


OCR Output








410 FLAVIUSJOSEPHUS [B. II.


As for the number of those that were expelled out of Egypt,he hath contrived to have the very same number with Lysi-machus, and says they were a hundred and ten thousand. Hethen assigns a certain wonderful and plausible occasion forthe name of Sabbath ; for he says, that " when the Jews hadtravelled a six days journey, they had buboes in their groins;and that on this account it was that they rested on theseventh day, as having gotten safely to that country which isnow called Judea ; that then they preserved the language ofthe Egyptians, and called that day the Sabbath; for thatmalady of buboes in their groins was named Sabbatosis by theEgyptians." And would not a man now laugh at this fellow'strifling, or rather hate his impudence in writing thus ? Wemust, it seems, tafcc it for granted that all these hundred andten thousand men must have these buboes. But, for certain,if those men had been blind and lame, and had all sorts ofdistempers upon them, as Apion says they had, they couldnot have gone one single day's journey: but if they had allbeen able to travel over a large desert, and besides that tofight and conquer those that oppose them, they had not allof them had buboes on their groins after the sixth day wasover; for no such distemper comes naturally and of necessityupon those that travel; but still, when there are many tenthousands in a camp together, they constantly marched asettled space [in a day]. Nor is it at all probable that sucha thing should happen by chance : this would be prodigiouslyabsurd to be supposed. However, our admirable authorApion had before told us, that " they came to Judea in sixdays time;" and again, that " Moses went up to a mountainthat lay between Egypt and Arabia, which was called Sinai,and was concealed there forty days, and that when he camedown from thence he gave laws to the Jews." But, then,how was it possible for them to tarry forty days in a desertplace, where there was no water, and at the same time to passall over the country between that and Judea in the six days?And as for this grammatical translation of the word Sabbath,it either contains an instance of his great impudence or grossignorance; for the words Sabbo and Sabbath are widely dif­







OCR Output








C. VII.] EVENTS OF THE SIE8E. 199


He said, that lie would come down, if he would give him hisright hand for his security. To which Titus replied, that hewas well pleased with such his agreeable conduct, and wouldbe well pleased if all the Jews would be of his mind, andthat he was ready to give the like security to the city. Nowfive of the ten dissembled with him, and pretended to beg formercy, while the rest cried out aloud, that they would neverbe slaves to the Romans, while it was in their power to diein a state of freedom. Now, while these men were quarrel­ling for a long while, the attack was delayed; Castor alsosent to Simon, and told him that they might take some timefor consultation about what was to be done, because he woulddelude the power of the Romans for a considerable time.And at the same time that he sent thus to him, he appearedopenly to exhort those that were obstinate to accept of Titus'shand for their security; but they seemed very angry at it,and brandished their naked swords upon the breast-works,and struck themselves upon their breasts, and fell down as ifthey had been slain. Hereupon Titus and those with himwere amazed at the courage of the men; and as they werenot able to see exactly what was done, they admired at theirgreat fortitude, and pitied their calamity. During this in­terval a certain person shot a dart at Castor, and woundedhim in his nose, whereupon he presently pulled out the dart,and showed it to Titus, and complained that this was unfairtreatment: so Caesar reproved him that shot the dart, andsent Josephus, who then stood by him, to give his right handto Castor. But Josephus said that he would not go to him,because these pretended petitioners meant nothing that wasgood ; he also restrained those friends of his who were zealousto go to him. But still there was one JEneas, a deserter,who said he would go to him. Castor also called to them,that somebody should come and receive the money which hehad with him ; this made JEneas the more earnestly to runto him, with his bosom open. Then did Castor take up agreat stone, and threw it at him, which missed him, becausehe guarded himself against it, but still it wounded anothersoldier that was coming to him. When Cicsar understood







OCR Output








TABLE


OF THE


JEWISH WEIGHTS AND MEASURES, PARTICULARLY OF THOSEMENTIONED IN JOSEPHUS'S WORKS.


Of the Jewish Measures of Length.
Inches. Feet. Inches.
Cubit, the standard 21 1 9
Zercth or large span 10.} 0 10J
Small Span 7 0 7
Palm or hand's breadth 3} 0 3£
Inch or thumb's breadth 1.16 0 1.16
Digit or finger's breadth .875 0 .876
Orgyia or fathom 84 7 0
Ezekiel's Canneh or reed 126 10 6
Arabian Canneh or pole 168 14 0
Schoenus's line or chain , 1680 140 0
Sabbath-day's journey 42000 3500 0
Jewish mile 84000 7000 0
Stadium or furlong 8400 700 0
Parasang 252000 210O0 0
Of the Jewish Measures of Capacity.
Cub. Inch. Pints or Pounds.
BathorEpha 807.274 27.83
Chorus or Chomer 8072.74 278.3
Seah or Saton 269.091 9.220
Ditto, according to Josephus 828.28 28.3
Ilin 134.54 4.4033
Ditto, according to Josephus 414.12 14.3
Omer or Assaron 80.722 2.78
Cab 44.859 1.544
Log 11.21 39
Metretes or Syrian firkin 207 7.125


(537)







OCR Output








C. I.] SIEGE OF GAMALA. 81


himself came to his assistance against those that had fled tothe citadel, and brought his whole army with him : now thisupper part of the city was every way rocky and difficult ofascent, and elevated to a vast altitude, and very full of peo­ple on all sides, and encompassed with precipices, wherebythe Jews cut off those that came up to them, and did muchmischief to others by their darts and the large stones whichthey rolled down upon them, while they were themselves sohigh that the enemy's darts could hardly reach them. How­ever, there arose such a divine storm against them as wasinstrumental to their destruction : this carried the Romandarts upon them, and made those which they threw returnback, and drove them obliquely away from them; nor couldthe Jews, indeed, stand upon their precipices, by reason ofthe violence of the wind, having nothing that was stable tostand upon, nor could they see those that were ascending upto them: so the Romans got up and surrounded them, andsome they slew before they could defend themselves, andothers as they were delivering up themselves; and the re­membrance of those that were slain at their former entranceinto the city increased their rage against them now: a greatnumber also of those that were surrounded on every side,and despaired of escaping, threw their children and theirwives, and themselves also, down the precipices to the valleybeneath, which near the citadel had been dug hollow to a vastdepth; but so it happened, that the anger of the Romansappeared not to be so extravagant as was the madness ofthose that were now taken, while the Romans slew but fourthousand, whereas the number of those that had thrown them­selves down was found to be five thousand: nor did any oneescape except two women, who were the daughters of Philip,and Philip himself was the son of a certain eminent mancalled Jacimus, who had been general of king Agrippa'sarmy ; and these did, therefore, escape, because they layconoealed from the rage of the Romans when the city wastaken ; for otherwise they spared not so much as the infants,of which many were flung down by them from the citadel.And thus was Gamala taken, on the three and twentieth day







OCR Output








DISSERTATION III. 513


mon.] An ox is also sacrificed, which the Egyptians worshipunder the name of Apis.1
They abstain from swine's flesh, as a memorial of thatmiserable destruction which the mange, to which that crea­ture is liable, brought on them, and with which they had beendefiled.2
That they had endured a long famine, they attest still bytheir frequent fastings.3 And that they stole the fruits ofthe earth, we have an argument from the bread of the Jews,which is unleavened.4
It is generally supposed they rest on the seventh day,5because that day gave them [the first] rest from their labors.Besides which, they are idle on every seventh year,0 as beingpleased with a lazy life. Others say, that they do honorthereby to Saturn ;7 or, perhaps, the Idaei gave them thispart of their religion, who [as we said above] were expelledtogether with Saturn, and who, as we have been informed,were the founders of this nation; or else it was because thestar Saturn moves in the highest orb, and of the seven planetsexerts the principal part of that energy whereby mankind aregoverned : and, indeed, that most of the heavenly bodies exert


1 These are only guesses of Tacitus or bis heathen authors, but no more.
2 Such memorials of what must have been very reproachful, arc strangersto the rest of mankind, and without any probability.
3 The Jews had but one solemn fast of old in the whole year, the great dayof expiation.
4 Unleavened bread was only used at the passover.
5 It is very strange that Tacitus should not know or confess that the Jews'seventh day, and seventh year of rest, wero in memory of the seventh, or Sab­bath-day's rest, after the six days of creation. Every Jew, as well as everyChristian, could have informed him of those matters.
o A strange hypothesis of the origin of the Sabbatic year, and without allgood foundation. Tacitus probably had never heard of the Jews' year ojjubilee, so he says nothing of it.
' As if the Jews, in the days of Moses, or long before, knew that theGreeks and Romans would long afterward call the seventh day of the weekSaturn's day; which Dio observes was not so called of old time; and it is aquestion whether before the Jews fefl into idolatry, they evor heard of sucha star or god as Saturn. Amos, v. 25: Acts, vii. 43.







OCR Output








DISSERTATION III. 529


by ramparts and ditches, since the situation of the place didnot admit of taking it by storm or surprise. He parted theduty among the legions; and there were no farther engage­ments, until whatever had been invented for the taking ofcities by the ancients, or by the ingenuity of the moderns,was got ready.
ANNALS, book xv.
Nero, in order to stifle the rumor [as if he had himselfset Rome on fire,] ascribed it to those people who were hatedfor their wicked practices, and called by the vulgar Chris­tians ; these he punished exquisitely. The author of thisname was Christ, who, in the reign of Tiberius, was broughtto punishment by Pontius Pilate the procurator.1 For thepresent this pernicious superstition was in part suppressed,but it broke out again, not only over Judea, whence this mis­chief first sprang, but in the city of Rome also, whither dorun from every quarter and make a noise, all the flagrantand shameful enormities. At first, therefore, those were seizedwho confessed, afterward a vast multitude were detected bythem, and were convicted, not so much as really guilty ofsetting the city on fire, but as hating all mankind; nay, theymade a mock of them as they perished, and destroyed themby putting them into the skins of wild beasts, and settingdogs upon them to tear them to pieces. Some were nailedto crosses, and others flamed to death: thoy were also usedin the night-time instead of torches, for illumination. Nerohad offered his own gardens for this spectacle. He alsogave them Circensian games, and dressed himself like adriver of a chariot, sometimes appearing among the commonpeople, sometimes in the circle itself; whence a commisera­tion arose, though the punishments were levelled at guiltypersons, and such as deserve to be made the most flagrantexamples, as if these people were destroyed, not for the


' This passage seems to have been directly taken from Josephus's famoustestimony concerning Christ and the Christians, Antiq. b. xviii. ch. iii. sect.3, of which Dissert. I. before.
IV. —45







OCR Output








DISSERTATION III. 535


VII. Since, therefore, Tacitus, soon after the publicationof Josephus's Antiquities, and in contradiction to them wasdetermined to produce such idle stories about the Jews, andsince one of those idle stories is much the same as that pub­lished in Josephus against Apion, from Manetho and Lysi-machus, and nowhere else met with so fully in all antiquity,it is most probable that those Antiquities of Josephus werethe very occasion of Tacitus giving us these stories, as weknow from Josephus himself, contr. Apion, b. i. sect. 1, thatthe same Antiquities were the very occasion of Apion's pub­lication of his equally scandalous stories about them, andwhich Josephus so thoroughly confuted in his two books writtenagainst them. And if Tacitus, as I suppose, had also readthose two books, his procedure in publishing such stories,after he had seen so thorough a confutation of them, wasstill more highly criminal. Nor will Tacitus's fault be muchless, though we suppose he neither saw the Antiquities, northe books against Apion, because it was so very easy for him,then at Rome, to have had more authentic accounts of -theorigin of the Jewish nation, and of the nature of the Jewishand Christian religions, from the Jews and Christians themselves, which, he owns, were very numerous there in his days;so that his publication of such idle stories is still utterly in­excusable.
VIII. It is, therefore, very plain, after all, that notwith­standing the encomiums of several of our learned crities uponTacitus, and hard suspicions upon Josephus, that all the (in­voluntary) mistakes of Josephus, in all his large works puttogether, their quality, as well as quantity, considered, donot amount to near so great a sum, as do these gross errorsand misrepresentations of Tacitus about the Jews amount toin a few pages; so little reason have some of our later andlesser crities to prefer the Greek and Roman profane his­torians and writers to the Jewish, and particularly to Jose­phus. Such later and lesser crities should have learnedmore judgment and modesty from their great father JosephScaliger, when, as we have seen, after all his deeper inquiries,







OCR Output








B. I.] AGAINST APION. 397


before him had already seen them. He had then been in­formed what sort of gods were, and after what manner theyhad been seen, insomuch that he did not stand in need of anynew artifice for obtaining this sight. However, the prophetby whose means the king thought to compass his design wasa wise man. If so, how came he not to know that such hisdesire was impossible to be accomplished ? for the event didnot succeed. And what pretence could there be to supposethat the gods would not be seen by reason of the people'smaims in their bodies, or leprosy ? for the gods are not angryat the imperfection of bodies, but at wicked practices: and asto eighty thousand lepers, and those in an ill state also, howis it possible to have them gathered together in one day ? nay,how came the king not to comply with the prophet ? for hisinjunction was that those who were maimed should be expelledout of Egypt, while the king only sent them to work in thequarries, as if he were rather in want of laborers than intendedto purge bis country. He says farther, that " this prophetslew himself, as foreseeing the anger of the gods, and thoseevents which were to come upon Egypt afterward; and thathe left this prediction for the king in writing." Besides, howcame it to pass that this prophet did not foreknow his owndeath at the first? nay, how came he not to contradict theking in his desire to see the gods immediately ? how camethat unreasonable dread upon him of judgments that were notto happen in his life-time ? or what worse thing could he suffer,out of the fear of which he made haste to kill himself? Butnow let us see the silliest thing of all. — The king, althoughhe had been informed of these things, and terrified with thefear of what was to come, yet did not he even then eject thesemaimed people out of his country, when it had been foretoldhim that he was to clear Egypt of them: but as Manethosays, — " He then, upon their request, gave them that city toinhabit, which had formerly belonged to the shepherds, andwas called Avaris ; whither when they were gone in crowds,"he says, " they chose one that had formerly been priest of He-liopolis ; and that this priest first ordained that they shouldneither worship the gods nor abstain from those animals thatIV. — 34







OCR Output








3T8 FLAVIUSJOSEPHUS [B. I.


but for himself he adorned the temple of Belus, and the othertemples, after an elegant manner, out of the spoils he hadtaken in the war. He also rebuilt the old city, and addedanother to it on the outside, and so far restored Babylon, that,none who should besiege it afterwards might have it in theirpower to divert the river, so as to facilitate an entrance intoit; and this he did by building three walls about the innercity, and three about the outer. Some of these walls he builtof burnt brick and bitumen, and some of brick only. So whenhe had thus fortified the city with walls, after an excellentmanner, and had adorned the gates magnificently, he addeda new palace to that which his father had dwelt in, and thisclose by it also, and that more eminent in its height and inits great splendor; it would, perhaps, require too long a nar­ration, if any one were to describe it; however, as prodigious,large and as magnificent as it was, it was finished in fifteendays. Now in this palace he erected very high walks, sup­ported by stone pillars; and by planting what was called apensile paradise, and replenishing it with all sorts of trees, herendered the prospect of an exact resemblance of a moun­tainous country. This he did to please his queen, becauseshe had been brought up in Media, and was fond of a moun­tainous situation."1
20. This is what Berosus relates concerning the foremen-tioned king, as he relates many other things about him alsoin the third book of his Chaldean history: wherein he com­plains of the Grecian writers for supposing, without any foun­dation, that Babylon was built by Semiramis,1 queen of Assy­ria, and for her false pretence to those wonderful edificesthereto relating, as if they were her own workmanship; as,indeed, in these affairs the Chaldean history cannot but be themost credible. Moreover, we meet with a confirmation of whatBerosus says, in the archives of the Phoenicians, concerningthis king Nabuchodonosor, that he conquered all Syria andPhoenicia ; in which case Philostratus agrees with the others


1 The groat improvements that Nebuchadnezzar made in the buildings atBabylon, do no way contradict those ancient and authentic testimonies whichascribe its first building to Nimro 1, and its first rebuilding to Semiramis, asBerosus seems hero to suppose.







OCR Output








188 SIMON AKD JOHN. [B. V.


CHAPTER VI.
CONCERNING THE TYRANTS SIMON AND JOHN. HOW ALSO, ASTITUS WAS GOING ROUND THE WALL OF THE CITY, NICANORWAS WOUNDED BY A DART ; WHICH ACCIDENT PROVOKEDTITUS TO PRESS ON THE SIEGE.
§ 1. Now, the warlike men that were in the city, and themultitude of the seditious that were with Simon, were tenthousand, besides the Idumeans. Those ten thousand hadfifty commanders, over whom this Simon was supreme. TheIdumeans that paid him homage were five thousand, and hadeight commanders, among whom those of greatest fame wereJacob, the son of Sosas, and Simon, the son of Cathlas.John, who had seized upon the temple, had six thousandarmed men under twenty commanders : the zealots also thathad come over to him, and left off their opposition, were twothousand four hundred, and had the same commander thatthey had formerly, Eleazar, together with Simon, the son ofArinus. Now, while these factions fought one against another,the people were their prey on both sides, as we have saidalready: and that part of the people which would not joinwith them in their wicked practices were plundered by bothfactions. Simon held the upper city, and the great wall asfar as Cedron, and as much of the old wall as bent fromSiloam to the east, and which went down to the palace ofMonobazus, who was king of the Adiabene beyond Euphrates :he also held that fountain and the Acra, which was no otherthan the lower city: he also held all that reached to thopalace of queen Helena, the mother of Monobazus. ButJohn held the temple, and the parts thereto adjoining for agreat way, as also Ophla, and the valley called the Valley ofCedron: and when the parts that were interposed betweentheir possessions were burnt by them, they left a spacewherein they might fight with each other; for this internalsedition did not cease even when the Romans were encampednear their very walls. But although they had grown wiser







OCR Output








174 JERUSALEM. [B. V.


CHAPTER IV.
THE DESCRIPTION OF JERUSALEM.
§ 1. The city of Jerusalem was fortified with three walls,on such parts as were not encompassed with unpassable val­leys ; for in such places it hath but one wall. The city wasbuilt upon two hills, which are opposite to one another, andhave a valley to divide them asunder; at which valley thecorresponding rows of houses on both hills end. Of thesehills that which contains the upper city is much higher, andin length more direct. Accordingly, it was called the Cita­del by king David; ho was the father of that Solomon whobuilt this temple :it the first; but it is by us called the Up­per Market-place. But the other hill, which was calledAcra, and sustains the lower city, is of the shape of a moonwhen she is horned: over against this there was a third hill,but naturally lower than Acra, and parted formerly from theother by a broad valley. However, in those times when theAsamoneans reigned, they filled up that valley with earth,and had a mind to join the city to the temple. They thentook off part of the height of Acra, and reduced it to be ofless elevation than it was before, that the temple might besuperior to it. Now the valley of the cheesemongers, as itwas called, and was that which we told you before dis­tinguished the hill of the upper city from that of the lower,extended as far as Siloam ; for that is the name of a fountainwhich hath sweet water in it, and this in great plenty also.But on the outsides these hills arc surrounded by deep val-lcvs, and, by reason of the precipices to them belonging onboth sides, they are every where unpassable.
2. Now of these three walls the old one was hard to betaken, both by reason of the valleys, and of that hill on whichIt was built, and which was above them. But besides thatgreat advantage, as to the place where they were situated,it was also built very strong; because David and Solomon,and the following kings, were very zealous about this work.







OCR Output








C. II.] SURRENDER OF GISCHALA. 85


no Roman guard about the city, ho seized the opportunitydirectly, and taking with him not only the armed men thatwere about him, but a considerable number of those that hadlittle to do, together with their families, he fled to Jerusalem.And, indeed, though the man was making haste to get away,and was tormented with fears of being a captive or of losinghis life, yet did he prevail with himself to take out of thecity along with him a multitude of women and children, asfar as twenty furlongs; but there he left them as he proceededfarther on his journey, where those that were left behindmade sad lamentations; for the farther every one of themwas come from his own people, the nearer they thought them­selves to be to their enemies. They also affrighted them­selves with this thought, that those who would carry theminto captivity were just at hand, and still turned themselvesback at the mere noise they made themselves in this theirhasty flight, as if those from whom they fled were just uponthem. Many also of them missed their ways, and the earnest­ness of such as aimed to outgo the rest threw down many ofthem. And, indeed, there was a miserable destruction madeof the women and children; while some of them took thecourage to call their husbands and kinsmen back, and to be­seech them, with the bitterest lamentations, to stay for them;but John's exhortation, who cried out to them to save them­selves and fly away, prevailed. He said also, that if theRomans should seize upon those whom they left behind, theywould be revenged on them for it. So this multitude thatran thus away was dispersed abroad, according as each ofthem was able to run one faster or slower than another.
5. Now on the next day Titus came to the wall to makethe agreement, whereupon the people opened their gates tohim, and came out to him, with their children and wives, andmade acclamations of joy to him, as to one that had been theirbenefactor, and had delivered the city out of custody; theyalso informed him of John's flight, and besought him to sparethem, and to come in, and bring the rest of those that werefor innovations to punishment. But Titus, not so much re­garding the supplications of the people, sent part of his horse-IV.—8







OCR Output








DISSERTATION III. 511


of Libya, and this at the time when Saturn was driven outof his kingdom by the power of Jupiter: an argument for itis fetched from their name. The mountain Ida is famous inCrete; and the neighboring inhabitants are named Idaei,which, with a barbarous augment, becomes the name of Judaei[Jews.] Some say they were a people that were very nume­rous in Egypt, under the reign of Isis, and that the Egyptiansgot free from that burden by sending them into the adjoiningcountries, under their captains Hierosolymus and Judas. Thegreatest part say, they were those Ethiopians whom fear andhatred obliged to change their habitations in the reign ofking Cepheus.1 There are those which report they wereAssyrians, who, wanting lands, got together, and obtainedpart of Egypt, and soon afterwards settled themselves incities of their own, in the lands of the Hebrews, and theparts of Syria that lay nearest to them.2 Others pretendtheir origin to be more eminent, and that the Solymi, a peoplecelebrated in Homer's poems-, were the founders of this nation,and gave this their own name, Hierosolyma, to the city, whichthey built there.3
CnAP. III.] Many authors agree, that when once an infec­tious distemper was arisen in Egypt, and made men's bodiesimpure, Bocchoris their king went to the oracle of [Jupiter]Hammon, and begged he would grant him some relief againstthis evil, and that he was enjoined to purge his nation of them,and to banish this kind of men into other countries, as hate­ful to the gods:4 that when he had sought for, and gottenthem all together, they were left in a vast desert; that here­upon the rest devoted themselves to weeping and inactivity;but one of those exiles, Moses by name, advised them to look


1 One would wonder how Tacitus or any heathens could suppose the AfricanEthiopians under Cepheus, who are known to be blacks, could be the parentsof the Jews, who are known to be whites.
3 This account comes nearest the truth; and this Tacitus might have fromJosephus, only disguised by himself.
3 This Tacitus might have out of Josephus, Antiq. B. vii. ch. iii. sect. 2.
» Strange doctrine to Josephus! who truly observes on this occasion, thatthe gods are angry not at bodily imperfections, but at wicked practices.Apion, I), i. sect. 28.







OCR Output








DISSERTATION I. 485


fore shall they eat the fruits of their own ways? Thus whenJosephus says, as we have seen, that the most equitablecitizens of Jerusalem, and those that were most zealous ofthe law, were very uneasy at the condemnation of this Jamesand some of his friends or fellow Christians, by the high-priest and sanhedrim, about A. D. 62, and declares, that hohimself was one of those Jews who thought the terriblemiseries of that nation effects of the vengeance of God fortheir murder of this James, about A. D. 68, we may easilysee those opinions could only be the opinions of convertedJews or Ebionites. The high-priest and sanhedrim, whoalways prosecuted the Christians, and now condemned theseChristians, and the body of those unbelieving Jews, who aresupposed to suffer for murdering this James, the head of theNazarene or Ebionite Christians in Judea, could not, to besure, be of that opinion ; nor could Josephus himself be ofthe same opinion, as he declares he was, without the strongestinclinations to the Christian religion, or without beingsecretly a Christian Jew, i. e. a Nazarene or Ebionite ; whichthing is, by the way, a very great additional argument thatsuch he was, and no other. Thus, lastly, when Josephus iscited in Suidas as affirming that Jesus officiated with thepriests in the temple, this account is by no means disagreeableto the pretensions of the Ebionites. Hcgesippus affirms thevery same of James the Just also.
VI. The first citation of the famous testimony concerningour Savior from Tacitus, almost all that was true of the Jewsis directly taken by him out of Josephus, as will be demon­strated under the third Dissertation hereafter.
VII. The second author I have alleged for it is JustinMartyr, one so nearly coeval with Josephus, that he mightbe born about the time when he wrote his Antiquities, appealsto the same Antiquities by that very name: and though hedoes not here directly quote them, yet does he seem to me toallude to this very testimony in them concerning our Savior,when he affirms in this place to Trypho the Jew, That hisnation originally knew that Jesus teas risen from the dead,


' Is. Hi. 10.


41*







OCR Output








386 FLAVIUS J0SBPHU3 [B. I.


were with him, and explained to them all the circumstancesof their people; for he had all their habitations and politydown in writing." Moreover, Hecateus declares again," what regard we have for our laws, and that we resolve toendure any thing rather than transgress them, because wethink it right for us to do so." Whereupon he adds, that" although they are in a bad reputation among their neigh­bors, and among all those that come to them, and have beenoften treated injuriously by the kings and governors ofPersia, yet can they not be dissuaded from acting but whatthey think best; but that when they are stripped on this ac­count, and have torments inflicted upon them, and they arebrought to the most terrible kinds of death, they meet themafter an extraordinary manner, beyond all other people, andwill not renounce the religion of their forefathers." Hecateusalso produces demonstrations not a few of this their resolutetenaciousness of their laws, when he speaks thus: — "Alex­ander was once at Babylon, and had an intention to rebuildthe temple of Belus that was fallen to decay, and, in orderthereto, he commanded all his soldiers in general to bringearth thither; but the Jews, and they only, would not complywith that command; nay, they underwent stripes and greatlosses of what they had on this account, till the king forgavethem, and permitted them to live in quiet." He adds farther,that "when the Macedonians came to them into that country,and demolished the [old] temples and the altars, they assistedthem in demolishing them all,1 but [for not assisting them inrebuilding them] they either underwent losses, or sometimesobtained forgiveness." He adds farther, that "these mendeserve to be admired on that account." Ho also speaks ofthe mighty populousness of our nation, and says, that " thePersians formerly carried away many ten thousands of ourpeople to Babylon, as also, that not a few ten thousands wereremoved, after Alexander's death, into Egypt and Phoenicia,by reason of the sedition that was arisen in Syria." Thesame person takes notice in his history, how large the countryis which we inhabit, as well as of its excellent character, and


1 S- " read the text with Havercamp, though the place bo difficult.







OCR Output








DISSERTATION III. 527


They that built this city foresaw that, from the differenceof their conduct of life from their neighbors, they should havefrequent wars; thence it came to pass that they had provi­sions for a long siege. After Pompey's conquest also, theirfear and experience had taught them generally what theyshould want.1
Moreover, the covetous temper that prevailed under Clau­dius gave the Jews an opportunity of purchasing for moneyleave2 to fortify Jerusalem; so they built walls in time ofpeace, as if they were going to war, they being augmentedin number by those rude multitudes of people that retiredthither on the ruin of the other cities ; for every obstinatefellow ran away thither, and there became more seditious thanbefore.
There were three captains, and as many armies. Simonhad the remotest and largest parts of the walls under him.John, who was also called Bar Gioras [the son of Gioras,]had the middle parts of the city under him : and Eleazar hadfortified the temple itself. John and Simon were superior inmultitude and strength of arms, Eleazar was superior by hissituation; but battles, factions and burnings were common tothem all; and a great quantity of corn was consumed by fire.After awhile John sent some who, under the pretence of offer­ing sacrifice, might slay Eleazar and his body of troops, whichthey did, and got the temple under their power. So the citjnow was parted into two factions, until, upon the coming ofthe Romans, this war abroad produced peace between thes-that were at home.


1 This is Tacitus's or the Romans' own hypothesis, unsupported by Jose-phus.
2 This sale of leave for the Jews to build the walls of Jerusalem for moneyis also Tacitus's or the Romans' own hypothesis, unsupported by Josephus.Nor is Joscphus's character of Claudius near so bad, as to other things also,as it is in Tacitus and Suetonius. Dio says he was far from covetousness inparticular. The others seem to have misrepresented his meek and quiettemper and learning, but without ambition, and his great kindness to theJews, as the most contemptible folly. See Antiq. b. xix. ch. iv. sect. 4. Hewas, indeed, much ruled at first by a very bad minister, Pallas; and at lastwas ruled and poisoned by a very bad wife, Agrippina.







OCR Output








INDEX. 545


Azizus, iii. 284; is circumcised, amimarries Drusilln, ib.; dies, 288.
Azotus, or Ashdod, its inhabitantsplagued, i. 389; taken by Jonathan,ii. 315.
Baal, iv. 380; god of the Tynans,
li. 118.Baalis, king, ii. 178.Baaras, a place, and plant, iv. 319.Baasha, kills Nadab, ii. 165 : dies, 69.Baha's children preserved, ii. 535;
afterwards killed, 536.Babylon, derived from Babel, i. 92;taken by Cyrus, ii. 195; Nebu­chadnezzar's buildings at Babylon,ii. 190: its walls not built by Se-miramis, but by Nebuchadnezzar,iv. 378; its walls built by Nobon-nidus of brick and bitumen, ib.;its pensile gardens erected by Ne­buchadnezzar, iv. 378; ii. 191.
Bacchides, ii. 321, 326; he attacksthe Jews, ib.
Bagoses, ii. 250.
Balak, king of Moab, i. 280.
Baladan, king of Babylon, ii. 155.
Balaam, the prophet, i. 280, et seq.,his ass speaks, 282.
Ballas, king of Sodom, i. 101.
Balm, or Balsam, near Jericho, ii.417, 507.
Baltasar [Belshazzar, or Naboandel,or Nnbonadius,] king of Babylon,ii. 191 ; his terrible vision, and itsinterpretation, 193; his death. 195.
Balthasar [Belteshazzar,] Daniel'sname, ii. 283.
Banus, a hermit, i. 18.
Barachias, ii. 140.
Barak, encounters Siscra, i. 361.
Barbarians, their riches formerlyconsisted in cattle, i. 182.
Bardanes, is slain, iii. 273.
Baris, built by Daniel, ii. 197.
Barnabuzus, ii. 235.
Baruch, left with Jeremiah the pro­phet in Judea, ii. 177.
Barzaphernes, governor, iii. 361.
Bnrzillai, i. 512, 520.
Bazan, or Baasha, king of Israel,slays Nadab, ii. 67.
Bassus (Vcntidius.) See Ventidius.
Bassus (Cecilius,) murderer of Sep­tus Coesar, ii. 454; iii. 354.
Bassus (Lucilius,) sent with an army


into Judea; takes Macherus, iv.316, et teq.Bathsheba, i. 493, et seq.Bathyllus, iii. 436.Battering-ram, described, iv. 34.Battle at Taricheoe, iv. 64.Belus, the Tyrian god, ii. 71.Belus, the Babylonian god, ii. 190;
his temple, ib.Benaiah, a man of valor, i. 524; sonof Jehoiada, 489; made comman­der, ii. 8; son of Achilus, 11.Beneficence, its commendation and
reward, i. 458.Benhadad besieges Samaria, ii. 79;the second time, 105; falls sick,and is smothered, 110.Benjamites attacked at Gibea, and atlast cut off, i. 354 ; their tribe re­stored, ib.Berenice, daughter of Agrippa, iii.
160; is married to Herod, 247.Berenice, Agrippa's mother, dies, iii
162.Berenice, Archclaus'a and Mariam-
ne's daughter, iii. 284.Berenice, the widow of Herod, mar­ries Polemon, iii. 285; leaves him,286.Berenice, Salome's daughter, Aristo-
bulus's wife, iii. 9.Berenice, Agrippa senior's daughter,
in danger, iv. 506.Berytus, where the cause betweenHerod and his sons was debated,iii. 63.Bigthan, ii. 235.
Birth-day of Ptolemy's son kept bythe Syrians, ii. 290; presents madethereupon, 292.Bocchoris, king of Egypt, iv. 403.Book of the law found, ii. 159.Books composed by Solomon, ii. 13;twenty-two most sacred among theJews, iv. 364.Booz, i. 381; kindness towards Ruth,
382; marries her, 383.Brazen vessels more valuable than
gold, ii. 223.Bride, how she was to part from one
that refused to marry her, i. 308.Britons, iv. 279.Britannicus, iii. 494.lirocchus, a tribune, iii. 239.Brother, n title which Alexander Balasgave to Jonathan, ii. 335; the same


46*







OCR Output








342 eleazar's speeches. [b. vil


die,1 as well as those were whom we have begotten ; nor is itin the power of the most happy of our race to avoid it. Butfor abuses and slavery, and the sight of our wives led awayafter an ignominious manner, with their children, these arenot such evils as are natural and necessary among men ; al­though such as do not prefer death before those miseries,when it is in their power so to do, must undergo even themon account of their own cowardice. We revolted from theRomans with great pretensions to courage; and when at thevery last they invited us to preserve ourselves, we would notcomply with them. Who will not, therefore, believe that theywill certainly be in a rage at us, in case they can take usalive ? Miserable will then be the young men who will bestrong enough in their bodies to sustain many torments;miserable also will be those of elder years, who will not beable to bear those calamities which young men might sustain.One man will be obliged to hear the voice of his son im­ploring help of his father, when his hands are bound. Butcertainly our hands are still at liberty, and have a sword inthem; let them, then, be subservient to us in our glorious de­sign ; let us die before we become slaves under our enemies,and let us go out of the world, together with our children andour wives, in a state of freedom. This is it that our lawscommand us to do; this it is that our wives and childrencrave at our hands; nay, God himself hath brought this ne­cessity upon us ; while the Romans desire the contrary, andare afraid lest any of us should die before we are taken. Letus, therefore, make haste, and, instead of affording them somuch pleasure as they hope for in getting us under theirpower, let us leave them an example which shall at oncecause their astonishment at our death, and their admirationof our hardiness therein."


1 Reland here seta down a parallel aphorism of one of the Jcwith Rabbins,— " We are born, that we may die, and die that we may live."







OCR Output








C. III.] THE HIGH-PBIEST ANANUS. 99


advice. So Ananus and his party believed his oath, and didnow receive him to their consultations without farther suspi­cion ; nay, so far did they believe him, that they sent him astheir ambassador into the temple to the zealots, with proposalsof accommodation; for they were very desirous to avoid thepollution of the temple as much as they possibly could, andthat no one of their nation should be slain therein.
14. But now this John, as if his oath had been made to thezealots, and for confirmation of his good-will to them, and notagainst them, went into the temple, and stood in the midstof them, and spake as follows: — That " ho had run manyhazards on their accounts, and in order to let them know ofevery thing that was secretly contrived against them by Ana­nus and his party ; but that both he and they should be castinto the most imminent danger, unless some providential as­sistance were afforded them ; for that Ananus made no longerdelay, but had prevailed with the people to send ambassadorsto Vespasian to invite him to come presently and take the city;and that he had appointed a fast for the next day againstthem, that they might obtain admission into the temple on areligious account, or gain it by force, and fight with themthere: that he did not see how long they could either endurea siege, or how they could fight against so many enemies. Headded farther, that it was by the providence of God he washimself sent as an ambassador to them for an accommodation;for that Ananus did, therefore, offer them such proposals, thathe might come upon them when they were unarmed ; that theyought to choose one of these two methods, either to intercedewith those that guarded them to save their lives, or to providesome foreign assistance for themselves: that if they fosteredthemselves with the hopes of pardon, in case they were sub­dued, they had forgotten what desperate things they had done,or could suppose, that as soon as the actors repented, thosethat had suffered by them must be presently reconciled tothem ; while those that have done injuries, though they pre­tend to repent of them, are frequently hated by the othersfor that sort of repentance; and that the sufferers, when theyget the power into their hands, are usually still more severe







OCR Output








B. I.] AGAINST APIOS. 3G7


for that purpose. For this reason it was, that the Phoeniciansthemselves came soon, by trading and navigation, to bo knownto the Grecians, and by their means the Egyptians becameknown to the Grecians also, as did all those people whencethe Phoenicians in long voyages over the seas carried waresto the Grecians. The Medes also, and the Persians, whenthey were lords of Asia, became well known to them; andthis was especially true of the Persians, who led their armiesas far as the other continent [Europe.] The Thracians werealso known to them by the nearness of their countries, andthe Scythians by the means of those that sailed to Pontus;for it was so in general, that all maritime nations, and thosethat inhabited near the eastern or western seas, became mostknown to those that were desirous to be writers ; but such ashad their habitations farther from the sea were for the mostpart unknown to them: which things appear to have hap­pened as to Europe also, where the city of Rome, that haththis long time been possessed of so much power, and hathperformed such great actions in war, is yet never mentionedby Herodotus, nor by Thucydides, nor by any one of theircontemporaries; and it was very late, and with great diffi­culty, that the Romans became known to the Greeks. Nay,those that were reckoned the most exact historians, andEphorus for one, was so very ignorant of the Gauls and theSpaniards, that he supposed the Spaniards who inhabit sogreat a part of the western regions of the earth, to be nomore than one city. Those historians also have ventured todescribe such customs as were made use of by them, whichthey never had cither done or said ; and the reason why thesewriters did not know the truth of their affairs was this, thatthey had not any commerce together; but the reason whythey wrote such falsities was this, that they had a mind toappear to know things which others had not known. Howcan it then be any wonder, if our nation was no more knownto many of the Greeks, nor had given them any occasion tomention them in their writings, while they were so remotefrom the sea, and had a conduct of life so peculiar to them­selves ?







OCR Output








C. VIII.] VESPASIAN. 51


the Romans ? Is it death ? If so, what we are afraid ofwhen we but suspect our enemies will inflict it on us, shallwe inflict it on ourselves for certain ? But, it may be said,we must be slaves. And are we then in a clear state ofliberty at present ? It may also be said, that it is a manlyact for one to kill himself. No, certainly, but a most unmanlyone; as I should esteem that pilot to be an arrant coward,who, out of fear of a storm, should sink his ship of his ownaccord. Now, self-murder is a crime most remote from thecommon nature of all animals, and an instance of impietyagainst God our Creator: nor, indeed, is there any animalthat dies by its own contrivance or by its own means, for thedesire of life is a law engraven in them all; on which ac­count we deem those that openly take it away from us to beour enemies, and those that do it by treachery are punishedfor so doing. And do not you think that God is very angrywhen a man does injury to what he hath bestowed on him ?For from him it is that wo have received our being, and weought to leave it to his disposal to take that being away fromus. The bodies of all men are, indeed, mortal, and arecreated out of corruptible matter ; but the soul is ever im­mortal, and is a portion of the divinity that inhabits ourbodies. Besides, if any one destroys or abuses a depositumhe hath received from a mere man, he is esteemed a wickedand perfidious person; but then if any one cast out of hisbody this divine depositum, can we imagine that he who isthereby affronted does not know of it ? Moreover, our lawjustly ordains that slaves which run away from their mastersshall be punished, though the masters they ran away frommay have been wicked masters to them. And shall woendeavor to run away from God, who is the best of allmasters, and not think ourselves guilty of impiety ? Do notyou know, that those who depart out of this life according tothe law of nature, and pay that debt which was received fromGod, when he that lent it us is pleased to require it backagain, enjoy eternal fame: that their houses and their pos­terity are sure; that their souls are pure and obedient, andobtain a most holy place in heaven, from whence, in the revo­







OCR Output








B. I.] AGAINST APION. 361


for thcin always to make such a profession ; but their businesswas to demonstrate that they could write well, and make animpression upon mankind thereby; and in what manner ofwriting they thought they were able to exceed others, to thatdid they apply themselves. Some of them betook themselvesto the writing of fabulous narrations; some of them endeavoredto please the cities or the kings, by writing in their commen­dation ; others of them fell to finding faults with transactions,or with the writers of such transactions, and thought to makoa great figure by so doing. And, indeed, these do what isof all things the most contrary to true history; for it is thegreat character of true history, that all concerned thereinboth speak and write the same things; while these men, bywriting differently about the same things, think they shall bobelieved to write with the greatest regard to truth. We,therefore, [who are Jews,] must yield to the Grecian writersas to language and eloquence of composition ; but then weshall give them no such preference as to the verity of ancienthistory, and least of all as to that part which concerns theaffairs of our own several countries.
0. As to the care of writing down the records from theearliest antiquity among the Egyptians and Babylonians, thatthe priests were intrusted therewith, and employed a philoso­phical concern about it; that they were the Chaldean prieststhat did so among the Babylonians, and that the Phoenicians,who were mingled among the Greeks, did especially make uso
been chronology or history, but philology, to know words and not things,they not much entering oftentimes into the real contents of their authors,and judging which were the most accurate discoverers of truth, and most tobe depended on in their several histories, but rather inquiring who wrotethe finest style and had the greatest elegance in their expressions, which arethings of small consequence in comparison with the other. Thus you willsometimes find great debates among the learned, whether Herodotus orThucydides were the finest historians in the Ionic and Attic ways of writing,which signify little as to the real value of each of their histories, while itwould be of much more moment to let the reader know that, as the conse­quence of Herodotus's history, which begins so much earlier, and reachesso much wider than that of Thucydides, is, therefore, vastly greater; eo isthe most part of Thucydides, which belongs to his own times, and fell underhis own observation, much the most certain.
IV.—31







OCR Output








C. IX.] THE SIEGE. 209


-with the slavery we were under at Babylon, where the peoplewere captives for seventy years; yet were they not deliveredinto freedom again before God made Cyrus his gracious in­strument in bringing it about: accordingly, they were setfree by him, and did again restore the worship of theirdeliverer at his temple. And, to speak in general, we canproduce no example wherein our fathers got any success bywar, or failed of success when without war they committedthemselves to God. When they stayed at home, they con­quered, as pleased their judge; but when they went out tofight, they were always disappointed: for example, when theking of Babylon besieged this very city, and our kingZedekiah fought against him, contrary to what predictionswere made to him by Jeremiah the prophet, he was at oncetaken prisoner, and saw the city and the temple demolished.Yet how much greater was the moderation of that king thanis that of your present governors, and that of the people thenunder him, than is that of you at this time ? for whenJeremiah cried out aloud, how very angry God was at them,because of their transgressions, and told them they shouldbe taken prisoners, unless they would surrender up theircity, neither did the king nor the people put him to death:but for you (to pass over what you have done within the city,which I am not able to describe, as your wickedness deserves,)you abuse me, and throw darts at me, who only exhort youto save yourselves, as being provoked when you are put inmind of j'our sins, and cannot bear the very mention of thosecrimes which you every day perpetrate. For another ex­ample, when Antiochus, who was called Epiphanes, laybefore this city, and had been guilty of many indignitiesagainst God, and our forefathers met him in arms, they thenwere slain in the battle, this city was plundered by ourenemies, and our sanctuary made desolate for three yearsand six months. And what need I bring any more examples ?Indeed, what can it be that hath stirred up an army of theRomans against our nation ? is it not the impiety of the in­habitants ? Whence did our servitude commence ? was it notderived from the seditions that were among our forefathers,


18*







OCR Output








330 MASADA AND THE SICARII. [B. VII.


appointed for that purpose, but water was also to be broughtto the camp, because the place afforded no fountain that wasnear it. When, therefore, Silva had ordered these affairsbeforehand, he fell to besieging the place; which siege waslikely to stand in need of a great deal of skill and pains, byreason of the strength of the fortress, the nature of which Iwill now describe.
3. There was a rock, not small in circumference, and veryhigh. It was encompassed with valleys of such vast depthdownward, that the eye could not reach their bottoms: theywere abrupt, and such as no animal could walk upon, ex­cepting at two places of the rock, where it subsides, in orderto afford a passage for ascent, though not without difficulty.Now, of the ways that lead to it, one is that from the lakeAsphaltiCis, towards the sunrising, and another on the west,where the ascent is easier: the one of these ways is calledthe Serpent, as resembling that animal in its narrowness andits perpetual windings: for it is broken off at the prominentprecipices of the rock, and returns frequently into itself, andlengthening again by little and little, hath much ado to pro­ceed forward; and he that would walk along it, must first goon one leg and then on the other ; there is also nothing butdestruction in case your feet slip; for on each side there is avastly deep chasm and precipice, sufficient to quell thecourage of every body by the terror it infuses into the mind.When, therefore, a man hath gone along this way for thirtyfurlongs, the rest is the top of the hill, not ending at a smallpoint, but is no other than a plain upon the highest part ofthe mountain. Upon this top of the hill Jonathan the high-priest first of all built a fortress, and called it Masada; afterwhich the rebuilding of this place employed the care of kingHerod to a great degree: he also built a wall round aboutthe entire top of the hill, seven furlongs long: it was com­posed of white stone; its height was twelvo and its breadtheight cubits, there were also erected upon that wall thirty-eight towers, each of them fifty cubits high; out of which youmight pass into lesser edifices, which were built on the insideround the entire wall; for the king reserved the top of the







OCR Output








376 FLAVIUSJOSEPHCS [B. I.


lus, the priest of Astarte, who reigned thirty-two years, andlived sixty-eight years; he was succeeded by his son Bade-zorus, who lived forty-five years, and reigned six years: hewas succeeded by Matgenus his son; he lived thirty-two years,and reigned nine years : Pygmalion succeeded him ; he livedfifty-six years, and reigned forty-seven years. Now, in thoseventh year of his reign, his sister fled away from him, andbuilt the city of Carthage in Libya." So the whole time fromthe reign of Hirom till the building of Carthage amounts tothe sum of one hundred fifty-five years and eight months.Since, then, the temple was built at Jerusalem in the twelfthyear of the reign of Hirom, there were from the building ofthe temple until the building of Carthage one hundred forty-three years and eight months. Wherefore, what occasion isthere for alleging any more testimonies out of the Phoenicianhistories [on the behalf of our nation,] since what I have saidis so thoroughly confirmed already ? And to be sure our an­cestors came into this country long before the building of thetemple; for it was not till we had gotten possession of thewhole land by war that wo built our temple. And this is thepoint that I have clearly proved out of our sacred writings inmy Antiquiiies.
19. I will now relate what hath been written concerning usin the Chaldean histories, which records have a great agree­ment with our books in other things also. Berosus shall bewitness to what I say; he was by birth a Chaldean, wellknown by the learned on account of his publication of thoChaldean books of astronomy and philosophy among theGreeks. This Berosus, therefore, following the most ancientrecords of that nation, gives us a history of the deluge of wa­ters that then happened, and of the destruction of mankindthereby, and agrees with Moses's narration thereof. He alsogives us an account of that ark wherein Noah, the origin ofour race, was preserved, when it was brought to the highestpart of the Armenian mountains: after which he gives us acatalogue of the posterity of Noah, and adds the years of theirchronology, and at length comes down to Nebolassar, who wasking of Babylon and of the Chaldeans. And when he was







OCR Output








158 SEDITIONS AT JERUSALEM. [ii. V.


country, and those of profane persons with those of thepriests, and the blood of all sorts of dead carcasses stood inlakes In the holy courts themselves. And now, " O mostwretched city, what misery so great as this didst thou sufferfrom- the Romans, when they came to purify thee from thyintestine hatred ? For thou couldest be no longer a place fitfor God, nor couldest thou long continue in being, after thouhadst been a sepulehre for the bodies of thine own people,and hadst made the holy house itself a burying-place in thiscivil war of thine. Yet' mayest thou again grow better, ifperchance thou wilt hereafter appease the anger of that Godwho is the author of thy destruction." But I must restrainmyself from these passions by the rules of history, since thisis not a proper time for domestical lamentations, but for his­torical narrations: I, therefore, return to the operations thatfollow in this sedition.
4. And now there were three treacherous factions in thocity, the one parted from the other. Eleazar and his party,that kept the sacred first-fruits, came against John in theircups. Those that were with John plundered the populace,and went out with zeal against Simon. This Simon had hissupply of provisions from the city in opposition to the sedi­tious. When, therefore, John was assaulted on both sides,he made his men turn about, throwing his darts upon thosecitizens that came up against him, from the cloisters he hadin his possession, while he opposed those that attacked himfrom the temple by his engines of war. And if at any timehe was freed from those that were above him, which happenedfrequently, from their being drunk and tired, he sallied outwith a great number upon Simon and his party; and this hedid always in such parts of the city as he could come at, till


1 This is an excellent reflection of Josephus, including liis hopes of the re­storation of the Jews upon their repentance. See Antiq. Ii. iv. ch. vii. sect,46, which is the grand Hope of Israel, as Manasseh-ben-Israel, the famousJewish rabbi, stales it, in his small but remarkable treatise on that subject,of which the Jewish prophets are every where full. Sco the principal ofthose prophecies collected together at the end of the Essay on the Revela­tion, page Vl2. &c.







OCR Output








154 TITUS AT JERUSALEM. [b. IV-


polis, which is distant twenty furlongs from Alexandria:there he put his army on board some long ships, and sailedupon the river along the Mendesian Nomus, as far as thocity Thmuis: there he got out of the ships, and walked onfoot, and lodged all night at a small city called Tunis. Hissecond station was Heracleopolis, and his third Pclusium ; hethen refreshed his army at that place for two days, and onthe third passed over the mouths of Nile at Pelusium; hethen proceeded one station over the desert, and pitched hiscamp at the temple of the Casian Jupiter,1 and on the nextday at Ostracine. This station had no water, but the peopleof the country make use of water brought from other places.After this he rested at Rhinocolura, and from thence he wentto Raphia, which was his fourth station. This city is thebeginning of Syria. For his fifth station he pitched his campat Gaza; after which he came to Ascalon, and thence toJamnia, and after that to Joppa, and from Joppa to Caesarea,having taken a resolution to gather all his other forces toge­ther at that place.
1 There are coins of this Casian Jupiter still extant, as Spanheim here in­forms us.







OCR Output








C. VII.] EVENTS OF THE SIEGE. 197


the Romans. But when they fought them from the walls,they were too hard for them ; the Romans being encouragedby their power, joined to their skill, as were the Jews bytheir boldness, which was nourished by the fear they werein, and that hardiness which is natural to our nation undercalamities; they were also encouraged still by the hope ofdeliverance, as were the Romans by their hopes of subduingthem in a little time. Nor did either side grow weary; butattacks and fightings upon the wall, and perpetual sallies outin bodies, were there all the day long; nor were there anysort of warlike engagements that were not then put in use.And the night itself had much ado to part them, when theybegan to fight in the morning; nay, the night itself waspassed without sleep on both sides, and was more uneasythan the day to them, while the one was afraid lest the wallshould be taken, and the other lest the Jews should makesallies upon their camps: both sides also lay in their armorduring the night-time, and thereby were ready at the firstappearance of light to go to the battle. Now, among theJews the ambition was, who should undergo the first dangers,and thereby gratify their commanders. Above all, they hada great veneration and dread of Simon ; and to that degreewas he regarded by every one of those that were under him,that at his command they were very ready to kill themselveswith their own hands. What made the Romans so courageouswas their usual custom of conquering, and disuse of beingdefeated, their constant wars, and perpetual warlike exercises,and the grandeur of their dominion : and what was now theirchief encouragement, Titus, who was present every wherewith them all; for it appeared a terrible thing to grow wearywhile Caesar was there, and fought bravely, as well as theydid, and was himself at once an eye-witness of such as be­haved themselves valiantly, and he who was to reward themalso. It was, besides, esteemed an advantage at present tohave any one's valor known by Coesar, on which accountmany of them appeared to have more alacrity than strengthto answer it. And now, as the Jews were about this timestanding in array before the wall, and that in a strong body,


17*







OCR Output








JOSEPHUS'S DISCOURSE ABOUT HADES. 457


3. For there is one descent into this region, at whose gatewe helieve there stands an archangel with a host; which gatewhen those pass through that are conducted down by theangels appointed over souls, they do not go the same way;but the just are guided to the right hand, and are led withhymns, sung by the angels appointed over that place, unto aregion of light, in which the just have dwelt from thebeginning of the world; not constrained by necessity, butever enjoying the prospect of the good things they see, andrejoicing in the expectation of those new enjoyments whichwill be peculiar to every one of them, and esteeming thosethings beyond what we have here : with whom there is noplace of toil, no burning heat, no piercing cold, nor anybriars there; but the countenance of the fathers and of thejust, which they see, always smiles upon them, while theywait for that rest and eternal new life in heaven which is tosucceed this region. This place we call the bosom of Abraham.
4. But as to the unjust, they are dragged by force to tholeft hand by the angels allotted for punishment, no longergoing with a good-will, but as prisoners driven by violence ;to whom are sent the angels appointed over them to reproachthem, and threaten them with their terrible looks, and tothrust them still downward. Now those angels that are setover these souls drag them into the neighborhood of hellitself; who, when they are hard by it, continually hear thenoise of it, and do not stand clear of the hot vapor itself; butwhen they have a near view of this spectacle, as of a terribleand exceeding great prospect of fire, they are struck with afearful expectation of a future judgment, and in effectpunished thereby: and not only so, but where they see theplace [or choir] of the fathers and of the just, even herebyare they punished; for a chaos deep and large is fixedbetween them; insomuch that a just man that hath com­passion upon them cannot be admitted, nor can one that isunjust, if he were bold enough to attempt it, pass over it.
5. This is the discourse concerning Hades, wherein thesouls of all men are confined until a proper season, whichGcd hath determined, when he will mako a resurrection of
IV. — 39







OCR Output








B. II.] AGAINST A PI ON. 418


mean not particular men, but entire and large nations them­selves also; for those anciently named Iberi, and Tyrrheni,and Sabini, arc now called Romani. And if Apion rejectthis way of obtaining the privilege of a citizen of Alexandria,let him abstain from calling himself an Alexandrian here­after ; for otherwise how can he who was born in the veryheart of Egypt be an Alexandrian, if this way of acceptingsuch a privilege, of which he would have us deprived, be onceabrogated ? although, indeed, these Romans, who are now thelords of the habitable earth, have forbidden the Egyptians tohave the privileges of any city whatsoever; while this finefellow, who is willing to partake of such a privilege himself ashe is forbidden to make use of, endeavors by calumnies to de­prive those of it that have justly received it: for Alexanderdid not, therefore, get some of our nation to Alexandria, be­cause he wanted inhabitants for this his city, on whose build­ing he had bestowed so much pains : but this was given to ourpeople as a reward, because he had, upon a careful trial, foundthem all to have been men of virtue and fidelity to him; for,as Hecateus says concerning us, " Alexander honored ournation to such a degree that, for the equity and the fidelitywhich the Jews had exhibited to him, he permitted them tohold the country of Samaria free from tribute. Of the samemind also was Ptolemy, the son of Lagus, as to those Jewswho dwelt at Alexandria;" for he intrusted the fortresses ofEgypt into their hands, as believing they would keep themfaithfully and valiantly for him; and when he was desirousto secure the government of Cyrene and the other cities ofLibya to himself, he sent a party of Jews to inhabit them.And for his successor Ptolemy, who was called Philadelphia,he did not only set all those of our nation free who were cap­tives under him, but did frequently1 give money [for theirransom;] and, what was his greatest work of all, he had a


1 For iroXXa<i(, or frequeatly, I wuuld here read noXXa, a great deal of money;for we, indeed, read both in Aristeas and Josephus, that this Ptolemy Phila­delphia once gave a very great sum of money to redeem above 100,000 Jew­ish captives, but not of any sums of money, which he disbursed on theiraccount at other times, that I know of.


35*







OCR Output








274 PRECEDING SIGNS. [B. VI.


before the Jews' rebellion, and before those commotions whichpreceded the war, when the people were come in great crowdsto the feast of unleavened bread, on the eighth day' of themonth Xanthicus [Nisan,] and at the ninth hour of the night,so great a light shone round the altar and the holy house, thatit appeared to be bright day-time, which light lasted for halfan hour. This light seemed to bo a good sign to the unskilful,but was so interpreted by the sacred scribes as to portendthose events that followed immediately upon it. At the samefestival also, a heifer, as she was led by the high-priest to besacrificed, brought forth a Iamb in the midst of the temple.Moreover, the eastern gate of the inner [court of the temple,]which was of brass, and vastly heavy, and had been with diffi­culty shut by twenty men, and rested upon a basis armed withiron, and had bolts fastened very deep into the firm floor,which was there made of one entire stone, was seen to beopened of its own accord about the sixth hour of the night.Now those that kept wateh in the temple came hereupon run­ning to the captain of the temple, and told him of it, who thencame up thither, and not without great difficulty was able toshut the gate again. This also appeared to the vulgar to bea very happy prodigy, as if God did thereby open them thegate of happiness. But the men of learning understood it,that the security of their holy house was dissolved of its ownaccord, and that the gato «as opened for the advantage oftheir enemies. So these publicly declared that the signal fore­showed the desolation that was coming upon them. Besidesthese, a few days after that feast, on the one and twentiethday of the month Artemisius [Jyar,] a certain prodigious andincredible phenomenon appeared: 1 suppose the account of itwould seem to be a fable, were it not related by those thatsaw it, and were not the events that followed it of so consid­


1 Since Josephus still used the S^ro-Macedoniau month Xanthicus for theJewish month Nisan, this 8th, or, as Nicephorus read it, this ninth of Xan­thicus or Nisan was almost a week before the Passover on the 14th : aboutwhich time wo learn from St. Johu, that many used to go out of the country toJerusalem to purify themselves, John xi. 55, with xii. 1, in agreement with Jo-sepbus also. 1i. v. ch. iii. sect. 1. And it might well be, that in the sigbt ofthese this extraordinary Tght might appear.







OCR Output








424 FLAVIUSJOSEPHUS [b. II.


priests succeed in the performance of their sacrifices, andassemble together at midday, and receive the keys of thetemple, and the vessels by tale, without any thing relating tofood or drink being carried into the temple; nay, we are notallowed to offer such things at the altar, excepting what isprepared for the sacrifices.
9. What then, can we say of Apion, but that he examinednothing that concerned these things, while still he uttered in­credible words about them ? but it is a great shame for agrammarian not to be able to write true history. Now, if heknew the purity of our temple, he hath entirely omitted totake notice of it: but he forges a story about the siezing of aGrecian, about ineffable food, and the most delicious prepara­tion of dainties; and pretends that strangers could go intoa place whercinto the noblest men among the Jews are notallowed to enter, unless they be priests. This, therefore, isthe utmost degree of impiety, and a voluntary lie, in order tothe delusion of those who will not examine into the truth ofmatters: whereas such unspeakable mischiefs as are aboverelated, have been occasioned by such calumnies that areraised upon us.
10. Nay, this miracle of piety derides us further and addsthe following pretended facts to his former fable ; for he says,that this man related how, " while the Jews were once in along war with the Idumeans, there came a man out of one ofthe cities of the Idumeans, who there had worshiped Apollo.This man, whose name is said to have been Zabitlus, came tothe Jews, and promised that he would deliver Apollo, the godof Dora, into their hands, and that he would come to ourtemple, if they would all come up with him, and bring thewhole multitude of the Jews with them: that Zabidus madehim a certain wooden instrument, and put it round abouthim, and set three rows of lamps therein, and walked aftersuch a manner that he appeared to those that stood a greatway off him to be a kiud of star walking upon the earth : thatthe Jews were terribly frightened at so surprising an appear­ance, and stood very quiet at a distance; and that Zabidus,while they continued so very quiet, went into the holy house,







OCR Output








C. III.] OF THE JEWS. 259


pains they had taken; at which procedure of theirs many ofthe most inconsiderate among the Komans, who were carriedaway with violent passions, followed hard after them as theywere retiring, and applied ladders to the cloister, and got upto it suddenly: but the more prudent part of them, whenthey understood this unaccountable retreat of the Jews, stoodstill where they were before. However, the cloister was fullof those that were gone up the ladders; at which time theJews set it all on fire; and as the flame burst out every whereon the sudden, the Romans that were out of the danger wereseized with a very great consternation, as were those thatwere in the midst of the danger in the utmost distress. Sowhen they perceived themselves surrounded with the flames,some of them threw themselves down backwards into thecity, and some among their enemies [in the temple;] as didmany leap down to their own men, and broke their limbs topieces; but a great number of those that were going to takethese violent methods were prevented by the fire, thoughsome prevented the fire by their own swords. However, thefire was on the sudden carried so far as to surround thosewho would have otherwise perished. As for Caesar himself,he could not, however, but commiserate those that thusperished, although they got up thither without any order forso doing, since there was no way of giving them any relief.Yet was this some comfort to those that were destroyed, thatevery body might see that person grieve for whose sake theycame to their end; for he cried out openly to them, andleaped up, and exhorted those that were about him to do theirutmost to relieve them. So every one of them died cheer­fully, as carrying along with him these words, and this inten­tion of Caesar, as a sepulehral monument. Some there were,indeed, who retired into the wall of the cloister, which wasbroad, and were preserved out of the fire, but were then sur­rounded by the Jews; and although they made resistanceagainst the Jews, for a long time, yet were they wounded bythem, and at length they all fell down dead.
2. At the last, a young man among them, whose name wasLongus, became a decoration to this sad affair, and while







OCR Output








DISSERTATION I. 469


not in order to the putting away [or the remission] of somesins [only,] but for the purification of the body, supposingstill that the soul were thoroughly purified beforehand byrighteousness. Now when [many] others came in crowdsabout him, for they were greatly delighted in hearing hiswords, Herod was afraid that this so great power of per­suading men might tend to some sedition or other, for theyseemed to be disposed to do every thing he should advisethem to; so he supposed it better to prevent any attempt fora mutation from him by cutting him off, that after any suchmutation should be brought about, and the public shouldsuffer, to repent [of such negligence.] Accordingly, he wassent a prisoner, out of Herod's suspicious temper, to Mache-rus, the castle I before mentioned, and was there put todeath. When Josephus had said this of John, he makesmention also of our Savior in the same history, after thismanner : — Now there was about this time one Jesus, a wiseman, if it be lawful to call him a man, for he was a doer ofwonderful works, a teacher of such men as receive the truthwith pleasure ; he drew over to him both many of the Jews,and many of the Gentiles also: he was the Christ. Andwhen Pilate, at the suggestion of the principal men amongus, had condemned him to the cross, those that loved him atthe first did not forsake him, for he appeared to them aliveagain the third day, as the divine prophets had foretold these,and ten thousand other wonderful things concerning him.And still the tribe of Christians, so named from him, are notextinct at this day. And since this writer, sprung from theHebrews themselves, hath delivered things above in his ownwork, concerning John the Baptist and our Savior, what roomis there for any farther evasion? &c.
Now James was so wonderful a person, and was so cele­brated by all others for righteousness, that the judicious Jewsthought this to have been the occasion of that siege of Jeru­salem, which came on presently after his martyrdom, and thatit befell them for no other reason, than that impious fact theywere guilty of against him. Josephus, therefore, did notrefuse to attest thereto in writing, by the words following : —IV.—40







OCR Output








304 VESPASIAN'S RECEPTION AT ROME. [B. VII.


was then put a stop to, which was likely, by the fury where­with it was carried along, to have gone over the whole city,)Antiochus accused the Jews as the occasion of all the mis­chief that was done. Now this induced the people of Anti-och, who were now under the immediate persuasion, by reasonof the disorder they were in, that this calumny was true, andwould have been under the same persuasion, even thoughthey had not borne an ill-will at the Jews before, to believethis man's accusation, especially when they considered whathad been done before, and this to such a degree, that they allfell violently upon those that were accused, and this likemadmen, in a very furious rage also, even as if they had seenthe Jews in a manner setting fire themselves to the city: norwas it without difficulty that one Cneas Collegas, the legate,could prevail with them to permit the affairs to be laid beforeCoesar; for as to Cecennius Petus, the president of Syria,Vespasian had already sent him away; and so it happened,that he was not yet come back thither. But when Collegashad made a careful inquiry into the matter, he found out thetruth, and that not one of those Jews that were accused byAntiochus had any hand in it, but that all was done by somevile persons greatly in debt, who supposed, that if they couldonce set fire to the market-place and burn the public records,they should have no farther demands made upon them. Sothe Jews were under great disorder and terror, in the uncer­tain expectations of what would be the upshot of these accu­sations against them.


CHAPTER IV.
HOW VESPASIAN WAS RECEIVED AT ROME; A3 ALSO HOW THEGEHMAN8 REVOLTED FROM THE ROMANS, BUT WERE SUB­DUED. THAT THE SARMATIANS OVERRAN MYSIA, BUT WERECOMPELLED TO RETURN TO THEIR OWN COUNTRY AGAIN.
§ 1. And now Titus Caesar, upon the news that was broughthim concerning his father, that his coming was much desiredby all the Italian cities, and that Rome especially received







OCR Output








C. VI.] NICANOR WOUNDED. 180


at the first onset the Romans made upon them, this lastedbut awhile; for they returned to their former madness, andseparated one from another, and fought it out, and did everything that the besiegers could desire them to do; for theynever suffered any thing that was worse from the Romansthan they made each other suffer; nor was there any miseryendured by the city, after these men's actions, that could beesteemed new. But it was most of all unhappy before it wasoverthrown, while those that took it did it a greater kind­ness ; for I venture to affirm, that the sedition destroyedthe city, and the Romans destroyed the sedition, which itwas a much harder thing to do than to destroy the walls; sothat wo may justly ascribe our misfortunes to our own peo­ple, and the just vengeance taken on them to the Romans;as to which matter let every one determine by the actionson both sides.
2. Now, when affairs within the city were in this posture,Titus went round the city on the outside with some chosenhorsemen, and looked about for a proper place where hemight make an impression upon the walls; but as he was indoubt where he could possibly make an attack on any side,(for the place was no way accessible where the valleys were,and on the other side, the first wall appeared too strong tobe shaken by the engines,) he thereupon thought it best tomake his assault upon the monument of John the high-priest;for there it was that the first fortification was lower, and thesecond was not joined to it, the builders neglecting to buildthe wall strong where the new city was not much inhabited:hero also was an easy passage to the third wall, throughwhich he thought to take the upper city, and, through thetower of Antonia, the temple itself. But, at this time, as howas going round about the city, one of his friends, whosename was JVicanor, was wounded with a dart on his leftshoulder, as he approached, together with Josephus, too nearthe wall, and attempted to discourse to those that were uponthe wall about terms of peace; for he was a person knownby them. On this account it was that Cuesar, as soon as heknew their vehemence that they would not bear even such as







OCR Output








APPENDIX.


DISSERTATION I.
THE TESTIMONIES OP JOSEPHUS CONCERNING JESUS CHRIST,JOHN THE BAPTIST, AND JAMES THE JUST, VINDICATED.
Since we meet with several important testimonies in Jose-phus, the Jewish historian, concerning John the Baptist, theforerunner of Jesus of Nazareth, concerning Jesus of Naza­reth himself, and concerning James the Just, the brother ofJesus of Nazareth ; and since the principal testimony, whichis that concerning Jesus of Nazareth himself, has of late beengreatly questioned by many, and rejected by some of thelearned as spurious, it will be fit for me, who have ever de­clared my firm belief that these testimonies were genuine, toset down fairly some of the original evidence and citations Ihave met with in the first fifteen centuries concerning them,and then to make proper observations upon that evidence, forthe reader's more complete satisfaction.
But before I produce the citations themselves out of Jose-phus, give me leave to prepare the reader's attention, by set­ting down the sentiments of perhaps the most learned person,and the most competent judge that ever was, as to the au­thority of Josephus: I mean of Joseph Scaliger in the Prole­gomena to his book, De JZmendatione Temporum, p. 17."Josephus is the most diligent and the greatest lover oftruth of all writers; nor are we afraid to affirm of him, thatit is more safe to believe him, not only as to the affairs of theJews, but also as to those that are foreign to them, than allthe Greek and Latin writers; and this, because his fidelityand his compass of learning are every where conspicuous."


(405)







OCR Output








82 SURRENDER OF GISCHi A. [b. IV.


of the month Hyperbereteus [Tisri,] whereas the city hadfirst revolted on the four and twentieth day of the monthGorpieus [Elul.]
CHAPTER II.


THE SURRENDER OF GISCHALA, WHILE JOHN FLIES AWAY FROMIT TO JERUSALEM.
§ 1. Now no place of Galilee remained to be taken but thesmall city of Gischala, the inhabitants of which yet were de­sirous of peace; for they were generally husbandmen, andalways applied themselves to cultivate the fruits of the earth.However, there were a great number that belonged to a bandof robbers, that were already corrupted, and had crept inamong them, and some of the governing part of the citizenswere sick of the same distemper. It was John, the son of acertain man whose name was Levi, that drew them into thisrebellion, and encouraged them in it. He was a cunningknave, and of a temper that could put on various shapes ;very rash in expecting great things, and very sagacious inbringing about what he hoped for. It was known to everybody that he was fond of war, in order to thrust himself intoauthority: and the seditious part of the people of Gischalawere under his management, by whose means the populace,who seemed ready to send ambassadors in order to surrender,waited for the coming of the Romans in battle array. Ves­pasian sent against them Titus, with a thousand horsemen,but withdrew the tenth legion to Scythopolis, while he re­turned to Caesarea with the two other legions, that he mightallow them to refresh themselves after their Ion;? and hardcampaign, thinking withal that the plenty which was in thosecities would improve their bodies and their spirits against thedifficulties they were to go through afterwards; for he sawthere would be occasion for great pains about Jerusalem,which was not yet taken, because it was the royal city, andthe principal city of the whole nation, and because those thathad run away from the war in other places got all together







OCR Output








228 OREAT SLAUGHTERS [B. V.


CHAPTER XIII.
THE GllEAT SLAUGHTERS AND SACRILEGE THAT WERE INJERUSALEM.
§ 1. Accordingly Simon would not suffer Matthias, bywhose means he got possession of the city, to go off withouttorment. This Matthias was the son of Boethus, and wasone of the high-priests, one that had been very faithful to thepeople, and in great esteem with them : he, when the multi­tude were distressed by the zealots, among whom John wasnumbered, persuaded the people to admit this Simon to comein to assist them, while he had made no terms with him, norexpected any thing that was evil from him. But when Simonwas come in, and had gotten the city under his power, heesteemed him that had advised them to admit him as hisenemy equally with the rest, as looking upon that advice asa piece of his simplicity only: so he had him then broughtbefore him, and condemned to die for being on the side of tneRomans, without giving him leave to make his defence. Hecondemned also his three sons to die with him; for as to thefourth, he prevented him by running away to Titus before.And when he begged for this, that he might he slain beforehis sons, and that as a favor, on account that he had procuredthe gates of the city to be opened to him, he gave order thathe should be slain the last of them also; so he was not slaintill he had seen his sons slain before his eyes, and that bybeing produced over against the Romans; for such a chargehad Simon given to Ananus, the son of Bamadus, who wasthe most barbarous of all his guards. He also jested uponhim, and told him, that he might now see whether those towhom he intended to go over would send him any succors ornot; but still he forbade their dead bodies should be buried.After the slaughter of these, a certain priest, Ananias, theson of Masambulus, a person of eminency, as also Aristeus,the scribe of the sanhedrim, and born at Emmaus, and withhim fifteen men of figure among the people, were slain. They







OCR Output








472 DISSERTATION I.


Chrysostom, lib. iv. epist. 225. — There was one Josephus, aJew of the greatest reputation, and one that was zealous ofthe law; one also that paraphrased the Old Testament withtruth, and acted valiantly for the Jews, and had showed thattheir settlement was nobler that can be described by words.Now since he made their interest give place to truth, for hewould not support the opinion of impious men, I think itnecessary to set down his words. What then does he say ?Now there was about that time Jesus, a wise man, if it belawful to call him a man, for he was a doer of wonderfulworks, a teacher of such men as receive the truth withpleasure. He drew over to him both many of the Jews, andmany of the Gentiles : he was the Christ. And when Pilate,at the suggestion of the principal men among us, had con­demned him to the cross, those that loved him at first did notforsake him, for he appeared to them the third day alive again,as the divine prophets had said these, and a vast number ofother wonderful things concerning him; and the tribe ofChristians, so named from him, arc not extinct at this day.Now I cannot but wonder greatly at this man's love oftruth in many respects, but chiefly where he says — "Jesuswas a teacher of men which received the truth with pleasure."About A. D. 440. Sozomon. Hist. Ecrfes. lib. cap. 1. —Now Josephus, the son of Matthias, a priest, a man of verygreat note both among the Jews and the Romans, may wellbe a witness.of credit as to the truth of Christ's history ; forho scruples to call him a man, as being a doer of wonderfulworks, and a teacher of the words of truth : he names himChrist openly; and is not ignorant that he was condemned tothe cross, and appeared on the third day alive; and that tenthousand other wonderful things were foretold of him by thedivine prophets. He testifies also, that those whom he drewover to him, being many of the Gentiles as well as of theJews, continued to love him ; and that the tribe named fromhim was not then extinct. Now ho seems to me, by this hisrelation, almost to proclaim that Christ is God. However,he appears to have been so affected by the strangeness of thething, as to run as it were in a sort of middle way, so as not







OCR Output








500 DISSERTATION II.


passage, he says, that " Isaac was fully persuaded of whatho knew was to come;" and, therefore, " cheerfully yieldedhimself up for a sacrifice." Nor, indeed, does that name ofthis place, Jehovah Jireh, which continued till the days ofMoses, and signified, God will see, or, rather, God will pro­vide, seem to be given it by Abraham on any other account,than that God would there, in the fulness of time, "providehimself a lamb [that lamb of God, which was to take awaythe sins of the world]1 for a burnt-offering."
But if, now after all, it be objected, that how peculiar andhow typical soever the circumstances of Abraham and Isaacmight be in themselves, of which the heathens about themcould have little notion, yet such a divine command to Abra­ham for slaying his beloved son Isaac must, however, be ofvery ill example to the Gentile world, and that it probablydid cither first occasion, or, at least, greatly encourage theirwicked practices, in offering their children for sacrifices totheir idols, I answer by the next consideration.
18. That this objection is so far from truth, that God'spublic and miraculous prohibition of the execution of thiscommand to Abraham, (which command itself the Gentileswould not then at all be surprised at, because it was so liketo their own usual practices), as well as God's substitutionof a vicarious oblation, seems to have been the very occasionof the immediate oblation of those impious sacrifices byTethmosis, or Amosis, among the neighboring Egyptians,and of the substitution of more inoffensive ones there insteadof them. Take the account of this abolition, which we shallpresently prove, was about the time of Abraham's offeringup his son Isaac, as it is preserved by Porphyry, fromManetho, the famous Egyptian historian and chronologer,which is also cited from Porphyry by Eusebius and Theodorit.—"Amosis,"2 says Porphyry, "abolished the law for slay­ing of men in IIeliopolis of Egypt, as Manetho bears wit­ness, in his book of Antiquity and Piety. They were sacri­ficed to Juno, and were examined, as were the pure calves,


'John, i. 29. » Marsh, p. 301.







OCR Output








C. V.] PRECEDING SIGNS. 275


erablo a nature as to deserve such signals: for, before sun-setting, chariots and troops of soldiers in their armor wereseen running about among the clouds, and surrounding ofcities. Moreover, at the feast which we call Pentecost, as thepriests were going by night into the inner1 [court of the]temple, as their custom was, to perform their sacred minis­trations, they said that in the first place they felt a quaking,and heard a great noise, and after that they heard a sound asof a multitude, saying, " Let us remove hence." But whatis still more terrible, there was one Jesus the son of Ananus,a plebeian and a husbandman, who four years before the warbegan, and at that time the city was in very great peace andprosperity, came to that feast whereon it is our custom forevery one to make tabernacles to God in the temple,2 began,on a sudden to cry aloud, — "A voice from the east, a voicefrom the west, a voice from the four winds, a voice againstJerusalem and the holy house, a voice against the bridegroomsand the brides, and a voice against this whole people." Thiswas his cry, as he went about by day and by night, in all thelanes of the city. However, certain of the most eminentamong the populace had great indignation at this dire cry ofhis, and took up the man, and gave him a great number ofsevere stripes: yet did he not cither say any thing for him­self, or any thing peculiar to those that chastised him, butstill went on with the same words which he cried before.Hereupon our rulers, supposing, as the case proved to be, thatthis was a sort of divine fury in the man, brought him to theRoman procurator, where he was whipped till his bones werelaid bare : yet did not he make any supplication for himself,nor shed any tears; but turning his voice to the most lamentable


1 This hero seems to be the court of the priests.
* Both Reland and Havercamp in this place follow after the naturalpunctuation and sense of Josephus, and this contrary to the opinion of Va-lesius and Dr. Hudson, lest Josephus should say that the Jews built boothsor tents within the temple, at the feast of Tabernacles; which the latter rab­bins will not allow to have been the ancient practice : but then, since it isexpressly told us in Nchemiah, viii. 10, that in still older times, the Jcwtmade booths in the court of the house of God at that festival, Josephus may wellbe permitted to say the same. And, indeed, the modern rabbins are of verysmall authority in all such matters of remote antiquity.







OCR Output








436 FLAVIUSJOSEPHUS [B. II.


what great diligence they should use in their occupations,and what times of rest should be interposed; that, by livingunder that law as under a father and a master, we might beguilty of no sin, neither voluntary nor out of ignorance; forhe did not suffer the guilt of ignorance to go on withoutpunishment, but demonstrated the law to be the best and themost necessary instruction of all others, permitting the peopleto leave off their other employments, and to assemble togetherfor the hearing of the law, and learning it exactly, and thisnot once or twice, or oftener, but every week ; which thing allthe other legislators seem to have neglected.
19. And, indeed, the greatest part of mankind arc so farfrom living according to their own laws, that they hardlyknow them; but when they have sinned, they learn fromothers that they have transgressed the law. Those also whoare in the highest and principal posts of the government con­fess they are not acquainted with those laws, and are obligedto take such persons for their assessors in public administra­tions as profess to have skill in those laws: but for our people,if any body do but ask any one of them about our laws, hewill more readily tell them all than he will tell his own name,and this in consequence of our having learned them imme­diately as soon as ever we became sensible of any thing, andof our having them as it were engraven on our souls. Ourtransgressors of them are but few, and it is impossible, whenany do offend, to escape punishment.
20. And this very thing it is that principally creates sucha wonderful agreement of minds amongst us all; for thisentire agreement of ours in all our notions concerning God,and our having no difference in our course of life and manners,procures among us the most excellent concord of these ourmanners that is anywhere among mankind: for no otherpeople but the Jews have avoided all discourses about Godthat any way contradict one another, which yet are frequentamong other nations; and this is true not only among ordi­nary persons, according as every one is affected, but some ofthe philosophers have been insolent enough to indulge suchcontradictions, while some of them have undertaken to use







OCR Output








B. II.] AGAINST APION. 425


and carried oft'that golden head of an ass (for so facetiouslydoes he write,) and then went his way back again to Dora ingreat haste." And say you so, sir? as I may reply: thendoes Apion load the ass, that is himself, and lays on him aburden of fooleries and lies: for he writes of places that haveno being, and not knowing the cities he speaks of, he changestheir situation ; for Idumea borders upon our country, and isnear to Gaza, in which there is no such city as Dora;although there be, it is true, a city named Dora in Phoe­nicia, near mount Carmel, but it is four days journey fromIdumea.1 Now, then, why does this man accuse us, becausewe have not gods in common with other nations ? If ourforefathers were so easily prevailed upon to have Apollocome to them, and thought they saw him walking upon theearth, and the stars with him; for certainly those who haveso many festivals, wherein they light lamps, must yet, at thisrate, have never seen a candlestick ! but still it seems thatwhile Zabidus took his journey over the country, where wereso many ten thousands of people, nobody met him. lle also,it seems, even in a time of war, found the walls of Jerusalemdestitute of guards : I omit the rest. Now, the doors of theholy house were seventy2 cubits high and twenty cubitsbroad; they were all plated over with gold, and almost ofsolid gold itself, and there were no fewer than twenty3 menrequired to shut them every day; nor was it lawful ever toleave them open, though it seems, this lamp-bearer of oursopened them easily, or thought he opened them, as he thoughthe had the ass's head in his hand. Whether, therefore, hereturned it to us again, or whether Apion took it and broughtit into the temple again, that Antiochus might find it, andafford a handle for a second fable of Apion's, is uncertain.
11. Apion also tells a false story, when he mentions anoath of ours, as if we "swore by God, the maker of the


1 Judea in the Greek, by a gross mistake of the transcribers.
2 Seven, in the Greek, by a like gross mistake of the transcribers. Seeof the War, B. v. eh. v. sect. 4.
3 Two hundred, in the Greek, contrary to the twenty in the Wak-, B. vii.cb. T. sect. 3.


36*







OCR Output








C. II.] CAPTURE OF SIMON THE TYRANT. 299


of Armenia and Cappadocia: he also thought fit that two ofthe legions should stay with him till he should go intoEgypt. He then went down with his army to that Caesareawhich lay by the seaside, and there laid up the rest of hisspoils in great quantities, and gave order that the captivesshould be kept there; for the winter season hindered himthen from sailing into Italy.


CHAPTER II.
HOW TITCS EXHIBITED ALL SORTS OF SHOWS AT C&SAREAPHILIPPI. CONCERNING SIMON THE TYRANT, HOW HE WASTAKEN, AND RESERVED FOR THE TRIUMPH.
§ 1. Now, at the same time that Titus Caesar lay at thesiege of Jerusalem, did Vespasian go on board a merchantship, and sailed from Alexandria to Rhodes, whence he sailedaway in ships with three rows of oars : and as he touched atseveral cities that lay in his road, he was joyfully receivedby them all, and so passed over from Ionia into Greece;whence he set sail from Corcyra to the promontory of Iapyx,whence he took his journey by land. But as for Titus, hemarched from that Caesarea which lay by the seaside, andcame to that which is named Csesarea Phillippi, and staidthere a considerable time, and exhibited all sorts of showsthere. And here a great number of the captives were destroyed,some being thrown to wild beasts, and others in multitudesforced to kill one another, as if they were their enemies. Andhere it was that Titus was informed of the seizure of Simon,the son of Gioras, which was made after the mannerfollowing: — This Simon, during the siege of Jerusalem, wasin the upper city, but when the Roman army was gotten withinthe walls, and were laying the city waste, he then took themost faithful of his friends with him, and among them somethat were stone-cutters, with those iron tools which belongedto their occupation, and as great a quantity of provisions aswould suffice them for a long time, and let himself and all







OCR Output








C. IX.J VESPASIAN. 133


it.1 It was of old a most happy land, both for the fruits itbore and the riches of its cities, although it be now all burntup. It is related how, for the impiety of its inhabitants, itwas burnt by lightning; in consequence of which there arestill the remainders of that divine fire; and the traces [orshadows] of the five cities are still to be seen, as well as the ,ashes growing in their fruits, which fruits have a color as ifthey were fit to be eaten; but if you pluck them with yourhands, they dissolve into smoke and ashes. And thus whatis related of this land of Sodom hath these marks of credibilitywhich our very sight affords us.


CHAPTER IX.
THAT VESPASIAN, AFTER HE HAD TAKEN GADAUA, MADEPREPARATION FOR THE SIEGE OF JERUSALEM ; BUT THAT,UPON HIS HEARING OF THE DEATH OF NERO, HE CHANGEDHIS INTENTIONS : AS ALSO, CONCERNING SIMON OF GERASA.
§ 1. And now Vespasian had fortified all the places roundabout Jerusalem, and erected citadels at Jericho and Adida,and placed garrisons in them both, partly out of his own Ro­mans, and partly out of the body of his auxiliaries. He alsosent Lucius Annius to Gerasa, and delivered to him a bodyof horsemen, and a considerable number of footmen. Sowhen he had taken the city, which he did at the first onset,he slew a thousand of those young men who had not pre­vented him by flying away ; but he took their families captive,and permitted his soldiers to plunder them of their effects;after which he set fire to their houses, and went away to theadjoining villages, while the men of power fled away, and theweaker part were destroyed, and what was remaining was allburnt down. And now the war having gone through all themountainous country, and all the plain country also, thosethat were at Jerusalem were deprived of the liberty of going
1 See the note on B. v. oh. xiii. sect. C.
IV. —12







OCR Output








BOOK V.


CONTAINING
THE INTERVAL OF NEAR SIX MONTHS.
FROM THE COMING OF TITUS TO BESIEGE JERUSALEM TO THEGREAT EXTREMITY TO WHICH THE JEWS WERE REDUCED.


CHAPTER I.
CONCERNING THE SEDITIONS AT JERUSALEM, AND WHAT TERRI­BLE MISERIES AFFLICTED THE CITY BY THEIR MEANS.
§ 1. When, therefore, Titus had marched over that desertwhich lies between Egypt and Syria, in the manner foremen-tioned, he came to Caesarea, having resolved to set his forcesin order at that place before he began the war. Nay, indeed,while he was assisting his father at Alexandria in settling thatgovernment which had been newly conferred upon them byGod, it so happened, that the sedition at Jerusalem was re­vived, and parted into three factions; and that one factionfought against the other, which partition in such evil casesmay be said to be a good thing, and the effect of divine jus­tice. Now, as to the attack the zealots made upon the people,and which I esteem the beginning of the city's destruction, ithath been already explained after an accurate manner; asalso whence it arose, and to how great a mischief it was in­creased. But, for the present sedition, one should not mis­take if he called it a sedition begotten by another sedition,and to be like a wild beast grown mad, which for want offood from abroad, fell now upon eating its own flesh.


(155)







OCR Output








DISSERTATION II. 495


of God,1 who are ever found to have had an entire certaintyof those their revelations: and what evidently shows they werenot deceived is this, that the events and consequences of thingsafterward always corresponded, and secured them of thetruth of such divine revelations. Thus, the first miraculousvoice from heaven,2 calling to Abraham not to execute thiscommand, and the performance of these eminent promisesmade by the second voice,3 on account of his obedience tothat command, are demonstrations that Abraham's commissionfor what he did was truly divine, and are an entire justifica­tion of his conduct in this matter. The words of the firstvoice from heaven will come hereafter to be set down in afitter place, but the glorious promises made to Abraham'sobedience by the second voice must here be produced fromverses 15, 16, 17, 18. "And the angel of the Lord calledunto Abraham out of heaven the second time, and said, Bymyself have I sworn, saith the Lord, for because thou hastdone this thing, and hast not withheld thy son, thine onlyson, from me, that in blessing I will bless thee, and in multi­plying I will multiply thy seed as the stars of heaven, and asthe sand which is upon the sea-shore; and thy seed shallpossess the gate of his enemies: and in thy seed shall all thenations of the earth be blessed, because thou hast obeyed myvoice." Every one of which promises have been eminentlyfulfilled ; and, what is chiefly remarkable, the last and prin­cipal of them, that in Abraham's seed all the nations of theearth should be blessed, was never promised till this time. Ithad been twice promised him, chap. xii. vi. 3, and xviii. 18,that in himself should all the families of the earth be blessed;but that this blessing was to belong to future times, and tobe bestowed by the means of one of his late posterity, theMessias, that great seed and son of Abraham only, was neverrevealed before, but, on such an amazing instance of his faithand obedience as was this his readiness to offer up his onlybegotten son Isaac was now first promised, and has been longago performed, in the birth of Jesus of Nazareth, the son of


' Isniah, xli. 8. » Gen. xxii. 11, 12. » Gen. xxii. 17, 18.







OCR Output








DISSERTATION I. 473


to put any indignity upon believers in him, but rather to af­ford his suffrage to them.
About A. D. 510. Cassiodorus Hist. Tripartit. e Sozo-tneno.—Now Josephus, the son of Mattathias, and a priest, aman of great nobility among the Jews, and of great dignityamong the Romans, shall be a truth of Christ's history: forhe dares not call him a man, as a doer of famous works, anda teacher of true doctrines; he names him Christ openly; andis not ignorant that he was condemned to the cross, and ap­peared on the third day alive, and that an infinite number ofother wonderful things were foretold of him by the holy pro­phets. Moreover, he testifies also, that there were then alivemany whom he had chosen, both Greeks and Jews, and thatthey continued to love him; and that the sect which wasnamed from him was by no means extinct at that time.
About A. D. 640. Chron. Alex. p. 514.—Now Josephusalso relates in the eighteenth book of Antiquities, how Johnthe Baptist, that holy man, was beheaded on account ofHcrodias, the wife of Philip, the brother of Herod himself;for Herod had divorced his former wife, who was still alive,and had been his lawful wife : she was the daughter of Aretas,king of the Petreans. When, therefore, Herod had takenHerodias away from her husband, while he was yet alive (onwhoso account he slew John also,) Aretas made war againstHerod, because bis daughter had been dishonorably treated :in which war he says, that all Herod's army was destroyed,and that he suffered that calamity because of the wickednesshe had been guilty of against John. The same Josephus re­lates, that Herod lost his kingdom on account of Herodias,and that with her he was banished to Lyons, &c.
P. 526, 527.] — Now that our Savior taught his preachingthree years, is demonstrated both by our necessary reason­ings, as also out of the holy gospels, and out of Josephus'swritings, who was a wise man among the Hebrews, &c.
P. 584, 586.]—Josephus relates in the fifth book of the
[Jewish] war, that Jerusalem was taken in the third [second]
year of Vespasian, as after forty years since they had dared
to put Jesus to death: in which time he says, that James the


40* '







OCR Output








C. VIII.] VESPASIAN. 55


case, and Low it becomes generals to die. Dost thou sendme to Nero ? For why ? Are Nero's successors till theycome to thee still alive ? Thou, O Vespasian, art Caesar andemperor, thou and this thy son. Bind me now still faster,and keep me for thyself; for thou, O Caesar, art not onlylord over me, but over the land, and the sea, and all man­kind ; and certainly I deserve to be kept in closer custodythan I now am in, in order to be punished, if I rashly affirmany thing of God." When he had said this, Vespasian atpresent did not believe him, but supposed that Josephus saidthis, as a cunning trick, in order to his own preservation;but in a little time he was convinced, and believed what hesaid to be true, God himself erecting his expectations, so asto think of obtaining the empire, and by other signs fore­showing his advancement. He also found Josephus to havespoken truth on other occasions : for one of those friends thatwere present at that secret conference, said to Josephus: "Icannot but wonder how thou couldest not foretell to the peo­ple of Jotapata that they should be taken, nor couldest fore­tell this captivity which hath happened to thyself, unless whatthou now sayest be a vain thing, in order to avoid the ragethat is risen against thyself." To which Josephus replied:" I did foretell to the people of Jotapata, that they would betaken on the forty-seventh day, and that I should be caughtalive by the Romans." Now when Vespasian had inquiredof the captives privately about these predictions, he foundthem to be true, and then he began to believe those that con­cerned himself. Yet did ho not set Josephus at liberty fromhis bonds, but bestowed on him suits of clothes, and otherprecious gifts ; he treated him also in a very obliging manner,and continued so to do, Titus still joining his interest in thehonors that were done him.


selves, rather than go into slavery under heathens. I doubt this would havebeen no better than zelf-murder; and I believe it was rather some vain doc­trine, or interpretation of the rigid Pharisees, or Essencs, or Hcrodiane,than a just consequence from any law of God delivered by Moses.







OCR Output








3 blOS Oil bSl 077 v If


DATE DUE





Stanford University Libraries
Stanford. Ca.





94305







OCR Output








C n.] SURRENDER OF GISCHALA. 83


thither. It was also naturally strong, and the walls thatwere built round it made him not a little concerned about it.Moreover, he esteemed the men that were in it to be so coura­geous and bold, that even without the consideration of thewalls, it would bo hard to subdue them; for which reason hetook care of and exercised his soldiers beforehand for thework, as they do wrestlers before they begin their under­taking.
2. Now Titus, as he rode up to Gischala, found it wouldbe easy for him to take the city upon the first onset; butknew withal, that if he took it by force, the multitude wouldbe destroyed by the soldiers without mercy. (Now he wasalready satiated with the shedding of blood, and pitied themajor part, who would then perish without distinction, toge­ther with the guilty.) So he was rather desirous the citymight be surrendered up to him on terms. Accordingly,when he saw the wall full of those men that were of the cor­rupted party, he said to them, that "he could not but wonderwhat it was they depended on, when they alone stayed tofight the Romans, after every other city was taken by them,especially when they have seen cities much better fortifiedthan theirs is overthrown by a single attack upon them ; whileas many as have intrusted themselves to the security of theRomans' right hands, which he now offers to them, withoutregarding their former insolence, do enjoy their own posses­sions in safety: for that while they had hopes of recoveringtheir liberty, they might be pardoned; but that their con­tinuance still in their opposition, when they saw that to beimpossible, was inexcusable : for that if they will not complywith such humane offers, and right hands for security, theyshould have experience of such a war as would spare nobody,and should soon be made sensible that their wall would bebut a trifle when battered by the Roman machines; in de­pending on which they demonstrate themselves to be theonly Galileans that were no better than arrogant slaves andcaptives."
3. Now none of the populace durst not only make a reply,but durst not so much as get upon the wall, for it was all







OCR Output








322 LUCILIUS BASSUS. [b. VII.


5. When Bassus had settled thescaffairs he marched hastilyto the forest of Jarden, as it is called; for he had heard thata great many of those that had fled from Jerusalem and Ma-cherus formerly were there gotten together. When he was,therefore, come to the place, and understood that the formernews was no mistake, he in the first place surrounded thewhole place with his horsemen, that such of the Jews as hadboldness enough to try to break through might have no waypossible for escaping, by reason of the situation of thesehorsemen; and for the footmen, he ordered them to cut downthe trees that were in the wood whither they were fled. Sothe Jews were under a necessity of performing some gloriousexploit, and of greatly exposing themselves in a battle, sincethey might, perhaps, thereby escape. So they made a generalattack, and with a great shout fell upon those that surroundedthem, who received them with great courage; and so, whilethe one side fought desperately and the others would notyield, the fight was prolonged on that account. But the eventof the battle did not answer the expectations of the assailants;for so it happened, that no more than twelve fell on the Ro­man side, with a few that were wounded; but not one of theJews escaped out of this battle, but they were all killed, be­ing in the whole not fewer in number than three thousand,together with Judas, the son of Jairus, their general, con­cerning whom we have before spoken, that he had been acaptain of a certain band at the siege of Jerusalem, and bygoing down into a certain vault under ground had privatelymade his escape.
6. About the same time it was that Caesar sent a letter toBassus, and to Liberius Maximus, who was the procurator[of Judea,] and gave order that all Judea should be exposedto sale;l for he did not found any city here, but reserved thecountry for himself. However, he assigned a place for eighthundred men only, whom he had dismissed from his army,


1 It is very remarkable that Titus did not people this now desolate countryof Judea, but ordered it to be ail sold; nor, indeed, is it properly peoplednt this day, but lies ready for its old inhabitants, the Jews, at their futurerestoration. See Literal Accomplishment of Prophecies, p. 77.







OCR Output








C. III.] TERRIBLE FAMINE. 263


concealed. Upon this the seditious came in presently, andsmelling the horrid scent of this food, they threatened her,that they would cut her throat immediately, if she did notshow them what food she had gotten ready. She replied,that " she had saved a very fine portion of it for them;" andwithal uncovered what was left of her son. Hereupon theywere seized with a horror and amazement of mind, and stoodastonished at the sight, when she said to them, — " This ismine own son, and what hath been done was mine own doing.Come, eat of this food, for I have eaten of it myself. Donot you pretend to be either more tender than a woman, ormore compassionate than a mother: but if you be so scrupu­lous, and do abominate this my sacrifice, as I have eaten theone-half, let the rest be reserved for me also." After whichthose men went out trembling, being never so much affrightedat any thing as they were at this, and with some difficultythey left the rest of that meat to the mother. Upon whichthe whole city was full of this horrid action immediately: andwhile every body laid this miserable case before their owneyes, they trembled, as if this unheard-of action had beendone by themselves. So those that were thus distressed bythe famine were very desirous to die, and those already deadwere esteemed happy, because they had not lived long enougheither to hear or to see such miseries.
5. This sad instance was quickly told to the Romans, someof which could not believe it, and others pitied the distresswhich the Jews were under ; but there were many of them whowere hereby induced to a more bitter hatred than ordinaryagainst our nation. But for Caesar, he excused himself be­fore God as to this matter, and said, " that he had proposedpeace and liberty to the Jews, as well as an oblivion of alltheir former insolent practices ; but that they, instead of con­cord, had chosen sedition ; instead of peace, war; and, beforesatiety and abundance, a famine: that they had begun withtheir own hands to burn down that temple which we havepreserved hitherto; and that, therefore, they deserved to catsuch food as this was; that, however, this horrid action ofeating an own child ought to be covered with the overthrow







OCR Output








28 VESPASIAN. [B. III.


8. Vespasian, therefore, in order to try bow he mightoverthrow the natural strength of the place, as well as thebold defence of the Jews, made a resolution to prosecute thesiege with vigor. To that end he called the commandersthat were under him to a council of war, and consulted withthem which way the assault might be managed to the bestadvantage. And when the resolution was there taken to raisea bank against that part of the wall which was practicable,he sent his whole army abroad to get the materials together.So when they had cut down all the trees on the mountainsthat adjoined to the city, and had gotten together a vast heapof stones, besides the wood they had cut down, some of thembrought hurdles, in order to avoid the effects of the dartsthat were shot from above them. These hurdles they spreadover their banks, under cover whereof they formed theirbank, and so were little or nothing hurt by the darts thatwere thrown upon them from the wall, while others pulledthe neighboring hillocks to pieces, and perpetually broughtearth to them; so that while they were busy three sorts ofways, nobody was idle. However, the Jews cast great stonesfrom the walls upon the hurdles which protected the men,with all sorts of darts also; and the noise of what could notreach them was yet so terrible, that it was some impedimentto the workmen.
9. Vespasian then set the engines for throwing stones anddarts round about the city. The number of the engines wasin all a hundred and sixty, and bid them fall to work, anddislodge those that were upon the wall. At the same timesuch engines as were intended for that purpose threw at oncelances upon them with a great noise; and stones of the weightof a talent were thrown by the engines that were preparedfor that purpose, together with fire, and a vast multitude ofarrows, which made the wall so dangerous, that the Jewsdurst not only not come upon it, but durst not come to thoseparts within the wall which were reached by the engines : forthe multitude of the Arabian archers, as well as those alsothat threw darts and flung stones, fell to work at the sametime with the engines. Yet did not the others lie still, when







OCR Output








DISSERTATION I. 477


About A. D. 1120. Zonarus Annal. torn. i. p. 267.—Jose-pbus, in the eighteenth book of Antiquities, writes thus con­cerning our Lord and God Jesus Christ:—Now there wasabout this time Jesus, a wise man, if it be lawful to call hima man, for he was a doer of wonderful works, a teacher of suchmen as receive the truth with pleasure. He drew over to himmany of the Jews, and many of the Gentiles: he was theChrist. And when Pilate, at the suggestion of the principalmen among us, had condemned him to the cross, those thathad loved him at first did not forsake him, for he appearedto them the third day alive again, as the divine prophets hadsaid these, and ten thousand other wonderful things concern­ing him: and the tribe of Christians, so named from him, arenot extinct at this day.
About A. D. 1120. Glyca> Annal p. 234. —Then didPhilo, that wise man, and Josephus, flourish. This last wasstyled The lover of truth, because he commended John, whobaptized our Lord; and because he bore witness that Christ,in like manner, was a wise man, and the doer of great mira­cles ; and that when he was crucified, he appeared the thirdday.
About A. D. 1170. Gotfridus Viterbiensis Ghron. p. 866,e Vers, llufini.—Josephus relates that a very great wararose between Aretas, king of the Arabians, and Herod, onaccount of the sin which Herod had committed again John.Moreover, the same Josephus writes thus concerning Christ.—There was at this time Jesus, a wise man, if at least it bolawful to call him a man, for he was a doer of wonderful works,a teacher of such men as willingly hear truth. He also drewover to him many of the Jews, and many of the Gentiles : hewas Christ. And when Mate, at the accusation of the prin­cipal men of our nation, had decreed that he should be cruci­fied, those that had loved him from the beginning did not for­sake him, for he appeared to them the third day alive again,according to what the divinely-inspired prophets had foretold,that these and innumerable other miracles should come to passabout him. Moreover, both the name and sect of Christians,who were named from him, continue in being unto this day.







OCR Output








394 FLAVIHS JOSEPHUS [b. t


durst not tell the king of these things; but that he left awriting behind him about all those matters, and then slewhimself, which made the king disconsolate." After whichhe writes thus verbatim: "After those that were sent to workin the quarries had continued in that miserable state for along while, the king was desired that he should set apart thecity of Avaris, which was then left desolate of the shepherds,for their habitation and protection ; which desire he grantedthem. Now this city, according to the ancient theology,was Typho's city. But when these men were gotten into it,and found the place fit for a revolt, they appointed them­selves a ruler out of the priests of Heliopolis, whose namewas Osarsipk, and they took their oaths that they would beobedient to him in all things. He then, in the first place,made this law for them, that they should neither worship theEgyptian gods, nor should abstain from any one of thosesacred animals which they have in the highest esteem, butkill and destroy them all: that they should join themselvesto nobody but to those that were of this confederacy. Whenhe had made such laws as these, and many more such as weremainly opposite to the customs of the Egyptians,1 he gaveorder that they should use the multitude of the hands theyhad in building walls about their city, and make themselvesready for a war with king Amenophis, while he did himselftake into his friendship the other priests, and those thatwere polluted with them, and send ambassadors to thoseshepherds who had been driven out of the land by Tethmosisto the city called Jerusalem ; whereby he informed them ofhis own affairs, and of the state of those others that hadbeen treated after such an ignominious manner, and desiredthat they would come with one consent to his assistance inthis war against Egypt. He also promised that he would,in the first place, bring them back to their ancient city andcountry, Avaris, and provide a plentiful maintenance fortheir multitude; that he would protect them and fight for


1 This is a very valuablo testimony of Manctho, that the laws of Osarsiphor Moses were not nmde in compliance with, but in oppos'tion to, the customsof the Egyptians. Sic the note on Antiq. B. iii. ch. viii sect. 9.







OCR Output








DISSERTATION III. 509


inexcusable. The two only other writers whom we know of,whence such Jewish affairs might be supposed to be taken byTacitus, who never appears to have been in Judca himself,are Justus of Tiberias, a Jewish historian, contemporarywith Josephus, and one Antonius Julianus, once mentionedby Minutius Felix in his Octavius, sect. 33, as having writtenon the same subject with Josephus, and both already men­tioned by me on another occasion, Dissert. I. As to Justusof Tiberias, he could not be the historian whence Tacitustook his Jewish affairs, because, as we have seen, in the placejust cited, the principal passage in Tacitus of that nature,concerning Christ, and his sufferings under the emperorTiberius, and by his procurator Pontius Pilate, was not thereas we know from the testimony of Photius, Cod. xxx. Andas to Antonius Julianus, his very name shows him to havebeen not a Jew but a Roman. He is never mentioned byJosephus, and so probably knew no more of the country oraffairs of Judea than Tacitus himself. He was, I suppose,rather an epitomiser of Josephus, and not so early as Tacitus,than an original historian himself before him. Nor could soexact a writer as Tacitus ever take up with such poor andalmost unknown historians as these were, while Josephus'sseven books of the Jewish war were then so common; werein such great reputation at Rome; were attested to, andrecommended by Vespasian and Titus the emperors, by kingAgrippa, and king Archelaus, and Herod, king of Chaleis;and he was there honored with a statue: and these his bookswere reposited at the public library at Rome, as we knowfrom Josephus himself, from Eusebius, and Jerom, while wonever hear of any other history of the Jews that had thenand there any such attestations or recommendations. Somethings, indeed, Tacitus might take from the Roman recordsof this war, I mean from the Commentaries of Vespasian,which are mentioned by Josephus himself, in his own Life,sect. Go, vol. i., and some others from the relations of Romanpeople, where the affairs of Rome were concerned; as alsoother affairs might be remembered by old officers and soldiersthat had been in the Jewish war. Accordingly, I still supposo


43 *







OCR Output








C. III.] THE HIGH-PRIEST ANANUS. 95


and slaughtering our men, from which enormities these Ro­mans themselves would have abstained. To see these Romansnever going beyond the bounds allotted to profane persons,nor venturing to break in upon any of our sacred customs,nay, having a horror on their minds when they view at adistance those sacred walls, while some that have been bornin this very country, and brought up in our customs, andcalled Jews, do walk about in the midst of the holy places, atthe very time when their hands are still warm with theslaughter of their own countrymen. Besides, can any one beafraid of a war abroad, and that with such as will have com­paratively much greater moderation than our own peoplehave ? For truly, if we may suit our words to the things theyrepresent, it is probable one may hereafter find the Romansto be the supporters of our laws, and those within ourselvessubverters of them. And now I am persuaded that everyone of you here come satisfied before I speak, that theseoverthrowers of our liberties deserve to be destroyed; andthat nobody can so much as devise a punishment that theyhave not deserved by what they have done, and that you areall provoked against them by those their wicked actions,whence you have suffered so greatly. But, perhaps, manyof you are affrighted at the multitude of those zealots, and attheir audaciousness, as well as at the advantage they haveover us in their being higher in place than we are; for thesecircumstances, as they have been occasioned by your negli­gence, so will they become still greater by being still longerneglected; for their multitude is every day augmented, byevery ill man's running away to those that arc like to them­selves, and their audaciousness is, therefore, inflamed, be­cause they meet with no obstruction to their designs. Andfor their higher place, they will make use of it for enginesalso, if we give them time to do so; but be assured of this,that if we go up to fight them, they will be made tamer bytheir own consciences; and what advantage they have in theheight of their situation they will lose by the opposition oftheir reason: perhaps also God himself, who hath beenaffronted by them, will make what they throw at us return







OCR Output








DISSERTATION I. 487


that the main parts at least of this testimony itself were inhis copy.
(1.) When Origen introduces Josephus's testimony concern­ing James the Just, that he thought the miseries of the Jewswere an instance of the divine vengeance on that nation forputting James to death instead of Jesus, he uses an expres­sion no way necessary to his purpose, nor occasioned by anywords of Josephus there, that they had slain that Christwhich was foretold in the prophecies. Whence could thisexpression come here into Origen's mind, when he was quo­ting a testimony of Josephus's concerning the brother ofChrist, but from his remembrance of a clause in the testi­mony of the same Josephus concerning Christ himself, thatthe prophets had foretold his death and resurrection, and tenthousand other wonderful things concerning him ?
(2.) How came Origen to be so surprised at Josephus'sascribing the destruction of Jerusalem to the Jews murderingJames the Just, and not to their murdering of Jesus, as wehave seen he was, if he had not known that Josephus hadspoken of Jesus and his death before, and that he had a verygood opinion of Jesus, which yet he could learn no way soauthentically as from this testimony ? Nor do the words hehere uses, that Josephus was not remote from the truth, per­haps allude to any thing else but to this very testimony be­fore us.
(3.) How came the same Origen, upon another slight occa­sion, when he had just set down that testimony of Josephusconcerning James the Just, the brother of Jesus who wascalled Christ, to say, that it may be questioned whether theJews thought Jesus to be a man, or whether they did not sup­pose him to be a being of a diviner kind ? This looks so verylike to the fifth and sixth clauses of this testimony in Jose­phus, that Jesus was a wise man, if it be latvful to call hima man, that it is highly probable Origen thereby alluded tothem: and this is the more to be depended on, because allthe unbelieving Jews, and all the rest of the Nazarene Jews,esteemed Jesus with one consent as a mere man, the son ofJoseph and Mary; and it is not, I think, possible to produco







OCR Output








334 ELEAZAR'S SPEECHES, [b. VII.


This work of theirs was like a real edifice; and when the ma­chines were applied, the blows were weakened by its yielding,and as the materials, by such concussion, were shaken closertogether, the pile by that means became firmer than before.When Silva saw this, he thought it best to endeavor thetaking of this wall by setting fire to it; so he gave order thatthe soldiers should throw a great number of burning torchesupon it: accordingly, as it was chiefly made of wood, it soontook fire; and, when it was once set on fire, its hollownessmade that fire spread to a mighty flame. Now, at the verybeginning of this fire a north wind that then blew provedterrible to the Romans; for, by bringing the flame down­ward, it drove it upon them, and they were almost in despairof success, as fearing their machines would be burnt: butafter this, on a sudden, the wind changed into the south, asif it were done by divine providence, and blew strongly thecontrary way, and carried the flame, and drove it against thewall, which was now on fire through its entire thickness. Sothe Romans, having now assistance from God, returned totheir camp with joy, and resolved to attack their enemy thevery next day, on which occasion they set their watch morecarefully that night, lest any of the Jews should run awayfrom them without being discovered.
6. However, neither did Eleazar once think of flying away,nor would he permit any one else to do so: but when he sawtheir wall burnt down by the fire, and could devise no otherway of escaping, or room for their farther courage, and settingbefore their eyes what the Romans would do to them, theirchildren, and their wives, if they got them in their power, heconsulted about having them all slain. Now, as he judgedthis to be the best thing they could do in their present cir­cumstances, he gathered the most courageous of his compan­ions together, and encouraged them to take that course by aspeech' which he made to them in the manner following: —


1 The speeches in this and the next section, as introduced under the personof this Eleazar, are exceeding remarkable, and on the noblest subjects, thecontempt of death, and the dignity and immortality of the soul: and that notonly among the .Jews, but among the Indians themselves also, and are highly







OCR Output








DISSERTATION I. 483


Christ f' And we may full as well prove from Pilate's in­scription upon the cross, that he hereby declared himself abeliever in Christ, for the real king of the Jews, as we canfrom these words of Josephus, that he hereby declared him­self to be a real believer in him, as the true Messiah.
IV. Though Josephus did not design here to declare him­self openly to be a Christian, yet could he not possiblybelieve all that he here asserts concerning Jesus Christ,unless he were so far a Christian as the Jewish Nazarenes orEbionites then were who believed Jesus of Nazareth to be thetrue Messiah, without believing he was more than a man;who also believed the necessity of the observation of theceremonial law of Moses in order to salvation for all mankind,which were the two main articles of those Jewish Christians'faith, though in opposition to all the thirteen apostles ofJesus Christ in the first century, and in opposition to thewhole Catholic church of Christ in the following centuriesalso. Accordingly, I have elsewhere proved, that Josephuswas no other, in his own mind and conscience, than aNazarene or Ebionite Jewish Christian: and have observedthat this entire testimony, and all that Josephus says ofJohn the Baptist, and of James, as well as his absolutesilence about all the rest of the apostles and their companions,exactly agrees to him under that character, and no other.And, indeed, to me it is most astonishing, that all our learnedmen, who have of late considered these testimonies ofJosephus, except the converted Jew Galatinus, should misssuch an obvious and natural observation. We all know thisfrom St. James's2 own words, that so many ten thousands ofJews as believed in Christ, in the first century, were allzealous of the ceremonial law, or were no other than Nazareneor Ebionite Christians; and, by consequence, if there wereany reason to think our Josephus to be, in any sense, abeliever or a Christian, as from all these testimonies therewere very great ones, all those and many other reasons couldnot but conspire to assure us he was no other than a Nazarene
' Matth. xxTH. 17, 22. > Acts xxi. 20







OCR Output








118 THE POLICY [B. IV.


drawn out of the gates, and despaired of Lis preservation, hebesought them to grant him a burial; but as they had threat­ened him beforehand not to grant him any spot of earth fora grave, which he chiefly desired of them, so did they slayhim [without permitting him to be buried.] Now when theywere slaying him, he made this imprecation upon them, thatthey might undergo both famine and pestilence in this war;and besides all, that they might come to the mutual slaughterof one another; all which imprecations God confirmed againstthese impious men, and was what came most justly upon them,when not long afterward they tasted of their own madness intheir mutual seditions one against another. So when thisNiger was killed, their fears of being overturned were dimin­ished ; and, indeed, there was no part of the people but theyfound out some pretence to destroy them; for some were,therefore, slain, because they had had differences with someof them: and as to those who had not opposed them in timesof peace, they watched seasonable opportunities to gain someaccusation against them; and if any one did not come nearthem at all, he was under their suspicion as a proud man: ifany one came with boldness, he was esteemed a contemnerof them; and if any one came as aiming to oblige them, hewas supposed to have some treacherous plot against them,while the only punishment of crimes, whether they were ofthe greatest or smallest sort, was death. Nor could any oneescape unless he were very inconsiderable, either on accountof the meanness of his birth or on account of his fortune.
2. And now all the rest of the commanders of the Romansdeemed this sedition among their enemies to be of great ad­vantage to them, and were very earnest to march to the city;and they urged Vespasian, as their lord and general in allcases, to make haste, and said to him, that " the providenceof God is on our side, by setting our enemies at varianceagainst one another; that still the change in such cases maybe sudden, and the Jews may quickly be at one again, eitherbecause they may be tired out with their civil miseries, orrepent them of such doings." But Vespasian replied, that" they were greatly mistaken in what they thought fit to be







OCR Output








280 speech of titus [b. VL


that tribute which is paid to God,1 with such other gifts thatare dedicated to him ; nor have we called those that carriedthese donations to account, nor prohibited them; till at lengthyou became richer than we ourselves, even when you weroour enemies; and you made preparations for war against uswith our money: nay, after all, when you were in the enjoy­ment of all these advantages, you turned your too greatplenty against those that gave it you, and, like merciless ser­pents, have thrown out your poison against those that treatedyou kindly. I suppose, therefore, that you might despise theslothfulness of Nero, and, like limbs of the body that arebroken or dislocated, you did then lie quiet, waiting for someother time, though still with a malicious intention, and havenow showed your distemper to be greater than ever, and haveextended your desires as far as your impudent and immensehopes would enable you to do it. At this time my fathercame into this country, not with a design to punish you forwhat you had done under Cestius, but to admonish you; forhad he come to overthrow your nation, he had run directlyto your fountain-head, and had immediately laid this citywaste; whereas ho went and burnt Galilee, and the neigh­boring parts, and thereby gave you time for repentance:which instance of humanity you took for an argument of hisweakness, and nourished up your impudence by our mildness.When Nero was gone out of the world, you did as thewickedest wretehes would have done, and encouraged your­selves to act against us by our civil dissensions, and abusedthat time when both I and my father were gone away forEgypt, to make preparations for this war. Nor were youashamed to raise disturbances against us when we were madeemperors, and this while you had experienced how mild wehad been, when we were no more than generals of the army.But when the government was devolved upon us, and allother people did thereupon lie quiet, and even foreign nations


1 Spanheim notes hero, that the Romans used to permit the Jews to col­lect their sacred tribute, and send it to Jerusalem ; of which we have hadabundant evidence in Josephus already on other occasions.







OCR Output








168 TITUS AT JERUSALEM. [B. V.


to the city, but declined from him on both sides, and pressedafter those that fled up the hill; yet did he still fall upontheir flank, and put a stop to their fury. In the mean time,a disorder and a terror fell again upon those that were forti­fying their camp at the top of the hill, upon their seeingthose beneath them running away; insomuch that the wholelegion was dispersed, while they thought that the sallies ofthe Jews upon them were plainly insupportable, and thatTitus was himself put to flight; because they took it forgranted, that if he had stayed the rest would never have fledfor it. Thus were they encompassed on every side by a kindof panic fear, and some dispersed themselves one way andsome another, till certain of them saw their general in thevery midst of an action, and, being under great concern forhim, they loudly proclaimed the danger he was in to theentire legion : and now shame made them turn back, and theyreproached one another that they did worse than run awayby deserting Caesar. So they used their utmost force againstthe Jews, and declining from the straight declivity, they drovethem on heaps into the bottom of the valley. Then did theJews turn about and fight them ; but as they were themselvesretiring, and now, because the Romans had the advantage ofthe ground and were above the Jews, they drove them all intothe valley. Titus also pressed upon those that were nearhim. and sent the legion again to fortify their camp; whilehe, and those that were with him before, opposed the enemy,and kept them from doing farther mischief; insomuch that ifI may be allowed neither to add any thing out of flattery,nor to diminish any thing out of envy, but to speak the plaintruth, Caesar did twice deliver that entire legion when it wasin jeopardy, and gave them a quiet opportunity of fortifyingtheir camp.







OCR Output








C. VII.] VESPASIAN. 85


saw the ram always battering, that the stroke might be turnedaside, or that the place might feel less of the strokes by theyielding nature of the chaff. This contrivance very muchdelayed the attempts of the Romans, because, let them re­move their engine to what part they pleased, those that wereabove it removed their sacks, and placed them over againstthe strokes it made, insomuch that the wall was no way hurt,and this by diversion of the strokes, till the Romans made anopposite contrivance of long poles, and by tying hooks attheir ends, cut off the sacks. Now when the battering-ramthus recovered its force, and the wall, having been but newlybuilt, was giving way, Josephus and those about him had af­terward immediate recourse to fire to defend themselves with­al ; whereupon they took what materials soever they had thatwere but dry, and made a sally three ways, and set fire tothe machines, and the hurdles, and the banks of the Romansthemselves; nor did the Romans well know how to come totheir assistance, being at once under a consternation at theJews' boldness, and being prevented by the flames fromcoming to their assistance; for the materials being dry withthe bitumen and pitch that were among them, as was brim­stone also, the fire caught hold of every thing immediately,and what cost the Romans a great deal of pains was in onehour consumed.
21. And here a certain Jew appeared worthy of our rela­tion and commendation; he was the son of Sameas, and wascalled Eleazar, and was born at Saab in Galilee. This mantook up a stone of vast bigness, and threw it down from thewall upon the ram, and this with so great a force, that itbrake off the head of the engine. He also leaped down, andtook up the head of the ram from the midst of them, andwithout any concern carried it to the top of the wall, and thiswhile he stood as a fit mark to be pelted by all his enemies.Accordingly, he received the strokes upon his naked body,and was wounded with five darts; nor did he mind any ofthem while he went up to the top of the wall, where he stoodin the sight of them all, as an instance of the greatest bold­ness ; after which he threw himself on a heap with his wounds







OCR Output








4t INDEX.


vors to take possession of the king­dom, 405; fights with his elderbrother for the crown, 400; bringshim to an accommodation, ib.; iii.334; sends a golden vine to l'om-pey, ii. 414 ; is, with his children,brought captive to Rome by l'om-pey, 422 ; escapes, but is retakenand sent back again, 425; iii. 345:is poisoned by the partisans ofPompey, 347; his children, ib.Aristobulus, son of Herod the Great,ii. 550; marries Berenice, iii. il;put in prison, 58; accused by hisfather and condemned, 64; stran­gled, 68, 425.Aristobulus, son of Herod, king of
Chalcis, iii. 288: iv. 324.Aristobulus, son of Joseph and Mari-
amne, iii. 161.Aristobulus, son of Aristobulus, ismade high-priest by Herod, ii. 498;drowned by the secret order of thesame Herod, iii. 401.Aristobulus, son of Aristobulus and
Berenice, iii. 160.Aristocracy the best form of govern­ment, i. 304; instituted in Judeaby (iabinius, iii. 344.Arithmetic and astronomy came fromChaldea to Egypt, and thence intoGreece, i. 100.Arius sends a letter to Onias, ii. 293.Ark of God, its description, i. 225;taken by the Philistines, 387; re­stored, 392; carried to Jerusalem,482.Ark of Noah, where it rested, i. 87 ;mentioned by all barbariau histo­rians, ib.; its remains long pre­served, 88.Armais, king of Egypt, iv. 371.Armenia conquered by Antonius, ii.5U8; Cotys, king of the Lesser Ar­menia, iii. 256.Armesses, king of Egypt. iv. 371.Arphaxad, i. 97.Arsaees, king, ii. 360, 373.Artabanus, king of Media, iii. 145.Artahanus, king of the Parthions, iii.154, 193; flies to Izates, 270;kindly received and restored to hiskingdom, 272 ; dies, 273.Artabazes, or Artavasdes, is given aso present to Cleopatra by Antonius,iii 384.


Artaxerxos, ii. 232 ; his edict againstthe Jews, 237 ; contradicted, 245.
Artaxias, iii. 509.
Artorius saves his life, iv. 260.
Arucas, i. 95.
Arudeus, i. 95.
Aruntius (Euaristus,) iii. 225.
Aruntius (Pnulus,) iii. 219.
Asa, ii. 64; alliance with the king ofDamascus, 68.
Asael killed by Abner, i. 469.
Asamoneus, ii. 301.
Asamoneans, the end of their reign,ii. 490.
Asealonites punished, ii. 287.
Asbod, ii. 345; inhabitants plagued,i. 389.
Ashpenaz, a eunuch, ii. 183.
Asincus and Anileus, iii. 191.
Asprenas, iii. 218; cut in pieces,221.
Assemblies forbidden to all at Romebut to the Jews, ii. 445.
Ass's head falsely reported by Apionas an object of worship among theJews, iv. 420.
Assyrian empire overthrown, ii. 155.
Astarte's temple, i. 464; iv. 375.
Astronomy; for its improvement thefirst men lived near a thousandyears, i. 90; came out of Chaldeainto Egvpt, and thence into Greece,100.
Asylum, right of, belonging to somotowns, i. 294.
Athenians decree honors to Hvrcanus,ii. 434.
Athenio, ii. 285.
Athenio, n general of Cleopatra, iii.385 ; perfidious, ii. 515.
Athrunges crowns himself king ofJudea, iii. 121; is conquered, 122.
Atratinus, ii. 173.
Augustus's arrival in Syria, ii. 512;his letter to Herod, iii. 63 ; holds ncouncil about the affairs of Judea,112; his edict and letter in favorof the Jews, 33 ; is angry wilh He­rod, 54; is reconciled to him, 60;divides Herod's dominions, 468;his death, 486.
Azariah, the prophet, ii. 66.
Azarias. one of Daniel's companions,ii. 183.
Azarias, n commander, is defeated byGorgias, ii. 314.







OCR Output








350 JONATHAN. [B. Til.


2. Now Catullus easily admitted of these his calumnies,and aggravated matters greatly, and made tragical exclama­tions, that he might also be supposed to have had a hand inthe finishing of the Jewish war. But what was still harder,he did not only give a too easy belief to his stories, but hetaught the Sicarii to accuse men falsely. He bid this Jona­than, therefore, to name one Alexandei a Jew (with whomhe had formerly had a quarrel, and openly professed that hehated him ;) he also got him to name his 'vife Bernice as con­cerned with him. These two Catullus ordered to, be slain inthe first place; nay, after them he caused all the rich andwealthy Jews to be slain, being no fewer in all than threethousand. This he thought ho might do safely, because heconfiscated their effects, and added them to Caesar's revenues.
3. Nay, indeed, lest any Jews that lived elsewhere shouldconvict him of this villany, he extended his false accusationsfarther, and persuaded Jonathan and certain others that werecaught with him, to bring an accusation of attempts for inno­vation against the Jews that were of the best character bothat Alexandria and at Rome. One of these against whomthis treacherous accusation was laid was Josephus, the writerof these books. However, this plot, thus contrived by Ca­tullus, did not succeed according to his hopes; for though hecame himself to Rome, and brought Jonathan and his com­panions along with him in bonds, and thought he should havehad no farther inquisition made as to those lies that wereforged under his government or by his means; yet did Ves­pasian suspect the matter, and make an inquiry how far itwas true. And when he understood that the accusation laidagainst the Jews was an unjust one, he cleared them of thecrimes charged upon them, and this on account of Titus'sconcern about the matter, and brought a deserved punish­ment upon Jonathan; for he was first tormented and thenburnt alive.
4. But as to Catullus, the emperors were so gentle to him,that he underwent no severer condemnation at this time: yetwas it not long before he fell into a complicated and almostincurable distemper, and died miserably. He was not only







OCR Output








C. II.] THE CITY. 251


together with Josephus, and show themselves to the people ;upon which a great many fled to the Romans. These menalso got in a great number together, and stood before theRomans, and besought the seditious, with groans and .tearsin their eyes, in the first place, to receive the Romans entirelyinto the city, and save that their own place of residenceagain; but that, if they would not agree to such a proposal,they would at least depart out of the temple, and save theholy house for their own use; for that the Romans wouldnot venture to set the sanctuary on fire, but under the mostpressing necessity. Yet did the seditious still more and morecontradict them; and while they cast loud and bitter re­proaches upon these deserters, they also set their engines forthrowing of darts, and javelins, and stones, upon the sacredgates of the temple, at due distances from one another, inso­much that all the space round about within the temple mightbe compared to a burying-ground, so great was the numberof the dead bodies therein; as might the holy house itself becompared to a citadel. Accordingly, these men rushed uponthese holy places in their armor, that were otherwise unap­proachable, and that while their hands were yet warm withthe blood of their own people, which they had shed: nay,they proceeded to such great transgressions, that the verysame indignation which Jews would naturally have againstRomans, had they been guilty of such abuses against them,the Romans now had against Jews, for their impiety in re­gard to their own religious customs. Nay, indeed, therewere none of the Roman soldiers who did not look with asacred horror upon the holy house, and adored it, and wishedthat the robbers would repent before their miseries becameincurable.
4. Now Titus was deeply affected with this state of things,and reproached John and his party, and said to them —" Have not you, vile wretches that you are, by our permis­sion put up this partition-wall' before your sanctuary ? Havenot you been allowed to put up the pillars thereto belonging,


1 Of this partition-wall, separating Jews and Gentiles, with its pillars andinscription, sec the description of the temples, ch. xv.







OCR Output








C. XII.] TITUS WALLS UP THE CITY. 225


only part tho whole wall that was to be built among them,nor did only one legion strive with another, but the lesserdivisions of the army did the same; insomuch that each sol­dier was ambitious to please his decurion, each decurion hiscenturion, each centurion his tribune, and the ambition ofthe tribunes was to please their superior commanders; whileCaesar himself took notice of and rewarded the like conten­tion in those commanders ; for he went round about the worksmany times every day, and took a view of what was done.Titus began the wall from the camp of the Assyrians, wherehis own camp was pitched, and drew it down to the lowerparts of Cenopolis ; thence it went along the valley of Cedronto the Mount of Olives; it then bent towards the south, andencompassed the mountain as far as the rock called Periste-rion, and that other hill which lies next it, and is over thevalley which reaches to Siloam; whence it bended again tothe west, and went down to the valley of the fountain, be­yond which it went up again at the monument of Ananus thehigh-priest, and encompassing that mountain where Pompeyhad formerly pitched his camp, it returned back to tho northside of the city, and was carried on as far as a certain villagecalled the House of the Erebinthi: after which it encompassedHerod's monument, and there, on the cast, was joined toTitus's own camp, where it began. Now, the length of thiswall was forty furlongs, one only abated. Now, at this wallwithout were erected thirteen places to keep garrison in,whose circumferences put together amounted to ten furlongs ;the whole was completed in three days: so that what wouldnaturally have required some months was done in so short aninterval as is incredible. When Titus had, therefore, encom­passed the city with this wall, and put garrisons into properplaces, he went round the wall at the first watch of the night,and observed how the guard was kept; the second watch heallotted to Alexander; the commanders of legions took thethird watch. They also cast lots among themselves who shouldbe upon the watch in the night-time, and who should go allnight long round the spaces that were interposed between thegarrisons.







OCR Output








C.X.] SIEGE OF TARICHEiE. 65


as did the others with a great noise after him, and extendedthemselves upon the plain as wide as the enemy which con­fronted them, by which means they appeared much more nu­merous than they really were. Now the Jews, although theywere surprised at their onset and at their good order, maderesistance against their attacks for a little while ; but whenthey were pricked with their long poles, and overborne bythe violent noise of the horsemen, they came to be trampledunder their feet; many also of them were slain on every side,which made them disperse themselves and run to the city asfast as every one of them were able. So Titus pressed uponthe hindmost, and slew them; and of the rest some he fellupon as they stood on heaps, and some he prevented, andmet them in the mouth, and run them through; many alsohe leaped upon as they fell one upon another, and trod themdown, and cut off all the retreat they had to the wall, andturned them back into the plain, till at last they forced apassage by their multitude, and got away, and ran into thocity.
4. But now there fell out a terrible sedition among themwithin the city; for the inhabitants themselves, who hadpossessions there, and to whom the city belonged, were notdisposed to fight from the very beginning; and now the lessso, because they had been beaten ; but the foreigners, whichwere very numerous, would force them to fight so much thomore, insomuch that there was a clamor and a tumult amongthem, as all mutually angry one at another. And whenTitus heard this tumult, for he was not far from the wall, hecried out, — " Fellow-soldiers, now is the time; and why dowe make any delay, when God is giving up the Jews to us ?Take the victory which is given you: do not you hear what anoise they make ? Those that have escaped our hands arein an uproar against one another. We have the city, if wemake haste: but besides haste, we must undergo some labor,and use some courage; for no great thing uses to be ac­complished without danger: accordingly, wo must not onlyprevent their uniting again, which necessity will soon compelthem to do, but we must also prevent the coming of our own


6*







OCR Output








B. II.] AGAINST APION. 453


bad laws notwithstanding, what penalties then do they deserveto undergo who do not observe their own laws, which theyesteem so far superior to them ? Whereas, therefore, lengthof time is esteemed to be the truest touchstone in all cases, Iwould make that a testimonial of the excellency of our laws,and of that belief thereby delivered to us concerning God:for as there hath been a very long time for this comparison,if any one will but compare its duration with the duration ofthe laws made by other legislators, he will find our legislatorsto have been the ancientest of them all.
40. We have already demonstrated that our laws have beensuch as have always inspired admiration and imitation intoall other men; nay, the earliest Grecian philosophers, thoughin appearance they observed the laws of their own countries,yet did they, in their actions and their philosophic doctrines,follow our legislator, and instructed men to live sparingly,and to have friendly communication one with another. Nay,farther, the multitude of mankind itself have had a great in­clination of a long time to follow our religious observances;for there is not any city of the Grecians, nor any of the Bar­barians, nor any nation whatsoever, whither our custom ofresting on the seventh day hath not come, and by which ourfasts, and lighting up lamps, and many of our prohibitions asto our food, are not observed : they also endeavor to imitateour mutual concord with one another, and the charitable dis­tribution of our goods, and our diligence in our trades, andour fortitude in undergoing the distresses we are in, on ac­count of our laws; and what is here matter of the greatestadmiration, our law hath no bait of pleasure to allure men toit, but it prevails by its own force; and as God himself per­vades all the world, so hath our law passed through ail theworld also: so that if any one will but reflect on his owncountry and his own family, he will have reason to give creditto what I say. It is, therefore, but just, either to condemnall mankind of indulging a wicked disposition, when theyhave been so desirous of imitating laws that are to themforeign and evil in themselves, rather than following laws oftheir own that are of a better character, or else our accusers







OCR Output








C.X.] VESPASIAN RELEASES JOSEPHUS. 149


Mucianus came also, who was the president of the province,and told him with what alacrity the people [received thenews of his advancement,] and how the people of every cityhad taken the oath of fidelity to him.
7. So Vespasian's good fortune succeeded to his wishesevery where, and the public affairs were, for the greatestpart, already in his hands; upon which he considered, thathe had not arrived at the government without divine Pro­vidence, but that a righteous kind of fate had brought theempire under his power; for as he called to mind the othersignals, which had been a great many every where, thatforetold he should obtain the government, so did he rememberwhat Josephus had said to him, when he ventured to foretellhis coming to the empire while Nero was alive; so he wasmuch concerned that this man was still in bonds with him.He then called for Mucianus, together with his other com­manders and friends, and, in the first place, he informedthem what a valiant man Josephus had been, and what greathardships he had made him undergo in the siege of Jotapata.After he had related those predictions' of his which he hadthen suspected as fictitions, suggested out of the fear he wasin, but which had by time been demonstrated to be divine." It is a shameful thing," said he, " that this man who hathforetold my coming to the empire beforehand, and been theminister of a divine message to me, should still be retainedin the condition of a captive or prisoner." So he called forJosephus, and commanded that he should be set at liberty;


1 As Daniel was preferred by Darius and Cyrus, on account of his havingforetold the destruction of the Babylonian monarchy by their means, andthe consequent exaltation of the Jledes and Persians, v. Ti., or rather, asJeremiah, when he was a prisonor, was set at liberty, and honorably treatedby Nebuzaradan, at the command of Nebuchadnezzar, on account of hishaving foretold the destruction of Jerusalem by tho Babylonians, Jer. xl.1-0, so was our Josephus set at liberty, and honorably treated, on accountof his having foretold the advancement of Vespasian and Titus to theRoman empire. All theso are most eminent instances of the interpositionof divine providence, and of the certainty of divine predictions in tho greatrevolutions of the four monarchies. Several such like examples there areboth in the sacred and other histories; as is the case of Joseph in Egypt,and of Juddua tho high-priest, in the days of Alexander the Great, &o.


13*







OCR Output








358 FLAVIUSJOSEPHUS [b. I.


Trojan war, so many years afterward, is in great doubt, andgreat inquiry is made whether the Greeks used their lettersat that time; and the most prevailing opinion, and thatnearest the truth, is, that their present way of using thoseletters was unknown at that time. However, there is notany writing which the Greeks agree to be genuine amongthem# ancienter than Homer's poems,1 who must plainly beconfessed later than the siege of Troy; nay, the report goes,that even he did not leave his poems in writing, but that theirmemory was preserved in songs, and they were put togetherafterward; and that this is the reason of such a number ofvariations as are found in them. As for those who set them­selves about writing their histories, I mean such as Cadmusof Miletus, and Acusilaus of Argos, and any others that maybe mentioned as succeeding Acusilaus, they lived but a littlewhile before the Persian expedition into Greece. But thenfor those that first introduced philosophy, and the considera­tion of things celestial and divine among them, such as Pkere-cydes the Syrian, and Pythagoras, and Thales, all with oneconsent agree that they learned what they knew of theEgyptians and Chaldeans, and wrote but little. And theseare the things which are supposed to be the oldest of all amongthe Greeks; and they have much ado to believe that thewritings ascribed to those men are genuine.
3. How can it then be other than an absurd thing for theGreeks to be so proud, and to vaunt themselves to be theonly people that arc acquainted with antiquity, and that havedelivered the true accounts of those early times after anaccurate manner? Nay, who is there that cannot easilygather from the Greek writers themselves, that they knew


1 This preservation uf Homer's Poems by memory, and not by his ownwriting thcm down, and that thence they were styled rhapsodiss, as sung byhim, like ballads, by parts, and not composed and connected together incomplete works, are opinions well known from the ancient commentators;though such Bupposnl seems to myself, as well as to Fabricius, Iiiblioth.Grace, i. p. '269, and to others, highly improbable. Nor does Josephus saythere were no ancienter writings among the Greeks th;in Homer-s poems,but that they did not fully own any ancienter writings pretending to suchantiquity, which is true.







OCR Output








522 DISSERTATION III.


that Vespasian had with him three legions, well exercised inwar. Histor. book ii. chap, v.]
When Vespasian was a very young man, it was promisedhim that he should arrive at the highest pitch of fame: butwhat did first of all seem to confirm the omen was histriumphs and consulship, and the glory of his victories overthe Jews. When he had once obtained these he believed itwas portended that he should como to the empire.1
There is between Judea and Syria a mountain and a god,both called by the same name of Carmel, though our pre­decessors have informed us that this god had no image, andno temple, and, indeed, no more than an altar and solemnworship. Vespasian was once offering a sacrifice there, at atime when he had some secret thought in his mind: thepriest, whose name was Basilides, when he over and overlooked at the entrails, said, Vespasian, whatever thou artabout, whether the building of thy house, or enlargement ofthy lands, or augmentation of thy slaves, thou art granted amighty seat, very large bounds, a huge number of men.These doubtful answers were soon spread abroad by fame,and at this time were explained: nor was any thing so muchin public vogue; and very many discourses of that naturewere made before him, and the more because they foretoldwhat he expected.
Mucianus and Vespasianus went away, having fully agreedon their designs; the former to Antioch, the latter toCaesarea. Antioch is the capital of Syria, and Ca;sarea thecapital of Judea. The commencement of Vespasian's ad­vancement to the empire was at Alexandria, where Tiberiu?Alexander made such haste, that he obliged the legions totake the oath of fidelity to him on the calends of July, whichwas ever after celebrated as the day of his inauguration,although the army in Judea had taken the oath on the fifth


1 Joscphus takes notice in general of these many omens of Vespasian's•idvancement to the empire, and distinctly adds his own remarkable pre­diction of it also. Antiq. b. Hi. ell. viii. sect. 3-9.
* This although seems to imply that Vespasian was proclaimed emperor injudea before he was so proclaimed at Alexandria, as the whole history of







OCR Output








C. V.] II1E IS M P L E. 181


the outside adorned with any work of the painter or engraver.The cloisters [of the outmost court] were in breadth thirtycubits, while the entire compass of it was by measure six fur­longs, including the tower of Antonia; those entire courtsthat were exposed to the air were laid with stones of all sorts.When you go through these [first] cloisters unto the second[court of the] temple, there was a partition, made of stone allround, whose height was three cubits; its construction wasvery elegant; upon it stood pillars, at equal distances fromone another, declaring the law of purity, some in Greek andsome in Roman letters, that no foreigner should go withinthat sanctuary ; for that second [court of the] temple wascalled the Sanctuary, and was ascended to by fourteen stepsfrom the first court. This court was four-square, and had awall about it peculiar to itself; the height of its buildings,although it were ' on the outside forty cubits, was hidden bythe steps, and on the inside that height was but twenty-fivecubits , for it being built over against a higher part of the hillwith steps, it was no farther to be entirely discerned within,being covered by the hill itself. Beyond these fourteen stepsthere was the distance of ten cubits: this was all plain;whence there were other steps, each of five cubits a-piece, thatled to the gates, which gates on the north and south sideswere eight, on each of those sides four, and of necessity twoon the east. For since there was a partition built for thewomen on that side, as the proper place wherein they were toworship, there was a necessity of a second gate for them ; this


1 What Josephus seems here to mean is this, that these pillars supportingthe cloisters in the second court, had their foundations or lowest parts asdeep as the floor of the first or lowest court, but that so far of those lowestparts as were equal to the elevation of the upper floor above the lowest, were,and must be, hidden on the inside by the ground or rock itself, on which thatupper court was built: so that forty cubits visible below were reduced totwenty-five visiblo above, and implies the difference of their heights to befifteen cubits. The main difficulty lies here, how fourteen or fifteen stepsshould give an ascent of fifteen cubits, half a cubit seeming sufficient for asingle step. Possibly there were fourteen or fifteen steps at the partitionwall, and fourteen or fifteen more thence into the court itself, which wouldbring the whole near to the just proportion. Sec sect. 3, infra. But I deter­mine nothing.
rv\ —16







OCR Output








THE
WORKS
Of
JOSEPH US,
WITH A LIFE
WRITTEN BY HIMSELF.TRANSLATED FROM THE ORIGINAL GREEK.
INCLUDING
EXPLANATORY NOTES AND OBSERVATIONS,
BV
WILLIAM WHISTON, A.M.
WITH
A COMPLETE INDEX.IN FOUR VOLUMES.
VOL. IV.


NEW YOEK:
OAKLEY, MASON & CO.,
No. 21 MURRAY STREET.


1869.







OCR Output








C.X.] THE SIC A R II AT ALEXANDRIA. 345


on every side, with a fire within the place, as well as a perfectsilence. So they were at a loss to guess at what had hap­pened. At length they made a shout, as if it had been at ablow given by the battering-ram, to try whether they couldbring any one out that was within ; the women heard thisnoise, and came out of their underground cavern, and informedthe Romans what had been done, as it was done; and thosecond of them clearly described all, both what was said andwhat was done, and the manner of it; yet did they not easilygive their attention to such a desperate undertaking, and didnot believe it could be as they said : they also attempted toput the fire out; and quickly cutting themselves a way throughit, they came within the palace, and so met with the multitudeof the slain, but could take no pleasure in the fact, though itwere done to their enemies. Nor could they do other thanwonder at the courage of their resolution, and the immoveablecontempt of death which so great a number of them hadshown, when they went through with such an action as thatwas.
CHAPTER X.


WHAT DANGERS THEY WERE IN THERE ; ON WHICH ACCOUNTTHAT TEMPLE, WHICH HAD FORMERLY BEEN BUILT BYOSIAS THE HIGH-PRIEST, WAS DESTROYED.
§ 1. When Masada was thus taken, the general left agarrison in the fortress to keep it, and he himself went awayto Caesarea ; for there were now no enemies left in the coun­try, but it was all overthrown by so long a war. Yet didthis war afford disturbances and dangerous disorders even inplaces very far remote from Judea; for still it came to passthat many Jews were slain at Alexandria in Egypt: for asmany of the Sicarii as were able to fly thither, out of theseditious wars in Judea, were not content to have saved them­selves, but must needs be undertaking to make new distur­bances, and persuaded many of those that entertained them







OCR Output








356 FLAVIUSJOSEPHOS [B. I.


great antiquity, and had a distinct subsistence of its ownoriginally; as also, I have therein declared how we came toinhabit this country wherein we now live. Those Antiquitiescontain the history of five thousand years, and are taken outof our sacred books, but are translated by me into the Greektongue. However, since I observe a considerable number ofpeople giving ear to the reproaches that are laid against usby those who bear ill-will to us, and will not believe what Ihave written concerning the antiquity of our nation, whilothey take it for a plain sign that our nation is of a late date,because they are not so much as vouchsafed a bare mentionby the most famous historiographers among the Grecians, I,therefore, have thought myself under an obligation to writesomewhat briefly about these subjects, in order to convictthose that reproach us of spite and voluntary falsehood, andto correct the ignorance of others, and withal to instruct allthose who are desirous of knowing the truth of what greatantiquity we really are. As for the witnesses whom I shallproduce for the proof of what I say, they shall be such asare esteemed to be of the greatest reputation for truth, andthe most skilful in the knowledge of all antiquity, by theGreeks themselves. I will also show, that those who havewritten so reproachfully and falsely about us are to be con­victed by what they have written themselves to the contrary.I shall also endeavor to give an account of the reasons whyit hath so happened, that there have not been a great numberof Greeks who have made mention of our nation in theirhistories: I will, however, bring those Grecians to light, who


later than his days, so does it perfectly agree to my own determination,from Justus of Tiberias, that he wrote or finished his own life after the 3dof Trnjan, or A. D. 100, to which Noldius also agrees, de Herod. No. 383." [Epaphroditu>] since Flavius Josephus," says Dr. Hudson, " wrote [orfinished] his books of Antiquities on the 13th of Domitian, [A. I>. 03,] andafter that wrote the memoirs of his own life as an appendix to the books ofAntiquities, and at last his two books against Apion, and yet dedicated allthose writings to Epaphroditus, he can hardly bo that Epaphroditus whowas formerly secretary to Nero, and was slain on the 14th [or 15th] ofDomitian, after ho had been for a good while in banishment, but anotherEpaphroditus, a free man and procurator of Trajan, a? says Orotius onLuke, i. 3."







OCR Output








468 DISSERTATION I.


tiles also, he must manifestly have had somewhat in himextraordinary above the rest of mankind; for how otherwisecould he draw over so many of the Jews and of the Gentiles,unless he performed admirable and amazing works, and useda method of teaching that was not common ? Moreover, thescripture of the Acts of the Apostles bear witness, that therewere many ten thousands of Jews who were persuaded thathe was the Christ of God, who was foretold by the prophets[Acts xi. 20.]
About A. D. 330. Hist. Eccleg. lib. i. cap. 11. —Now thedivine scripture of the gospels makes mention of John theBaptist as having his head cut off by the younger Herod.Josephus also concurs in this history, and makes mention ofHerodias by name, as wife of his brother, whom Herod hadmarried, upon divorcing his former lawful wife. She was thedaughter of Aretas, king of the Petrcan Arabians; andwhich Herodias he had parted from her husband while he wasalive: on which account also, when he had slain John, hemade war with Aretas [Aretas made war with him,] becausehis daughter had been used dishonorably: in which war,when it came to a battle, he says that all Herod's army wasdestroyed, and that he suffered this because of his wickedcontrivance against John. Moreover, the same Josephus, byacknowledging John to have been a most righteous man, andthe Baptist, conspires in his testimony with what is writtenin the gospels. He also relates, that Herod lost his kingdomfor the sake of the same Herodias, together with whom hewas himself condemned to be banished to Vienna, a city of_Gaul. And tins is his account in the eighteenth book of theAntiquities, where he writes thus of~JoIm verbatim: — Someof the Jews thought that the destruction of Herod's armycame from God, and that very justly, as a punishment forwhat he did against John that was called the Baptist, forHerod slew him, who was a good man, and one that com­manded the Jews to exercise virtue, both as to righteousnesstowards one another, and piety towards God, and so to cometo baptism, for that by this means the washing [with water]would appear acceptable to him, when they made use of it,







OCR Output













OCR Output








B. II.] AGAINST AflON. 443


same time he hath ordained, that such as break these lawsshould be punished, without the allowance of any excusewhatsoever.
31. Now the greatest part of offences with us are capital;as if any one be guilty of adultery; if any one force a virgin ;if any one be so impudent as to attempt sodomy with a male,or if, upon another's making an attempt upon him, ho sub­mits to be so used. There is also a law for slaves of the likenature that can never be avoided. Moreover, if any onecheats another in measures or weights, or makes a knavishbargain and sale in order to cheat another; if any one stealswhat belongs to another, and takes what he never deposited,all these have punishments allotted them : not so much as aremet with among other nations, but more severe ones. Andas for attempts of unjust behavior toward parents, or for im­piety against God, though they be not actually accomplished,the offenders are destroyed immediately. However, the re­ward for such as live exactly according to the laws is notiiilver nor gold; it is not a garland of olive branches or ofr.mallage, nor any such public sign of commendation; butnvery good man hath his own conscience bearing witness tohimself; and by virtue of our legislator's prophetic spirit, andof the firm security God himself affords such a one, ho believesthat God hath made this grant to those that observe theselaws, even though they be obliged readily to die for them,that they shall come into being again, and at a certain revo­lution of things shall receive a better life than they had en­joyed before. Nor would I venture to write thus at thistime, were it not well known to all by our actions, that manyof our people have many a time bravely resolved to endureany sufferings rather than speak one word against our law.
32. Nay, indeed, in case it had so fallen out, that ournation had not been so thoroughly known among all men asthey are, and our voluntary submission to our laws had notbeen so open and manifest as it is; but that somebody hadpretended to have written these laws himself, and had readthem to the Greeks, or had pretended that he had met withmen out of the limits of the known world, that had such reve­







OCR Output








238 THE ROMANS ASSAULT [B. VI.


farther make them less zealous in their attempts; and forthose tbat had run under the darts, some of them were terri­fied by the good order and closeness of the enemies' ranks,before they came to a close fight, and others were prickedwith their spears, and turned back again : at length they re­proached one another for their cowardice, and retired withoutdoing any thing. This attack was made upon the first dayof the month Panemus [Tamuz.] So when the Jews wereretreated, the Romans brought their engines, although theyhad all the while stones thrown at them from the tower ofAntonia, and were assaulted by fire and sword, and by allsorts of darts which necessity afforded the Jews to make use of;for although these had great dependence on their own walland a contempt of the Roman engines, yet did they endeavorto hinder the Romans from bringing them. Now these Ro­mans struggled hard, on the contrary, to bring them, as deem­ing that this zeal of the Jews was in order to avoid any im­pression to be made on the tower of Antonia, because its wallwas but weak and its foundations rotten. However, thattower did not yield to the blows given it from the engines;yet did the Romans bear the impressions made by the ene­mies' darts, which were perpetually cast at them, and did notgive way to any of those dangers that came upon them fromabove, and so they brought their engines to bear. But then,as they were beneath the other, and were sadly wounded bythe stones thrown down upon them, some of them threw theirshields over their bodies, and partly with their hands, andpartly with their bodies, and partly with crows, they under­mined its foundations, and with great pains they removedfour of its stones. Then night came upon both sides, andput an end to this struggle for the present: however, thatnight the wall was so shaken by the battering-rams in thatplace where John had used his stratagem before, and had un­dermined their banks, that the ground then gave way, andthe wall fell down suddenly.
4. When this accident had unexpectedly happened, theminds of both parties were variously affected: for though onewould expect that the Jews would be discouraged, because







OCR Output








C. II.] THE ASSAULT. 253


tonia, as a dispenser of rewards to those soldiers that signa­lized themselves in the fight, than by coming down, andhazarding his own person in the forefront of them; for thatthey would all fight stoutly, while Caesar looked upon them."With this advice Caesar complied, and said, that " the onlyreason ho had for such compliance with the soldiers was this,that he might be able to judge of their courageous actions,and that no valiant soldier might lie concealed, and miss ofhis reward, and no cowardly soldier might go unpunished,but that he might himself be an eye-witness, and able to giveevidence of all that was done, who was to be the disposer ofpunishments and rewards to them." So he sent the soldiersabout their work at the hour forementioned, while he wentout himself to a higher place in the tower of Antonia, whencehe might see what was done, and there waited with impatienceto see the event.
6. However, the soldiers that were sent did not find theguards of the temple asleep, as they hoped to have done, butwere obliged to fight with them immediately hand to hand,as they rushed with violence upon them with a great shout.Now, as soon as the rest within the temple heard that shoutof those that were upon the watch, they ran out in troopsupon them. Then did the Romans receive the onset of thosethat came first upon them; but those that followed them fellupon their own troops, and many of them treated their ownsoldiers as if they had been enemies; for the great confusednoise that was made on both sides hindered them from dis­tinguishing one another's voices, as did the darkness of thenight hinder them from the like distinction by the sight; be­sides that blindness which arose otherwise also from the pas­sion and the fear they were in at the same time: for whichreason it was all one to the soldiers who it was they struckat. However, this ignorance did less harm to the Romansthan to the Jews, because they were joined together undertheir shields, and made their sallies more regularly than theothers did, and each of them remembered his watch-word;while the Jews were perpetually dispersed abroad, and madetheir attacks and retreats at random, and so did frequentlyIV. — 22







OCR Output








212 TITUS RESUMES THE SIEGE. [B. V.


all the other springs that were without the city, did so farfail that water was sold by distinct measures; whereas theynow have such a great quantity of water for your enemies,as is sufficient not only for drink both for themselves andtheir cattle, but for watering their gardens also. The samewonderful sign you had also experience of formerly, whenthe forementioned king of Babylon made war against us, andwhen he took the city and burnt the temple; while yet Ibelieve the Jews of that age were not so impious as you are.Wherefore, I cannot but suppose that God is fled out of hissanctuary, and stands on the side of those against whom youfight. Now, even a man, if he be but a good man, will flyfrom an impure house, and will hate those that are in it; anddo you persuade yourselves that God will abide with you inyour iniquities, who sees all secret things, and hears what iskept most private ? Now, what crime is there, I pray you,that is so much as kept secret among you, or is concealed byyou ? nay, what is there that is not open to your veryenemies ? for you show your transgressions after a pompousmanner, and contend one with another which of you shall bemore wicked than another; and you make a public demonstra­tion of your injustice, as if it were virtue. However, thereis a place left for your preservation, if you be willing to ac­cept of it; and God is easily reconciled to those that confesstheir faults and repent of them. O hard-hearted wretchesas you are! cast away all your arms, and take pity of yourcountry already going to ruin: return from your wickedways, and have regard to the excellency of that city you aregoing to betray, to that excellent temple, with the donationsof so many countries in it. Who could bear to be the firstthat should set that temple on fire ? who could be willing thatthese things should be no more ? and what is there that canbetter deserve to be preserved ? O insensible creatures, andmore stupid than are the stones themselves! And if youcannot look at these things with discerning eyes, yet, how­ever, have pity upon your families, and set before every oneof your eyes your children, and wives, and parents, whichwill be gradually consumed either by famine or by war. I







OCR Output








C. V.] THE TEMPLE. 185


as to those parts of it that were not gilt, they were exceed­ing white. On its top it had spikes with sharp points, to pre­vent any pollution of it hy birds sitting upon it. Of itsstones some of them were forty-five cubits in length, five inheight, and six in breadth. Before this temple stood thealtar, fifteen cubits high, and equal both in length andbreadth : each of which dimensions was fifty cubits. Thefigure it was built in was a square, and it had corners likehorns, and the passage up to it was by an insensible acclivity.It was formed without any iron tool, nor did any such irontool so much as touch it at any time. There was also a wallof partition, about a cubit in height, made of fine stones, andso as to be grateful to the sight; this encompassed the holyhouse and the altar, and kept the people that were on theoutside off from the priests. Moreover, those that had thegonorrhoea and the leprosy were excluded out of the cityentirely: women also, when their courses were upon them,were shut out of the temple ; nor, when they were free fromthat impurity, were they allowed to go beyond the limitbefore mentioned: men also, that were not thoroughly pure,were prohibited to come into the inner [court of the] temple;nay, the priests themselves that were not pure were pro­hibited to come into it also.
7. Now all those of the stock of the priests that could notminister by reason of some defect in their bodies, came with­in the partition, together with those that had no such im­perfection, and had their share with them by reason of theirstock, but still made use of none except their own privategarments; for nobody but he that officiated had on his sacredgarments: but then those priests that were without anyblemish upon them went up to the altar clothed in fine linen.They abstained chiefly from wine out of this fear, lest other­wise they should transgress some rules of their ministration.The high-priest did also go up with them ; not always, indeed,but on the seventh days and new moons, and if any festivalsbelonging to our nation, which we celebrate every year,happened. When he officiated, ho had on a pair of breechesthat reached beneath his privy parts to his thighs, and had


16*







OCR Output








840 eleazar's speeches. [b. vn.


venge upon the Romans, when they acted in concert with ourcountrymen. Wherefore, you see how little our good-willand fidelity to them profited us, while they were slain, theyand their whole families, after the most inhuman manner,which was all the requital that was made them for the assist­ance they had afforded the others: for that very same de­struction which they had prevented from falling upon theothers did they suffer themselves from them, as if they hadbeen ready to be the actors against them. It would be toolong for me to speak at this time of every destruction broughtupon us: for you cannot but know, that there was not anyone Syrian city which did not slay their Jewish inhabitants,and were not more bitter enemies to us than were the Romansthemselves: nay, even those of Damascus, when they wereable to allege no tolerable pretence against us, filled theircity with the most barbarous slaughters of our people, andcut the throats of eighteen thousand1 Jews with their wivesand children. And as to the multitude of those that wereslain in Egypt, and that with torments also, we have beeninformed they were more than sixty thousand: those, indeed,being in a foreign country, and so naturally meeting withnothing to oppose against their enemies, were killed in themanner forementioned. As for all those of us who havowaged war against the Romans in our own country, had wenot sufficient reason to have sure hopes of victory ? for wchad arms and walls, and fortresses so prepared as not to beeasily taken, and courage not to be moved by any dangersin the cause of liberty, which encouraged us all to revolt fromthe Romans. But, then, these advantages sufficed us but fora short time, and only raised our hopes, while they reallyappeared to be the origin of our miseries; for all wc had hathbeen taken from us, and all hath fallen under our enemies,as if these advantages were only to render their victory overus the more glorious, and were not disposed for the preserva­tion of those by whom these preparations were made. Andas for those that are already dead in the war, it is reasonablewe should esteem them blessed, for they are dead in defending
Sec B. ii. ch. xx. sect. 2, where the number of the slain is but 10,000.







OCR Output








B. I.] AGAINST APION. 399


particular, they might have laid a private plot against him­self, but would hardly have made war against all the Egyp­tians ; I mean this on the account of the great kindred they,who were so numerous, must have had among them. Nay,still, if they had resolved to fight with the men, they wouldnot have had impudence enough to fight with their gods; norwould they have ordained laws quite contrary to those of theirown country, and to those in which they had been bred upthemselves. Yet are we beholden to Manetho, that ho doesnot lay the principal charge of this horrid transgression uponthose that came from Jerusalem, but says that the Egyptiansthemselves were the most guilty, and that they were theirpriests that contrived these things, and made the multitudetake their oaths for doing so. But still, how absurd is it tosuppose that none of these people's own relations or friendsshould be prevailed with to revolt, nor to undergo the hazardsof war with them ? while these polluted people were forced tosend to Jerusalem, and bring their auxiliaries from thence.What friendship, I pray, or what relation was there formerlybetween them that required this assistance ? On the contrary,these people were enemies, and greatly differed from them intheir customs. He says, indeed, that they complied imme­diately, upon their promising them that they should conquerEgypt; as if they did not themselves very well know thatcountry out of which they had been driven by force. Now,had these men been in want, or lived miserably, perhaps theymight have undertaken so hazardous an enterprise; but asthey dwelt in a happy city, and had a large country, and onebetter than Egypt itself, how came it about that for the sakeof those that had of old been their enemies, and of those thatwere maimed in their bodies, and of those whom none of theirown relations would endure, they should run such hazards inassisting them ? For they could not foresee that the kingwould run away from them; on the contrary, he saith himself,that " Amenophis's son had three hundred thousand men withhim, and met them at Pelusium." Now, to be sure, those thatcame could not be ignorant of this; but for the king's re­pentance and flight, how could they possibly guess at it ? He







OCR Output








124 VESPASIAN TAKES GADABA. [b. IV.


thus did they fall upon the holy places' and the cities; yetdid it now so happen that they were sometimes very illtreated by those upon whom they fell with such violence, andwere taken by them as men are taken in war: but still theyprevented any farther punishment, as do robbers, who, assoon as their ravages [are discovered,] run their way. Norwas there now any part of Judea that was not in a miserablecondition, as well as its most eminent city also.
3. These things were told Vespasian by deserters: foralthough the seditious watched all the passages out of thecity, and destroyed all, whosoever they were, that camethither, yet were there some that had concealed themselves;and when they had fled to the Romans, persuaded theirgeneral to come to the city's assistance, and save the re­mainder of the people; informing him withal, that it wasupon account of the people's good-will to the Romans thatmany of them were already slain, and the survivors in dangerof the same treatment. Vespasian did, indeed, already pitythe calamities these men were in, and arose, in appearance,as though he was going to besiege Jerusalem, but in realityto deliver them from a [worse] siege they were alreadyunder. However, he was obliged first to overthrow whatremained elsewhere, and to leave nothing out of Jerusalembehind him that might interrupt him in that siege. Accord­ingly, he marched against Gadara, the metropolis of Perea,which was a place of strength, and entered that city on thefourth day of the month Dystrus [Adar;] for the men ofpower had sent an embassage to him, without the knowledgeof the seditious, to treat about a surrender ; which they didout of the desire they had of peace, and for saving theireffects, because many of the citizens of Gadara were rich


1 13y this ii(io or holy places, as distinct from cities, must bo meant pro-seischtz or houses of prayer, out of cities; of which we find mention made inthe New Testament and other authors. See Luke, vi. 12; Acts, xvi. 13,10; Antiq. B. xiv. eh. x. sect. 23; his Life, sect. 61. In qua Is quero pro-seucha ? Juvenal, Sat. iii. ver. 296. They were situated sometimes by thosides of rivers, Acts, xvi. 13, or by tho sea-side, Antiq. B. xiv. ch. x. sect.23. So did the seventy-two interpreters go to prayer every morning by thesea-side, before they went to their work, B. xii. ch. ii. sect. 12.







OCR Output








108 THE IDC MEANS [b. IV.


were the minds of the Idumeans at rest; for they were in arage at the injury that had been offered them, by their ex­clusion out of the city; and when they thought the zealotshad been strong, but saw nothing of theirs to support them,they were in doubt about the matter, and many of them re­pented that they had come thither. But the shame thatwould attend them, in case they returned without doing anything at all, so far overcame that their repentance, that theylay all night before the wall, though in a very bad encamp­ment ; for there broke out a prodigious storm in the night,with the utmost violence, and very strong winds, with thelargest showers of rain, with continual lightnings, terriblethunderings, and amazing concussions and bellowings of theearth that was in an earthquake. These things were a mani­fest indication that some destruction was coming upon men,when the system of the world was put into this disorder, andany one would guess that these wonders foreshowed somegrand calamities that were coming.
6. Now the opinion of the Idumeans and of the citizenswas one and the same. The Idumeans thought that God wasangry at their taking arms, and that they would not escapepunishment for their making war upon their metropolis.Ananus and his party thought that they had conquered with­out fighting, and that God acted as a general for them; buttruly they proved ill conjectures at what was to come, andmade those events to be ominous to their enemies, while theywere themselves to undergo the ill effects of them; for theIdumeans fenced one another by uniting their bodies into oneband, and thereby kept themselves warm, and connectingtheir shields over their heads, were not so much hurt by therain. But the zealots were more deeply concerned for thedanger these men were in, than they were for themselves,and got together, and looked about them to see whether theycould devise any means of assisting them. The hotter sortof them thought it best to force their guards with their arms,and after that to fall into the midst of the city, and publiclyopen the gates to those that came to their assistance; assupposing the guards would be in disorder, and give way at







OCR Output








166 TITUS AT JERUSALEM. [D. V.


courage one another when they were gotten together, andtook their armor immediately, and ran out upon the tenthlegion, and fell upon the Romans with great eagerness, andwith a prodigious shout, as they were fortifying their camp.These Romans were caught in different parties, and this is inorder to perform their several works, and on that accounthad in a great measure laid aside their arms; for they thoughtthe Jews would not have ventured to make a sally upon them;and, had they been disposed so to do, they supposed theirsedition would have distracted them: So they were put intodisorder unexpectedly; when some of them left their worksthey were about, and immediately marched off, while manyran to their arms, but were smitten and slain before theycould turn back upon the enemy. The Jews became stillmore and more in number, as encouraged by the good suc­cess of those that first made the attack; and while they hadsuch good fortune, they seemed both to themselves and to theenemy to be many more than they really were. The dis­orderly way of their fighting at first put the Romans also toa stand, who had been constantly used to fight skilfully ingood order, and with keeping their ranks, and obeying theorders that were given them: for which reason the Romanswere caught unexpectedly, and were obliged to give way tothe assaults that were made upon them. Now when theseRomans were overtaken, and turned back upon the Jews,they put a stop to their career; yet when they did not takecare enough of themselves through the vehemency of theirpursuit, were wounded by them: but as still more and moreJews sallied out of the city, the Romans wore at lengthbrought into confusion, and put to flight, and ran away fromtheir camp. Nay, things looked as though the entire legionwould have been in danger, unless Titus had been informedof the case they were in, and had sent them succors imme­diately. So he reproached them for their cowardice, andbrought those back that were running away, and fell himselfupon the Jews in their flank, with those select troops thatwere with him, and slew a considerable number, and wounded







OCR Output








B. II.J AGAINST A PI ON. 435


same notions of the nature of God; yet durst not these mendisclose those true notions to more than a few, because thebody of the people were prejudiced with other opinions be­forehand. But our legislator, who made his actions agree tohis laws, did not only prevail with these that were his con­temporaries to agree with these his notions, but so firmly im­printed this faith in God upon all their posterity, that itnever could be removed. The reason why the constitutionof this legislation was ever better directed to the utility ofall, than other legislations were, is this, that Moses did notmake religion a part of virtue, but he saw and he ordainedother virtues to be parts of religion; I mean justice, andfortitude, and temperance, and a universal agreement of themembers of the community with one another: for all ouractions and studies, and all our words [in Moses's settlement,]have a reference to piety towards God ; for he hath left noneof these in suspense or undetermined. For there are twoways of coming at any sort of learning, and a moral conductof life; the one is by instruction in words, the other bypractical exercises. Now, other lawgivers have separatedthese two ways in their opinions, and choosing one of thoseways of instruction, or that which best pleased every one ofthem, neglected the other. Thus did the Lacedemonians andthe Cretians teach by practical exercises, but not by words;while the Athenians and almost all the other Grecians madelaws about what was to be done, or left undone, but had noregard to the exercising them thereto in practice.
18. But for our legislator, he very carefully joined thesetwo methods of instruction together ; for he neither left thesepractical exercises to go on without verbal instruction, nordid he permit the hearing of the law to proceed without theexercises for practice; but beginning immediately from theearliest infancy, and the appointment of every one's diet,he left nothing of the very smallest consequence to be doneat the pleasure and disposal of the person himself: accord­ingly, he made a fixed rule of law, what sorts of food theyshould abstain from, and what sorts they should make useof, as also what communion they should have with others;







OCR Output













OCR Output








CXI.] VESPASIAN GOES TO ROME. 153


eight months and five days;' and had he lived much longer, Icannot but think the empire would not have been sufficientfor his lust. Of the others that were slain were numberedabove fifty thousand. This battle was fought on the thirdday of the month Apellus [Casleu:] on the next day Mucianuscame into the city with his army, and ordered Antonius andhis men to leave off killing; for they were still searching thehouses, and killed many of Vitellius's soldiers, and many ofthe populace, as supposing them to be of his party, prevent­ing by their rage any accurate distinction between them andothers. He then produced Domitian, and recommended himto the multitude, until his father should come himself: so thepeople, being now freed from their fears, made acclamationsof joy for Vespasian as for their emperor, and kept festivaldays for his confirmation and for the destruction of Vitellius.5. And now, as Vespasian was come to Alexandria, thisgood news came from Rome, and at the same time came em­bassies from all his own habitable earth to congratulate himupon his advancement; and though this Alexandria was thegreatest of all cities next to Rome, it proved too narrow tocontain the multitude that then came to it. So upon thisconfirmation of Vespasian's entire government, which wasnow settled, and upon the unexpected deliverance of thepublic affairs of the Romans from ruin, Vespasian turned histhoughts to what remained unsubdued in Judea. However,he himself made haste to go to Rome, as the winter was nowalmost over, and soon set the affairs of Alexandria in order,but sent his son Titus, with a select part of his army, to de­stroy Jerusalem. So Titus marched on foot as far as Nico­


1 The numbers in Josephus, chap. ix. sect. 2, 9, for Galba 7 months 7 days,for Otho 3 months 2 days, and here for Vitellius 8 months 5 days, do notagree with any Roman historians, who also disagree among themselves. And,indeed, Scaliger justly complains, as Dr. Hudson observes on chap. ix. sect.2, that this period is very confused and uncertain in the ancient authors.They were probably some of them contemporary together for some time; oneof the best evidences we have, I mean Ptolemy's Canon, omits them all, asif they did not altogether reign one whole year, nor had a single Thoth orNew-Year's day (which then fell upon Aug. 0,) in their entire reigns. Dioalso, who says that Vitellius reigned a year within ten days, does yet esti­mate all their reigns together at no more than 1 year, 1 month and 2 days.







OCR Output








276 PRECEDING SIONS. [b. VI.


tone possible, at every stroke of the whip his answer was,"Woe, woe to Jerusalem." And when Albinus (for he wasthen our procurator) asked him, " Who he was ? and whencehe came ? and why he uttered such words ?" he made no man­ner of reply to what he said, but still did not leave off hismelancholy ditty, till Albinus took him to be a madman, anddismissed him. Now, during all the time that passed beforethe war began, this man did not go near any of the citizens,nor was seen by them while he said so; but he every dayuttered these lamentable words, as if it were his premeditatedvow, — " Woe, woe to Jerusalem." Nor did he give ill wordsto any of those that beat him every day, nor good words tothose that gave him food; but this was his reply to all men,and, indeed, no other than a melancholy presage of what wasto come. This cry of his was the loudest at the festivals;and he continued this ditty for seven years and five months,without growing hoarse, or being tired therewith, until thevery time that he saw his presage in earnest fulfilled in oursiege, when it ceased; for as he was going round upon thewall, he cried out with his utmost force, — " Woe, woe to thecity again, and to the people, and to the holy house." Andjust as he added at the last, — "Woe, woe to myself also,"there came a stone out of one of the engines, and smote him,and killed him immediately; and, as he was uttering the verysame presages, he gave up the ghost.
4. Now, if any one consider these things, he will find thatGod takes care of mankind, and by all ways possible fore­shows to our race what is for their preservation, but that menperish by those miseries which they madly and voluntarilybring upon themselves; for the Jews, by demolishing thetower of Antonia, had made their temple four-square, while,at the same time, they had it written in their sacred oracles,that " then should their city be taken, as well as their holyhouse, when once their temple should become four-square."But now, what did the most elevate them in undertaking thiswar, was an ambiguous oracle that was found also in theirsacred writings, how, " about that time, one from their coun­try should become governor of the habitable earth." The







OCR Output








B. II.] AGAINST APION. 437


such words as entirely take away the nature of God, as othersof them have taken away his providence over mankind. Norcan any one perceive amongst us any difference in the con­duct of our lives, hut all our works are common to us all.We have one sort of discourse concerning God, which is con­formable to our law, and affirms that he sees all things; asalso we have but one way of speaking concerning the conductof our lives, that all other things ought to have piety fortheir end; and this any body may hear from our women andservants themselves.
21. And, indeed, hence hath arisen that accusation whichEome make against us, that we have not produced men thathave been the inventors of new operations, or of new waysof speaking; for others think it a fine thing to persevere innothing that has been delivered down from their forefathers,and these testify it to be an instance of the sharpest wisdomwhen these men venture to transgress those traditions;whereas we, on the contrary, suppose it to be our only wisdomand virtue to admit no actions nor supposals that are contraryto our original laws; which procedure of ours is a just andsure sign that our law is admirably constituted; for suchlaws as are not thus well made are convicted upon trial towant amendment.
22. But while we are ourselves persuaded that our lawwas made agreeably to the will of God, it would be impiousfor us not to observe the same; for what is there in it thatany body would change ? and what can be invented that isbetter ? or what can we take out of other people's laws thatwill exceed it ? Perhaps some would have the entire settle­ment of our government altered. And where shall we finda better or more righteous constitution than ours ? while thismakes us esteem God to be the governor of the universe, andpermits the priests in general to be the administrators of theprincipal affairs, and withal intrusts the government over theother priests to the chief high-priest himself: which priestsour legislator, at their first appointment, did not advance tothat dignity for their riches, or any abundance of otherpossessions, or any plenty they had, as the gifts of fortune;


37*







OCR Output








448 flavius Joseph us [b. n.


have advanced a certain timorousness and fear, as also mad­ness and fraud, and any other of the vilest passions into thenature and form of gods, and have persuaded whole cities tooffer sacrifice to the hetter sort of them ; on which accountthey have been absolutely forced to esteem some gods as thegivers of good things, and to call others of them averters ofevil. They also endeavor to move them, as they would thevilest of men, by gifts and presents, as looking for nothingelse than to receive some great mischief from them unlessthey pay them such wages.
36. Wherefore it deserves our inquiry, what should be theoccasion of this unjust management and of these scandalsabout the Deity ? And truly I suppose it to be derived fromthe imperfect knowledge the heathen legislators had at firstof the true nature of God: nor did they explain to the peopleeven so far as they did comprehend of it; nor did they com­pose the other parts of their political settlements accordingto it, but omitted it as a thing of very little consequence, andgave leave both to the poets to introduce what gods theypleased, and those subject to all sorts of passions, and to theorators to procure political decrees from the people for theadmission of such foreign gods as they thought proper. Thepainters also and statuaries of Greece had herein great power,as each of them could contrive a shape [proper for a god ;]the one to be formed out of clay, and the other by making abare picture of such a one. But those workmen that wereprincipally admired, had the use of ivory and of gold as theconstant materials for their new statutes: [whereby it comesto pass that some temples are quite deserted, while others arein great esteem, and adorned with all the rites of all kindsof purification.] Besides this, the first gods, who have longflourished in the honors done them, are now grown old [whilethose that flourished after them are come in their room as asecond rank, that I may speak the most honorably of themthat I can;] nay, certain other gods there arc who are newlyintroduced, and newly worshipped [as we by way of digres­sion have said already, and yet have left their places of wor­ship desolate ;] and for their temples, some of them arc already







OCR Output








C.III.] JOHNOFGISCHALA. 87


come to them, and inquired of them what miseries hadhappened abroad, when their breath was so short, and hot,and quick, that of itself it declared the great distress theywere in; yet did they talk big under their misfortunes, andpretended to say, that they had not fled away from theRomans, but came thither in order to fight them with lesshazard, for that it would be an unreasonable and a fruitlessthing for them to expose themselves to desperate hazardsabout Gischala and such weak cities, whereas they ought tolay up their weapons and their zeal, and reserve it for theirmetropolis. But when they related to them the taking ofGischala, and their decent departure, as they pretended,from that place, many of the people understood it to be nobetter than a flight: and especially when the people weretold of those that were made captives, they were in greatconfusion, and guessed those things to be plain indicationsthat they should be taken also. But for John, he was verylittle concerned for those whom he had left behind him, butwent about among all the people, and persuaded them to goto war, by the hopes he gave them. He affirmed that theaffairs of the Romans were in a weak condition, and extolledhis own power. He also jested upon the ignorance of theunskilful, as if those Romans, although they should take tothemselves wings, could never fly over the wall of Jerusalem,who found such great difficulties in taking the villages ofGalilee, and had broken their engines of war against their walls.2. These harangues of John's corrupted a great part ofthe young men, and puffed them up for the war ; but as tothe more prudent part, and those in years, there was not aman of them but foresaw what was coming, and made lamen­tation on that account, as if the city was already undone:and in this confusion were the people. But then it must beobserved, that the multitude that came out of the countrywere at discord before the Jerusalem sedition began; forTitus went from Gischala to Caesarea, and Vespasian fromCaesarea to Jamnia and Azotus, and took them both; andwhen he had put garrisons into them he came back with agreat number of the people, who were come over to him,







OCR Output








136 SIMON OF GERASA. [B. IV.


ho left them, and went into the mountainous part of thecountry. So he proclaimed liberty to those in slavery, anda reward to those already free, and got together a set ofwicked men from all quarters.
4. And as he had now a strong body of men about him,he overran the villages that lay in the mountainous country;and when there were still more and more that came to him,he ventured to go down into the lower parts of the country;and since he was now become formidable to the cities, manyof the men of power were corrupted by him; so that hisarmy was no longer composed of slaves and robbers, but agreat many of the populace were obedient to him as to theirking. He then overran the Acrabattene toparchy, and theplaces that reached as far as the great Idumea; for he builta wall at a certain village called Nain, and made use of thatas a fortress for his own party's security; and at the valleycalled Pharan, he enlarged many of the caves, and manyothers he found ready for his purpose; these he made use ofas repositories for his treasures and receptacles for his prey,and therein he laid up the fruits that he had got by rapine;and many of his partisans had their dwelling in them ; andho made no secret of it that he was exercising his men before­hand, and making preparations for the assault of Jerusalem.5. AVhereupon the zealots, out of the dread they were inof his attacking them, and being willing to prevent one thatwas growing up to oppose them, went out against him withtheir wenpons. Simon met them, and joining battle with them,slew a considerable number of them, and drove the rest beforehim into the city, but durst not trust so much upon his forcesas to make an assault upon the walls; but he resolved firstto subdue Idumea; and as he had now twenty thousandarmed men, he marched to the borders of their country.Hereupon the rulers of the Idumeans got together on thesudden the most warlike part of their people, about twenty-five thousand in number, and permitted the rest to be a guardto their own country, by reason of the incursions that weremade by the Sicarii that were at Masada. Thus they receivedSimon at their borders, where they fought him, and continued







OCR Output








C. III.] SEDITIONS IN JERUSALEM. 169


CHAPTER III.
HOW THE SEDITION' WAS AGAIN REVIVED WITHIN JERUSALEM,AND YET TnE JEWS CONTRIVED SNARES FOR THE ROMANS :HOW TITUS ALSO THREATENED HIS SOLDIERS FOR THEIRUNGOVERNABLE RASHNESS.
§ 1. As now the war abroad ceased for awhile, the sedi­tion within was revived; and on the feast of unleavenedbread, which was now come, it being the fourteenth day ofthe month Xanthicus [Nisan,] when it is believed the Jewswere first freed from the Egyptians, Eleazar and his partyopened the gates of this [inmost court of the] temple, andadmitted such of the people1 as were desirous to worship Godinto it. But John made use of this festival as a cloak for histreacherous designs, and armed the most inconsiderable ofhis own party, the greater part of which were not purified,with weapons concealed under their garments, and sent themwith great zeal into the temple, in order to seize upon it,which armed men, when they were gotten in, threw their gar­ments away, and presently appeared in their armor: uponwhich there was a very great disorder and disturbance about
1 Here we see the true occasion of those vast numbers of Jews that werein Jerusalem during this siege by Titus, and perished therein ; that the siegebegan at the feast of the Passover, when such prodigious multitudes of Jewsand proselytes of the gate were come from all parts of Judea, and from othercountries, in order to celebrate that great festival. See the note, B. vi.chap. ix. sect. 3. Tacitus himself informs us, that the number of men, wo­men, and children in Jerusalem, when it was besieged by the Romans, as hohad been informe'l, was 600.000. This information must have been takenfrom the Romans; for Josephus never mentions the number of those thatwere besieged, only he lets us know, that of the vulgar, carried dead out ofthe gates and buried at the public charges, was the like number of 600,000,chap. xiii. sect. 7. However, when Cestius Callus came first to the siege,that sum in Tacitus is no way disagreeable to Josephus's history, thoughthey were become much more numerous when Titus encompassed the city atthe Passover. As to the number that perished during the siege, Josephusassures us, as we shall see hereafter, they were 1,100,000, besides 97,000captives; but Tacitus's history of the last part of this siege is not now ex­tant, so we cannot compare his parallel numbers with those in Joscphue.
IV. —15







OCR Output








508 DISSERTATION III.


DISSERTATION III.
TACITUS'S ACCOUNTS OF THE ORIGIN OF THE JEWISH NATION,AND OF THE PARTICULARS OF THE LAST JEWISH WAR ; THATTHE FORMER WAS PROBABLY WRITTEN IN OPPOSITION TOJOSEPHUS'S ANTIQUITIES, AND THAT THE LATTER WAS FORCERTAIN ALMOST ALL DIRECTLY TAKEN FROM JOSEPHUS'SHISTORY OF THE JEWISH WAR.
Since Tacitus, the famous Roman historian, who haswritten more largely and professedly about the origin of theJewish nation, about the chorography of Judea, and the lastJewish war under Cestius, Vespasian, and Titus, than anyother old Roman historian; and since both Josephus andTacitus were in favor with the same Roman emperors, Ves­pasian, Titus, and Domitian; and since Tacitus was aneminent pleader and writer of history at Rome, during thetime, or not long after, our Josephus had been there studyingthe Greek language, reading the Greek books, and writinghis own works in the same Greek language, which languagewas almost universally known at Rome in that age; and since,therefore, it is next to impossible to suppose that Tacituscould be unacquainted with the writings of Josephus, itcannot but be highly proper to compare their accounts ofJudea, of the Jews, and Jewish affairs, together. Nor is itother than a very surprising paradox to me, how it has beenpossible for learned men, particularly for the several learnededitors of Josephus and Tacitus, to be so very silent aboutthis matter as they have hitherto been, especially when notonly the correspondence of the authors as to time and place,but the likeness of the subject-matter and circumstances isso very often so very remarkable; nay, indeed, since manyof the particular facts belonged peculiarly to the region ofJudea, and to the Jewish nation, and are such as could hardlybe taken by a foreigner from any other author than from ourJosephus, this strange silence is almost unaccountable, if not







OCR Output








C. V.] T H E I D U M E A N S. 113


naked, and seemed to be the food of dogs and wild beasts.And I cannot but imagine that virtue itself groaned at thesemen's case, and lamented that she was here so terribly con­quered by wickedness. And this at last was the end ofAnanus and Jesus.
3. Now after these were slain, the zealots and the multi­tude of the Idumeans fell upon the people as upon a flock ofprofane animals, and cut their throats; and for the ordinarysort, they were destroyed in what place soever they caughtthem. But for the noblemen and the youth, they first caughtthem and bound them, and shut them up in prison, and putoft" their slaughter, in hopes that some of them would turnover to their party ; but not one of them would comply withtheir desires, but all of them preferred death before beingenrolled among such wicked wretches as acted against their,own country. But this refusal of theirs brought upon themterrible torments; for they were so scourged and torturedthat their bodies were not able to sustain their torments, tillat length, and with difficulty, they had the favor to be slain.Those whom they caught in the day-time were slain in thenight, and then their bodies were carried out, and thrownaway, that there might be room for other prisoners; and theterror that was upon tho people was so great, that no onehad courage enough either openly to weep for the dead manthat was related to him, or to bury him; but those that wereshut up in their own houses could only shed tears in secret,and durst not even groan, without great caution, lest any oftheir enemies should hear them : for if they did, those thatmourned for others soon underwent the same death with thosewhom they mourned for. Only, in the night-time, they wouldtake up a little dust, and throw it upon their bodies; andeven some that were the most ready to expose themselves todanger would do it in the day-time; and there were twelvethousand of the better sort who perished in this manner.
4. And now these zealots and Idumeans were quite wearyof barely killing men; so they had the impudence of settingup fictitious tribunals and judicatures for that purpose; and


10 *







OCR Output








B. I.] AGAINST APION. 401


us: for he forbade those that had the leprosy either to con­tinue in a city, or to inhabit in a village, but commanded thatthey should go about by themselves with their clothes rent;and declares that such as either touch them, or live underthe same roof with them, should be esteemed unclean; naymore, if any one of their disease be healed, and he recoverhis natural constitution again, he appointed them certainpurifications, and washings with spring-water, and the shavingoff all their hair; and enjoins that they shall offer many sa­crifices, and those of several kinds, and then at length to beadmitted into the holy city; although it were to be expectedthat, on the contrary, if he had been under the same cala­mity, he should have taken care of such persons beforehand,and have had them treated after a kinder manner, as affectedwith a concern for those that were to be under the like mis­fortunes with himself. Nor was it only those leprous peoplefor whose sake he made these laws, but also for such as shouldbe maimed in the smallest part of their body, who yet are notpermitted by him to officiate as priests: nay, although anypriest already initiated, should have such a calamity fall uponhim afterward, he ordered him to be deprived of his honorof officiating. How can it, then, be supposed that Mosesshould ordain such laws against himself, to his own reproachand damage who so ordained them ? Nor, indeed, is thatother notion of Manctho's at all probable, wherein he relatesthe change of his name, and says, that "he was formerlycalled Osarsiph:" and this a name no way agreeable to theother, while his true name was Mouses, and signifies a personwho is preserved out of the water; for the Egyptians callwater Moil. I think, therefore, I have made it sufficientlyevident that Manetho, while he followed his ancient records,did not much mistake the truth of the history; but that whenhe had recourse to fabulous stories, without any certain au­thor, he either forged them himself, without any probability,or else gave credit to some men who spake so out of their ill-will to us.
32. And now I have done with Manetho, I will inquireinto what Cheremon says : for he also, when he pretended to


34*







OCR Output








C. VIII.] SIEGE OF THE UPPER CITY. 285


after the whole city should be destroyed, and the Romansgone away, they might come out again, and escape from them.This was no better than a dream of theirs; for they werenot able to lie hid either from God or from the Romans.However, they depended on these underground subterfuges,and set more places on fire than did the Romans themselves;and those that fled out of their houses, thus set on fire, intoditches, they killed without mercy, and pillaged them also;and if they discovered food belonging to any one, they seizedupon it, and swallowed it down, together with their bloodalso; nay, they were now come to fight one with anotherabout their plunder; and I cannot but think, that, had nottheir destruction prevented it, their barbarity would havomade them taste of even the dead bodies themselves.


CHAPTER VIII.
HOW CESAR RAISED BANKS ROUND ABOUT THE UPPER CITY,1AND WHEN THEY WERE COMPLETED GAVE ORDERS THAT THEMACHINES SHOULD BE BROUGHT: HE THEN POSSESSED HIM­SELF OF THE WHOLE CITY.
§ 1. Now when Caesar perceived that the upper city wasso steep, that it could not possibly be taken without raisingbanks against it, he distributed the several parts of that workamong his army, and this on the twentieth day of the monthLous [Ab.] Now, the carriage of the materials was a diffi­cult task, since all the trees, as I have already told you, thatwere about the city within the distance of a hundred furlongs,had their branches cut off already, in order to make the for­mer banks. The works that belonged to the four legions wereerected on the west side of the city, over against the royalpalace; but the whole body of the auxiliary troops, with therest of the multitude that were with them [erected theirbanks] at the Xystus, whence they reached to the bridge,and that tower of Simon which he had built as a citadel for


1 t e. Mount Sion.







OCR Output








C. IX.] SIMON OF GERASA. 143


12. And thus did Simon get possession of Jerusalem in thothird year of the war, in the month Xanthicus [Nisan;] where­upon John, with his multitude of zealots, as being both pro­hibited from coming out of the temple, and having lost theirpower in the city (for Simon and his party had plunderedthem of what they had,) were in despair of deliverance. Simonalso made an assault upon the temple, with the assistance ofthe people, while the others stood upon the cloisters and thebattlements, and defended themselves from their assaults.However, a considerable number of Simon's party fell, andmany were carried off wounded, for the zealots threw theirdarts easily from a superior place, and seldom failed of hittingtheir enemies; but having tho advantage of situation, andhaving withal erected four very large towers aforehand, thattheir darts might come from higher places, one at the south­east corner of the court, one above the Xystus, the third atanother corner, over against the lower city, and the last waserected above the top of the Pastophoria, where one of thepriests stood of course, and gave a signal' beforehand with atrumpet, at the beginning of every seventh day, in the eveningtwilight, as also at the evening when that day was finished, asgiving notice to the people when they were to leave off workand when they were to go to work again. These men also settheir engines to cast darts and stones withal upon those towers,with their archers and slingers. And now Simon made hisassault upon the temple more faintly, by reason that thegreatest part of his men grew weary of that work; yet did henot leave off his opposition, because his army was superior tothe others, although the darts which were thrown by the en­gines were carried a great way, and slew many of those thatfought for him.


1 This beginning and ending the observation of the Jewish seventh day, orSabbath, with a priest's blowing of a trumpet, is remarkable, and nowhereelse mentioned, that I know of. Nor is Reland's conjecture here improbable,that this was the very place that has puzzled our commentators so long,called Mutach Sabalti, the Covert of the Sabbath, if that be the true reading,2 Kings xvi. 18, because here the proper priest stood dry, under a covering,to proclaim the beginning and ending of every Jewish Sabbath.







OCR Output








548 INDEX.


Cypros, Antipater's daughter by Cy-pros, iii. 101; married to AlexasSelcias, ib.
Cypros, Herod's daughter, married toAntipater, iii. 161.
Cypros, daughter of Phasaelus andS:ilampsio, married to Agrippasenior, iii. 160.
Cyrenius, or Quirinius, iii. 130; iv.327.
Cyrcuians derived from the Lacedoe­monians, iii. 517.
Cyrus, king of Persia, ii. 195; pur­poses to rebuild the Jewish temple;releases the Jews from their cap­tivity, 201; his death, 205.
Cyrus, the son of Xerxes, made king,ii. 231; his letter rescinding theedict of Haman, 245.
Dagon, his temple burnt, ii. 346.
Damascene colonies transported intoHigher Media, ii. 141.
Damascus taken by Tiglathpileser, ii.141; taken by the Romans, ii. 413.
Dan built by the Danitcs, 1. 357.
Danaus, or Hermeus, king of Egypt,iv. 393.
Daniel the prophet, ii. 183; is cas­trated, ib.; Daniel foretells futureevents, 185; tells and interpretsNebuchadnezzar's dream, 186 ; ishonored for it, 187; his companionsare cast into a fiery furnace, ib.;Daniel explains the handwritingupon the wall, 194; is carried intoMedia, 195; is made one of thepresidents of the kingdom, ib.; aconspiracy against him, ib. ; isthrown into the lion's den, 196;builds a tower at Ecbatana, 197;the manner and certainty of hisprophecies, 198; his vision of theram and the he-goat, 199 ; his pro­phecy of the destruction of theJews, 200; of the profanation ofthe temple, 310.
Darius, the son of Astyages. calledby anothername among the Greeks,ii. 195.
Darius, the son of Hystaspes, madeking, ii. 207; makes a splendidentertainment, ib.; proposes ques­tions to be resolved, ib.; his lettersfor rebuilding the temple, 211; hasCyrus's records searched about that [


temple, 218; gives order for itsrebuilding, ib.; his edict againstthe Samaritans, 221.
Dathan, i. 264.
David anointed by Samuel, i. 422;plays upon the harp before Saul.424; fights Goliath, 427; his andJonathan's friendship, 431; is re­conciled to Saul, ib.; is in dangerof being killed by Saul, 453; hisflight, ib., 438; he spares Saul'slife twice, 447, 452; promises toassist the king of Gath, 455; pur­sues tho Amalekites, 462 ; makesa funeral oration for Saul andJonathan, 467; is made king ofJudah, ib. ; and of the Israelites,476; takes Jerusalem, 478; caststhe Jebnsites out, ib. ; marriesseveral wives, 480; conquers thePhilistines, 481; has the ark car­ried to Jerusalem, 482; purposesto build the temple, 484; his vic­tories, 486; his liberality to Me-phibosheth, 489 ; falls in love withDathsheba, 493; causes Uriah tobe slain, 494; marries Uathsheba,495; is reproved by Nathan theprophet, ib., his son by Bathshebadies, 497: he mourns for Absalom'sdeath, 516; orders the people tobe numbered, 529; chooses thopestilence, 630 ; makes great pre­parations for the building of thetemple, 633; exhorts Solomon tobuild it, ib., 640; divides thopriests and Levites into twenty-four courses, 538; he dies, 543 ; isburied, ib.; treasures hidden inhis monument, 465, 544; ii. 373.
Day unusually lengthened, i. 336.
Deborah, i. 361.
Decrees of the Romans, &c, in favorof tho Jews, ii. 433, 441, et seg.
Dellius, ii. 475, 495,; iii. 170.
Deluge, i. 85, et seg.
Demetrius, Alabarch at Alexandria,iii. 286.
Demetrius, the son of Demetrius, joinsJonathan and Ptolemy, and con­quers Alexander, ii. 347, et seg. ;called Nicator, 349; his letter infavor of the Jews, 350; hated bythe Antiochians, 351; breaks friend­ship with Jonathan, 353 ; conquer­ed by Antiochns, ib.; made pri-







OCR Output








90 THE HIGH-PRIEST ANANTJS. [B. IV.


lying pretence these men made for so flagrant an enormitywas this, that these men had had conferences with the Romansfor a surrender of Jerusalem to them; and so they said theyhad slain only such as were traitors to their common liberty.Upon the whole, they grew the more insolent upon this boldprank of theirs, as though they had been the benefactors andsaviors of the city.
6. Now the people were come to that degree of meannessand fear, and these robbers to that degree of madness, thatthese last took upon them to appoint high-priests.1 So whenthey had disannulled the succession, according to those familiesout of which the high-priests used to be made, they ordainedcertain unknown and ignoble persons for that office, that theymight have their assistance in their wicked undertakings; forsuch as obtained this highest of all honors, without anydesert, were forced to comply with those that bestowed it onthem. They also set the principal men at variance one withanother, by several sorts of contrivances and tricks, andgained the opportunity of doing what they pleased, by themutual quarrels of those who might have obstructed theirmeasures; till at length, when they were satiated with theunjust actions they had done toward men, they transferredtheir contumelious behavior to God himself, and came intothe sanctuary with polluted feet.
7. And now the multitude were going to rise against themalready; for Ananus, the ancientest of the high-priests, per­suaded them to it. He was a very prudent man, and had,perhaps, saved the city, if he could but have escaped thehands of those that plotted against him. Those men made


1 Here we may discover the utter disgrace and ruin of the high-priest­hood among tho Jews, when undeserving, ignoble, and vile persons wereadvanced to that noble office by the seditious ; which sort of high-priests,as Josephus well remarks here, were thereupon obliged to comply with andassist those that advanced them in their impious practices. Tho names ofthese high-priests, or rather ridiculous and profane persons, were Jesus, thoson of Damneus, Jesus, the sou of Gamaliel, Matthias, the son of Theophilus,and that prodigious ignoramus Phannias, the son of Samuel; all which weshall meet with in Josephus's future history of this war; nor do wc meetwith any other so much as pretended high-priest after rhannias, till Jcru-salem was taken and destroyed.







OCR Output








C. I.] SEDITIONS AT JERUSALEM. 159


he set on fire those houses that were full of corn,1 and of allother provisions. The same thing was done by Simon, when,upon the other's retreat, he attacked the city also: as if theyhad on purpose done it to serve the Romans, by destroyingwhat the city had laid up against the siege, and by thus cut­ting off the nerves of their own power. Accordingly it socame to pass, that all the places that were about the templewere burnt down, and were become an intermediate desertspace, ready for fighting on both sides of it; and that almostall that corn was burnt, which would have been sufficient fora siege of many years. So they were taken by the means ofthe famine, which it was impossible they should have beenunless they had thus prepared the way for it by this procedure.5. And now, as the city was engaged in a war on all sides,from these treacherous crowds of wicked men, the people ofthe city between them were like a great body torn in pieces.The aged men and the women were in such distress by theirinternal calamities that they wished for the Romans, andearnestly hoped for an external war, in order to their deliveryfrom their domestical miseries. The citizens themselves wereunder a terrible consternation and fear; nor had they anyopportunity of taking counsel, and of changing their conduct;nor were there any hopes of coming to an agreement withtheir enemies; nor could such as had a mind fly away; forguards were set at all places, and the heads of the robbers,although they were seditious one against another in other re­spects, yet did they agree in killing those that were for peacewith the Romans, or were suspected of an inclination to desertto them, as their common enemies. They agreed in nothingbut this, to kill those that were innocent. The noise also ofthose that were fighting was incessant both by day and bynight; but the lamentation of those that mourned exceededthe other; nor was there ever any occasion for them to leaveoff their lamentations, because their calamities came perpetu­


1 This destruction of such a vast quantity of corn and other provisions, nswas sufficient for many years, was the direct occasion of that terrible faminewhich consumed incredible numbers of Jews in Jerusalem during its siege.Nor probably could the Romans have taken this city, after all, had not theseseditious Jews been so infatuated as thus madly to destroy what Josephuahere justly styles "the nerves of their power."







OCR Output








C. VIII.] VESPASIAN. 49


upon him, would not have sent to him a friend of his own, norput the fairest color upon the vilest action, by pretendingfriendship and meaning perfidiousness; nor would he havehimself acquiesced, or come to him, had it been to deceive him.
3. Now, as Josephus began to hesitate with himself aboutNicanor's proposal, the soldiery were so angry that they ranhastily to set fire to the den; but the tribune would not permitthem so to do, as being very desirous to take the man alive.And now, as Nicanor lay hard at Josephus to comply, and heunderstood how the multitude of the enemies threatened him,he called to mind the dreams which he had dreamed in thonight-time, whereby .God had signified to him beforehand boththe future calamities of the Jews and the events that concernedthe Roman emperors. Now Josephus was able to give shrewdconjectures about the interpretation of such dreams as havebeen ambiguously delivered by God. Moreover, he was notunacquainted with the prophecies contained in the sacredbooks, as being a priest himself, and of the posterity of priests;and just then was he in an eestacy, and setting before himthe tremendous images of the dreams he had lately had, heput up a secret prayer to God, and said, — " Since it pleaseththee, who hath created the Jewish nation, to depress the same,and since all their good fortune is gone over to the Romans,and since thou hast made choice of this soul of mine to fore­tell what is to come to pass hereafter, I willingly give theemy hands, and am content to live. And I protest openly thatI do not go over to the Romans as a deserter of the Jews, butas a minister from thee."
4. When he had said this, he complied with Nicanor'sinvitation. But when those Jews who had fled with himunderstood that ho yielded to those that invited him to comeup, they came about him in a body, and cried out, — " Nay,indeed, now may the laws of our forefathers, which Godordained himself, well groan to purpose; that God, we mean,who hath created the souls of the Jews of such a temperthat they despise death. O Josephus ! art thou still fond oflife? and canst thou bear to see the light in a state ofslavery? How soon hast thou forgotten thyself? How
IV.—5







OCR Output








C. Xlii.] AND SACRILEGE. 229


also kept Josephus's father in prison, and made public pro­clamation, that no citizen whatsoever should either speak tohim himself, or go into his company among others, for fearhe should betray them. They also slew such as joined inlamenting these men without any farther examination.
2. Now when Judas, tho son of Judas, who was one ofSimon's under-officers, and a person intrusted by him to keepone of the towers, saw this procedure of Simon, he calledtogether ten of those under him, that were most faithful tohim (perhaps this was done partly out of pity to those thathad so barbarously been put to death, but principally in orderto provide for his own safety,) and spake thus to them: —" How long shall we bear these miseries? or what hopes havewe of deliverance by thus continuing faithful to such wickedwretches ? Is not the famine already come against us ? Arenot the Romans in a manner gotten within the city? Is notSimon become unfaithful to his benefactors ? and is there notreason to fear he will very soon bring us to the like punish­ment, while the security the Romans offer us is sure ? Comeon, let us surrender up this wall, and save ourselves and thecity. Nor will Simon be very much hurt, if, now he despairsof deliverance, he be brought to justice a little sooner thanhe thinks on." Now these ten were prevailed upon by thosearguments; so he sent the rest of those that were under himsome oi;o way and some another, that no discovery might bemade of what they had resolved upon. Accordingly, hecalled to the Romans from the tower about the third hour;but they, some of them out of pride, despised what he said,and others of them did not believe him to be in earnest,though the greatest number delayed the matter, as believingthey should get possession of the city in a little time withoutany hazard. But when Titus was just coming thither withhis armed men, Simon was acquainted with the matter beforehe came, and presently took the tower into his own custodybefore it was surrendered, and seized upon these men, andput them to death in the sight of the Romans themselves ;and when he had mangled their dead bodies, he threw themdown before the wall of the city.IV. —20







OCR Output








B. II.] AGAINST A PI ON. 431


are better than other men, both for moderation and suchvirtue as is agreeable to nature. Indeed, their endeavor wasto have every thing they ordained believed to be very ancient,tha.t they might not be thought to imitate others, but mightappear to have delivered a regular way of living to othersafter them. Since, then, this is the case, the excellency ofa legislator is seen in providing for the people's living afterthe best manner, and in prevailing with those that are to usethe laws he ordains for them to have a good opinion of them,and in obliging the multitude to persevere in them, and tomake no changes in them, neither in prosperity nor adversity.Now, I venture to say, that our legislator is the most ancientof all the legislators whom we have any where heard of; foras for the Lycurguses, and Solons, and Zaleucus Locrensis,and all those legislators which arc so admired by the Greeks,they seem to be of yesterday, if compared with our legislator,insomuch as the very name of a law was not so much knownas in old times among the Grecians. Homer is a witness tothe truth of this observation, who never uses that term in allhis poems; for, indeed, there was then no such thing amongthem, but the multitude was governed by wise maxims, andby the injunctions of their king. It was also a long time'that they continued in the use of these unwritten customs,although they were always changing them upon several occa­sions. But for our legislator, who was of so much greaterantiquity than the rest (as even those that speak against usupon all occasions do always confess,) he exhibited himselfto the people as their.best governor and counsellor, and in­cluded in his legislation the entire conduct of their lives, andprevailed with them to receive it, and brought it so to pass,that those that were made acquainted with his laws did mostcarefully observe them.
17. But let us consider his first and greatest work: forwhen it was resolved on by our forefathers to leave Egypt,and return to their own country, this Moses took the manyten thousands that were of the people, and saved them out


1 Viz. After the greatest part of the world had left off their obedience toGod, their original legislator. Seo Scripture Polities, page 6, 7.







OCR Output








DISSERTATION I. 467


the cause of the destruction of Jerusalem, and of the demo­lition of the temple, and ought to have said, that their ma­chinations against Jesus were the cause of those miseriescoming on the people, because they had slain that Christ,who was foretold by the prophets, he, though as it were un­willingly, and yet as one not remote from the truth, says :" These miseries befell the Jews by way of revenge for Jamesthe Just, who was the brother of Jesus, that was called Christ,because they had slain him who was a most righteous person."Now this James was he whom that genuine disciple of Jesus,Paul, said he had seen as the Lord's brother, [Gal. i. 19;]which relation implies not so much nearness of blood, or thesameness of education, as it does the agreement of mannersand preaching. If, therefore, he says the desolation of Jeru­salem befell the Jews for the sake of James, with how muchgreater reason might ho have said, that it happened for thesake of Jesus ? &c.
About A. D. 324. Uuseb. Demonstr. Evan. lib. iii. p. 124.— Certainly the attestation of those I have already produced,concerning our Savior may be sufficient. However, it maynot be amiss, if, over and above, we make use of Josephusthe Jew for a farther witness; who, in the eighteenth bookof his Antiquities, when he was writing the history of whathappenedunder Pilate, makes mention of our Savior in thesewords: -V^Jpw there was about this time, Jesus, a wise man,if it be lawful to call him a man, for he was a doer of won­derful works, a teacher of such men as had a veneration fortruth; he drew over to him both many of the Jews and manyof the Gentiles: he was the Christ. And when Pilate, at thesuggestion of the principal men among us, had condemnedhim to the cross, those that loved him at first did not forsakehim, for he appeared to them alive again the third day, asthe divine prophets had spoken of these, and ten thousandother wonderful things concerning him ; whence the tribe ofChristians, so named from him, are not extinct at this day. JIf, therefore, we have this historian's testimony, that he noT'only brought over to himself the twelve apostles with the se­venty disciples, but many of the Jews and many of the Gen-







OCR Output








C. I.] THE ROMANS. 241


before they can have taken breath, these advantages promiseus no less than a certain and sudden victory. As for myself,I shall at present waive any commendations of those who diein war,1 and omit to speak of the immortality of those menwho are slain in the midst of their martial bravery: yet can­not I forbear to imprecate upon those who are of a contrarydisposition, that they may die in time of peace, by some dis­temper or other, since their souls are condemned to the grave,together with their bodies; for what man of virtue is therewho does not know that those souls which are severed fromtheir fleshly bodies in battles by the sword, and received bythe ether, that purest of elements, and joined to that companywhich are placed among the stars: that they become gooddemons and propitious heroes, and show themselves as suchto their posterity afterwards ? while upon those souls thatwear away in and with their distempered bodies, comes asubterranean night, to dissolve them to nothing, and a deepoblivion to take away all the remembrance of them, and thisnotwithstanding they be clean from all spots and defilementsof tlm world, so that, in this case, the soul at the same timecomes to the utmost bounds of its life, and of its body, andof its memorial also. But, since fate hath determined thatdeath is to come of necessity upon all men, a sword is a betterinstrument for that purpose than any disease whatsoever.Why is it not then a very mean thing for us not to yield upthat to the public benefit, which we must yield up to fate ?And this discourse have I made upon the supposition thatthose who first attempt to go upon this wall must needs bekilled in the attempt, though still men of true courage have achance to escape, even in the most hazardous undertakings.For, in the first place, that part of the former wall that is
1 In this speech of Titus we may clearly see the notions which the Kommisthen hail of death, a:id of the happy state of those who died bravely in war,and the contrary estate of those who died ignobly in their beds by sickness,Rclaud here also produces two parallel passages, the one out of AmmiauusMarcellinus, concerning the Alaui, lib. 31, that " they judged that man happywho laid down his life in battle." The other of Valerius Maximus, lib. xi.ch. 6, who says that " the Cimbri and Celtiberi exulted for joy in the army,as being to go out of the world gloriously and hippily."
IV. —21







OCR Output








552 INDEX.


chelaus, 133; her dream, and death,135.
God (the true God,) his presence inthe tabernacle, i. 238; judged tobe only the pod of the hills by theSyrians, ii. 82; discovers his in­effable name to Moses, i. 185.
Gods of Laban stolen, i. 129; ofCutha, brought to Samaria, ii. 147;of the Amalekites, worshipped byAmaziah, 129; of the heathen, notto be cursed or blasphemed, i. 301 :iv. 440; Beelzebub, the god offlies, ii. 95.
Goliaih of Oath challenges the Jewsto a single combat, i. 425; is slainby David, 427.
Gorgias is put to flight, ii. 308; hasbetter success, 314.
Gorion and Simeon exhort the peopleto attack the mutineers, iv. 91 ;put to death, 117.
Gratus, iv. 107 ; puts Simon to dcath,120; meets Varus, 464; discoversClaudius, and brings him out to beemperor, 237.
Greeks put Hebrew names into theirown form, i. 94.
IIauad, king, i. 180.
lladad, or Iladar, becomes Solomon'senemy, ii. 40.
Hadadezer, or Ifadarezer, ii. 47.
Hagar and Isbmael are sent away byAbraham, i. 110.
Haggai, a prophet, ii. 219; he andZcchariah encourage the Jews torebuild their temple, 217.
Halicarnassians' decree in favor ofthe Jews, ii. 451.
Haman, an enemy of the Jews, ii.236; his edict against the Jews,ib.; he orders a gibbet to be erect­ed for Mordccai, 241; is obliged tohonor Mordccai, 243; the edict iscontradicted, 245; he is hanged,244.
Harlots excluded from marriage, i.307.
Hatach, or Acratheus, ii. 238.
Hazael, ii. 77, 110; he plunders Ju-dea, 124; he dies, 127.
Hebrews twice carried captives be­yond Euphrates, ii. 181 ; thoughtby some to have come originallyfrom Egypt, i. 100; not put to ser­


vile labor, in the days of Solomon,ii. 38 : of those Hebrews that cameto offer their sacrifices from beyondEuphrates, i. 200; fight the Ca-naanites against Moses's order,201; ten tribes lived beyond Eu­phrates, ii. 223; language andcharacter came near to the Syriac,201; nouns have all the same for­mation, i. 94 ; have but one temploand altar, 289; met at Shiloh thricein a year, 355; only the two tribesunder the Roman dominion, ii.223; their wise men in the daysof Solomon, 13.
Hclcias the Great, iii. 184.
llelcias, treasurer, iii. 294.
Helena, queen, embraces the Jewishreligion, iii. 203; goes to Jerusa­lem, 270; buried there, 277.
Herennius Capito, iii. 164.
Herod, the son of Antipatcr, ii. 429;iii. 346; began to rule in Galilee inhis 15th [25th] year, ii. 435; pntsEzechias, and other robbers, todeath, 437; being accused for it,ho takes his trial, 437; iii. 352;escapes, ii. 439; goes to SextusCivjsar, and is made governor ofCelesyria, ib.; is in favor with theRomans, 455: made procurator orgovernor of Syria, iii. 350; putsMalichus to death, ib.; beats An­tigonus, ii. 459; bribes Mark An­tony, ib.; impeached by the Jews,but made a tetrarch by Antony,403; gets the better of the Jews,ib.; escapes the snares of the Par­tisans, 407, 408; accidents of hisflight, iii. 304; goes to Egypt,thence to Rhodes, and thence toRome, ii. 472; iii. 307; made kingby the Roman senate, ii. 473; iii.308 ; sails back to Judca, and fightsagainst Antigonus, ii. 475; takesJoppa, and besieges Jerusalem,475; iii. 371; takes Sepphoris, ii.478; conquers his enemies, ib.;joins his troops with Antony's, atthe siege of Samosatn, 482; is pro­videntially delivered, 481; defeatsPappus, 484; besieges Jerusalem,takes it, makes Antigonus prisoner,and sends him in chains to Antony,480; iii. 383; promotes his friends,and destroys those of Antigonus,







OCR Output








C. II.] 70 JERUSALEM. 163


would be affrighted and submit; for he had been informed,what was really true, that the people, who were fallen underthe power of the seditious and the robbers, were greatly de­sirous of peace; but being too weak to rise up against therest, they lay still.
2. Now, so long as he rode along the straight road whichled to the wall of the city, nobody appeared out of the gates;but when he went out of that road, and declined towards thetower Pesphinus, and led the band of horsemen obliquely,an immense number of the Jews leaped out suddenly at thetowers called the Women's Towers, through that gate whichwas over against the monuments of queen Helena, and in­tercepted his horse; and standing directly opposite to thosethat still ran along the road, hindered them from joiningthose that had declined out of it. They intercepted Titusalso, with a few others. Now it was here impossible for himto go forward, because all the places had trenches dug inthem from the wall to preserve the gardens round about, andwere full of gardens obliquely situated, and of many hedges;and to return back to his own men, he saw it was also im­possible, by reason of the multitude of the enemies that laybetween them; many of whom did not so much as know thatthe king was in any danger,1 but supposed him still amongthem. So he perceived that his preservation must be whollyowing to his own courage, and turned his horse about, andcried out aloud to those that were about him to follow him,


1 We may here note, that Titus is here called a king and Carsar, by Jose-phus, even while he was no more than the emperor's son and general of theKoman army, and his father Vespasian was still alive; just as the NewTestament says Archelaus reigned, or seas king. Matt. ii. 22, though he wasproperly no more than ethnarch, as Josephus assures us, Antiq. B. xvii.ch. xi. sect. 4 ; Of the War, B. ii. ch. vi. sect. 3. Thus also the Jews calledthe Roman emperors kings, though they never took that title to themselves:We have no king but Caesar, John xix. 15; Submit to the king us supreme,1 Pet. ii. 13, 17; which is also the language of the Apostolical Constitu­tions, ii. 11, 34; iv. 13; v. 19; vi. 2, 25; vii. 16; viii. 2, 13; and elsewherein the New Testament, John xix. 15; Matt. x. 18; xvii. 25; 1 Tim. ii. 2;and in Josephus also; although I suspect Josephus particularly esteemedTitus as joint king with his father, ever since his divine dreams that declaredthem both such, B. iii. ch. viii. sect. 9.







OCR Output








DISSERTATION III. 531


crimes adhering to that name, he to be punished ? In themeantime, I have taken this course about those who havebeen brought before me as Christians. I asked them whetherthey were Christians or not ? If they confessed that theywere Christians, I asked them again, and a third time, inter­mixing threatenings with the questions: if they perseveredin their confession, I ordered them to executed;' for I didnot doubt but, let their confession be of any sort whatsoever,this positiveness and inflexible obstinacy deserved to be pun­ished. There have been some of this mad sect whom I tooknotice of in particular as Roman citizens, that they might bosent to that city.2 After some time, as is usual in such exami­nations, the crime spread itself, and many more cases camebefore me. A libel was sent me, though without an author,containing many names [of persons accused.] These deniedthat they were Christians now, or ever had been. They calledupon the gods, and supplicated to your image,3 which I causedto be brought to me for that purpose, with frankincense andwine: they also cursed Christ:4 none of which things, as it issaid, can any of those that are really Christians be compelledto do ; so I thought fit to let them go. Others of them, thatwere named in the libel, said they were Christians, but pre­sently denied it again; that, indeed, they had been Christians,but had ceased to be so, some three years, some many more;and one there was that said he had not been so these twentyyears. All these worshipped your image, and the images ofour gods: these also cursed Christ. However, they assured


1 Amazing doctrine! that a firm and fixed resolution of keeping a goodconscience should be thought without dispute to deserve death, and this bysuch comparatively excellent heathens as Pliny and Trajan.
2 This was the case of St. Paul, who being a citizen of Rome, was allowedto appeal unto Caesar, and mas sent to Rome accordingly. Acts xxii. 25-29;xxv. 25; xxvi. 32; xxvii. 37.
3 Amazing stupidity! that the emperor's image, even while he was alive,should bo allowed capable of divine worship, even by such comparativelyexcellent heathens as Pliny and Trajan.
* Take here a parallel account of the martyrdom of Polycarp, sect. 9. Theproconsul said—"Reproach Christ." Polycarp replied — "Eighty and sixyears have I now served Christ, and he has never done mo the least wrong;how then can I blaspheme my King and my Savior?"







OCR Output








222 CLOSE FIGHTING. [B. V.


to their assistance; and as they were very bold upon thegood success they had had, their violent assaults were almostirresistible: nay, they proceeded as far as the fortificationsof the enemies' camp, and fought with their guards. Nowthere stood a body of soldiers in array before that camp,which succeeded one another by turns in their armor; andas to those the law of the Bomans was terrible, that he wholeft his post there, let the occasion be whatsoever it mightbe, he was to die for it; so that body of soldiers preferringrather to die in fighting courageously, than as a punishmentfor their cowardice, stood firm ; and at the necessity thesemen were in of standing to it, many of the others that hadrun away, out of shame, turned back again: and when theyhad set the engines against the wall, they kept the multi­tudes from coming more of them out of the city [which theycould the more easily do,] because they had made no pro­vision for preserving or guarding their bodies at this time;for the Jews fought now hand to hand with all that came intheir way, and, without any caution, fell against the pointsof their enemies' spears, and attacked them, bodies againstbodies; for they were now too hard for the Romans, not somuch by their other warlike actions, as by these courageousassaults they made upon them; and the Romans gave waymore to their boldness than they did to the sense of the harmthey had received from them.
6. And now Titus was come from the tower of Antonia,whither he was gone to look out for a place for raising otherbanks, and reproached the soldiers greatly for permittingtheir own walls to be in danger, when they had taken thewalls of their enemies, and sustained the fortune of men be­sieged, while the Jews were allowed to sally out against them,though they were already in a sort of prison. He then wentround about the enemy with some chosen troops, and fell upontheir flank himself; so the Jews, who had been before assaultedin their faces, wheeled about to Titus, and continued the fight.The armies also were now mixed one among another, and thedust that was raised so far hindered them from seeing oneanother, and the noise that was made so far hindered them







OCR Output








C. I.] SIEGEOFGAMALA. 77


dejected by reflecting on their ill success, and because theyhad never before fallen into such a calamity, and besides this,because they were greatly ashamed that they had left theirgeneral alone in great dangers. As to what concerned him­self, he avoided to say any thing, that he might by no meansseem to complain of it; but he said that " we ought to bearmanfully what usually falls out in war, and this by consider­ing what the nature of war is, and how it can never be thatwe must conquer without bloodshed on our own side; for therestands about us that fortune which is of its own nature muta­ble : that while they had killed so many ten thousands of theJews, they had now paid their small share of the reckoningto fate, and as it is the part of weak people to be too muchpuffed up with good success, so is it the part of cowards to betoo much affrighted at that which is ill; for the change fromthe one to the other is sudden on both sides, and he is the bestwarrior who is of a sober mind under misfortunes, that he maycontinue in that temper, and cheerfully recover what hathbeen lost formerly; and as for what had now happened, itwas neither owing to their own effeminacy, nor to the valorof the Jews, but the difficulty of the place was the occasionof their advantage and of our disappointment: upon reflect­ing on which matter one might blame your zeal as perfectlyungovernable; for when the enemy had retired to their highestfastnesses, you ought to have restrained yourselves, and notby presenting yourselves at the top of the city, to be exposedto dangers; but upon your having obtained the lower partsof the city, you ought to have provoked those that had retiredthither to a safe and settled battle: whereas in rushing sohastily upon victory, you took no care of your safety. Butthis incautiousness in war, and this madness of zeal, is not aRoman maxim, while we perform all that we attempt by skilland good order: that procedure is the part ef barbarians, andis what the Jews chiefly support themselves by. We ought,therefore, to return to our own virtue, and to be rather angrythan any longer dejected at this unlucky misfortune, and letevery one seek for his own consolation from his own hand;for by this means she will avenge those that have been des­


7*







OCR Output








308 TIIE SARMATIANS INVADE MYSIA. [B. VII.


brought to punishment; for as soon as ever the news of theirrevolt was come to Rome, and Caesar Domitian was made ac­quainted with it, ho made no delay even at that his age, whenhe was exceeding young, but undertook this weighty affair.He had a courageous mind from his father, and had madegreater improvements than belonged to such an age: accord­ingly, he marched against the barbarians immediately; where­upon their hearts failed them at the very rumor of his ap­proach, and they submitted themselves to him with fear, andthought it a happy thing that they were brought under theirold yoke again without suffering any farther mischiefs. When,therefore, Domitian had settled all the affairs of Gaul in suchgood order, that it would not be easily put into disorder anymore, he returned to Rome with honor and glory, as havingperformed such exploits as were above his own age, but worthyof so great a father.
3. At the very same time with the forementioned revolt ofthe Germans, did the bold attempt of the Scythians againstthe Romans concur; for those Scythians who are called Sar-matians, being a very numerous people, transported them­selves over the Danube into Mysia without being perceived;after which by their violence and entirely unexpected assault,they slew a great many of the Romans that guarded thefrontiers; and as the consular legate Fonteius Agrippa cameto meet them, and fought courageously against them, he wasslain by them. They then overran all the region that hadbeen subject to him, tearing and rending every thing that fellin their way. But when Vespasian was informed of what hadhappened, and how Mysia was laid waste, he sent away Ru-brius Gallus to punish these Sarmatians; by whose meansmany of them perished in the battles he fought against them,and that part which escaped fled with fear to their own country.So when this general had put an end to the war, he providedfor the future security of the country also; for ho placed moreand more numerous garrisons in the place, till he made it al­together impossible for the barbarians to pass over the river anymore. And thus had this war in Mysia a sudden conclusion.







OCR Output








DISSERTATION I. 481


III. The famous clause in this testimony of Josephus con­cerning Christ, This was Christ, or the Christ, did not meanthat this Jesus was the Christ of God, or the true Messiasof the Jews, but that this Jesus was distinguished from allothers of that name, of which there were not a few, asmentioned by Josephus himself, by the addition of the othername of Christ; or that this person was no other than howhom all the world knew by the name of Jesus Christ, andhis followers by the name of Christians. This I esteem tobe a clear case, and that from the arguments following.
(1.) The Greeks and Romans, for whose use Josephuswrote his Antiquities, could no otherwise understand thesowords. The Jews indeed, and afterwards the Christians,who knew that a great Messias, a person that was to- beChrist, the Anointed of God, that was to perform the officeof a King, a Priest, and a Prophet, to God's people, mightreadily so understand this expression; but Josephus, as Ihave already noted, wrote here, not to Jews or Christians,but to Greeks and Romans, who knew nothing of this, butknew very well that an eminent person living in Judea, whosoname was Jesus Chrest, or Jesus Christ, had founded a newand numerous sect, which took the latter of those names, andwere every where from him called Chrestians, or Christians ;in which sense alone could they understand theso words cfJosephus, and in which sense I believe he desired they shouldunderstand them: nor does Josephus ever use the Hebrewterm 3Iessiah in any of his writings, nor the Greek termChrist in any such acceptation elsewhere.
(2.) Josephus himself as good as explains his own meaning,and that by the last clause of this very passage, where hesays the Christians were named from this Christ, without asyllable as though he really meant he was the true Messiah,or Christ of God. He farther seems to me to explain thishis meaning in that other place, where alone he elsewherementions this name of Christ, that is, when upon occasion ofthe mention of James, when he was condemned by Ananus,he calls him the Brother of Jesus, not that was the trueMessiah, or the true Christ, but only that was called Christ.IV. —41







OCR Output








466 DISSERTATION I.


THE ANCIENT CITATIONS OF THE TESTIMONIES OF JOSEPHUS,FROM HIS OWN TIME TILL THE END OF THE FIFTEENTH CEN­TURY.
About A. D. 110. Tacit. Annal. lib. xv. cap. 44.—Nero,in order to stifle the rumor [as if he had himself set Romeon fire,] ascribed it to those people who were hated for theirwicked practices, and called by the vulgar Christians: thesehe punished exquisitely. The author of this name was Christ,who, in the reign of Tiberius, was brought to punishment byPontius Pilate the Procurator.
About A. D. 147. Just. Mart. Dialog, cum Trypho, p.234. — You [Jews] knew that Jesus was risen from the dead,and ascended into heaven, as the prophecies did foretell wasto happen.
About A. D. 230. Origen. Comment, on Matth. p. 230.— This James was of so shining a character among the peo­ple, on account of his righteousness, that Flavius Josephus,when, in his twentieth book of the Jewish Antiquities, he hada mind to set down what was the cause why the people suf­fered such miseries, till the very holy house was demolished,he said, that these things befell them by the anger of God,on account of what they had dared to do to James, the bro­ther of Jesus, who was called Christ: and wonderful it is,that, while he did not receive Jesus for Christ, he did never­theless bear witness that James was so righteous a-man. Hesays farther, that the people thought that they suffered thesethings for the sake of James.
About A. D. 250. Contr. Cels. lib. i. p. 35, 36. —I wouldsay to Celsus, who personates a Jew, that admitted of Johnthe Baptist, and how he baptised Jesus, that one who livedbut a little while after John and Jesus, wrote, how that Johnwas a baptizer unto the remission of sins: for Josephus testi­fies in the eighteenth book of Jewish Antiquities, that Johnwas the Baptist, and that ho promised purification to thosethat were baptised. The same Josephus also, although he didnot believe in Jesus as Christ, when he was inquiring after







OCR Output








C. V.] ANB SOMAN CAMPS. 17


offices of life, but might also be of advantage to them in theirwars. And, indeed, if any one does but attend to the otherparts of their military discipline, he will he forced to confessthat their obtaining so large a dominion hath been the acqui­sition of their valor, and not the bare gift of fortune: for theydo not begin to use their weapons first in time of war, nor dothey then put their hands first into motion, while they avoidedso to do in times of peace: but as if their weapons did alwayscling to them, they have never any truce from warlike exer­cises ; nor do they stay till times of war admonish them touse them; for their military exercises differ not at all fromthe real use of their arms, but every soldier is every day exer­cised, and that with great diligence, as if it were in time ofwar, which is the reason why they bear the fatigues of battlesso easily; for neither can any disorder remove them fromtheir usual regularity, nor can fear affright them out of it, norcan labor tire them: which firmness of conduct makes themalways to overcome those that have not the same firmness;nor would he be mistaken that should call those their exercisesunbloody battles, and their battles bloody exercises. Nor cantheir enemies easily surprise them with the suddenness of theirincursions ; for as soon as they have marched into an enemy'sland, they do not begin to fight till they have walled theircamp about; nor is the fence they raise rashly made or un­even ; nor do they all abide in it, nor do those that are in ittake their places at random, but if it happens that the groundis uneven, it is first levelled: their camp is also four squareby measure, and carpenters are ready in great numbers, withtheir toob, to erect the buildings for them.1


1 This description of the exact symmetry and regularity of the Roman armyand of the Koman encampments, with the sounding their trumpets, &c, andorder of war, described in this and the next chapter, is so very like to thesymmetry and regularity of the people of Israel in the wilderness (see thedescription of the temples, ch. ix.,) that one cannot well avoid the supposalthat the one was the ultimate pattern of the other, and that the tacties of theancients were taken from the rules given by God to Moses. And it is thoughtby some skilful in these matters, that these accounts of Josephus as to theRoman camp and armor, and conduct in war, are preferable to those in theRoman authors themselves.


2*







OCR Output








182 THE TEMPLE. [B. V.


gate was cut out of its wall over against the first gate. Therewas also on the other sides one southern and one northerngate, through which was a passage into the court of the women;for as to the other gates the women were not allowed to passthrough them: nor when they went through their own gatecould they go beyond their own wall. This place was allottedto the women of our own country, and of other countries, pro­vided they were of the same nation, and that equally: thewestern part of this court had no gate at all, but the wall wasbuilt entire on that side. But then the cloisters which werebetwixt the gates extended from the wall inward before thechambers, for they were supported by very fine and largepillars. These cloisters were single, and, excepting their mag­nitude, were no way inferior to those of the lower court.
3. Now nine of these gates were on every side covered overwith gold and silver, as were the jambs of their doors andtheir lintels: but there was one gate that was without [theinward court of] the holy house, which was of Corinthianbrass, and greatly excelled those that were only covered overwith silver and gold. Each gate had two doors, whose heightwas severally thirty cubits, and their breadth fifteen. How­ever, they had large spaces within of thirty cubits, and hadon each side rooms, and those, both in breadth and in length,built like towers, and their height was above forty cubits.Two pillars did also support these rooms, and were in circum­ference twelve cubits. Now the magnitudes of the other gateswere equal one to another ; but that over the Corinthian gate,which opened on the east over against the gate of the holyhouse itself, was much larger, for its h.-lght was fifty cubits,and its doors were forty cubits, and it was adorned after amost costly manner, as having much richer and thicker platesof silver and gold upon them than the other. These ninegates had that silver and gold poured upon them by Alexander,the father of Tiberius. Now there were fifteen steps which ledfrom the wall of the court of the women to this greater sate ;whereas those that led thither from the other gates were fivesteps shorter.
4. As to the holy house itself, which was placed in the







OCR Output








502 DISSERTATION II.


thought that Jeptha had made such a vow, and executed it,he is so far from hinting at its heing done in compliance withany law of God, that he expressly condemns him for it, ashaving acted contrary thereto; or, in his own words, "' ashaving offered an oblation neither conformable to the law,nor acceptable to God, nor weighing with himself what opinionthe hearers would have of such a practice."
7. That Isaac being at this time, according to Josephus,2who is herein justly followed by Archbp. Usher,^ no less thantwenty-five years of age, and Abraham being, by consequence,one hundred and twenty-five, it is not to be supposed thatAbraham could bind Isaac, in order to offer him in sacrifice,but by his own free consent; which free consent of the partywho is to suffer seems absolutely necessary in all such cases ;and which free consent St. Clement, as well as Josephus,distinctly takes notice of on this occasion. St. Clement des­cribes it thus :— "4 Isaac, being fully persuaded of what heknew was to come, cheerfully yielded himself up for a sacri­fice." And for Josephus,5 after introducing Abraham in apathetic speech, laying before Isaac the divine command, andexhorting him patiently and joyfully to submit to it, he tellsus, that "Isaac very cheerfully consented;" and then intro­duces him, in a short but very pious answer, acquiescing inthe proposal; and adds, that " he then immediately andreadily went to the altar to be sacrificed." Nor did Jephtha6perform his rash vow, whatever it were, till his daughter hadgiven her consent to it.
8. It appears to me that Abraham never despaired entirelyof the interposition of Providence for the preservation ofIsaac, although in obedience to the command he prepared tosacrifice him to God. This seems to me intimated in Abra­ham's words to his servants, on the third day, when he wasin sight of the mountain on which he was to offer his sonIsaac: "? We will go and worship, and we will come againto you." As also in his answer to his son, when he inquired,


1 Antiq. B. v. chap. vii. sect. 10. • Antiq. B. I. ehap. liii.
» Ush. Annal, ad. A. M. 21. « Clem. sect. 31.
6 Antiq. B. I. ch. liii. sect. 3. • Judges, xi. 30, 37. ' Gen. xxii. 6, 7.







OCR Output








224 TITUS WALLS UP THE CITY. [B. V.


than that is reserved for them. However, Titus did not thinkit fit for so great an army to lie entirely idle, and that yet itwas in vain to fight with those that would he destroyed oneby another : he also showed them how impracticable it was tocast up any more banks for want of materials, and to guardagainst the Jews' coming still more impracticable; as also,that to encompass the whole city round with his army was notvery easy, by reason of its magnitude, and the difficulty ofthe situation, and on other accounts dangerous upon the salliesthe Jews might make out of the city. For although theymight guard the known passages out of the place, yet wouldthey, when they found themselves under the greatest distress,contrive secret passages out, as being well acquainted withall such places; and if any provisions were carried in bystealth, the siege would thereby be longer delayed. He alsoowned, that he was afraid that the length of time thus to beepent would diminish the glory of his success: for though itbe true that length of time will perfect every thing, yet thatto do what we do in a little time is still necessary to the gain­ing reputation: that, therefore, his opinion was, that if theyaimed at quickness, joined with security, they must build awall round about the whole city, which was, he thought, theonly way to prevent the Jews from coming out any way, andthat then they would either entirely despair of saving thecity, and so would surrender it up to him, or be still the moreeasily conquered, when the famine had farther weakenedthem. For that besides this wall he would not lie entirely atrest afterward, but would take care then to have banks raisedagain, when those that would oppose them were become weaker.But that if any one should think such a work to be too great,and not to be finished without much difficulty, he ought toconsider that it is not fit for Romans to undertake any smallwork; and that none but God himself could with ease ac­complish any great thing whatsoever.
2. These arguments prevailed with the commanders. SoTitus gave orders that the army should be distributed to theirseveral shares of this work; and, indeed, there now cameupon the soldiers a certain divine fury, so that they did not







OCR Output








270 THE TEMPLE IS BURNED. [B \u


quench the fire; and gave order to Liberalius, the centurion,and one of those spearmen that were about him, to beat thesoldiers that were refractory with their staves, and to restrainthem: yet were their passions too hard for the regards theyhad for Caesar, and the dread they had of him who forbadethem, as was their hatred of the Jews, and a certain vehementinclination to fight them, too hard for them also. Moreover,the hope of plunder induced many to go on, as having thisopinion, that all the places within were full of money, and asseeing that all around about it was made of gold. And, be­sides, one of those that went into the place prevented Caesar,when he ran so hastily out to restrain the soldiers, and threwthe fire upon the hinges of the gate, in the dark; wherebythe flame burst out from within the holy house itself immedi­ately, when the commanders retired and Cnesar with them,and when nobody any longer forbade those that were withoutto set fire to it. And thus was the holy house burnt downwithout Caesar's approbation.
8. Now, although any one would justly lament the destruc­tion of such a work as this was, since it was the most ad­mirable of all the works that we have seen or heard, both forits curious structure and its magnitude, and also for the vastwealth bestowed upon it, as well as for the glorious reputa­tion it had for its holiness; yet might such a one comforthimself with this thought, that it was fate that decreed it soto be, which is inevitable, both as to living creatures and asto works and places also. However, one cannot but wonderat the accuraoy of this period thereto relating; for the samemonth and day were now observed, as I said before, whereinthe holy house was burnt formerly by the Babylonians. Nowthe number of years that passed from its first foundation,which was laid by king Solomon, till this its destruction,which happened in the second year of the reign of Vespasian,are collected to be one thousand one hundred and thirty,besides seven months and fifteen days; and from the secondbuilding of it, which was done by Haggai, in the second yearof Cyrus the king, till its destruction under Vespasian, therewere six hundred thirty-nine years and forty-five days.







OCR Output








C. I.] SEDITIONS AT JERUSALEM. 157


anco in the great distresses they were in, having in his powerthe upper city and a great part of the lower, did now makemore vehement assaults upon John and his party, becausethey were fought against from above also ; yet was ho beneaththeir situation when he attacked them, as were they beneaththe attacks of the others above them: whereby it came topass, that John did both receive and inflict great damage,and that easily, as he was fought against on both sides ; andthe same advantage that Eleazar and his party had over him,since he was beneath them, the same advantage had he, byhis higher situation, over Simon. On which account he easilyrepelled the attacks that were made from beneath, by theweapons thrown from their hands only; but was obliged torepel those that threw their darts from the temple above him,by his engines of war; for he had such engines as threwdarts, and javelins, and stones, and that in no small number,by which he did not only defend himself from such as foughtagainst him, but slew moreover many of the priests as theywere about their sacred ministrations. For notwithstandingthese men were mad with all sorts of impiety, yet did theystill admit those that desired to offer their sacrifices, althoughthey took care to search the people of their own country be­forehand, and both suspected and watched them ; while theywere not so much afraid of strangers, who, although they hadgotten leave of them, how cruel soever they were, to comeinto that court, were yet often destroyed, by this sedition;for those darts that were thrown by the engines came withthat force that they went over all the buildings, and reachedas far as the altar, and the temple itself, and fell upon thepriests, and those' that were about the sacred offices: inso­much that many persons who came thither with great zealfrom the ends of the earth to offer sacrifices at this celebratedplace, which was esteemed holy by all mankind, fell downbefore their own sacrifices themselves, and sprinkled thataltar which was venerable among all men, both Greeks andBarbarians, with their own blood; till the dead bodies ofstrangers were mingled together with those of their own


1 TUo Lcvites.IV. —14







OCR Output








516 DISSERTATION III.


and the [great] sea. They have a prospect of Syria on theirnorth quarter, as at some distance from them.1
The bodies of the men are healthy, and such as will beargreat labors.
They have not many showers of rain: their soil is veryfruitful: the produce of their land is, like ours, in greatplenty.2
They have also, besides ours, two trees peculiar to them­selves, the balsam-tree and the palm-tree. Their groves ofpalms are tall and beautiful. The balsam-tree is not verylarge. As soon as any branch is swelled, the vines quake asfor fear, if you bring an iron knife to cut them. They areto be opened with the broken piece of a stone, or with theshell of a fish. The juice is useful in physic.
Libanus is their principal mountain, and is very high, andyet, what is very strange to be related, it is always shadowedwith trees, and never free from snow. The same mountainsupplies the river Jordan with water, and affords it its foun­tains also. Nor is this Jordan carried into the sea; it passesthrough one and a second lake undiminished, but it is stoppedby the third.3
This third lake is vastly great in circumference, as if itwere a sea.4 It is of an ill taste and is pernicious to the ad­joining inhabitants by its strong smell. The wind raises nowaves there, nor will it maintain either fishes, or such birdsas use the water. The reason is uncertain, but the fact isthus, that bodies cast into it are borne up, as by somewhatsolid. Those who can and those who cannot swim are equally


1 Seo the chorography of Judea in Josephus, Of the War, b. iii. sect. 3;whence most probably Tacitus framed this short abridgement of it. Itcomes in both authors naturally before Vespasian's first campaign.
2 The latter branch of this Tacitus might have from Josephus, Of the War,b. iii. ch. iii. sect. 2, 3, 4. The other is not in the present copies.
3 These accounts of Jordan, of its fountains derived from Mount Libanus,and of the two lakes it runs through, and its stoppage by the third, are ex­actly agreeable to Josephus, Of the War, b. iii. ch. x. sect. 7, 8.
* No less than 080 furlongs long and 150 broad, in Josephus, Of the War,b. iv. ch. viii. sect. 4.







OCR Output








C.X.] VESPASIAN. 71


friends were too hard for him, and pretended that nothingagainst Jews could be any impiety; and that he ought toprefer what was profitable before what was fit to be done,where both could not be made consistent. So he gave theman ambiguous liberty to do as they advised, and permittedthe prisoners to go along no other road than that which ledto Tiberias only. So they readily believed what they de­sired to be true, and went along securely, with their effects,the way which was allowed them, while the Romans seizedupon all the road that led to Tiberias, that none of themmight go out of it, and shut them up in the city. Thencame Vespasian, and ordered them all to stand in the stadium,and commanded them to kill the old men, together with theothers that were useless, which were in number a thousandand two hundred. Out of the young men he chose six thou­sand of the strongest, and sent them to Nero, to dig throughthe isthmus, and sold the remainder for slaves, being thirtythousand and four hundred, besides such as he made apresent of to Agrippa; for as to those that belonged to hiskingdom, he gave him leave to do what he pleased with them:however, the king sold these also for slaves; but for therest of the multitude who were Trachonites, and Gaulanites,and of Hippos, and some of Gadara, the greatest part ofthem were seditious persons and fugitives, who were of suchshameful characters that they preferred war before peace.These prisoners were taken on the eighth day of the monthGorpieus [Elul.]







OCR Output








C. V.] IDE TEMPLE. 179


those porticoes curious pillars; yet were all the courts thatwere exposed to the air every where green. There were,moreover, several groves of trees, and long walks throughthem, with deep canals and cisterns that in several parts werefilled with brazen statues, through which the water ran out.There were withal many dove-courts,1 of tame pigeons aboutthe canals. But, indeed, it is not possible to give a completedescription of these palaces; and the very remembrance ofthem is a torment to one, as putting one in mind what vastlyrich buildings that fire which was kindled by the robbers hathconsumed : for these were not burnt by the Romans, but bythese internal plotters, as we have already related, in the be­ginning of their rebellion. That fire began at the tower ofAntonia, and went on to the palaces, and consumed the upperparts of the three towers themselves.


CHAPTER V.
A DESCRIPTION OF THE TEMPLE.
§ 1. Now this temple, as I have already said, was builtupon a strong hill. At first the plain at the top was hardlysufficient for the holy house and the altar; for the groundabout it was very uneven, and like a precipice; but when kingSolomon, who was the person that built the temple, had builta wall to it, on its cast side, there was then added one cloisterfounded on a bank cast up for it, and on the other parts theholy house stood naked. But in future ages the people2 added


1 These dove-courts in Josephus, built by Herod the Great, are, in theopinion of Reland, the very same that are mentioned by the Talmudists, andnamed by them 1Irrod's dove-courts. Nor is there any reason to supposeotherwise, since in both accounts they were expressly tamo pigeons whichwere kept in them.
* See the description of the temples hereto belonging;, chap. xv. But note,that what Josephus here says of the original scantiness of this mount Moriah,that it was quite too little for the temple, and that at first it held only one",loister, or court of Solomon's building, and that the foundations were forcedto be added long afterwards by degrees, to render it capable of the cloisters







OCR Output








, ' '


617659










OCR Output








V. I.] AGAINST APION. 371


also called captives in their sacred books." And this accountof his is the truth; for feeding of sheep was the employment'of our forefathers in the most ancient ages, and as they ledsuch a wandering life in feeding sheep, they were called shep­herds. Nor was it without reason that they were called cap­tives by the Egyptians, since one of our ancestors, Joseph,told the king of Egypt that he was a captive,2 and afterwardsent for his brethren into Egypt by the king's permission.But as for these matters I shall make a more exact inquiryabout them elsewhere.3
15. But now I shall produce the Egyptians as witnesses tothe antiquity of our nation. I shall, therefore, here bring inManetho again, and what he writes as to the order of thetimes in this case: and thus he speaks.—"When this peopleor shepherds were gone out of Egypt to Jerusalem, Tethmo-sis the king of Egypt who drove them out reigned afterwardtwenty-five years and four months, and then died; after himhis son Chebron took the kingdom for thirteen years; afterwhom came Amenophis, for twenty years and seven months;then came his sister Amesses, for twenty-one years and ninemonths : after her came Mephres, for twelve years and ninemonths; after her was Mephramuthosis, for twenty-five yearsand ten months; after him was Thmosis, for nine years andeight months; after him came Amenophis, for thirty yearsand ten months; after him came Orus, for thirty-six yearsand five months; then came his daughter Acencheres, fortwelve years and one month; then was her brother Rathotis,for nine years; then was Acencheres, for twelve years andfive months; then came another Acencheres, for twelve yearsand three months; after him Armais, for four years and onemonth; after him was Ramesses, for one year and fourmonths ; after him came Armesses Miammoun, for sixty yearsand two months; after him Amenophis, for nineteen years


iGen. xlvi. 32,.34; xlvii, 3, 4.
* In our copies of the book of Genesis and of Joscphus, this Joseph nevercalls himself a captive, when ho was with the king of Egypt, though he doescall himself a servaat, a slave, or a captive, many times in tho Testament ofthe twelve Patriarchs, under Joseph, sect. I, 11, 13, 14, 15, 16.
s This is now wanting.







OCR Output








436 DISSERTATION I.


and ascended into heaven, as the prophecies did foretell wasto happen. Since there neither now is, nor probably in thedays of Justin was any other Jewish testimony extant, whichis so agreeable to what Justin here affirms of those Jews, asis this of Josephus the Jew before us; nor indeed does heseem to me to have had any thing else particularly in hisview here, but this very testimony, where Josephus says, thatJesus appeared to his followers alive the third day after hiscrucifixion, as the divine prophets had foretold these, and tenthousand other wonderful things concerning him.
VIII. The third author I have quoted for Joscphus's testi­monies of John the Baptist, of Jesus of Nazareth, and ofJames the Just, is Origen, who is indeed allowed on all handsto have quoted him for the excellent characters of John theBaptist, and of James the Just, but whose supposed entiresilence about this testimony concerning Christ is usuallyalleged as the principal argument against its being genuine,and particularly as to the clause, This was the Christ, andthat, as we have seen, because he twice assures us, that, inhis opinion Josephus did not himself acknowledge Jesus forChrist. Now as to this latter clause, I have already showed,that Josephus did not here, in writing to the Greeks andRomans, mean any such thing by those words as Jews andChristians naturally understand by them: I have also ob­served, that all the ancients allow still, with Origen, thatJosephus did not, in the Jewish and Christian sense, acknow­ledge Jesus for the true Messiah, or the true Christ of God,notwithstanding their express quotation of that clause inJosephus as genuine: so that unless we suppose Origen tohave had a different notion of these words from all the otherancients, we cannot conclude from this assertion of Origen's,that he had not those words in his copy, not to say that it is,after all, much more likely that his copy a little differed fromthe other copies in this clause, or indeed, omitted it entirely,than that he, on its account, must be supposed not to havehad the rest of this testimony therein, though indeed I seeno necessity of making any such supposal at all. However,it seems to me, that Origen affords us four several indications







OCR Output








0. I.] THE SIEGE. 237


the violence of their attacks was invincible, and that the alac­rity they showed would not be discouraged by their calami-ties ; for what would not those be able to bear if they shouldbe fortunate, who turned their very misfortunes to the im­provement of their valor? These considerations made theRomans to keep a stronger guard about their banks than theyformerly had done.
3. But now John and his party took care for securingthemselves afterward, even in case this wall should be throwndown, and fell to their work before the battering-rams werebrought against them. Yet did they not compass what theyendeavored to do, but as they were gone out with theirtorches, they came back under great discouragement beforethey came near to the banks: and the reasons were these: —That, in the first place, their conduct did not seem to beunanimous, but they went out in distinct parties, and at dis­tinct intervals, and after a slow manner, and timorously, and,to say all in word, without a Jewish courage; for they werenow defective in what is peculiar to our nation, that is, inboldness, in violence of assault, and in running upon thoenemy all together, and in persevering in what they go about,though they do not at first succeed in it; but they now wentout in a more languid manner than usual, and at the sametime found the Romans set in array, and more courageousthan ordinary, and that they guarded their banks both withtheir bodies and their entire armor, and this to such a degreeon all sides, that they left no room for the fire to get amongthem, and that every one of their souls were in such goodcourage, that they would sooner die than desert their ranks;for besides their notion that all their hopes were cut off, incase these their works were once burnt, the soldiers weregreatly ashamed that subtilty should be quite too hard forcourage, madness for armor, multitude for skill, and Jews forRomans. The Romans had now also another advantage, inthat their engines for sieges co-operated with them in throwingdarts and stones as far as the Jews, when they were comingout of the city; whereby the man that fell became an impedi­ment to him that was next him, as did the danger of going







OCR Output








C. I.] SEDITIONS AT JERUSALEM. 161


whereas the other sides of that court had so many steps aswould not let them come nigh enough to the cloisters.
6. Thus did John hope to be too hard for his enemies bythese engines, constructed by his impiety ; but God himselfdemonstrated that his pains would prove of no use to him, bybringing the Romans upon him before he had reared any ofhis towers ; for Titus, when he had gotten together part ofhis forces about him, and had ordered the rest to meet himat Jerusalem, marched out of Caesarea. He had with himthose three legions that had accompanied his father when helaid Judea waste, together with that twelfth legion which hadbeen formerly beaten with Cestius: which legion, as it wasotherwise remarkable for its valor, so did it march on nowwith greater alacrity to avenge themselves on the Jews, asremembering what they had formerly suffered from them.Of these legions he ordered the fifth to meet him, by goingthrough Emmaus, and the tenth to go up by Jericho; healso moved himself together with the rest: besides whichmarched those auxiliaries that came from the kings, beingnow more in number than before, together with a consider­able number that came to his assistance from Syria. Thosealso that had been selected out of these four legions, and sentwith Mucianus to Italy, had their places filled up out of thosesoldiers that came out of Egypt with Titus, which were twothousand men, chosen out of the armies at Alexandria. Therefollowed him also three thousand, drawn from those thatguarded the river Euphrates; as also there came TiberiusAlexander, who was a friend of his, most valuable both forhis good-will to him and for his prudence. He had formerlybeen governor of Alexandria, but was now thought worthyto be general of the army under [Titus.] The reason ofthis was, that he had been the first who encouraged Vespasianvery lately to accept this his new dominion, and joined him­self to him with great fidelity, when things were uncertain,and fortune had not yet declared for him. He also followedTitus as a counsellor, very useful to him in this war, both byhis age and skill in such affairs.


14*







OCR Output








c. vii.] placidus. 127


But Placidus, relying much upon his horsemen and his formergood success, followed them, and slew all that he overtook,as far as Jordan; and when he had driven the whole multitudeto the river-side, where they were stopped by the current(for it had been augmented lately by rains, and was notfordable,) he put his soldiers in array over against them ; sothe necessity the others were in provoked them to hazard abattle, because there was no place whither they could flee.They then extended themselves a very great way along thebanks of the river, and sustained the darts that were thrownat them, as well as the attacks of the horsemen, who beatmany of them, and pushed them into the current. At whichfight, hand to hand, fifteen thousand of them were slain,while the number of those that were unwillingly forced toleap into Jordan was prodigious. There were besides twothousand and two hundred taken prisoners. A mighty preywas taken also, consisting of asses, and sheep, and camels,and oxen.
6. Now this destruction that fell upon the Jews, as it wasnot inferior to any of the rest in itself, so did it still appeargreater than it really was : and this because not only thewhole country through which they fled was filled with slaugh­ter, and Jordan could not be passed over by reason of thedead bodies that were in it, but because the lake Asphaltitiswas also full of dead bodies, that were carried down into itby the river. And now Placidus, after this good success thathe had had, fell violently upon the neighboring smaller citiesand villages; when he took Abila, and Julias, and Bezemoth,and all those that lay as far as the lake Asphaltitis, and putsuch of the deserters into each of them as he thought proper.He then put his soldiers on board the ships, and slew such ashad fled to the lake, insomuch that all Perea had either sur­rendered themselves, or were taken by the Romans, as far asMacherus.







OCR Output








C. VII.] VESPASIAN. 29


they could not throw at the Romans from a higher place;for they then made sallies out of the city, like privaterobbers, by parties, and pulled away the hurdles that coveredthe workmen, and killed them when they were thus naked:and when those workmen gave way, these cast away the earththat composed the bank, and burnt the wooden parts of it,together with the hurdles, till at length Vespasian perceivedthat the intervals there were between the works were of dis­advantage to him; for those spaces of ground afforded theJews a place for assaulting the Romans. So he united thehurdles, and at the same time joined one part of the army tothe other, which prevented the private excursions of the Jews.
10. And when the bank was now raised, and broughtnearer than ever to the battlements that belonged to thewalls, Josephus thought it would be entirely wrong in him ifhe could make no contrivances in opposition to theirs, andthat might be for the city's preservation : so he got togetherhis workmen, and ordered them to build the wall higher : andwhen they said this was impossible to be done while so manydarts were thrown at them, he invented this sort of cover forthem: he bid them fix piles, and expand before them the rawhides of oxen, newly killed, that these hides, by yielding andhollowing themselves when the stones were thrown at them,might receive them ; for that the other darts would slide offthem, and the fire that was thrown would be quenched by themoisture that was in them: and these he set before the work­men ; and under them these workmen went on with theirworks in safety, and raised the wall higher, and that both byday and by night, till it was twenty cubits high. Ho alsobuilt a good number of towers upon the wall, and fitted to itstrong battlements. This greatly discouraged the Romans,who, in their own opinions, were already gotten within thewalls, while they were now at once astonished at Josephus'scontrivance, and at the fortitude of the citizens that were inthe city.
11. And now Vespasian was plainly irritated at the greatsubtilty of this stratagem, and at the boldness of the citizensof Jotapata; for taking heart again, upon the building of this


3*







OCR Output








534 DISSERTATION III.


the Antiquities of Josephus, and knew that the most part ofthe accounts he produced of the origin of the Jewish nationentirely contradicted those Antiquities. He also could hardlyavoid seeing that those accounts contradicted one anotheralso, and were childish, absurd, and supported by no goodevidence whatsoever: as also, he could hardly avoid seeingthat Josephus's accounts in those Antiquities were authentic,substantial, and thoroughly attested to by the ancient recordsof that nation, and of the neighboring nations also, which,indeed, no one can now avoid seeing, that carefully perusesand considers them.
IV. Tacitus, therefore, in concealing the greatest part ofthe true ancient history of the Jewish nation, which lay beforehim in Josephus, and producing such fabulous, ill-grounded,and partial histories, which he had from the heathens, acteda most unfair part: and this procedure of his is here themore gross, in regard he professed such great impartiality,Hist. b. i. cap. i. and is allowed to have observed that impar­tiality in the Roman affairs also.
V. Tacitus's hatred and contempt of God's peculiar people,the Jews, and his attachment to the grossest idolatry, super­stition, and astral fatality of the Romans, were, therefore, sostrong in him, as to overbear all restraints of sober reasonand equity in the case of those Jews, though he be allowedso exactly to have followed them on other occasions relatingto tho Romans.
VI. Since, therefore, Tacitus was so bitter against theJews, and since he knew that Christ was a Jew himself, andthat his apostles and first followers were Jews, and also knewthat the Christian religion was derived into the Roman pro­vinces from Judea, it is no wonder that his hatred and con­tempt of the Jews extended itself to the Christians also, whomthe Romans usually confounded with the Jews : as, therefore,his hard words of the Jews appear to have been generallygroundless, and hurt his own reputation, instead of theirs, soought we to esteem his alike hard words of the Christians tcbe blots upon his own character and not upon theirs.







OCR Output








C. VI.] VESPASIAN. 23


auxiliaries which were lightly armed and the archers to marchfirst, that they might prevent any sudden insults from theenemy, and might search out the woods that looked suspi­ciously, and were capable of ambuscades. Next to thesefollowed that part of the Romans which was completely armed,both footmen and horsemen. Next to these followed ten outof every hundred, carrying along with them their arms, andwhat was necessary to measure out a camp withal; and afterthem such as were to make the road even and straight, andif it were anywhere rough and hard to be passed over, toplane it, and to cut down the woods that hindered their march,that the army might not be in distress or tired with theirmarch. Behind these he set such carriages of the army asbelonged both to himself and to the other commanders, witha considerable number of their horsemen for their security.After these he marched himself, having with him a selectbody of footmen, and horsemen, and pikemen. After thesecame the peculiar cavalry of his own legion; for there were ahundred and twenty horsemen that peculiarly belonged toevery legion. Next to these came the mules that carried theengines for sieges, and the other warlike machines of thatnature. After these came the commanders of the cohortsand tribunes, having about them soldiers chosen out of therest. Then came the ensigns encompassing the eagle, whichis at the head of every Roman legion, the king and thestrongest of all birds, which seems to them a signal of domi­nion, and an omen that they shall conquer all against whomthey march : these sacred ensigns are followed by the trum­peters. Then came the main army in their squadrons andbattalions, with six men in depth, which were followed at lastby a centurion, who, according to custom, observed the rest.As for the servants of every legion, they all followed thefootmen, and led the baggage of the soldiers, which was borneby the mules and other beasts of burden. But behind allthe legions came the whole multitude of the mercenaries ; andthose that brought up the rear came last of all for the securityof the whole army, being both footmen, and those in theirarmor also, with a great number of horsemen.







OCR Output








C.X.] VESPASIAN, EMPEROR. 115


companies, anil consulted openly about changing the publicaffairs, and out of their indignation eried out how " at Romethere are soldiers that live delicately; and when they havenot ventured so much as to hear the fame of war, they ordainwhom they please for our governors, and in hopes of gainmake them emperors ; while you have gone through so manylabors, and are grown into years under your helmets, giveleave to others to use such a power, when yet you have amongyourselves one more worthy to rule than any whom they haveset up. Now what juster opportunity shall they ever have ofrequiting their generals, if they do not make use of this thatis now before them ? while there are so much juster reasonsfor Vespasian's being emperor than for Vitellius, as they arethemselves more deserving than those that made the otheremperors; for that they have undergone as great wars ashave the troops that come from Germany; nor are they infe­rior in war to those that have brought that tyrant to Rome,nor have they undergono smaller labors than they ; for thatneitner will the Roman senate nor people bear such a lasci­vious emperor as Vitellius, if he be compared with their chasteVespasian ; nor will they endure a most barbarous tyrant in­stead of a good governor, nor choose one that hath no child1to preside over them, instead of him that is a father, becausethe advancement of men's own children to dignities is cer­tainly the greatest security kings can have for themselves.Whether, therefore, we estimate the capacity of governingfrom the skill of a person in years, we ought to have Vespa­sian, or whether, from the strength of a young man, we oughtto have Titus; for by this means we shall have the advantageof both their ages, for that they will afford strength to thosethat shall be made emperors, they having already three le­gions, besides other auxiliaries from the neighboring kings,


1 The Roman authors that now remain say Vitellius hail children, whereasJosephus introduces here the Roman soldiers in Judea, saying he had none.Which of these assertions was the truth I know not. Spanheim thinks h«hath given a peculiar rcason for calling Vitellius childless, though he reallyhas children. Diss, de Num. pages 649, 650, to which it appears very diffi­cult to give our assont.
IV.—13







OCR Output








B. I.] AGAINST APION. 393


mentions: he then ascribes certain fabulous stories to thisking, as having in a manner forgotten how he had alreadyrelated that the departure of the shepherds for Jerusalemhad been five hundred and eighteen years before; for Teth-mosis was king when they went away. Now, from his days,the reigns of the intermediate kings, according to Manetho,amounted to three hundred and ninety-three years, as hesays himself, till the two brothers, Sethos and Hermeus; theone of which, Sethos, was called bv that other name ofEgyptus, and the other, Hermeus, by that of Danaus. Healso says, that Sethos cast the other out of Egypt, and reignedfifty-nine years, as did his eldest son, Rhampses, reign afterhim sixty-six years. When Manetho, therefore, had acknow­ledged that our forefathers were gone out of Egypt so manyyears ago, he introduces his fictitious king, Amenophis, andsays thus : u This king was desirous to become a spectator ofthe gods, as had Orus, one of his predecessors in that king­dom, desired the same before him; he also communicatedthat his desire to his namesake, Amenophis, who was theson of Papis, and one that seemed to partake of a divinenature, both as to wisdom and the knowledge of futurities."Manetho adds, " how this namesake of his told him, that hemight see the gods if he would clear the whole country ofthe lepers and of the other impure people: that the king waspleased with this injunction, and got together all that hadany defects in their bodies out of Egypt, and that theirnumber was eighty thousand; whom he sent to those quarrieswhich are on the east side of the Nile, that they might workin them, and might be separated from the rest of theEgyptians." He says farther, that " there were some of thelearned priests that were polluted with the leprosy; but thatstill this Amenophis, the wise man and the prophet, wasafraid that the gods would be angry at him and at the king,if there should appear to have been violence offered them;who also added this farther [out of his sagacity aboutfuturities,] that certain people would come to the assistanceof these polluted wretches, and would conquer Egypt, andkeep it in their possession thirteen years : that, however, he







OCR Output








390 FLAVIUS JOSEPHOS [b. I.


fer the observation of their laws and their religion towardsGod before the preservation of themselves and their country.
23. Now that some writers have omitted to mention ournation, not because they knew nothing of us, but becausethey envied us, or for some other unjustifiable reasons, Ithink I can demonstrate by particular instances: for Hiero-nymus, who wrote the history of [Alexander's] successors,lived at the same time with Hecateus, and was a friend ofking Antigonus, and president of Syria. Now it is plain,that Hecateus wrote an entire- book concerning us, whileIlieronymus never mentions us in his history, although hewas bred up very near to the places where we live: thus dif­ferent from one another arc the inclinations of men; whilethe one thought we deserved to be carefully remembered, assome ill-disposed passion blinded the other's mind so entirely,that he could not discern the truth. And now certainly theforegoing records of the Egyptians, and Chaldeans, andPhoenicians, together with so many of the Greek writers, willbe sufficient for the demonstration of our antiquity. More­over, besides those forementioned, Theophilus, and Theodo-tus, and Mnaseas, and Aristophanes, and Hermogenes, Eu-hemerus, also, and Conon, and Zopyrion, and, perhaps, manyothers (for I have not lighted upon all the Greek books,) havemade distinct mention of us. It is true, many of the menbefore mentioned have made great mistakes about the trueaccounts of our nation in the earliest times, because they hadnot perused our sacred books; yet have they all of themafforded their testimony to our antiquity, concerning which Iam now treating. However, Demetrius Phalereus and theelder Philo, with Eupolemus, have not greatly missed thotruth about our affairs; whose lesser mistakes ought, there­fore, to be forgiven them; for it was not in their power tounderstand our writings with the utmost accuracy.
24. One particular there is still remaining behind, of whatI at first proposed to speak to, and that is to demonstrate,that those calumnies and reproaches which some have thrownupon our nation are lies, and to make use of those writers'own testimonies against themselves; and that, in general,







OCR Output








B. II.] AGAINST APION. 451


having been forbidden so to do by one of their laws: and acapital punishment had been decreed to such as introduced astrange god; it being manifest that they who make use ofsuch a law do not believe those of other nations to be reallygods, otherwise they had not envied themselves the advantageof more gods than they already had. And this was the happyadministration of the affairs of the Athenians! Now, as tothe Scythians, they take a pleasure in killing men, and differlittle from brute beasts; yet do they think it reasonable tohave their institutions observed. They also slew Anacharsis,a person greatly admired for his wisdom among the Greeks,when he returned to them, because he appeared to comefraught with Grecian customs : one may also find many tohave been punished among the Persians on the very sameaccount. And to be sure Apollonius was greatly pleased withthe laws of the Persians, and was an admirer of them, becausethe Greeks enjoyed the advantage of their courage, and hadthe very same opinion about the gods which they had ! Thislast was exemplified in the temples which they burnt, andtheir courage in coming and almost entirely enslaving theGrecians. However, Apollonius has imitated all the Persianinstitutions, and that by his offering violence to other men'swives, and castrating his own sons. Now with us it is a capitalcrime if any one does thus abuse even a brute beast: and asfor us, neither hath the fear of our governors, nor a desireof following what other nations have in so great esteem, beenable to withdraw us from our own laws; nor have wc exertedour courage in raising up wars to increase our wealth, butonly for the observation of our laws: and when we with pa­tience bear other losses, yet when any persons would compelus to break our laws, then it is that we choose to go to war,though it be beyond our ability to pursue it, and bear thegreatest calamities to the last with much fortitude. And, in­deed, what reason can there by why we should desire to imi­tate the laws of other nations, while we see they are notobserved by their own legislators ? And why do not the La­cedemonians think of abolishing that form of their governmentwhich suffers them not to associate with any others, as well as







OCR Output








218 OBSTINACY OF THE SEDITIOUS. [B. V.


the wall of the city. This miserable procedure made Titusgreatly to pity them, while they caught every day five hun­dred Jews; nay, some days they caught more: yet did it notappear to be safe for him to let those that were taken by forceto go their way; and to set a guard over so many he sawwould be to make such as guarded them useless to him. Themain reason why he did not forbid that cruelty was this, thathe hoped the Jews might, perhaps, yield at that sight, out offear lest they might themselves afterwards be liable to the samecruel treatment. So the soldiers, out of the wrath and hatredthey bore the Jews, nailed those they caught, one after oneway, and another after another, to the crosses, by way of jest,when their multitude was so great that room was wanting forthe crosses, and crosses wanting for the bodies.
2. But so far were the seditious from repenting at this sadsight, that on the contrary, they made the rest of the multi­tude believe otherwise; for they brought the relations of thosethat had deserted upon the wall, with such of the populace aswere very eager to go over upon the security offered them,and showed them what miseries those underwent who fled tothe Romans : and told them that those who were caught weresupplicants to them, and not such as were taken prisoners.This sight kept many of those within the city who were soeager to desert, till the truth was known: yet did some ofthem run away immediately as unto certain punishment, es­teeming death from their enemies to be a quiet departure, ifcompared with that by famine. So Titus commanded thatthe hands of many of those that were caught should be cutoff, that they might not be thought deserters, and might becredited on account of the calamity they were under, and sentthem in to John and Simon, with this exhortation, that " theywould now at length leave off [their madness,] and not forcehim to destroy the city, whereby they would have those advan­tages of repentance, even in their utmost distress, that theywould preserve their own lives, and so fine a city of their own,and that temple which was their peculiar." He then wentround about the banks that were cast up, and hastened them,in order to show that his words should in no long time bo







OCR Output








364 FLAVIUSJOSEPHUS [B. I.


to these books of our own nation, is evident by what we do;for during so many ages as have already passed, no one hathbeen so bold as either to add any thing to them, to take anything from them, or to make any change in them; but it isbecome natural to all Jews, immediately and from their verybirth, to esteem these books to contain divine doctrines, andto persist in them, and, if occasion be, willingly to die forthem. For it is no new thing for our captives, many of themin number, and frequently in time, to be seen to endure racksand deaths of all kinds upon the theatres, that they may notbe obliged to say one word against our laws, or the recordsthat contain them; whereas there are none at all among theGreeks who would undergo the least harm on that account,no, nor in case all the writings that are among them were tobe destroyed; for they take them to be such discourses as arcframed agreeably to the inclinations of those that write them;and they have justly the same opinion of the ancient writers,since they see some of the present generation bold enough towrite about such affairs wherein they were not present, norhad concern enough to inform themselves about them fromthose that knew them; examples of which may be had in thislate war of ours, where some persons have written histories,and published them, without having been in the places con­cerned, or having been near them when the actions were done;but these men put a few things together by hearsay, and in­solently abuse the world, and call these writings by the nameof Histories.
9. As for myself, I have composed a true history of thatwhole war, and of all the particulars that occurred therein,as having been concerned in all its transactions; for I actedas general of those among us that are named Galileans, aslong as it was possible for us to make any opposition. I wasthen seized on by the Romans, and became a captive; Ves­pasian also and Titus had me kept under a guard, and forcedme to attend them continually. At the first I was put intobonds, but was set at liberty afterward, and sent to accom­pany Titus, when he came from Alexandria to the siege ofJerusalem; during which time there was nothing done which







OCR Output








510 DISSERTATION III.


tbat Tacitus had some part of his information these ways,and particularly where he a little differs from or makes addi­tions to Josephus: but then, as this will all reach no fartherthan three or four years during this war, so will it by nomeans account for that abridgement of the geography of thecountry, and entire series of the principal facts of historythereto relating, which are in Tacitus, from the days ofAntiochus Epiphanes, 240 years before that war, with whichAntiochus both Josephus and Tacitus begin their distincthistories of the Jews, preparatory to the history of this lastwar. Nor could Tacitus take the greatest part of thoseearlier facts belonging to the Jewish nation from the daysof Moses, or to Christ and the Christians in the days of Tibe­rius, from Roman authors; of which Jewish and Christianaffairs those authors had usually very little knowledge, andwhich the heathen generally did grossly pervert and shame­fully falsify: and this is so true as to Tacitus's own accountsof the origin of the Jewish nation, that the reader may almosttake it for a constant rule, that when Tacitus contradictsJosephus's Jewish Antiquities, he cither tells direct falsehoods,or truths so miserably disguised, as renders them little betterthan falsehoods, and hardly ever lights upon any thing re­lating to them that is true and solid, but when tho same is inthose Antiquities at this day; of which matters more will besaid in the notes on this history immediately following.


HISTORY OF THE JEWS.
BOOK V. CHAP. H.
Since we are now going to relate the final period of thisfamous city [Jerusalem], it seems proper to give an accountof its original.1 The tradition is, that the Jews ran awayfrom the island of Crete, and settled themselves on the coast


1 Most of these stories are so entirely groundless, nnd so contradictory toone another, that they do not deserve a serious confutation. It is strangeTacitus could persuade himself thus crudely to set them down.







OCR Output








318 LUCILIUS BASSUS. [B. VII.


that he might exceed its natural strength and security, whichyet itself rendered it hard to be taken by those fortifica­tions which were made by the hands of men. Moreover, heput a large quantity of darts and other machines of war intoit, and contrived to get every thing thither that might anyway contribute to its inhabitants' security under the longestsiege possible.
3. Now within this place there grew a sort of rue,1 thatdeserves our wonder on account of its largeness; for it is noway inferior to any fig-tree whatsoever, cither in height or inthickness ; and the report is, that it had lasted over since thetimes of Herod, and would probably have lasted much longer,had it not been cut down by those Jews who took possessionof the place afterward. But still in that valley which en­compasses the city on the north side, there is a certain placecalled Baaras, which produces a root2 of the same namewith itself: its color is like to that of flame, and towards theevening it sends out a certain ray like lightning; it is noteasily taken by such as would do it, but recedes from theirhands, nor will yield itself to be taken quietly, until citherthe urine of a woman or her menstrual blood be poured uponit: nay, even then it is certain death to those that touch it,unless any one take and hang the root itself down from hishand, and so carry it away. It may also be taken anotherway without danger, which is this.—They dig a trench quiteround about it, till the hidden part of the root be very small,they then tie a dog to it; and when the dog tries hard tofollow him that tied him, this root is easily plucked up; hutthe dog dies immediately, as if it were instead of the manthat would take the plant away; nor after this need any one


1 Spanheim observes here, that in Uraecia Major and Sicily they had rueprodigiously great and durable, like this rue at Maeherus.
■ This strange account of the place and root Baaras seems to have beentaken from the magicians, and the root to have been made use of in thodays of Josephus in that superstitious way of casting out demons, supposedby him to have been derived from king Solomon, of which we have alreadyseen he had a great opinion; Antiq. B. viii. ch. ii. sect. 5. We also mayhence learn the true notion Josephus had of demons and demoniaes, exactlylike that of the Jews and Christians in tho New Testament, and the firstfour centuries. See Antiq. B. vi. ch. viii. sect. 2; B. xi. ch. ii. sect 3.







OCR Output








B. II.] AGAINST APION. 429


ficing whole hecatombs to the gods, and make use of thosesacrifices for feasting; and yet is not the world thereby ren­dered destitute of cattle, as Apion was afraid would come topass. Yet, if all men had followed the manners of the Egyp­tians, the world had certainly been made desolate as to man­kind, but had been filled full of the wildest sort -of brutebeasts, which, because they suppose them to bo gods, theycarefully nourish. However, if any one should ask Apionwhich of the Egyptians he thinks to be the most wise andmost pious of them all, he would certainly acknowledge thepriests to be so; for the histories say, that two things wereoriginally committed to their care by their king's injunctions,the worship of the gods and the support of wisdom andphilosophy. Accordingly, these priests are all circumeised,and abstain from swine's flesh; nor does any one of the otherEgyptians assist them in slaying those sacrifices they offer tothe gods. Apion was, therefore, quite blinded in his mind,when for the sake of the Egyptians, he contrived to reproachus, and to accuse such others as not only make use of thatconduct of life which he so much abuses, but have also taujrhtother men to be circumeised, as says Herodotus, which makesme think that Apion is hereby justly punished for his castingsuch reproaches on the laws of his own country; for he wascircumeised himself of necessity, on account of an uleer inhis privy member; and when he received no benefit by suchcircumcision, but his member became putrid, he died in greattorment. Now men of good tempers ought to observe theirown laws concerning religion accurately, and to perseveretherein, but not presently to abuse the laws of other nations,while this Apion deserted his own laws, and told lies aboutours. And this was the end of Apion's life, and this shall bethe conclusion of our discourse about him.
15. But now, since Apollonius Molo, and Lysimachus, andsome others write treatises about our lawgiver Moses, andabout our laws, which are neither just nor true, and thispartly out of ignorance, but chiefly out of ill will to us, whilethey calumniate Moses as an impostor and deceiver, and pre­tend that our laws teach us wickedness, but nothing is virtu­







OCR Output








2-1 VESPASIAN. [B. III.


3. And thus did Vespasian march with his army, and cameto the bounds of Galilee, where he pitehed his camp, and re­strained his soldiers, who were eager for war: he also showedhis army to the enemy, in order to affright them, and to affordthem a season for repentance, to see whether they wouldchange their minds before it came to a battle, and at thesame time he got things ready for besieging their strong­holds. And, indeed, this sight of the general brought manyto repent of the revolt, and put them all into a consternation:for those that were in Josephus's camp, which was at the citycalled Garis, not far from Sepphoris, when they heard thatthe war was come near them, and that the Romans wouldsuddenly fight them hand to hand, dispersed themselves, andfled not only before they came to a battle, but before theenemy ever came in sight, while Josephus and a few otherswere left behind; and as he saw that he had not an armysufficient to engage the enemy, that the spirits of the JewsWere sunk, and that the greater part would willingly come toterms, if they might be credited, he already despaired of thesuccess of the whole war, and determined to get as far as hepossibly could out of danger; so he took those that stayedalong with him, and fled to Tiberias.


CHAPTER VII.
VESPASIAN, WHEN HE HAD TAKEN THE CITY GADARA, MARCHESTO JOTAPATA : AFTER A LONG SIEGE, THE CITY IS BETRAYEDBY A DESERTER, AND TAKEN BY VESPASIAN.
§ 1. So Vespasian marched to the city Gadara, and tookit upon the first onset, because he found it destitute of anyconsiderable number of men grown up and fit for war. Hothen came into it, and slew all the youth, the Romans havingno mercy on any age whatsoever; and this was done out ofthe hatred they bore the nation, and because of the iniquitythey had been guilty of in the affair of Cestius. He also setfire not only to the city itself, but to all the villas and small







OCR Output








30 VESPASIAN. [B. III.


wall, they made fresh sallies upon the Romans, and hadevery day conflicts with them by parties, together with allsuch contrivances as robbers make use of, and with theplundering of all that came to hand, as also with the settingfire to all the other works ; and this till Vespasian made hiaarmy leave off fighting them, and resolved to lie round thecity, and to starve them into a surrender, as supposing thateither they would be forced to petition him for mercy, bywant of provisions, or if they should have the courage to holdout till the last, they would perish by famine; and he con­cluded he should conquer them the more easily in fighting,if he gave them an interval, and then fell upon them whenthey were weakened by famine; but still he gave orders thatthey should guard against their coming out of the city.
12. Now the besieged had plenty of corn within the city,and, indeed, of all other necessaries, but they wanted water,because there was no fountain in the city, the people beingthere usually satisfied with rain-water; yet it is a rare thingin that country to have rain in summer : and at this season,during the siege, they were in great distress for some contri­vance to satisfy their thirst; and they were very sad at thistime particularly, as if they were already in want of waterentirely; for Josephus seeing that the city abounded withother necessaries, and that the men were of good courage, andbeing desirous to protract the siege to the Romans longer thanthey expected, ordered their drink to be given them by mea­sure ; but this scanty distribution of water by measure wasdeemed by them as a thing more hard upon them than thewant of it; and their not being able to drink as much as theywould made them more desirous of drinking than they hadotherwise been ; nay, they were as much disheartened therebyas if they were come to the last degree of thirst. Nor werethe Romans unacquainted with the state they were in; forwhen they stood over against them beyond the wall, they couldsee them running together, and taking their water by measure,which made them throw their javelins thither, the place beingwithin their reach, and kill a great many of them.
13. Hereupon Vespasian hoped that their receptacles of







OCR Output








INDEX. 569


God, 290; thanks the army, anddistributes rewards, 298; cele­brates his father's and brother'sbirthdays, 301; makes great shows,ib. ; comes to Antioch, 310; andto Rome, 311; what persons hecarried with him for the triumph,ib.; his approbation of Josephus'shistory, i. 63; his generosity toJosephus, 70.
Top.irchies (three,) or prefectures,added to Judea, ii. 350.
Tower of Babel, and the Sibyl's testi­mony concerning it, i. 92.
Trachonites rebel, iii. 50.
Traditions of the Pharisees unwrit­ten, ii. 381.
Trnjan, captain of the tenth legion,iv. 42.
Treasure kept in the temple, &c, ii.223.
Tribes of Israel, and their portionsof land by lot, i. 339.
Tribute paid out of Judea to Anti-ochus Pius, ii. 373; great menfarm such tributes, 286; poll-money paid to the kings of Syria,337; ten thousand drachmoe paidout of the temple to them, ib.;three hundred talents paid by Jona­than to Demetrius, 350 ; Jews freedfrom paying such tribute, 350;high-priest used to pay twentytalents tribute to the kings ofEgypt, 282; poll-money, crowntax, &c, forpiven the principalorders of the Jews, ib.
Triumphal gate at Home, iv. 312.
Triumphal pomp described, iv. 312,et seq.
Trophies give offence to the Jews, ii.537.
Trumpet, its invention, i. 254.
Trypho, the tyrant, brings youngAntiochus back to Syria, ii. 353;his perfidious behavior to Anti­ochus, 360; draws Jonathan intoa snare, 361; makes an irruptionintu Judea, 362; imposes uponSimon, ib.; kills Jonathan, 364;causes Antiochus to be killed, 367;is made king by the army, ib.; iskilled at Apamea, 368.
Trypho, Ptolemy's favorite, ii. 291.
Trypho, Herod's barber, iii. 68, 424.
Tubal-Cain, i. 82.


Tyrannicus Priscus, iii. 539.
Tyrannus's deposition against Alex­ander, iii. 57, 420.
Tyre built, ii. 18; oppressed byMarion, 458; besieged, 146.
Tyre, the name of a castle built byHyrcanus, ii. 295.
Tyrians, their god, Banl, ii. 119;their ancient records, iv. 373; theybeat the Assyrians at sea, ii. 146;their temples of Jupiter Olympius,of Hercules, and of Astarte, 35;iv. 375.
Valerian, a decurion, iv. 60.
Valerius, proconsul of Asia, iii. 227.
Varro, ii. 551.
Varus (Quintilius,) iii. 87, 92; comesto succor Sabinus, 123, 124, 463;punishes the mutineers, 124, 464.
Vashti, ii. 233.
Vatinius, iii. 217.
Veils of the tabernacle, i. 224.
Ventidius Bassusbribed by Autigonus,ii. 474; sent to repel the Parthians,ib.; kills Pacorus in battle, anddefeats the Parthians, 480.
Vespasian and Titus's generosity to­wards the Jews, ii. 278 ' his warsin Judea, iv. 7, et seq.
Vindex rebels, iv. 128.
Vine (golden) in Herod's temple, ii.559; another sent to Rome, 414.
Vitellius, ii. 561; iv. 307 ; is highlytreated by the Jews, iii. 153, 159;expedition against Arctas, 158; isordered by Tiberius to enter intoan alliance with Artabanus, 154.
Vitellius made emperor after Otho,iv. 144.
Urnmidius Quadratus, iii. 282.
Voice heard in the temple, iv. 275.
Vologesses, king of Parthia, iii. 275;iv. 310; he declares war againstIzales, iv. 326.
Volumnius, procurator of Syria, iii.51, 60, 65, 423.
Vonones, iii. 144.
Vow of Jephtha, i. 378, et acq.
Uriah slain, i. 494.
Uzzah smitten by God, i. 482.
Uzziah, or Azariuh, ii. 133; bums in­cense in the temple, 134; is smit­ten with the leprosy, 135.
War not begun with foreign nationstill ambassadors are sent, i. 317.


48*







OCR Output








JOSEPHUS'S DISCOUESE ABOUT HADES. 461


to an ill catastrophe. Whosoever shall have lived wickedlyand luxuriously may repent: however, there will be need ofmuch time to conquer an evil habit; and even after repent­ance, his whole life must be guarded with great care anddiligence, after the manner of a body, which, after it hathbeen a long time afflicted with a distemper, requires a stricterdiet and method of living: for though it may be possible,perhaps, to break off the chain of our irregular affections atonce, yet our amendment cannot be secured without the graceof God, the prayers of good men, the help of the brethren,and our own sincere repentance and constant caro. It is agood thing not to sin at all; it is also good, havmg sinned,to repent, as it is best to have health always; but it is a goodthing to recover from a distemper. To God be glory anddominion for ever and ever, Amen.


UND OF THE WRITINGS OF J0SEPIIUS.


89*







OCR Output








C. IX.J THE SIEGE. 201


been injured? Will not you turn again and look back, andconsider whence it is that you fight with such violence, andhow great a supporter you have profanely abused ? Will notyou recall to mind the prodigious things done for your fore­fathers and this holy place, and how great enemies of yourswere by him subdued under you ? I even tremble myself indeclaring the works of God before your ears that are un­worthy to hear them; however, hearken to me, that you maybe informed how you fight not only against the Romans, butagainst God himself. In old time there was one Necao, kingof Egypt, who was also called Pharaoh ; he came with a pro­digious army of soldiers, and seized Queen Sarah, the motherof our nation. What did Abraham our progenitor then do?Did he defend himself from this injurious person by a war,although he had three hundred and eighteen captains underhim, and an immense army under each of them. Indeed,he deemed them to be no number at all without God's assist­ance, and only spread out his hands towards this holy place,1which you have now polluted, and reckoned upon him asupon his invincible supporter, instead of his own army. Wasnot our queen sent back, without any defilement, to her hus­band the very next evening ? while the king of Egypt fledaway, adoring this place, which you have defiled by shed­ding thereon the blood of your own countrymen; and healso trembled at those visions which he saw in the nightseason, and bestowed both silver and gold on the Hebrews,as on a people beloved by God. Shall I say nothing, orshall I mention the removal of our fathers into Egypt, whewhen they were used tyrannically, and were fallen under thepower of foreign kings for four hundred years together, andmight have defended themselves by war and by fighting, didyet do nothing but commit themselves to God? Who is


1 Josephus supposes, in this his admirable speech to tho Jews, that notAbraham only, but Pharaoh, king of Egypt, prayed towards a temple at Je­rusalem, or towards Jerusalem, itself, in which were Mount Zion and MountMoriah, on which the tabernacle and temple did afterwards stand ; and thislong before either the Jewish tabernacle or temple was built. Nor is thefamous command given by God to Abraham to go two or three days' journeyon purpose to offer up his son Isiac there, unfavorable to such a notion.







OCR Output








38 VESPASIAN. [B. Ill


was come ere the wall yielded to the machines employedagainst it, though it had been battered without intermission.However, those within covered their bodies with their armor,and raised works over against that part which was throwndown, before those machines were laid, by which the Romanswere to ascend into the city.
24. In the morning Vespasian got his army together inorder to take the city [by storm,] after a little recreationupon the hard pains they had been at the night before; andas he was desirous to draw off those that opposed him fromthe places where the wall had been thrown down, he madethe most courageous of the horsemen get off their horses,and placed them in three ranks over against those ruins ofthe wall, but covered with their armor on every side, andwith poles in their hands, that so these might begin theirascent as soon as the instruments for such ascent were laid:behind them he placed the flower of the footmen; but for therest of the horse, he ordered them to extend themselves overagainst the wall, upon the whole hilly country, in order toprevent any from escaping out of the city when it should betaken; and behind these he placed the archers round about,and commanded them to have their darts ready to shoot.The same commands he gave to the slingers, and to thosethat managed the engines, and bid them to take up otherladders, and have them ready to lay upon those parts of thewall which were yet untouched, that the besieged might boengaged in trying to hinder their ascent by them, and leavethe guard of the parts that were thrown down, while the restof them should be overborne by the darts cast at them, andmight afford his men an entrance into the city.
25. But Josephus, understanding the meaning of Vespa­sian's contrivance, set the old men, together with those thatwere tired out, at the sound parts of the wall, as expectingno harm from those quarters, but set the strongest of his menat the place where the wall was broken down, and before themall six men by themselves, among whom he took his share ofthe first and greatest danger. He also gave orders, that" when the legions made a shout they should stop their ears,







OCR Output








.56 VESPASIAN. [B. III.


CHAPTER IX.
HOW JOPPA WAS TAKEN, AND TIBERIAS DELIVERED UP.
§ 1. Now Vespasian returned to Ptolemais on the fourthday of the month Panemus [Tamuz,] and from thence hecame to Caesarea, which lay by the sea-side. This was avery great city of Judea, and for the greatest part inhabitedby Greeks; the citizens here received both the Roman armyand its general with all sorts of acclamations and rejoicings,and this partly out of the good-will they bore to the Romans,but principally out of the hatred they bore to those thatwere conquered by them ; on which account they came clamor­ing against Josephus in crowds, and desired he might be putto death. But Vespasian passed over this petition concern­ing him, as offered by the injudicious multitude, with a baresilence. Two of the legions also he placed at Caesarea, thatthey might there take their winter-quarters, as perceiving thecity very fit for such a purpose; but he placed the tenth andthe fifth at Scythopolis, that he might not distress Caesareawith the entire army. This place was warm, even in winter,as it was suffocating hot in the summer-time, by reason of itssituation in a plain, and near to the sea [of Galilee.]
2. In the mean time, there were gathered together as wellsuch as had seditiously got out from among their enemies, asthose that had escaped out of the demolished cities, whichwere in all a great number, and repaired Joppa, which hadbeen left desolate by Cestius, that it might serve them for aplace of refuge; and because the adjoining region had beenlaid waste in the war, and was not capable of supporting them,they determined to go off to sea. They also built themselvesa great many piratical ships, and turned pirates upon the seasnear to Syria, and Phoenicia, and Egypt, and made those seasunnavigable to all men. Now as soon as Vespasian knew oftheir conspiracy, he sent both footmen and horsemen to Joppa,who entered the city, which was unguarded, in the night-time:however, those that were in it perceived that they should bo







OCR Output








482 DISSERTATION I.


(3.) It was quite beside the purpose of Josephus to declarehimself here to be a Christian, or a believer in Jesus as thetrue Messiah. Had he intended so to do, he would surelyhave explained the meaning of the word Christ to his Greekand Roman readers: he would surely have been a great dealfuller and larger in his accounts of Christ, and of theChristian religion: nor would such a declaration at that timehave recommended him, or his nation, or his writings, toeither the Greeks or the Romans; of his reputation with bothwhich people he is known to have been, in the writing ofthese Antiquities, very greatly solicitous.
(4.) Josephus's usual way of writing is historical anddeclarative of facts, and of the opinions of others, and butrarely such as directly informs us of his own opinion, unlesswe prudently gather it from what he says historically, or asthe opinions of others. This is very observable in thewritings of Josephus, and in particular as to what he says ofJohn the Baptist, and of James the Just; so that this in­terpretation is most probable, as most agreeable to Josephus'sway of writing in parallel cases.
(5.) This seems to be the universal sense of all the ancientswithout exception, who cite this testimony from him; andthough they almost everywhere own this to be the true read­ing, yet do they everywhere suppose Josephus to be still anunbelieving Jew, and not a believing Christian : nay, Jeromappears so well assured of this interpretation, and thatJosephus did not mean to declare any more by these wordsthan a common opinion, that, according to his usual way ofinterpreting authors, not to the words but to the sense (ofwhich we have, I think, two more instances in his accountsout of Josephus, now before us,) he renders this clause cre-debatur esse Christus, i. e. he was believed to be Christ.Nor is the parallel expression of Pilate to be otherwise under­stood, when he made that inscription upon the cross, This isJesus the King of the Jews;1 which is well explained byhimself elsewhere, and corresponds to the import of thepresent clause, What shall I do with Jesus who is called


1 Matth. xxvii. 31.







OCR Output








B. II.] AGAINST APlOlT. 410


people of Rome: we also offer perpetual sacrifices for them;nor do we only offer them every day at the common expenseof all the Jews, but although we offer no other such sacrificesout of our common expenses, no not for our own children,yet do we this as a peculiar honor to the emperors, and tothem alone, while we do the same to no other person whom­soever.- And let this suffice for an answer in general toApion, as to what ho says with relation to the AlexandrianJews.
7. However, I cannot but admire those other authors whofurnished this man with such his materials; I mean Possido-nius and Apollonius [the son of] Molo,1 who, while they ac­cuse us for not worshipping the same gods whom others wor­ship, they think themselves not guilty of impiety when theytell lies of us, and frame absurd and reproachful stories aboutour temple ; whereas it is a most shameful thing for free mento forge lies on any occasion, and much more so to forge themabout our temple, which was so famous over all the world,and was preserved so sacred by us; for Apion hath the im­pudence to pretend, — " That the Jews placed an ass's headin their holy place ;" and he affirms, — " That this was dis­covered when Antiochus Epiphanes spoiled our temple, andfound that ass's head there made of gold, and worth a greatdeal of money." To this my first answer shall be this: —That had there been any such thing among us, an Egyptianought by no means to have thrown it in our teeth, since anass is not a more contemptible animal than ***2 and goats,and other such creatures, which among them are gods. But,besides this answer, I say farther, how comes it about thaApion does not understand this to be no other than a palpa­ble lie, and to be confuted by the thing itself as utterly in­credible ? For we Jews arc always governed by the samelaws, in which we constantly persevere; and although manymisfortunes have befallen our city, as the like have befallenothers, and although Theos [Epiphanes,] and Pompey the


1 Culled more properly Molo or Apollonius Halo, ns hereafter; for Apollo­nius, the son of Molo, was nnother person, as Strabo informs us, lib. xiv.' Furones in the Latin, which what animal it denotes does not now appear







OCR Output








C. V.] THE ID UME AN S. Ill


were in; but when these were also made sensible that theIdumeans were come in, none of them durst come to theirassistance; only they returned the terrible echo of wailing,and lamented their misfortunes. A great howling of thewomen was excited also, and every one of the guards was indanger of being killed. The zealots also joined in the shoutsraised by the Idumeans ; and the storm itself rendered thecry more terrible: nor did the Idumeans spare any body;for as they are naturally a most barbarous and bloody nation,and had been distressed by the tempest, they made use oftheir weapons against those that had shut the gates againstthem, and acted in the same manner as to those that suppli­cated for their lives, and to those that fought them, insomuchthat they ran through those with their swords who desiredthem to remember the relation there was between them, andbegged of them to have regard to their common temple. Nowthere was at present neither any place for flight, nor anyhope of preservation, but as they were driven one uponanother in heaps, so were they slain. Thus the greater partwere driven together by force, as there was now no place ofretirement, and the murderers were upon them, and, havingno other way, threw themselves down headlong into the city;whereby, in my opinion, they underwent a more miserabledestruction than that which they avoided, because that was avoluntary one. And now the outer temple was all of itoverflowed with blood; and that day, as it came on, saw eightthousand five hundred dead bodies there.
2. But the rage of the Idumeans was not satiated by theseslaughters ; but they now betook themselves to the city, andplundered every house, and slew every one they met: andfor the other multitude they esteemed it needless to go onwith killing them, but they sought for the high-priests, andthe generality went with the greatest zeal against them : andas soon as they caught them they slew them, and then stand­ing upon their dead bodies, in way of jest, upbraided Ananuswith his kindness to the people, and Jesus with his speechmade to them from the wall. Nay, they proceeded to thatdegree of impiety, as to cast away their dead bodies without







OCR Output








346 TIIE S1CARII AT ALEXANDRIA. [B. VIL


to assert their liberty, to esteem the Romans to he no betterthan themselves, and to look upon God as their only lord andmaster. But when part of the Jews of reputation opposedthem, they slew some of them, and with the others they werevery pressing in their exhortations to revolt from the Ro­mans ; but when the principal men of the senate saw whatmadness they were come to, they thought it no longer safefor themselves to overlook them. So they got all the Jewstogether to an assembly, and accused the madness of theSicarii, and demonstrated that they had been the authors ofall the evils that had come upon them. They said also, that" these men, now they were ran away from Judea, having nosure hope of escaping, because as soon as ever they shall boknown they will be soon destroyed by the Romans, they comehither, and fill us full of those calamities which belong tothem, while we have not been partakers with them in any oftheir sins." Accordingly, they exhorted the multitude tohave a care lest they should be brought to destruction bytheir means, and to make their apology to the Romans forwhat had been done, by delivering these men up to them;who, being thus apprised of the greatness of the danger theywere in, complied with what was proposed, and ran with greatviolence upon the Sicarii, and seized upon them; and, indeed,six hundred of them were caught immediately; but as to allthose that fled into Egypt,1 and to the Egyptian Thebes, itwas not long ere they were caught also, and brought back,whose courage, or whether we ought to call it madness orhardiness in their opinions, every body was amazed at. Forwhen all sorts of torments and vexations of their bodies thatcould be devised were made use of to them, they could notget any one of them to comply so far as to confess, or seem


1 Since Josephus here informs us, that some of these Sicarii or ruffianswent from Alexandria (which was itself in Egypt, in a large sense) intoEgypt and Thebes, there situated, Reland well observes from Vosius, thatEgypt sometimes denotes Proper or Upper Egypt as distinct from Delta andthe lower parts near Palestine. Accordingly, as he adds, those that say itnever rains in Egypt, must mean the Proper or Upper Egypt, because itdoes sometimes rain in the other parts. See the notes on Antiq. B. ii. ch.vii. sect. 7; and B. iii. ch. i. sect. 6.







OCR Output








216 THE FAMINE. [b. V.


some part of what they had brought; though these would notgive them the least crumb, and they were to be well con­tented that they were only spoiled, and not slain at the sametime.
4. These were the afflictions which the lower sort of thepeople suffered from these tyrants' guards; but for the menthat were in dignity, and withal were rich, they were carriedbefore the tyrants themselves, some of which were falsely ac­cused of laying treacherous plots, and so were destroyed;others of them were charged with designs of betraying thecity to the Romans ; but the readiest way of all was this, tosuborn somebody to affirm that they were resolved to desertto the enemy. And he who was utterly despoiled of what hehad by Simon was sent back again to John, as of those whohad been already plundered by John, Simon got what re­mained ; insomuch that they drank the blood of the populaceto one another, and divided the dead bodies of the poor crea­tures between them; so that although, on account of theirambition after dominion, they contended with each other, yetdid they very well agree in their wicked practices, for he thatdid not communicate what he got by the miseries of others tothe other tyrant, seemed to be too little guilty, and in onerespect only, and he that did not partake of what was socommunicated to him, grieved at this as at the loss of whatwas a valuable thing, that he had no share in such barbarity.
5. It is therefore impossible to go distinctly over every in­stance of these men's iniquity. I shall, therefore, speak mymind here at once briefly, that neither did any other city eversuffer such miseries, nor did any age ever breed a generationmore fruitful in wickedness than this was, from the beginningof the world. Finally, they brought the Hebrew nation intocontempt, that they might themselves appear comparativelyless impious with regard to strangers. They confessed, whatwas true, that they were the slaves, the scum, and the spu­rious and abortive offspring of our nation, while they over­threw the city themselves, and forced the Romans, whetherthey would or no, to gain a melancholy reputation by actinggloriously against them, and did almost draw that fire upon







OCR Output













OCR Output








DISSERTATION II. ,501


Jewish prophet Micah1 implies, when he inquires, "Where­with shall I come before the Lord, and bow myself beforethe High God ? Shall I come before him with burnt-offerings,with calves of a year old ? "Will the Lord be pleased withthousands of rams, with ten thousands of fakids of the goats?Shall I give my first-born for my transgression, the fruit ofmy body for the sin of my soul ?" No, certainly, " for hehath showed thee, O man, what is good; and what doth theLord require of thee, but to do justly, and to love mercy,and to humble thyself, to walk with thy God ?"
It is true, God did here try the faith and obedience ofAbraham to himself, whether they were as strong as the Pa­gans exhibited to their demons or idols; yet did ho withaltake effectual care, and that by a miraculous interpositionalso, to prevent the execution, and provided himself a ramas a vicarious substitute, to supply the place of Isaac imme­diately. "2 And the angel of the Lord called unto Abraham,and said, Abraham, Abraham; and he said, Here am I; andhe said, Lay not thine hand upon the lad, neither do thouany thing unto him ; for now I know that thou fearest God,seeing thou hast not withheld thy son, thine only son, fromme. And Abraham lifted up his eyes and looked, and be­hold a ram caught in a thicket by his horns; and Abrahamwent and took the ram, and offered him up for a burnt-offer­ing in the stead of his son." Thus though Jeptha3 has bymany been thought to have vowed to offer up his only daugh­ter and child for a sacrifice, and that as bound on him, uponsupposition of his vow, by a divine law, Lev. xxvii. 28, 29,of which opinion I was once myself; yet upon more matureconsideration I have, for some time, thought this to be a mis­take, and that his vow extended only to her being devoted tcserve God at the tabernacle, or elsewhere, in a state of per­petual virginity; and that neither that law did enjoin anyhuman sacrifices, nor do we meet with any example of itsexecution in this sense afterwards. Philo never mentionsany such law, no more than Josephus: and when Josephus


1 Micah, Ti. 6-8. ' Gen. xxii. 11-13. * Judges, xi. 3(5-39.







OCR Output








200 THE ROMANS TAKE [B. V.


that this was a delusion, he perceived that mercy in war is apernicious thing, because such cunning tricks have less placeunder the exercise of greater severity. So he caused theengine to work more strongly than before, on account of hisanger at the deceit put upon him. But Castor and his com­panions set the tower on fire when it began to give way, andleaped through the flame into a hidden vault that was underit, which made the Romans farther suppose that they weremen of great courage, as having cast themselves into the fire.


CHAPTER VIII.
HOW THE ROMANS TOOK THE SECOND WALL, AND GOT ALLREADY FOR TAKING THE THIRD WALL.
§ 1. Now Ciesar took this wall there on the fifth day afterhe had taken the first; and when the Jews had fled from him,he entered into it, with a thousand armed men, and those ofhis choice troops, and this at a place where were the mer­chants of wool, the braziers, and the market for cloth, andwhere the narrow streets led obliquely to the wall. Where­fore, if Titus had either demolished a larger part of the wallimmediately, or had come in, and, according to the law of war,had laid waste what was left, this victory would not, I sup­pose, have been mixed with any loss to himself. But now, outof the hope he had that he should make the Jews ashamed oftheir obstinacy, by not being willing, when he was able, toafflict them more than he needed to do, he did not widen thebreach of the wall, in order to make a safer retreat uponoccasion: for he did not think they would lay snares for himthat did them such a kindness. When, therefore, he came in,he did not permit his soldiers to kill any of those they caught,nor to set fire to their houses neither; nay, he gave leave tothe seditious, if they had a mind, to fight without any harmto the people, and promised to restore the people's effects tothem, for ho was very desirous to preserve the city for hisown sake, and the temple for the sake of the city. As to the







OCR Output








332 MASADA AND THE SICARII. [B. VII


and his Sicarii got possession of the fortress by treachery.These fruits were also fresh and full ripe, and no way inferiorto such fruits newly laid in, although they were little short of ahundred yearsl from the laying in these provisions [by Herod]till the place was taken by the Romans; nay, indeed, whenthe Romans got possession of those fruits that were left, theyfound them not corrupted all that while; nor should we bemistaken if we supposed that the air was here the cause oftheir enduring so long, this fortress being so high, and so freefrom the mixture of all terrene and muddy particles of matter.There was also found here a large quantity of all sorts of wea­pons of war, which had been treasured up by that king, andwere sufficient for ten thousand men: there was cast iron, andbrass, and tin, which show that he had taken much pains tohave all things here ready for the greatest occasions: for thereport goes how Herod thus prepared this fortress on his ownaccount, as a refuge against two kinds of danger; the one,for fear of the multitude of the Jews, lest they should deposehim, and restore their former kings to the government: theother danger was greater and more terrible, which arose fromCleopatra, queen of Egypt, who did not conceal her inten­tions, but spake often to Antony, and desired him to cut offHerod, and entreated him to bestow the kingdom of Judcaupon her. And certainly it is a great wonder that Antonydid never comply with her commands on this point, as he wasso miserably enslaved to his passion for her; nor should anyone have been surprised if she had been gratified in such herrequest. So the fear of these dangers made Herod rebuildMasada, and thereby leave it for the finishing stroke of theRomans in this Jewish war.
5. Since, therefore, the Roman commander Silva had nowbuilt a wall on the outside round about this whole place, as wehave said already, and had thereby made a most accurateprovision to prevent any one of the besieged running away,he undertook the siege itself, though he found but one singleplace that would admit of the banks ho was to raise: for bc­


1 Pliny and others confirm this strange paradox, that provisions laid upagainst sieges will continue good a hundred years, as Spaubciui notes uponthis plac<>.







OCR Output








388 FLAVIUSJOSEPHUS [B. I.


and in weight two talents; upon these there is a light thatis never extinguished either by night or by day. There isno image, nor any thing, nor any donations therein;nothing at all is there planted, neither grove, nor any thingof that sort. The priests abide therein both nights and days,performing certain purifications, and drinking not the leastdrop of wine while they are in the temple." Moreover, heattests that we Jews went as auxiliaries along with king Alex­ander, and after him with his successors. I will add farther,what he says ho learned, when he was himself with the samoarmy, concerning the actions of a man that was a Jew. Hiswords arc these : — "As I was myself going to the Red Sea,there followed us a man whose name was Mosollam: he wasone of the Jewish horsemen who conducted us: he was a per­son of great courage, of a strong body, and by all allowed tobe the most skilful archer that was either among the Greeksor Barbarians. Now this man, as people were in great num­bers passing along the road, and a certain augur was ob­serving an augury by a bird, and requiring them all to standstill, inquired what they staid for? Hereupon the augurshowed liim the bird from whence he took his augury, andtold him, that if the bird staid where he was, they ought allto stand still, but that if he got up and fled onward, theymust go forward; but that if he flew backward, they mustretire again. Mosollam made no reply, but drew his bow,and shot at the bird, and hit him, and killed him ; and as theaugur and some others were very angry, and wished impreca­tions upon him, he answered them thus : — "Why are you somad as to take this most unhappy bird into your hands ? forhow can this bird give us any true information concerningour march who could not foresee how to save himself? forhad he been able to foreknow what was future, he would nothave come to this place, but would have been afraid lest Mo­sollam the Jew should shoot at him and kill him." But ofHecatcus's testimonies we have said enough; for as to suchas desire to know more of them, they may easily obtain themfrom his book itself. However, I shall not think it too muchfor me to name Agatharchides, as having made mention of







OCR Output








C. VII.] VESPASIAN. 39


that they might not be affrighted at it, and that, to avoid themultitude of the enemy's darts, they should bend down ontheir knees, and cover themselves with their shields; andthat they should retreat a little backward for a while, till thearchers should have emptied their quivers; but that, whenthe Romans should lay their instruments for ascending thewalls, they should leap out on the sudden, and with their owninstruments should meet the enemy; and that every oneshould strive to do his best, in order not to defend his owncity, as if it were possible to be preserved, but in order torevenge it when it was already destroyed; and that theyshould set before their eyes how their old men were to beslain, and their children and wives were to be killed imme­diately by the enemy; and that they would beforehand spendall their fury on account of the calamities just coming uponthem, and pour it out on the actors."
26. And thus did Josephus dispose of both his bodies ofmen : but then for the useless part of the citizens, the womenand children, when they saw their city encompassed by athreefold army (for none of the usual guards that had beenfighting before were removed;) when they also saw not onlythe walls thrown down, but their enemies, with swords intheir hands, as also the hilly country above them shining withtheir weapons, and the darts in the hands of the Arabianarchers, they made a final and lamentable outcry of destruc­tion, as if the misery were not only threatened, but actuallycome upon them already. But Josephus ordered the womento be shut up in their houses, lest they should render thewarlike actions of the men too effeminate, by making themcommiserate their condition, and commanded them to holdtheir peace, and threatened them if they did not, while hecame himself before the breach, where his allotment was ; forall those who brought ladders to the other places he took nonotice of them, but earnestly waited for the shower of arrowsthat was coming.
27. And now the trumpeters of the several Roman legion3sounded together, and the army made a terrible shout, andth? darts, as by order, flew so fast, that they intercepted the







OCR Output













OCR Output








C. VIII.] MAS A DA AND THE SICARII. 338


hind that tower which secured the road that led to the palaceand to the top of the hill, from the west, there was a certaineminency of the rock, very hroad and very prominent, butthree hundred cubits beneath the highest part of Masada; itwas called the white promontory. Accordingly, he got uponthat part of the rock, and ordered the army to bring earth ;and when they fell to that work with alacrity, and abundanceof them together, the bank was raised, and became solid, fortwo hundred cubits in height. Yet was not this bank thoughtsufficiently high for the use of the engines that were to be setupon it; but still another elevated work of great stones com­pacted together was raised upon that bank: this was fiftycubits both in breadth and height. The other machines thatwere now got ready were like to those that had been firstdevised by Vespasian, and afterwards by Titus, for sieges.There was also a tower made of the height of sixty cubits, andall over plated with iron, out of which the Romans threwdarts and stones from the engines, and soon made those thatfought from the walls of the place to retire, and would not letthem lift up their heads above the works. At the same timeSilva ordered that great battering-ram which he had made tobe brought thither, and to be set against the wall, and tomake frequent batteries against it, which, with some difficulty,broke down a part of the wall, and quite overthrew it. How­ever, the Sicarii made haste, and presently built another wallwithin that, which should not be liable to the same misfor­tune from the machines with the other : it was made soft andyielding, and so was capable of avoiding the terrible blowsthat affected the other. It was framed after the followingmanner : — They laid together great beams of wood length­ways, one close to the end of another, and the same way inwhich they were cut: there were two of these rows parallelto one another, and laid at such a distance from each otheras the breadth of the wall required, and earth was put intothe space between those rows. Now, that the earth mightnot fall away upon the elevation of this bank to a greaterheight, they farther laid other beams over across them, andthereby bound those beams together that lay lengthways.







OCR Output








C.X.] THE SICAR1I AT ALEXANDRIA. 347


to confess, that Caesar was their lord; hut they preservedtheir own opinion, in spite of all the distress they werebrought to, as if they received those torments and the fire it­self with bodies insensible of pain, and with a soul that inmanner rejoiced under them. But what was most of all .as­tonishing to the beholders, was the age of the children; fornot one of these children was so far overcome by these tor­ments as to name Caesar for their lord. • So far does thestrength of the courage [of the soul] prevail over the weak­ness of the body.
2. Now Lupus did then govern Alexandria; who presentlysent Caesar word of this commotion; who having in suspicionthe restless temper of the Jews for innovation, and beingafraid lest they should get together again, and persuade someothers to join with them, gave orders to Lupus to demolishthat Jewish temple1 which was in the region called Onion,and was in Egypt, which was built, and had its denominationfrom the occasion following: —Onias, the son of Simon, oneof the Jewish high-priests, fled from Antiochus, the king ofSyria, when he made war with the Jews, and came to Alex­andria ; and as Ptolemy received him very kindly, on accountof his hatred to Antiochus, ho assured him, that, if he wouldcomply with his proposal, he would bring all the Jews to hisassistance; and when the king agreed to do it so far as hewas able, he desired him to give him leave to build a templesomewhere in Egypt, and to worship God according to thecustoms of his own country; for that the Jews would thenbe so much readier to fight against Antiochus, who had laidwaste the temple at Jerusalem; and that they would thencome to him with greater good-will; and that, by grantingthem liberty of conscience, very many of them would comeover to him.


1 Of this temple of Onias's building in Egypt, see the notes on Antiq. B.xiii. ch. iii. sect. 1. But whereas it is elsewhere, both Of the War, B. i. ch. i.scot. 1, ami in the Antiquities us now quoted, said, that this temple was liketo that at Jerusalem, and here that it was not like il, but like a tower, sect. 3,there is some reason to suspect the reading here, and that either the negativeparticle is here to be blotted out, or the word entirely added.







OCR Output








INDEX. 547


Cherubim, their shape not known, ii.20.
Christ and Christians, iii. 148.
Chusarthes, or Cushan, oppresses theIsraelites, i. 357.
Chushi, or Hushai, i. 509.
Cutheans, who they were, and whencethey came, ii. 145; go to Samaria,182; hinder the rebuilding of thetemple, 217.
Cinuamus, iii. 272.
Circumcision is received in Palestineby the Jews, iv. 382; its institu­tion, i. 104; the Arabians circum­cise their children after the 13thyear of their age, 109; tho Syriansin Palestine received it from theEgyptians, ii. 59; not to be forcedupou any body, i. 32; the Idumeausforced to be circumcised, and be­come Jews, or leave their country,ii. 374; the Itureans forced to becircumcised, 386.
Classicus, iv. 307.
Claudius Coesar, iii. 227, 236; isdragged out of a coiner to the im­perial dignity, ib., 487; is favoredby the army, 238; his liberalityto Agrippa, 246; his edict, infavor of the Jews, 247; his let­ter to the Jews, 263; he dies, 286,494.
Clement, iii. 209.
Cleopatra, daughter of Antiochusmarried to Ptolemy, ii. 283.
Cleopatra, wife of Philometer, ii.339; she takes up nrms againstPtolemy, 391; makes an alliancewith Alexander, ib.; takes Pto-leinais, 392.
Cleopatra, wife of Demetrius II., ii.3ti8; married to Antiochus Soter,ib.
Cleopatra, queen of Egypt, meets An­tony, ii. 463 ; her cruelty and ava­rice, 506; iii. 384; kills her sisterArsinoe, ii. 506; obtains part ofArabia and Judea, 507; temptsHerod to lie with her, ib.; Herodconducts her towards Egypt, 508.
Cleopatra (Selene) besieged by Ti-granes, ii. 405; iii. 333.
Cleopatra of Jerusalem, the wife ofHerod, iii. 74, 428.
Cleopatra, wife of Florus, iii. 303.
Clitus, author of a rebellion at Ti­


berias, i. 40; cuts off his left hand,
41 ; iii. 558.Cluvius, iii. 217.Collega (Cneus,) iv. 304.Colonies in and out of Italy, iii. 248.Columns in the land of Siriad, i. 83;
Corinthian, in Solomon's palace, ii.
32; in Herod's temple, iv. 180.Commandments written upon two
tables, i. 219; by the hand of God,
220 ; not to have their very words
published, 219.Conscience of good actions is safer to
bo relied on, that on tho conceal­ment of evil ones, i. 140.Conspiracy against Herod, ii. 538, et
teq.Convention of Asia at Ancyra, iii. 33 ;
at Jerusalem, i. 27.Coponius, iii. 136, 141, 471.Coracinus, a fish, iv. 68.Corban, or sacred treasure, iii. 482.Cores, or Korah, raises a sedition, i.
264; perishes, 271.Corinthus, iii. 80; an Arabian by
birth, 431.Cornelius Faustus, ii. 420; iii. 340.Cornelius, iv. 260.Corus, o Jewish measure, i. 260.Costobarus, an Idumcan, Salome's
husband, ii. 533.Costobarus, a ringleader of the rob­bers, iii. 297.Cotylas, or Zeno, ii. 370 ; iii. 322.Cotys, king, iii. 256.Cow, the red cow for purification, i.
276.Coze, or Koze, Idumcan Idol, ii. 533.Crassus, succeeds Gabinius, ii. 426;
arrives in Judea, and plunders
the temple of its treasures, 427;
perishes in an expedition, iii. 346.Creation of the world, i. 75.Crown or mitre of the high-priest, i.
229.Cumanus, iii. 278, 490.Curses denounced from Mount Ebal,
i. 319, 337.Cuspius Fadus, procurator, ii. 561;
iii. 261, 489.Customs or taxes of Syria. Phoenicia,
Judea, and Samaria, 8000 talents,
ii. 28U.Cypros, King Agrippa's wife, iii. 489.Cypros, Antipater senior's wife, ii.
429; iii. 346.







OCR Output








266 THE ROMANS FIRE [B. VI.


sudden, and caught hold of the cloisters. Upon the Jewsseeing this fire all about them, their spirits sunk, togetherwith their bodies, and they were under such astonishmentthat not one of them made any haste either to defend him­self or to quench the fire, but they stood as mute spectatorsof it only. However, they did not so grieve at the loss ofwhat was now burning as to grow wiser thereby for the timeto come; but, as though the holy house itself had been on firealready, they whetted their passions against the Romans.This fire prevailed during that day and the next also; for thesoldiers were not able to burn all the cloisters that wereround about together at one time, but only by pieces.
3. But then, on the next day, Titus commanded part ofhis army to quench the fire, and to make a road for the moreeasy marching up of the legions, while he himself gatheredthe commanders together. Of those there were assembledthe six principal persons, Tiberius Alexander, the commander[under the general] of the whole army, with Sextus Cercalis,the commander of the fifth legion, and Larcius Lepidus thecommander of the tenth legion, and Titus Frigius, the com­mander of the fifteenth legion; there was also with themEternius, the leader of the two legions that came from Alex­andria, and Marcus Antonius Julianus, procurator of Judca ;after these came together also the rest of the procurators andtribunes. Titus proposed to these, that they should givehim their advice what should be done about the holy house.Now some of these thought " it would be the best way to actaccording to the rules of war [and demolish it,] because thoJews would never leave off rebelling while that house wasstanding, at which house it was that they used to get all to­gether." Others of them were of opinion, that "in case theJews would leave it, and none of them would lay their armsup in it, he might save it; but that in case they got upon it,and fought any more, he might burn it; because it must thenbe looked upon not as a holy house, but as a citadel; andthat the impiety of burning it would then belong to thosethat forced this to be done, and not to them." But Tit'assaid, that "although the Jews should get upon that holy







OCR Output








10 VESPASIAN. [B. III.


were bidden upon the least intimation. So they were easilybeaten; for as soon as ever their first ranks were once in dis­order, they were put to flight by the enemy's cavalry; andthose of them that came behind such as crowded to the wallfell upon their own party's weapons, and became one another'senemies, and this so long till they all were forced to give wayto the attacks of the horsemen, and were dispersed all overthe plain; which plain was wide, and all fit for the horse­men ; which circumstance was very commodious for the Ro­mans, and occasioned the slaughter of the greatest numberof the Jews; for such as ran away they could overrun themand make them turn back; and when they had brought themback after their flight, and driven them together, they ranthem through, and slew a vast number of them, insomuchthat others encompassed others of them, and drove them be­fore them whithersoever they turned themselves, and slewthem easily with their arrows; and the great number therewere of the Jews seemed a solitude to themselves, by reasonof the distress they were in, while the Romans had such goodsuccess with their small number, that they seemed to them­selves to be the greater multitude. And as the former strovezealously under their misfortunes, out of the shame of a suddenflight, and hopes of the change in their success, so did thelatter feel no weariness, by reason of their good fortune; in­somuch that the fight lasted till the evening, till ten thousandmen of the Jews' side lay dead, with two of their generals,John and Silas, and the greater part of the remainder werewounded, with Niger, their remaining general, who fled awaytogether to a small city of Idumea called Sallis: some fewalso of the Romaus were wounded in this battle.
3. Yet were not the spirits of the Jews broken by so greata calamity, but the losses they had sustained rather quickenedtheir resolution for other attempts; for, overlooking the deadbodies which lay under their feet, they were enticed by theirformer glorious actions to venture on a second destruction;so when they had lain still so little a while that their woundswere not yet thoroughly cured, they got together all theirforces, and came with greater fury, and in much greater







OCR Output








68 THE COUNTRY OF (JENNES A RETH. [B. III.


can grow upon it, and the inhabitants, accordingly, plant allsorts of trees there; for the temper of the air is so wellmixed, that it agrees very well with those several sorts; par­ticularly walnuts, which require the coldest air, flourish therein vast plenty; there are palm-trees also, which grow best inhot air ; fig-trees also and olives grow near them, which yetrequire an air that is more temperate. One may call thisplace the ambition of nature, where it forces those plantsthat are naturally enemies to one another to agree together:it is a happy contention of the seasons, as if every one ofthem laid claim to this country; for it not only nourishesdifferent sorts of autumnal fruits beyond men's expectation,but preserves them also a great while; it supplies men withthe principal fruits, with grapes} and figs, continually, duringten months of the year, and the rest of the fruits as theybecome ripe together through the whole year: for, besidesthe good temperature of the air, it is also watered from amost fertile fountain. The people of the country called itCapharnaum: some have thought it to bo a vein of the Nile,because it produces the Coracin fish, as well as that lake doeswhich is near to Alexandria. The length of this countryextends itself along the banks of this lake that bears thesame name for thirty furlongs, and is in breadth twenty.And this is the nature of the place.
9. But now, when the vessels were gotten ready, Vespasianput on ship-board as many of his forces as he thought sufficientto be too hard for those that were upon the lake, and set sailafter them. Now these which were driven into the lake couldneither fly to the land, where all was in their enemies' handand in war against them; nor could they fight upon the level


1 It may be worth our while to observe here, that near this lake ofGenncsarcth, grapes and figs hang on the trees ten months of the year.We may observe also, that in Cyril of Jerusalem, Cateches. xviii. 3, whichwas delivered not long before Easter, there were no fresh leaves of fig-treesnor bunches of fresh grapes in Judca; so that when St. Mark says, ch. li.13, that our Savior, soon after the same time of the year, came and fouadleaves on a fig-treo near Jerusalem, but no figs, became the time of new fysripening tvas not yet, he says very true ; nor were they, therefore, other thanold leaves which our Savior saw, and old figs which he expected, and whicheven with us commonly hang on the trees all winter long.







OCR Output








84 SURRENDER OF 0, ISCIIALA. [B. IV.


taken up by the robbers, who were also the guard at thegates, in order to prevent any of the rest from going out inorder to propose terms of submission, and from receiving anyof the horsemen into the city. But John returned Titus thisanswer, that " for himself he was content to hearken to hisproposals, and that he would either persuade or force thosethat refused them. Yet he said that Titus ought to havesuch regard to the Jewish law, as to grant them leave tocelebrate that day, which was the seventh day of the week,on which it was unlawful not only to remove their arms, buteven to treat of peace also; and that even the Romans werenot ignorant how the period of the seventh day was amongthem a cessation from all labors; and that he who shouldcompel them to transgress the law about that day would beequally guilty with those that were compelled to transgressit: and that this delay could be of no disadvantage to him:for why should any body think of doing any thing in thenight, unless it was to fly away ? which he might prevent byplacing his camp round about them : and that they shouldthink it a great point gained, if they might not be obligedto transgress the laws of their country; and that it wouldbe a right thing for him, who designed to grant them peacewithout their expectation of such a favor, to preserve the lawsof those they saved inviolable." Thus did this man put atrick upon Titus, not so much out of regard to the seventhday as to his own preservation; for he was afraid lest heshould be quite deserted, if the city should be taken, and hadhis hopes of life in that night, and in his flight therein. Nowthis was the work of God, who, therefore, preserved this John,that he might bring on the destruction of Jerusalem ; as also,it was his work that Titus was prevailed with by this pretencefor a delay, and that ho pitched his camp farther off the cityat Cydessa. This Cydessa was a strong Mediterranean villageof the Tyrians, which always hated and made war against theJews; it had also a great number of inhabitants, and waswell fortified, which made it a proper place for such as wereenemies to the Jewish nation.
4. Now, in the night-time, when John saw that there was







OCR Output








C. II.] TITUS AT JERUSALEM. 167


more of them, and put them all to flight, and made them runaway hastily down the valley. Now, as these Jews sufferedgreatly in the declivity of the valley, so, when they weregotten over it, they turned about and stood over against theRomans, having the valley between them, and there foughtwith them. Thus did they continue the fight till noon ; butwhen it was already a little after noon, Titus set those thatcame to the assistance of the Romans with him, and thosethat belonged to the cohorts, to prevent the Jews from makingany more sallies, and then sent the rest of the legion to thenpper part of the mountain to fortify their camp.
5. This march of the Romans seemed to the Jews to be aflight; and as the watchman that was placed upon the wallgave a signal by shaking his garment, there came out a freshmultitude of Jews, and that with such mighty violence, thatone might compare it to the running of the most terrible wildbeasts. To say the truth, none of those that opposed themcould sustain the fury with which they made their attacks;but, as if they had been cast out of an engine, they brakethe enemy's ranks to pieces, who were put to flight, and ranaway to the mountain; none but Titus himself, and a fewothers with him, being left in the midst of the acclivity. Nowthese others, who were his friends, despised the danger theywere in, and were ashamed to leave their general, earnestlyexhorting him, " to give way to these Jews that are fond ofdying, and not to run into such dangers before those thatought to stay before him ; to consider what his fortune was,and not, by supplying the place of a common soldier, to ven­ture to turn back upon the enemy so suddenly; and this be­cause he was general in the war, and lord of the habitableearth, on whose preservation the public affairs do all depend."These persuasions Titus seemed not so much as to hear, butopposed those that ran upon him, and smote them on theface; and when he had forced them to go back, he slew them:he also fell upon great numbers as they marched down thehill, and thrust them forward ; while those men were so amazedat his courage and his strength, that they could not fly directly







OCR Output








210 TITUS RESUME6 [B. V.


when the madness of Aristohulus and Hyrcanus, and ourmutual quarrels, brought Pompey upon this city, and whenGod reduced those under subjection to the Romans who wereunworthy of the liberty they had enjoyed. After a siege,therefore, of three months, they were forced to surrenderthemselves, although they had not been guilty of suchoffences with regard to our sanctuary and our laws as youhave; and this while they had much greater advantages togo to war than you have. Do not we know what endAntigonus, the son of Aristobulus, came to, under whosereign God provided that this city should be taken again uponaccount of the people's offences ? When Herod, the son ofAntipater, brought upon us Sosius, and Sosius brought uponus the Roman army, they were then encompassed and be­sieged for six months, till, as a punishment for their sins,they were taken, and the city was plundered by the enemy.Thus it appears that arms were never given to our nation,but that we are always given up to be fought against and tobe taken ; for I suppose that such as inhabit this holy placeought to commit the disposal of all things to God, and thenonly to disregard the assistance of men, when they resignthemselves up to their arbitrator who is above. As for you,what have you done of those things that are recommendedby our legislator ? and what have you not done of those thingsthat he hath condemned ? How much more impious are youthan those which were so quickly taken ? You have notavoided so much as those sins that are usually done in secret;I mean thefts and treacherous plots against men, and adul­teries. You are quarrelling about rapines and murders, andinvent strange ways of wickedness. Nay, the temple itselfis become the receptacle of all, and this divine place ispolluted by the hands of those of our own country; whichplace hath yet been reverenced by the Romans, when it wasat a distance from them, when they have suffered many oftheir own customs to give place to our law. And, after allthis, do you expect him whom you have so impiously abusedto be your supporter ? To be sure, then you have a right tobe petitioners, and to call upon him to assist you, so pure are







OCR Output








CONTENTS OF VOL. IV.


THE JEWISH WAR.—CONTINUED


BOOK III.
Containing the interval of about one year, from Ves­
pasian's COMING TO SUBDUE THE JEWS TO THE TAKING
OF GRANADA PAGE 7
BOOK IV.
Containing the interval of about one year, from the
siege of gamala to the coming of titus to besiege
jerusalem 72
BOOK V.
Containing the interval of near six months, from
the coming of titus to besiege jerusalem to the
great extremity to which the jews were reduced... 155
BOOK VI.
Containing the interval of about one month, from
the great extremity to which tne jews were re­
duced to the taking of jerusalem by titus 235
BOOK VII.
Containing the interval of about three years, from
the taking of jerusalem by titus to the sedition
of the jews at cyrene 296


(Hi)







OCR Output








396 KLAVIUS JOSEPHUB [B. I.


but were not satisfied till they had been guilty of sacrilege,and destroyed the images of the gods, and used them inroasting of those sacred animals that used to be worshipped,and forced the priests and prophets to be the executionersand murderers of those animals, and then ejected them nakedout of the country. It was also reported, that the priest whoordained their polity and their laws was by birth of Heliopolis,and his name Osarsiph, from Osyris, who was the god ofHeliopolis; but that, when he was gone over to these people,his name was changed, and he was called Mooes."
27. This is what the Egyptians relate about the Jews, withmuch more, which I omit for the sake of brevity.—But stillManetho goes on, that " after this Amenophis returned backfrom Ethiopia with a great army, as did his son Rhampseswith another army also; and that both of them joined battlewith the shepherds and the polluted people, and beat them,and slew a great many of them, and pursued them to thebounds of Syria." These and the like accounts are writtenby Manetho. But I will demonstrate that he trifles, and tellsarrant lies, after I have made a distinction which will relateto what I am going to say about him: for this Manetho hadgranted and confessed that this nation was not originallyEgyptian, but that they had come from another country, andsubdued Egypt, and then went away again out of it. But thatthose Egyptians who were thus diseased in their bodies werenot mingled with us afterward, and that Moses who broughtthe people out was not one of that company, but lived manygenerations earlier, I shall endeavor to demonstrate fromManetho's own accounts themselves.
28. Now for the first occasion of this fiction, Manetho sup­poses what is no better than a ridiculous thing; for he saysthat " King Amenophis desired to see the gods." What gods,I pray, did he desire to see ? If he meant the gods whomtheir laws ordained to be worshipped, the ox, the goat, thocrocodile, and the baboon, he saw them already ; but for theheavenly gods, how could he see them, and what should occa­sion this his desire ? To be sure,1 it was because another king


1 Gt. By Jupiter.







OCR Output








540 INDEX.


iEneas, succeeds Obodas, iii. 53.
iEsop, a servant, ii. 499.
^Ethiopian commodities were slavesand monkeys, ii. 42.
Agag, i. 418; is killed, 413.
Agar, or Hagar, and Ishmael, are sentaway by Abraham, i. 110.
AyyapciaBai, or forcible pressure, takenoff the Jews by Demetrius, ii. 330.
Aggcus, or Haggai, the prophet, ii.217; he prophecies at the rebuild­ing of the temple, 219.
Agones, or games, instituted by Herod,ii. 536; at the finishing Coesarea,iii. 29.
Agrippa, (Marcus) his bounty towardstho Jews, ii. 279; splendidly enter­tained by Herod, iii. 9; makes equalreturns to him, iii. 10; his expedi­tion to the Bosphorus, ib.; hearsthe cause of the Jews in Ionia, iii.11 ; confirms their privileges, iii.10; his letter to the Ephesiaus, infavor of the Jews, 34 ; and to thoseof Cyrene, ib.
Agrippa the Great, or elder, Herod'sgrandson, iii. 76, 425; his adven­tures, 102; is imprisoned, 170; hisliberty and happiness foretold, 171;released, and made lord of twotetrarchies, with the title of king,177 ; gives Caius a sumptuous en­tertainment at Rome, 187 ; is sentto Claudius, 241 ; his advice toClaudius, ib.; Claudius bestows onhim almost all the dominions of hisgrandfather, 240; his eulogium,255; his bounty towards those ofBerytus, 250; he treats severalkings splendidly, ib.; entertainsCmsarca with shows, and appearshimself upon the stage in a magni­ficent dress, 257; dies soon after,259; his death and children, 489.Agrippa, his son by Cypros, iii. 489;did not immediately succeed in hisfather's kingdom, 201 ; Claudiusgave him that of his undo Herod,27.H; to which he added the tetrar­chies of Philip and Lysanias, 284;is hurt at tho siege of Gamala, iv.74 ; his letters to Josephus, i. 03 ;his speech to the Jews, to dissuadethem from a war with the Romans,iii. 571.Agrippa, son of Felix, iii. 285.


Agrippa Fonteius slain, iv. 308.
Ahab, ii. 70; reproved by Elijah, 78 ;fights with Benhadad, 82; pardoushim, 84; is afterwards killed bythe Syrians, 90; his sons, 117.
Ahaz, the king of Judah, ii. 139.
Ahaziah, king of Israel, ii. 95.
Ahaziah, king of Judah, ii. 114.
Ahijah, the prophet, ii. 47.
Ahimelecb, or Achimclcch, slain bythe order of Saul, i. 442.
Ahitophel, or Achitophel, i. 505;gives evil counsel, 509: hangs him­self, 512.
Ai besieged, i. 331 ; taken, 333.
Aizel, or Uzal, i. 97.
Alans, iv. 325.
Albinus, iii. 295.
Alcimus, or Jacimus, ii. 321; calum­niates Judas, 322; dies. 325.
Alcyon, a physician, ii. 227.
Alexander Lysimachus, the alabarch,iii. 104, 247, 278.
Alexander, the son of Alexander, byGlaphyra, iii. 425.
Alexander, the son of Antiochus Epi-phanes, ii. 334; surnamed Balas,ib. in note; king of Syria, 335; hisletter to Jonathan, ib.; engages ina battle with Demetrius, 338; de­mands Ptolemy's daughter in mar­riage, 343 ; is killed in Arabia, andhis head sent to Ptolemy, 348.
Alexander and Aristobulus, Herod'ssons, strangled by their father'sorder, iii. 08, 425.
Alexander, the son of Aristobulus, ii.423; iii. 342; makes war upon theRomans, 343; is conquered, 311;killed, ii. 430; iii. 347.
Alexander Janneus succeeds his bro­ther Aristobulus, iii. 327; a sedi­tion raised against him, 328; hisexpedition against Ptolemais, ii.387; is called Thracida, for hisbarbarous cruelty, 397; dies of aquartan ague, 401; iii. 331; hissons Hyrcanus and Aristobulus, ii.402.
Alexander the Great succeeds his fa­ther Philip, ii. 251; conquers Da­rius, 203; pursues his victories,ib.; sends a letter to the high-priest at Jerusalem, ib.; goes toJerusalem, 254; his dream, 255;adores tho name of God on the







OCR Output








0. IV.] COME TO JERUSALEM. 10]


to call in the Idumeans; so they wrote a bhfrrt" letter to thiseffect, that "Ananus had imposed on the people,, and wasbetraying their metropolis to the Romans; that they them­selves had revolted from the rest, and were in custody in thetemple, on account of the preservation of their liberty: .thatthere was but a small time left wherein they might hope fortheir deliverance; and that unless they would come iou-"mediately to their assistance, they should themselves be soosr"in the power of Ananus, and the city would bo in the powerof the Romans." They also charged the messengers to tellmany more circumstances to the rulers of the Idumeans.Now there were two active men proposed for the carryingthis message, and such as were well able to speak, and topersuade them that things were in this posture; and, whatwas a qualification still more necessary than the former, theywere very swift of foot; for they knew well enough thatthese would immediately comply with their desires, as beingever a tumultuous and disorderly nation, always on the watchupon every motion, delighting in mutations; and upon yourflattering them ever so little, and petitioning them, they soontake their arms, and put themselves into motion, and makehaste to a battle, as if it were to a feast. There was, indeed,occasion for quick dispatch in the carrying of this message,in which point the messengers were no way defective. Boththeir names were Ananias; and they soon came to the rulersof the Idumeans.
2. Now these rulers were greatly surprised at the contentsof the letter, and at what those that came with it further toldthem ; whereupon they ran about the nation like madmen,and made proclamation that the people should come to war;so a multitude was suddenly gotten together, sooner, indeed,than the time appointed in the proclamation, and every bodycaught up their arms, in order to maintain the liberty oftheir metropolis ; and twenty thousand of them were put intobattle-array, and came to Jerusalem under four commanders,John, and Jacob the son of Sosas; and besides these wereSimon the son of Cathlas, and Phincas the son of Clusothus.
3. Now this exit of the messengers was not known either


9*







OCR Output








C. V.] T H E I D U SI E A N S. 115


tended accusation, and in a few words confuted the crimeslaid to bis charge; after which he turned his speech to hisaccusers, and went over distinctly all their transgressions ofthe law, and made heavy lamentations upon the confusionthey had brought public affairs to. In the mean time thezealots grew tumultuous, and had much ado to abstain fromdrawing their swords, although they designed to preserve theappearance and show of a judicature to the end. They werealao desirous, on other accounts, to try the judges, whetherthey would be mindful of what was just at their own peril.Now the seventy judges brought in their verdict, that theperson accused was not guilty, as choosing rather to die them­selves with him, than to have his death laid at their doors:hereupon there arose a great clamor of the zealots upon hisacquittal; and they all had indignation at the judges, for notunderstanding that the authority that was given them wasbut in jest. So two of the boldest of them fell upon Zacha-rias in the middle of the temple, and slew him; and as hefell down dead, they bantered him, and said, — " Thou hastalso our verdict, and this will prove a more sure acquittal tothee than the other." They also threw him down from thetemple immediately into the valley beneath it. Moreover theystruck the judges with the backs of their swords, by way ofabuse, and thrust them out of the court of the temple; andspared their lives with no other design than that, when theywere dispersed among the people in the city, they might be­come their messengers, to let them know they were no betterthan slaves.
5. But by this time the Idumcans repented of their coming,and were displeased at what had been done; and when theywere assembled together by one of the zealots, who had comeprivately to them, he declared to them what a number ofwicked pranks they had themselves done in conjunction withthose that had invited them, and gave a particular accountof what mischiefs had been done against their metropolis. Hosaid that " they had taken arms as though the high-priestswere betraying their metropolis to the Romans, but had found







OCR Output








29-1 BRIEF HISTORY OF JERUSALEM. [B. VI.


so he was reserved for the triumph, and to be then slain ; aswas John condemned to perpetual imprisonment. And nowthe Romans set fire to the extreme parts of the city, andburnt them down, and entirely demolished its walls.


CHAPTER X.
THAT WHEREAS THE CITY OF JERUSALEM HAD BEEN FIVE TIMESTAKEN FORMERLY, THIS WAS THE SECOND TIME OF ITS DESO­LATION. A BRIEF ACCOUNT OF ITS HISTORY.
§ 1. And thus was Jerusalem taken, in the second year ofthe reign of Vespasian, on the eighth day of the monthGorpieus [Elul.] It had been taken five times1 before,though this was the second time of its desolation; forShishak, the king of Egypt, and after him Antiochus, andafter him Pompey, and after them Sosias and Herod tookthe city, but still preserved it: but before all these the kingof Babylon conquered it, and made it desolate, one thousandfour hundred and sixty-eight years and six months after itwas built. But he who first built2 it was a potent man among


1 Besides these fire hero enumerated who had taken Jerusalem of old,Josephus, upon farther recollection, reckons a sixth, Antiq. B. xii. ch. 1.sect. I, who should have been here inserted in the second place, I meanl'tolcmy, the son of Lagus.
2 Why the great Bochart should say, De Phcenic. Colon. B. ii. ch. iv., that"there are in this clause of Josephus as lnany mistakes as words," I do byno means understand. Josephus thought Mclehisedek first built or rebuiltand adorned this city, and that it was then called Salem, as Psal. lxxvi. 2,that it afterward came to be called Jerusalem; and that Melehisedck, beinga priest as well as a king, built to the true God therein a temple or placefor public divine worship and sacrifice; all which things may he very true,for aught we know to the contrary. And for the word aptr or Temple, as ifit must needs belong to the Great Temple built by Solomon long afterward,Josephus himself uses »<ac for the small tabernacle of Moses, Antiq. B. iii.ch. vi. seet. 4. See also Antiq. B. iii. ch. vi. sect. 1, as he here presentlyuses upiv for a large and splendid synagogue of the Jews at Antioch only,B. vii. ch. iii. sect. 3.
Ar. B. This is the proper place for such as have closely attended to theselatter Books of the War, to peruse, and that with equal attention, thosedistinct and plain predictions of Jesus of Nazareth, in the gospels thereto







OCR Output








C. IX.] SIMON OF GBRASA. 139


which was barren. In short, there was no sign remainingof those places that had been laid waste that ever they hadhad a being.
8. This success of Simon excited the zealots afresh; andthough they were afraid to fight him openly in a fair battle,yet did they lay ambushes in the passes, and seized upon hiswife, with a considerable number of her attendants ; where­upon they came back to the city rejoicing, as if they hadtaken Simon himself captive, and were in present expectationthat he would lay down his arms, and make supplication tothem for his wife ; but instead of indulging any merciful affec­tion, he grew very angry at them for seizing his beloved wife;so he came to the wall of Jerusalem, and, like wild beasts whenthey are wounded and cannot overtake those that woundedthem, he vented his spleen upon all persons that he met with.Accordingly, he caught all those that were come out of thecity gates, either to gather herbs or sticks, who were unarmedand in years ; he then tormented them and destroyed them,out of the immense rage he was in, and was almost ready totaste the very flesh of their dead bodies. He also cut off thehands of a great many, and sent them into the city to astonishhis enemies, and in order to make the people fall into asedition, and desert those that had been the authors of hiswife's seizure. He also enjoined them to tell the people, thatSimon swore by the God of the universe, who sees all things,that unless they will restore him his wife, he will break downtheir wall, and inflict the like punishment upon all the citizens,without sparing any age, and without making any distinctionbetween the guilty and the innocent. These threatenings sogreatly affrighted not the people only, but the zealots them­selves also, that they sent his wife back to him, when he be­came a little milder, and left off his perpetual blood-shedding.
9. But now sedition and civil war prevailed not only overJudea, but in Italy also; for now Galba was slain in the midstof the Roman market-place; then was Otho made emperor,and fought against Vitellius, who set up for emperor also, forthe legions in Germany had chosen him. But when he gavebattle to Valens and Cecinna, who were Vitcllius's generals







OCR Output








C. VIII.] SIEGE OF THE UPPER CITY. 287


by himself, that so they might bring out their families withthem, yet did he receive such as these also. However, he setover them such as were to distinguish some from others, inorder to see if any of them deserved to be punished. And,indeed, the number of those that were sold was immense;but of the populace above forty thousand were saved, whomCaesar let go whither every one of them pleased.
3. But now at this time it was that one of the priests, theson of Thebuthus, whose name was Jesus, upon his havingsecurity given him by the oath of Caesar, that he should bepreserved, upon condition that he should deliver to him cer­tain of the precious things that had been reposited in thetemple,1 came out of it, and delivered him from the wall ofthe holy house two candlesticks, like to those that lay in theholy house, with tables, and cisterns, and vials, all made ofsolid gold, and very heavy. He also delivered to him theveils and the garments, with the precious stones, and a greatnumber of other precious vessels that belonged to their sacredworship. The treasurer of the temple also, whose name wasPhineas, was seized on, and showed Titus the coats and gir­dles of the priests, with a great quantity of purple and scar­let, which were there reposited for the uses of the veil, asalso a great deal of cinnamon and cassia,2 with a large quan­tity of other sweet spices, which used to be mixed together,and offered as incense to God every day. A great manyother treasures were also delivered to him, with sacred orna­ments of the temple not a few; which things thus deliveredto Titus obtained of him for this man the same pardon thathe had allowed to such as deserted of their own accord.
4. And now were the banks finished on the seventh day ofthe month Gorpieus [Elul,] in eighteen days' time, when theRomans brought their machines against the wall. But for


1 What became of these spoils of tho temple that escaped the fire, see Jo-sephus himself hereafter, B. vii. ch. v. sect. 5, and Roland de Spoliis Temj>li,p. 129-138.
3 These various sorts of spices, even, moro than those four which Mosesprescribed, Exod. xxxi. 34, we see were used in the public worship underHerod's temple, particularly cinnamon and cassia; which Reland takes par­ticular notice of, as agreeing with the later testimony of the Talmudists.







OCR Output








550 INDEX.


Eleutheri (or Freemen), horsemen s0
called, iii. 302.Eli, is judge after Sampson, i. S80;
his profligate sons, 384.Eliashib, ii. '227; dies, 250.
Elijah, the prophet, ii. 71 ; his mira­cles for the widow of Sarepta, ib.;presents himself to Ahab, ib.; fore­tells rain, ib.; false prophets killedby his order, 70 ; calls for fire fromheaTen, 96; taken up, 98; his let­ter to Jehoram, 112.
Elimelech, i. 380.
Elioneus made high-priest, iii. 257.
Elisha, the prophet, ii. 77 ; his mira­cles, 100, 102; his death, 227; hiscure of the fountain, iv. 131.
Elkanah, orElcanah, Samuel's father,i. 384.
Elon succeeds Ibsan, i. 373.
Elthemus, iii. 389.
Eluleus, ii. 140.
Enemies, when conquered, may belawfully killed, ii. 104.
Enoch, i. 82, 80.
Enoch and Elijah translated, ii. 98.
Enos, the sou of Seth, i. 86.
Ensigns of the Komnns, iii. 146;sacrifices to them, iv. 277.
Epaphroditus, his character, Pref. i.lxviii.; a great friend of Joscphus,71.
EpheMans, their decree in favor ofthe Jews, ii. 452.
Ephod, i. 230.
Epicrates, ii. 378.
Epicurians, their error concerningProvidence confuted, ii. 200.
Epistle of Jonathan the high-priest,ii. 356; of Philadelphia, 206; toEleazar the high-priest, ib.; ofSolomon and Hiram, 15; of Xerxesto Esdras, 221; of Artaxcrxes tothe governors near Judca, 245; ofAntiochus the Great to Ptolemy,280; of the Samaritans to Antio­chus, 299; of Alexander Balas toJonathan, 335; of Onias to Ptole­my and Cleopatra, 339; of Deme­trius to Jonathan and the Jews,350 ; of Julius Coesar to the Romanmagistrates, 442 ; of Mark Antonyto the Tyrians, 400.
Esaiah, or Isaiah, the prophet, ii.150, et seq.; his eulogium, 155; hisprophecy concerning the Assyrians,


ib.; concerning Cyras, 202; hisprophecy concerning the temple ofOnias, iv. 318.
Esau, or Edom, i. 136; his birth,119.
Esdras, ii. 221 ; his grief for theforeign marriages. 224; reads thelaw of Moses to the people, 226;dies, 227.
Essen, or high-priest's breast-plate,i. 230.
Essens honored by Herod, ii. 555;are against swearing, iii. 474;manners, rites, &c, described, ii.358; iii. 139, 472; abstained fromanointing themselves with oil, ib.:diligence in reading their sacredbooks, 475; Simon the Essen aninterpreter of dreams, iii. 134.
Esther, ii. 235; married to the king,ib.; concerned for the Jews, 239 ;invites the king and Haumn, 241.
Etham, ii. 44.
Ethbaal, or Ithobalus, ii. 72 ; iv. 375,380.
Ethi, or Ittai, the Gittite, i. 500.
Ethnarchy, Simon's, contracts thencedated, ii, 305.
Euaratus of Cos, iii. 57, 421.
Euaristus Aruntius, iii. 225.
Eve created, i. 77; her fall, 78.
Evil-merodach. ii. 191; iv. 379.
Euodus, iii. 172.
Eupolemus, son of John, ii. 325.
Eurycles slanders the sons of Herod,iii. 55, 418; he returns to his owncountry, 421.
Eutychus, Agrippa's charioteer, iii.100.
Eutychus, Caius Cazsar's charioteer,iii. 243.
Exorcisms, composed by Solomon, ii.14.
Ezcchias, ii. 430.
Ezckicl the prophet, ii. 163, 174;carried captive to Babylon, 100;his prophecy concerning the de­struction of the Jews, 168; hiiprophecy reconciled to that of Je­remiah, 174.
Fabatus, Ca>sar's servant, iii. 80;
Herod's steward, 431.Fnbius, governor of Damascus, ii.
457; iii. 358.Fabius, a centurion, ii. 420.







OCR Output








C. VII.] VESPASIAN TAKES GADARA. 125


men. This embassy the opposite party knew nothing of, butdiscovered it as Vespasian was approaching near the city.However, they despaired of keeping possession of the city,as being inferior in number to their enemies which werewithin the city, and seeing the Romans very near to the city ;so they resolved to fly, but thought it dishonorable to do itwithout shedding some blood, and revenging themselves onthe authors of this surrender; so they seized upon Dolesus(a person not only the first in rank and family in that city,but one that seemed the occasion of sending such an embassy,)and slew him, and treated his dead body after a barbarousmanner, so very violent was their anger at him, and then ranout of the city. And as now the Roman army was just uponthem, the people of Gadara admitted Vespasian with joyfulacclamations, and received from him the security of his righthand; as also a garrison of horsemen and footmen, to guardthem against the excursions of the runagates; for as to theirwall, they had pulled it down before the Romans desired thembo to do, that they might thereby give them assurance thatthey were lovers of peace, and that, if they had a mind, theycould not now make war against them.
4. And now Vespasian sent Placidus against those thathad fled from Gadara, with five hundred horsemen and threethousand footmen, while he returned himself to Csesarea withthe rest of the army. But as soon as these fugitives sawthe horsemen that pursued them just upon their backs, andbefore they came to a close fight, they ran together to acertain village which was called Bethennabris, where findinga great multitude of young men, and arming them, partly bytheir own consent, partly by force, they rashly and suddenlyassaulted Placidus and the troops that were with him. Thesehorsemen at the first onset gave way a little, as contriving toentice them farther off the wall; and when they had drawnthem into a place fit for their purpose, they made their horseencompass them round, and threw their darts at them. Sothe horsemen cut off the flight of the fugitives, while the footterribly destroyed those that fought against them; for thoseJews did no more than show their courage, and then were


11*







OCR Output








C. VI.] LUCILIUS BASSTJS. 317


what was walled in was itself a very rocky hill, elevated to avery great height, which circumstance alone made it veryhard to be subdued. It was also so contrived by nature, thatit could not be easily ascended; for it is, as it were, ditchedabout with such valleys on all sides, and to such a depth, thatthe eye cannot reach their bottoms, and such as are not easilyto be passed over, and even such as it is impossible to fillup with earth. For that valley which cuts it on the westextends to three-score furlongs, and did not end till it cameto the lake Asphaltitis; on the same side it was also thatMacherus had the tallest top of its hill elevated above therest. But then, for the valleys that lay on the north andsouth sides, although they be not so large as that already de­scribed, yet is it, in like manner, an impracticable thing tothink of getting over them; and for the valley that lies onthe east side, its depth is found to be not less than a hundredcubits. It extends as far as a mountain that lies over againstMacherus, with which it is bounded.
2. Now when Alexander [Janneus,] the king of the Jews,observed the nature of this place, he was the first who builta citadel here, which afterwards was demolished by Gabiniuswhen he made war against Aristobulus. But when Herodcame to be king, he thought the place to be worthy of thoutmost regard, and of being built upon in the firmest manner,and this especially because it lay so near to Arabia; for itis seated in a convenient place on that account, and hath aprospect toward that country: he, therefore, surrounded alarge space of ground with walls and towers, and built a citythere, out of which city there was a way that led up to thovery citadel itself on the top of the mountain: nay, morethan this, he built a wall round that top of the hill, anderected towers at the corners of a hundred and sixty cubitshigh ; in the middle of which place he built a palace after amagnificent manner, wherein were large and beautiful edifices.He also made a great many reservoirs for reception of water,that there might be plenty of it ready for all uses, and thosein the properest places that were afforded him there. Thusdid he, as it were, contend with the nature of the place,


27*







OCR Output








186 THE TEMPLE. [B. V.


on an inner garment of linen, together with a blue garmentround without seam, with fringe-work, and reaching to thefeet. There were also golden bells that hung upon thefringes, and pomegranates intermixed among them. Thebells signified thunder, and the pomegranates lightning.But that girdle that tied the garment to the breast wasembroidered with five rows of various colors of gold, andpurple, and scarlet, as also of fine linen and blue, with whichcolors we told you before the veils of the temple were em­broidered also. The like embroidery was upon the ephod;but the quantity of gold therein was greater. Its figure wasthat of a stomacher for the breast. There were upon it twogolden buttons like small shields, which buttoned the ephodto the garment: in these buttons were enclosed two verylarge and very excellent sardonyxes, having the names ofthe tribes of that nation engraved upon them : on the otherpart there hung twelve stones, three in a row one way, andfour in the other; a sardius, a topaz, and an emerald; a car­buncle, a jasper, and a sapphire; an agate, an amethyst, anda ligure; an onyx, a beryl, and a chrysolite; upon every onoof which was again engraved one of the forementioned namesof the tribes. A mitre also of fine linen encompassed hishead, which was tied by a blue riband, about which there wasanother golden crown, in which was engraven the sacredname [of God:] it consists of four vowels. However, thehigh-priest did not wear these garments at other times, buta more plain habit; he only did it when he went into themost sacred part of the temple, which he did but once in ayear, on that day when our custom is for all of us to keep afast to God. And thus much concerning the city and thetemple; but for the customs and laws hereto relating, weshall speak more accurately another time; for there remaina great many things thereto relating, which have not beenhere touched upon.
8. Now, as to the tower of Antonia, it was situated at thecorner of two cloisters of the court of the temple, of that onthe west and that on the north; it was erected upon a rockof fifty cubits in height, and was on a great precipice : it wasthe work of king Herod, wherein he demonstrated his







OCR Output








APPENDIX.


<KV)







OCR Output








C. VI.] LUCILIUS DASSUS. 319


be afraid of taking it into their hands. Yet after all thispains in getting, it is only valuable on account of one virtueit hath, that if it be only brought to the sick persons, itquickly drives away those called demons, which are no otherthan the spirits of the wicked that enter into men that arealive, and kill them, unless they can obtain some help againstthem. Here are also fountains of hot water that flow outof this place, which have a very different taste one from theother; for some of them are bitter and others of them areplainly sweet. Here also arc many eruptions of cold waters,and this not only in the places that lie lower, and have theirfountains near one another; but, what is still more wonder­ful, here is to be seen a certain cave hard by, whose cavityis not deep, but it is covered over by a rock that is promi­nent : above this rock there stand up two [hills or] breasts,as it were, but a little distant one from another; the one ofwhich sends out a fountain that is very cold, and the othersends out one that is very hot; which waters, when they aremingled together, compose a most pleasant bath: they aremedicinal, indeed, for other maladies, but especially good forstrengthening the nerves. This place has in it also mines ofsulphur and alum.
4. Now when Bassus had taken a full view of this place,he resolved to besiege it, by filling up the valley that lay onthe east side: so he fell hard to work, and took great painsto raise his banks as soon as possible, and by that means torender the siege easy. As for the Jews that were caught inthat place, they separated themselves from the strangers thatwere with them, and they forced those strangers, as an other­wise useless multitude, to stay in the lower part of the city,and undergo the principal dangers, while they themselvesseized on the upper citadel, and held it, and this both on ac­count of its strength and to provide for their own safety.They also supposed they might obtain their pardon, in casethey should [at last] surrender the citadel. However, theywere willing to make trial in the first place whether the hopesthey had of avoiding a siege would come to any thing ; withwhich intention they made sallies every day, and fought with







OCR Output








DISSERTATION II. 507


that were also sealed with them : they were sacrificed threein a day. In whose stead Amosis commanded that men ofwax, of the same number, should be substituted."
Now, I have lately shown, that these Egyptians had Abra­ham in great veneration, and that all the wisdom of thoseEgyptians, in which Moses was afterwards learned, was de­rived from no other than from Abraham. Now it appearsevidently, by the forecited passage, that the first abolitionof these human sacrifices, and the substitution of waxenimages in their stead, and particularly at Heliopolis, in thenorth-east part of Egypt, in the neighborhood of Beersheba,in the south of Palestine, where Abraham now lived, at thedistance of about one hundred and twenty miles only, wasin the days, and by the order of Tethmosis or Amosis, whowas the first of the Egyptian kings, after the expulsion ofthe Phoenician shepherds. Now, therefore, we are to inquirewhen this Tethmosis or Amosis lived, and compare his timewith the time of the sacrifice of Isaac. Now, if we look intomy chronological table, published A. D. 1721, we shall findthat the hundred and twenty-fifth year of Abraham, or whichis all one, the twenty-fifth year of Isaac, falls into A. M.2573, or into the thirteenth year of Tethmosis or Amosis,which is the very middle of his twenty-five years' reign; sothat this abolition of human sacrifices in Egypt, and substi­tution of others in their room, seems to have been occasionedby the solemn prohibition of such a sacrifice in the case ofAbraham, and by the following substitution of a ram in itsstead : which account of this matter not only takes away thegroundless suspicions of the moderns, but shows the greatseasonableness of the divine prohibition of the execution ofthis command to Abraham, as probably the direct occasionof putting a stop to the barbarity of the Egyptians in offer­ing human sacrifices, and that for many, if not for all gene­rations afterward.







OCR Output








C. IX.] SIMON OF GEEASA. 137


the battle all that day; and the dispute lay whether they hadconquered him or been conquered by him. So he went backto Nain, as did the Idumeans return home. Nor was it longere Simon came violently again upon their country; whenhe pitched his camp at a certain village called Thecoe, andsent Eleazar, one of his companions, to those that kept garri­son at Hcrodium, and in order to persuade them to surrenderthat fortress to him. The garrison received this man readily,while they knew nothing of what he came about; but assoon as he talked of the surrender of the place, they fellupon him with their drawn swords, till he found he had noplace for flight, when he threw himself down from the wallinto the valley beneath; so he died immediately; but theIdumeans, who were already much afraid of Simon's power,thought fit to take a view of the enemy's army before theyhazarded a battle with them.
6. Now there was one of their commanders named Jacob,who offered to serve them readily upon that occasion, but hadit in his mind to betray them. He went, therefore, from thevillage Allurus, wherein the army of the Idumeans weregotten together, and came to Simon; and at the very first heagreed to betray his country to him, and took assurancesupon oath from him that he should always have him in esteem,and then promised him that he would assist him in subduingall Idumea under him: upon which account ho was feastedafter an obliging manner by Simon, and elevated by hismighty promises ; and when he was returned to his own menhe at first belied the army of Simon, and said it was manifoldmore in number than what it was; after which he dexterouslypersuaded the commanders, and, by degrees, the whole multi­tude, to receive Simon, and to surrender the whole govern­ment up to him without fighting. And as he was doing this,he invited Simon by his messengers, and promised him todisperse the Idumeans, which he performed also: for as soonas their army was nigh them, he first of all got upon hishorse, and fled, together with those whom he had corrupted;hereupon a terror fell upon the whole multitude, and before


12*







OCR Output








B. II.] AGAINST APION. 417


drian Jews is well known; for this distribution of wheat wasno otherwise omitted with regard to the Jews than it was withregard to the other inhabitants of Alexandria. But they stillwere desirous to preserve what the kings had formerly in­trusted to their care, I mean the custody of the river; nordid those kings think them unworthy of having the entirecustody thereof upon all occasions.
6. But, besides this Apion objects to us thus. —" If thoJews," says he, "be citizens of Alexandria, why do they notworship the same gods with the Alexandrians ? ' To whichI give this answer : — Since you arc yourselves Egyptians,why do you fight it out one against another, and have impla­cable wars about your religion ? At this rate, we must notcall you all Egyptians, nor, indeed, in general men, becauseyou breed up with great care beasts of a nature quite contraryto that of men, although the nature of all men seems to beone and the same. Now, if there be such differences inopinion among your Egyptians, why are you surprised thatthose who came to Alexandria from another country, and hadoriginal laws of their own before, should persevere in the ob­servance of those laws ? But still he charges us with beingthe authors of sedition : which accusation, if it be a just one,why is it not laid against us all, since we are known to be allof one mind ? Moreover, those that search into such matterswill soon discover, that the authors of sedition have been suchcitizens of Alexandria as Apion is; for while they were theGrecians and Macedonians who were in possession of thiscity, there was no sedition raised against us, and we werepermitted to observe our ancient solemnities; but when thenumber of the Egyptians therein came to be considerable, thetimes grew confused, and then these seditions brake out stillmore and more, while our people continued uncorrupted.These Egyptians, therefore, were the authors of these troubles,who not having the constancy of Macedonians, nor the pru­dence of Grecians, indulged all of them the evil manners ofEgyptians, and continued their ancient hatred against us;for what is here so presumptuously charged upon us, is owingto the differences that are amongst themselves; while imny







OCR Output








130 J E II I C H 0 A N D [B. IV.


as far as the lake Asphaltitis ; its length is two hundred andthirty furlongs, and its breadth one hundred and twenty, andit is divided in the midst by Jordan. It hath two lakes in it,that of Asphaltitis and that of Tiberias, whose natures areopposite to each other: for the former is salt and unfruitful,but that of Tiberias is sweet and fruitful. This plain is muchburnt up in summer-time, and by reason of the extraordinaryheat, contains a very unwholesome air; it is all destitute ofwater excepting the river Jordan, which water of Jordan isthe occasion why those plantations of palm-trees that arenear its banks are more flourishing and much more fruitful,as are those that are remote from it not so flourishing orfruitful.
3. Notwithstanding which there is a fountain by Jerichothat runs plentifully, and is very fit for watering the ground;it arises near the old city, which Joshua the son of Nun, thegeneral of the Hebrews, took the first of all the cities of theland of Canaan by right of war. The report is, that thisfountain at the beginning caused not only the blasting of theearth and the trees, but of the children born of women; andthat it was entirely of a sickly and corruptive nature to allthings whatsoever, but that it was made gentle and very whole­some and fruitful by the prophet Elisha. This prophet wasfamiliar with Elijah, and was his successor, who, when heonce was the guest of the people at Jericho, and the men ofthe place had treated him very kindly, he both made themamends as well as the country by a lasting favor : for he wentout of this city to this fountain, and threw into the currentan earthen vessel full of salt; after which he stretched outhis righteous hand unto heaven, and, pouring out a inild drink-offering, he made this supplication,1 that " the current mightbe mollified, and that the veins of fresh water might beopened; that God also would bring into the place a moretemperate and fertile air for the current, and would bestowupon the people of that country plenty of the fruits of the


1 This excellent prayer of Elisha is wanting in our copios, 2 Kings, ii. 21,22, though it be referred to also in the Apostolical Constitutions, B. vii. oh.xxxvii.; and the success of it is mentioned in them all.







OCR Output








568 INDEX.


by Ptolemy, ii. 268; with its cupsand vials, 271.
Table in the court of the priests, i.226.
Tamar, David's daughter, i. 480.
Tamar, Absalom's daughter, marriedto Rehoboam, i. 514.
Tartan, ii. 149.
Temple upon Mount Gerizzim, ii. 257,341; like to that at Jerusalem,252.
Temple built by Herod, in honor ofAugustus, ii. 534; iii. 304.
Temple of the golden calf, iv. 72.
Temples in Egypt, ii. 341.
Temples of the Canaanites were to bedemolished, i. 298.
Temples of foreign nations not to beplundered, nor their donationstaken away, i. 301.
Temples of Hercules and Astarte atTyre, ii. 35; of Demus and theGraces at Athens, 434; of Belusat Babylon, ii. 190.
Temple built by Herod at Samaria,ii. 541.
Temple (Herod's) at Jerusalem de­scribed, ii. 558; iv. 179.
Temple Onion in Egypt built like thatat Jerusalem, ii. 341, 379; iii.301.
Temple of Diana at Elymais, ii. 315;of Dagon at Ashdod, or Azotus,346; of Apollo at Gaza, 393.
Temple of Jerusalem rebuilt by Zoro-babel, ii. 204; the Jews hinderedin building it, 20",; they go on byorder of Darius, 212; it is finishedin seven years, 219; lower thanSolomon's temple, 559; plunderedby Antiocbus Epiphanes, 298;taken by Pompey, and its mostholy place seen by him, 421 ; re­built by Herod, 557; burnt byTitus, iv. 268; Titus goes into themost holy place, 269.
Temple of Solomon described, ii. 18,et seq.; dedicated by Solomon, 25;foreigners could go but to a par­tition-wall in Herod's temple, 563;women excluded the two innercourts, ib.; tax out of the temple-treasure remitted, 337 ; Daniel'sprophecy fulfilled, 310.
Terah, Abraham's father, i. 97.
Terebinth, or turpentiDC-tree, near


Hebron, supposed as old as theworld, iv. 138.
Tero, an old soldier, iii. 66; 424;charged with treason by Trvpbo,ib.
Thaumastus, iii. 170.
Theatres erected at Jerusalem byHerod, ii. 536; at Coesarea, 549.
Theft, how punished, i. 312.
Theodorus, ii. 392 ; iii. 328.
Theodosius, ii. 341.
Thermusa, iii. 143.
Theudas, an impostor, iii. 277.
Tholomy, ii. 430.
Tbumtnosis, or Tethmosis, king ofEgypt, iv. 371, 394.
Thrugamma, or Togarmah, i. 93.
Tiberius Alexander, iii. 278.
Tiberius Alexander, governor of Alex­andria, iii. 534; he brings Egyptover to Vespasian, iv. 148.
Tiberius the emperor, iii. 145, 481;his dilatory proceedings, 166; hisprognostic of a successor, 174; hisdeath, ib.
Tiglathpilcser, ii. 137.
Tigranes, king of Armenia, ii. 404,509; iii. 161, 333.
Timaus, king of Egypt, iv. 368.
Timidius, iii. 208.
Timotheus, ii. 311 ; he is put to flightby Judas, 312.
Tiridates, iii. 273 : iv. 326.
Tithes and first fruits given to thoLevites, i. 274; their tithes ortenth parts given to the priests,ib. ; this law restored by Hezekiah,ii. 144.
Titus Coesar sent to Alexandria, iv.8; brings a great number of troopsto Vespasian, 16; bis piety towardshis father, 36; he and Vespasiantake Jotapata, 46; his mildness toJosephus, 55; is sent against Tari-chece, 62; his valor in this expedi­tion, ib.; his speech to his soldiers,ib.; takes Taricheoe, 66; sent toRome with king Agrippa, to com­pliment Galba, 135; arrives atJerusalem, and is exposed to greatdanger, 163; his grent valor, ib.;his great concern to save Jerusalem,204; and the temple, 247; hisspeech to his soldiers, 239; hisspeech to the Jewish tyrants, 279;ascribes the conquest of the city to







OCR Output








442 FLAVIUSJOSEPHtJS [b. II


another, ought not to bo required back again. No one is totouch another's goods. He that lends money must not de­mand usury for its loan. These and many more of the likesort are the rules that unite us in the bands of society onewith another.
29. It will be also worth our while to see what equity ourlegislator would have us exercise in our intercourse withstrangers ; for it will thence appear, that he made the bestprovision he possibly could, both that we should not dissolveour own constitution, nor show any envious mind towardsthose that would cultivate a friendship with us. Accordingly,our legislator admits all those that have a mind to observeour laws so to do, and this after a friendly manner, as es­teeming that a true union which not only extends to our ownstock, but to those that would live after the same mannerwith us: yet does he not allow those that come to us by ac­cident only to be admitted into communion with us.
30. However, there are other things which our legislatorordained for us beforehand, which of necessity we ought todo in common to all men; as to afford fire, and water, andfood to such as want it; to show them the roads ; nor to letany one lie unburied. He also would have us treat those thatare esteemed our enemies with moderation ; for he doth notallow us to set their country on fire, nor to permit us to cutdown those trees that bear fruit; nay, farther, he forbids usto spoil those that have been slain in war. He hath alsoprovided for such as are taken captive, that they may not beinjured, and especially that the women may not be abused.Indeed, he hath taught us gentleness and humanity so ef­fectually, that he hath not despised the care of brute beasts,by permitting no other than a regular use of them, and for­bidding any other; and if any of them come to our houses,like supplicants, we are forbidden to slay them : nor may wekill the dams, together with their young ones; but we areobliged, even in an enemy's country, to spare and not killthose creatures that labor for mankind. Thus hath our law­giver contrived to teach us an equitable conduct every way,by using us to such laws as instruct us therein ; while at the







OCR Output








148 VESPASIAN, EMPEROR. [B. IV.


such as sail within three hundred furlongs of it, that shipsmay cast anchor a great way off in the night-time, by reasonof the difficulty of sailing nearer. About this island arebuilt very great piers, the handy-work of men, against which,when the sea dashes itself, and its waves are broken againstthose boundaries, the navigation becomes very troublesome,and the entrance through so narrow a passage is rendereddangerous ; yet is the haven itself, when you are got into it,a very safe one, and of thirty furlongs in largeness: intowhich is brought what the country wants in order to itshappiness; as also what abundance the country affords, morethan it wants itself, is hence distributed into all the habitableearth.
G. Justly, therefore, did Vespasian desire to obtain thatgovernment, in order to corroborate his attempts upon thewhole empire; so he immediately sent to Tiberius Alexander,who was then governor of Egypt and of Alexandria, andinformed him what the army had put him upon, and how he,being forced to accept of the burden of government, was de­sirous to have him for his confederate and supporter. Nowas soon as ever Alexander had read this letter, he readilyobliged the legions and the multitude to take the oath offidelity to Vespasian, both which willingly complied withhim, as already acquainted with the courage of the man fromthat his conduct in their neighborhood. Accordingly, Ves­pasian, looking upon himself as already intrusted with thegovernment, got all things ready for his journey [to Rome.]Now fame carried this news abroad more suddenly than onecould have thought, that he was emperor over the east;upon which every city kept festivals, and celebrated sacrificesand oblations for such good news: the legions also that werein Mysia and Pannonia, who had been in commotion a littlebefore, on account of this insolent attempt of Vitellius, werevery glad to take the oath of fidelity to Vespasian upon hiscoming to the empire. Vespasian then removed from Cajsareato Berytus, where many embassages came to him from Syriaand many from other provinces, bringing with them fromevery city crowns and the congratulations of the people.







OCR Output








428 FLAVIUSJOSEPHUS [b. n.


However, Apion is ignorant of what every body knows, thatthe Egyptians were servants to the Persians, and afterwardto the Macedonians, when they were lords of Asia, and wereno better than slaves, while we have enjoyed liberty formerly;nay, more than that, have had the dominion of the cities thatlie round about us, and this nearly for a hundred and twentyyears together, until Pompeius Magnus. And when all thekings every where were conquered by the Romans, ourancestors were the only people who continued to be esteemedtheir confederates and friends, on account of their fidelityto them.
13. But, says Apion, "we Jews have not had any wonder­ful men amongst us, nor any inventors of arts, nor any emi­nent for wisdom." He then enumerates Socrates, and Zeno,and Cleanthes, and some others of the same sort; and afterall, he adds himself to them, which is the most wonderfulthing of all that he says, and pronounces Alexandria to behappy, because it hath such a citizen as he is in it; for hewas the fittest man to be a witness to his own deserts, althoughhe hath appeared to all others no better than a wicked mounte­bank, of a corrupt life and ill discourses; on which accountone may justly pity Alexandria, if it should value itself uponsuch a citizen as he is. But as to our own men, we have hadthose who have been as deserving of commendation as anywhosoever; and such as have perused our Antiquities cannotbe ignorant of them.
14. As to the other things which he sets down as blame­worthy, it may, perhaps, be the best way to let them passwithout apology, that he may be allowed to be his own accuser,and the accuser of the rest of the Egyptians. However, heaccuses us for sacrificing animals, and for abstaining fromswine's flesh, and laughs at us for the circumeision of ourprivy members. Now, as for our slaughter of tame animalsfor sacrifices, it is common to us and to all other men; butthis Apion, by making it a crime to sacrifice them, demon­strates himself to be an Egyptian ; for had he been either aGrecian or a Macedonian [as he pretends to be] he had notshowed any uneasiness at it; for those people glory in sacri­







OCR Output








398 FLAVICSJOSEPHUS [B. I.


were worshipped by the Egyptians, but should kill and eatthem all, and should associate with nobody but those that hadconspired with them; and that he bound the multitude byoaths to be sure to continue in those laws; and that when hehad built a wall about Avaris, he made war against the king.'Manetho adds also that " this priest sent to Jerusalem to in­vite that people to come to his assistance, and promised togive them Avaris, for that it had belonged to the forefathersof those that were coming from Jerusalem; and that whenthey were come, they made a war immediately against theking, and got possession of all Egypt." He says also, that" the Egyptians came with an army of two hundred thousandmen; and that Amenophis, the king of Egypt, not thinkingthat he ought to fight against the gods, ran away presentlyinto Ethiopia, and committed Apis and certain other of theirsacred animals to tho priests, and commanded them to takecare of preserving them." He says farther, that " the peopleof Jerusalem came accordingly upon the Egyptians, and over­threw their cities, and burnt their temples, and slew theirhorsemen, and in short, abstained from no sort of wickednessnor barbarity : and for that priest who settled their polity andtheir laws," he says, " he was by birth of Heliopolis, and hisname was Osarsiph, from Osyris, the god of Heliopolis; butthat he changed his name, and called himself Moses." Hethen says that " on the thirteenth year afterward, Amenophis,according to the fatal time of the duration of his misfortunes,came upon them out of Ethiopia with a great army, and join­ing battle with the shepherds and with the polluted people,overcame them in battle, and slew a great many of them, and"pursued them as far as the bounds of Syria."
29. Now Manetho does not reflect upon the improbabilityof his lie: for the leprous people, and the multitude that waswith them, although they might formerly have been angry atthe king, and at those that had treated them so coarsely, andthis according to the prediction of the prophet; yet certainly,when they were come out of the mines, and had received ofthe king a city and a country, they would have grown mildertowards him. However, had they ever so much hated him in







OCR Output








C.X.] VESPASIAN, EMPEROR. 147


5. So upon the exhortations of Mucianus and the othercommanders that he would accept of the empire, and uponthat of the rest of the army, who cried out that they werewilling to be led against all his opposers, he was, in the firstplace, intent upon gaining the dominion over Alexandria, asknowing that Egypt was of the greatest consequence in orderto obtain the entire government, because of its supplying ofcorn [to Rome;] which corn if he could be master of, hehoped to dethrone Vitellius, supposing he should aim to keepthe empire by force (for he would not be able to support him­self if the multitude at Rome should once be in want of food;)and because he was desirous to join the two legions that wereat Alexandria to the other legions that were with him. Healso considered with himself, that he should then have thatcountry for a defence to himself against the uncertainty offortune; for Egypt1 is hard to be entered by land, and hathno good havens by sea. It hath on the west the dry desertsof Libya, and on the south Siene, that divides it fromEthiopia, as well as the cataracts of the Nile, that cannot besailed over, and on the east the Red Sea, extending as far asCoptus; and it is fortified on the north by the land thatreaches to Syria, together with that called the Egyptain Sea,having no havens in it for ships. And thus is Egypt walledabout on every side. Its length between Pelusium and Sieneis two thousand furlongs, and the passage by sea from Plin-thine to Pelusium is three thousand six hundred furlongs. Itsriver Nile is navigable as far as the city called Elephantine,the forenamed cataracts hindering ships from going anyfarther. The haven also of Alexandria is not entered by themariners without difficulty, even in times of peace; for thepassage inward is narrow and full of rocks, that lie under thewater, which oblige the mariners to turn from a straightdirection: its left side is blocked up by works made by men'shands on both sides; on its right side lies the island calledPharus, which is situated just before the entrance, andsupports a very great tower that affords the sight of a fire to
1 Here ire have an authentic description of the bounds and circumstancesof Egypt in the days of Vespasian and Titus.







OCR Output








C. IX.] TITUS RESUMES THE SIEGE. 203


CHAPTER IX.


LEAVING OFF THE SIEGE FOR AWHILE, SET HIMSELF AGAINTO PROSECUTE THE SAME, BUT SOON SENT JOSEPHUS TO DIS­COURSE WITH HIS OWN COUNTRYMEN ABOUT PEACE.
§ 1. A resolution was now taken by Titus to relax thesiege for a little while, and to afford the seditious an intervalfor consideration, and to see whether the demolishing of theirsecond wall would not make them a little more compliant, orwhether they were not somewhat afraid of a famine, becausethe spoils they had gotten by rapine would not be sufficientfor them long ; so he made use of this relaxation in order tocompass his own designs. Accordingly, as the usual appointedtime when he must distribute subsistence-money to the soldierswas now come, he gave orders that the commanders shouldput the army into battle array, in the face of the enemy, andthen gave every one of the soldiers their pay. So the soldiers,according to custom, opened the cases wherein their armsbefore lay covered, and marched with their breast-plates on,as did the horsemen lead their horses in their fine trappings.Then did the places that were before the city shine very splen­didly for a great way; nor was there any thing ever so grate­ful to Titus's own men, or so terrible to the enemy, as thatsight. For the whole old wall and the north side of the templewere full of spectators ; and one might see the houses full ofsuch as looked at them: nor was there any part of the citywhich was not covered over with their multitude; nay, a verygreat consternation seized upon the hardiest of the Jews them­selves, when they saw all the army in the same place, togetherwith the fineness of their arms and the good order of theirmen. And I cannot but think that the seditious would havechanged their minds at that sight, unless the crimes they hadcommitted against the people had been so horrid that theydespaired of forgiveness from the Romans; but as they be­lieved death with torments must be their punishment, if they







OCR Output








336 eleazar's speeches. [b. yii.


against God, nor been partners with those of others; we alsotaught other men to preserve their liberty. Wherefore, con­sider how God hath convinced us that our hopes were in vain,by bringing such distress upon us in the desperate state weare now in, and which is beyond all our expectations; forthe nature of this fortress which was in itself unconquer­able, hath not proved a means of our deliverance; and evenwhile we have still great abundance of food, and a great quan­tity of arms, and other necessaries more than wo want, we areopenly deprived by God himself of all hope of deliverance ;for that fire which was driven upon our enemies did not of itsown accord turn back upon the wall which we had built: thiswas the effect of God's anger against us for our manifold sinswhich we have been guilty of in a most insolent and extrava­gant manner with regard to our own countrymen ; the pun­ishments of which let us not receive from the Romans, butfrom God himself, as executed by our own hands; for thesewill be more moderate than the other. Let our wives die be­fore they are abused, and our children before they have tastedof slavery ; and after we have slain them, let us bestow thatglorious benefit upon one another mutually, and preserve our­selves in freedom, as an excellent funereal monument for us.But first let us destroy our money and the fortress by fire;for I am well assured that this will be a great grief to theRomans, that they shall not be able to seize upon our bodies,and shall fail of our wealth also: and let us spare nothingbut our provisions; for they will be a testimonial when weare dead, that we were not subdued for want of necessaries,but that, according to our original resolution, we have pre­ferred death before slavery."
7. This was Eleazar's speech to them. Yet did not theopinions of all the auditors acquiesce therein; but althoughsome of them were very zealous to put his advice in practice,and were in a manner filled with pleasure at it, and thoughtdeath to be a good thing, yet had those that were most ef­feminate a commiseration for their wives and families; andwhen these men were especially moved by the prospect oftheir own certain death, they looked wistfully at one another,







OCR Output








132 THE LAKE ASPHALTITIS. [b. IV.


air, it becomes exceeding cold, and becomes of a nature quitecontrary to the ambient air: as in winter again it becomeswarm; and if you go into it, it appears very gentle. Theambient air is here also of so good a temperature, that thepeople of the country are clothed in linen only, even whensnow covers the rest of Judea. This place is one hundredand fifty furlongs from Jerusalem, and sixty from Jordan.The country, as far as Jerusalem, is desert and stony; butthat as far as Jordan and the lake Asphaltitis lies lower in­deed, though it be equally desert and barren. But so muchshall suffice to have said about Jericho, and of the great hap­piness of its situation.
4. The nature of the lake Asphaltitis is also worth de­scribing. It is, as I have said already, bitter and unfruitful.It is so light [or thick] that it bears up the heaviest thingsthat are thrown into it; nor is it easy for any one to makethings sink therein to the bottom if he had a mind so to do.Accordingly, when Vespasian went to see it, he commandedthat some who could not swim should have their hands tiedbehind them and be thrown into the deep, when it so happenedthat they all swam, as if a wind had forced them upwards.Moreover, the change of the color of this lake is wonderful,for it changes its appearance thrice every day, and as therays of the sun fall differently upon it, the light is variouslyreflected. However, it casts up black clods of bitumen inmany parts of it; these swim at the top of the water, and re­semble both in shape and bigness headless bulls: and whenthe laborers that belong to the lake come to it, and catch holdof it as it hangs together, they draw it into their ships; butwhen the ship is full, it is not easy to cut off the rest, for itis so tenacious as to make the ship hang upon its clods tillthey set it loose with the menstrual blood of women, and withurine, to which alone it yields. This bitumen is not onlyuseful for the caulking of ships, but for the cure of men'sbodies: accordingly, it is mixed in a great many medicines.The length of this lake is five hundred and eighty furlongs,where it is extended as far as Zoar, in Arabia ; and its breadthis a hundred and fifty. The country of Sodom borders upon







OCR Output








248 j o s e p n u s [b. vl


in charge, and this in the Hebrew language.' So he earnestlyprayed them, " To spare their own city, and to prevent thatfire which was just ready to seize upon the temple, and tooffer their usual sacrifices to God therein." At these wordsof his, a great sadness and silence were observed among thepeople. But the tyrant himself cast many reproaches uponJosephus, with imprecations besides ; and at last added thiswithal, — " That he did never fear the taking of the city, be­cause it was God's own city." In answer to which Josephussaid thus with a loud voice : — "To be sure thou hast keptthis city wonderful pure for God's sake ; the temple also con­tinues entirely unpolluted ! Nor hast thou been guilty of anyimpiety against him for whose assistance thou hopest! Hestill receives his accustomed sacrifices ! Vile wretch that thouart! If any one should deprive thee of thy daily food, thouwouldst esteem him to be an enemy to thee; but thou hopestto have that God for thy supporter in this war whom thouhast deprived of his everlasting worship : and thou imputestthose sins to the Romans, who, to this very time, take care tohave our laws observed, and almost compel these sacrifices tobe still offered to God which have by thy means been inter­mitted. Who is there that can avoid groans and lamentationsat the amazing change that is made in the city ? since veryforeigners and enemies do now correct that impiety whichthou hast occasioned; while thou art a Jew, and wast educatedin our laws, art become a greater enemy to them than theothers. But still, John, it is never dishonorable to repent,and amend what hath been done amiss, even at the last ex­tremity. Thou hast an instance before thee in Jechoniah,2the king of tho Jews, if thou hast a mind to save the city,who, when the king of Babylon made war against him, did,of his own accord, go out of this city before it was taken, anddid undergo a voluntary captivity, with his family, that thesanctuary might not be delivered up to the enemy, and that


1 The same that in the New Testament is always so called, and was thenthe common language of the Jews in Judea, which was the Syriac dialect.
2 Our present copies of the Old Testament want this encomium upon KingJechoniah or Jehoiachim, which it seem'! was in Josephus's copy.







OCR Output








18 THE ROMAN ARMIES [B. irX.


2. As for what is within the camp, it is set apart for tents,but the outward circumference hath the resemblance to a wall,and is adorned with towers at equal distances, where betweenthe towers stand the engines for throwing arrows and darts,and for slinging stones, and where they lay all other enginesthat can annoy the enemy, all ready for their several opera­tions. They also erect four gates, one at every sido of thocircumference, and those large enough for the entrance of thebeasts, and wide enough for making excursions, if occasionshould require. They divide tho camp within into streetsvery conveniently, and place the tents of the commanders inthe middle; but in the very midst of all is the general's owntent, in the nature of a temple, insomuch that it appears to bea city built on the sudden, with its market-place, and placefor handicraft trades, and with seats for the officers superiorand inferior, where, if any differences arise, their causes areheard and determined. The camp, and all that is in it, isencompassed with a wall round about, and that sooner thanone would imagine, and this by the multitude and the skillof the laborers; and, if occasion require, a trench is drawnround the whole, whose depth is four cubits, and its breadthequal.
3. When they have thus secured themselves, they livetogether by companies, with quietness and decency, as areall their other affairs managed with good order and security.Each company hath also their wood, and their corn, andtheir water brought them, when they stand in need of them;for they neither sup nor dine as they please themselvessingly, but all together. Their times also for sleeping, andwatching, and rising, are notified beforehand by tho soundof trumpets, nor is any thing done without such a signal:and in the morning the soldiery go every one to their cen­turions, and these centurions to their tribunes, to salutethem; with whom all the superior officers go to the generalof the whole army, who then gives them of course the watch­word, and other orders, to be by them carried to all that areunder their command; which is also observed when they goto fight, and thereby they turn themselves about on the







OCR Output








B. II.] AGAINST APION. 455


enemies to injustice: they take care of righteousness : theybanish idleness and expensive living, and instruct men to becontent with what they have, and to be laborious in theircallings: they forbid men to make war from a desire ofgetting more, but make men courageous in defending thelaws: they are inexorable in punishing malefactors: theyadmit no sophistry of words, but are always established byactions themselves, which actions we ever propose as surerdemonstrations than what is contained in writing only; onwhich account I am so bold as to say, that we are becomethe teachers of other men in the greatest number of things,and those of the most excellent nature only: for what is moreexcellent than inviolable piety ? what is more just than sub­mission to laws ? and what is more advantageous than mutuallove and concord ? And this so far, that we are neither tobe divided by calamities, nor to become injurious and seditious -in prosperity; but to contemn death when we are in war, andin peace to apply ourselves to our mechanical occupations,or to our tillage of the ground; while we in all things andalways are satisfied that God is the inspector and governorof our actions. If these precepts had either been written atfirst, or more exactly kept by any others before us, we shouldhave owed them thanks as disciples owe to their masters:but if it be visible that we have made use of them more thanany other men, and if we have demonstrated that the originalinvention of them is our own let the Apions, and the Molons,with all the rest of those that delight in lies and reproaches,stand confuted; but let this and the foregoing book bodedicated to thee, Epaphroditus, who art so great a lover oftruth, and by thy means to those that have been in likemanner desirous to be acquainted with the affairs of ournation.







OCR Output








c. viii.] eleazar's speeches. 337


and by the tears that were in their eyes declared their dissentfrom his opinion. When Eleazar saw these people in suchfear, and that their souls were dejected at so prodigious aproposal, he was afraid lest, perhaps, these effeminate personsshould by their lamentations and tears enfeeble those thatheard what he had said courageously; so he did not leave offexhorting them, but stirred up himself; and recollectingproper arguments for raising their courage, ho undertook tospeak more briskly and fully to them, and that concerningthe immortality of the soul. So he made a lamentable groan,and fixing his eyes intently on those that wept, he spake thus:— " Truly I was greatly mistaken when I thought to be as­sisting to brave men who struggled hard for their liberty,and to such as were resolved either to live with honor or elseto die ; but I find that you are such people as are no betterthan others, either in virtue or in courage, and are afraid ofdying, though you be delivered thereby from the greatestmiseries, while you ought to make no delay in this matter,nor to await any one to give you good advice; for the lawsof our country, and of God himself, have, from ancient times,and as soon as ever we could use our reason, continuallytaught us, and our forefathers have corroborated the samedoctrine by their actions and by their bravery of mind, thatit is life that is a calamity to men, and not death; for thislast affords our souls their liberty, and sends them by a re­moval into their own place of purity, where they are to beinsensible of all sorts of misery; for while souls are tied downto a mortal body, they are partakers of its miseries; andreally, to speak the truth, they arc themselves dead; for theunion of what is divine to what is mortal is disagreeable. Itis true, the power of the soul is great, even when it is im­prisoned in a mortal body; for by moving it after a way thatis invisible, it makes the body a sensible instrument, andcauses it to advance farther in its actions than moral naturecould otherwise do. However, when it is freed from thatweight which draws it down to the earth, and is connectedwith it, it obtains its own proper place, and does then becomea partaker of that blessed power and those abilities which areIV. —29







OCR Output








B. II.") AGAINST APION. 1^9


exercise of virtue; for this way of worship of God is themost holy of all others.
24. There ought also to he hut One Temple for One God:for likeness is the constant foundation of agreement. Thistemple ought to he common to all men, because he is thecommon God of all men. His priests arc to be continuallyabout his worship ; over whom he that is the first by his birthis to be their ruler perpetually. His business must be to offersacrifices to God, together with those priests that are joinedwith him; to see that the laws be observed; to determinecontroversies, and to punish those that are convicted of in­justice : while he that does not submit to him shall be subjectto the same punishment as if he had been guilty of impietytowards God himself. When we offer sacrifices to him, wedo it not in order to surfeit ourselves, or to be drunken; forsuch excesses are against the will of God and would be anoccasion of injuries and of luxury; but by keeping ourselvessober, orderly, and ready for our other occupations, and beingmore temperate than others. And for our duty at the sacri­fices themselves, we ought, in the first place, to pray1 for thecommon welfare of all, and after that for our own; for woare made for fellowship one with another : and he who prefersthe common good before what is peculiar to himself is aboveall acceptable to God. And let our prayers and supplicationsbe made humbly to God, not [so much] that he would giveus what is good (for he hath already given that of his ownaccord, and hath proposed the same publicly to all,) as thatwe may duly receive it, and when we have received it, may


' We may hero observe how known a thing it was among the Jews andheathens, in this and many other instances, that sacrifices were still accom­panied with prayers ; whence most probably came those phrases of the sacri­fice of prayer, the sacrifice of praise, the sacrifice of thanksgiving. Howeverthose ancient forms used at sacrifices are now generally lost, to the no smalldamage of true religion. It is here also exceeding remarkable, that althoughthe temple of Jerusalem was built as the only place where the whole nationof the Jews were to offer their sacrifices, yet is there no mention of thesacrifices themselvei", but of prayers only, in Solomon's long and famous formof devotion at its dedication; 1 Kings, xviii; 2 Chron. vi. See also manypassages cited in the Apostolical Constitutions, vii. 37, and Of the War above,1i. vii. ch. v. sect. 0.







OCR Output








ANTIQUITY OF THE JEWS.
FLAVIUS JOSEPHUS AGAINST APION.'


BOOK I.
§ 1. I suppose that, by my books of the Antiquity of theJews, most excellent Epaphroditus,2 I have made it evidentto those who peruse them, that our Jewish nation is of very


1 This first book has a wrong title. It is not written against Apion, as isthe first part of the second book, but against those Greeks in general whowould not believe Joscphus's former accounts of the very ancient state ofthe Jewish nation, in his XX Books of Antiquities; and in particular againstAgatharchides, Manetho, Chercmon, and Lysimachus. It is one of the mostlearned, excellent, and useful books of all antiquity; and upon Jerome'sperusal of this and the following books, he declares, that "it seems to hima miraculous thing, how one that was a Hebrew, who had been from hisinfancy instructed in sacred learning, should be able to produce such anumber of testimonies out of profane authors, as if he had read over all theGrecian libraries." Epist. 84, ad magnum: And the learned Jew, Manas-seh-ben-Israel, esteemed these two books so excellent, as to translate theminto Hebrew: this wo learn from his own catalogue of his works which Ihave seen. As to the time and place when and where these two books werewritten, the learned have not hitherto been able to determine them, anyfarther than that they were written some timo after his Antiquities, or sometime after A. D. 93, which, indeed, is too obvious at their entrance to beoverlooked even by a careless peruser; they being directly intended againstthose that would not believe what he had advanced in those books concern­ing the great antiquity of the Jewish nation. As to the place, they allimagine that these two books were written where tho former were, I meanat Rome; and I confess, that I myself believed both those determinationstill I came to finish my notes upon these books, when I met with plain indi­cations that they were written not at Rome, but in Judea, and this afterthe third year of Trajan, or A. D. 100.
2 Take Dr. Hudson's note here, which, as it justly contradicts the commonopinion that Josephus cither died under Domitian, or at least wrote nothing


(355)







OCR Output








B. II.] AGAINST APION. 415


dom, that he might obtain it for himself unjustly.1 For thiscause, then, it was that Onias undertook a war against himon Cleopatra's account; nor would he desert that trust theroyal family had reposed in him in their distress. Accord­ingly, God gave a remarkable attestation to his righteous pro­cedure; for when Ptolemy Physco2 had the presumption tofight against Onias's army, and had caught all the Jews thatwere in the city [Alexandria,] with their children and wives,and exposed them naked and in bonds to his elephants, thatthey might be trodden upon and destroyed; and when he hadmade those elephants drunk for that purpose, the event provedcontrary to his preparations ; for these elephants left the Jewswho were exposed to them, and fell violently upon Physco'sfriends, and slew a great number of them: nay, after this,Ptolemy saw a terrible ghost, which prohibited his hurtingthose men: his very concubine whom he loved so well, somecall her Ithaca, and others Irene, making supplications tohim, that he would not perpetrate so great a wickedness. Sohe complied with her request, and repented of what he eitherhad already done or was about to do; whence it is well knownthat the Alexandrian Jews do with good reason celebrate thisday, on the account that they had thereon been vouchsafedsuch an evident deliverance from God. However, Apion, thecommon calumniator of men, hath the presumption to accusethe Jews for making this war against Physco, when he oughtto have commended them for the same. This man also makesmention of Cleopatra the last queen of Alexandria, and abusesus, because she was ungrateful to us; whereas he ought tohave reproved her, who indulged herself in all kinds of injus­tice and wicked practices, both with regard to her nearest re­lations and husbands who had loved her, and, indeed, in gen­


1 Here begins a gre.it defect in the Greek copy; but the old Latin versionfully supplies that defect.
* What error is here generally believed to have been committed by our Jo-sephus in ascribing a deliverance of the Jews to the reign of Ptolemy Physco,tho seventh of thoso Ptolemies, which has been universally supposed to havehappened under Ptolemy Philopator, the fourth of them, is no better than agross error of tho moderns, and not of Josephus, as I have fully proved intho Authent. Rec. Tart i. p. liOO-20 J, whither I refer the inquisitive reader.







OCR Output








c. viii.] eleazar's speeches. 341


and not in betraying their liberty; but as to the multitude ofthose that are now under the Romans, who would not pitytheir condition ? and who would not make haste to die, beforehe would suffer the same miseries with them ? Some of themhave been put upon the rack, and tortured with fire andwhippings, and so died. Some of them have been half-devoured by wild beasts, and yet have been reserved aliveto bo devoured by them a second time, in order to affordlaughter and sport to our enemies; and such of those asare alive, still are to be looked on as the most miserable,who being so desirous of death could not come at it. Andwhere is now that great city, the metropolis of the Jewishnation ? which was fortified by so many walls round about,which had so many fortresses and large towers to defendit, which could hardly contain the instruments prepared forthe war, and which had so many ten thousands of men tofight for it ? Where is this city that was believed to haveGod himself inhabitant therein ? It is now demolished to thevery foundations, and hath nothing but that monument of itpreserved, I mean the camp of those that have destroyed it,which still dwells upon its ruins; some unfortunate old menalso lie upon the ashes of the temple, and a few women arethere preserved alive by the enemy for our bitter shame andreproach. Now, who is there that revolves these things inhis mind, and yet is able to bear the sight of the sun, thoughhe might live out of danger ? Who is there so much his coun­try's enemy, or so unmanly, and so desirous of living, as notto repent that he is still alive ? and I cannot but wish thatwe had all died, before we had seen that holy city demolishedby the hands of our enemies, or the foundations of our holytemple dug up after so profane a manner. But since we hada generous hope that deluded us, as if we might, perhaps,have been able to avenge ourselves on our enemies on thataccount, though it be now become vanity, and hath left usalone in this distress, let us make haste to die bravely. Letus pity ourselves, our children, and our wives, while it is inour own power to show pity to them ; for we were born to


29 *







OCR Output








B. II.] AGAINST APION. 423


for the proper way of confuting fools is not to use bare words,but to appeal to the things themselves that make against them.Now then, all such as ever saw the construction of our tem­ple, of what nature it was, knew well enough how the purityof it was never to be profaned; for it had four several courts,1encompassed with cloisters round about, every one of whichhad, by our law, a peculiar degree of separation from therest. Into the first court every body was allowed to go, evenforeigners, and none but women, during their courses, wereprohibited to pass through it; all the Jews went into the se­cond court, as well as their wives, when they were free fromall uncleanness; into the third court went in the Jewish men,when they were clean and purified; into the fourth went thepriests, having on their sacerdotal garments ; but for the mostsacred place, none went in but the high-priests, clothed intheir peculiar garments. Now there is so great caution usedabout these offices of religion, that the priests are .appointedto go into the temple but at certain hours; for in the morn­ing, at the opening of the inner temple, those that are toofficiate receive the sacrifices, as they do again at noon, tillthe doors are shut. Lastly, it is not so much as lawful tocarry any vessel into the holy house; nor is there any thingtherein but the altar [of incense,] the table [of show-bread,]the censer, and the candlestick, which are all written in thelaw; for there is nothing farther there, nor are there anymysteries performed that may not be spoken of; nor is thereany feasting within the place. For what I have now said ispublicly known, and supported by the testimony of the wholepeople, and their operations are very manifest; for althoughthere be four courses of the priests, and every one of themhave above five thousand men in them, yet do they officiateon certain days only ; and when those "days are over, other


1 It is remarkable that Joscphus here, and, I think, nowhere else, reckonsup four distinct courts of the temple; that of the Gentiles, that of the wo­men of Israel, that of the men of Israel, and that of the priests; as also,that the court of the women admitted of tho men (I suppose only of thehusbands of those wives that were therein,) while the court of the men didnot admit any women into it at all.







OCR Output








474 DISSERTATION I.


brother of our Lord, and bishop of Jerusalem, was throwndown [from the temple,] and slain of them by stoning.
About A. D. 740. Anastasias Abbas contr. Jud.— NowJosephus, an author and writer of your own, says of Christ,that he was a just and good man, showed and declared so tobe by divine grace, who gave aid to many by signs andmiracles.
About A. Z>. 790. Greorgius Syncellus Ohron. p. 339.—These miseries befell the Jews by way of revenge for Jamesthe Just, who was the brother of Jesus that was called Christ,on the account that they had slain him who was a most right­eous person. Now as Ananus, a person of that character,thought ho had a proper opportunity, because Festus wasdead, and Albinus was but upon the road, so he assemblesthe sanhedrim of judges, and brings before them James, thebrother of Jesus, who was called Christ, and some of his com­panions, and when he had formed an accusation against them,as breakers of the law, he delivered them to be stoned; but asfor those that seemed the most equitable of the citizens, andthose that were the most uneasy at the breach of the laws,they disliked what was done. They also sent to the king[Agrippa] desiring him to send to Ananus that he should actso no more, for that what he had already done could not bejustified, &c.
About A. D. 850. Johan. Malela Chron. lib. x.—Fromthat time began the destruction of the Jews, as Josephus, thephilosopher of the Hebrews, hath written; who also said this,that from the time the Jews crucified Christ, who was a goodand a righteous man (that is, if it be fit to call such a one aman, and not a God,) the land of Judea was never free fromtrouble. These things the same Josephus the Jew has relatedin his writings.
About A. D. 800. Photius Cod. lib. xlviii.—I have readthe treatise of Josephus about the universe, whose title I haveelsewhere read to be, Of the Substance of the Universe. Itis contained in two very small treatises. He treats of theorigin of the world in a brief manner. However, he speaksof the divinity of Christ, who is our true God, in a way very







OCR Output








C.X.] FIflHI ON THE LAKE. 69


by sea, for their ships were small and fitted only for piracy;they were too weak to fight with Vespasian's vessels, and themariners that were in them were so few, that they were afraidto come near the Romans, who attacked them in greatnumbers. However, as they sailed round about the vessels,and sometimes as they came near them, they threw stones atthe Romans, when they were a good way off, or came closerand fought them; yet did they receive the greatest harmthemselves in both cases. As for the stones they threw atthe Romans, they only made a sound one after another ; forthey threw them against such as were in their armor, whilethe Roman darts could reach the Jews themselves; and whenthey ventured to come near the Romans they became sufferersthemselves, before they could do any harm to the other, andwere drowned, they and their ships together. As for thosethat endeavored to come to an actual fight, the Romans ranmany of them through with their long poles. Sometimes theRomans leaped into their ships with swords in their hands,and slew them; but when some of them met the vessels, theRomans caught them by the middle, and destroyed at oncetheir ships, and themselves who were taken in them. Andfor such as were drowning in the sea, if they lifted theirheads up above the water, they were either killed by darts orcaught by the vessels; but if, in the desperate case they werein, they attempted to swim to their enemies, the Romans cutoff either their heads or their hands : and, indeed, they weredestroyed after various manners every where, till the rest,being put to flight, were forced to get upon the land, whilethe vessels encompassed them about [on the sea:] but asmany of these were repulsed when they were getting ashore,they were killed by the darts upon the lake; and the Romansleaped out of their vessels, and destroyed a great many moreupon the land: one might then sec the lake all bloody andfull of dead bodies, for not one of them escaped. And aterrible stink and a very sad sight there was on the followingdays over that country; for as for the shores they were fullof shipwrecks, and of dead bodies all swelled; and as thedead bodies were inflamed by the sun, and putrefied, they







OCR Output








104 T H K I D V M E A N S [B. IV,


could we bo concealed from such a vast number of our fellow-citizens, among whom we are conversant every hour, whilewhat is done privately in the country is, it seems, known bythe zealots, who are but few in number, and under confine­ment also, and are not able to come out of the temple intothe city ? Is this the first time that they are become sensiblehow they ought to be punished for their insolent actions? forwhile these men were free from the fear they are now under,there was no suspicion raised that any of us were traitors.But if they lay this charge against the people, this musthave been done at a public consultation, and not one of thepeople must have dissented from the rest of the assembly; inwhich case the public fame of this matter would have cometo you sooner than any particular indication. But how couldthat be ? Must there not, then, have been ambassadors sentto confirm the agreements ? And let them tell us who thisambassador was that was ordained for that purpose. Butthis is no other than a pretence of such men as arc loath todie, and arc laboring to escape those punishments that hangover them: for if fate had determined that this city was tobe betrayed into its enemy's hands, no other than these menthat accuse us falsely could have the impudence to do it,there being no wickedness wanting to complete their impu­dent practices but this only, that they become traitors. Andnow you Idumcans are come hither already with your arms;it is your duty, in the first place, to be assisting to your me­tropolis, and to join with us in cutting off those tyrants thathave infringed the rules of our regular tribunals, that havetrampled upon our laws, and made their swords the arbitra­tors of right and wrong; for they have seized upon men ofgreat eminence, and under no accusation, as they stood inthe midst of the market-place, and tortured them with puttingthem into bonds; and without bearing to hear what they hadto say or what supplications they made, they destroyed them.You may, if you please, come into this city, though not inthe way of war, and take a view of the marks still remainingof what I now say, and may see the houses that have beendepopulated by their rapacious hands, with those wives and







OCR Output








B. I.] AGAINST A PI ON. * 357


have not omitted such our history, for the sake of those thateither do not know them, or pretend not to know them already.2. And now, in the first place, I cannot but greatly wonderat those men who suppose that we must attend to none butGrecians when we are inquiring about the most ancient facts,and must inform ourselves of their truth from them only,while we must not believe ourselves nor other men; for I amconvinced that the very reverse is the truth of tho case: Imean this, if we will not be led by vain opinions, but willmake inquiry after truth from facts themselves; for theywill find, that almost all which concerns the Greeks happenednot long ago; nay, one may say, is of yesterday only. Ispeak of the building of their cities, the invention of theirarts, and the description of their laws; and as for their careabout the writing down of their histories, it is very near thelast thing they set about. However, they acknowledge them­selves so far, that they were the Egyptians, the Chaldeans,and the Phoenicians (for I will not now reckon ourselvesamong them) that have preserved the memorials of the mostancient and most lasting traditions of mankind; for almostall these nations inhabit such countries as are least subjectto destruction from the world about them; and these alsohave taken especial care to have nothing omitted of whatwas [remarkably] done among them; but their history wasesteemed sacred, and put into public tables, as written bymen of the greatest wisdom they had among them. But asfor the place where the Grecians inhabit, ten thousand de­structions have overtaken it, and blotted out the memory offormer actions; so that they were ever beginning a new wayof living, and supposed that every one of them was the originof their new state. It was also late and with difficulty thatthey came to know the letters they now use; for those whowould advance their use of these letters to the greatestantiquity, pretend that they learned them from the Phoeni­cians and from Cadmus; yet is nobody able to demonstratethat they have any writing preserved from that time, neitherin their temples nor in any other public monuments. Thisappears, because the time when those lived who went to the







OCR Output








B.I.] AGAINST APION. 389


us Jews, though in way of derision at our simplicity, as hesupposes it to be ; for when he was discoursing of the affairsof Stratonice, " how she came out of Macedonia into Syria,and left her husband Demetrius, while yet Seleucus wouldnot marry her as she expected, but, during the time of hisraising an army at Babylon, stirred up a sedition about An-tioch; and how, after that, the king came back, and uponhis taking of Antioch, she fled to Seleucia, and had it in herpower to sail away immediately, yet did she comply with adream which forbade her so to do, and so was caught andput to death." When Agatharchides had premised this story,and had jested upon Stratonice for her superstition, he givesa like example of what was reported concerning us, and writesthus : — " There are a people called Jews, and dwell in a citythe strongest of all other cities, which the inhabitants callJerusalem, and are accustomed to rest on every seventhday;' on which times they make no use of their arms, normeddle with husbandry, nor take care of any affairs of life,but spread out their hands in their holy places, and pray tillthe evening. Now it came to pass that when Ptolemy, theson of Lagus, came into this city with his army, that thesemen, in observing this mad custom of theirs, instead of guard­ing the city, suffered their country to submit itself to a betterlord ; and their law2 was openly proved to have commandeda foolish practice. This accident taught all other men butthe Jews to disregard such dreams as these were, and not tofollow the like idle suggestions delivered as a law, when, insuch uncertainty of human reasonings, they are at a loss whatthey should do." Now this our procedure seems a ridiculousthing to Agatharchides, but will appear to such as considerit without prejudice a great thing, and what deserved a greatmany encomiums ; I mean, when certain men constantly pre­


1 A glorious testimony this of the observation of the Sabbath by the Jews.See Antiq. B. xvi. ch. ii. sect. 4; ch. vi. sect. 2; the Life, sect. 54, and War,B. iv. ch. ix. 6ect. VI.
* Not their law, but the superstitious interpretation of their leaders, whichneither the Maccabees nor our blessed Savior did ever approve of.


33*







OCR Output








470 DISSERTATION I.


These miseries befell the Jews by way of revenge for Jamesthe Just, who was the brother of Jesus that was called Christ,on this account, that they had slain him who was a mostrighteous person.
The same Josephus declares the manner of his death in thetwentieth book of the Antiquities, in these words : — Caesarsent Albinus into Judea to be procurator, when he had heardthat Festus was dead. Now Ananus junior, who, as wc said,had been admitted to the high-priesthood, was in his temperbold and daring in an extraordinary manner. He was alsoof the sect of the Sadducees, who are more savage in judgmentthan any of the other Jews, as we have already signified.Since, therefore, this was the character of Ananus, he thoughthe had now a proper opportunity [to exercise his authority,]because Festus was dead, and Albinus was but upon the road;so he assembles the sanhedrim of judges, and brings beforethem James, the brother of Jesus, who was called Christ, andsome others [of his companions,] and when he had formed anaccusation against them, as breakers of the law, he deliveredthem to be stoned: but as for those who seemed the mostequitable of the citizens, and those who were the most uneasyat the breach of the laws, they disliked what was done. Theyalso sent to the king [Agrippa,] desiring him to send toAnanus that he should act so no more, for that what he hadalready done could not be justified, &c.
About A. D. 360. Ambrose or Hegesippus de Excul.Urb. lIierosolym. lib. ii. cap. 12.—We have discovered thatit was the opinion and belief of the Jews, as Josephus affirms(who is an author not to be rejecter], when he writes againsthimself,) that Herod lost his army, not by the deceit of men,but by the anger of God, and that justly, as an effect of re­venge for what he did to John the Baptist, a just man, whohad said to him, It is not lawful for thee to have thy brother'swife.
The Jews themselves also bear witness to Christ, as appearsby Josephus, the writer of their history, who says thus: —That there was at that time a wise man, if, says he, it belawful to have him called a man, a doer of wonderful works,







OCR Output








418 F L A V I U S J 0 S E P H U S [B. II.


of them have not obtained the privileges of citizens in propertimes, but style those who are well known to have had thatprivilege extended to them all no other than foreigners; forit does not appear that any of the kings have ever formerlybestowed those privileges of citizens upon Egyptians, no morethan have the emperors done it more lately; while it wasAlexander who introduced us into this city at first, the kingsaugmented our privileges therein, and the Romans have beenpleased to preserve them always inviolable. Moreover, Apionwould lay a blot upon us, because we do not erect images forour emperors; as if those emperors did not know this before,or stood in need of Apion as their defender; whereas he oughtrather to have admired the magnanimity and modesty of theRomans, whereby they do not compel those that are subjectto them to transgress the laws of their countries, but arewilling to receive the honors due to them after such a manneras those who are to pay them esteem consistent with pietyand with their own laws ; for they do not thank people forconferring honors upon them, when they are compelled byviolence so to do. Accordingly, since the Grecians and someother nations think it aright thing to make images; nay,when they have painted the pictures of their parents, andwives, and children, they exult for joy; and some there arewho take pictures for themselves of such persons as were noway related to them; nay, some take the pictures of suchservants as they were fond of. What wonder is it, then, ifsuch as these appear willing to pay the same respect to theirprinces and lords ? But, then, our legislator hath forbiddenus to make images, not by way of denunciation beforehand,that the Roman authority was not to be honored, but as de­spising a thing that was neither necessary nor useful for eitherGod or man; and he forbade them, as we shall prove here­after, to make these images for any part of the animal crea­tion, and much less for God himself, who is no part of suchanimal creation. Yet hath our legislator nowhere forbiddenus to pay honors to worthy men, provided they be of anotherkind, and inferior to those we pay to God : with which honorswe willingly testify our respect to our emperors and to the







OCR Output








348 THE SICARII AT ALEXANDRIA. [B. VII.


3. So Ptolemy complied with his proposals, and gave hima place' one hundred and eighty furlongs distant from Mem­phis. That Nomos was called the Nomos of Heliopolis, whereOnias built a fortress and a temple not like to that at Jeru­salem, but such as resembled a tower. He built it of largestones to the height of sixty cubits: he made the structureof the altar in imitation of that in our own country, and inlike manner adorned with gifts, excepting the make of thecandlestick; for he did not make a candlestick, but had a[single] lamp hammered out of a piece of gold, which illu­minated the place with its rays, and which he hung by achain of gold>; but the entire temple was encompassed witha wall of burnt brick, though it had gates of stone. Theking also gave him a large country for a revenue in money,that both the priests might have a plentiful provision madefor them, and that God might have great abundance of whatthings were necessary for his worship. Yet did not Oniasdo this out of a sober disposition, but he had a mind to con­tend with the Jews at Jerusalem, and could not forget theindignation he had for being banished thence. Accordingly,he thought that, by building this temple, he should draw awaya great number from them to himself. There had been alsoa certain ancient prediction made by [a prophet,] whosename was Isaiah, about six hundred years before, that thistemple should be built by a man that was a Jew in Egypt.2And this is the history of the building of that temple.
4. And now Lupus, the governor of Alexandria, upon thereceipt of Caesar's letter, came to the temple, and carried outof it some of the donations dedicated thereto, and shut upthe temple itself. And as Lupus died a little afterward,Paulinus succeeded him. This man left none of those dona­


1 We must observe, that Josephus here speaks of Antiochus, who profanedthe temple, as now alive, when Onias had leave given him by Philometer tobuild his temple; whereas it seems not to have been actually built till aboutfifteen years afterwards. Vet because it is said in the Antiquities, that Oniaswent to Philometer, B. xii. ch. ix. sect. 7, during the lifetime of that Antio­chus, it is probable he petitioned, and, perhaps, obtained his leave then,though it wcro not actually built or finished till fifteen ycars afterward.
2 Isa. xix. 18-23.







OCR Output








208 TITUS RESUMES [B. V.


there that does not know how Egypt was overrun with allsorts of wild beasts, and consumed by all sorts of distempers ?how their land did not bring forth its fruit ? how the Nilofailed of water ? how the ten plagues of Egypt followed uponone another ? and how by those means our fathers were sentaway under a guard, without any bloodshed, and withoutrunning any dangers, because God conducted them as hispeculiar servants 1 Moreover, did not Palestine groan underthe ravages the Assyrians1 made, when they carried awayour sacred ark ? as did their idol Dagon, and as also did thatentire nation of those that carried it away; how they weresmitten with a loathsome distemper in the secret parts oftheir bodies, when their very bowels came down togetherwith what they had eaten, till those hands that stole it awaywere obliged to bring it back again, and that with the soundof cymbals and timbrels, and other oblations, in order toappease the anger of God for their violation of his holy ark.It was God who then became our general, and accomplishedthese great things for our fathers, and this because they didnot meddle with war and fighting, but committed it to himto judge about their affairs. When Sennacherib, king ofAssyria, brought along with him all Asia, and encompassedthis city round with his army, did ho fall by the hands ofmen ? were not those hands lifted up to God in prayers, with­out meddling with their arms, when an angel of God destroyedthat prodigious army in one night? when the Assyrian king,as he arose the next day, found a hundred fourscore and fivothousand dead bodies, and when he, with the remainder ofhis army fled away from the Hebrews, though they were un­armed, and did not pursue them. You are also acquainted


1 Note here, that Josephus, in this his same admirable speech, calls theSyrians, nay, even the Philistines on the most south part of Syria, Assyrians;which Keland observes as what was common among the ancient writers.Note also, that Josephus might well put the Jews in mind, as he does heremore than once, of their wonderful and truly miraculous deliverance fromSennacherib, king of Assyria, while the Roman army, and himself withthem, were now encamped upon and beyond that very spot of ground wherethe Assyrian army lay 780 years before, and which retained the very nameof the C'imp of the Assyrians to that very day. See chap. vii. sect. 3, andchnp. xii. si-ct. 2.







OCR Output
















OCR Output








C. VIII.] MASADA AND THE SICARII. 82&


regard to God might be preserved: they thence proceeded todestroy utterly the least remains of a political government,and introduced the most complete scene of iniquity in allinstances that were practicable, under which scene, that sortof people that were called zealots grew up, and who, indeed,corresponded to the name; for they imitated every wickedwork ; nor, if their memory suggested any evil thing that hadformerly been done, did they avoid zealously to pursue thesame; and although they gave themselves that name fromtheir zeal for what was good, yet did it agree to them onlyby way of irony, on account of those they had unjustly treatedby their wild and brutish disposition, or as thinking thegreatest mischiefs to be the greatest good. Accordingly,they all met with such ends as God deservedly brought uponthem in way of punishment; for all such miseries have beensent upon them as man's nature is capable of undergoing,till the utmost period of their lives, and till death came uponthem in various ways of torment; yet might one say justlythat they suffered less than they had done, because it wasimpossible they could be punished according to their de­serving. But to make a lamentation according to the desertsof those who fell under these men's barbarity, this is not aproper place for it: I, therefore, now return again to theremaining part of the present narration.
2. For now it was that the Roman general came and ledhis army against Eleazar, and those Sicarii who held thefortress Masada together with him ; and for the wholecountry adjoining, he presently gained it, and put garrisonsinto the most proper places of it: he also built a wall <juiteround the entire fortress, that none of the besieged mighteasily escape: he also set his men to guard the several partsof it: he also pitched his camp in such an agreeble place ashe had chosen for the siege, and at which place the rockbelonging to the fortress did make the nearest approach tothe neighboring mountain, which yet was a place of difficultyfor getting plenty of provisions : for it was not only food thatwas to be brought from a great distance [to the army,] andthis with a great deal of pain to those Jews who were


28 *







OCR Output








B. I.] AGAINST APION. 383


also, a still anclenter writer, and a poet, makes mention ofour nation, and informs us that it came to the assistance ofking Xerxes in his expedition against Greece. For, in hisenumeration of all those nations, he last of all, inserts oursamong the rest, when he says, — " At the last there passedover a people wonderful to be beheld; for they spake thePhoenician tongue with their mouths; they dwelt in theSolymean mountains near a broad lake : their heads weresooty; they had round rasures on them; their heads andfaces were like nasty horse heads also, that had been hardenedin the smoke."
I think, therefore, that it is evident to every body, thatCherilus means us, because the Solymean mountains are inour country, wherein we inhabit, as is also the lako calledAsphaltitis; for this is a broader and larger lake than anyother that is in Syria: and thus does Cherilus make mentionof us. But now, that not only the lowest sort of the Gre­cians, but those that are had in the greatest admiration fortheir philosophic improvements among them, did not onlyknow the Jews, but when they lighted upon any of them ad­mired them also, it is easy for any one to know. ForClearchus, who was the scholar of Aristotle, and inferior tono one of the Peripateties whomsoever, in his first book con­cerning sleep says, —" That Aristotle his master relatedwhat follows of a Jew," and sets down Aristotle's own dis­


to bo desired by Xerxes for his army as the Jews, to whom he was alwaysvery favorable. As for the rest of Cherilus's description, that their headswere sooty ; thai they had round rasures oa their heads; that their heads andfaces ucre like nasty horse heads, which had beea hardened in the smoke; theseawkward characters probably fitted the Solymi of Pisidia no better thanthey did the Jews in Judea. And, indeed, this reproachful languago heregiven theso people, is to me a strong indication that they were the poordespicable Jews, and not the Pisidian Solymi celebrated in Homer, whomCherilus here describes; nor are wo to expect that either Cherilus or Ilcca-teus, or any other Pagan writers cited by Josephus and Eusebius, made nomistakes in the Jewish history. If, by comparing their testimonies with themore authentic record of that nation, wo find them, for the main, to confirmthe same ns we always do, we ought to be satisfied, and not expect thatthey ever had an exact knowledge of all the circumstances of the Jewishaffairs, which, indeed, it was almost always impossible for them to havp.See sect. 23.







OCR Output








C. IX.] THE SIEGE. 205


"To spare themselves, to spare their country and their tem­ple, and not to he more obdurate in these cases than foreign­ers themselves: for that the Romans, who had no relation tothose things, had a reverence for their sacred rites and places,although they belonged to their enemies, and had till nowkept their hands off from meddling with them, while such aswere brought up under them, and, if they be preserved, willbe the only people that will reap the benefit of them, hurryon to have them destroyed. That certainly they have seentheir strongest walls demolished, and that the wall still re­maining was weaker than those that were already taken.That they must know the Roman power was invincible, andthat they had been used to serve them; for that in case it beallowed a right thing to fight for liberty, that ought to havebeen done at first; but for them that have once fallen underthe power of the Romans, and have now submitted to themfor so many years, to pretend to shake off that yoke after­ward, was the work of such as had a mind to die miserably,not of such as were lovers of liberty. Besides, men may wellenough grudge at the dishonor of owning ignoble mastersover them, but ought not to do so to those who have all thingsunder their command: for what part of the world is there thathath escaped the Romans, unless it be such as are of no usefor violent heat or for violent cold ? And evident it is thatfortune is on all hands gone over to them ; and that God,when he had gone round the nations with this dominion, isnow settled in Italy. That, moreover, it is a strong and fixedlaw, even among brute beasts as well as among men, to yieldto those that are too strong for them, and to suffer those tohave the dominion who are too hard for the rest in w:ir. Forwhich reason it was that their forefathers, who were far supe­rior to them both in their souls and bodies and other advan­tages, did yet submit to the Komans, which they would nothave suffered, had they not known that God was with them.As for themselves, what can they depend on in this theiropposition, when the greatest part of their city is alreadytaken ? and when those that are within it are under greatermiseries than if they were taken, although their walls be stillIV. —18







OCR Output








320 DISSERTATION III.


ANNALS, book xii.


But he that was the brother of Pallas, whose surname wasFelix, did not act with the same moderation [as did Pallashimself.] He had been a good while ago set over Judea,and thought he might be guilty of all sorts of wickednesswith impunity, while he relied on so sure an authority.
The Jews had almost given a specimen of sedition; andeven after the death of Caius was known, and they had notobeyed his command, there remained a degree of fear, lestsome future prince should renew that command [for thesetting up the prince's statue in their temple.] And in themeantime, Felix, by the use of unseasonable remedies, blewup the coals of sedition into a flame, and was imitated by hispartner in the government, Ventidius Cumanus; the countrybeing thus divided between them, that the nation of theGalileans were under Cumanus, and the Samaritans underFelix, which two nations were of old at variance, but now,out of contempt of their governors, did less restrain theirhatred: they then began to plunder one another, to send inparties of robbers, to lie in wait, and sometimes to fightbattles, and withal to bring spoils and prey to the procurators,[Cumanus and Felix.] Whereupon these procurators beganto rejoice; yet when the mischief grew considerable, soldierswere sent to quiet them, but the soldiers were killed; and theprovince had been in the flame of war, had not Quadratus,the president of Syria, afforded his assistance. Nor was itlong in dispute whether the Jews who had killed the soldiersin the mutiny should be put to death: it was agreed theyshould die ; only Cumanus and Felix occasioned a delay; forClaudius, upon hearing the causes as to this rebellion, hadgiven [Quadratus] authority to determine the case, even asto the procurators themselves; but Quadratus showed Felixamong the judges, and took him into his seat of judgment, onpurpose that he might discourage his accusers. So Cumanus







OCR Output








400 FLAVIUS JOSEPHUS [B. I.


then says that " those who came from Jerusalem, and madethis invasion, got the granaries of Egypt into their possession,and perpetrated many of the most horrid actions there." Andthence he reproaches them, as though he had not himself in­troduced them as enemies, or as though he might accuse suchas were invited from another place for so doing, when thonatural Egyptians themselves had done the same things beforetheir coming, and had taken oaths so to do. However, "Ame-nophis some time afterward came upon them, and conqueredthem in battle, and slew his enemies, and drove them beforehim as far as Syria." As if Egypt were so easily taken bypeople that come from any place whatsoever; and as if thosethat had conquered it by war, when they were informed thatAmenophis was alive, did neither fortify the avenues out ofEthiopia into it, although they had great advantages for doingit, nor did get their other forces ready for their defence; butthat " he followed them over the sandy desert, and slew themas far as Syria;" while yet it is not an easy thing for anarmy to pass over that country, even without fighting.
30. Our nation, therefore, according to Manctho, was notderived from Egypt, nor were any of the Egyptians mingledwith us. For it is to be supposed that many of the leprousand distempered people were dead in the mines, since theyhad been there a long time, and in so ill a condition ; manyothers must be dead in the battles that happened afterward,and more still in the last battle and flight after it.
31. It now remains that I debate with Manetho aboutMoses. Now tho Egyptians acknowledge him to have beena wonderful and a divine person; nay, they would willinglylay claim to him themselves, though after a most abusive andincredible manner, and pretend that ho was of Hcliopolis,and one of the priests of that place, and was ejected out ofit among the rest, on account of his leprosy ; although it hadbeen demonstrated out of their records, that he lived fivehundred and eighteen years earlier, and then brought ourforefathers out of Egypt into the country that is now in­habited by us. But now that he was not subject in his bodyto any such calamity, is evident from what he himself tellp







OCR Output








C. IX.] JERUSALEM. 135


when he heard that Galba was made emperor, he attemptednothing till he also should send him some directions aboutthe war: however, he sent his son Titus to him to salute him,and to receive his commands about the Jews. Upon the verysame errand did king Agrippa sail along with Titus to Galba:but as they were sailing in their long ships by the coasts ofAchaia, for it was winter-time, they heard that Galba wasslain before they could get to him, after he had reigned sevenmonths and as many days. After whom Otho took the go­vernment, and undertook the management of public affairs.So Agrippa resolved to go on to Rome without any terror,on account of the change in the government; but Titus, by adivine impulse, sailed back from Greece to Syria, and camein great haste to Caesarea, to his father. And now they wereboth in suspense about the public affairs, the Roman empirebeing then in a fluctuating condition, and did not go on withtheir expedition against the Jews, but thought that to makeany attack upon foreigners was now unseasonable, on accountof the solicitude they were in for their own country.
3. And now there arose another war at Jerusalem. Therewas a son of Giora, one Simon, by birth of Gerasa, a youngman not so cunning, indeed, as John [of Gischala,] who hadalready seized upon the city, but superior in strength ofbody and courage: on which account, when he had beendriven away from that Acrabattene toparchy which he oncehad by Ananus the high-priest, he came to those robbers whohad seized upon Masada. At the first they suspected him,and only permitted him to come with the woman he broughtwith him into the lower part of the fortress, while they dweltin the upper part of it themselves. However, his mannersso well agreed with theirs, and he seemed so trusty a man,that he went out with them, and ravaged and destroyed thecountry with them about Masada: yet when he persuadedthem to undertake greater things, he could not prevail with. them so to do; for as they were accustomed to dwell in thatcitadel, they were afraid of going far from that which wastheir hiding place: but he affecting to tyrannize, and beingfond of greatness, when he had heard of the death of Ananus







OCR Output








C. III.] DANGER OF THE JEWS AT ANTIOCU. 303


upon the theatre at a time when the people of Antioch wereassembled together, and became an informer against his father,and accused both him and others that they had resolved toburn the whole city in one night; he also delivered up tothem some Jews that were foreigners, as partners in theirresolutions. When the people heard this, they could notrefrain their passion, but commanded that those who weredelivered up to them should have fire brought to burn them,who were accordingly all burnt upon the theatre immediately.They did also fall violently upon the multitude of the Jews,as supposing that, by punishing them suddenly, they shouldsave their own city. As for Antiochus, he aggravated therage they were in, and thought to give them a demonstrationof his own conversion, and of his hatred of the Jewish customs,by sacrificing after the manner of the Greeks; he persuadedthe rest also to compel them to do the same, because theywould by that means discover who they were that had plottedagainst them, since they would not do so ; and when the peoploof Antioch tried the experiment, some few complied, but thosethat would not do so were slain. As for Antiochus himself,he obtained soldiers from the Roman commander, and becamea severe master over his own citizens, not permitting them torest on the seventh day, but forcing them to do all that theyusually did on other days ; and to that degree of distress didhe reduce them in this matter, that the rest of the seventhday was dissolved not only at Antioch, but the same thingwhich took thence its rise was done in other cities also, in likemanner, for some small time.
4. Now, after these misfortunes had happened to the Jewsat Antioch, a second calamity befell them, the description ofwhich when we were going about, we premised the accountforegoing: for upon this accident, whereby tho four-squaromarket-place was burnt down, as well as the archives, andthe place where the public records were preserved, and thoroyal palaces (and it was not without difficulty that the fire


place out of Fuller's Miscellanies. They had the like governor or governorsallowed them at Babylon under their captivity there, as the history of Su­sanna implies.







OCR Output








176 JERUSALEM. [B. V.


in the Grecian language, may be called The Neio City. Since,therefore, its inhabitants stood in need of a covering, thefather of the present king, and of the same name with him,Agrippa, began that wall we spoke of; but he left off buildingit when he had only laid the foundations, out of the fear hewas in of Claudius Caesar, lest he should suspect that sostrong a wall was built in order to make some innovation inpublic affairs; for the city could no way have been taken, ifthat wall had been finished in the manner it was begun ; asits parts were connected together by stones twenty cubits longand ten cubits broad, which could never have been eithereasily undermined by any iron tools, or shaken by any en­gines. The wall was, however, ten cubits wide, and it wouldprobably have had a height greater than that, had not hiszeal who began it been hindered from exerting itself. Afterthis it was erected with great diligence by the Jews as highas twenty cubits, above which it had battlements of two cubits,and turrets of three cubits altitude, insomuch that the entirealtitude extended as far as twenty-five cubits.
3. Now the towers that were upon it were twenty cubits inbreadth and twenty cubits in height; they were square, andsolid as was the wall itself, wherein the niccness of the jointsand the beauty of the stones were no way inferior to those ofthe holy house itself. Above this solid altitude of the tow­ers, which was twenty cubits, there were rooms of great mag­nificence, and over them upper rooms, and cisterns to receiverain-water. They were many in number, and the steps bywhich you ascended up to them were every one broad. Ofthese towers, then, the third wall had ninety, and the spacesbetween them were each two hundred cubits; but in themiddle wall were forty towers, and the old wall was partedinto sixty, while the whole compass of the city was thirty-three furlongs. Now, the third wall was all of it wonderful;yet was the tower Psephinus elevated above it at the north­west corner, and where Titus pitched his own tent; for, be­ing seventy cubits high, it both afforded a prospect of Arabiaat sun-rising, as well as it did of the utmost limits of the He­brew possessions at the sea westward. Moreover, it was an







OCR Output








178 JERUSALEM. [b. v,


its length were twenty cubits, and were equal to each other:its upper buildings were more magnificent, and had greatervariety than the other towers had; for the king thought itmost proper for him to adorn that which was denominatedfrom his wife better than those denominated from men, asthose wore built stronger than this that bore his wife's name.The entire height of this tower was fifty cubits.
4. Now, as these towers were so very tall, they appearedmuch taller by the place on which they stood; for that veryold wall wherein they were was built upon a high wall, andwas itself a kind of elevation that was still thirty cubitstaller; over which were the towers situated, and thereby weremade much higher to appearance. The largeness also of thestones was wonderful; for they were not made of commonsmall stones, nor of such larger ones only as men could carry,but they were of white marble, cut out of the rock; eachstone was twenty cubits in length, and ten in breadth, andfive in depth. They were so exactly united to one another,that each tower looked like one entire rock of stone, so grow­ing naturally, and afterward cut by the hands of the artificersinto their present shape and corners ; so little, or not at all,did their joints or connexion appear. Now, as these towerswere themselves on the north side of the wall, the king had apalace inwardly thereto adjoined, which exceeds all my abilityto describe it; for it was so very curious as to want no costnor skill in its construction, but was entirely walled about tothe height of thirty cubits, and was adorned with towers atequal distances, and with large bed-chambers, that could con­tain beds for a hundred guests a-piece, in which the varietyof the stones is not to be expressed; for a large quantity ofthose that were rare of that kind was collected together.Their roofs were also wonderful, both for the length of thebeams and the splendor of their ornaments. The number ofthe rooms was also very great, and the variety of the figuresthat were about them was prodigious; their furniture wascomplete, and the greatest part of the vessels that were putin them was of silver and gold. There were besides manyporticoes, one beyond another, round about, and in each of







OCR Output








VIII.] MASADA AND THE SICARII. 327


CHAPTER VIII.
CONCERNING MASADA, AND THOSE SICARII WHO KEPT IT J ANDHOW SILVA BETOOK HIMSELF TO FORM THE SIEGE OF THATCITADEL. ELEAZAR'S SPEECHES TO THE BESIEGED.
§ 1. When Bassus was dead in Judea, Flavius Silvasucceeded him as procurator there; who when he saw thatall the rest of the country was suhducd in this war, and thatthere was but one only strong hold that was still in rebellion,he got all his army together, that lay in different places, andmade an expedition against it. This fortress was calledMasada. It was one Eleazar, a potent man, and the com­mander of these Sicarii, that had seized upon it. Ho was adescendant from that Judas who had persuaded abundanceof the Jews, as we have formerly related, not to submit tothe taxation when Cyrenius was sent into Judea to make one;for then it was that the Sicarii got together against thosethat were willing to submit to the Romans, and treated themin all respects as if they had been their enemies, both byplundering them of what they had, by driving away theircattle, and by setting fire to their houses; for they said thatthey differed not at all from foreigners, by betraying in socowardly a manner that freedom which Jews thought worthyto be contended for to the utmost, and by owning that theypreferred slavery under the Romans before such a contention.Now this was in reality no better than a pretence and acloak for the barbarity which was made use of by them, andto color over their own avarice, which they afterwards madeevident by their own actions; for those that were partnerswith them in their rebellion joined also with them in the waragainst the Romans, and went farther lengths with them intheir impudent undertakings against them ; and when theywere again convicted of dissembling in such their pretences,they still more abused those that justly reproached them fortheir wickedness. And, indeed, that was a time most fertilein all manner of wicked practices, insomuch that no kind of







OCR Output








B. I.] AG AINST APION. 391


this self-contradiction hath happened to many other authors,by reason of their ill-will to some people, I conclude is notunknown to such as have read histories with sufficient care;for some of them have endeavored to disgrace the nobilityof certain nations, and of some of the most glorious cities,and have cast reproaches upon certain forms of government.Thus hath Theopompus abused the city of Athens, Polycratesthat of Lacedoemon, as hath he that hath wrote the Tripoli-ticus (for he is not Theopompus as is supposed by some) doneby the city of Thebes. Timeus also hath greatly abused theforegoing people and others also: and this ill-treatment theyuse chiefly when they have a contest with men of the greatestreputation : some out of envy and malice, and others, as sup­posing that, by this foolish talking of theirs, they may bethought worthy of being remembered themselves; and, indeed,they do by no means fail of their hopes with regard to thefoolish part of mankind, but men of sober judgment still con­demn them of great malignity.
25. Now the Egyptians were the first that cast reproachesupon us; in order to please which nation some others under­took to pervert the truth, while they would neither own thatour forefathers came into Egypt from another country, asthe fact was, nor give a true account of our departure thence.And, indeed, the Egyptians took many occasions to hate usand envy us: in the first place, because our ancestors' hadhad the dominion over their country; and when they weredelivered from them, and gone to their own country again,they lived there in prosperity; in the next place, the differ­ence of our religion from theirs hath occasioned great enmitybetween us, while our way of divine worship did as much ex­ceed that which their laws appointed, as does the nature ofGod exceed that of brute beasts; for so far they all agreethrough the whole country, to esteem such animals as gods,although they differ one from another in the peculiar worshipthey severally pay to them. And certainly men they are en­tirely of vain and foolish minds, who have thus accustomed
1 The Phoenician shepherds, whom Joscphus mistook for the Israelites.See the note on sect. 10.







OCR Output








114 CRUELTY OF [b. IV.


as they intended to have Zacharias,1 the son of Baruch, onoof the most eminent of the citizens, slain; so what provokedthem against him was that hatred of wickedness and love ofliberty which were so eminent in him: he was also a richman, so that by taking him off, they did not only hope toseize his effects, but also to get rid of a man that had greatpower to destroy them. So they called together, by a publicproclamation, seventy of the principal men of the populace,for a show, as if they were real judges, while they had noproper authority. Before these was Zacharias accused of adesign to betray their polity to the Romans, and had traitor­ously sent to Vespasian for that purpose. Now there ap­peared no proof or sign of what he was accused, but theyaffirmed themselves, that they were well persuaded that so itwas, and desired that such their affirmation might be takenfor sufficient evidence. Now when Zacharias plainly sawthat there was no way remaining for his escape from them,as having been treacherously called before them, and thenput in prison, but not with any intention of a legal trial, hetook great liberty of speech in that despair of his life he wasunder. Accordingly, he stood up, and laughed at their pre­


1 Some commentators are ready to suppose, that this Zacharias the son ofBaruch, hero most unjustly slain by the Jews in the temple, was the verysame person with Zacharias the son of Burachias, whom our Savior says theJews slew between the temple and the altar. Matt, xxiii. 35. This is n some­what strange exposition ; since Zi-chariah the prophet was really the son ofBarachia and grandson of Iddo, Zech. i. 1, and how he died, we have no otheraccount than that before us in St. Matthew, while this Zacharia was the sonof Baruch; since the slaughter was past when our Savior spoke those words,the Jews had then already slain him; whereas this slaughter of Zachariasthe son of Baruch, in Josephus, was then about 34 years future; and sincethat slaughter was between the temple and the altar, in the court of the priests,one of tho most sacred and remote parts of the whole temple, while thiswas, in Josephus's own words, in the middle of the temple, nnd much themost probably in the court of Israel only (for we have had no intimationthat the zealots had at this time profaned the court of the priests. See B.v. ch. i. sect. 2.) Nor do I believe that our Josephus, who always insists onthe peculiar sacredness of that inmost court, and of the holy house that wasin it, would have omitted so material an aggravation of this barharousmurder, as perpetrated in a place so very holy, had that been the true placeof it. Sec Anticl. B xi. ch. vii. 6cct. 1, and the note here on B. v. ch. i.sect '1.







OCR Output








C. IX.J TITUS IN THE CITY. 291


2. And now, since his soldiers were already quite tiredwith killing men, and yet there appeared to be a vastmultitude still remaining alive, Caesar gave orders that theyshould kill none but those that were in arms, and opposedthem, but should take the rest alive. But, together withthose whom they had orders to slay, they slew the aged andthe infirm ; but for those that were in their flourishing age,and who might be useful to them, they drove them togetherinto the temple, and shut them up within the walls of thecourt of the women; over which Caesar set one of his freed-men, as also Fronto, one of his own friends, which last wasto determine every one's fate, according to his merits. Sothis Fronto slew all those that had been seditious androbbers, who were impeached one by another; but of theyoung men he chose out the tallest and most beautiful, andreserved them for the triumph: and as for the rest of themultitude that were above seventeen years old, he put theminto bonds, and sent them to the Egyptian1 mines. Titusalso sent a great number into the provinces, as a present tothem, that they might be destroyed upon their theatres bythe sword and by the wild beasts; but those that were underseventeen years of age were sold for slaves. Now, duringthe days wherein Fronto was distinguishing these men, thereperished for want of food eleven thousand, some of which didnot taste any food, through the hatred their guards bore tothem, and others would not take in any when it was giventhem. The multitude also was so very great, that they werein want even of corn for their sustenance.
3. Now, the number2 of those that were carried captive


1 See the several predictions, that the Jews, if they became obstinate intheir idolatry and wickedness, should bo sent again, or sold, into Egypt, fortheir punishment, Deut. xxviii. 68; Jer. xiv. 7; Hos. viii. 13; ix. 3; xi. 4,5; Esd. xv. 10-13, with Authentic Records, Part i. page 49, 121, and RelandPalaestina, torn. ii. page 715.
* The whole multitude of Jews that were destroyed during the entire sevenyears before this time, in all the countries of and bordering on Judea, issummed up by Archbishop Usher, from Lypsius, out of Josephus, at theyear of Christ 70, and amounts to 1,337,490. Nor could there have beenthat number of Jews in Jerusalem to be destroyed in this siege, as will bepresently set down by Josephus; but that both Jews and proselytes of







OCR Output








C. III.] POSITION OF THE ROMANS. 173


low-soldiers, and made supplication to him, that he wouldpardon the rashness of a few on account of the better obe­dience of all the rest; and promised for them, that theyshould make amends for their present fault by their morevirtuous behavior for the time to come.
5. So Caesar complied with their desires, and with whatprudence dictated to him also ; for he esteemed it fit to punishsingle persons by real executions, but that the punishmentof great multitudes should proceed no farther than reproofs:so he was reconciled to the soldiers, but gave them a specialcharge to act more wisely for the future; and he consideredwith himself how he might be even with the Jews for theirstratagem. And now, when the space between the Romansand the wall had been levelled, which was done in four days,and as he was desirous to bring the baggage of the army,with the rest of the multitude that followed him, safely to thecamp, he set the strongest part of his army over against thatwall which lay on the north quarter of the city, and overagainst the western part of it, and made his army seven deep,with the footmen placed before them, and the horsemen behindthem, each of the last in three ranks, while the archers stoodin the midst in seven ranks. And now, as the Jews wereprohibited, by so great a body of men, from making salliesupon the Romans, both the beasts that bare the burdens, andbelonged to the three legions, and the rest of the multitude,marched on without any fear. But as for Titus himself, hewas but about two furlongs distant from the wall, at that partof it where was the corner,' and over against that tower whichwas called Psephinus; at which tower the compass of thewall belonging to the north bended, and extended itself overagainst the west; but the other part of the army fortified it­self at the tower called Jiippicus, and was distant, in likemanner, but two furlongs from the city. However, the tenthlegion continued in its own place upon the Mount of Olives.


1 Perhaps, says Dr. Hudson, here was that gate called the Gate of theCorner, in 2 Chron. xxvi. 9. See ch. iv. sect. 2


15*







OCR Output








92 THE HIGH-PRIEST ANANUS. [B. IV.


the son of Josephus, and Symeon1 the son of Gamaliel, whoencouraged them, by going up and down when they were as­sembled together in crowds, and as they saw them alone, tobear no longer, but to inflict punishment upon these pestsand plagues of their freedom, and to purge the temple ofthese bloody polluters of it. The best esteemed also of thehigh-priests, Jesus the son of Gamala, and Ananus the son ofAnanus, when they were at their assemblies, bitterly re­proached the people for their sloth, and excited them againstthe zealots; for that was the name they went by, as if theywere zealous in good undertakings, and were not rather zeal­ous in the worst actions, and extravagant in them beyondthe example of others.
10. And now, when the multitude were gotten together toan assembly, and every one was in indignation at these men'sseizing upon the sanctuary, at their rapine and murders, buthad not yet begun their attacks upon them (the reason ofwhich was this, that they imagined it to be a difficult thingto suppress these zealots, as, indeed, the case was,) Ananusstood in the midst of them, and casting his eyes frequentlyat the temple, and having a flood of tears in his eyes, he said,—" Certainly it had been good for me to die before I hadseen the house of God full of so many abominations, or thesesacred places, that ought not to be trodden upon at random,filled with the feet of these blood-shedding villains; yet do I,who am clothed with the vestments of high-priesthood, andam called by that most venerable name [of high-priest,] stilllive, and am but too fond of living, and cannot endure to un­dergo a death which would be the glory of my old age; andif 1 were the only person concerned, and as it were in adesert, I would give up my life, and that alone for God'ssake; for to what purpose is it to live among a people insen­


1 This Symeon, the son of Gamaliel, is mentioned as the president of theJewish sanhedrim, and one that perished in thu destruction of Jerusalem, bythe Jewish rabbins, as Reland observes on this place. He also tells us, thatthose rabbins mention one Jesus, the son of Gamala, ns once a high-priest,but this long before the destruction of Jerusalem; so that if he were thesame person with this Jesus, the son of Gamala, in Josephus, he must havelived to be very old, or they have been very bad chronologers.







OCR Output








408 F L A V I U S J"0 S E P H L S [B. II.


ever, it is not a very easy thing to go over this man's dis­course, nor to know plainly what he means; yet does heseem, amidst a great confusion and disorder in his falsehoods,to produce, in the first place, such things as resemble whatwe have examined already, and relate to the departure of ourforefathers out of Egypt: and, in the second place, he ac­cuses those Jews that arc inhabitants of Alexandria; as, inthe third place, he mixes with those things such accusationsas concern the sacred purifications with the other legal ritesused in the temple.
2. Now, although I cannot but think that I have alreadydemonstrated, and that abundantly more than was necessary,that our fathers were not originally Egyptians, nor werethence expelled, neither on account of bodily diseases or anyother calamities of that sort; yet will I briefly take notice ofwhat Apion adds upon that subject: for in his third book,which relates to the affairs of Egypt, he speaks thus: " Ihave heard of the ancient men of Egypt, that Moses was of Hc-liopolis, and that he thought himself obliged to follow thecustoms of his forefathers, and offered his prayers in the openair towards the city walls ; but that he reduced them all to bedirected towards sunrising, which was agreeable to the situa­tion of Heliopolis: that he also set up pillars instead ofgnomons,1 under which was represented a cavity like that ofa boat, and the shadow that fell from their tops fell downupon that cavity, that it might go round about the like courseas the sun itself goes round in the other." This is that won­derful relation which we have given us by this great gram­marian. But that it is a false one is so plain, that it standsin need of few words to prove it, but is manifest from theworks of Moses; for when he erected the first tabernacle toGod, he did himself neither give order for any such kind of arepresentation to be made at it, nor ordain that those thatcame after him should make such a one. Moreover, when,in a future age, Solomon built his temple in Jerusalem, he


1 This seems to have been the first dial Miat had been made in Egypt, andwas a little before the time that Ahaz made his [first] dial in Judea, andabout anno 755, in the first year of the seventh Olympiad as we shall seepresently. Sec 2 Kings, xx. 11 ; Isaiah, xxxviii. 8.







OCR Output








96 THE HIGH-PRIEST ANANUS. [b. IV.


against themselves, and these impious wretches will be killedby their own darts : let us but make our appearance beforethem, and they will come to nothing. However, it is a rightthing, if there should bo any danger in the attempt, to diebefore these holy gates, and to spend our very lives, if notfor the sake of our children and wives, yet for God's sake,and for the sake cf his sanctuary. I will assist you bothwith my counsel and with my hand ; nor shall any sagacityof ours be wanting for your support, nor shall you see that Iwill be sparing of my body neither."
11. By these motives Ananus encouraged the multitude togo against the zealots, although he knew how difficult it wouldbe to disperse them, because of their multitude, and theiryouth, and the courage of their souls, but chiefly because oftheir consciousness of what they had done, since they wouldnot yield, as not so much as hoping for pardon at the last forthose their enormities. However, Ananus resolved to undergowhatever sufferings might come upon him, rather than over­look things now they were in such great confusion. So thomultitude cried out to him to lead them on against those whomhe had described in his exhortation to them, and every oneof them was most readily disposed to run any hazard what­soever on that account.
12. Now while Ananus was choosing out his men, and put­ting those who were proper for his purpose in array for fight­ing, the zealots got information of his undertaking (for therewere some who went to them, and told them all that the peoplewere doing,) and were irritated at it, and leaping out of thetemple in crowds and by parties, spared none whom they metwith. Upon this Ananus got the populace together on thesudden, who were more numerous, indeed, than the zealots,but inferior to them in arms, because they had not been regu­larly put into array for fighting: but the alacrity that everybody showed supplied all their defects on both sides, the citi­zens taking up so great a passion as was stronger than arms,and deriving a degree of courage from the temple more forci­ble than any multitude whatsoever; and indeed these citizensthought it was not possible for them to dwell in the city, un­







OCR Output








128 VESPASIAN HASTES [B. IV


CHAPTER VIII.
HOW VESPASIAN, UPON HEARING OF SOME COMMOTIONS INGALL,1 MADE HASTE TO FINISH THE JEWISH WAR : A DE­SCRIPTION OF JERICHO AND OF THE GREAT PLAIN ; WITH ANACCOUNT BESIDES OF THE LAKE ASPnALTITIS.
§ 1. In the mean time an account came that there werecommotions in Gall, and that Vinilex, together with the menof power in that country, had revolted from Nero: whichaffair is more accurately described elsewhere. This report,thus related to Vespasian, excited him to go on briskly withthe war ; for he foresaw already the civil wars which werecoming upon them, nay, that the very government was indanger ; and he thought, if he could first reduce the easternparts of the empire to peace, he should make the fears forItaly the lighter: while, therefore, the winter was his hin­drance [from going into the field,] he put garrisons into thevillages and smaller cities for their security: he put decurionsalso into the villages, and centurions into the cities : he, be­sides this, rebuilt many of the cities that had been laid waste;but at the beginning of the spring he took the greatest partof his army, and led it from Coesarea to Antipatris, where hespent two days in settling the affairs of that city, and then,on the third day, he marched on, laying waste and burningall the neighboring villages. And when he had laid wasteall the places about the toparchy of Thamnas, he passed onto Lydda and Jamnia ; and when both those cities had comeover to him, be placed a great many of those that had comeover to him [from other places] as inhabitants therein, andthen came to Ernmaus, where he seized upon the passageswhich led thence to their metropolis, and fortified his camp,and, leaving the fifth legion therein, he came to the toparchyof Bethletephon. He then destroyed that place and theneighboring places by fire, and fortified at proper places the


1 Gr. Gaia tia, anil so every whcrc.







OCR Output








C. VI.] TITUS PRESSES THE SIEGE. 191


<vere opposed to them when they made their excursions.These engines, that all the legions had ready prepared forthem, were admirably contrived; but still more extraordinaryones belonged to the tenth legion: those that threw dartsand those that threw stones were more forcible and largerthan the rest, by which they not only repelled the excur­sions of the Jews, but drove those away that were upon thewalls also. Now the stones that were cast were of the weightof a talent, and were carried two furlongs and farther. Theblow they gave was no way to be sustained, not only by thosethat stood first in the way, but by those that were beyondthem for a great space. As for the Jews, they at firstwatched the coming of the stone, for it was of a white color,and could, therefore, not only be perceived by the greatnoise it made, but could be seen also before it came by itsbrightness: accordingly, the watchmen that sat upon thetowers gave them notice when the engine was let go, and thestone came from it, and cried out aloud, in their own countrylanguage, The son cometh :' so those that were in its way


1 What should be the meaning of this signal or watehword, when thewatchmen saw a stone coming from the engine, The son cometh, or whatmistake there is in the reading, I cannot tell. The MSS., both Greek andLatin, all agree in this reading; and I cannot approve of any groundlessconjectural alteration of the text from nos to ios, that not the son or astone, but that the arrow or dart cometh; as hath been made by Dr. Hudson,and not corrected by Havercamp. Had Joscphus written even his firstedition of these books of the war in pure Hebrew, or had the Jews thenused the pure Hebrew at Jerusalem, the Hebrew word for a son is so likethat for a stone, Ben and Eben, that such a correction might have been moreeasily admitted. But Josephus wrote his former edition for the use of theJews beyond Euphrates, and so in the Chaldee language, as he did thissecond edition in the Greek language: and Bar was the Chaldee word forson, instead of the Hebrew Ben, and was used not only in Chaldea, &c,but in Judca also, as the New Testament informs us. Dio also lets us knowthat the very Romans at Rome pronounced the name of Simon, the son ofGioras, Bar Boras for Bar Gioras, as we learn from Xiphiline, p. 217.lleland takes notice, "That many will here look for a mystery, as thoughthe meaning were that the Son of God came now to take vengeance on thesins of the Jewish nation," which is, indeed, the truth of the fact, buthardly what the Jews could now mean; unless, possibly by way of derisionof Christ's threatenings so often made, that he would come at the head ofthe Roman army for their destruction But even this interpretation has







OCR Output








504 DISSERTATION II.


10. That the firm and just foundation of Abraham's faithand assurance in God for such a resurrection was this, besidesthe general consideration of the divine veracity, that duringthe whole time of his sojourning in strange countries, inCanaan and Egypt, ever since he had been called out ofChaldea or Mesopotamia, at seventy-five years of age,1 hehad had constant experience of a special, of an overruling,of a kind and gracious Providence over him, till this his125th year, which against all human views had continuallyblessed him and enriched him, and in his elder age had givenhim first Ishmael by Hagar, and afterward promised himIsaac to " spring2 from his own body now dead,3 and fromthe deadness of Sarah's womb, when she was past age, andwhen it ceased to be with Sarah after the manner of women,"4nnd had actually performed that and every other promise,how improbable soever that performance had appeared, hehad ever made to him, and this during fifty entire years to­gether ; so that although, at his first exit out of Chaldea crMesopotamia, he might have been tempted to " stagger atsuch a promise of God through unbelief,"5 yet might he nowafter fifty years constant experience he justly strong in faith,giving glory to God, as being fully persuaded, that what Godhad promised, the resurrection of Isaac, he was both able andwilling to perform.
11. That this assurance, therefore, that God, if he per­mitted Isaac to be slain, would infallibly raise him again fromthe dead, entirely alters the state of the case of Abraham'ssacrificing Isaac to the true God, from that of all otherhuman sacrifices whatsoever offered to false ones, all those-others being done without the least promise or prospect ofsuch a resurrection ; and this, indeed, takes away all pretenceof injustice in the divine command, as well as of all inhu­manity or cruelty in Abraham's obedience to it.
I 12. That, upon the whole, this command to Abraham, andwhat followed upon it, looks so very like an intention of Godto typify or represent beforehand in Isaac, a beloved or only
lGm. xii. 4. 'Rom. iv. 19. s Ileb. xi. 11.
<Oen.ZTiii.il. 6 Rom. iv. 20, 21.







OCR Output








382 FLAVIUSJOSEPnUS [B. I.


nation unknown of old to several of the Grecian cities, and,indeed, was thought worthy of imitation by some of them.This is declared by Theophrastus, in his writings concerninglaws; for he says, " that the laws of the Tyrians forbid mento swear foreign oaths." Among which he enumerates someothers, and particularly that called Corban, which oath canonly be found among the Jews, and declares what a man maycall a tiling devoted to God. Nor, indeed, was Herodotus ofHalicarnassus unacquainted with our nation, but mentions itafter a way of his own, when he saith thus, in the secondbook concerning the Colehians. His words are these: —" The only people who were circumeised in their privy mem­bers originally, were the Colehians, the Egyptians, and theEthiopians; but the Phoenicians, and those Syrians that arein Palestine, confess that they learned it from the Egyptians.And for those Syrians who live about the rivers Thermodonand Parthenius, and their neighbors the Macrones, they saythey have lately learned it from the Colehians ; for these arethe only people that are circumeised among mankind, andappear to have done the very same thing with the Egyptians.But as for the Egyptians and Ethiopians themselves, I amnot able to say which of them received it from the other."This, therefore, is what Herodotus says, that " the Syriansthat are in Palestine are circumeised." But there are no in­habitants of Palestine that are circumeised excepting theJews; and, therefore, it must be his knowledge of them thatenabled him to speak so much concerning them. Cherilus'


1 Whether these verses of Cherilus, the heathen poet, in the days ofXerxes, belong to the Solyrai in Pisidia, that were near a small lake, or tothe Jews that dwelt on the Solymean or Jerusalem mountains, near thegreat and broad lake Asphaltitis, that were a strange people, and spake thePhoenician tongue, is not agreed on by the learned. It is yet certain thatJosephus hero, and Eusebius, Prop. ix. 9, p. 412, took them to be Jews,and I confess I cannot but very much incline to the same opinion. Theother Solymi were not a strange people, but heathen idolators, like thoother part of Xerxes's army; and that these spake the Phoenician tongueis next to impossible, as the Jews certainly did; nor is there the least evi­dence for it elsewhere. Nor was the lake adjoining to the mountains of thoSolymi at all large or broad in comparison of the Jewish lake Asphaltitis:nor, indeed, were these so considerable a people as the Jews, nor so likely







OCR Output








374 FLAVIUSJOSEPIIUS [b. i.


forty-three years and eight months before the Tyrians builtCarthage; and in their annals the building of our temple isrelated; for Hirom, the king of Tyro, was the friend ofSolomon our king, and had such friendship transmitted downto him from his forefathers. He thereupon was ambitious tocontribute to the splendor of this edifice of Solomon's, andmade him a present of one hundred and twenty talents ofgold. He also cut down the most excellent timber out ofthat mountain which is called Libanus, and sent it to himfor adorning its roof. Solomon also not only made him manyother presents, by way of requital, but gave him a countryin Galilee also that was called Chabulon.^ But there wasanother passion, a philosophic inclination of theirs, whichcemented the friendship that was betwixt them; for they sentmutual problems to one another, with a desire to have themunriddled by each other; wherein Solomon was superior toHirom, as he was wiser than he in other respects : and manyof the epistles that passed between them arc still preservedamong the Tyrians. Now, that this may not depend on mybare word, I will produce for a witness Dius, one that isbelieved to have written the Phoenician history after an ac­curate manner. This Dius, therefore, writes thus in hiphistories of the Phoenicians. — " Upon the death of Abibalus,his son Hirom took the kingdom. This king raised banks afthe eastern parts of the city, and enlarged it; he also joinedthe temple of Jupiter Olympus, which stood before in anisland by itself, to the city, by raising a causeway betweenthem, and adorned that temple with donations of gold. Hemoreover went up to Libanus, and had timber cut down forthe building of temples. They say farther, that Solomon,when he was king of Jerusalem, sent problems to Hirom tobe solved, and desired he would send others back for him tosolve; and that he who could not solve the problems proposedto him should pay money to him that solved thera. Andwhen Hirom had agreed to the proposals, but was not able tosolve the problems, he was obliged to pay a great deal ofmoney, as a penalty for the same. As also they relate that
1 1 Kings ix. 13.







OCR Output








INDEX. 559


Mary, cats her own child, iv. 262.Mathusala, i. 82.
Mattathias, great-grandson of Asamo-neus, refuses to sacrifice to an idol,and persuades the Jews to fight onthe Sabbath, ii. 302; exhorts hissons to defend the law, 303; dies,304.Matthias, high-priest, iii. 253.Matthias Cuitus, i. 18.Matthias, son of Margalothus, iii. 9",446; he and his partners are burntalive, iii. 100.
Matthias, son of Theophilus, madehigh-priest, iii. 85, 2'JO; he is de­prived, 100.
Matthias, Josephns's father, i. 18.
Matthias, son of Boethus, calls inSimon to his aid. and is put todeath by him, iv. 228.
Maximus (Liborius), iv. 322
Maximus (Trebcllius), iii. 231.
Meal, the purest used in the Jewishoblation*, i. 244.
Meirus, son of lielgas, iv. 272.
Melas, iii. 58.
Melchisedeck, i. 102.
Memucan, ii. 233
Menes, or Mineus, built Memphis,ii. 37.
Mephibosheth highly favored by Da­vid, i. 489, 520.
Mesha, king of Moab, ii. 98.
Meshech, one of the three holy chil­dren, ii. 183.
Messalina, iii. 286.
Mestraei, or Mitzraim, Egyptians, i.94.
Metellius, a Roman, iii. 527.
Micah the prophet, quoted in Jere­miah, ii. 165.
Micaiah, the prophet, ii. 84, 87.
Mice spoil the country of Ashdod, i.390; five golden mice, 391.
Michal married to David, i. 429; savesDavid's life, 433.
Milk, &c, offered by Abel, i. 80.
Minucianus (Annius,) iii. 206, 211.
Misael, one of the three holy children,ii. 183.
Mithridates, king of Pergamus, ii.430; brings succors to Coosar inEgypt, 431; iii. 347.
Mithridates, king of Parthia, ii. 397.
Mithridates, king of Pontus, dies, ii.417.


Mithridates, a Parthian, marries Ar-tabanus's daughter, iii. 198; takenprisoner, 199; set at liberty, ib.;expedition against the Jews, androuts Anileus, 200.
Mitzraim, i. 95.
Modius yEquicolus, i. 25, 32, 40.
Monobazus, brother of Izates, is kingafter his brother's death, iii. 276.
Monobazus, king of Adiabene, iii.265; his death, 267.
Moon eclipsed, iii. 101.
Moses, his character, Prcf. i. lxx.;his birth foretold, i. 172; how bornand saved, 173, 175; why calledMoia, iv. 401; adopted by Ther-musis, i. 176; brought up to suc­ceed her father, 177; tramples onthe crown, ib.; made general ofthe Egyptian army, and beats theEthiopians, 180; marries Tharbis,181; flies out of Egypt, ib.; seesthe burning bush at Sinai, 183;appointed to deliver the Israelites,ib.; does miracles and hears themost sacred name of God, 184, 185;returns to Egypt, 185; works mira­cles before Pharaoh, 186; leads theIsraelites out of Egypt, 192; theirnumber, 193; his prayer, 196;leads the Israelites through theRed Sea, 197; makes the bitterwater sweet, 203; brings water outof the rock, 208; beats the Ama-lekites, 212; brings the tables ofthe covenant, 219 ; stays forty d:iyaupon Mount Sinai, 220; confersthe priesthood on Aaron, 235; of­fers sacrifices at the tabernacle,238; receives laws and commandsat the tabernacle, 239, 248; num­bers the people, 253; gives ordersfor their marching, 255; sendsspies to search the land of Canaan,257; quells the faction of Corah,270; his justice, 269 ; his prayerto God, 268; cleanses the people,276; destroys Sihon and Og, 279 ;defeats the kings of Midian, 291;appoints Joshua his successor, 293;his predictions before his death,297; his song, 318; blesses Joshua,321; is surrounded with a cloud,and disappears, 322; his deathgreatly lamented by the people,ib. ; his great authority, 260; his







OCR Output








370 FLAVIUSJOSEPHCS |B. I.


kings, but on the contrary denotes captive shepherds, andtins on account of the particle Hyc ; for that Hyc, with theaspiration, in the Egyptian tongue, again denotes shepherds,and that expressly also: and this to me seems the moreprobable opinion, and more agreeable to ancient history.[But Manetho goes on] — " These people, whom we have be­fore named kings, and called shepherds also, and their descen­dants," as he says, "kept possession of Egypt five hundredand eleven years. After these," he says,—" That the kingsof Thebais and of the other parts of Egypt, made an insurrec­tion against the shepherds, and that there a terrible and longwar was made between them." He says farther,—" Thatunder a king, whose name was Alisphragmuthosis, the shep­herds were subdued by him, and were, indeed, driven out ofother parts of Egypt, but were shut up in a place that con­tained ten thousand acres: This place was named Avaris"Manetho says,—" That the shepherds built a wall round allthis place, which was a large and a strong wall, and this inorder to keep all their possessions and their prey within aplace of strength, but that Thummosis, the son of Alisphrag­muthosis, made an attempt to take them by force and bysiege, with four hundred and eighty thousand men to lieround about them ; but that, upon his despair of taking theplace by that siege, they came to a composition with them,that they should leave Egypt, and go, without any harm tobe done to them, whithersoever they would; and that afterthis composition was made, they went away with their wholefamilies and effects, not fewer in number than two hundredand forty thousand, and took their journey from Egyptthrough the wilderness for Syria; but that, as they were infear of the Assyrians, who had then the dominion over Asia,they built a city in that country which is now called Judea,and that large enough to contain this great " number of men,and called it Jerusalem."' Now Manetho, in another bookof his, says,—" That this nation, thus called shepherds, were


1 Iferc we lmvo an account of the first building of the city of Jerusalem,according to Manetho, when the Phoenician shepherds were expelled out ofEgypt, about thirty-seven years before Abraham eamo out of llaran.







OCR Output








264 THE ROMANS FIRE [b. VI.


of their very country itself: and men ought not to leave sucha city upon the habitable earth, to be seen by the sun,wherein mothers are thus fed, although such food be fitter forthe fathers than for the mothers to cat of, since it is theythat continue still in a state of war against us, after they haveundergone such miseries as these." And at the same timethat he said this, he reflected on the desperate condition thesemen must be in; nor could he expect that such men could berecovered to sobriety of mind, after they had endured thosevery sufferings, for the avoiding whereof it only was probablethey might have repented.


CHAPTER IV.
WHEN THE BANKS WERE COMPLETED, AND THE BATTERIXG-RAMS BROUGHT AND COULD DO NOTHING, TITUS GAVE OR­DERS TO SET FIRE TO THE GATES OF THE TEMPLE: IN NOLONG TIME AFTER WniCH THE HOLY HOUSE ITSELF WAS


§ 1. And now two of the legions had completed their bankson the eighth day of the month Lous [Ab.] WhereuponTitus gave orders that the battering-rams should be brought,and set over against the western edifico of the inner temple;for, before these were brought, the firmest of all the otherengines had battered the wall for six days together withoutceasing, without making any impression upon it; but the vastlargeness and strong connection of the stones was superiorto that engine and to the other battering-rams also. OtherRomans did, indeed, undermine the foundations of the north­ern gate, and, after a world of pains, removed the outermoststones; yet was the gate still upheld by the inner stones, andstood still unhurt; till the workmen, despairing of all suchattempts by engines and crows, brought their ladders to thecloisters. Now the Jews did not interrupt them in so doing;but when they were gotten up they fell upon them, and foughtwith them ; some of them they thrust down, and threw them







OCR Output








C. XIII.] AND SACRILEGE. 231


could have done from the famine among the Jews; for whenthey came first to the Eomans, they were puffed up by thefamine, and swelled like men in a dropsy: after which theyall on the sudden overfilled those hodies that were beforeempty, and so hurst asunder, excepting such only as wereskilful enough to restrain their appetites, and by degrees tookin their food into bodies unaccustomed thereto. Yet didanother plague seize upon those that were thus preserved;for there was found among the Syrian deserters a certainperson who was caught gathering pieces of gold out of theexcrement of the Jews' bellies; for the deserters used toswallow such pieces of gold, as we told you before, when theycame out; and for these did the seditious search them all; forthere was a great quantity of gold in the city, insomuch thatas much was now sold [in the Roman camp] for twelve Attic[drams] as was sold before for twenty-five. But when thiscontrivance was discovered in one instance, the fame of itfilled their several camps, that the deserters came to themfull of gold. So the multitude of the Arabians, with theSyrians, cut up those that came as supplicants, and searchedtheir bellies. Nor does it seem to me that any misery befellthe Jews that was more terrible than this, since in one night'stime about two thousand of these deserters were thus dis­sected.
5. When Titus came to the knowledge of this wicked prac­tice, he had like to have surrounded those that had beenguilty of it with his horse, and have shot them dead; and hehad done it, had not their number been so very great, andthose that were liable to this punishment would have beenmanifold more than those whom he had slain. However, hecalled together the commanders of the auxiliary troops he hadwith him, as well as the commanders of the Roman legions(for some of his own soldiers had been also guilty herein, ashe had been informed,) and had great indignation againstboth sorts of them, and said to them, — "What! have any ofmy own soldiers done such things as this out of the uncertainhope of gain, without regarding their own weapons, which aremade of silver and gold ? Moreover, do the Arabians and







OCR Output








C. IV.] REVOLT OF THE GERMANS. 307


vailed with them so to do; for when they saw the Romangovernment in a great internal disorder, by the continualchanges of its rulers, and understood that every part of thehabitable earth under them was in an unsettled and totteringcondition, they thought this was the best opportunity thatcould afford itself for themselves to make a sedition, whenthe state of the Romans was so ill. Classicus' also andVitellius,2 two of their commanders, puffed them up with suchhopes. These had, for a long time, been openly desirous ofsuch an innovation, and were induced by the present oppor­tunity to venture upon the declaration of their sentiments;the multitude was also ready, and when these men told themof what they intended to attempt, that news was gladly re­ceived by them. So when a great part of the Germans hadagreed to rebel, and the rest were no better disposed, Ves­pasian, as guided by divine Providence, sent letters to PetiliusCerealis, who had formerly had the command of Germany,whereby he declared him to have the dignity of consul, andcommanded him to take upon him the government of Britain;so he went whither he was ordered to go, and when he wasinformed of the revolt of the Germans, he fell upon them assoon as they were gotten together, and put his army in battlearray, and slew a great multitude of them in the fight, andforced them to leave off their madness, and to grow wiser;nay, had he not fallen thus suddenly upon them on the place,it had not been long ere they would, however, have been


1 This Classicus, and Civilis, and Cerealis, are names well-known inTacitus; the two former as moving sedition against the Romans, and thelast as sent to repress them by Vespasian, just as they are here describedin Joscphus, which is the case also of Fonteius Agrippa, and RubriusCallus, in sect. 3. But as to the very favorable account presently given ofDomitian, particularly as to his designs in this his Gallic and German ex­pedition, it is not a little contrary to that in Suetonius, Vesp. sect. 7. Norare the reasons unobvious that might occasion this great diversity: Domitianwas one of Josephus's patrons, and when he published these books of theJewish war, was very young, and had hardly begun those wicked practiceswhich rendered him so infamous afterward; while Suetonius seems to havebeen too young, and too low in life, to receive any remarkable favors fromhim, as Domitian was certainly very lewd and cruel, and generally hated,when Suetonius wrote about him.
* Civilis. Tacit







OCR Output








C. V.J A FALSE PROPHET. 273


speak all in a few words, there it was that the entire richesof the Jews were heaped up together, while the rich peoplehad there huilt themselves chambers [to contain such fur­niture.] The soldiers also came to the rest of the cloistersthat were in the outer [court of the] temple, whither thewomen and children, and a great mixed multitude of thepeople, fled, in number about six thousand. But beforeCaesar had determined any thing about these people, or giventhe commanders any orders relating to them, the soldierswere in such a rage that they set that cloister on fire; bywhich means it came to pass, that some of these were de­stroyed by throwing themselves down headlong, and somewere burnt in the cloisters themselves. Nor did any one ofthem escape with his life. A false prophet was the occasion 1of these people's destruction, who had made a public pro­clamation in the city that very day, that " God commandedthem to get up upon the temple, and that there they shouldreceive miraculous signs of their deliverance." Now therowas then a great number of false prophets suborned by thetyrants to impose on the people, who denounced this to them,that they should wait for deliverance from God; that thiswas in order to keep them from deserting, and that theymight be buoyed up above fear and care by such hopes.Now a man that is in adversity does easily comply with suchpromises; for when such a seducer makes him believe thathe shall be delivered from those miseries which oppress him,then it is that the patient is full of hopes of such his deliverance.3. Thus were the miserable people persuaded by these de­ceivers, and such as belied God himself; while they did notattend nor give credit to the signs that were so evident, anddid so plainly foretell their future desolation, but like meninfatuated, without either eyes to see or minds to consider, didnot regard the denunciations that God made to them. Thusthere was a star2 resembling a sword which stood over thecity, and a comet2 that continued a whole year. Thus also


1 Keland here justly takes notice, that these Jews, who had despised thetrue Prophet, were deservedly abused and deluded by these fake ones.
* Whether Josephus means that this star was different from that comet whichlasted a whole year, I cannot certainly determine. His words most favortheir being different one from another.







OCR Output








268 THE TEMPLE -* [u. VI.


But as for that house, God had for certain long ago doomedit to the fire; and now that fatal day was come, according tothe revolution of ages; it was the tenth day of the monthLous [Ab,] upon which it was formerly burnt by the king ofBabylon: although these flames took their rise from the Jewsthemselves, and were occasioned by them: for upon Titus'sretiring, the seditious lay still for a little while, and then at­tacked the Romans again, when those that guarded the holyhouse fought with those that quenched the fire that was burn­ing in the inner [court of the] temple; but these Romans putthe Jews to flight, and proceeded as far as the holy house it­self. At which time one of the soldiers, without staying forany orders, and without any concern or dread upon him at sogreat an undertaking, and being hurried only by a certaindivine fury, snatched somewhat out of the materials that wereon fire, and being lifted up by another soldier, he set fire toa golden window, through which there was a passage to therooms that were round about the holy house, on the northside of it. As the flames went upward, the Jews made agreat clamor, such as so mighty an affliction required, andran together to prevent it: and now they spared not theirlives any longer, nor suffered any thing to restrain their force,3ince that holy house was perishing, for whose sake it wasthat they kept such a guard about it.
G. And now a certain person came running to Titus, andtold him of this fire, as he was resting himself in his tentafter the last battle; whereupon he rose up in great haste,and, as he was, ran to the holy house, in order to have a stopput to the fire; after him followed all his commanders, andafter them followed the several legions in great astonishment:so there was a great clamor and tumult raised, as was naturalupon the disorderly motion of so great an army. Then didCaesar, both by calling to the soldiers that were fighting witha loud voice and by giving a signal to them with his righthand, order them to quench the fire. But they did not hearwhat he said, though he spake so loud, having their ears al­ready dinned by a greater noise another way: nor did theyattend to the signal he made with his hand neither, as still







OCR Output








C. IV.] JERUSALEM. 177


octagon, and over against it was the tower Hippicus, andhard by it two others were erected by king Herod in the oldwall. These were for largeness, beauty, and strength beyondall that were in the habitable earth ; for besides the magna­nimity of his nature, and his magnificence towards the cityon other occasions, he built these after such an extraordinarymanner, to gratify his own private affections, and dedicatedthese towers to the memory of those three persons who hadbeen the dearest to him, and from whom he named them." They were his brother, his friend, and his wife. This wifehe had slain out of his love [and jealousy,] as we have alreadyrelated ; the other two he lost in war, as they were courage­ously fighting. Hippicus, so named from his friend, wassquare ; its length and breadth was each twenty-five cubits,and its height thirty, and it had no vacuity in it. Over thissolid building, which was composed of great stones unitedtogether, there was a reservoir twenty cubits deep; over whichthere was a house of two stories, whose height was twenty-fivecubits, and divided into several parts ; over which were battle­ments of two cubits, and turrets all round of three cubitshigh, insomuch that the entire height added together amountedto four-score cubits. The second tower, which he named fromhis brother Phasaelus, had its breadth and its height equal,each of them forty cubits: over which was its solid height offorty cubits; over which a cloister went round about, whoseheight was ten cubits, and it was covered from enemies bybreastworks and bulwarks. There was also built over thatcloister another tower, parted into magnificent rooms, and aplace for bathing; so that this tower wanted nothing thatmight make it appear to be a royal palace. It was alsoadorned with battlements and turrets, more than was theforegoing, and the entire altitude was about ninety cubits:the appearance of it resembled the tower of Pharus, whichexhibited a fire to such as sailed to Alexandria, but was muchlarger than it in compass. This was now converted to ahouse, wherein Simon exercised his tyrannical authority.The third tower was Mariamne, for that was his queen'sname : it was solid as high as twenty cubits: its breadth and







OCR Output








556 INDEX.


antiquity of their rites, 14, et seq. ;towns in Syria, Phoenicia, ami Idu-ruea, belonging to them, ii. 399.Jezebel, Ahau's wife, ii. 70; is tornto pieces by dogs, 116.
Images, or brazen oxen, not lawful tobe made by Solomon, ii. 45; imagesof animals are against the law, 538,547 ; to set them up, or consecratethem, forbidden, iii. 98.
Incense only to be offered by the pos­terity of Aaron, ii. 134.
Infants murdered in Egypt, i. 172.
Joab, i. 4ti8; takes the citadel of Jeru­salem, 47'J: conspires, 535.
.1..uh in. or Jotham, ii. 7, 176.
Jonzar, high-priest, iii. 101, 136, 141;deprived by Archelaus, ib.
John (Baptist) killed by Herod, iii.158.
John, the son of Dorcas, iv. 89.
John (Qaddis,) is killed, ii. 330.
John, son of Levi, rebuilds Gischala,i. 23 ; iii. 550; enemy to Josephus,i. 27; iii. 550; aims at absolutedominion, iv. 87, 121.
John, son of Judas, high-priest, mur­ders his brother in the temple, ii.250.
John, captain of the Idumcans, killed,iv. 194.
John, or Johanan, son of Kareah. ii.178; pursues after lshuiael, 180.
Joktan, i. 96.
Jonad;ib, i. 499, 502.
Juuas, the prophet, ii. 131.
Jonathan, son of Annnus, iii. 252;refuses the high-priesthood, ib. ;his actions, 493, et «y. ; is mur­dered, 496.
Jonathan, called Apphus, the Macca-bee, ii. :!01 ; makes a league withAntiochus, iii. 320; is surprisedand killed, 321.
Jonathan, son of Saul, beats a garri­son of the Philistines, i. 409; re­conciles Saul to David, 432; hisconference with David, 435: slainin battle, 463.
Jonathan, a Sadducee, provokes Hyr-canus against the Pharisees, ii. 381.
Jonathan, a Jew, challenges the Ro­mans to single combat, iv. 257; iskilled by Prisons, 258.
Jonathan, a ringleader of the Sicarii,iv. 319.


Jonathan, high-priest, murdered, iii.
288.Jonathan, the Maccabee, commanderof the Jews, ii. 330; with his bro­ther Simon defeats the Nabateans,331 ; makes peace with Bacchides,333; restores divine worship, 336 ;defeats Demetrius's captains, 355 ;renews the league with the Romansand Spartans, 356 ; his letter to theSpartans, ib.; killed by Trypho,364.Joppa taken by the Romans, iii. 536 ;
demolished, iv. 58.Joseph Cabi, high-priest, iii. 294; is
deprived, ib.Joseph, son of Camus, made high-priest, iii. 264 ; deprived, 278.Joseph, (Caiaphas) made high-priest,
iii. 142; deprived, 154.Joseph, son of a female physician,
stirs up a sedition, i. 41.Joseph, son of Dalcus, iv. 272.Joseph, a treasurer, ii. 522.Joseph, Herod's uncle, ii. 502; mar­ried Salome, iii. 402; discovers hisinjunction to kill Mariamne: is putto death, ii. 503, 505; iii. 402.Joseph, son of Tobias, reproaches hisuncle, ii. 284; sent to Ptolemy,ib.; his tax-gatherer, 286; goes toSyria, 287; his wealth and chil­dren, ib.; dies, 294.Joseph, son of Jacob, his dreams, i.138; sold to the Ishmaelites, 141;his chastity, 143; put in prison,145; released, 149; discovers hisbrethren, 153; tries them, 159;discovers himself, 164; his death,170.Josephus made governor of Galilee,iii. 546; his danger at Taricheoe,551 ; reduces Tiberias, 556 ; is ingreat danger again, iv. 230; hismother laments him as dead, ib.;his speech to the Tarichetcns, i. 36;his stratagems, 36, 46 ; escapes agreat danger, 36; goes to Tiberias,39; his wonderful dream. 44; goesto Tarichea;, 53; his father put inchains, iv. 229; his love to hiscountry, 284; is betrayed, 48 ; sur­renders to Nicanor, 49; speech tohis companions, 50; is in dangerof his life, 52; advises the castingof lots, 53; oarried to Vespasian,







OCR Output








B. II.] AGAINST APION. 447


daughter he brought forth from his own head,) made a con­spiracy against him to seize upon him and confine him, as hehad himself seized upon and confined his own father before.
35. And justly have the wisest men thought these notionsdeserved severe rebukes ; they also laugh at them for deter­mining that we ought to believe some of the gods to be beard­less and young, and others of them to bo old, and to havebeards accordingly: that some are set to trades: that one godis a smith, and another goddess is a weaver; that one god isa warrior, and fights with men: that some of them are harp­ers, or delight in archery; and, besides, that mutual seditionsarise among them, and that they quarrel about men, and thisso far that they not only lay hands upon one another, butthat they are wounded by men, and lament, and take on forsuch their afflictions. But what is the grossest of all in pointof lasciviousness, are those unbounded lusts ascribed to almostall of them and their amours, which how can it be other thana most absurd supposal, especially when it reaches to the malegods, and to the female goddesses also? Moreover, the chiefof all their gods, and their first father himself, overlooks thosegoddesses whom he hath deluded and begotten with child, andsuffers them to be kept in prison or drowned in the sea. Heis also so bound up by fate, that he cannot save his own off­spring, nor can he bear their deaths without shedding of tears.These are fine things, indeed! as are the rest that follow.Adulteries truly are so impudently looked on in heaven bythe gods, that some of them have confessed they envied thosethat were bound in the very act. And why should they notdo so, when the eldest of them, who is their king also, hathnot been able to restrain himself in the violence of his lustfrom lying with his wife so long as they might get into theirbed-chamber ? Now some of the gods are servants to men,and will sometimes be builders for a reward, and sometimeswill be shepherds; while others of them, like malefactors, arebound up in a prison of brass. And what sober person isthere who would not be provoked at such stories, and rebukethose that forged them, and condemn the great silliness ofthose that admit them for true ? Nay, others there are that







OCR Output








46 VESPASIAN. [b. in.


noise, at the hour that had been told them, to the wall; andit was Titus himself that first got upon it, with one of his tri­bunes, Domitius Sabinus, and had a few of the fifteenth legionalong with him. So they cut the throats of the watch, andentered the city very quietly. After these came Cercalis thetribune, and Placidus, and led on those that were under them.Now when the citadel was taken, and the enemy were in thevery midst of the city, and when it was already day, yet wasnot the taking of the city known by those that held it, for agreat many of them were fast asleep, and a great mist, whichthen by chance fell upon the city, hindered those that got upfrom distinctly seeing the case they were in, till the wholeRoman army was gotten in, and they were raised up only tofind the miseries they were under; and as they were slaying,they perceived the city was taken. And for the Romans, theyso well remembered what they had suffered during the siege,that they spared none, nor pitied any, but drove the peopledown the precipice from the citadel, and slew them as theydrove them down; at which time the difficulties of the placehindered those that were still able to fight from defendingthemselves; for as they were distressed in the narrow streets,and could not keep their feet sure along the precipice, theywere overpowered with the crowd of those that came fightingthem down from the citadel. This provoked a great many,even of those chosen men that were about Josephus, to killthemselves with their own hands; for when they saw that thevcould kill none of the Romans, they resolved to prevent beingkilled by the Romans, and got together in great numbers inthe utmost parts of the city, and killed themselves.
35. However, such of the watch as at the first perceivedthey were taken, and ran away as fast as they could, went upinto one of the towers on the north side of the city, and fora while defended themselves there; but as they were encom­passed with a multitude of enemies, they tried to use theirright hands when it was too late, and at length cheerfullyoffered their necks to be cut off by those that stood over them.And the Romans might have boasted that the conclusion ofthat siege was without blood [on their side,] if there had not







OCR Output








236 PEOGEESS OJ [B. VI.


any hope of victory; for they glorified after a brutish mannerin that despair of deliverance they were already in. Andnow the Romans, although they were greatly distressed ingetting together their materials, raised their banks in one andtwenty days, after they had cut down all the trees that werein the country that adjoined to the city, and that for ninetyfurlongs round about, as I have already related. And, truly,the very view itself of the country was a melancholy thing:for those places which were before adorned with trees andpleasant gardens, were now become a desolate country everyway, and its trees were all cut down ; nor could any foreignerthat had formerly seen Judea and the most beautiful suburbsof the city, and now saw it as a desert, but lament and mournsadly at so great a change; for the war had laid all the signsof beauty quite waste; nor if any one that had known theplace before had come on a sudden to it now, would he haveknown it again; but though he were at the city itself, yetwould he have inquired for it notwithstanding.
2. And now the banks were finished, they afforded a foun­dation for fear both to the Romans and to the Jews; for thoJews expected that the city would be taken, unless they couldburn those banks, as did the Romans expect that, if thesewere once burnt down, they should never be able to take it;for there was a mighty scarcity of materials, and the bodiesof the soldiers began to fail with such hard labors, as didtheir souls faint with so many instances of ill success; nay,the very calamities themselves that were in the city proved agreater discouragement to the Romans than to those withinthe city; for they found the fighting-men of the Jews to bonot at all mollified among such their sore afflictions, while theyhad themselves perpetually less and less hopes of success, andtheir hanks were forced to yield to tho stratagems of theenemy, their engines to the firmness of their wall, and theirclosest fights to the boldness of their attack; and, what wastheir greatest discouragement of all, they found the Jews'courageous souls to be superior to the multitude of the mise­ries they were under by their sedition, their famine, and thewar itself; insomuch that they were ready to imagine, that







OCR Output








C. I.] THE TOWER OP ANTON IA. 289


this fall of their wall was unexpected by them, and they hadmade no provision in that case, yet did they pull up theircourage, because the tower of Antonia itself was still standing;as was the unexpected joy of the Romans at this fall of thewall soon quenched by the sight they had of another wall,which John and his party had built within it. However, theattack of this second wall appeared to be easier than that ofthe former, because it seemed a thing of greater facility to getup to it through the parts of the former wall that were nowthrown down. This new wall appeared also to be much weakerthan the tower of Antonia, and, accordingly, the Romans im­agined that it had been erected so much on the sudden, thatthey should soon overthrow it: yet did not any body venturenow to go up to this wall, for that such as first ventured to doso must certainly be killed.
5. And now Titus, upon consideration that the alacrity ofsoldiers in war is chiefly excited by hopes and by good words,and that exhortations and promises do frequently make mento forget the hazards they run, nay, and sometimes to despisedeath itself, got together the most courageous part of his army,and tried what he could do with his men by these methods :—" O fellow-soldiers," said he, " to make an exhortation to mento do what hath no peril in it, is, on that very account, inglo­rious to such to whom that exhortation is made ; and, indeed,so it is in him that makes the exhortation an argument of hisown cowardice also. I therefore think that such exhortationsought then only to be made use of when affairs are in a dan­gerous condition, and yet are worthy of being attempted byevery one themselves: accordingly, I am fully of the sameopinion with you, that it is a difficult task to go up this wall;but that it is proper for those that desire reputation for theirvalor to struggle with difficulties in such cases, will then ap­pear, when I have particularly showed that it is a brave thingto die with glory, and that the courage here necessary shallnot go unrewarded in those that first begin the attempt. Andlet my first argument to move you to it be taken from whatprobably some would think reasonable to dissuade you, I meanthe constancy and patience of these Jews, even under their







OCR Output








DISSERTATION II. 505


begotten son, what was to happen long afterward to the greatson and seed of Abraham, the Messiah, the beloved and the" only begotten of the Father, whose day Abraham saw byfaith beforehand, and rejoiced to see it," l viz., that he, "bythe determinate counsel and foreknowledge of God should becrucified, and slain"2 as a sacrifice, and should be raisedagain the third day, and this at Jerusalem also; and that,in the mean time, God would accept of the sacrifices of rams,and the like animals, at the same city Jerusalem, that onecannot easily avoid the application. This seems the reasonwhy Abraham was obliged to go to the land of Moriah, orJerusalem; and why it is noted, that it was the third day3.that he came to the place, which implies that the return back,after the slaying of the sacrifice, would naturally be the thirdday also ; and why this sacrifice was not Ishmael the son ofthe flesh only, but Isaac the son by promise, the beloved sonof Abraham, and why Isaac was styled the only son, or onlybegotten son* of Abraham, though he had Ishmael besides;and why Isaac himself was to bear the wood5 on which hewas to be sacrificed ; and why the place was no other thanthe land of Moriah,6 or vision, i. e., most probable a placewhere the Shecinah or Messiah had been seen, and God byhim worshipped, even before the days of Abraham, and wherelately lived, and perhaps now lived, Melehisedeck, the grandtype of the Messiah (who might then possibly be present atthe sacrifice,) and why this sacrifice was to be offered eitheron the mountain called afterward distinctly Moriah, wherethe temple stood, and where all the Mosaic sacrifices were' afterward to be offered, as Josephus 7 and the generality sup­pose, or, perhaps, as others suppose, that where the Messiahhimself was to be offered, its neighbor mount Calvary. Thisseems also the reason why the ram was substituted as avicarious sacrifice instead of Isaac. These circumstancesseem to me very peculiar and extraordinary, and to renderthe present hypothesis extremely probable. Nor, perhaps,did St. Clement mean any thing else, when, in his forecited
iJohn, viii. 56. 1 Acts, ii. 23. 3Gen. xxii. 2, 4. * Heb. xi. 17.5 Gen. xxii. 6. 'John, xix. 17. ' Antiq. B. i. cap. xiii. sect. 2.
IV. —43







OCR Output








196 EVENTS OF THE SIEGE. [B. V


out of the reach of the darts, and did no longer endeavor tohinder the impressions of their rams, which, by continuallybeating upon the wall, did gradually prevail against it; sothat the wall already gave way to the Nico; for by that namedid the Jews themselves call the greatest of their engines,because it conquered all things. And now they were for along while grown weary of fighting, and of keeping guards,and were retired to lodge on the night-times at a distancefrom the wall. It was on other accounts also thought bythem to be superfluous to guard the wall, there being besidesthat two other fortifications still remaining, and they beingslothful, and their counsels having been ill-concerted on alloccasions ; so a great many grew lazy, and retired. Then theRomans mounted the breach, where Nico had made one, andall the Jews left the guarding that wall, and retreated to thesecond wall: so those that had gotten over that wall openedthe gates, and received all the army within it. And thus didthe Romans get possession of this first wall, on the fifteenthday of the siege, which was the seventh day of the monthArtemisius [Jyar,] when they demolished a great part of it,as well as they did of the northern parts of the city, whichhad been demolished also by Cestius formerly.
3. And now Titus pitched his camp within the city, at thatplace which was called the Camp of the Assyrians, havingseized upon all that lay as far as Cedron, but took care to beout of the reach of the Jews' darts. He then presently beganhis attacks, upon which the Jews divided themselves intoseveral bodies, and courageously defended that wall, whileJohn and his faction did it from the tower of Antonia, andfrom the northern cloister of the temple, and fought the Ro­mans before the monuments of king Alexander ; and Simon'sarmy also took for their share the spot of ground that wasnear John's monument, and fortified it as far as to that gatewhere water was brought into the tower Hippicus. However,the Jews made violent sallies, and that frequently also, andin bodies together, out of the gates, and there fought theRomans; and when they were pursued all together to thewall, they were beaten in those fights, as wanting the skill of







OCR Output








288 SIEGE OF THE UPPER CITY. [B. VI.


the seditious, some of them, as despairing of saving the city,rotired from the wall to the citadel; others of them wentdown into the subterranean vaults, though still a great manyof them defended themselves against those that brought theengines for the battery; yet did the Romans overcome themby their number and by their strength, and what was theprincipal thing of all, by going cheerfully about their work,while the Jews were quite dejected and become weak. Now,as soon as a part of the wall was battered down, and certainof the towers yielded to the impression of the battering-rams,those that opposed themselves fled away, and such a terrorfell upon the tyrants as was much greater than the occasionrequired; for before the enemy got over the breach, theywere quite stunned, and were immediately for flying away.And now, one might see these men, who had hitherto beenso insolent and arrogant in their wicked practices, to be castdown, and to tremble, insomuch that it would pity one's heartto observe the change that was made in those vile persons.Accordingly, they ran with great violence upon the Romanwall that encompassed them, in order to force away thosethat guarded it, and to break through it, and get away. Butwhen they saw that those who had formerly been faithful tothem had gone away (as, indeed, they were fled whithersoeverthe great distress they were in persuaded them to flee;) asalso, when those that came running before the rest told them,that the western wall was entirely overthrown, while otherssaid the Romans were gotten in, and others that they werenear, and looking out for them, which were only the dictatesof their fear, which imposed upon their sight, they fell upontheir face, and greatly lamented their own mad conduct; andtheir nerves were so terribly loosed, that they could not fleoaway. And here one may chiefly reflect on the power of Godexercised upon these wicked wretches, and on the good for­tune of the Romans; for these tyrants did now wholly de­prive themselves of the security they had in their own power,and came down from those very towers of their own accord,wherein they could have never been taken by force, nor, in­deed, any other way than by famine. And thus did the Ro­







OCR Output








DISSERTATION II. 499


their gods: for even their sons and their daughters have theyburnt in the fire to their gods." Sec chap, xviii. 10; 2 Kingsxvii. 17.
" ' And Ahaz made his son to pass through the fire, accord­ing to the abominations of the heathen, whom the Lord castout before the children of Israel."
"2 Moreover, Ahaz burnt incense in the valley of the sonof Hinnom, and burnt his children [his son in Josephus] inthe fire, after the abominations of the heathen, whom the Lordhad cast out before the children of Israel."
"3And the Sepharvites burnt their children in the fire toAdrammelech and Anammelech, the gods of Sepharvaim," &c.
"4 And Josiah defiled Topheth, which is in the valley of thechildren of Hinnom, that no one might make his son or hisdaughter to pass through the fire unto Molech."
"5Yea, they sacrificed their sons and their daughters untodemons ; and shed innocent blood, the blood of their sons andof their daughters, whom they sacrificed unto the idols of Ca­naan, and the land was polluted with blood." See Isaiah,lvii. 5.
"6The children of Judah hath done evil in my sight, saiththe Lord; they have set their abominations in the house whichis called by my name, to pollute it: and they have built thehigh places of Tophet, which is in the valley of the son ofHinnom, to burn their sons and their daughters in the fire,which I commanded them not, nor came it into my heart."
"" Thus saith the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel, beholdI will bring evil upon this place, the which whosoever hearethhis ears shall tingle, because they have forsaken me, and haveestranged this place, and have burnt incense unto other gods,whom neither they nor their fathers have known, nor thekings of Judah, and have filled this place with the blood ofinnocents. They have built also the high places of Baal, toburn their sons with fire for burnt-offerings unto Baal, whichI commanded not, nor spake it, neither came it into mymind," &c.


1 2 Kings xvi. 3. > 2 Chion. xxviii. 3. '2 Kings xvii. 31.
4 2 Kings xxii. 10. ' Psal. cvi. 37, 38. • Jer. vii. 30-32.
' Jer. xix. 3-5.







OCR Output








518 DISSERTATION III.


the spirit or air that is over it thereby corrupted; and thatby this means the fruits of the earth, both corn and grapes,rot away, both the soil and the air being equally unwholesome.
The river Belus docs also run into the sea of Judea ; andthe sands that are collected about its mouth, when you mixnitre with them, arc melted into glass; this sort of shore is"but small, but its sand, for the use of those that carry it off,is inexhaustible.
Chap. VIII.] A great part of Judea is composed of scat­tered villages; it also has larger towns: Jerusalem is thecapital city of the whole nation. In that city there was atemple of immense wealth ; in the first parts that are fortifiedis the city itself; next it the royal palace. The temple isenclosed in its most inward recesses. A Jew can come nofarther than the gates; all but the priests arc excluded bytheir threshold. While the East was under the dominion ofthe Assyrians, the Medes, and the Persians, the Jews wereof all slaves the most despicable.1
2After the dominion of the Macedonians prevailed, kingAntiochus tried to conquer their superstition, and to introducethe customs of the Greeks; but he was disappointed of hisdesign, which was to give this most profligate nation a changefor the better, and that was by his war with the Parthians,for at this time Arsaces had fallen off [from the Macedonians.]Then it was that the Jews set kings over them, because theMacedonians were become weak, the Parthians were not yetvery powerful, and the Romans were very remote: whichkings, when they had been expelled by the mobility of thevulgar, and had recovered their dominion by war, attemptedthe same things that kings used to do, I mean they introducedthe destruction of cities, the slaughter of brethren, of wives,and parents, but still went on in their superstition; for theytook upon them withal the honorable dignity of the high-priesthood, as a firm security to their power and authority.


1 A great slander against the Jews, without any just foundation. Josephuswould have informed him better.
* Here begin Josephus's and Tacitus's true accounts of the Jews prelimi­nary to the la«t war. See Of the War, Prooem. sect. 7.







OCR Output








144 VITELLIUS, EMPEROR, [b. IV.


CHAPTER X.
HOW THE SOLDIERS, BOTH IN JUDEA AND EGYPT, PROCLAIMEDVESPASIAN EMPEROR ; AND HOW VESPASIAN RELEASED JOSE-PHUS OF HIS BONDS.
§ 1. Now about this very time it was that heavy calamitiescame about Rome on all sides; for Vitellius was come fromGermany with his soldiery, and drew along with him a greatmultitude of other men besides. And when the spaces allottedfor soldiers could not contain them, he made all Rome itselfhis camp, and filled all the houses with his armed men; whichmen, when they saw the riches of Rome with those eyes whichhad never seen such riches before, and found themselves shoneround about on all sides with silver and gold, they had muchado to contain their covetous desires, and were ready to betakethemselves to plunder, and to the slaughter of such as shouldstand in their way. And this was the state of affairs in Italyat that time.
2. But when Vespasian had overthrown all the places thatwere near to Jerusalem, he returned to Caesarea, and heardof the troubles that were at Rome, and that Vitellius was em­peror. This produced indignation in him, although he wellknew how to be governed, as well as to govern, and could not,with any satisfaction, own him for his lord, who acted somadly, and seized upon the government as if he were abso­lutely destitute of a governor. And as this sorrow of his wasviolent, he was not able to support the torments he was under,nor to apply himself farther in other wars, when his nativecountry was laid waste; but then, as much as his passionexcited him to avenge his country, so much was he restrainedby the consideration of his distance therefrom, because fortunomight prevent him, and do a world of mischief before he couldhimself sail over the sea to Italy, especially as it was still thewinter season; so he restrained his anger, how vehementsoever it was at this time.
3. But now his commanders and soldiers met in several







OCR Output








B. I.] AGAINST APION. 375


one Abdemon, a man of Tyre, did solve the problems, andpropose others which Solomon could not solve, upon which hewas obliged to repny a great deal of money to Hirom."These things arc attested to by Dius, and confirm what wehave said upon the same subjects before.
18. And now I shall add Menander, the Ephesian, as anadditional witness. This Menander wrote the acts that weredone both by the Greeks and Barbarians, under every oneof the Tyrian kings, and had taken much pains to learn theirhistory out of their own records. Now when he was writingabout those kings that had reigned at Tyre, he came toHirom, and says thus: — "Upon the death of Abibalus, hisson Hirom took the kingdom ; he lived fifty-three years, andreigned thirty-four. Ho raised a bank on that called thoBroad Place, and dedicated that golden pillar which is inJupiter's temple: ho also went and cut down timber from themountain called Libanus, and got timber of cedar for thoroofs of the temples. He also pulled down the old templesand built new ones : besides this, he consecrated the templesof Hercules and of Astarte. He first built Hercules's temploin the month Peritus, and that of Astarte, when he mado hisexpedition against the Tityans, who would not pay him theirtribute; and when he had subdued them to himself, be re­turned home. Under this king there was a younger son ofAbdemon, who mastered the problems which Solomon, kingof Jerusalem, had recommended to be solved." Now, thotime from this king to the building of Carthage is thus caleu­lated.— " Upon the death of Hirom, Beleazarus, his son, tookthe kingdom; he lived forty-three years, and reigned sevenyears: after him succeeded his son Abdastartus; he livedtwenty-nine years, and reigned nine years. Now, four sonsof his nurse plotted against him, and slew him, the eldest ofwhich reigned twelve years: after them came Astartus, theson of Deleastartus ; he lived fifty-four years, and reignedtwelve years : after him came his brother Aserymus ; he livedfifty-four years, and reigned nine years; he was slain by hisbrother Pheles, who took the kingdom, and reigned but eightmonths, though he lived fifty years: he was slain by Ithoba­







OCR Output








C. II.] OF THE JEWS. 255


7. In the mean time, the rest of the Roman army had, inseven days' time, overthrown [some] foundations of the towerof Antonia, and had made a ready and broad way to thetemple. Then did the legions come near the first court,1 andbegan to raise their banks. The one bank was over againstthe north-west corner of the inner temple;2 another was atthat northern edifice which was between the two gates: ofthe other two, one was at the western cloister of the outercourt3 of the temple; the other against its northern cloister.However, these works were thus far advanced by the Ro­mans, not without great pains and difficulty, and particularlyby being obliged to bring their materials from the distanceof a hundred furlongs. They had farther difficulties alsoupon them; sometimes by their overgreat security they werein that they should overcome the Jewish snares laid for them,and by that boldness of the Jews which their despair of es­caping had inspired them withal; for some of their horse­men, when they went out to gather wood or hay, let theirhorses feed, without having their bridles on, during the timeof foraging; upon which horses the Jews sallied out in wholebodies, and seized them. And when this was continuallydone, and Caesar believed, what the truth was, that thehorses were stolen more by the negligence of his own menthan by the valor of the Jews, he determined to use greaterseverity to oblige the rest to take care of their horses: so hecommanded that one of those soldiers who had lost theirhorses should be capitally punished ; whereby he so terrifiedthe rest, that they preserved their horses for the time tocome; for they did not any longer let them go from thern tofeed by themselves, but, as if they had grown to them, theywent always along with them when they wanted necessaries.Thus did the Romans still continue to make war against thetemple, and to raise their banks against it.
8. Now, after one day had been interposed since theRomans ascended the breach, many of the seditious were sopressed by the famine upon the present failure of theirravages, that they got together, and made an attack on those


1 Court of the Gentiles. * Court of Israel. ' Court of the Gentiles.







OCR Output








C. VII.J VESPASIAN. 33


away by force, he should be put into custody. His commis­eration also of the people under their lamentations had muchbroken that his eagerness to leave them; so he resolved tostay, and arming himself with the common despair of the citi­zens, he said to them, — " Now is the time to begin to fightin earnest, when there is no hope of deliverance left. It is abrave thing to prefer glory before life, and to set about somesuch noble undertaking as may be remembered by late pos­terity." Having said this, ho fell to work immediately, andmade a sally, and dispersed the enemies' out-guards, and ranas far as the Roman camp itself, and pulled the coverings oftheir tents to pieces, that were upon their banks, and set fireto their works. And this was the manner in which he neverleft off fighting, neither the next day nor that after it, but wenton with it for a considerable number both of days and nights.18. Upon this Vespasian, when he saw the Romans dis­tressed by these sallies (though they were ashamed to be madeto run away by the Jews, and when at any time they madethe Jews run away, their heavy armor would not let thempursue them far, while the Jews, when they had performedany action, and before they could be hurt themselves, stillretired into the city,) ordered his armed men to avoid theironsets, and not fight it out with men under desperation, whilenothing is more courageous than despair; but that their vio­lence would be quenched when they saw they failed of theirpurposes, as fire is quenched when it wants fuel; and thatit was proper for the Romans to gain their victories ascheap as they could, since they were not forced to fight, butonly to enlarge their own dominions. So he repelled the Jewsin great measure by the Arabian archers and the Syrianslingers, and by those that threw stones at them; nor wasthere any intermission of the great number of their offensiveengines. Now the Jews suffered greatly by these engines,without being able to escape from them, and when these en­gines threw their stones or javelins a great way, and the Jewswere within reach, they pressed hard upon the Romans, andfought desperately, without sparing either soul or body, onepart succoring another by turns, when it was tired down.







OCR Output








B. I.] AGAINST APION. 405


and took counsel what they should do, and determined that,as the night was coming on, they should kindle fires andlamps, and keep watch : that they also should fast the nextnight, and propitiate the gods, in order to obtain deliverancefrom them : that on the next day there was one Moses, whoadvised them that they should venture upon a journey, andgo along one road, till they should come to places fit forhabitation: that he charged them to have no kind regardsfor any man, nor give good counsel to any, but always toadvise them for the worst, and to overturn all those templesand altars of the gods they should meet with: that the restcommended what he had said with one consent, and did whatthey had resolved on, and so travelled over the desert: Butthat the difficulties of the journey being over, they came toa country inhabited; and that there they abused the men,and plundered and burnt their temples; and then came intothat land which is called Judea, and there they built a city,and dwelt therein; and that their city was named Hierosyla,from this their robbing of the temples ; but that still, uponthe success they had afterwards, they, in time changed itsdenomination, that it might not be a reproach to them, andcalled the city Hierosoli/ma, and themselves Hierosolymites."35. Now this man did not discover and mention the sameking with the others, but feigned a newer name, and, passingby the dream -and the Egyptian prophet, he brings him to[Jupiter] Hammon, in order to gain oracles about scabbyand leprous people; for he says, that the multitude of Jewswere gathered together at the temples. Now it is uncertainwhether he ascribes this name to these lepers, or to thosethat were subject to such diseases among the Jews only; forhe describes them as a people of the Jews. What peopledoes he mean ? foreigners, or those of that country ? Why,then, dost thou call them Jews, if they were Egyptians?But if they were foreigners, why dost thou not tell us whencethey came ? And how could it be, that after the king haddrowned many of them in the sea, and ejected the rest intodesert places, there should be still so great a multitude re­maining ? Or after what manner did they pass over the







OCR Output








454 FLAVIUSJ0SEPHU3 [B. IT.


must leave off their spite against us. Nor are we guilty ofany envious behavior towards them when we honor our ownlegislator, and believe what he, by his prophetic authority,hath taught us concerning God: for though we should notbe able ourselves to understand the excellency of our ownlaws, yet would the great multitude of those that desire toimitate them justify us in greatly valuing ourselves uponthem.
41. But as for the [distinct] political laws by which we aregoverned, I have delivered them accurately in my books ofAntiquities: and have only mentioned them now so far aswas necessary to my present purpose, without proposing tomyself either to blame the laws of other nations or to makean encomium upon our own; but in order to convict thosethat have written about us unjustly, and in an impudentaffectation of disguising the truth. And now I think I havesufficiently completed what I proposed in writing these books :for whereas our accusers have pretended that our nation area people of a very late original, I have demonstrated thatthey are exceeding ancient; for I have produced as wit­nesses thereto many ancient writers who have made mentionof us in their books, while they said that no such writer hadso done. Moreover, they had said that we were sprung fromthe Egyptians, while I have proved that we came from an­other country into Egypt: while they had told lies of us, asif we were expelled thence on account of diseases on our bo­dies, it has appeared, on the contrary, that we returned toour own country by our own choice, and with sound andstrong bodies. Those accusers reproached our legislator asa vile fellow; whereas God in old time bare witness to hisvirtuous conduct; and since that testimony of God, timoitself hath been discovered to have borne witness to the samething.
42. As to the laws themselves, more words are unnecessary,for they are visible in their own nature, and appear to teachnot impiety, but the truest piety in the world. They do notmake men hate one another, but encourage people to com­municate what they have to one another freely: they are







OCR Output








C. V.] THE SABBATIC RIVER SEEN BY TITUS. 309


CHAPTER V.
CONCERNING THE SABBATIC RIVER WHICH TITUS SAW AS HEWAS JOURNEYING THROUGH SYRIA; AND HOW THE PEOPLEOF ANTIOCH CAME WITH A PETITION TO TITUS AGAINSTTHE JEWS, BUT WERE REJECTED BY HIM : AS ALSO CON­CERNING titus's and Vespasian's triumph.
§ 1. Now Titus Cuesar tarried some time at Berytus, as wetold you before. He thence removed, and exhibited magnifi­cent shows in all those cities of Syria, through which he went,and made use of the captive Jews as public instances of thedestruction of that nation. He then saw a river as he wentalong, of such a nature as deserves to be recorded in history;it runs in the middle between Arcea, belonging to Agrippa'skingdom, and Raphanea. It hath somewhat very peculiar init; for when it runs, its current is strong, and has plenty ofwater, after which its springs fail for six days together, andleave its channel dry, as any one may see; after which daysit runs on the seventh day as it did before, and as though ithad undergone no change at all: it hath also been observedto keep this order perpetually and exactly; whence it is thatthey call it the Sabbatic river,] that name being taken fromthe sacred seventh day among the Jews.
2. But when the people of Antioch were informed thatTitus was approaching, they were so glad at it, that theycould not keep within their walls, but hasted away to give himthe meeting: nay, they proceeded as far as thirty furlongsand more with that intention. These were not the men only,


1 Since in these lutter ages this Sabbatic river, once so famous, which, byJosephus's account here, ran every seventh day, and rested on six, but ac­cording to Pliny, Nat. Hist. xxxi. 11, ran perpetually on six days, and restedevery seventh (though it no way appears by either of their accounts that theseventh dos/ of this river was the Jewish seventh day or Sabbath,) is quitovanished, I shall add no more about it; only see Dr. Hudson's note. InVarenius's Geography, I. 17, tho reader will find several instances of suchperiodical fountains and rivers, though none of their periods were that ofjust a week, as of old this appears to have been.







OCR Output








CXI.] AND OVERTHROWN. 221


take the pains to extinguish the fire, since if it were ex­tinguished, the banks were swallowed up already [and becomeuseless to them.]
5. Two days after this, Simon and his party made anattempt to destroy the other banks; for the Romans hadbrought their engines to bear there, and began already tomake the wall shake. And here one Tephtheus of Garsis,a city of Galilee, and Megassarus, one who was derived fromsome of queen Mariamne's servants, and with them one fromAdiabene, he was the son of Nabateus, and called by thename of Chagiras, from the ill fortune he had, the wordsignifying a lame man, snatched some torches, and ran sud­denly upon the engines. Nor were there during this warany men that ever sallied out of the city who were theirsuperiors, either in their own boldness or in the terror theystruck into their enemies. For they ran out upon the Ro­mans, not as if they were enemies but friends, without fearor delay; nor did they leave their enemies till they hadrushed violently through the midst of them, and set theirmachines on fire. And though they had darts thrown atthem on every side, and were on every side assaulted withtheir enemies' swords, yet did they not withdraw themselvesout of the dangers they were in till the fire had caught holdof the instruments; but when the flame went up, the Romanscame running from their camp to save their engines. Thendid the Jews hinder their succors from the wall, and foughtwith those that endeavored to quench the fire without anyregard to the danger their bodies were in. So the Romanspulled the engines out of the fire, while the hurdles thatcovered them were on fire : but the Jews caught hold of thebattering-rams through the flame itself, and held them fast,although the iron upon them was become red-hot: and nowthe fire spread itself from the engines to the banks, and pre­vented those that came to defend them; and all this whilethe Romans were encompassed round about with the flame,and, despairing of saving their works from it, they retired totheir camp. Then did the Jews become still more and momin number, by the coming of those that were within the city


19*







OCR Output








C. I.] SIESE OF GAMALA, 75


and brake in by force upon those that were in the city; butthese men fell upon the Romans for some time at their firstentrance, and prevented their going any farther, and withgreat courage beat them back; and the Romans were sooverpowered by the greater multitude of the people, who beatthem on every side, that they were obliged to run into upperparts of the city. Whereupon the people turned about andfell upon their enemies, who had attacked them, and thrustthem down to the lower parts, and as they were distressed bythe narrowness and difficulty of the place, slew them; and asthese Romans could neither beat those back that were abovethem, nor escape the force of their own men that were forcingtheir way forward, they were compelled to fly into theirenemies' houses, which were low; but these houses, being thusfull of soldiers, whose weight they could not bear, fell downsuddenly; and when one house fell it shook down a greatmany of those that were under it, as did those do to such aswere under them. By this means a vast number of the Ro­mans perished, for they were so terribly distressed, that al­though they saw the houses subsiding, they were compelledto leap upon the tops of them; so that a great many wereground to powder by these ruins, and a great many of thosethat got from under them lost some of their limbs, but still agreater number were suffocated by the dust that arose fromthose ruins. The people of Gamala supposed this to be anassistance afforded them by God, and without regarding whatdamage they suffered themselves, they pressed forward, andthrust the enemy upon the tops of their houses; and whenthey stumbled in the sharp and narrow streets, and wereperpetually falling down, they threw their stones or darts atthem and slew them. Now, the very ruins afforded themstones enough, and for iron weapons the dead men of theenemies' side afforded them what they wanted; for, drawingthe swords of those that were dead, they mado use of themto dispatch such as were only half dead; nay there were agreat number who, upon their falling down from the tops ofhouses, stabbed themselves and died after that manner; nor,indeed, was it easy for those that were beaten back to fly







OCR Output








184 THE TEMPLE. [B. V.


5. When any persons entered into the temple, its floor re­ceived them. This part of the temple, therefore, was in heightsixty cubits, and its length the same, whereas its breadth wasbut twenty cubits: but still that sixty cubits in length wasdivided again, and the first part of it was cut off at fortycubits, and had in it three things that were very wonderfuland famous among all mankind ; the candlestick, the table [ofshow-bread,] and the altar of incense. Now, the seven lampssignified the seven planets, for so many there were springingout of the candlestick. Now, the twelve loaves that were uponthe table signified the circle of the zodiac and the year; butthe altar of incense, by its thirteen kinds of sweet-smellingspices, with which the sea replenished it, signified that Godis the possessor of all things that are both in the uninhabitableand habitable parts of the earth, and that they are all to bededicated to his use. But the inmost part of the temple of allwas of twenty cubits. This was also separated from the outerpart by a veil. In this there was nothing at all. It was in­accessible and inviolable, and not to be seen by any, and wascalled the Holy of Holies. Now, about the sides of the lowerpart of the temple there were little houses, with passages outof one into another: there were a great many of them, andthey were of three stories high ; there were also entrances oneach side into them from the gate of the temple. But thesuperior part of the temple had no such little houses any far­ther, because the temple was there narrower, and forty cubitshigher, and of a smaller body than the lower parts of it. Thuswe collect that the whole height, including the sixty c.ubits
. from the floor, amounted to a hundred cubits.
6. Now, the outward face of the temple, in its front,wanted nothing that was likely to surprise either men'sminds or their eyes; for it was covered all over with platesof gold of great weight, and, at the first rising of the sun, re­flected back a very fiery splendor, and made those whoforced themselves to look upon it to turn their eyes away,just as they would have done at the sun's own rays. Butthis temple appeared to strangers, when they were comingto it at a distance, like a mountain covered with snow; for







OCR Output








500 CAPTURE OF SIMON THE TYRANT. [B. VII


of thcni down into a certain subterraneous cavern that wasnot visible above ground. Now so far as had been diggedof old, they went onward along it without disturbance ; butwhere they met with solid earth, they dug a mine under ground,and this in hopes that they should be able to proceed so faras to rise from under ground in a safe place, and by thatmeans escape. But when they came to make the experiment,they were disappointed of their hope: for the miners couldmake but small progress, and that with difficulty also; inso­much that their provisions, though they distributed them bymeasure, began to fail them. And now Simon, thinking hemight be able to astonish and delude the Romans, put on awhite frock, and buttoned upon him a purple cloak, and ap­peared out of the ground in the place where the temple hadformerly been. At the first, indeed, those that saw him weregreatly astonished, and stood still where they were ; but after­ward they came nearer to him, and asked him who he was ?Now Simon would not tell them, but bid them call for theircaptain; and when they ran to call him, Tcrentius Kufus,1who was left to command the army there, came to Simon, andlearned of him the whole truth, and kept him in bonds, andlet Caesar know that he was taken. Thus did God bring thisman to be punished for what bitter and savage tyranny hehad exercised against his countrymen, by those who were hisworst enemies; and this while he was not subdued by vio­lence, but voluntarily delivered himself up to them to be pun­ished, and that on the very same account that he had laidfalse accusations against many Jews, as if they were fallingaway to the Romans, and had barbarously slain them; forwicked actions do not escape the divine anger, nor is justicetoo weak to punish offenders, but in time overtakes those thattransgress its laws, and inflicts its punishments upon thewicked in a manner so much more severe, as they expected


1 This Terentius Rufus, as Reland in part observes here, is the same per­son whom the Talmudists called Turmis Rufus, of whom they relate, that hsploughed up Sion as a field, and made Jerusalem become as heaps, and the moun­tain of the house as the high places of a forest; Tvhich was long before fore­told by the prophet Micah, iii. 12, and quoted from him in the propheciesof Jeremiah, xxvi. 18







OCR Output








338 blbazar's speeches. [b. vn.


then every way incapable of being hindered in their opera­tions. It continues invisible, indeed, to the eyes of men, asdoes God himself; for certainly it is not itself seen while it isin the body; for it is there after an invisible manner, and,when it is freed from it, it is still not seen. It is this soulwhich hath one nature, and that an incorruptible one also ;but yet is it the cause of the change that is made in the body;for whatsoever it be which the soul touches, that lives andflourishes, and from whatsoever it is removed that withersaway and dies; such a degree is there in it of immortality.Let me produce the state of sleep as a most evident demon­stration of the truth of what I say; wherein souls, when thobody does not distract them, have the sweetest rest dependingon themselves, and conversing with God, by their alliance tohim ; they then go everywhere, and foretell many futuritiesbeforehand. And why are we afraid of death, while we arepleased with the rest we have in sleep ? and how absurd athing is it to pursue after liberty while we are alive, and yetto envy it to ourselves where it will be eternal ? We, there­fore, who have been brought up in a discipline of our own,ought to become an example to others of our readiness to die.Yet if we do stand in need of foreigners to support us in thismatter lot us regard those Indians who profess the exerciseof philosophy; for these good men do but unwillingly undergothe time of life, and look upon it as a necessary servitude,and make haste to let their souls loose from their bodies:nay, when no misfortune presses them to it, nor drives themupon it, these have such a desire of a life of immortality thatthey tell other men beforehand that they are about to depart;and nobody hinders them, but every one thinks them happymen, and gives them letters to be carried to their familiarfriends [that are dead ;] so firmly and certainly do they be­lieve that souls converse with one another [in the other world.]So when these men have heard all such commands that wereto be given them, they deliver their body to the fire; and inorder to their getting their soul a separation from the bodyin the greatest purity, they die in the midst of hymns ofcommendations made to them; for their dearest friends con­







OCR Output








146 V JS S P A S I A N, E M P E R 0 R . [b. IV.
and will have farther all the armies in the east to supportthem, as also those in Europe, so far as they are out of thedistance and dread of Vitellius, besides such auxiliaries asthey may have in Italy itself, that is, Vespasian's brother,1and his other son [Domitian;] the one of which will bring ina great many of those young men that are of dignity, whilethe other is intrusted with the government of the city, whichoffice of his will be no small means of Vespasian's obtainingthe government. Upon the whole, the case may be such thatif we ourselves make farther delays, the senate may choosean emperor whom the soldiers, who are the saviors of theempire, will have in contempt."
4. These were the discourses the soldiers had in theirseveral companies; after which they got together in a greatbody, and encouraging one another, they declared Vespasianemperor,2 and exhorted him to save the government whichwas now in danger. Now Vespasian's concern had been fora considerable time about the public; yet did not he intendto set up for governor himself, though his actions showed himto deserve it, while he preferred that safety, which is in aprivate life, before the dangers in a state of such dignity:but when he refused the empire, the commanders insisted themore earnestly upon his acceptance, and the soldiers cameabout him with their drawn swords in their hands, andthreatened to kill him, unless he would now live according tohis dignity. And when he had shown his reluctance a greatwhile, and had endeavored to thrust away this dominionfrom him, he at length, being not able to persuade them,yielded to their solicitations that would salute him emperor.


'This brother of Vespasian was Flnvius Sabinus, as Suetonius informs us,in Vitell. sect. 15, and in Vespas. sect. 2. He is also named by Josephuspresently, chap. xi. sect. 4.
* It is plain by the nature of the thing, as well as by Josephus andEutropius, that Vespasian was first of all saluted emperor in Judea, and nottill some time afterward in Egypt. Whence Tacitus's and Suctonius'spresent copies must be correctod, when they both say that he was first pro­claimed in Egypt, and that on the kalends of July, while they still say itwas the fifth of the nones or ides of the same July, before he was proclaimedin Judea. I suppose the month they there intended was June, and notJuly, as the copies now have it; nor does Tacitus's coherence imply less.See Essny on the Revelation, p. 130.







OCR Output








C. I.] DEMOLITION OF THE CITY. 297


was the end which Jerusalem came to by the madness of thosethat were for innovations ; a city otherwise of great magnifi­cence, and of mighty fame among all mankind.
2. But Caesar resolved to leave there as a guard the tenthlegion, with certain troops of horsemen and companies offootmen. So having entirely completed this war, he was de­sirous to commend his whole army on account of the greatexploits they had performed, and to bestow proper rewardson such as had signalized themselves therein. He had,therefore, a great tribunal made for him in the midst of theplace where he had formerly encamped, and stood upon itwith his principal commanders about him, and spake so as tobe heard by the whole army in the manner following: —" That he returned them abundance of thanks for their good­will which they had showed to him : he commended them forthat ready obedience they had exhibited in this whole war;which obedience had appeared in the many and great dangerswhich they had courageously undergone; as also for thatcourage they had showed, and had thereby augmented ofthemselves their country's power, and had made it evident toall men, that neither the multitude of their enemies, strengthof their places, nor the largeness of their cities, nor the rashboldness and brutish rage of their antagonists, were sufficientat any time to get clear of the Roman valor, although some ofthem may have fortune in many respects on their side. Hesaid farther, that it was but reasonable for them to put an endto this war, now it had lasted so long; for they had nothingbetter to wish for when they entered into it; and that this hap­pened more favorably for them, and more for their glory, thatall the Romans had willingly accepted of those for their go­vernors, and the curators of their dominions, whom they hadchosen for them, and had sent into their own country for thatpurpose, which still continued under the management of thosewhom they had pitched on, and were thankful to them forpitching upon them : that, accordingly, although he did bothadmire and tenderly regard them all, because he knew thatevery one of them had gone as cheerfully about their work astheir abilities and opportunities would give them leave; yet,







OCR Output








484 DISSERTATION I.


or Ebionitc Christian; and this I take to be the plain andevident key of this whole matter.
V. Since, therefore, Josephus appears to have been in hisown heart and conscience no other than a Nazarene orEbionite Christian, and, by consequence, with them rejectedall our Greek gospels and Greek books of the New Testament,and received only the Hebrew gospel of the Nazarenes orEbionites, styled by them The gospel according to theHebrews, or according to the twelve apostles, or even accord­ing to Matthew, we ought always to have that Nazarene orEbionitc gospel, with the other Nazarene or Ebionite frag­ments in view, when we consider any passages of Josephusrelating to Christ or to Christianity. Thus, since thatgospel omitted all that is in the beginning of our St. Matthew'sand St. Luke's gospels, and began with the ministry of Johnthe Baptist: in which first parts of the gospel history are theaccounts of the slaughter of the infants, and of the enrolmentor taxation under Augustus Caesar and Herod, it is no greatwonder that Josephus has not taken care particularly andclearly to preserve those histories to us. Thus, when wefind that Josephus calls James, the brother of Christ, by thename of James the Just, and describes him as a most just orrighteous man, in an especial manner, we are to rememberthat such is his name and character in the gospel accordingto the Hebrews, and the other Ebionite remains of Hegc-sippus, but no where else, that I remember, in the earliestantiquity; nor are we to suppose they herein referred to anyother than that righteousaess which was by the Jewish law,wherein St. Paul,1 before he embraced Christianity, professethhimself to have been blameless. Thus when Josephus, withother Jews, ascribed the miseries of that nation underVespasian and Titus, with the destruction of Jerusalem, tothe barbarous murder of James the Just, we must remember,what we learn from the Ebionite fragments of Hegesippus,that these Ebionites interpreted a prophecy of Isaiah as fore­telling this very murder, and those consequent miseries: Letus take away the just one, for he is unprofitable to us; there­


1 Philipp. iii. 4-0.







OCR Output








B. I.] AGAINST APION. 881


nezzar he began to besiege Tyre, and Cyrus the Persian tookthe kingdom on the fourteenth year of Hirom. So that therecords of the Chaldeans and Tyrians agree with our writingsabout this temple ; and the testimonies here produced are anindisputable and undeniable attestation to the antiquity of ournation. And I suppose that what I have already said maybe sufficient to such as are not very contentious.
22. But now it is proper to satisfy the inquiry of thosethat disbelieve the records of barbarians, and think none butGreeks to be worthy of credit, and to produce many of thesevery Greeks who were acquainted with our nation, and to setbefore them such as upon occasion have made mention of usin their own writings. Pythagoras, therefore, of Samos,lived in very ancient times, and was esteemed a person su­perior to all philosophers in wisdom and piety towards God.Now it is plain, that he did not only know our doctrines, but-was in a very great measure a follower and admirer of them.There is not, indeed, extant' any writing that is owned forhis; but many there are who have written his history, ofwhom Hermippus is the most celebrated, who was a personvery inquisitive into all sort of history. Now this Hcrmip-pus, in his first book concerning Pythagoras, speaks thus:—That "Pythagoras, upon the death of one of his associates,whose name was Calliphon, a Crotoniate by birth, affirmedthat this man's soul conversed with him both night and day,and enjoined him not to pass over a place where an ass hadfallen down ; as also, not to drink of such waters as causedthirst again, and to abstain from all sorts of reproaches."After which he adds this : — " This he did and said in imita­tion of the doctrines of the Jews and Thracians, which hetransferred into his own philosophy." For it is very trulyaffirmed of this Pythagoras, that he took a great many of thelaws of the Jews into his own philosophy. Nor was our


1 This is a thing well known by the learned, that we are not secure thatwe hare any genuine writings of Pythagoras ; those Golden Verses, whichare his best remains, being generally supposed to have been written not byhimself, but by some of his scholars only, in agreement with what Josephushere affirms of him.







OCR Output








220 EOMAN BANKS RAISED [B. V.


galled : for they had so great a regard to the promises thathad been made of their courage, that they would needs per­severe in their fighting, and at length many of them retired,but not till they were wounded; and then they perceived thattrue Macedonians, if they were to be conquerors, must haveAlexander's good fortune also.
4. Now as the Romans began to raise their banks on thetwelfth day of the month Artemisius [Jyar,] so had theymuch ado to finish them by the twenty-ninth day of the samemonth, after they had labored hard for seventeen days con­tinually. For there were now four great banks raised, oneof which was at the tower Antonia: this was raised by thefifth legion over against the middle of that pool which wascalled Struthius. Another was cast up by the twelfth legion,at the distance of about twenty cubits from tho other. Butthe labors of the tenth legion, which lay a great way offthese, were on the north quarter, and at the pool calledAmygdalon ; as was that of the fifteenth legion about thirtycubits from it, and at the high-priest's monument. And now,when the engines were brought, John had from within under­mined the space that was over against the tower of Antonia,as far as the banks themselves, and had supported the groundover the mine with beams laid across one another, wherebythe Roman works stood upon an uncertain foundation. Thendid he order such materials to be brought in as were daubedover with pitch and bitumen, and set them on fire: and asthe cross-beams that supported the banks were burning, theditch yielded on the sudden, and the banks were shakendown, and fell into the diteh with a prodigious noise. Now,at the first there arose a very thick smoke and dust, as thefire was choked with the fall of the bank; but as the suffo­cated materials were now gradually consumed, a plain flamebrake out, on which sudden appearance of the flame a con­sternation fell upon the Romans, and the shrewdness of thecontrivance discouraged them: and, indeed, this accidentcoming upon them at the time when they thought they hadalready gained their point, cooled their hopes for the timoto come. They also thought it would be to no purpose to







OCR Output








INDEX. 541


high-priest's forehead, 256 ; entersthe temple, ib.; grants privilegesto the Jews, ib.; the Pamphyliansea gives way to his army, i. 199 ;his arms and armor kept in thetemple of Diana, ii. 315.Alexander, son of Phasaelus and Sa-
lampsio, iii. 160.Alexander (Tiberius) sncceeds Cus-pius Fadus, iii. 278, 489; is madeprocurator of Egypt, 504; chiefcommander of the Roman army,iv. 148, 266.
Alexander Zebina, king of Syria, isconquered and dies, ii. 378.
Alexandra, Alexander Janneus's wi­dow, holds the administration afterhis death, ii. 402; dies, 406; hereulogium, ib.
Alexandra, daughter of Hyrcanus,writes a letter to Cleopatra, ii.495; sends the pictures of her sonand daughter to Antonius, 496; isfeignedly reconciled to Herod, 497 ;is suspected by Herod, 498; pre­pares to fly into Egypt, 499 ; be­moans the death of Aristobulus,502 ; acquaints Cleopatra with thesnares of Herod, and the death ofher sin, ib.; is put into prison,506; her indecent behavior towardsher daughter Mnriamne, 530 ; iskilled by Herod's order, 533.
Alexandra, daughter of l'luisac'iisand Salampsio, iii. 160; is marriedto Timius Cyprius, ib.
Alexandria, a great part of that cityassigned to the Jews, ii. 428; theJews declared its citizens, 441.
Alisphragmuthosis, or Halisphragmu-thosis, iv. 370.
Aliturius, a Jew, i. 20.
Alliance between Ptolemy and Antio-chus, ii. 283.
Altar of incense, i. 227; of burnt-olTering made of unhewn stone, iv.387.
Amalekites attack the Israelites, i.209; arc conquered and plundered,212.
Aman, or llaman, enemy of the Jews,ii. 236; his edict against the Jews,ib.; orders a gallows for Mordecai,241 ; is obliged to honor Mordecai,243 ; his malicious design laid be­fore the king, 244 ; his edict coun-
IV. —46


termanded, 245; he is himselfhanged, 244.Amarinus, or Omri, ii. 69.Amasa, i. 512; killed by Joab, son
of Jethcr, 522, 542.Amasias, or Amaziah, ii. 127; makeswar on Jehoash, and is beaten,130 ; murdered in a conspiracy, ib.Amathus, i. 97.
Ambassadors sent with presents toHezckiah, ii. 155; ambassadorsslain by the Arabs, 515; this aviolation of the law of nations, ib.Ambassage sent by Jonathan to theLacedemonians, ii. 356; sent bythe Jews to Rome, 320.Ambivius (Marcus) iii. 142.Amenophis, iv. 371, 392, 402.Amesses, iv. 371.Ammonius, killed, ii. 347.Amnon falls in lovo with his sisterTamar, i. 499; is slain by Absa­lom's order, 501.Amorites given to the tribes of Reu­ben and Gad, and the half tribe ofManasseh, i. 324.Amphitheatres built at Jerusalem byHerod, ii. 536 ; another at Jericho,iii. 106.Aim-am, Moses's father, i. 173.Amram, iii. 263.Amraphel, i. 101.Anacharis, or Rabsaris, ii. 149.Ananelus made high-priest, ii. 495 ;deprived of it, 4U7 ; restored to it,501.Ananias made high-priest, iii. 278,493, 521 ; he and his son sent infetters to Rome, iii. 283; slain, to­gether with his brother, 526.Ananias, the son of Onias, ii. 379,
392.Ananias, the son of Masambalus, iv.
228.An anus, senior, made high-priest, iii.
294 ; his eulogium, iv. 90.Ananus, junior, made high-priest, i.42; iii. 295; iv. 92; his speech to thepeople, ib.; accused of the murderof James, iii. 295 ; deprived of thehigh-priesthood, ib.; his death, iv.111.Ananus, the son of Seth, made high-priest, iii. 141; deposed, 142.Ananus, son of Iiamadus, iv. 228;flies to Titus, 265.







OCR Output








258 A STRATAGEM [b. VI.


self, and a great despiser of the Romans,) one whose namewas Pudens, of the body of horsemen, out of his abomina­tion of the other's words, and of his impudence withal, and,perhaps, out of an inconsiderate arrogance, on account ofthe other's lowness of stature, ran out to him, and was toohard for him in other respects, but was betrayed by his illfortune; for he fell down; and as he was down, Jonathancame running to him, and cut his throat; and then standingupon his dead body, he brandished his sword, bloody as itwas, and shook his shield with his left hand, and made manyacclamations to the Roman army, and insulted over the deadman, and jested upon the Romans; till at length one Priscusa centurion shot a dart at him, as he was leaping and playingthe fool with himself, and thereby pierced him through;upon which a shout was set up both by the Jews and theRomans, though on different accounts. So Jonathan grewgiddy by the pain of his wounds, and fell down upon thebody of his adversary, as a plain instance how suddenlyvengeance may come upon men that have success in warwithout any just deserving the same.


CHAPTER III.
CONCERNING A STRATAGEM THAT WAS DEVISED BY THE JEWS,BY WHICH THEY BURNT MANY OF THE ROMANS; WITH AN­OTHER DESCRIPTION OF THE TERRIBLE FAMINE THAT WASIN THE CITY.
§ 1. But now the seditious that were in the temple didevery day openly endeavor to beat off the soldiers that wereupon the banks; and on the twenty-seventh day of the fore-named month [Panemus or Tamuz] contrived such a strata­gem as this: — They filled that part of the western cloister1which was between the beams and the roof under them withdry materials, as also with bitumen and pitch, and then re­tired from that place, as though they were tired with the


1 Of the court of the Gentiles.







OCR Output








AN EXTRACT
OUT OP
JOSEPHUS'S DISCOURSE TO THE GREEKS
COKCEBNISG
HADES.


§ 1. Now as to Hades, wherein the souls of the righteousand unrighteous are detained, it is necessary to speak of it.Hades is a place in the world not regularly finished; asubterraneous region, wherein the light of this world doesnot shine; from which circumstance, that in this region thelight does not shine, it cannot but be there must be in it per­petual darkness. This region is allotted as a place of custodyfor souls, in which angels are appointed as guardians to them,who distribute to them temporary putiishments, agreeable toevery one's behavior and manners.
2. In this region there is a certain place set apart as alake of unquenchable fire; whereinto we suppose no one hathhitherto been cast; but it is prepared for a day afore-determined by God, in which one righteous sentence shalldeservedly be passed upon all men; when the unjust, andthose that have been disobedient to God, and have givenhonor to such idols as have been the vain operations of thehands of men as to God himself, shall be adjudged to thiseverlasting punishment, as having been the causes of defile­ment; while the just shall obtain an incorruptible and never-fading kingdom. These are now, indeed, confiued in Hades,but not in the same place wherein the unjust are confined.


(450)







OCR Output








B. II.] AGAINST APION. 421


8. He adds another Grecian fable, in order to reproach us.In reply to which it would be enough to say, that they whopresume to speak about divine worship, ought not to be igno­rant of this plain truth, that it is a degree of less impurity topass through temples than to forge wicked calumnies of itspriests. Now such men as he are more zealous to justify asacrilegious king than to write what is just and what is trueabout us, and about our temple : for when they are desirousof gratifying Antiochus, and of concealing that perfidiousnessand sacrilege which he was guilty of with regard to our na­tion when he wanted money, they endeavor to disgrace us,and tell lies even relating to futurities. Apion becomes othermen's prophet upon this occasion, and says, — that " Antio­chus found in our temple a bed, and a man lying upon it,with a small table before him, full of dainties from the [fishesof the] sea, and the fowls of the dry land : that this man wasamazed at these dainties thus set before him : that he imme­diately adored the king, upon his coming in, as hoping thathe would afford him all possible assistance : that he fell downupon his knees, and stretched out to him his right hand, andbegged to be released; and that when the king bid him sitdown, and tell him who he was, and why he dwelt there, andwhat was the meaning of those various sorts of food that wereset before him, the man made a lamentable complaint, andwith sighs and tears in his eyes, gave him this account of thedistress he was in, and said, that he was a Greek; and that,as he went over this province in order to get his living, hewas seized upon by foreigners, on a sudden, and brought tothis temple and shut up therein, and was seen by nobody, butwas fattened by these curious provisions thus set before him :and that truly at the first such unexpected advantages seemedto him matter of great joy: that, after a while, they broughta suspicion upon him, and at length astonishment, what theirmeaning should be : that at last he inquired of the servantsthat came to him, and was by them informed, that it was inorder to the fulfilling a law of the Jews, which they must nottell him, that he was thus fed; and that thoy did the same ata set time every year: that they used to catch a Greek fo-IV. — 36







OCR Output








i20 FLATIUS JOSEPnUS [b. ii.


Great, and Licinius Crassus, and, last of all, Titus Caesar,have conquered us in war, and gotten possession of our tem­ple ; yet have they none of them found any such thing there,nor, indeed, any thing but what was agreeable to the strictestpiety; although what they found we are not at liberty to re­veal to other nations. But for Antiochus [Epiphanes,] hohad no just cause for that ravage in our temple that he made;he only came to it when he wanted money, without declaringhimself our enemy, and attacked us while we were his asso­ciates and his friends : nor did he find any thing there thatwas ridiculous. This is attested by many worthy writers;Polybius of Megalopolis, Strabo of Cappadocia, Nicolaus ofDamascus, Timagenes, Castor the chronologer, and Apollo-dorus,1 who all say, that it was out of Antiochus's want ofmoney that he broke his league with the Jews, and despoiledtheir temple when it was full of gold and silver. Apion oughtto have had a regard to these facts, unless he had himselfhad either an ass's heart or a dog's impudence; of such adog I mean as they worship; for he had no other externalreason for the lies he tells of us. As for us Jews, we ascribeno honor or power to asses, as do the Egyptians to crocodilesand asps, when they esteem such as are seized upon by theformer or bitten by the latter to be happy persons, and per­sons worthy of God. Asses are the same with us which theyare with other wise men, viz. creatures that bear the burdensthat we lay upon them ; but if they come to our threshing-floors, and eat our corn, or do not perform what we imposeupon them, we beat them with a great many stripes, becauseit is their business to minister to us in our husbandry affairs.But this Apion of ours was either perfectly unskilful in thecomposition of such fallacious discourses, or, however, whenhe began [somewhat better,] he was not able to persevere inwhat he had undertaken, since he hath no manner of successin those reproaches he casts upon us.


1 It is (i great pity that these six pagan authors, here mentioned to havedescribed the famous profanation of the Jewish temple by Antiochus Epi­phanes, should be all lost; I mean so far of their writings as contained thatdescription; though it is plain Josephus perused them all, as extant in histime.







OCR Output








C. III.] SNARES FOR THE ROMANS. 171


if they had been ejec'H out of the city by those who werefor peace, and rambled ;il>out as if they were afraid of beingassaulted by the Romans, and were in fear of one another;while those that stood upon the wall, and seemed to be of thepeople's side, cried out aloud for peace, and entreated thatthey might have security for their lives given them, and calledfor the Romans, promising to open their gates to them; andas they cried out after that manner, they threw stones attheir own people, as though they would drive them away fromthe gates. These also pretended that they were excluded byforce, and that they petitioned those that were within to letthem in ; and rushing upon the Romans perpetually, withviolence, they then came back, and seemed to be in greatdisorder. Now the Roman soldiers thought this cunningstratagem of theirs was to be believed real, and thinking theyhad the one party under their power, and could punish themas they pleased, and hoping that the other party would opentheir gates to them, set to the execution of their designs ac­cordingly. But for Titus himself, he had this surprisingconduct of the Jews in suspicion; for whereas he had invitedthem to come to terms of accommodation by Josephus butone day before, he could then receive no civil answer fromthem; so he ordered the soldiers to stay where they were.However, some of them that were set in the front of the worksprevented him, and catching up their arms ran to the gates;whereupon those that seemed to have been ejected at the firstretired ; but as soon as the soldiers were gotten between thetowers on each side of the gate, the Jews ran out, and en­compassed them round, and fell upon them behind, while thatmultitude which stood upon the wall threw a heap of stonesand darts of all kinds at them, insomuch that they slew aconsiderable number, and wounded many more; for it wasnot easy for the Romans to escape, by reason those behindthem pressed them forward; besides which, the shame theywere under for being mistaken, and the fear they were in oftheir commanders, engaged them to persevere in their mis­take : wherefore they fought with their spears a great while,and received many blows from the Jews, though, indeed, they







OCR Output








C. V.] TRIUMPH OF THE ROMAN EMPERORS. 313


shows as they deserve, and the magnificence of them all;such indeed, as a man could not easily think of, as performedeither by the labor of workmen, or the variety of riches, orthe rarities of nature: for almost all such curiosities as themost happy men ever get by piecemeal were here one heapedon another, and those both admirable and costly in their na­ture ; and as all brought together on that day demonstratedthe vastness of the dominions of the Romans: for there washere to be seen a mighty quantity of silver, and gold, andivory, contrived into all sorts of things, and did not appearas carried along in pompous show only, but, as a man maysay, running along like a river. Some parts were composedof the rarest purple hangings, and so carried along, andothers accurately represented to the life what was embroideredby the art of the Babylonians. There were also preciousstones that were transparent, some set in crowns of gold andsome in other ouches as the workmen pleased; and of thesesuch a vast number were brought, that we could not butthence learn how vainly wo imagined any of them to berarities. The images of the gods were also carried, being aswell wonderful for their largeness as made very artificially,and with great skill of the workmen: nor were any of theseimages of any other than very costly materials ; and manyspecies of animals were brought, every one in their ownnatural ornaments. The men also, who brought every oneof these shows, were great multitudes, and adorned with pur­ple garments, all over interwoven with gold; those that werechosen for carrying these pompous shows having also aboutthem such magnificent ornaments as were both extraordinaryand surprising. Besides these, one might see that even thegreat number of the captives was not unadorned, while thevariety that was in their garments and their fine texture con­cealed from the sight the deformity of their bodies. Butwhat afforded the greatest surprise of all was, the structureof the pageants that were borne along: for, indeed, he thatmet them could not but be afraid that the bearers would notbe able firmly enough to support them, such was their magni­tude : for many of them were so made that they were on threeIV. —27







OCR Output








232 GREAT SLAUGHTERS [B. V.


Syrians now first of all begin to govern themselves as theyplease, and to indulge their appetites in a foreign war, andthen out of their barbarity in murdering men, and out oftheir hatred to the Jews, get it ascribed to the Romans ?"for this infamous practice was said to be spread among someof ids own soldiers also. Titus then threatened, that howould put such men to death, if any of them were discoveredto be so insolent as to do so again : moreover, he gave it incharge to the legions, that they should make a search aftersuch as were suspected, and should bring them to him. Butit appeared that the love of money was too hard for all theirdread of punishment, and a vehement desire of gain is naturalto men, and no passion is so venturesome as covetousness;otherwise such passions have certain bounds, and are subor­dinate to fear. But, in reality, it was God who condemnedthe whole nation, and turned every course that was taken fortheir preservation to their destruction. This, therefore, whichwas forbidden by Caesar under such a threatening, was ven­tured upon privately against the deserters, and these barba­rians would go out still, and meet those that ran away beforeany saw them, and looking about them to see that no Romansspied them, they dissected them, and pulled this pollutedmoney out of their bowels; which money was still found in afew of them, while yet a great many were destroyed by thebare hope there was of thus getting by them ; which miser­able treatment made many that were deserting to return backagain into the city.
6. But as for John, when he could no longer plunder thepeople, he betook himself to sacrilege, and melted down manyof the sacred utensils, which had been given to the temple,as also many of those vessels which were necessary for suchas ministered about holy things, the caldrons, the dishes, andthe tables: nay, he did not abstain from those pouring ves­sels that were sent them by Augustus and his wife ; for theRoman emperors did ever both honor and adorn this temple;whereas this man, who was a Jew, seized upon what were thedonations of foreigners, and said to those that were with him,that it was proper for them to use divine things, while they







OCR Output








INDEX. 549


soner by Arsaces, and released,360; Trypho rebels against him,367; defeated, and flies in Tain toCleopatra, his wife, 376; goesthence to Tyre, is made a prisoner,and dies, ib.
Demetrius Eucures made king ofSyria Damascena, ii. 394; his as­sistance desired by the Jews, 395 ;
, makes war upon Alexander andconquers him, 396 ; iii. 329; makeswar with his brother Philip, is car­ried prisoner into 1'urthia, and diesthere, ii. 397.
Demetrius of Gadara obtains the re­building of that city, ii. 421.
Demetrius Phalerius, ii. 260; iv. 414;his petition to King Philadelphus,ii. 264.
Demetrius Soter made king of Syria,ii. 321; puts Antiochus to death,ib.; sends Bachides against theJews, ib.; his character, 334; hisletter to Jonathan, 336; is killed,338.
Demons, ii. 14.
Demoteles, ii. 356.
Diana's temple at Elymais in Persia,ii. 315.
Dido, sister of Pygmalion, iv. 376.
Dinah, Jacob's daughter, i. 133.
Diodorus, son of Jason, ii. 375.
Diodorus, or Trypho, ii. 351.
Dionysius, ii. 415.
Diopuantus, iii. 08.
Divorce, causes of it, i. 309.
Doeg, the Syrian, i. 439.
Dogs; it is natural to them to devourthe bones with the flesh, ii. 291.
Dolabella's letter to the Ephesians infavor of the Jews, ii. 447.
Dolesus, iv. 121.
Domitia kind to Josephus, i. 71.
Domitian, regent in his father's ab­sence, iv. 153; kind to Josephus,i. 71; expedition against the Ger­mans, iv. 308.
Domitius Sabinus, iv. 201.
Doris, Herod's wile, ii. 459; expelledthe court, iii. 434.
Dorians erect Ccesar's statue in asynagogue, iii. 251; Petrouius'sedict against them, ib.
Dortus, iii. 282.
Dositheus, a Jew, his perfidiousness,ii. 520.


Dositheus, a general of the Jews, iv.414.
Dove sent out of the ark, i. 87.
Draco's laws, iv. 360.
Drusilla, a daughter of Agrippa se­nior, iii. 160; married to Azizus,284; afterwards to Felix, 285.
Drusus, her brother, iii. 160.
Drusus, brother of Tiberius, iii. 173.
Eaqle, pulled down from the front ofthe temple, iii. 98; holding a dra­gon in his claws in the Lacede­monian seal, ii. 294.
Earthquake wherein the followers ofDa than and Abiram were swallowedup, i. 271.
Earthquake, a very great one in Ju-dea, ii. 512.
Eating the sinew upon the hip, whvrefused by the Jews, i. 133.
Ebutius, iv. 26; slain, 76.
Eclipse of the moon. iii. 101.
Ecnibalus, king of Tyre, iv. 380.
Eglon oppresses the Israelites, i. 358.
Elah succeeds liaasha in the kingdomof Israel, ii. 69.
Eleazar, son of Aaron, i. 235.
Eleazar, the son of Ananias, high-priest, iii. 142, 521.
Eleazar, the son of Dineus, iii. 281,288.
Eleazar, the son of Dodo, i. 527.
Eleazar casts out a demon, ii. 14.
Eleazar. the brother of Joazar, madehigh-priest, iii. 133; deprived, ib.
Eleazar, brother of Judas .Maccabeus,ii. 301, 318; crushed to death byan elephant, ib.
Eleazar of Massada's speech to hisgarrison, iv. 334.
Eleazar, high-priest in the days ofJoshua, i. 272 ; dies, 345.
Eleazar, high-priest in tho days ofPhiladelphus, Prof. i. lxxix.; ii.265; his letter to Philadelphus,267; dies, 283.
Eleazar, the son of Sameas, his valor,iv. 35.
Eleazar, the son of Simon, iii. 545;iv. 100, 156, 169.
Eleazar, the companion of Simon,dies, iv. 137.
Eleazar, commander of the temple,iii. 296, 521.
Eleazar taken by Rufus, iv. 321.







OCR Output








C. VI.] FURTHER CRUELTIES. 117


CHAPTER VI.
HOW THE ZEALOTS, WHEN THEY WERE FREED FROM THE IDU-MEANS, SLEW A GREAT MANY MORE OF THE CITIZENS. ANDHOW VESPASIAN DISSUADED THE ROMANS, WHEN THEY WEREVERY EARNEST TO MARCH AGAINST THE JEWS, FROM PRO­CEEDING IN THE WAR AT MAT TIME.
§ 1. The Idumeans complied with these persuasions, andin the first place, they set those that were in the prisons atlibert}7, being about two thousand of the populace, who there­upon fled away immediately to Simon, one whom we shallspeak of presently. After which these Idumeans retired fromJerusalem, and went home, which departure of theirs was agreat surprise to both parties; for the people, not knowingof their repentance, pulled up their courage for a while, aseased of so many of their enemies, while the zealots grew moreinsolent, not as deserted by their confederates, but as freedfrom such men as might hinder their designs, and put somestop to their wickedness. Accordingly, they made no longerany delay, nor took any deliberation in their enormous prac­tices, but made use of the shortest method for all their exe­cutions ; and what they had once resolved upon, they put inpractice sooner than any one could imagine. But their thirstwas chiefly after the blood of valiant men, and men of goodfamilies; the one sort of which they destroyed out of envy,the other out of fear, for they thought their whole securitylay in leaving no potent men alive; on which account theyslew Gorion, a person eminent in dignity, and on account ofhis family also; he was also for a democracy, and of as greatboldness and freedom of spirit as were any of the Jews who­soever ; the principal thing that ruined him, added to hisother advantages, was his free speaking. Nor did Niger ofPerea escape their hands : he had been a man of great valorin their war with the Romans, but was now drawn throughthe middle of the city; and as he went he frequently criedout, and showed the scars of his wounds; and when ho was







OCR Output








40 VESPASIAN. [lJ. III.


light. However, Joscphus's men remembered the charges hehad given them; they stopped their ears at the sounds, andcovered their bodies against the darts; and as to the enginesthat were set ready to go to work, the Jews ran out uponthem, before those that should have used them were gottenupon them. And now, on the ascending of the soldiers, therewas a great conflict, and many actions of the hands and ofthe soul were exhibited, while the Jews did earnestly en­deavor, in the extreme danger they were in, not to show lesscourage than those who, without being in danger, fought sostoutly against them; nor did they leave struggling with theRomans till they either fell down dead themselves or killedtheir antagonists. But the Jews grew weary with defendingthemselves continually, and had not enow to come in theirplaces and succor them; while on the side of the Romans,fresh men still succeeded those that were tired, and still newmen soon got upon the machines for ascent in the room ofthose that were thrust down: those encouraging one another,and joining side to side with their shields, which were a pro­tection to them, they became a body of men not to be broken;and as this band thrust away the Jews, as though they werethemselves but one body, they began already to get uponthe wall.
28. Then did Josephus take necessity for his counsellor inthis utmost distress (which necessity is very sagacious in in­vention, when it is irritated by despair,) and gave orders topour scalding oil upon those whose shields protected them:whereupon they soon got it ready, being many that broughtit, and what they brought being a great quantity also, andpoured it on all sides upon the Romans, and threw down uponthem their vessels as they were still hissing from the heat ofthe fire; this so burnt the Romans, that it dispersed thatunited band, who now tumbled down from the wall, withhorrid pains; for the oil did easily run down the whole bodyfrom head to foot, under their entire armor, and fed upontheir flesh like flame itself, its fat and unctuous nature ren­dering it soon heated and slowly cooled; and as the menwere cooped up in their head-pieces and breast-plates, they







OCR Output








C. IV.] VESPASIAN'S RECEPTION AT ROME. 305


him with great alacrity and splendor, betook himself to re­joicing and pleasures to a great degree, as now freed fromthe solicitude he had been under, after the most agreeablemanner. For all men that were in Italy showed their re­spects to him in their minds before he came thither, as if hewere already come, as esteeming the very expectation theyhad of him to be his real presence, on account of the greatdesires they had to see him, and because the good-will theybore him was entirely free and unconstrained ; for it was adesirable thing to the senate, who well remembered thecalamities they had undergone in the late changes of theirgovernors, to receive a governor who was adorned with thegravity of old age, and with the highest skill in the actionsof war, whose advancement would be, as they knew, for no­thing else but for the preservation of those that were to bogoverned. Moreover, the people had been so harassed bytheir civil miseries, that they were still more earnest for hiscoming immediately, as supposing they should then be firmlydelivered from their calamities, and believed they shouldthen recover their secure tranquillity and prosperity; andfor the soldiery, they had the principal regard to him, forthey were chiefly apprized of his great exploits in war; and,since they had experienced the want of skill and want ofcourage in other commanders, they were very desirous to befreed from that great shame they had undergone by theirmeans, and heartily wished to receive such a prince as mightbe a security and an ornament to them. And as this good­will to Vespasian was universal, those that enjoyed any re­markable dignities could not have patience enough to stay inRome, but made haste to meet him at a very great distancefrom it: nay, indeed, none of the rest could endure the delayof seeing him, but did all pour out of the city in such crowds,and were so universally possessed with the opinion, that itwas easier and better for them to go out than to stay there,that this was the very first time that the city joyfully per­ceived itself almost empty of its citizens ; for those that staidwithin were fewer than those that went out. But as soon asthe news was come that he was hard by, and those that had


26*







OCR Output








494 DISSERTATION II.


name of the Lord." If, therefore, this shortening or takingaway the lives of men be no objection against any divinecommand for that purpose, it is full as strong against thepresent system of the world, against the conduct of divineprovidence in general, and against natural religion, which isfounded on the justice of that providence, and is no way pe­culiar to revealed religion, or to the fact of Abraham nowbefore us : nor is this case much different from what was soonafter the days of Abraham thoroughly settled, after Job's andhis friend's debates, by the inspiration of Alihu, and the de­termination of God himself, where the divine providence wasat length thoroughly cleared and justified before all the world,as it will be, no question, more generally cleared and justifiedat the final judgment.
3. That, till this profane age, it has also, I think, beenuniversally allowed by all sober men, that a command of God,when sufficiently made known to be so, is abundant authorityfor the taking away the life of any person whomsoever. Idoubt both ancient and modern princes, generals of armies,and judges, even those of the best reputation also, have ven­tured to take many men's lives away upon much less author­ity : nor, indeed, do the most sceptical of the moderns careto deny this authority directly; they rather take a method ofobjecting somewhat more plausible, though it amount to muchthe same : they say, that the apparent disagreement of anycommand to the moral attributes of God, such as this of theslaughter of an only child seems plainly to be, will be agreater evidence that such a command does not come fromGod, than any pretended revelation can be that it does. Butas to this matter, although divine revelations have so longceased, that we are not well acquainted with the manner ofconveying such revelations with certainty to men, and byconsequence the apparent disagreement of a command withthe moral attributes of God ought at present, generally, ifnot constantly, to deter men from acting upon such a pre­tended revelation, yet was there no such uncertainty in thedays of the old prophets of God, or of Abraham, the friend







OCR Output








164 TITUS AT JERUSALEM. [B. V.


and ran with violence into the midst of his enemies, in orderto force his way through them to his own men. And hencewe may principally learn, that both the success of wars, andthe dangers that kings1 are in, are under the providence ofGod: for while such a number of darts were thrown at Titus,when he had neither his head-piece on nor his breast-plate,(for, as I told you, he went out not to fight, but to view thecity,) none of them touched his body, but went aside withouthurting him, as if all of them missed him on purpose, andonly made a noise as they passed by him. So he divertedthose perpetually with his sword that came on his side, andoverturned many of those that directly met him, and madehis horse ride over those that were overthrown. The enemyindeed made a shout at the boldness of Caesar, and exhortedone another to rush upon him. Yet did those against whomhe marched fly away, and go off from him in great numbers;while those that were in the same danger with him kept upclose to him, though they were wounded both on their backsand on their sides; for they had each of them but this onehope of escaping, if they could assist Titus in opening him­self a way, that he might not be encompassed round by hisenemies before he got away from them. Now there were twoof those that were with him, but at some distance; the oneof which the enemy had encompassed round, and slew himwith their darts, and his horse also; but the other they slewas he leaped down from his horse, and carried off his horsewith them. But Titus escaped with the rest, and came safeto the camp. So this success of the Jews' first attack raisedtheir minds, and gave them an ill grounded hope; and thisshort inclination of fortune on their side made them verycourageous for the future.
3. But now, as soon as that legion that had been at Era-maus was joined to Caesar at night, he removed thence whenit was day, and came to a place named Scopus ; from whencethe city began already to be seen, and a plain view might betaken of the great temple. Accordingly, this place on thenorth quarter of the city, and adjoining thereto, was a plain,


1 See the preceding note.







OCR Output








C. XIII.] AND SACRILEGE. 233


were fighting for the Divinity, without fear; and that suchwhoso warfare is for the temple, should live of the temple: onwhich account he emptied the vessels of that sacred wine andoil which the priests kept to be poured on the burnt-offerings,and which lay in the inner court of the temple, and distributedit among the multitude, who, in their anointing themselves,and drinking, used [each of them] above a hin of them. Andhere I cannot but speak my mind, and what the concern I amunder dictates to me, and it is this : — I suppose, that hadthe Romans made any longer delay in coming against thesevillains, that the city would either have been swallowed up bythe ground opening upon them, or been overflowed by water,or else been destroyed by such thunder as the country ofSodom' perished by; for it had brought forth a generation ofmen much more atheistical than were those that suffered suchpunishments; for by their madness it was that all the peoplecame to be destroyed.
7. And, indeed, why do I relate these particular calamities?while Manneus, the son of Lazarus, came running to Titus atthis very time, and told him, that there had been carried outthrough that one gate, which was intrusted to his care, nofewer than a hundred and fifteen thousand eight hundred andeighty dead bodies, in the interval between the fourteenthday of the month Xanthicus [Nisan,] when the Romanspitched their camp by the city, and the first day of the monthPanemus [Tamuz.] This was itself a prodigious multitude:and though this man was not himself set as a governor atthat gate, yet was he appointed to pay the public stipend forcarrying these bodies out, and so was obliged of necessity tonumber them, while the rest were buried with their relations ;though all their burial was but this, to bring them away, and


1 Josephus, both here and before, B. iv. ch. viii. sect. 4, esteems the landof Sodom not as part of the lake Asphaltitis, or under its waters, but near itonly, as Tacitus also took the samo notion from him, Hist. v. vi. 7, whichthe great Reland takes to be the very truth, both on his note on this place,and in his Palestina, torn. i. p. 2o4-i;o8; though I rather suppose part ofthat region of rentapolis to be now under the waters of the south part ofthat sea, but perhaps not the whole country.


20*







OCR Output








402 FLAVIUS JOSEPHUB [B. I.


write the Egyptian history, sets down the same name for thisking that Manetho did, Amenophis, as also of his son Ha­rnesses, and then goes on thus :—" The goddess Isis appearedto Amenophis in his sleep, and blamed him that her templehad been demolished in the war. But that Phritiphantes, thesacred scribe, said to him, that in case he would purge Egyptof the men that had pollutions upon them, he should be nolonger troubled -with such frightful apparitions : that Amenc-phis, accordingly, chose out two hundred and fifty thousandof those that were thus diseased, and cast them out of thecountry: that Moses and Joseph were scribes, and Josephwas a sacred scribe : that their names were Egyptian origin­ally ; that of Moses had been Tisithen, and that of JosephPetegeph: that these two came to Pelusium, and lighted uponthree hundred and eighty thousand that had been left thereby Amenophis, he not being willing to carry them into Egypt:that these scribes made a league of friendship with them, andmade with them an expedition against Egypt; that Ameno­phis could not sustain their attacks, but fled into Ethiopia,and left his wife with child behind him, who lay concealed incertain caverns, and there brought forth a son, whose namewas 3Iessene, and who, when he was grown up to man's estate,pursued the Jews into Syria, being about two hundred thou­sand men, and then received his father Amenophis out ofEthiopia."
33. This is the account Cheremon gives us. Now I takeit for granted, that what I have said already hath plainlyproved the falsity of both these narrations: for had therebeen any real truth at the bottom, it was impossible that theyshould so greatly disagree about the particulars. But forthose that invent lies, what they write will easily give us verydifferent accounts, while they forge what they please out oftheir own heads. Now Manetho says, that the king's desireof seeing the gods wa? the origin of the ejection of the pol­luted people; but Chci <)mon feigns that it was a dream of hisown, sent upon him by Isis, that was the occasion of it.Manetho says, that the person who foreshowed this purgationof Egypt to the king was Amenophis: but this man says it







OCR Output








48 VESPASIAN. [b. in.


concealed recesses of the city: but as the city was first taken,he was assisted by a certain supernatural providence; for hewithdrew himself from the enemy, when he was in the midstof them, and leaped into a certain deep pit, whereto thereadjoined a large den at one side of it, which den could not beseen by those that were above ground; and here he met withforty persons of eminency that had concealed themselves, andwith provisions enough to satisfy them for not a few days.So in the day-time he hid himself from the enemy, who hadseized upon all places, and in the night-time he got up outof the den, and looked about for some way of escaping, andtook exact notice of the watch: but as all places were guardedevery where on his account, that there was no way of gettingoff unseen, he went down again into the den. Thus he con­cealed himself two days; but on the third day, when theyhad taken a woman who had been with them, he was dis­covered. Whereupon Vespasian sent immediately and zea­lously two tribunes, Paulinus and Gallicanus, and orderedthem to give Josephus their right hands as a security for hislife, and to exhort him to come up.
2. So they came and invited the man to come up, and gavehim assurances that his life should be preserved; but theydid not prevail with him, for ho gathered suspicions from theprobability there was that one who had done so many thingsagainst the Romans must suffer for it, though not from the mildtemper of those that invited him. However, he was afraid thathe was invited to come up in order to be punished, until Ves­pasian sent besides these a third tribune, Nicanor, to him;he was one that was well known to Josephus, and had beenhis familiar acquaintance in old time. AVhen ho was come,he enlarged upon the natural mildness of the Romans towardsthose they have once conquered, and told him that he hadbehaved so valiantly that the commanders rather admired thanhated him: that the general was very desirous to have himbrought to him, not in order to punish him, for that he coulddo though he should not come voluntarily, but that he wasdetermined to preserve a man of his courage. He, moreover,added this, that Vespasian, had he been resolved to impose







OCR Output








360 FLAVIUSJOSEPHUS [B. L


Thucydides himself is accused of some as writing what isfalse, although he seems to have given us the exactest historyof the affairs of his own time.
4. As for the occasions of so great disagreement of theirs,there may be assigned many that are very probable, if anyhave a mind to make an inquiry about them; but I ascribethese contradictions chiefly to two causes, which I will nowmention, and still think what I shall mention in the firstplace to bo the principal of all: For, if we remember, thatin the beginning the Greeks had taken no care to have publicrecords of their several transactions preserved, this must forcertain have afforded those that would afterward write aboutthose ancient transactions the opportunity of making mis­takes, and the power of making lies also; for this originalrecording of such ancient transactions hath not only beenneglected by the other states of Greece, but even amongthe Athenians themselves also, who pretend to bo aborigines,and to have applied themselves to learning, there are no suchrecords extant; nay, they say themselves, that the laws ofDraco concerning murders, which are now extant in writing,are the most ancient of their public records; which Dracoyet lived but a little before the tyrant Pisistratus.1 For asto the Arcadians, who make such boasts of their antiquity,what need I speak of them in particular, since it was stilllater before they got their letters, and learned them, and thatwith difficulty also?
5. There must, therefore, naturally arise great differencesamong writers when they had no original records to lay fortheir foundation, which might at once inform those who hadan inclination to learn, and contradict those that would telllies. However, we are to suppose a second occasion, besidesthe former, of these contradictions; it is this.—That thosewho were the most zealous to write history were not solici­tous for the discovery of truth,2 although it was very easyi -——————- -


1 About the days of Cyrus and Daniel.
* It is here well worth our observation, what the reasons are that suchancient authors as Herodotus, Josephus, and others, have been read to solittle purpose by many learned crities, viz.: that their main aim has not







OCR Output








122 THE TYRANNY OF JOHN. [B. IV.


the opinions of others, and giving out injunctions of his own,in a very imperious manner, so that it was evident he wassetting up a monarchical power. Now some submitted tohim out of their fear of him, and others out of their good-willto him; for he was a shrewd man to entice men to him, bothby deluding them and putting cheats upon them. Nay, manythere were that thought they should be safer themselves, ifthe causes of their past insolent actions should now be reducedto one head, and not to a great many. His activity was sogreat, and that both in action and in counsel, that he hadnot a few guards about him ; and yet there was a great partyof his antagonists that left him; among whom envy at himweighed a great deal, while they thought it a very heavything to be in subjection to one that was formerly their equal.But the main reason that moved men against him was thedread of monarchy, for they could not hope easily to put anend to his power if he had once obtained it; and yet theyknew that he would have this pretence always against them,that they had opposed him when he was first advanced; whileevery one chose rather to suffer any thing whatsoever in war,than that, when they had been in a voluntary slavery for sometime, they should afterward perish. So the sedition was di­vided into two parts, and John reigned in opposition to hisadversaries over one of them: but for their leaders theywatched one another, nor did they at all, or at least verylittle, meddle with arms in their quarrels; but they foughtearnestly against the people, and contended one with anotherwhich of them should bring home the greatest prey. Butbecause the city had to struggle with three of the greatestmisfortunes, war, and tyranny, and sedition, it appeared uponthe comparison that the war was the least troublesome to thepopulace of them all. Accordingly they ran away from theirown houses to foreigners, and obtained that preservation fromthe Romans which they despaired to obtain among their ownpeople.
2. And now a fourth misfortune arose, in order to bringour nation to destruction. There was a fortress of very greatstrength not far from Jerusalem, which had been built by our







OCR Output








DISSERTATION II. 493


Gomorrah by fire and brimstone from heaven, and to extir­pate the main body of the Amorites out of the land of Canaan,as soon as their iniquities were full,' and in these instancesincluded the young innocent infants, together with the oldhardened sinners ; when God was pleased to send an angel,and by him to destroy 185,000 Assyrians (the number at­tested to by Berosus the Chaldean, as well as by our ownBibles,) in the days of Hezekiah, most of which seem to havehad no other peculiar guilt upon them than that common tosoldiers in war, of obeying, without reserve, their king Sen­nacherib, his generals and captains: and when at the plagueof Athens, London, or Marseilles, &c. so many thousandrighteous men and women, with innocent babes, were sweptaway on a sudden by a fatal contagion, I do not rememberthat sober men have complained that God dealt unjustly withsuch his creatures, in those to us seemingly severe dispensa­tions ; nor are we certain when any such seemingly severe dispen­sations are really such, nor do we know but shortening the livesof men may sometimes be the greatest blessing to them, andprevent or put a stop to those courses of gross wickednesswhich might bring them to greater misery in the world tocome: nor is it indeed fit for such poor, weak, and ignorantcreatures as we are, in the present state, to call our Almighty,and All-wise, and All-good Creator and Benefactor, to anaccount upon any such occasions; since we cannot but ac­knowledge, that it is he that hath made us, and not we our­selves;'* that we are nothing, and have nothing of ourselvesindependent on him, but that all we are, all we have, and allwe hope for, is derived from him, from his free and undeservedbounty, which, therefore, he may justly take from us in whatway soever, and whensoever he pleases; all wise and goodmen still saying in such cases with the pious Psalmist, xxxix.9, " I was dumb, I opened not my mouth, because thou didstit;" and with patient Job, i. 21; ii. 10, " Shall we receivegood at the hand of God, and shall we not receive evil ? TheLord gave and the Lord hath taken away, blessed be the
i Gen. xv. lb. 3 Psal. c. 3.
IV. — 42







OCR Output








240 TITUS ADDRESSES [B. VI.


ill successes ; for it is unbecoming you, who are Romans andmy soldiers, who have in peace been taught how to make wars,and who have also been used to conquer in those wars, to beinferior to Jews either in action of the hand or in courage ofthe soul, and this especially when you are at the conclusionof your victory, and are assisted by God himself; for as toour misfortunes, they have been owing to the madness of theJews, while their sufferings have been owing to your valor,and to the assistances God hath afforded you; for as to theseditions they have been in, and the famine they are under,and the siege they now endure, and the fall of their wallswithout our engines, what can they all be but demonstrationsof God's anger against them, and of his assistance affordedus ? It will not, therefore, be proper for you either to showyourselves inferior to those to whom you are really superior,or to betray that divine assistance which is afforded you. And,indeed, how can it be esteemed otherwise than a base andunworthy thing, that while the Jews, who need not be muchashamed if they be deserted, because they have long learnedto be slaves to others, do yet despise death, that they be sono longer; and do make sallies into the very midst of us fre­quently, not in hopes of conquering us, but merely for a de­monstration of their courage ; we, who have gotten possessionof almost all the world that belongs to either land or sea, towhom it will be a great shame if we do not conquer them, donot once undertake any attempt against our enemies whereinthere is much, danger, but sit still idle, with such brave armsas we have, and only wait till the famine and fortune do ourbusiness themselves, and this when we have it in our power,with some small hazard, to gain all that we desire: for, if wego up to this tower of Antonia, we gain the city; for if theroshould be any more occasion for fighting against those withinthe city, which I do not suppose there will, sinco we shallthen be upon the top of the hill,1 and be upon our enemies
■Belaud notes here, Tory pertinently, that the tower of Antor.ni stoodhigher than the floor of the temple, or court adjoining to it; and that, accord­ingly, they descended thence into the temp'.e, as Josephus elsewhere speaksalso. Sec B. vi. ch. ii. sect. 0.







OCR Output








298 TITUS COMMENDS HIS SOLDIERS. [b. VII.


he said, that he would immediately bestow rewards and dig­nities on those that had fought the most bravely, and withgreater force, and had signalized their conduct in the mostglorious manner, and had made his army more famous bytheir noble exploits ; and that no one who had been willing totake more pains than another should miss of a just retributionfor the same : for that he had been exceeding careful aboutthis matter, and that the more, because he had much ratherreward the virtues of his fellow-soldiers than punish such ashad offended."
3. Hereupon Titus ordered those whose business it was toread the list of all that had performed great exploits in thiswar, whom he called to him by their names, and commendedthem before the company, and rejoiced in them in the samemanner as a man would have rejoiced in his own exploits. Healso put on their heads crowns of gold, and golden ornamentsabout their necks, and gave them long spears of gold, andensigns that were made of silver, and removed every one ofthem to a higher rank; and, besides this, he plentifully dis­tributed among them out of the spoils, and the other preythey had taken, silver, and gold, and garments. So whenthey had all these honors bestowed on them, according to hisown appointment made to every one, and he had wished allsorts of happiness to the whole army, he came down, amongthe great acclamations which were made to him, and thenbetook himself to offer thank-offerings [to the gods,] and atonce sacrificed a vast number of oxen, that stood ready at thealtars, and distributed them among the army to feast on.And when he had staid three days among the principal com­manders, and so long feasted with them, ho sent away the restof his army to the several places where they would be everyone best situated; but permitted the tenth legion to stay as aguard at Jerusalem, and did not send them away beyond Eu­phrates, where they had been before, And as he rememberedthat the twelfth legion had given way to the Jews under Ces-tius their general, he expelled them out of all Syria; for theyhad lain formerly at Raphanea, and sent them away to aplace called Meletine, near Euphrates, which is in the limits







OCR Output








DISSERTATION III. 517


borne up by it.1 At a certain time of the year2 it easts outbitumen: the manner of gathering it, like other arts, has beentaught by experience. The liquor is of its own nature of ablack color; and if you pour vinegar upon it, it clings to­gether, and swims on the top. Those whose business it istake it in their hands, and pull it into the upper parts of theship, after which it follows, without farther attraction, and"fills the ship full, till you cut it off: nor can you cut it offeither with a brass or iron instrument; but it cannot bear thetouch of blood, or of a cloth wet with the menstrual purga­tions of women, as the ancient authors say. But those thatare acquainted with the place assure us, that these waves ofbitumen are driven along, and by the hand drawn to the shore;and that when they are dried by the warm steams from theearth and the force of the sun, they are cut in pieces withaxes and wedges, as timber and stones are cut in pieces.
Chap. VII.] Not far from this lake are those plains, whichare related to have been of old fertile, and to have had many3cities full of people, but to have been burnt up by a strokeof lightning: it is also said, that the footsteps of that de­struction still remain, and that the earth itself appears asburnt earth, and has lost its natural fertility: and that as anargument thereof, all the plants that grow of their own ac­cord, or are planted by the hand, whether they arrive at thedegree of an herb, or of a flower, or at complete maturity,become black and empty, and, as it were, vanish into ashes.As for myself, as I am willing to allow that these once famouscities were burnt by fire from heaven, so would I supposethat the earth is infected with the vapor of the lake, and


1 Strabo says, that a man could not sink into the water of this lake so deepas the navel.
2 Josephus never says that this bitumen was cast out at a certain time ofthe year only, and Strabo says the direct contrary; but Pliny agrees withTacitus.
8 This is exactly according to Josephus, and must have been taken fromhim in the place forecited, aud that particularly because it is peculiar to him,so far as I know, in all antiquity. The rest thought the cities were in thevery same place where now the lake is, but Josephus and Tacitus say theywere "in its neighborhood only, which is Mr. Reland's opinion also.
IV. —44







OCR Output








C. XII.] AND CONSEQUENT MISERY. 227


4. However, when Titus in going his rounds along thosevalleys saw them full of dead bodies, and the thick putrefaction running about them, he gave a groan, and spreadingout his hands to heaven, called God to witness that this wasnot his doing ; and such was the sad case of the city itself.But the Romans were very joyful, since none of the seditiouscould now make sallies out of the city, because they werethemselves disconsolate, and the famine already touched themalso. These Romans besides had great plenty of corn andother necessaries out of Syria, and out of the neighboringprovinces ; many of which would stand near to the wall ofthe city, and show the people what great quantities of pro­visions they had, and so make the enemy more sensible oftheir famine, by the great plenty, even to satiety, which theyhad themselves. However, when the seditious still showedno inclinations of yielding, Titus, out of his commiserationof the people that remained, and out of his earnest desire ofrescuing what was still left of these miseries, began to raisehis banks again, although materials for them were hard to become at; for all the trees that were about the city had beenalready cut down for the making of the former banks. Yetdid the soldiers bring with them other materials from the dis­tance of ninety furlongs, and thereby raised banks in fourparts much greater than the former, although this was doneonly at the tower of Antonia. So Caesar went his roundsthrough the legions, and hastened on the works, and showedthe robbers that they were now in his hands. But thesemen, and these only, were incapable of repenting of thewickedness they had been guilty of; and separating theirsouls from their bodies, they used them both as if they be­longed to other folks and not to themselves: for no gentleaffection could touch their souls, nor could any pain affecttheir bodies, since they could still tear the dead bodies of thepeople, as dogs do, and fill the prisons with those that werosick.







OCR Output








DISSERTATION II. 491


DISSERTATION II.
CONCERNING GOD'S COMMAND TO ABRAHAM TO OFFER UPISAAC, HIS SON, FOR A SACRIFICE.
Since this command of God to Abraham1 has of late beengreatly mistaken by some, who venture to reason about veryancient facts from very modern notions, and this without adue regard to either the customs, or opinions, or circum­stances of the times whereto those facts belong, or indeed tothe true reasons of the facts themselves; since the mistakesabout those customs, opinions, circumstances, and reasons,have of late so far prevailed, that the very same action ofAbraham's, which was so celebrated by St. Paul,2 St. James,3the author to the Hebrews,4 Philo,6 and Josephus," in thefirst century, and by innumerable others since, as an uncom­mon instance of signal virtue, of heroic faith in God, andpiety towards him; nay, is in the sacred history7 highly com­mended by the divine angel of the covenant, in the name ofGod himself, and promised to be plentifully rewarded; sincethis command, I say, is now at last in the eighteenth centurybecome a stone of stumbling, and a rock of offence amongus, and that sometimes to persons of otherwise good sense,and of a religious disposition of mind also, I shall endeavorto set this matter in its true, i. e. in its ancient and originallight, for the satisfaction of the inquisitive. In order wheretowe are to consider.
1. That, till this very profane age, it has been, I think,universally allowed by all sober persons, who owned them­selves the creatures of God, that the Creator has a just rightover all his rational creatures, to protract their lives to whatlength he pleases ; to cut them off when and by what instru­ments he pleases; to afflict them with what sickness he pleases,


I Gen. xxii. 2 Rom. iv. 10-25. 3 James ii. 21-32.
* Heb. xi. 17-19. b Phil, de Gygant. p. 294.
•Jos. Antiq. B. i. c. xiii. ' Gen. xxii. 15-18.







OCR Output








CIV.] COME TO JERUSALEM. 105


families that are in black mourning for their slaughtered re­lations ; as also, you may hear their groans and lamentationsall the city over ; for there is nobody but hath tasted of theincursions of these profane wretches, who have proceeded tothat degree of madness, as not only to have transferred theirimpudent robberies out of the country and the remote citiesinto this city, the very face and head of the whole nation,but out of the city into the temple also; for that, is now madetheir receptacle and refuge, and the fountain-head whencetheir preparations are made against us. And this place,which is adored by the habitable world, and honored by suchas only know it by report, as far as the ends of the earth, istrampled upon by these wild beasts born among ourselves.They now triumph in the desperate condition they are alreadyin, when they hear that one people are going to fight againstanother people, and one city against another city, and thatyour nation hath gotten an army together against its ownbowels. Instead of which procedure it were highly fit andreasonable, as I said before, for you to join with us in cuttingoft" these wretches, and in particular to be revenged on themfor putting this very cheat upon you; I mean, for having theimpudence to invite you to assist them, of whom they oughtto have stood in fear, as ready to punish them. But if youhave some regard to these men's invitation of you, yet mayyou lay aside your arms, and come into the city under thenotion of our kindred, and take upon you a middle name be­tween that of auxiliaries and of enemies, and so become judgesin this case. However, consider what these men will gain bybeing called into judgment before you, for such undeniableand such flagrant crimes, who would not vouchsafe to hearsuch as had no accusations laid against them to speak a wordfor themselves. However, let them gain this advantage byyour coming. But still, if you will neither take our part inthat indignation we have at these men, nor judge between us,the third thing I have to propose is this, that you let us bothalone, and neither insult upon our calamities, nor abide withthese plotters against their metropolis: for though you shouldhave ever so great a suspicion that some of us have discoursed







OCR Output








C. VII.] VESPASIAN. 37


which the engines threw upon them, yet did not they desertthe wall, but fell upon those who managed the ram, under theprotection of the hurdles, with fire, and iron weapons, andstones: and these could do little or nothing, but fell them­selves perpetually, while they were seen by those whom theycould not see; for the light of their own flame shone aboutthem, and made them a most visible mark to the enemy, asthey were in the day-time, while the engines could not beseen at a great distance, and so what was thrown at themwas hard to be avoided; for the force with which these en­gines threw stones and darts made them hurt several at atime, and the violent noise of the stones that were cast bythe engines was so great that they carried away the pinnaclesof the wall, and broke off the corners of the towers; for nobody of men could be so strong as not to be overthrown tothe last rank by the largeness of the stones. And any onomay learn the force of the engines by what happened thisvery night; for as one of those that stood round about Jose-phus was near the wall, his head was carried away by such astone, and his skull was flung as far as three furlongs. Inthe day-time also, a woman with child had her belly so vio­lently struck, as she was just come out of her house, that theinfant was carried to the distance of half a furlong, so greatwas the force of that engine. The noise of the instrumentsthemselves was very terrible; the sound of the darts andstones that were thrown by them was so also: of the samesort was the noise the dead bodies made when they werodashed against the wall; and, indeed, dreadful was the clamorwhich these things raised in the women within the city, whickwas echoed back at the same time by the cries of such aswere slain ; while the whole space of ground whereon theyfought ran with blood, and the wall might have been ascendedover by the bodies of the dead carcasses; the mountains alsocontributed to increase the noise by their echoes; nor wasthere on that night any thing of terror wanting that couldeither affect the hearing or the sight; yet did a great part ofthose that fought so hard for Jotapata fall manfully, as weroa great part of them wounded. However, the morning-watchIV. —4







OCR Output













OCR Output








INDEX. 543


Antipater, son of Salome, impeachesArchelaus, iii. 112.
Antipater, son of Herod, ii. 459 ; sentto Rome to Cresar, iii. 21, 430, 437,he sets his father against his bre­thren, 20; his subtilty, 38: reignsjointly with his father, 72; hatedby every body, 71; attempts bisfather's life, 72; is concerned forhimself, ib.; appears before Varus'stribunal, 87, 440; his plea, 88; isput in irons, 94; is put to death,104, 450.
Antipatris taken by Vespasian, iv.128.
Antonia, Claudius's daughter by Pc-tina, iii. 494.
Antonia, Claudius's mother, lendsmoney to Agrippa the elder, iii.165; her eulogium, 168.
Antonia, called Baris, iii. 333 ; takenby Titus, iv. 244, et seg.
Antonius (Lucius) sends a letter tothe Sardians, in favor of the Jews,ii. 448.
Antoninus Primus, iv. 150.
Antony, a captain or centurion, iv. 9.
Antony (Mark), his decree in favorof the Jews, ii. 445; marches intoAsia, after Cassius's defeat, 459;his letter to Hyrcanus, 460; to theTyrians, 461 ; falls in love withCleopatra, 463; makes Phasaelusand Herod tetrarchs, 463; orderstheir accusers to be put to death,ib.; confers signal favors on Herod,473; sojourns at Athens, 479; hisluxury, 4'JO.
Anubis, a god, iii. 149.
Apachmas, king of Egypt, iv. 369.
Apame, Darius's concubine, ii. 210.
Apion, ambassador, iii. 181.
Apollodotus, captain of the Gazeans,ii. 392 ; killed, 393.
Apollonius, ii. 375.
Apollonius Daus, ii. 344; challengesJonathan to an engagement, and isdefeated, 345.
Apollonius, governor of Samaria, ii.300, 304.
Aponius, iii. 244.
Apophis, king of Egypt, iv. 369.
Apsalom, iii. 527.
Apsan, or Ibzan, judge, i. 373.
Aquila, the murderer of Caius, iii.220.


Arabians circumcise their childrenwhen thirteen, i. 109 ; twelve townstaken from them by Alexander, ii.411.
Arabia borders on Judea, ii. 411;Petra the king's residence, ib.;Zabdiel their lord, 348; Arabiansdefeated, 516; their women greatpoisoners, iii. 82.
Aram, i, 96.
Aran, or Haran, i. 97.
Arasca, or Nisroch, ii. 1 52.
Arases, or Rezin, ii. 139.
Araunah, or Oronna, the Jebusite;his threshing-floor, i. 532; theplace where Isaac was to have beensacrificed, and where the templowas afterwards built, 533.
Archelaus, king of Cappadocia, comesto Herod, iii. 48, 414; goes withhim to Antioch, 417; reconcilesHerod to bis son Alexander, and tohis brother Pheroras, 416.
Archelaus, son of Herod the Great,iii. 74, 85, 436, 467; made eth-narch, 128; marries Glaphyia, 134;proclaimed king, 106, 450; hisspeech to the people, 107, 453;endeavors to appease the people,108; goes to Rome, 111; accusedthere by the deputies of the people,125, 470; banished to Vienna, ib.;his dreams and Glaphyra's, 134,471.
Archelaus, grandson of Chclcias, iii.260.
Archelaus, son of Magadatus, iv. 265.
Aretas, king of the Arabians, ii. 393,410; iii. 60, 335, 431; expeditionagainst Aristobulus, ii. 411; suc­ceeds Obodas, iii. 54; impeachesSylleus, 80; succors Hyrcanus,335.
Aretas, king of Celesyria, marchesagainst Judea, ii. 399.
Aretas of l'ctra, iii. 123, 156.
Arioch, ii. 183.
Arion, treasurer, ii. 290.
Aristobulus, son of Hyrcanus I., thefirst high-priest who assumed thetitle of king, ii. 383; called Phil-tllen, or lover of the Greeks, 386.
Aristobulus, son of Alexander Jan-neus, an enterprising man, ii. 402 ;complains of the Pharisees, 403;reproaches his mother, 404; endea-







OCR Output








C.X.] SIEGE OF TARICIIBJE, 6'S


so you may not be ignorant who you are, and who they areagainst whom we are going to fight. For as to us Romans,no part of the habitable earth hath been able to escape ourhands hitherto; but as for the Jews, that I may speak of themtoo, though they have been already beaten, yet do they notgive up the cause; and a sad thing it would be for us to growweary under our good success, when they bear up under theirmisfortunes. As to the alacrity which you show publicly, Isee it, and rejoice at it; yet am I afraid lest the multitudeof the enemy should bring a concealed fright upon some ofyou: let such a one consider again who we are that are tofight, and who those are against whom we are to fight. Nowthese Jews, though they be very bold, and great despisers ofdeath, are but a disorderly body, and unskilful in war, andmay rather be called a rout than an army; while I need saynothing of our skill and our good order; for this is the reasonwhy we Romans alone are exercised for war in time of peace,that we may not think of number for number when we come tofight with our enemies : for what advantage should we reapfor our continual sort of warfare, if we must still be equal innumber to such as have not been used to war ? Consider far­ther, that you are to have a conflict with men in effect un­armed, while you are well armed; with footmen, while youare horsemen, with those that have no good general, whileyou have one; and as these advantages make you in effectmanifold more than you are, so do their disadvantages mightilydiminish their number. Now it is not the multitude of men,though they be soldiers, that manages wars with success, butit is their bravery that does it, though they bo but a few; fora few are easily set in battle array, and can easily assist oneanother, while over-numerous armies are more hurt by them­selves than by their enemies. It is boldness and rashness,the effects of madness, that conduct the Jews. Those pas­sions, indeed, make a great figure when they succeed, but arcquite extinguished upon the least ill success: but wc are ledon by courage, and obedience, and fortitude, which shows it­self, indeed, in our good fortune, but still does not for cvcidesert us in our ill fortune. Nay, indeed, your fighting is to







OCR Output








B. II.] AGAINST APION. 411


ferent from one another; for the word Sabbath in the Jewishlanguage denotes rest from all sorts of work; hut the wordSabbo, as he affirms, denotes among the Egyptians the maladyof a bubo in the groin.
3. This is that novel account which the Egyptian Apiongives us concerning the Jews' departure out of Egypt, and isno hetter than a contrivance of his own. But why shouldwe wonder at the lies he tells us about our forefathers, whenhe affirms them to be of Egyptian original, when he lies alsoabout himself? for although he was born at Oasis in Egypt,he pretends to be, as a man may say, the top man of all theEgyptians; yet does he forswear his real country and pro­genitors, and, by falsely pretending to be born at Alexandria,cannot deny the pravity of his family; for you see how justlyhe calls those Egyptians whom he hates and endeavors toreproach; for had he not deemed Egyptians to be a name ofgreat reproach, he would not have avoided the name of anEgyptian himself; as we know that those who brag of theirown countries value themselves upon the denomination theyacquire thereby, and reprove such as unjustly lay claimthereto. As for the Egyptians' claim to be of our kindred,they do it on one of the following accounts : — I mean eitheras they value themselves upon it, and pretend to bear thatrelation to us; or else as they would draw us in to be par­takers of their own infamy. But this fine fellow Apion seemsto broach this reproachful appellation against us, [that wewere originally Egyptians,] in order to bestow it on theAlexandrians as a reward for the privilege they had givenhim of being a fellow-citizen with them : he also is apprisedof the ill-will the Alexandrians bear to those Jews who aretheir fellow-citizens, and so proposes to himself to reproachthem, although he must thereby include all the other Egyp­tians also; while in both cases he is no better than animpudent liar.
4. But let us now see what those heavy and wicked crimesare which Apion charges upon the Alexandrian Jews. " Theycame," says he, "out of Syria, and inhabited near the tem­pestuous sea, and were in the neighborhood of the dashing







OCR Output








512 DISSERTATION III.


for no assistance from any of the gods, or from any of man­kind, since they had been abandoned by both, but bade thembelieve in him, as in a celestial leader,1 by whose help theyhad already gotten clear of their present miseries. Theyagreed to it; and although they were unacquainted with everything, they began their journey at random : but nothing tiredthem so much as want of water; and now they laid themselvesdown on the ground to a great extent, as just ready to perish,when a herd of wild asses came from feeding, and went to arock overshadowed by a grove of trees. Moses followedthem, as conjecturing that there was [thereabouts] somegrassy soil, and so he opened large sources of water for them.2That was an case to them; and when they had journeyedcontinually six entire days,a on the seventh they drove outthe inhabitants, and obtained those lands wherein their cityand temple were dedicated.
Cn\AP. IV.] As for Moses, in order to secure the nationfirmly to himself, he ordained new rites, and such as werecontrary to those of other men. All things are with themprofane which with us are sacred; and again, those practicesare allowed among them which arc by us esteemed mostabominable.1
They place the image of that animal in their most holyplace, by whose indication it was that they had escaped theirwandering condition and their thirst.5
They sacrifice rams, by way of reproach, to [Jupiter Ham­


1 This believing in Moses as in a celestial leader, seems a blind confessionof Tacitus that Moses professed to have his laws from God.
a This looks also like a plain confession of Tacitus, that Moses brought theJews water out of a rock in grcat plenty, which he might have from Jose-phus, Antiq. b. iii. ch. i. sect. 7.
s Strange indeed ! that 0(10,000 men should travel above 200 miles overthe deserts of Arabia in six days, and conquer Judea the seventh.
* This is not true in general, but only so far, that the Israelites were bycircumcision and other rites to be kept separate from the wicked and idola­trous nations about them.
6 This strange story contradicts what the same Tacitus will tell us pre­sently, that when Pompey went into the holy of holies he found no imagathere.







OCR Output








542 INDEX.


Ananus, governor of tho temple, iii.283.
Ananus, son of Jonathan, iii. 540.
Anchus, or Achish, i. 454.
Andromachus expelled the court ofHerod, iii. 45.
Andronicus, ii. 341.
Angels of God become familiar withwomen, i. 84.
Anileus, iii. 191 ; killed by the Baby­lonians, 201.
Annibal put to death by Fad us for amutiny, iii. 202.
Annius (Lucius) takes Gerasa, iv.133.
Annius Minucianus, iii. 200.
Annius Rufus, iii. 142.
Anoch or Enoch, i. 81.
Anteius killed, iii. 222.
Antigonus governs Asia, ii. 208.
Antigonus, son of Aristobulus, ii. 422,425; impeaches Hyrcanus and An-tipater, 432; conquered by Herod,ii. 459; invades Judea, 464; re­established, 469; iii. 366; culs offIlyrcanus's ears, and causes thedeath of Phasaelus, ii. 469, 470;surrenders himself, 488; iii. 382;sent in fetters to Marcus Antonius,383 ; the first king whose head wascut off by the Romans, ii. 492.
Antigonus, son of Hyrcanus I., madecommander at the siege of Samaria,ii. 378; beloved by his brother,383; watched by the queen andher favorites, ii. 384; iii. 325.
Antioch, the chief city in Syria, iv.11; the Jews made citizens thereofby Selcucus, ii. 277; is burnt, iv.303.
Antiochians rebel, ii. 348; their envyagainst the Jews, 278.
Antiochus, king of Conimagena. iii.145, 247, 256; iv. 219. 324; Com-magena and part of Cilicia grantedhim, iii. 247.
Antiochus Cyzicenus, ii. 377 ; assiststhe Samaritans, but is put to flight,ib.; iii. 323 ; is taken prisoner, andput to death by Seleucus, ii. 394.
Antiochus Dionysius makes an expe­dition against the Jews, ii. 398;iii. 381.
Antiochus the Great, ii. 279; his let­ters in favor of the Jews, 280, 282 ;his wars with l'tolemy Philopater


and Physcon, 279, et seg.; marrieshis daughter Cleopatra to Ptolemy,283.
Antiochus Epiphanes, his expeditioninto Egypt, ii. 295; takes Jerusa­lem, 297 ; goes into Persia, 300;designs to destroy the Jews, ib.;his impiety, 372; ho dies, 315.
Antiochus Eupator, his son, invadesJudea, ii. 316; fights with Judas,317; iii. 319; makes peace withthe Jews, ii. 319; breaks it, 320;is killed. 321.
Antiochus Grypus, ii. 376; his death,393.
Antiochus Philomcter, ii. 387.
Antiochus Pius makes war with Se­leucus, ii. 394; is slain, ib.
Antiochus Eusebius, or Pius, besiegesJerusalem, ii 371; raises the siege,373; marches against the Par­tisans, and is killed, ib.
Antiochus, the son of Alexander,commonly called The God, ii. 279 ;crowned in his youth, 353; entersinto alliance with Jonathan thehigh-priest, ib.; slain by Trypho,his tutor, 306; iii. 320.
Antiochus, the brother of Seleucus,slain in battle, ii. 394.
Antiochus Soter, brother of Deme­trius, ii. 377; makes war withTrypho, 368.
Antipas, Herod's son by Malthace,iii. 75; is tetrarch of Galilee, 104;goes to Rome to get to be a king,111, 450; what was given him byCicsar, 408.
Antipas put in prison and slain, iv. 89.
Antipater, the Idumean, excites trou­bles, ii. 410; sent ambassador toAretas, 422; his wife Cyprus, andhis children, 429; his valor, 431;advises Hyrcanus to put himselfunder the protection of Aretas, iii.335; makes his son Phasaelus go­vernor of Jerusalem, and Herod ofGalilee, ii. 435 ; endeavors to de­serve Cesar's favor, iii. 347 ; hon­ored by CiOsar, and made citizenof Kome, ii. 432; iii. 319; his de­fence against Antigonus, ii. 432;iii. 350; made governor of Judea,ii. 433; iii. 350; poisoned, ii. 450,
Antipater, son of Phasaelus and Salampsio, iii. 160.







OCR Output








292 NUMBER OF CAPTIVES. [B. VI.


during this whole war, was collected to he ninety-seventhousand; as was the number of those that perished duringthe whole siege eleven hundred thousand, the greater partof whom were, indeed, of the same nation [with the citizensof Jerusalem,] but not belonging to the city itself; for theywere come up from all the country to the feast of unleavenedbread, and were on a sudden shut up by an army, which atthe very first occasioned so great a straitness among them,that there came a pestilential destruction upon them, andsoon afterward such a famine, as destroyed them moresuddenly. And that this city could contain so many peoplein it, is manifest by that number of them which was takenunder Cestius, who being desirous of informing Nero of theflower of the city, who otherwise was disposed to contemnthat nation, entreated the high-priests, if the thing werepossible, to take the number of their whole multitude. Sothese high-priests, upon the coming of that feast which iscalled the Passover, when they slay their sacrifices, from theninth hour till the eleventh, but so that a company not lessthan ten' belong to every sacrifice (for it is not lawful forthem to feast singly by themselves;) and many of us aretwenty in a company. Now, the number of sacrifices was


justice were just then come up out of the other countries of Galilee, Sa­maria, Judca, Pcrea, and other remoter regions, to the Passover, in vastnumbers, and therein cooped up, as in a prison, by the Koman army, asJosephus himself well observes in this and the next section, and as is ex­actly related elsewhere, B. v. ch. iii. sect. 1, and ch. xiii. sect. 7.
1 This number of a company for one paschal lamb, between ten andtwenty, agrees exactly with the number thirteen, at our Savior's last pass-over. As to the whole number of the Jews that used to come up to thePassover, and cat of it at Jerusalem, see the noto on B. ii. ch. xiv. sect. 3.This number ought to be here, indeed, just ten times the number of thelambs, or just 2,5U5,000 by Josephus's own reasoning; whereas it is in hispresent copies no less than 2,700,000, which last number is, however, nearestthe other number in the place now cited, which is 3,000,000. But what ishere chiefly remarkable is this, that no foreign nation ever came thus todestroy the Jews at any of their solemn festivals, from the days of Moseatill this time, but came now upon their apostasy from God, and fromobedience to him. Nor is it possible, in the nature of things, that, in anyother nation, such vast numbers should be gotten together, and perish inthe siege of any one city whatsoever, as now happened in Jerusalem.







OCR Output








190 TITUS PRESSES THE SIEGE. [B. V".


reproached them to persuade them to what tended to theirown preservation, was provoked to press on the siege. Healso, at the same time, gave his soldiers leave to set thesuburbs on fire, and ordered that they should bring timbertogether, and raise banks against the city; and when he hadparted his army into three parts, in order to set about those. works, he placed those that shot darts and the archers in themidst of the banks that were then raising; before whom hoplaced those engines that threw javelins, and darts, and stones,that he might prevent the enemy from sallying out upon theirworks, and might hinder those that were upon the wall frombeing able to obstruct them. So the trees were now cut downimmediately, and the suburbs left naked. But now while thetimber was carrying to raise the banks, and the whole armywas earnestly engaged in their works, the Jews were not,however, quiet; and it happened that the people of Jerusalem,who had been hitherto plundered and murdered, were now ofgood courage, and supposed they should have a breathingtime, while the others were very busy in opposing theirenemies without the city; and that they should now beavenged on those that had been the authors of their miseries,in case the Romans did but get the victory.
3. However, John stayed behind out of his fear of Simon,even while his own men were earnest in making a sally upontheir enemies without. Yet did not Simon lie still, for helay near the place of the siege; he brought his engines ofwar, and disposed of them at due distances upon the wall;both those which they took from Cestius formerly, and thosewhich they got when they seized the garrison that lay in thetower Antonia. But though they had these engines in theirpossession, they had so little skill in using them, that theywere in a great measure useless to them; but a few therewere who had been taught by deserters how to use them,which they did use, though after an awkward manner. Sothey cast stones and arrows at those that were making thebanks; they also ran out upon them by companies, and foughtwith them. Now, those that were at work covered them­selves with hurdles spread over their banks, and their engines







OCR Output








B. I.] AGAINST APION. 377


relating the acts of this king, he describes to us, — " How hesent his son Nabuchodonosor against Egypt, and against ourland, with a great army, upon his being informed that theyhad revolted from him; and how, by that means, he subduedthem all, and set our temple that was at Jerusalem on fire;nay, and removed our people entirely out of their own country,and transferred them to Babylon; when it so happened thatour city was desolate during the interval of seventy years,until the days of Cyrus king of Persia." He then says that" this Babylonian king conquered Egypt, and Syria, andPhoenicia, and Arabia, and exceeded in his exploits all thathad reigned before him in Babylon and Chalden." A littleafter which Berosus subjoins what follows in his history ofancient times : I will set down Berosus's own accounts, whichare these. — " When Nabolassar, father of Nabuchodonosor,heard that the governor whom he had set over Egypt, andover the parts of Celosyria and Phoenicia had revolted fromhim, he was not able to hear it any longer, but committingcertain parts of his army to his son Nabuchodonosor, who wasthen but young, he sent him against the rebel: Nabuchodo­nosor joined battle with him, and conquered him, and reducedthe country under his dominion again. Now, it so fell outthat his father Nabolassar fell into a distemper at this time,and died in the city of Babylon, after he had reigned twenty-nine years. But as he understood, in a little time, that hisfather Nabolassar was dead, he set the affairs of Egypt andthe other countries in order, and committed the captives hehad taken from the Jews, and Phoenicians, and Syrians, andof the nations belonging to Egypt, to some of his friends, thatthey might conduct that part of the forces that had on heavyarmor, with the rest of his baggage to Babylonia, while hewent in haste, having but a few with him, over the desert toBabylon, whither, when he was come, he found the publicaffairs had been managed by the Chaldeans, and that theprincipal person among them had preserved the kingdom forhim. Accordingly, he now entirely obtained all his father'sdominions. He then came and ordered the captives to beplaced as colonies in the most proper places of Babylonia:


32*







OCR Output








C. IV.] OPERATIONS NEAR SEPPHORIS. 15


far as Julias. Its inhabitants are a mixture of Jews andSyrians. And thus have I, with all possible brevity, de­scribed the country of Judea, and those that lie roundabout it.


CHAPTER IV.
JOSEPHUS MAKES AN ATTEMPT UPON SEPPHORIS, BUT IS RE­PELLED. TITUS COMES WITH A GREAT ARMVT TO PTOLEMAIS.
§ 1. Now the auxiliaries which were sent to assist the peopleof Sepphoris, being a thousand horsemen and six thousandfootmen, under Placidus the tribune, pitched their camp intwo bodies in the great plain. The foot were put into the cityto be a guard to it, but the horse lodged abroad in the camp.These last, by marching continually one way or other, andoverrunning the parts of the adjoining country, were verytroublesome to Josephus and his men; they also plunderedall the places that wero out of the city's liberty, and inter­cepted such as durst go abroad. On this account it was thatJosephus marched against the city, as hoping to take what hehad lately encompassed with so strong a wall, before they re­volted from the rest of the Galileans, that the Romans wouldhave had much ado to take it: by which means he proved tooweak, and failed of his hopes, both as to the forcing the place,and as to his prevailing with the people of Sepphoris to de­liver it up to him. By this means he provoked the Romansto treat the country according to the law* of war ; nor did theRomans, out of the anger they bore at this attempt, leave offeither by night or by day burning the places in the plain, andstealing away the cattle that were in the country, and killingwhatsoever appeared capable of fighting, perpetually, andleading the weaker people as slaves into captivity: so thatGalilee was all over filled with fire and blood; nor was itexempted from any kind of misery or calamity; for the onlyrefuge they had was this, that when they were pursued, theycould retire to the cities which had walls built them byJosephus.







OCR Output








12 GALILEE. [B. Iii


they had been with Cestius Gallus before Vespasian came,and had given their faith to him, and received the securityof his right hand, and had received a Roman garrison ; andat this time withal they received Vespasian, the Roman gene­ral, very kindly, and readily promised that they would assisthim against their own countrymen. Now the general de­livered them, at their desire, as many horsemen and footmenas he thought sufficient to oppose the incursions of the Jews,if they should come against them. And, indeed, the dangerof losing Sepphoris would be no small one, in this war thatwas now beginning, seeing it was the largest city of Galilee,and built in a place by nature very strong, and might be asecurity of the whole nation's [fidelity to the Romans.]


CHAPTER III.
A DESCRIPTION OF GALILEE, SAMARIA, AND JUDEA.
§ 1. Now Phoenicia and Syria encompass about the Gali-lees, which are two, and called the Upper Galilee and theLower. They are bounded, towards the sun-setting, withthe borders of the territory belonging to Ptolemais, and byCarmel; which mountain had formerly belonged to the Gali­leans, but now belonged to the Tyrians, to which mountainadjoins Gaba, which is called the city of horsemen, becausethose horsemen that were dismissed by Herod the kingdwelt therein; they are bounded on the south with Sa­maria and Scythopolis, as far as the river Jordan ; on theeast with Ilippene and Gadaris, and also with Gaulanitis andthe borders of the kingdom of Agrippa; its northern partsare bounded by Tyre and the country of the Tyrians. Asfor that Galileo which is called the Lower, it extends inlength from Tiberias to Zabulon, and of the maritime placesPtolemais is its neighbor; its breadth is from the village calledXaloth, which lies in the great plain, as far as Bersabe, fromwhich beginning also is taken the breadth of the Upper Gali­lee, as far as the village Baca, which divides the land of the







OCR Output








C. II.] TOWER OF ANTONIA. 247


were Malachias, and Judas the son of Merto, and James theson of Sosas, the commander of the Idumeans; and of thezealots two brethren, Simon and Judas, the sons of Jairus.


CHAPTER II.
DOW TITUS GAVE ORDERS TO DEMOLISH THE TOWER OF AN­TONIA, AND THEN PERSUADED JOSEPHUS TO EXHORT THEJEWS AGAIN [TO A SURRENDER.]
§ 1. And now Titus gave order to his soldiers that werewith him to dig up the foundations of the tower of Antonia,and make him a ready passage for his army to come up;whilst he himself had Josephus brought to him (for he hadbeen informed that on that very day, which was the seven­teenth1 day of Panemus [Tamuz,] the sacrifice called thedaily sacrifice had failed, and had not been offered to God,for want of men to offer it, and that the people were griev­ously troubled at it,) and commanded him to say the samethings to John that he had said before, that, " if he had anymalicious inclination for fighting, he might come out with asmany of his men as he pleased, in order to fight without thedanger of destroying either his city or temple; but that hedesired he would not defile the temple, nor thereby offendagainst God: that he might, if he pleased, offer the sacrificeswhich wore now discontinued, by any of the Jews whom hoshould pitch upon. Upon this Josephus stood in such a placewhere he might be heard, not by John only, but by manymore, and then declared to them what Caesar had given him


1 This was a remarkable day indeed, the 17th of Panemus [Tamuz,] A. D.70, when, according to Daniel's prediction, 006 years before, the Romans,ia half a week, caused the sacrifice and oblation to cease, Dan. ix. 27. For fromthe month of February, A. D. 66, about which time Vespasian entered onthis war, to this very time, was just three years and a half. See Bp. Lloyd'sTables of Chronology, published by Mr. Marshall, on this year. Nor is it tobe omitted what very nearly confirms this duration of the war, that fouryears before the war began was somewhat above seven years and five monthsbefore the destruction of Jerusalem, ch. v. sect. 3.







OCR Output








INDEX. 567


Simon, son of Onias, the high-priest, Idies, ii. 293.
Simon the Essene, iii. 134.
Simon, son of Giora, iii. 538 ; iv. 135 ;fights with tho zealots, 136; con­quers Idumea, 138; made prisoner,and reserved for the triumph, 301;put to death at the triumph, 315.
Simon, brother of Judas and Jona­than, beats the enemy in Galilee,ii. 304; made captain of the Jews,326: his speech to them, 362;made their prince, 363; high-priest, 365 ; killed by Ptolemy hisson-in-law, 360.
Simon, captain of the Idumcans atJerusalem, iv. 106.
Simon, a life-guard man to Josephus,i. 35.
Simon of Jerusnlem, iii. 255.
Simon, a magician, iii. 284.
Simon, a Pharisee, i. 42.
Simon, a servant of Herod, assumesthe crown, iii. 120.
Simon, son of Saul, iii. 530.
Simon persuades the people to ex­clude Agrippa from the temple, iii.255.
Sisera oppresses the Israelites, i.360; is killed by Jael, 362.
Sisinnes, ii. 203 ; governor of Syria,219.
Slaughter, the greatest that ever wasin one battle, ii. 64.
Sodomites and their associates con­quered, i. 101.
Sodomites burnt with fire from hea­ven, i. 105, et seg.
Sohemus succeeds his brother Azizus,iii. 288; iv. 324.
Sohemus of Iturca betrays Herod'ssecret order for killing Mariamne,ii. 525; is put to death by Herod,529.
Solomon promised to David, i. 486;born, 498; anointed and proclaimedking, 537; again anointed and pro­claimed, 541 ; marries Pharaoh'sdaughter, ii. 9; determines thecause of two harlots, 11; his power,grandeur, and wisdom, 13; his let­ter to Hiram, 14; builds the tem­ple, 17; his addresses to God andthe people after it was built, 27;offers sacrifices, 29 ; builds himselfa royal palace, 31; solves the pro­


blems proposed by the king ofTyre, 34 ; fortifies Jerusalem, andbuilds several towns, 36; lays a taxon the remaining Canaanites, 38;fits out a fleet, ib.; his great riches,41, 43 ; his immoderate love of wo­men, 44 ; his death, 49.
Solyma, or Salem, the old name ofJerusalem, i. 480.
Sosias joins with Herod against An-tigonus, iii. 378; he takes Antigo-nus prisoner and carries him toAntony, ii. 489; iii. 383.
Souls of heroes slain supposed to beplaced among the stars, iv. 241.
Speech of Herod to his army, ii. 512;to the people, 557; speech of Mosesto Corah and the people, i. 264; tothe people before his death, 321.
Spies sent to view the land of Canaan,i. 255; to Jericho, 324 ; they bringback a faithful account, 325, etseg.
Spoils of barbarians rcpositcd in He­rod's temple, ii. 560.
Spoils in war equally divided betweenthose that fight and those thatguard the baggage, i. 462.
Supplicants in Syria used to comewith a halter about their heads, ii.83
Sylla, i. 67.
Sylleus, first minister to king Obodas,iii. 42 ; goes to Rome, 52 ; accusesHerod before Augustus, ib.; de­mands Salome in marriage, 42; isrefused, ib.; charged with severalmurders, 54 ; accused before Au­gustus, 60; sentenced to death, 62.
Syrian commodities, i. 141.
Syrians' hatred to the Jews, iii. 328.
Tabernacle built, i. 221 ; its descrip­tion, 222 ; its purification, 238.
Tabernacles (feast of,) a great festi­val of the Jews, ii. 25, 499; cele­brated in war by the leave of kingAntiochus, 372; celebrated forfourteen days upon the dedicationof Solomon's temple, ii. 30; Jewsthen cany boughs with fruit, 394 ;Jews then fixed tabernacles in thetemples, iv. 275; it is celebratedafter the Babylonian captivity, ii.226.
Table [of show-bread,] golden, made







OCR Output








384 FLAVIUS JOSEPH US [B. I.


course with him. The account is this, as written down byhim:—" Now for a great part of what this Jew said, it wouldbe too long to recite it; but what includes in it both wonderand philosophy, it may not be amiss to discourse of. Now,that I may be plain with thee, Hyperochides, I shall hereinseem to thee to relate wonders, and what will resemble dreamsthemselves. Hereupon Hyperochides answered modestly,and said, for that very reason it is that all of us arc verydesirous of hearing what thou art going to say. Then, re­plied Aristotle, for this cause it will be the best way to imi­tate that rule of the rhetoricians, which requires us first togive an account of the man, and of what nation he was, thatso we may not contradict our master's directions. Thensaid Hyperochides, go on, if it so pleases thee. This man,then, [answered Aristotle,] was by birth a Jew, and camefrom Celesyria; these Jews are derived from the Indianphilosophers ; they are named by the Indians Calami, andby the Syrians Judwi, and took their name from the countrythey inhabit, which is called Judea; but for the name oftheir city, it is a very awkward one, for they call it Jeru­salem. Now this man, when he was hospitably treated by agreat many, came down from the upper country to the placesnear the sea, and became a Grecian not only in his language,but in his soul also : insomuch that when we ourselves hap­pened to be in Asia about the same places whither he came,he conversed with us, and with other philosophical persons,and made a trial of our skill in philosophy; and as he hadlived with many learned men, he communicated to us moreinformation than he received from us." This is Aristotle'saccount of the matter, as given us by Clearchus; whichAristotle discoursed also particularly of the great andwonderful fortitude of this Jew in his diet and continentway of living, as those that please may learn more abouthim from Clearchus's book itself; for I avoid setting downany more than is sufficient for my purpose. Now Clearchussaid this by way of digression, for his main design was ofanother nature. But for Hecatcus of Abdcra, who was botha philosopher and one very useful in an active life, he was







OCR Output








B. I.] AGAINST APION, 369


of ignoble birth out of the eastern parts, and had boldnessenough to make an expedition into our country, and withease subdued it by force, yet without our hazarding a battlewith them. So when they had gotten those that governed usunder their power, they afterwards burnt down our cities, anddemolished the temples of the gods, and used all the inhabit­ants after a most barbarous manner; nay, some they slew,and led their children and their wives into slavery. Atlength they made one of themselves king, whose name wasSolatis; he also lived at Memphis, and made both the upperand lower regions pay tribute, and left garrisons in placesthat were the most proper for them. He chiefly aimed tosecure the eastern parts, as foreseeing that the Assyrians,who had then the greatest power, would be desirous of thatkingdom, and invade them ; and as he found in the Saitc No-mos [Seth-roite,] a city very proper for his purpose, andwhich lay upon the Bubastic channel, but with regard to acertain theologic notion was called Avaris: this he rebuilt,and made very strong by the walls he built about it, and bya most numerous garrison of two hundred and forty thousandarmed men which he put into it to keep it. Thither Salatiscame in summer time, partly to gather his corn and pay hissoldiers their wages, and partly to exercise his armed men,and thereby to terrify foreigners. When this man hadreigned thirteen years, after him reigned another, whose namewas Beoa, for forty-four years; after him reigned another,called ApacJinas, thirty-six years and seven months ; after himApophis reigned sixty-one years, and then Janias fifty yearsand one month; after all these reigned Assis forty-nine yearsand two months. And these six were the first rulers amongthem, who were all along making war with the Egyptians,and were very desirous gradually to destroy them to the veryroots. This whole nation was styled Ilycsos, that is, shep­herd-kings ; fur the first syllable IIYC, according to the sacreddialect, denotes a king, as is SOS a shepherd ; but this accord­ing to the ordinary dialect; and of these is compounded IIyc-sos, but some say that these people were Arabians." Now,in another copy it is said, that this word does not denote







OCR Output








C. III.] GALILEE. 13


Tyrians from it; its length is also from Mcloth to Thella, avillage near to Jordan.
2. These two Galilees, of so great largeness, and encom­passed with so many nations of foreigners, have been alwaysable to make a strong resistance on all occasions of war; forthe Galileans are inured to war from their infancy, and havebeen always very numerous; nor hath the country been everdestitute of men of courage, or wanted a numerous set ofthem : for their soil is universally rich and fruitful, and fullof the plantations of trees of all sorts, insomuch that it in­vites the most slothful to take pains in its cultivation by itsfruitfulness : accordingly, it is all cultivated by its inhabit­ants, and no part of it lies idle. Moreover, the cities lie herovery thick, and the very many villages there are here areevery where so full of people, by the richness of their soil,that the very least of them contained above fifteen thousandinhabitants.
3. In short, if any one will suppose that Galilee is inferiorto Perea in magnitude, he will be obliged to prefer it beforeit in its strength; for this is all capable of cultivation, and isevery where fruitful; but for Perea, which is, indeed, muchlarger in extent, the greater part of it is desert and rough,and much less disposed for the production of the milder kindsof fruits; yet hath it a moist soil [in other parts,] and pro­duces all kinds of fruits, and its plains are planted with treesof all sorts, while yet the olive-tree, the vine, and the palm-trees, are chiefly cultivated there. It is also suflicientlywatered with torrents, which issue out of the mountains, andwith springs that never fail to run, even when the torrentsfail them, as they do in the dog-days. Now the length ofPerea is from Macherus to Pella, and its breadth from Phila­delphia to Jordan : its northern parts are bounded by Pella,as we have already said, as well as its western with Jordan;the land of Moab is its southern border, and its easternlimits reach to Arabia and Silbonitis, and besides to Phila-dclphene and Gcrasa.
4. Now as to the country of Samaria, it lies between Judeaand Galilee: it begins at a village that is in the great plain
IV. —2







OCR Output








290 T I T U S I N T II E C I T T. [b. VI.


with these men's blood. And truly so it happened, thatthough the slayers left off at the evening, yet did the firegreatly prevail in the night; and as all was burning, camethat eighth day of the month Gorpieus [Elul,] upon Jerusa­lem, a city that had been liable to so many miseries duringthis siege, that had it always enjoyed as much happiness fromits first foundation, it would certainly have been the envy ofthe world. Nor did it, on any other account, so much deservethese sore misfortunes, as by producing such a generation ofmen as were the occasion of this its overthrow.


CHAPTER IX.
WHAT INJUNCTIONS CESAR GAVE WHEN HE WAS COME W1TIIINTHE CITY. THE NUMBER OF THE CAPTIVES, AND OF TnOSETHAT PERISHED IN THE SIEGE : AS ALSO CONCERNING THOSETHAT HAD ESCAPED INTO THE SUBTERRANEAN CAVERNS,AMONG WHOM WERE TIIE TYRANTS SIMON AND JOHN THEM­SELVES.
§ 1. Now, when Titus was come into this [upper] city, headmired not only some other places of strength in it, butparticularly those strong towers which the tyrants, in theirmad conduct, had relinquished: for when he saw their solidaltitude, and the largeness of their several stones, and theexactness of their joints, as also how great was their breadth,and how extensive their length, he expressed himself afterthe manner following: — "We have certainly had God forour assistant in this war, and it was no other than God whoejected the Jews out of these fortifications; for what couldthe hands of men or any machines do towards overthrowingthese towers?" At which time he had many such discoursesto his friends: he also let such go free as had been bound bythe tyrants, and were left in the prisons. To conclude, whenhe had entirely demolished the rest of the city, and overthrewits walls, he left these towers as a monument of his goodfortune, which had proved his auxiliaries, and enabled him totake what otherwise could not have been taken by him.







OCR Output








BOOK VII.


CONTAINING
THE INTERVAL OF ABOUT THREE YEARS.
FROM THE TAKING OF JERUSALEM BY TITUS TO THE SEDITIONOF THE JEWS AT CYRENE.


CHAPTER I.
HOW THE ENTIRE CITY OF JERUSALEM WAS DEMOLISHED,EXCEPTING THE THREE TOWERS : AND HOW TITUS COM­MENDED HIS SOLDIERS IN A SPEECH MADE TO THEM, ANDDISTRIBUTED REWARDS TO THEM, AND THEN DISMISSEDMANY OF THEM.
§ 1. Now as soon as the army bad no more people to slayor to plunder, because there remained none to be the objectsof their fury (for they would not have spared any, had thereremained any other such work to be done,) Caesar gave ordersthat they should now demolish the entire city and temple,but should leave as many of the towers standing as were ofthe greatest eminency, that is, Phasaelus, and llippicus, andMariamne, and so much of the wall as enclosed the city onthe west side. This wall was spared, in order to afford acamp for such as were to lie in garrison, as were the towersalso spared, in order to demonstrate to posterity what kindof a city it was, and how well fortified, which the Romanvalor had subdued ; but for all the rest of the wall, it was sothoroughly laid even with the ground by those that dug it upto the foundation, that there was left nothing to make thosethat c:ime thither believe it had ever been inhabited. This


(290)







OCR Output








514 DISSERTATION III.


their power, and perform their courses, according to thenumber seven.1
Chap. V.] These rites, by what manner soever they werefirst begun, are supported by their antiquity.2 The rest oftheir institutions are awkward,3 impure, and got ground bytheir pravity: for every vile fellow, despising the rites of hisforefathers, brought thither their tribute and contributions,by which means the Jewish commonwealth was augmented.And because among themselves there is an unalterable fidelityand kindness always ready at hand, but bitter enmity to allothers,4 they are a people separated from others in their food,and in their beds; though they be the lewdest nation uponearth, yet will they not corrupt foreign women,5 though noth­ing be esteemed unlawful among themselves.0
They have ordained circumeision of the parts of generation,that they may thereby be distinguished from other people:the proselytes7 to their religion have the same usage.
They are taught nothing sooner than to despise the gods,to renounce their country, and to have their parents, children,and brethren in the utmost contempt:8 but still they takecare to increase and multiply, for it is esteemed utterly un­lawful to kill any of their children.
They also look on the souls of those that die in battle, or


1 That the sun, moon, nnd stars, rule over the affairs of mankind, was aheathen and not a Jewish notion. Neither Jews nor Christians were per­mitted to deal in astrology, though Tacitus seems to have been deep in it.
2 This acknowledgment of the antiquity of Moses, and of his Jewish settle­ment, was what the heathens cared not always to own.
3 What these pretended awkward and impure institutions were, Tacitusdoes not inform us.
* Josephus shows tho contrary, as to the laws of Moses, cor.tr. Apion,book ii. sect. 28.
6 A high, and, I doubt, a false commendation of the Jews.
* An entirely false character, and contrary to their many laws against un-cleanness. See Josephus, Antiq. b. iii. chap. xi. sect. 12.
' The proselytes of justice only, not the proselytes of the gates.
s How does this agree with that unalterable fidelity and kindness whichTacitus told us the Jews had towards one another? unless he only means thatthey preferred the divine commands before their nearest relations, which isthe highest degree of Jewish and Christian piety.







OCR Output








C.X.] THE FAMINE. 215


were most dear were perishing under their hands, they werenot ashamed to take from them the very last drops that mightpreserve their lives: and while they ate after this manner,yet were they not concealed in so doing; but the seditiousevery where came upon them immediately, and snatched awayfrom them what they had gotten from others; for when theysaw any houso shut up, this was to them a signal that thepeople within had gotten some food; whereupon they brokeopen the doors, and ran in, and took pieces of what they wereeating almost up out of their very throats, and this by force:the old men, who held their food fast, were beaten; and ifthe women hid what they had between their hands, their hairwas torn for so doing; nor was there any commiseration showncither to the aged or to the infants, but they lifted up chil­dren from the ground-, as they -hung upon the morsels theyhad gotten, and shook them down upon the floor. But stillwere they more barbarously cruel to those that had preventedtheir coming in, and had actually swallowed down what theywere going to seize upon, as if they had been unjustly de­frauded of their right. They also invented terrible methodsof torments, to discover where any food was, and they werethese: to stop up the passages of the privy parts of themiserable wretches, and to drive sharp stakes up their funda­ments ; and a man was forced to bear what it is terrible evento hear, in order to mal<e him confess that he had but onoloaf of bread, or that he might discover a handful of barley-meal that was concealed; and this was done when these tor­mentors were not themselves hungry; for the thing had beenless barbarous had necessity forced them to it: but thiswas done to keep their madness in exercise, and as makingpreparation of provisions for themselves for the followingdays. These men went also to meet those that had creptout of the city by night, as far as the Roman guards, togather some plants and herbs that grew wild; and when thosepeople thought they had got clear of the enemy, thesosnatched from them what they had brought with them, evenwhilo they had frequently entreated them, and that by call­ing upon the tremendous name of God, to give them back







OCR Output








B. II.] AGAINST APION. 427


on account, as they pretend, that the gods fled into theircountry, and saved themselves by heing changed into theshapes of wild beasts ! Whereas these Egyptians' are thevery people that appear to have never, in all the past ages,had one day of freedom, no not so much as from their ownlords. For I will not reproach them with relating themanner how the Persians used them, and this not once only,but many times, when they laid their cities waste, demolishedtheir temples, and cut the throats of those animals whomthey esteemed to be gods; for it is not reasonable to imitatethe clownish ignorance of Apion, who hath no regard to themisfortunes of the Athenians or of the Lacedemonians, thelatter of which were styled by all men the moit courageous,and the former the most religious of the Grecians. I saynothing of such kings as have been famous for piety, par­ticularly of one of them whose name was Cresas, nor whatcalamities he met with in his life; I say nothing of thecitadel of Athens, of the temple at Ephesus, of that atDelphi, nor of ten thousand others which have been burntdown, while nobody cast reproaches on those that were thesufferers, but on those that were the actors therein. Butnow we have met with Apion, an accuser of our nation,though one that still forgets the miseries of his own people,the Egyptians; but it is that Sesostris, who was once socelebrated a king of Egypt, that hath blinded him: now wewill not brag of our kings, David and Solomon, though theyconquered many nations ; accordingly, we will let them alone.


1 This notorious disgrace belonging peculiarly to the people of Egypt,ever since the times of the olil prophets of the Jews, noted both section 4already, and here, may be confirmed by the testimony of Isidorus, anEgyptian of Pelusium, Epist. lib. i. Ep. 489. And this is a rcmarkablocompletion of the ancient prediction of Ood, by Ezek. xxix. 14, 15, — '- Thatthe Egyptians should be a base kingdom, tho basest of tho kingdoms;" andthat it " should not exalt itself any more abovo the nations." The truth ofwhich still farther appears by tho present observation of Joscphus, thatthese Egyptians had never, in all the past ages since Sesostris, had one dayof liberty, no not so much as to have been free from despotic power underany of the monarchs to that day. And all this has been found equally truein the latter ages, under the Romans, Saracens, Mamraalukes, and Turks,from the days of Josephus to the present r.go also.







OCR Output








490 DISSERTATION I.


seen by Photius, as well as Justus of Tiberias, but in thisfamous testimony before us, so that it is most probablePhotius not only had this testimony in his copy, but believedit to be genuine al^o.
XI. As to the silence of Clement of Alexandria, who citesthe Antiquities of Josephus, but never cites any of the testi­monies now before us, it is no strange thing at all, since henever cites Josephus but once, and that for a point of chro­nology only, to determine how many years had passed fromthe days of Moses to the days of Josephus, so that his silencemay almost as well be alleged against a hundred otherremarkable passages in Josephus's works as against thesebefore us.
XII. Nor does the like silence of Tertullian imply thatthese testimonies, or any of them, were not in the copies ofhis age. Tertullian never once hints at any treatises ofJosephus's but those against Apion, and that in general onlyfor a point of chronology: nor does it any way appear thatTertullian ever saw any of Josephus's writings besides, andfar from being certain that he saw even those. He hadparticular occasion in his dispute against the Jews to quoteJosephus, above any other writer, to prove the completionof the prophecies of the Old Testament in the destructionof Jerusalem, and miseries of the Jews at that time, of whichhe there discourses, yet does he never once quote him uponthat solemn occasion; so that it seems to me, that Tertulliannever read either the Greek Antiquities of Josephus, or hisGreek books of the Jewish wars ; nor is this at all strangein Tertullian, a Latin writer, that lived in Africa, by noneof which African writers is there any one clause, that Iknow of, cited out of any of Josephus's writings: nor is itworth my while, in such numbers of positive citations of theseclauses, to mention the silence of other later writers, as beingrere of very small consequence.







OCR Output








CIV.] COME TO JERUSALEM. 107


used to be open to even all foreigners that came to worshipthere. We have, indeed, come in great haste to you, and toa war against our own countrymen: and the reason why wehave made such haste is this, that we may preserve that free­dom which you are so unhappy as to betray. You have pro­bably been guilty of the like crimes against those whom youkeep in custody, and have, I suppose, collected together thelike plausible pretences against them also that you make useof against us: after which you have gotten the mastery ofthose within the temple, and keep them in custody, while theyare only taking care of the public affairs. You have alsoshut the gates of the city in general against nations that arethe most nearly related to you: and while you give such in­jurious commands to others, you complain that you havebeen tyrannized over by them; and fix the name of unjustgovernors upon such as are tyrannized over by yourselves.Who can bear this your abuse of words, while they have aregard to the contrariety of your actions ? unless you meanthis, that those Idumeans do now exclude you out of yourmetropolis, whom you exclude from the sacred offices of yourown country. One may, indeed, justly complain of those thatare besieged in the temple, that when they had courageenough to punish those tyrants which they call eminent men,and free from any accusations, because of their being yourcompanions in wickedness, they did not begin with you, andthereby cut off beforehand the most dangerous parts of thistreason. But if these men have been more merciful than thepublic necessity required, we that are Idumeans will preservethis house of God, and will fight for our common country,and will oppose by war as well those that attack them fromabroad, as those that betray them from within. Here willwe abide before the walls in our armor, until either the Ro­mans grow weary in waiting for you, or you become friendsto liberty, and repent of what you have done against it."
5. And now did the Idumeans make an acclamation towhat Simon had said, but Jesus went away sorrowful, asseeing that the Idumeans were against all moderate counsels,and that the city was besieged on both sides. Nor, indeed,







OCR Output








214 THE FAMINE. [b. V.


for they were equally destroyed in both cases; for every suchperson was put to death under this pretence, that they werogoing to desert, hut in reality that the robbers might get,what they had. The madness of the seditious did also in­crease together with their famine, and both those miserieswere every day inflamed more and more; for there was nocorn which any where appeared publicly, but the robberscame running into, and searched men's private houses ; andthen if they found any, they tormented them, because theyhad denied they had any, and if they found none, they tor­mented them worse, because they supposed they had morecarefully concealed it. The indication they made use of,whether they had any or not, was taken from the bodies ofthese miserable wretches ; which, if they were in good case,they supposed they were in no want at all of food, but ifthey were wasted away, they walked off without searchingany farther: nor did they think it proper to kill such asthese, because they saw they would very soon die of them­selves for want of food. Many there were, indeed, whosold what they had for one measure; it was of wheat, ifthey were of the richer sort, but of barley, if they were poorer.When these had so done, they shut themselves up in the in­most rooms of their houses, and eat the corn they had gotten ;some did it without grinding it, by reason of the extremity ofthe want they were in, and others baked bread of it, accord­ing as necessity and fear dictated to them: a table was no­where laid for a distinct meal, but they snatched the breadout of the fire, half-baked, and eat it very hastily.
3. It was now a miserable case, and a sight that wouldjustly bring tears into our eyes, how men stood as to theirfood, while the more powerful had more than enough, and theweaker wero lamenting [for want of it.] But the famine wastoo hard for all other passions, and it is destructive to nothingso much as to modesty; for what was otherwise worthy ofreverence was in this case despised ; insomuch that childrenpulled the very morsels that their fathers were eating out oftheir very mouths; and what was still more to be pitied, sodid the mothers do as to their infants; and when those that







OCR Output








0. VII.] EVENTS OF THE SIEGE. 195


CHAPTER VII.
HOW ONE OF THE TOWERS ERECTED BY THE ROMANS FELL DOWNOF ITS OWN ACCORD ; AND HOW THE ROMANS, AFTER GREATSLAUGHTER HAD BEEN MADE, GOT POSSESSION OF THE FIRSTWALL : nOW ALSO TITUS MADE HIS ASSAULTS UPON THE SE­COND WALL : AS ALSO CONCERNING LONGINUS THE ROMANAND CASTOR THE JEW.
§ 1. Now, on the next night a surprising disturbance fellupon the Romans; for whereas Titus had given orders forthe erection of three towers of fifty cubits high, that by settingmen upon them at every bank, he might from thence drivethose away who were upon the wall, it so happened that oneof these towers fell down about midnight; and as its fallmade a very great noise, fear fell upon the army, and theysupposing that the enemy was coming to attack them, ran allto their arms. Whereupon a disturbance and a tumult aroseamong the legions; and as nobody could tell what had hap­pened, they went on after a disconsolate manner ; and seeingno enemy appeared, they were afraid one of another, andevery one demanded of his neighbor the watch-word, withgreat earnestness, as though the Jews had invaded theircamp. And now were they like people under a panic of fear,till Titus was informed of what had happened, and gave or­ders that all should be acquainted with it; and then, thoughwith some difficulty, they got clear of the disturbance theyhad been under.
2. Now these towers were very troublesome to the Jews,who otherwise opposed the Romans very courageously; forthey shot at them out of their lighter engines from thosetowers, as they did also by those that threw darts, and thearchers, and those that flung stones. Nor neither could theJews reach those that were over them, by reason of theirheight, and it was not practicable to take them, nor to over­turn them, they were so heavy, nor to set them on fire, be­cause they were covered with plates of iron. So they retired







OCR Output








66 SIEGE OF TARICHE.fi. [b. III.


men to our assistance, that as few as we are we may conquerso great a multitude, and may ourselves alone take the city."
5. As soon as ever Titus had said this, he leaped upon hishorse, and rode apace down to the lake; by which lake hemarched, and entered into the city the first of them all, asdid the others soon after him. Hereupon those that wereupon the walls were seized with a terror at the boldness ofthe attempt, nor durst any one venture to fight with him orto hinder him; so they left guarding the city; and some ofthose that were about Jesus fled over the country, while othersof them ran down to the lake, and met the enemy in theteeth; and some were slain as they were getting up into ships,but others of them as they attempted to overtake those thatwere already gone abroad. There was also a great slaughtermade in the city, while those foreigners that had not fledaway already made opposition; but the natural inhabitantswere killed without fighting; for in hopes of Titus's givingthem his right hand for security, and out of a consciousnessthat they had not given any consent to the war, they avoidedfighting, till Titus had slain the authors of this revolt, andthen put a stop to any farther slaughter, out of commiserationof these inhabitants of the place. But for those that hadfled to the lake, upon seeing the city taken, they sailed asfar as they possibly could from the enemy.
6. Hereupon Titus sent one of his horsemen to his father,and let him know the good news of what he had done; atwhich, as was natural, he was very joyful, both on accountof the courage and glorious actions of his son; for he thoughtthat now the greatest part of the war was over. He thencame thither himself, and set men to guard the city, andgave them command to take care that nobody got privatelyout of it, but to kill such as attempted so to do. And onthe next day he went down to the lake, and commanded thatvessels should be fitted up in order to pursue those that hadescaped in the ships. These vessels were quickly gottenready accordingly, because there was great plenty of materials,and a great number of artificers also.
7. Now this lake of Oennesareth is so called from the







OCR Output








106 THE IDUMEANS [b. IV.


with the Romans, it is in your power to watch the passagesinto the city; antf in case any thing that we have been ac­cused of is brought to light, then to come and defend yourmetropolis, and to inflict punishment on those that are foundguilty; for the enemy cannot prevent you, who are now sonear to the city. But if, after all, none of these proposalsseem acceptable and moderate, do not you wonder that thegates are shut against you, while you bear your arms aboutyou."
4. Thus spake Jesus : yet did not the multitude of theIdumeans give any attention to what he said, but were in arage, because they did not meet with a ready entrance intothe city. The generals also had indignation at the offer oflaying down their arms, and looked upon it as equal to acaptivity to throw them away at any man's injunction whom­soever. But Simon the son of Cathlas, one of their com­manders, with much ado quieted the tumult of his own men,and stood so that the high-priests might hear him, and saidas follows : — "I can no longer wonder that the patrons ofliberty arc under custody in the temple, since there are thosethat shut the gates of our common city' to their own nation,and at the same time are prepared to admit the Romans intoit; nay, perhaps, are disposed to crown the gates with gar­lands at their coming, while they speak to the Idumeans fromtheir towers, and enjoin them to throw down their arms whichthey have taken up for the preservation of its liberty: andwhile they will not intrust the guard of our metropolis totheir kindred, profess to make them judges of the differencesthat are among them ; nay, while they accuse some men ofhaving slain others without a legal trial, they do themselvescondemn a whole nation after an ignominious manner; andhave now walled up that city from their own nation, which


1 This appellation of Jerusalem given it here by Simon, the general of theIdumeans, The common city of the Idumeans, who were proselytes of justice,as well as of the original native Jews, greatly confirms that maxim of therabbins, here set down by Rclund, that Jerusahm was not assigned or appro-prialrd to the tribe of Benjamin or Judah, but every tribe had equal right to it[at their coming to worship there at the several festivals.] Sec a little be­fore, ch. iii. sect. 3.







OCR Output








500 DISSERTATION II.


"' They built the high places of Baal, which are in thevalley of the son of Hinnom, to cause their sons and theirdaughters to pass through the fire unto Molech, which I com­manded them not, neither came it into my mind that theyshould do this abomination to cause Judah to sin."
" 2 Moreover, thou hast taken thy sons and thy daughters,whom thou hast born unto me, and these hast thou sacrificedunto them to be devoured. Is this of thy whoredoms a smallmatter, that thou hast slain my children, and delivered themto cause them to pass through the fire for them ? See chap.xx. 1 Cor. x. 20.
"3 Thou hatest the old inhabitants of thy holy land, fordoing most odious works of witchcraft, and wicked sacrifices ;and also those merciless murderers of children, and devourersof man's flesh, and feasts of blood, with their priests, out ofthe midst of their idolatrous crew, and the parents that killedwith their own hands souls destitute of help."
6. That Almighty God never permitted, in any one in­stance, that such a human sacrifice should actually bo offeredto himself (though he had a right to have required it, if hehad so pleased,) under the whole Jewish dispensation, whichyet was full of many other kinds of sacrifices, and this at atime when mankind generally thought such sacrifices of thegreatest virtue for the procuring pardon of sin, and the divinefavor. This the ancient records of the heathen world attest.Take their notion in the words of Philo Byblius, the trans­lator of Sanchoniatho. "4 It was the custom of the ancients,in the greatest calamities and dangers, for the governors ofthe city or nation, in order to avert the destruction of all, todevote their beloved son to be slain, as a price of redemptionto the punishing [or avenging] demons ; and those so devotedwere killed after a mystical manner." This the history ofthe king of Moab,5 when he was in great distress in his waragainst Israel and Judah, informs us of; who then took hiseldest son, that should have reigned in his stead, and offeredhim for a burnt-offering upoa the city wall. This also the


' Jer. xxxii. 35. s Ezek. xvi. 20, 21. » Wisdom, xii. 4-6
4 Ap. Marsh. p. 76, 77. 5 2 Kings, iii. 27.







OCR Output








v.


J







OCR Output








C. VIII.] MASADA AND THE SICARII. 331


hill, which was of a fat soil and better mould than any valley,for agriculture, that such as committed themselves to thisfortress for their preservation might not even there be quitedestitute of food, in case they should ever be in want of itfrom abroad. Moreover, he built a palace therein at thewestern ascent: it was within and beneath the walls of thecitadel, but inclined to its north side. Now the wall of thispalace was very high and strong, and had at its four cornerstowers sixty cubits high. The furniture also of the edifices,and of the cloisters, and of the baths, was of great varietyand very costly;. and these buildings were supported bypillars of single stones on every side: the walls also and thefloors of the edifices were paved with stones of several colors.He also had cut many and great pits, as reservoirs for water,out of the rocks, at every one of the places that were in­habited, both above and round about the palace and beforethe wall; and by this contrivance he endeavored to havewater for several uses, as if there had been fountains there.Here was also a road digged from the palace, and leading tothe very top of the mountain, which yet could not be seen bysuch as were without [the walls;] nor, indeed, could enemieseasily make use of the plain roads; for the road on the eastside, as we have already taken notice, could not be walkedupon by reason of its nature; and for the western road, hebuilt a large tower at its narrowest place, at no less a distancefrom the top of the hill than a thousand cubits; which towercould not possibly be passed by, nor could it be easily taken ;nor, indeed, could those that walked along it, without anyfear, such was its contrivance, easily get to the end of it:and after such a manner was this citadel fortified both bynature and by the hands of men, in order to frustrate theattacks of enemies.
4. As for the furniture that was within this fortress, it wasstill more wonderful on account of its splendor and long con­tinuance; for here was laid up corn in large quantities, andsuch as would subsist men for a long time; hero was alsowine and oil in abundance, with all kinds of pulse and datesheaped up together: all which Eleazar found there when he







OCR Output








530 DISSERTATION III.


public advantage, but to satisfy the barbarous humor ofone man.
2v". B. Since I have set down all the vile calumnies ofTacitus upon the Christians as well as the Jews, it will beproper, before I come to my observations, to set down twoheathen records in their favor, and those hardly inferior inantiquity, and of much greater authority, than Tacitus; Imean Pliny's epistle to Trajan, when ho was proconsul ofBithynia, with Trajan's answer or rescript to Pliny, cited byTertullian, Eusebius, and Jerom. These are records of sogreat esteem with Havercamp, the last editor of Josephus,that he thinks they not only deserve to be read, but almostto be learned by heart also.


PLINY'S EPISTLE TO TRAJAN.
ABOUT A. D. 112.
SlR — It is my constant method to apply myself to you foithe resolution of all my doubts; for who can better governmy dilatory way of proceeding, or instruct my ignorance ? Ihave never been present at the examination of the Christians[by others,] on which account I am unacquainted with whatuses to be inquired into, and what and how far they used tobe punished: nor arc my doubts small, whether there be nota distinction to be made between the ages [of the accused,]and whether tender youth ought to have the same punishmentwith strong men ? whether there be not room for pardon uponrepentance?1 or whether it may not be an advantage to onethat had been a Christian, that he has forsaken Christianity ?whether the bare name,2 without any crimes besides, or the


1 Till now it seems repentance was not commonly allowed thoso that badbeen once Christians, but though they recanted, and returned to idolatry,yet were they commonly put to death. This was persecution in perfection!
2 This was the just and heavy complaint of tho ancient Christians, thatthey commonly suffered for that bare name, without the pretence of anycrimes they could proye against them. This was also persecution in per­fection1







OCR Output








INDEX. 561


temple Onion, ib.; that temple isshut up, iv. 349.
Onias procures rain in a famine byhis prayers, ii. 412; is stoned todeath, ib.
Ophellius, ii. 466; iii. 363.
Opobalsamuiu, ii. 40, 93, 417.
Oracle concerning the destruction ofJerusalem, iv. 247, 273; concern­ing a great prince to arise in Judea,276.
Oreb, a king of Midian, i. 365.
Orodes, iii. 144.
Oronna, see Araunah.
Osarsiph, see Moses.
Othniel, i. 357.
Otho, emperor, iv. 134, et acq.
Pacobus, iii. 273; redeems his wifeand concubines, iv. 326.
Pacorus, tho king of Parthia's son,gets possession of Syria, ii. 464;lays a plot to catch Hyrcanus andPhasaelus, 465; marches againstthe Jews, iii. 361; admitted intoJerusalem, 362 ; slain in battle, ii.480.
Pageants, or Pcgmata, at Titus's tri­umph, iv. 313.
Pallas, Felix's brother, iii. 292, 494.
Palm-trees, famous, ii. 93, 417; iii.337; iv. 130.
Pannychis, iii. 417.
Pappinius, iii. 209.
Pappus, sent into Samaria by Anti-gonus, ii. 484; iii. 379.
Paradise described, i. 77.
Parthians possess themselves of Sy­ria, and endeavor to settle Antigo-nus in Judea, iii. 301 ; their expe­dition into Judea, ii. 464 ; besiegeJerusalem, and lake the city andtemple, lb., et seq.; their perfi-diousness, 465; iii. 362.
Passover, a festival, i. 191, 217; ii.412; iii. 109; manner of its cele­bration, iv. 292; called the feastof unleavened bread, ii. 412; iii.109; iv. 169; on the 14th day ofNisan, ii. 219; iv. 169; numeroussacrifices then offered, and vastnumbers come up to it, iii. 110,454; from the 9th hour to tho 11th,and not less than ten to one pas­chal lamb, iv. 292.
Paulina ravished, iii. 149.


Paulinas, a tribune, iv. 48.
Paulinus succeeds Lupus, iv. 348; heplunders and shuts up the templeOnion, ib.
Pedanius, iii. 423; iv. 256
Pekah slays Pekahiah. and succeedshim, ii. 137; he defeats the kingof Judah, 139; he is. slain byHoshca, 141.
Pekahiah, king of Israel, ii. 137.
Pentecost, a festival, i. 247; iii. 117;whence its name, 459; vast num­bers came to it, ib.; the priestsattended the temple in tho night,iv. 275; the Jews did not then takejourneys, ii. 373.
Perea subdued by the Romans, iv.124, et acq.
Pergamens' decree in favor of theJews, ii. 450.
Persians, their seven principal fami­lies, ii. 206; their king is watchedduring his sleep, 207 ; their lawforbade strangers to see their king'swives, 233; seven men were theinterpreters of their laws, ib.; theirroyal robes, 240.
Petilius Cercalis, the proconsul, re­duces the Germans, iv. 307.
Petronius, governor of Egypt, ii. 543;supplies Herod with corn, ib.
Petronius (Publius) president ofSyria, iii. 182; sent with an armyto Jerusalem by Caius, to set uphis statue in the temple, ib.; iii.484; endeavors to prevent it, andsave the Jews, 485; his edict againsttho Dorites, 251.
Petus (Coesennius,)his expedition intoCommagena, iv. 323.
Phalion, ii. 413; iii. 336.
Phannius, son of Samuel, iv. 91.
Pharisees, a sect, ii. 379; iii. 138,332; envy Hyrcanus, ii. 379; op­posite to tho Sadducees in prin­ciples, 381; their great authority,iii. 78; especially in the reign ofAlexandra, ii. 402; iii. 332; re­fuse tho oaths of allegiance toCoesar and Herod, 7£; their un­written traditions, ii. 358, 381;their moderation in inflicting pun­ishments, ib.; tho common peopleside with them, ib.; arc skilful inthe law, i. 42.
Pharnaces, ii. 417.







OCR Output








496 DISSERTATION II.


David, the son of Abraham,* which highly deserves our ob­servation in this place: nor can we suppose that any thingelse than clear conviction that this command came from Godcould induce so good a man and so tender a father as Abra­ham was, to sacrifice his own beloved son, and to lose therebyall the comfort he received from him at present, and all theexpectation he had of a numerous and happy posterity fromhim hereafter.
4. That, long before the days of Abraham, the demons orheathen gods had required and received human sacrifices, andparticularly that of the offerer's own children, and this bothbefore and after the deluge. This practice had been indeedso long left off in Egypt, and the custom of sacrificing animalsthere was confined to so few kinds in the days of Herodotus,that he would not believe they had ever offered human sacri­fices at all, for he says :2 " That the fable, as if Hercules wassacrificed to Jupiter in Egypt, was feigned by the Greeks, whowere entirely unacquainted with the nature of the Egyptiansand their laws ; for how should they sacrifice men, with whomit is unlawful to sacrifice any brute beast ? (boars, and bulls,and pure calves, and ganders, only excepted.") However, itis evident from Sanchoniatho, Manetho, Pausanias, DiodorusSieulus, Philo, Plutarch, and Porphyry, that such sacrificeswere frequent both in Phoenicia and Egypt, and that longbefore the days of Abraham, as sir John Marsham and bishopCumberland have fully proved; nay, that in other places(though not in Egypt) this cruel practice continued long afterAbraham, and this till the very third, if not also to the fifthcentury of Christianity, before it was quite abolished. Takethe words of the original authors in English, as most of themoccur in their originals, in sir John Marsham's Chronicon,p. 76-78, 300-304.
"3 Cronus offered up his only begotten son, as a burnt-offering, to his father Ourauus, when there was a famine anda pestilence."
"4 Cronus, whom the Phoenicians name Israel [it shouldbe Il,"\ and who was after his death consecrated into the star


i Matth. i. 1. * Ap. Marsh. Chron. p. 303.
' l'hilo. Bib ex Sanction, p. 76. 4 Philo. Bib. ex Sanchon. p. 77.







OCR Output








362 FLAVIUSJOSEPHUS [B. I.


of their letters, both for the common affairs of life, and forthe delivering down the history of common transactions, Ithink I may omit any proof, because all men allow it so to be.But now as to our forefathers, that they took no less careabout writing such records (for I will not say they took greatercare than the others I spoke of,) and that they committed thatmatter to their high-priests and to their prophets, and thatthese records have been written all along down to our owntimes with the utmost accuracy; nay if it be not too bold forme to say it, our history will be so written hereafter; I shallendeavor briefly to inform you.
7. For our forefathers did not only appoint the best of thesepriests, and those that attended upon the divine worship, forthat design from the beginning, but made provision that thestock of the priests should continue unmixed and pure; forhe who is partaker of the priesthood must propagate of a wifeof the same nation, without having any regard to money, orany other dignities. But he is to make a scrutiny, and totake his wife's genealogy from the ancient tables,1 and pro­cure many witnesses to it. And this is our practice not onlyin Judea, but wheresoever any body of men of our nation dolive; and even there an exact catalogue of our priests' mar­riages is kept; I mean at Egypt and Babylon, or in any otherplace of the rest of the habitable earth, whithersoever ourpriests are scattered ; for they send to Jerusalem the ancientnames of their parents in writing, as well as those of their re­moter ancestors, and signify who are the witnesses also. Butif any war falls out, such as have fallen out a great many ofthem already, when Antiochus Epiphanes made an invasionupon our country, as also when Pompey tlie Great and Quin-tilius Varus did so also, and principally in the wars that havehappened in our own times, those priests that survive themcompose new tables of genealogy out of the old records, andexamine the circumstances of the women that remain; forstill they do not admit of those that have been captives, as


1 Of this accuracy, of the Jews before and in our Savior-s time, in carefullypreserving their genealogies all ulong, particularly those of the priests, seeJuscphus's Life, sect. 1. This accuracy seems to have ended at the destruc­tion of Jerusalem by Titus, or, however, at that by Adrian.







OCR Output








460 JOSEPIIUS'S DISCOURSE ABOUT HADES.


able by men, and it will not be impossible to discover thoway of ascending thither. The earth will not be unculti­vated, nor require too much labor of men, but will bringforth its fruits of its own accord, and will be well adornedwith them. There will be no more generations of wild beasts,nor will the substance of the rest of the animals shoot outany more; for it will not produce men; but the number ofthe righteous will continue, and never fail, together withrighteous angels and spirits [of God,] and with his word, asa choir of righteous men and women that never grow old,and continue in an incorruptible state, singing hymns to God,who hath advanced them to that happiness, by the means ofa regular institution of life; with whom the whole creationalso will lift up a perpetual hymn from corruption to incor-ruption, as glorified by a splendid and a pure spirit. It willnot then be restrained by a bond of necessity, but with alively freedom shall offer up a voluntary hymn, and shallpraise him that made them, together with the angels, andspirits, and men, now freed from all bondage.
7. And now if you Gentiles will be persuaded by thesomotives, and leave your vain imaginations about your pedi­grees, and gaining of riches, and philosophy, and will notspend your time about subtilities of words, and thereby leadyour minds into error, and if you will apply your ears to thohearing of the inspired prophets, the interpreters both ofGod and of his word, and will believe in God, you shall bothbe partakers of these things, and obtain the good things thatare to come: you shall see the ascent unto the immenseheaven plainly, and that kingdom which is there. For whatGod hath now concealed in silence [will be then made mani­fest], what neither eye hath seen, nor ear hath heard, norhath it entered into the heart of man the things that Godhath prepared for them that love him.
8. In whatsoever ways I shall find you, in them shall 1judge you entirely ; so cries the end of all things. And hewho hath at first lived a virtuous life, but towards the latterend falls into vice, these labors by him before endured shallbe altogether vain and unprofitable, even as in a play brought







OCR Output








202 THE ROMANS TAKE THE SECOND WALL. [B. V.


think that the Romans would never venture to come into thocity any more; and that, if they kept within it themselves,they should not be any more conquered. For God had blindedtheir minds for the transgressions they had been guilty of,nor could they see how much greater forces the Romans hadthan those that were now expelled, no more than they coulddiscern how a famine was creeping upon them; for hithertothey had fed themselves out of tho public miseries, and drankthe blood of the city. But now poverty had for a long timeseized upon the better part, and a great many had alreadydied for want of necessaries ; although the seditious, indeed,supposed the destruction of the people to be an easement tothemselves, for they desired that none others might be pre­served but such as were against a peace with the Romans, andwere resolved to live in opposition to them; and they werepleased when the multitude of those of a contrary opinion wereconsumed, as being then freed from a heavy burden. Andthis was their disposition of mind with regard to those thatwere within the city, while they covered themselves with theirarmor, and prevented the Romans when they were trying toget into the city again, and made a wall of their own bodiesover against that part of tho wall that was cast down. Thusdid they valiantly defend themselves for three days; but onthe fourth day they could not support themselves against thevehement assaults of Titus, but were compelled by force to flywhither they had fled before ; so he quietly possessed himselfagain of that wall, and demolished it entirely. And when hehad put a garrison into the towers that were on the south partsof the city, he contrived how he might assault the third wall.







OCR Output








160 SEDITIONS AT JERUSALEM. [B. V.


ally one upon another, although the deep consternation theywere in prevented their outward wailing; but being constrainedby their fear to conceal their inward passions, they were in­wardly tormented, without daring to open their lips in groans.Nor was any regard paid to those that were still alive bytheir relations: nor was there any care taken of burial forthose that were dead : the occasion of both which was this,that every one despaired of himself; for those that were notamong the seditious had no great desires of any thing, as ex­pecting for certain that they should very soon be destroyed;but for the seditious themselves, they fought against eachother while they trode upon the dead bodies as they layheaped one upon another, and, taking up a mad rage fromthose dead bodies that were under their feet, became thefiercer thereupon. They, moreover, were still inventing some­what or other that was pernicious against themselves; andwhen they had resolved upon any thing, they executed itwithout mercy, and omitted no method of torment or barbarity.Nay, John abused the sacred materials,1 and employed themin the construction of his engines of war; for the people andthe priests had formerly determined to support the temple,and raise the holy house twenty cubits higher; for kingAgrippa had, at a very great expense and with very greatpains, brought thither such materials as were proper for thatpurpose, being pieces of timber very well worth seeing, bothfor their straightness and their largeness ; but the war comingon, and interrupting the work, John had them cut, and pre­pared for the building him towers, he finding them longenough to oppose from them those his adversaries that foughthim from the temple that was above him. He also had thembrought and erected behind the inner court, over against thewest end of the cloisters, where alone' he could erect them;


1 This timber, we see, was designed for the rebuilding those twenty addi­tional cubits of the holy house above the hundred which had fallen downsome years before. See the note on Antiq. B. xv. ch. xi. sect. 3.
1 There being no gate on the west, and only on the west side of the courtof the priests, and so no steps there, this was the only side that the seditious,under this John of Gischala, could bring their engines close to the cloistersof that court endways, though upon the floor of the court of Israel. See thescheme of that temple in the description of the temples hereto belonging.







OCR Output








140 SIMON OF GERASA. [B. IV.


at Betriacum in Gall, Otho gained the advantage on the firstday, but on the second day Vitellius's soldiers had the victory;and, after much slaughter, Otho slew himself, when he hadheard of this defeat at Brixa, and after he had managed thepublic affairs three months' and two days. Otho's army alsocame over to Vitellius's generals, and he came himself downto Rome with his army. But in the mean time Vespasianremoved from Caesarea, on the fifth day of the month Desius[Sivan,] and marched against those places of Judea whichwere not yet overthrown. So he went up to the mountainouscountry, and took those two toparchies that were called theGophnitick and Acrabattene toparchies. After which he tookBethel and Ephraim, two small cities ; and when he had putgarrisons into them, he rode as far as Jerusalem, in whichmarch he took many prisoners and many captives; but Cerealis,one of his commanders, took a body of horsemen and foot­men, and laid waste that part of Idumea which was calledthe Upper Idumea, and attacked Caphethra, which pretendedto be a small city, and took it at the first onset, and burnt itdown. He also attacked Capharabim, and laid siege to it,for it had a very strong wall; and when he expected to spenda long time in that siege, those that were within opened theirgates on the sudden, and came to beg pardon, and surrenderthemselves up to him. When Cerealis had conquered themhe went to Hebron, another very ancient city. I have toldyou already, that this city is situated in a mountainous coun­try, not far off Jerusalem : and when he had broken into thecity by force, what multitude and young men were left thereinhe slew, and burnt down the city; so that as now all thoplaces were taken, excepting Hcrodium, and Masada, andMacherus, which were in the possession of the robbers; soJerusalem was what the Romans at present aimed at.
10. And now as soon as Simon had set his wife free, andrecovered her from the zealots, he returned back to the re­mainders of Idumea; and driving the nation all before himfrom all quarters, he compelled a great number of them to


1 Suetonius differs hardly three days from Josephus, and says Othopcrishedon the 95th day of his reign. In Othon. See the note on ch. xi. seet. 4.







OCR Output








262 TERRIBLE FAMINE. [b. VI.


own age; and, besides, my country would have had littlereason to thank me for suppressing the miseries that she un­derwent at this time.
4. There was a certain woman that dwelt beyond Jordan;her name was Mary; her father was Eleazar, of the villageBethezub, which signifies the House of Hyssop. She waseminent for her family and her wealth, and had fled away toJerusalem, with the rest of the multitude, and was with thembesieged therein at this time. The other effects of this womanhad been already seized upon, such I mean as she had broughtwith her out of Perea, and removed to the city. What shehad treasured up besides, as also what food she had contrivedto save, had been also carried off by the rapacious guards,who came every day running into her house for that purpose.This put the poor woman into a very great passion; and bythe frequent reproaches and imprecations she cast at theserapacious villains, she had provoked them to anger againsther; but none of them, either out of the indignation she hadraised against herself, or out of commiseration of her case,would take away her life; and if she found any food, sheperceived her labors were for others, and not for herself; andit was now become impossible for her any way to find anymore food, while the famine pierced through her very bowelsand marrow, when also her passion fired to a degree beyondthe famine itself; nor did she consult with any thing but withher passion and the necessity she was in. She then attempteda most unnatural thing, and snatching up her son, who was achild sucking at her breast, she said, — "O thou miserableinfant! for whom shall I preserve thee in this war, this famine,and this sedition ? As to the war with the Romans, if theypreserve our lives, we must be slaves. This famine also willdestroy us even before that slavery comes upon us. Yet arethe seditious rogues more terrible than both the other. Comeon; be thou my food, and bo thou a fury to these seditiousvarlets, and a byword to the world, which is all that is nowwanting to complete the calamities of us Jews." As soon asshe had said this, she slew her son, and then roasted him,and ate the one-half of him, and kept the other half by her,







OCR Output








INDEX. 655


read in the temple, and his rollburnt, 100; his prophecy of theJews'release from captivity, 169;he is thrown into the dungeon, 171 ;is left with Baruch, in Judca, 177.
Jericho taken, i. 329; its rebuildercursed, 330; it is plundered by theRomans, ii. 477.
Jeroboam conspires against Solomon,ii. 47 ; made king of the ten tribes,51; erects golden calves, ib.; hishand withered, 53; his expedition,against Abijah, 62; dies, 64.
Jeroboam II. makes war against theSyrians, ii. 131; dies, 134.
Jerusalem taken by David, i. 478;whence that name derived, 479;taken by the Babylonians, ii. 173,175; by Pompey, 420; by Herodand Sosius, 487; by Ptolemy, 258;how many times taken, iv. 294;made tributary to the Romans, ii.421 ; levelled with the ground, iv.295; declared holy, inviolable, andfree by Demetrius, ii. 337; twocitadels therein, 532; who firstbuilt it, iv. 294; situated in themiddle of Judea, 14 ; set on fire bythe Romans, 289; a fast kept thereyearly, ii. 489; as also when it wastaken by Pompey, and by Herodand Sosius, 421, 489; a Jebusiteking of Jerusalem, with four others,make war on the Gibeonites, i. 335;are put to flight by Joshua, ib.;Jerusalem described, iv. 174, 387.
Jesse, father of David, i. 422.
Jesus Christ, a testimony to him, iii.148.
Jesus, son of Phabet, deprived of thepriesthood, ii. 546.
Jesus, son of Ananus, his ominousclamor and death, iv. 275, et seq.
Jesus, or Jason, ii. 295.
Jesus, the son of Sapphias, governorof Tiberias, i. 2(i, 35; iii. 543.
Jesus, brother of Onias, prived ofthe high-priesthood, ii. 498.
Jesus, the eldest priest after Ananus,iv. 102, 111 ; his speech to the Idu-mcans, 102.
Jesus, or Joshua, the son of Nun. i.258; successor of Moses, 296:commands the Israelites against theAmalekites, 210: prophecies in thelife-time of Moses, 320 ; leads the


Israelites to Jordan, 325; consultsabout the partition of the land, 338;his speech to the two tribes andhalf, 341; his death, 345.
Jesus, son of Saphat, ringleader ofrobbers, i. 31; iv. 60.
Jcthro, tho Midianite, i. 348.
Jews, governed by Aristocracy, ii.424; iii. 346; priests careful tomarry according to their law, iv.362; in danger at Antioch, 304 ; atEcbutana near Galilee, i. 25; cutoff at Coesaroa, iii. 628; at Scy-thopolis, 630; in factions on ac­count of the priesthood, ii. 296;killed on the Sabbath, 302 ; Jewsbeyond Euphrates, 493; at Alex­andria, in Egypt and Cyprus, ii.379 ; go to war under Alexanderthe Great, 256; carried into Egyptby Ptolemy, 259; banished Rome,iii. 151; desire to bo a Roman pro­vince, 128; favored by SelcucusNicator, 277; by Vespasian andTitus, 278; by Marcus Agrippa,279; by Antiochus the Great, 280 ;shut up in the Hippodrome, but re­leased, iii. 105 ; pray for the wel­fare of tho Spartans, ii. 357; An­tiochus accuses his own father, iv.303; privileges granted them bythe kings of Asia, iii. 32; Egyp­tians and Tyrians chiefly hated theJews, iv. 368; Demetrius remitspart of tho tribute, ii. 330; Jewsat Alexandria allowed an ethnarch,428; allowed to gather their sacredcollections at Rome, 445; derivedfrom the same origin with theSpartans, 293 ; have their own lawsunder Alexander the Great, 256;prohibited to meddle with foreignwomen, 288; tenacious of theirlaws, iv. 386; numerous at Alex­andria, ii. 428; at Babylon, 493;form of their government, 220;quarrel with the Syrians about pri­vileges, iii. 291 ; their marriages,iv. 440 ; had a synagogue at An­tioch, 302; privileges under theRomans, iii. 11; send an embassyagainst Archelaus, 125; the AsiaticJews send an embassy to Csesar,33; great slaughter of Jews, 202;iv. 196, 343; calamities in Meso­potamia, and Babylonia, iii. 191,







OCR Output








476 DISSERTATION I.


demned him to the cross, those that loved hiin at the firstdid not forsake him, for he appeared to them alive again thothird day, as the divine prophets had foretold these, and tenthousand other wonderful things concerning him. And stillthe tribe of Christians, so named from him, are not extinctat this day. Since, therefore, the writers of the Hebrews hadengraven this testimony concerning our Lord and Saviour inhis own books, what defence can there remain for the un­believers ?
About A. D. 980. Suidas in voce Jesous.—We have foundJosephus, who hath written about the taking of Jerusalem(of whom Eusebius Pamphili makes frequent mention in hisecclesiastical history,) saying openly in his memoirs of thecaptivity, that Jesus officiated in the temple with the priests.This we have found Josephus saying, a man of ancient times,and not very long after the apostles, &c.
About A. D. 1000. Cedrenus Compend. IIhtor. p. 196.—Josephus does indeed write concerning John the Baptist asfollows : —Some of the Jews thought that the destruction ofHerod's army came from God, and that he was punishedvery justly for what punishment ho had inflicted on John,that was called the Baptist; for llerod slew him, who was agood man, and commanded the Jews to exercise virtue, bothby righteousness towards one another, and piety towardsGod, and so to come to baptism. But as concerning Christ,the same Josephus says, that about that time there was Jesus,a wise man, if it be lawful to call him a man, for he was adoer of wonderful works, and a teacher of such men as re­ceive the truth with pleasure, for that Christ drew over manyeven from the Gentiles; whom when Herod had crucified,those who at first had loved him did not leave off to preachconcerning him, for he appeared to them the third day aliveagain, as the divine prophets had testified, and spoken theseand other wonderful things concerning him.
About A.D. 1080. Tkeophylact. in Joan. lib. xiii.—Thecity of the Jews was taken, and the wrath of God was kin­dled against them; as also Josephus witnesses, that this cameupon them on account of the death of Jesus.







OCR Output








816 LUCILUJS BASSUS. [B. VII.


festival day to the city of Rome, as celebrated for the victoryobtained by their army over their enemies, for the end thatwas now put to their civil miseries, and for the commencementof their hopes of future prosperity and happiness.
7. After these triumphs were over, and after the affairs ofthe Romans were settled on the surest foundations, Vespasianresolved to build a temple to Peace, which was finished in soshort a time and so glorious a manner as was beyond allhuman expectation and opinion; for he having now by Provi­dence a vast quantity of wealth, besides what he had formerlygained in his other exploits, he had this temple adorned withpictures and statues; for in this temple was collected and re-posited all such rarities as men aforetimes used to wander allover the habitable world to see, when they had a desire to seeone of them after another: he also laid up therein those goldenvessels and instruments that were taken out of the Jewishtemple as ensigns of his glory. But still he gave order thatthey should lay up their law, and the purple veils of the holyplace, in the royal palace itself, and keep them there.


CHAPTER VI.
CONCERNING MACIIERUS, AND HOW LUCILIUS BASSUS TOOKTHAT CITADEL AND OTHER PLACES.
§ 1. Now Lucilius Bassus was sent as legate into Judea,and there he received the army from Cerealis Vitellianus, andtook that citadel which was in Herodium, together with thegarrison that was in it: after which he got together all thesoldiery that were there (which was a large body but dispersedinto several parties,) with the tenth legion, and resolved tomake war upon Machcrus; for it was highly necessary thatthis citadel should be demolished, lest it might be a means ofdrawing away many into a rebellion, by reason of itsstrength; for the nature of the place was very capable ofaffording the surest hopes of safety to those that possessed it;as well as delay and fear to those that should attack it; for







OCR Output








110 CRUELTY OF [B. IV.


earnestly desired them to do, and not to overlook those forwhose sake they were come, in the midst of their distresses,nor to bring them into a still greater danger ; for that whenthey had once seized on the guards, it would be easy for themto fall upon the city; but that if the city were once alarmed,they would not then be able to overcome those guards, be­cause as soon as they should perceive they were there, theywould put themselves in order to fight them, and would hindertheir coming into the temple.


CHAPTER V.
THE CRUELTY OF THE IDUMEANS, WHEN THEY WERE GOTTENINTO THE TEMPLE DURING THE STORM, AND OF THE ZEAL­OTS. CONCERNING THE SLAUGHTER OF ANANUS, AND JESUS,AND ZACIIARIAS. AND HOW THE IDUMEANS RETIRED HOME.
§ 1. This advice pleased the Idumeans, and they ascendedthrough the city to the temple. The zealots were also ingreat expectation of their coming, and earnestly waited forthem. When, therefore, these were entering, they also cameboldly out of the inner temple, and mixing themselves amongthe Idumeans, they attacked the guards; and some of thosethat were upon the wateh, but were fallen asleep, they killedas they were asleep ; but as those that were now awakenedmade a cry, the whole multitude arose, and in the amazementthey were in, caught hold of their arms immediately, and be­took themselves to their own defence; and so long as theythought they were only the zealots who attacked them, theywent on boldly, as hoping to overpower them by their num­bers, but when they saw others pressing in upon them also,they perceived the Idumeans were got in ; and the greatestpart of them laid aside their arms, together with their cour­age, and betook themselves to lamentations. But some fewof the younger sort covered themselves with their armor, andvaliantly received the Idumeans, and for a great while pro­tected the multitude of old men. Others, indeed, gave asignal to those that were in the city of the calamities they







OCR Output








C. II.] EXHORTS THE JEWS. 249


he might not sec the house of God set on fire; on which ac­count he is celebrated among all the Jews in their sacred me­morials, and his memory is become immortal, and will beconveyed fresh down to our posterity through all ages. ThisJohn is an excellent example in such a time of danger; and Idare venture to promise that the Romans shall still forgivothee. And take notice, that I, who make this exhortation tothee, am one of thine own nation ; I, who am a Jew, do makethis promise to thee. And it will become thee to considerwho I am that give thee this counsel, and whence I am de­rived : for while I am alive I shall never be in such slaveryas to forego my own kindred, or forget the laws of our fore­fathers. Thou hast indignation at me again, and makest aclamor at me, and reproachest me ; indeed, I cannot deny butI am worthy of worse treatment than all this amounts to, be­cause, in opposition to fate, I make this kind invitation tothee, and endeavor to force deliverance upon those whom Godhath condemned. And who is there that does not know whatthe writings of the ancient prophets contain in them ? andparticularly that oracle' which is just now going to be fulfilledupon this miserable city ? For they foretold that this cityshould be then taken, when somebody shall begin the slaughterof his own countrymen. And arc not both the city and theentire temple now full of the dead bodies of your countrymen?It is God," therefore, it is God himself, who is bringing onthis fire to purge that city and temple by means of the Ro­mans, and is going to pluck up this city, which is full of yourpollutions."
2. As Josephus spake these words, with groans and tearsin his eyes, his voice was intercepted by sobs. However, theRomans could not but pity the affliction he was under, andwonder at his conduct. But for John and those that were


1 Of this oracle, see the note on B. iv. ch. vi. sect. 3.
' Josephus, both hero and in many places elsewhere, speaks so, that it ismost evident ho was fully satisfied that God was on the Romans' side, andmade use of them now for the destruction of that wicked nation of the Jews,which was, for certain, the true state of this matter, as the prophet Danielfirst and our Savior himself afterwards, had clearly foretold. See Lit. Ac-SompL of I'roph p. 64, &c.







OCR Output








C. II.] JONATHAN. 257


as it were, cut off those limbs of their body which were in­fected, in order to prevent the distemper's spreading farther ;for they set the north-west cloister, which was joined to thetower of Antonia, on fire, and after that broke off abouttwenty cubits of that cloister, and thereby made a beginningin burning the sanctuary: two days after which, or on thetwenty-fourth day of the forenamed month [Panemus orTamuz,] the Romans set fire to the cloister that joined to theother, when the fire went fifteen cubits farther. The Jews,in like manner, cut off its roof; nor did they entirely leaveoff what they were about till the tower of Antonia wasparted from the temple, even when it was in their power tohave stopped the fire; nay, they lay still while the templewas first set on fire, and deemed this spreading of the fireto be for their own advantage. However, the armies werestill fighting one against another about the temple, and thewar was managed by continual sallies of particular partiesajrainst one another.
10. Now there was at that time a man among the Jews;low of stature he was, and of a despicable appearance; ofno character either as to his family, or in other respects; hisname was Jonathan. Ile went out at the high-priest John'smonument, and uttered many other insolent things to theRomans, and challenged the best of them all to a singlecombat. But many of those that stood there in the armyhuffed him, and many of them (as they might well be) weroafraid of him. Some of them also reasoned thus, and thatjustly enough, that it was not fit to fight with a man thatdesired to die : because those that utterly despaired of deliver­ance had, besides other passions, a violence of attacking menthat could not be opposed, and had no regard to God himself:and that to hazard one's self with a person, whom, if youovercome, you do no great matter, and by whom it ishazardous that you may be taken prisoner, would be an in­stance not of manly courage, but of unmanly rashness. Sothere being nobody that came out to accept the man's chal­lenge, and the Jew cutting them with a great number of re­proaches, as cowards (for he was a very haughty man in him­


22 *







OCR Output








70 VESPASIAN. [B. III.


corrupted the air, insomuch that the misery was not only theobject of commiseration to the Jews, but to those that hatedthem, and had been the authors of that misery. This wasthe upshot of the sea-fight. The number of the slain, in­cluding those that were killed in the city before, was sixthousand five hundred.
10. After this fight was over, Vespasian sat upon histribunal at Taricheae, in order to distinguish the foreignersfrom the old inhabitants; for those foreigners appeared tohave begun the war. So he deliberated with the other com­manders whether he ought to save those old inhabitants ornot. And when these commanders alleged, that the dis­mission of them would bo to his own disadvantage, becausewhen they were once set at liberty they would not be at rest,since they would be people destitute of proper habitations,and would be able to compel such as fled to fight against us,Vespasian acknowledged that they did not deserve to be saved,and that if they had leave given them to fly away, they wouldmake use of it against those that gave them that leave. Butstill he considered with himself after what manner they shouldbe slain;' for if he had them slain there, he suspected thatthe people of the country would thereby become his enemies;for that to be sure they would never bear it, that so manythat had been supplicants to him should bo killed; and tooffer violence to them after he had given them assurances oftheir lives, he could not himself bear to do it. However, his


1 This is the most cruel and barbarous action that Vespasian ever did inthis whole war, as he did it with great reluctance also. It was done bothafter public assurance given of sparing the prisoners' lives, and when allknew and confessed that these prisoners were no way guilty of any seditionagainst the Romans. Nor, indeed, did Titus now give his consent, so far asnppears, nor ever acted of himself so barbarously; nay, soon after thisTitus grew quite weary of shedding blood, and of punishing the innocentwith tho guilty, and gave the people of Gischala leave to keep the JewishSabbath, B. iv. ch. ii. sect. 3, 6, in the midst of their siege. Nor was Ves­pasian disposed to do what he did, till his officers persuaded him, and thatfrom two principal topics, viz.: that nothing could be unjust that was donoagainst Jews, and that when both cannot be consistent, advantage must pre­vail over justice. Admirable court doctrines these!







OCR Output








138 SIMON OF GERASA. [B. IV.


it came to a close fight they broke their ranks, and every oneretired to his own home.
7. Thus did Simon unexpectedly march into Idumea with­out bloodshed, and made a sudden attack upon the cityHebron, and took it; wherein he got possession of a greatdeal of prey, and plundered it of a vast quantity of fruit.Now the people of the country say that it is an ancientercity not only than any in that country, but than Memphisin Egypt, and, accordingly, its age is reckoned at two thou­sand and three hundred years. They also relate that it hadbeen the habitation of Abram, the progenitor of the Jews,after he had removed out of Mesopotamia ; and they say thathis posterity descended from thence into Egypt, whose monu­ments are to this very time showed in that small city; thefabric of which monuments are of the most excellent marble,and wrought after the most elegant manner. There is alsothere showed, at the distance of six furlongs from the city, avery large turpentine-tree;' and as the report goes, that thistree has continued ever since the creation of the world.Thence did Simon make his progress over all Idumea, anddid not only ravage the cities and villages, but laid waste thowhole country; for, besides those that were completely armed,he had forty thousand men that followed him, insomuch thathe had not provisions enough to suffice such a multitude.Now, besides this want of provisions that he was in, ho wasof a barbarous disposition, and bore great anger at this nation,by which means it came to pass that Idumea was greatly de­populated ; and as one may see all the woods behind despoiledof their leaves by locusts, after they have been there, so wasthere nothing left behind Simon's army but a desert. Someplaces they burnt down, some they utterly demolished; andwhatsoever grew in the country they either trod it down orfed upon it; and by their marches they made the groundthat was cultivated harder and more untractable than that


1 Some of the ancients cull this famous tree, or grove, an oak, others aturpentine tree, or grove. It has been very famous in all tho past ages, andis so, I suppose, at this day, and that particularly for an eminent mart ormeeting of merchants there every year, as the travellers inform us.







OCR Output








278 S P E E C II 0 F T I T 0 S [B. VI.


house,1 there was a boy that, out of the thirst he was in, de­sired some of the Roman guards to give him their right handsas a security for his life, and confessed he was very thirsty.These guards commiserated his age, and the distress he wasin, and gave him their right hands accordingly. So he camedown himself, and drank some water, and filled the vessel hehad with him when he came to them with water, and thenwent off, and fled away to his own friends; nor could any ofthose guards overtake him; but still they reproached him forhis perfidiousness. To which he made this answer: — "Ihave not broken the agreement; for the security I had givenme was not in order to my staying with you, but only in orderto my coming down safely, and taking up some water; bothwhich things I have performed, and thereupon think myselfto have been faithful to my engagement." Hereupon thosewhom the child had imposed upon admired at his cunning,and that on account of his age. On the fifth day afterward,the priests that were pined with the famine came down, andwhen they were brought to Titus by the guards, they beggedfor their lives: but he replied that " the time of pardon wasover as to them; and that this very holy house, on whoseaccount only they could justly hope to be preserved, was de­stroyed ; and that it was agreeable to their office that priestsshould perish with the house itself to which they belonged."So he ordered them to be put to death.
2. But as for the tyrants themselves, and those that werowith them, when they found that they wero encompassed onevery side, and, as it were, walled round without any methodof escaping, they desired to treat with Titus by word ofmouth. Accordingly, such was the kindness of his nature,and his desire of preserving the city from destruction, andwas joined to the advice of his friends, who now thought therobbers were come to a temper, that he placed himself on thewestern side of the outer [court of the] temple; for therewere gates on that side above the Xystus, and a bridge that


1 The Jews of later times agree with Josephus, that there were hiding-places of secret chambers about the holy house, as Reland here informs us,where he thinks he h:is found these very walls described in them.







OCR Output








►













OCR Output








8 • VESPASIAN. [B. III.


Vespasian equal to the task, and able to undergo the greatburden of so mighty a war, seeing he was grown an old manalready in the camp, and from his youth had been exercisedin warlike exploits: he was also a man that had long agopacified the west, and made it subject to the Romans, whenit had been put into disorder by the Germans: he had alsorecovered to them Britain by his arms, which had been littleknown before;' whereby he procured to his father, Claudius,to have a triumph bestowed on him without any sweat orlabor of his own.
3. So Nero esteemed these circumstances as favorableomens, and saw that Vespasian's age gave him sure expe­rience and great skill, and that he had his sons as hostagesfor his fidelity to himself, and that the flourishing age theywere in would make them fit instruments under their father'sprudence. Perhaps also there was some interposition ofProvidence, which was paving the way for Vespasian's beinghimself emperor afterwards. Upon the whole, he sent thisman to take upon him the command of the armies that werein Syria; but this not without great encomiums and flatteringcompellations, such as necessity required, and such as mightmollify him into complaisance. So Vespasian sent his sonTitus from Achaia, where he had been with Nero, to Alex­andria, to bring back with him from thence the fifth and thetenth legions, while he himself, when he had passed over theHellespont, came by land into Syria, where he gathered to­gether the Roman forces, with a considerable number ofauxiliaries from the kings in that neighborhood.


1 Take the confirmation of this in the words of Suetonius, here producedby Dr. Hudson: "In the reign of Claudius," says he, "Vespasian, for thesake of Narcissus, was sent as a lieutenant of a legion into Germany.Thence he removed into Britain, and fought thirty battles with the enemy."In Vesp. sect. 4. We may also here note from Josephus, that Claudius theemperor, who triumphed for the conquest of Britain, was enabled so to doby Vespasian's conduct and bravery, and that he is here styled the fatherof Vespasian.







OCR Output








JOSEPHUS'S DISCOURSE ABOUT HADES. 459


committed all judgment; and he in order to fulfil the willof his Father shall come as judge, whom we call Christ. ForMinos and Rhadamanthus are not the judges, as you Greeksdo suppose, but he whom God and the Father hath glorified ;
CONCERNING WHOM WE IIAVE ELSEWHERE GIVEN A MORE PAR­TICULAR ACCOUNT, FOR THE SAKE OF THOSE WHO SEEK AFTER
truth. This person, exercising the righteous judgment ofthe Father towards all men, hath prepared a just sentencefor every one, according to his works; at whose judgment-seat, when all men, and angels, and demons, shall stand,they will send forth one voice, and say, just is thy judg­ment: the rejoinder to which will bring a just sentence uponboth parties, by giving justly to those that have done wellan everlasting fruition ; but allotting to the lovers of wickedworks eternal punishment. To these belong the unquench­able fire, and that without end, and a certain fiery worm neverdying, and not destroying the body, but continuing itseruption out of the body with never-ceasing grief: neitherwill sleep give ease to theso men, nor will the night affordthem comfort: death will not free them from their punish­ment, nor will the interceding prayers of their kindred profitthem; for the just are no longer seen by them, nor are theythought worthy of remembrance. But the just shall rememberonly their righteous actions, whereby they have attained theheavenly kingdom, in which there is no sleep, no sorrow, nocorruption, no care, no night, no day measured by time: nosun driven in his course along the circle of heaven bynecessity, and measuring out the bounds and. conversions ofthe seasons, for the better illumination of the life of men;no moon decreasing and increasing, or introducing a varietyof seasons, nor will she then moisten the earth : no burningsun, no Bear turning round [the pole], no Orion to rise, nowandering of innumerable stars. The earth will not thenbe difficult to be passed over; nor will it be hard to find outthe court of paradise; nor will there be any fearful roaringof the sea, forbidding the passengers to walk on it; eventhat will be made easily passable to the just, though it willnot be void of moisture. Heaven will not then be uninhabit­







OCR Output








DISSERTATION I. 475


like to what we use, declaring that the same name of Christbelongs to him, and writes of his ineffable generation of thoFather after such a manner as cannot be blamed; which thingmay perhaps raise a doubt in some, whether Josephus werethe author of the work, though the phraseology does not atall differ from this man's other works. However, I havefound in some papers, that this discourse was not written byJosephus, but by one Caius a presbyter.
God. ccxxxviii.] Herod the tetrarch of Galileo and of Pc-rea, the son of Herod the Great, fell in love, as Josephussays, with the wife of his brother Philip, whose name wasHerodias, who was the grand-daughter of Herod the Great,by his son Aristobulus, whom he had slain. Agrippa wasalso her brother. Now Herod took her away from her hus­band and married her. This is he that slew John the Baptist,that great man, the forerunner [of Christ,] being afraid (asJosephus says) least he should raise a sedition among thepeople; for they all followed the directions of John, on accountof the excellency of his virtue. In his time was the passionof our Saviour.
Cod. xxiii.] I have read the Chronicle of Justus of Tiberias.He omits the greatest part of what was most necessary to borelated; but as infected with Jewish prejudices, being alsohimself a Jew by birth, he makes no mention at all of theadvent, or of the acts done, or of the miracles wrought byChrist.
The time uncertain. Macarius in Actis sanctorum, torn.v. p. 149, ap. Fabric Joseph, p. 61. — Josephus a priest ofJerusalem, and one that wrote with truth the history of theJewish affairs, bears witness that Christ, the true God, wasincarnate and crucified, and the third day rose again; whosewritings are reposited in the public library. Thus he says :Now there was about this time Jesus, a wise man, if it belawful to call him a man, for he was a doer of wonderfulworks, a teacher of such men as receive the truth with pleas­ure : he drew over to him both many of the Jews, and manyof the Gentiles also: this was the Christ. And when Pilate,at the suggestion of the principal men among us, had con­







OCR Output








B. I.] AGAINSTAPION. 368


suspecting that they had conversation with some foreigners.But what is the strongest argument of our exact managementin this matter, is what I am now going to say, that we havethe names of our high-priests from father to son set down inour records, for the interval of two thousand years ; and ifany of these have been transgressors of these rules, they areprohibited to present themselves at the altar, or to be par­takers of any other of our purifications: and this is justly orrather necessarily done, because every one is not permittedof his accord to be a writer, nor is there any disagreement inwhat is written, they being only prophets that have writtenthe original and earliest accounts of things as, they learnedthem of God himself by inspiration: and others have writtenwhat hath happened in their own times, and that in a verydistinct manner also.
8. For we have not an innumerable multitude of hooksamong us, disagreeing from and contradicting one another[as the Greeks have,] but only twenty-two books,1 which con­tain the records of all the past times, which are justly believedto be divine. And of them five belong to Moses, which con­tain his laws, and the traditions of the origin of mankind tillhis death. This interval of time was little short of threethousand years. But as to the time from the death of Mosestill the reign of Artaxerxes, king of Persia, who reigned afterXerxes, the prophets, who were after Moses, wrote down whatwas done in their times in thirteen books. The remainingfour books contain hymns to God, and precepts for the con­duct of human life. It is true our history hath been writtensince Artaxerxes very particularly, but hath not been es­teemed of the like authority with the former by our forefa­thers, because there hath not been an exact succession of pro­phets since that time: and how firmly we have given credit


1 Which were these twenty-two sacred books of the Old Testament, see theSupplement to the Essay on the Old Testament, p. Uo-29, viz., those we callcanonical, all excepting the Canticles ; but still with this farther exception,that the first book of apocryphal Esdras bo taken into that number, insteadof our caaonical Ezra, which seems to bo no more than a later epitome of thoother; which two books of Canticles and Ezra it no way appears that ourJoscphus ever saw.







OCR Output








C. III.] THE HKJH-PUIEST ANANUS. 98


sible of their calamities, and where there is no notion re­maining of any remedy for the miseries that are upon them ?For when you are seized upon, you bear it, and when you aresilent, and when people are murdered, nobody dares so muchas send out a groan openly. O bitter tyranny that we areunder! But why do I complain of the tyrants ? Was it notyou that overlooked those that first of all got together, forthey were then but a few, and by your silence made themgrow to be many, and by conniving at them when they tookarms, in effect armed them against yourselves ? You oughtto have then prevented their first attempts, when they fell areproaching your relations; but by neglecting that care intime, you have encouraged these wretches to plunder men.When houses were pillaged, nobody said a word, which wasthe occasion why they carried off the owners of those houses;and when they were drawn through the midst of the city,nobody came to their assistance. They then proceeded toput those whom you had betrayed into their hands intobonds; I do not say how many, and of what characters thosemen were whom they thus served, but certainly they weresuch as were accused by none, and condemned by none ; andsince nobody succored them when they were put into bonds,the consequence was, that you saw the same persons slain.We have seen this also ; so that still the best of the herd ofbrute animals, as it were, have been still led to be sacrificed,when yet nobody said one word, or moved his right hand fortheir preservation. Will you bear, therefore, will you bearto see your sanctuary trampled on ? and will you lay stepsfor these profane wretches, upon which they may mount tohigher degrees of insolence ? Will not you pluck them downfrom their exaltation ? For even by this time they had pro­ceeded to higher enormities, if they had been able to over­throw any thing greater than the sanctuary. They haveseized upon the strongest place of the whole city; you maycall it the temple if you please, though it be like a citadel orfortress. Now while you have tyranny in so great a degreewalled in, and see your enemies over your heads, to what pur­pose is it to take counsel ? And what have you to support







OCR Output








c. vni.J bleazar's speeches. 335


" Since we long ago, my generous friends, resolved never tobe servants to the Romans, nor to any other than to Godhimself, who alone is the true and just Lord of mankind, thetime is now come that obliges us to make that resolution truein practice : and let us not at this time bring a reproach uponourselves for self-contradiction, while we formerly would notundergo slavery, though it were then without danger, butmust now, together with slavery, choose such punishmentsalso as are intolerable: I mean this upon the supposition thatthe Romans once reduce us under their power while we aroalive. We were the very first that revolted from them, andwo are the last that fight against them; and I cannot butesteem it as a favor that God hath granted us, that it is stillin our power to die bravely and in a state of freedom, whichhath not been the case of others who were conquered unex­pectedly. It is very plain that we shall be taken within aday's time ; but it is still an eligible thing to die after a glo­rious manner, together with our dearest friends. This is whatour enemies themselves cannot by any means hinder, althoughthey be very desirous to take us alive. Nor can we proposeto ourselves any more to fight them and beat them. It hadbeen proper, indeed, for us to have conjectured at the pur­pose of God much sooner, and at the very first, when we wereso very desirous of defending our liberty, and when we re­ceived such sore treatment from one another, and worse treat­ment from our enemies, and to have been sensible that thesame God who had of old taken the Jewish nation into hisfavor, had now condemned them to destruction; for had heeither continued favorable, or been but in a lesser degreedispleased with us, he had not overlooked the destruction ofso many men, or delivered his most holy city to be burnt anddemolished by our enemies. To be sure we weakly hoped tohave preserved ourselves, and ourselves alone, still in a stateof freedom, as if we had been guilty of no sins ourselves


worthy the perusal of all the curious. It seems as if that philosophic ladywho survived, ch. ix. sect. 1, 2, remembered the substance of these discourses,as spoken by Eleazar, and so Josephus clothed them in his own words; at tholowest, they contain the Jewish notions on these heads as understood thenby our Josephus, and cannot but deserve a suitable regard from us.







OCR Output








256 P E D A N I u s. [b. VI.


Roman guards that were upon the mount of Olives, and thisabout the eleventh hour of the day, as supposing, first, thatthey would not expect an onset, and, in the next place, thatthey were then taking care of their bodies, and that, there­fore, they should easily beat them. But the Romans wereapprized of their coming to attack them beforehand, and run­ning together from the neighboring camps on the sudden,prevented them from getting over their fortifications, orforcing the wall that was built about them. Upon this cameon a sharp fight, and here many great actions were per­formed on both sides ; while the Romans showed both theircourage and their skill in war, as did the Jews come on themwith immoderate violence and intolerable passion. The oneparty were urged on by shame, and the other by necessity;for it seemed a very shameful thing to the Romans to let theJews go, now they were taken in a kind of net; while theJews had but one hope of saving themselves, and that was incase they could by violence break through the Roman wall;and one, whose name was Pedanius, belonging to a party ofhorsemen, when the Jews were already beaten and forceddown into the valley together, spurred his horse on theirflank with great vehemence, and caught up a certain youngman belonging to the enemy by his ankle, as he was runningaway. The man was, however, of a robust body, and in hisarmor ; so low did Pedanius bend himself downward from hishorse, even as he was galloping away, and so great was thestrength of his right hand and of the rest of his body, as alsosuch skill had he in horsemanship. So this man seized uponthat his prey as upon a precious treasure, and carried him ashis captive to Caesar: whereupon Titus admired the man thathad seized the other for his great strength, and ordered theman that was caught to be punished [with death] for hisattempt against the Roman wall, but betook himself to thesiege of the temple, and to pressing on the raising of thebanks.
9. In the mean time the Jews were so distressed by thefights they had been in, as the war advanced higher andhigher, and creeping up to the holy house itself, that they,







OCR Output








C. III.] TERRIBLE FAMINE. 261


life. Nor would men believe that those who were dying hadno food, but the robbers would search them when they wereexpiring, lest any one should have concealed food in theirbosoms, and counterfeited dying: nay, these robbers gapedfor want, and ran about stumbling and staggering along likemad dogs, and reeling against the doors of the houses likedrunken men ; they would also, in the great distress theywere in, rush into the very same houses two or three times inone and the same day. Moreover, their hunger was so in­tolerable, that it obliged them to chew every thing, while theygathered such things as the most sordid animals would nottouch, and endured to eat them; nor did they, at length, ab­stain from girdles and shoes, and the very leather which be­longed to their shields they pulled off and gnawed: the verywisps of old hay became food to some, and some gathered upfibres, and sold a very small weight of them for four Attic[drachmae.] But why do I describe the shameless impudencethat the famine brought on men in their eating inanimatethings ? while I am going to relate a matter of fact, the liketo which no history relates,1 either among the Greeks or bar­barians. It is horrible to speak of it, and incredible whenheard. I had, indeed, willingly omitted this calamity of ours,that I might not seem to deliver what is so portentous toposterity, but that I have innumerable witnesses to it in my


1 What Josephus observes here, that no parallel examples had been re­corded before this time of such sieges, wherein mothers were forced byextremity of famine to cat their own children, as had been threatened to theJews, in the law of Moses, upon obstinate disobedience, and more than oncefulfilled (see my Boyle's Lectures, p. 210-214,) is by Dr. Hudson supposedto have had two or three parallel examples in later ages. Ho might havehad more examples, I suppose, of persons on shipboard, or in a desert island,casting lots for each other's bodies. But all this was only in cases wherethey knew of no possible way to avoid death themselves but by killing andeating others. Whether such examples come up to the present case may bodoubted. The Romans were not only willing but very desirous to grantthose Jews in Jerusalem both their lives and their liberties, and to Eave boththeir city and their temple. But the zealots, the robbers, and the seditious,would hearken to no terms of submission. They voluntarily chose to reducethe citizens to that extremity, ns to force mothers to this unnatural barbarity,which in all its circumstances has not, 1 still suppose, been hitherto paralleled»mong the rest of mankind.







OCR Output








426 FLAVIUS JOSEPHUS [B. II.


heaven, and earth, and sea, to bear no good-will to anyforeigner, and particularly to none of the Greeks." Nowthis liar ought to have said directly, that " we would bear nogood-will to any foreigner, and particularly to none of theEgyptians." For then his story about the oath would havesquared with the rest of his original forgeries, in case ourforefathers had been driven away by their kinsmen, theEgyptians, not on account of any wickedness they had beenguilty of, but on account of the calamities they were under;for as to the Grecians, we were rather remote from them inplace than different from them in our institutions ; insomuchthat we have no enmity with them, nor any jealousy of them.On the contrary, it hath so happened, that many of themhave come over to our laws, and some of them have continuedin their observation, although others of them had not courageenough to persevere, and so departed from them again; nordid any body ever hear this oath sworn by us: Apion, itseems, was the only person that heard it, for he, indeed, wasthe first composer of it.
12. However, Apion deserves to be admired for his greatprudence, as to what I am going to say, which is this, that"there is a plain mark among us, that we neither have justlaws, nor worship God as we ought to do, because we are notgovernors, but are rather in subjection to Gentiles, sometimesto one nation and sometimes to another; and that our cityhath been liable to several calamities, while their city[Alexandria] hath been of old time an imperial city, andnot used to be in subjection to the Romans." But now thisman had better leave off his bragging; for every body buthimself would think that Apion said what he hath said againsthimself; for there are very few nations that have had thegood fortune to continue many generations in the principality,but still the mutations in human affairs have put them intosubjection under others; and most nations have been oftensubdued and brought into subjection by others. Now forthe Egyptians, perhaps, they are the only nation that havehad this extraordinary privilege, to have never served anyof those monarchs who subdued Asia and Europe, and this







OCR Output








C. V.] AND ROMAN CAMPS. 19


sudden, when there is occasion for making sallies, as theycome hack when they are recalled in crowds also.
4. Now when they are to go out of their camp, the trumpetgives a sound, at which time nohody lies still, but at the firstintimation they take down their tents, and all is made readyfor their going out; then do the trumpets sound again, toorder them to get ready for the march; then do they laytheir baggage suddenly upon their mules and other beasts ofburden, and stand, as at the place of starting, ready tomarch; when also they set fire to their camp; and this theydo because it will be easy for them to erect another camp,and that it may not ever he of use to their enemies. Thendo the trumpets give a sound the third time, that they areto go out, in order to excite those that, on any account, area little tardy, that so no one may be out of his rank whenthe army marches. Then does the crier stand at the gene­ral's right hand, and ask them thrice in their own tongue,whether they be now ready to go out to war or not ? Towhich they reply as often, with a loud and cheerful voice,saying, " We are ready." And this they do almost beforethe question is asked them: they do this as filled with a kindof martial fury, and at the same time that they so cry out,they lift up their right hands also.
5. When, after this, they are gone out of their camp, theyall march without noise, and in a decent manner, and everyone keeps his own rank, as if they were going to war. Thefootmen are armed with breast-plates and head-pieces, andhave swords on each side; but the sword which is on theirleft side is much longer than the other; for that on the rightside is not longer than a span. Those footmen also that arechosen out from the rest to be about the general himself havea lance and a buckler; but the rest of the foot-soldiers havea spear and a long buckler, besides a saw and a basket, apickaxe and an axe, a thong of leather and a hook, with pro­visions for three days, so that a footman hath no great needof a mule to carry his burdens. The horsemen have a longsword on their right sides, and a long pole in their hand; ashield also lies by them obliquely on one side of their horses,







OCR Output








206 TITUS RESUMES [b. V.


standing ? For that the Romans are not unacquainted withthat famine which is in the city, whereby the people arc al­ready consumed, and the fighting-men will in a little time beso too; for although the Romans should leave off the siege,and not fall upon the city with their swords in their hands,yet was there an insuperable war that beset them within, andwas augmented every hour; unless they were able to wagewar with famine, and fight against it, or could alone conquertheir natural appetites." He added this farther, — "Howright a thing it was to change their conduct, before their ca­lamities were become incurable, and to have recourse to suchadvice as might preserve them while opportunity was offeringthem for so doing: for that the Romans would not be mindfulof their past actions to their disadvantage, unless they perse­vered in their insolent behavior to the end; because theywere naturally mild in their conquests, and preferred whatwas profitable before what their passions dictated to them ;which profit of theirs lay not in leaving the city empty ofinhabitants nor the country a desert: on which account Caesardid now offer them his right hand for their security : whereas,if he took the city by force, he would not save any of them,and this especially if they rejected bis offers in these theirutmost distresses ; for the walls that were already taken couldnot but assure them that the third wall would quickly be takenalso. And although their fortifications should prove toostrong for the Romans to break through them, yet would thefamine fight for the Romans against them."
4. While Josephus was making this exhortation to theJews, many of them jested upon him from the wall, and manyreproached him; nay, some threw their darts at him; butwhen he could not himself persuade them by such open goodadvice, he betook himself to the histories belonging to theirown nation, and cried out aloud, — " O miserable creatures !are you so unmindful of those that used to assist you, thatyou will fight by your weapons and by your hands againstthe Romans? when did we ever conquer any other nation bysuch means ? and when was it that God, who is the Creatorof the Jewish people, did not avenge them when they had







OCR Output








C. IV.] TO THE JEWS. 281


sent embassies, and congratulated our access to the govern­ment, then did you Jews show yourselves to be our enemies.You sent embassies to those of your nation that are beyondEuphrates to assist you in your raising disturbances; newwalls were built by you round your city, seditions arose, andone tyrant contended against another, and a civil war brokeout among you; such, indeed, as became none but so wickeda people as you are. I then came to this city, as unwillinglysent by my father, and received melancholy injunctions fromhim. When I heard that the people were disposed to peace,I rejoiced at it: I exhorted you to leave off these proceedings,before I began this war : I spared you, even when you hadfought against me a great while: I gave my right hand assecurity to the deserters: I observed what I had promisedfaithfully. When they fled to me, I had compassion on manyof those I had taken captive : I tortured those that were eagerfor war, in order to restrain them. It was unwillingly thatI brought my engines of war against your walls: I alwaysprohibited my soldiers, when they were set upon yourslaughter, from their severity against you. After everyvictory I persuaded you to peace, as though I had been my­self conquered. When I came near your temple, I again de­parted from the laws of war, and exhorted you to spare yourown sanctuary, and to preserve your holy house to yourselves.I allowed you a quiet exit out of it, and security for yourpreservation; nay, if you had a mind, I gave you leavo tofight in another place. Yet have you still despised everyone of my proposals, and have set fire to your holy housewith your own hands. And now, vile wretches, do you desireto treat with me by word of mouth ? to what purpose is it thatyou would save such a holy house as this was, which is nowdestroyed ? what preservation can you now desire after thedestruction of your temple ? Yet do you stand still at thisvery time in your armor ; nor can you bring yourselves somuch as to pretend to be supplicants, even in this your utmostextremity. O miserable creatures ! what is it you depend on ?Are not your people dead ? is not your holy house gone ? isnot your city in my power ? and are not your own very lives


24*







OCR Output








554 INDEX.


Hophni, i. 384 ; is slain, 387.
Hoshca, king of Israel, ii. 142; he ismade a prisoner, 145.
House of the forest of Lebanon, ii. 43.
Huldah the prophetess, ii. 160.
Human sacrifice, ii, 101.
Hushai, i. 508, et seq.
Hymns composed by David, i. 526.
Hyrcanus, son of Joseph, ii. 288;his artful invention, 289; sent toPtolemy and kindly received, 291;actions and death, 291, 295.
Hyrcanus (John), son of Simon, es­capes being slain, ii. 369; attacksPtolemy, ib.; iii. 322; is madehigh-priest, ii. 369; iii. 322: isbesieged by Antiochus, ii. 371 ;buys a peace, 372; marches intoSyria, recovers the towns that hadbeen taken, and renews the alli­ance with the Unmans, 375 ; takesSamaria and demolishes it, 379:his intercourse with (iod, ib.: hisdream, 387; was ethnarch, high-priest, and prophet, iii. 324; hisdeath and eulogium, ii. 382.
Hyrcanus II. made high-priest, ii.403; iii. 332; agrees to leave thecivil government to his brother, ii.409 ; his inactive genius, and whyhe fled to Aretas, 410; tries tobribe Scaurus, 413 ; pleads againsthis brother before l'ompey, 415;recovers the high-priesthood, 421;confirmed therein by Coesftr, 433;iii. 350; honored by the Homansand Athenians, ii. 433, 434 ; takenprisoner, and his ears cut oft', 4ti9;released by the Parthians, and re­turns to Herod, 493 ' perfidiouslytreated, and put to death, 494; iii.400.
Jabkl, i. 82.
Jabesh Gilead demolished, i. 354.
Jabin enslaves the Israelites, i. 360.
Jacimus, or Alcimus, ii. 321.
Jacob born, i. 119; contracts withLaban for Rachel, 12ti; wrestleswith an angel, 132; his sons, 135;privately departs from Laban, 129;his posterity when ho went intoEgypt, 1 66; sends Benjamin toEgypt, 156; meets Esau, 132.
Jacob, an Idumean, betrays his coun­try, iv. 137.


Jadus, or Jadua, high-priest, ii. 252;meets Alexander, 255; dies, 257.
Jadon, ii. 53; killed by a lion, 54.
Jael kills Sisera, i. 362.
Jahazaleel the prophet, ii. 93.
James, the brother of Jesus Christ,stoned, iii. 295.
Japhet, i. 90; what countries his sonspossessed, 93.
Jason, or Jesus, ii. ;
Jason, son of E'eazar, ii. 324.
Javan, i. 93.
Ibis destroys serpents, i. 179.
Ibzan, judge after Jephtha, i. 372.
Ide, iii. 149; is crucified, 150.
Idumeans, ii. 311; iv. 100, et seq. ;refuso to give the Israelites pas­sage, i. 277; turn Jews, ii. 374 ;are but half Jews, 476 ; Koze theirformer idol, 533; celebrate theJewish festivals, iii. 117.
Jehoahaz, king of Judah, ii. 163 ; hodies in Egypt, 164.
Jehoahaz, sun of Jehu, king of Israel,ii. 123, 125.
Jehoash saved, ii. 119; made king,120; murdered, 125.
Jehoiachiu, or Jeconiah, ii. IC6.
Jehoiakim rebels against the Babylo­nians, ii. 164; is slain by Nebu­chadnezzar, and cast out of thegate, 166.
Jehonadab, ii. 117.
Jehoram, king of Judah. ii. 111.
Jchoram, king of Israel, his expedi­tion against the Moabites, ii. 98;his distemper and death. 112.
Jehoshaphat, lung of Judah, ii. 86;pardoned for an alliance with Ahab,92; his fleet broken. 95; his death,101.
Jehoshoba, ii. 119.
Jehu, ii. 77; is made king of Israel,114; his actions, 115, et seq.; putsBaal's priests to death, 118; dies123.
Jehu, the prophet, ii. 67.
Jephtha puts the Ammonites to flight,i. 371; sacrifices his daughter, 372;makes a great slaughter among theEphraimites, ib.
Jeremiah, ii. 163; his lamentationson the death of Josiah, ib.; hisprophecy against Jerusalem, I65;his scribe Baruch, 166; is accusedand discharged, 165; his prophecy







OCR Output








416 FIAVIUS J0SKPHU3 [B. II.


eral, with regard to all the Romans, and those emperors thatwere her benefactors ; who also had her sister Arsinoe slainin a temple, when she had done her no harm : moreover, shehad her brother slain by private treachery, and she destroyedthe gods of her country and the sepulehres of her progenitors;and while she had received her kingdom from the first Caesar,she had the impudence to rebel against his son' and successor:nay, she corrupted Antony with her love-trick, and renderedhim an enemy to his country, and made him treacherous to hisfriends, and [by his means] despoiled some of their royal au­thority, and forced others in her madness to act wickedly.But what need I enlarge upon this head any farther, whenshe left Antony in his fight at sea, though he were her hus­band, and the father of their common children, and compelledhim to resign up his government, with the army, and to followher [into Egypt:] nay, when last of all, Caesar had takenAlexandria, she came to that pitch of cruelty, that she de­clared she had some hopes of preserving her affairs still, incase she could kill the Jews, though it were with her ownhand ; to such a degree of barbarity and perfidiousness hadshe arrived. And doth any one think that we cannot boastourselves of any thing, if, as Apion says, this queen did notat a time of famine distribute wheat among us ? However,she at length met with the punishment she deserved. As forus Jews, we appeal to the great Ciesar what assistance webrought him, and what fidelity we showed to him against theEgyptians; as also to the senate and its decrees, and theepistles of Augustus Cffisar, whereby our merits [to the Ro­mans] are justified. Apion ought to have looked upon thoseepistles, and, in particular, to have examined the testimoniesgiven on our behalf under Alexander and all the Ptolemies,and the decrees of the senate and of the greatest Roman em­perors. And if Germanicus was not able to make a distribu­tion of corn to all the inhabitants of Alexandria, that onlyshows what a barren time it was, and how great a want therewas then of corn, but tends nothing to the accusation of theJews ; for what all the emperors have thought of the Alexan­


1 Sister's son, and adopted son.







OCR Output








194 TITUS PRESSES THE SIEGE. [B. V.


the machines was very hot, while the one side tried hard toset them on fire, and the other side to prevent it; on bothsides there was a confused cry made, and many of those inthe fore-front of the battle were slain. However, the Jewswere now too hard for the Romans, by the furious assaultsthey made like madmen; and the fire caught hold of theworks, and both all those works and the engines themselveshad been in danger of being burnt, had not many of thoseselect soldiers that came from Alexandria opposed themselvesto prevent it, and had they not behaved themselves withgreater courage than they themselves supposed they couldhave done: for they outdid those in this fight that had greaterreputation than themselves before. This was the state ofthings till Caear took the stoutest of his horsemen, and at­tacked the enemy, when he himself slew twelve of those thatwere in the fore-front of the Jews; which death of these men,when the rest of the multitude saw, they gave way, and hepursued them, and drove them all into the city, and savedthe works from the fire. Now it happened at this fight thata certain Jew was taken alive, who, by Titus's order, wascrucified before the wall, to see whether the rest of themwould be affrighted, and abate of their obstinacy. But afterthe Jews were retired, John, who was commander of theIdumeans, and was talking to a certain soldier of his acquaint­ance beforo tho wall, was wounded by a dart shot at him byan Arabian, and died immediately, leaving the greatest la­mentation to the Jews and sorrow to the seditious: for howas a man of great eminence both for his actions and hisconduct also.







OCR Output








DISSERTATION II. 497


Saturn, when he was king of the country, and had by a nymphof that country, named Anobret, an only begotten son, whom,on that account, they called Jeud (the Phoenicians to this daycalling an only begotten son by that name,) he, in his dreadof very great dangers that lay upon the country from war,adorned his son with royal apparel, and built an altar, andoffered him in sacrifice."
"' The Phoenicians, when they were in great dangers bywar, by famine, or by pestilence, sacrificed to Saturn one ofthe dearest of their people, whom they chose by public suf­frage for that purpose : and Sanchoniatho's Phoenician historyis full of such sacrifices. [These hitherto I take to have beenbefore the flood."]
"2In Arabia, the Dumatii sacrificed a child every year."
"3They relate, that of old the [Egyptian] kings sacrificedsuch men as were of the same color with Typho, at the sepulehreof Osiris."
" ' Manctho relates, that they burnt Typhonean men alivein the city Idithyia [or Ilithyia,] and scattered their asheslike chaff that is winnowed; and this was done publicly, andat a set season, in the dog-days."
"5 The barbarous nations did a long time admit of theslaughter of children, as of a holy practice, and acceptable tothe gods. And this thing both private persons, and kings,and entire nations practice at proper seasons."
"6The human sacrifices that were enjoined by the Dodo-nean oracle, mentioned in Pausanias's Achaies, in the tragicalstory of Coresus and Callirrhoe, sufficiently intimate that thePhoenician and Egyptian priests had set up this Dodoneanoracle before the time of Amosis, who destroyed that barbarouspractice in Egypt."


Ieque adytis hcec (ristia dicta reporlat,
Saaguine placastis veatos, et virgiae caisa.Cum primum Jliacus Danui venislis ad oras;Sanguine qucerendi reditus, aaimaque litandumArgoliea.1
1 Porphyry, p. 78. 2 Porphyry, p. 77. 3 Diod. p. 78.
* Plutarch, p. 78. 6 Nonnulli ap. Philon. p. 76.
• Cumbcrl. Sanchon. p. 38. ' Virg. /Eneid. B. ii. ver. 115.


42*







OCR Output








B. II.] AGAINST APION. 445


thousand changes in our fortune, by the changes that hap­pened among the kings of Asia, we have never betrayed ourlaws under the most pressing distresses we have been in, norhave we neglected them either out of sloth or for a livelihood.1Nay, if any one will consider it, the difficulties and laborslaid upon us, have been greater than what appears to havebeen borne by the Lacedemonian fortitude, while they neitherploughed their land nor exercised any trades, but lived intheir own city, free from all such pains-taking, in the enjoy­ment of plenty, and using such exercises as might improvetheir bodies ; while they made use of other men as their ser­vants for all the necessaries of life, and had their food pre­pared for them by the others: and these good and humaneactions they do for no other purpose but this, that by theiractions and their sufferings they may be able to conquer allthose against whom they make war. I need not add this,that they have not been fully able to observe their laws; fornot only a few single persons, but multitudes of them, havoin heaps neglected those laws, and have delivered themselvestogether with their arms, into the hands of their enemies.
33. Now, as for ourselves, I venture to say, that no one cantell of so many, nay, not more than one or two, that have be­trayed our laws; no, not out of fear of death itself: I do notmean such an easy death as happens in battles, but that whichcomes with bodily torments, and seems to be the severest kindof death of all others. Now I think those that have con­quered us have put us to such deaths, not out of their hatredto us when they had subdued us, but rather out of their desireto see a surprising sight, which is this, whether there be suchmen in the world who believe that no evil is to them so greatas to be compelled to do or to speak any thing contrary totheir own laws! Nor ought men to wonder at us, if we arcmore courageous in dying for our laws than all other menare; for other men Jo not easily submit to the easier thingsin which we are instituted; I mean working with our handsand eating but little, and being contented to eat and drink
1 Or, we have observed our times of rest and sorts of food allowed us [du­ring those distresses]
IV. —38







OCR Output








126 PL ACID US. [B. IV.


destroyed; for as they fell upon the Romans when they werejoined close together, and, as it were, walled about withtheir entire armor, they were not able to find any placewhere the darts could enter; nor were they any way able tobreak their ranks, while they were themselves run throughby the Roman darts, and like the wildest of wild beasts rushedupon the points of the others' swords ; so some of them weredestroyed, as cut with their enemies' swords upon their faces,and others were dispersed by the horsemen.
5. Now Placidus's concern was to exclude them in theirflight from getting into the village; and causing his horse tomarch continually on that side of them, he then turned shortupon them, and at the same time his men made use of theirdarts, and easily took their aim at those that were thenearest to them, as they made those that were farther offturn back by the terror they were in, till at last the mostcourageous of them brake through those horsemen, and fledto the wall of the village. And now those that guarded thewall were in great doubt what to do; for they could not bearthe thoughts of excluding those that came from Gadara,because of their own people that were among them; and yet,if they should admit them, they expected to perish with them,which came to pass accordingly; for as they were crowdingtogether at the wall, the Roman horsemen were just ready tofall in with them. However, the guards prevented them, andshut the gates, when Flacidus made an assault upon them,and fighting courageously till it was dark, he got possessionof the wall and of the people that were in the city, when theuseless multitude were destroyed; but those that were morepotent ran away, and the soldiers plundered the houses, andset the village on fire. As for those that ran out of thevillage, they stirred up such as were in the country, and ex­aggerating their own calamities, and telling them that thewhole army of the Romans were upon them, they put theminto great fear on every side; so they got in great numberstogether, and fled to Jericho, for they knew no other placethat could afford them any hope of escaping, it being a citythat had a strong wall and a great multitude of inhabitants.







OCR Output








INDEX. 551


Factions, three in Jerusalem, iv. 158.Fadus (Cuspius,) ii. 561; iii. 261,
489.Famine in Judea in Herod's reign, ii.542; in the reign of Claudius, iii.270, 278; in Jerusalem, iv. 214,226; for Saul's cruelty to the Gi-beonites, i. 525; at Samaria, ii.378.Fanuius's decree in favor of the Jews,
ii. 447.Fannius, a pretor, ii. 375.
Fast observed at Jerusalem, on theday on which l'ompey took Jeru­salem, ii. 48'J.
Felix, procurator of Judea, iii. 284,288, 494 ; punishes the mutineers,290.
Festivals of the Hebrews, i. 245;three great ones, iii. 154; Romangunrds were posted at the temple,490; immunity granted them atthose festivals, ii. 337; celebratedin shining garments, 384; and onthem no manner of work, i. 248;celebrated by the Gentiles in idle­ness and pleasure, 134; no mourn­ing among the Jews at such times,ii. 227; nor did they then travelfar, 373; Egyptian women appear­ed at such times in public, i. 144;wood carried on a festival day forthe altar, iii. 524; festival of thededication of the temple by JudasMaccabeus, ii. 310.
Flaccus (Norbanus,) proconsul, iii.34; president of Syria, 163.
Flesh of horses, mules, &c, forbiddento bo brought within tho walls ofJerusalem, ii. 282.
Florus (Gessius.) iii. 141, 297 ; is thecause of tho Jewish war, i. 21; iii.303, et ieq. ; is derided by the peo­ple, 499, 502; plunders the city,504 ; calumniates the Jews, 509.
Fonteius Agrippa killed, iv. 308.
Fountain near Jericho, iv. 130; iscured by Elisha, ib.; its wonderfulvirtue, 131.
Fronto, iv. 267, 291.
Fulvia, a lady, defrauded of her mo­ney by a Jew, iii. 151.
Furius, ii. 420; iii. 340.
Ga at protects the Shechemites againstAbimelech, i. 367.


Gabinius, ii. 415, 418; iii. 338; ismade president of Syria, ii. 423;iii. 343.Gad, the prophet, i. 532.Gadara taken by Vespasian, iv. 125.Gaddis (John) ii. 330.Galadens, their queen Laodice, ii.
394.Galba succeeds Nero, iv. 134; is mur­dered, ib.Galilee comes under the Roman do­minion, iv. 72, 86.Gallicanus, iv. 48.Galls become Herod's life-guards, iii
392.Gallus (jElius,) ii. 545.Gallus (Cestius,) i. 45; iii. 500.Gallus, a centurion, iv. 76.Gallus (Rubrius,) iv. 308.Gamala besieged, iv. 72, et seq.Games of the circus, iii. 207 ; Olym­pic games restored, 31 ; Ctesareangames instituted, ii. 536; iii. 29,396; ordained by Titus on thobirth-davs of his father and bro­ther, iv. 301.Gaza demolished, ii. 393.Gazeans grievously puuished by Jo­nathan, ii. 355.Gemellus (Tiberius,) iii. 173.Gemellus, Herod's friend, expelled
his court, iii. 45.Geometry invented by the long-lived
patriarchs, i. 90.Gcrizzim, its temple demolished, ii.
372.Germanicus, father of Caius, iii. 173;sent into the east, 145; poisonedby Piso, ib.Germans mutiny, iv. 306; a German'spredictions concerning Agrippa, iii.171.Giants, i. 257, 347.Gibeath, rape at, i. 351.Gibeonites, by a wile, make a cove­nant, i. 334; their fraud punished,ib.; they are satisfied for the at­tempt of Saul to slay them, 525.Gideon's stratagem, i. 364; he dies,
366.Glaphyra married to Alexander, iii. 9,38; her enmity with Snlome, ib.,409; her lamentation when herhusband was put in chains, 59; issent back a widow, 73 ; afterwardsmarried to Juba, and then to Ar­







OCR Output








412 FLAVIUSJOSEPHTJS [B. II.


of the waves." Now, if the place of habitation includes anything that is reproachful, this man reproaches not his ownreal country [Egypt,] but what he pretends to be his owncountry, Alexandria; for all are agreed in this, that the partof that city which is near the sea is the best part of all forhabitation. Now, if the Jews gained that part of the city byforce, and have kept it hitherto without impeachment, this isa mark of their valor : but in reality it was Alexander him­self that gave them that place for their habitation, when theyobtained equal privileges there with the Macedonians. Norcan I devise what Apion would have said, had their habita­tion been at Necropolis,1 and not been fixed hard by the royalpalace [as it is ;] nor had their nation had the denominationof Macedonians given them till this very day [as they have.]Had this man now read the epistles of King Alexander, orthose of Ptolemy, the son of Lagus, or met with the writingsof the succeeding kings, or that pillar which is still standingat Alexandria, and contains the privileges which the great[Julius] Caesar bestowed upon the Jews; had this man, I say,known these records, and yet hath the impudence to write incontradiction to them, he hath shown himself to be a wickedman : but if he knew nothing of these records, he hath shownhimself to be a man very ignorant: nay, when he appears towonder how Jews could be called Alexandrians, this is an­other like instance of his ignorance: for all such as are calledout to be colonies, although they be ever so far remote fromone another in their original, receive their names from thosethat bring them to their new habitations. And what occasionis there to speak of others, when those of us Jews that dweltat Antioch are named Antiochiam, because Seleucus, thefounder of that city, gave them the privileges belongingthereto ? After the like manner, do those Jews that inhabitEpheius and the other cities of Ionia enjoy the same namewith those that were originally bom there, by the grant of thesucceeding princes: nay, the kindness and humanity of theRomans hath been so great that it hath granted leave to almostall others to take the same name of Romans upon them; I


1 The burial-place for dead bodies, as I suppose.







OCR Output








B. I.] AGAINST AFION. 359


but little on any good foundation when they set to write, butrather wrote their histories from their own conjectures ?Accordingly, they confute one another in their own books topurpose, and are not ashamed to give us the most contra­dictory accounts of the same things; and I should spend mytime to little purpose, if I should pretend to teach the Greeksthat which they know better than I already, what a greatdisagreement there is between Hellanicus and Acusilaus abouttheir genealogies; in how many cases Acusilaus correctsHesiod; or after what manner Ephorus demonstrates Hella­nicus to have told lies in the greatest part of his history;as does Timeus in like manner as to Ephorus, and the suc­ceeding writers do to Timeus, and all the later writers do toHerodotus;1 nor could Timeus agree with Antiochus andPhilistius, or with Callias, about the Sicilian history, nomore than do the several writers of the Athidae follow oneanother about the Athenian affairs; nor do the historians thelike, that wrote the Argolies, about the affairs of the Argives.And now what need I say any more about particular citiesand smaller places, while in the most approved writers of theexpedition of the Persians, and of the actions which weretherein performed, there are so great differences? Nay,


1 It well deserves to be considered, that Josephus here says, how all thefollowing Greek historians looked on Herodotus as a fabulous author, andpresently, sect. 14, how Manetho, the most authentic writer of the Egyptianhistory, greatly complains of his mistakes in the Egyptian affairs; as alsothat Strabo, li. xi. p. 607, the most accurate geographer and historian,esteemed him such; that Xenophon, the much more accurate historian inthe days of Cyrus, implies, that Herodotus's accounts of that great manare almost entirely romantic. See the note on Antiq. B. xi. ch. ii. sect. 1,and Hutchinson's Prolegomena to his edition of Xenophon's Kty« Ilcutsia thatwe have already seen in the note on Antiq. B. viii. chap. x. sect. 3, howvery little Herodotus knew about the Jewish affairs and country, and thathe greatly affected what we call the marvellous, as Monsieur Rollin haslately and justly determined; whence we are not always to depend on theauthority of Herodotus, where it is unsupported by other evidence, butought to compare the other evidence with his, .ind, if it preponderate, toprefer it before his. I do not mean by this that Herodotus wilfully relatedwhat he believed to be false (as Ctesias seems to have done,) but that heoften wanted evidence, and sometimes preferred what was marvellous towhat was best attested as really true.







OCR Output








414 FLAVIUS JOSEPHUS [b. II.


great desire of knowing our laws and of obtaining the booksof our sacred scriptures: accordingly, he desired that suchmen might be sent him as might interpret our law to him;and in order to have them well compiled, he committed thatcare to no ordinary persons, but ordained that DemetriusPhalereus, and Andreas, and Aristeas; the first, Demetrius,the most learned person of his age, and the others such aswere intrusted with the guard of his body, should take thecare of this matter: nor would he certainly have been so desi­rous of learning our law and the philosophy of our nation,had he despised the men that made use of it, or had he not,indeed, had them in great admiration.
5. Now, this Apion was unacquainted with almost all thekings of those Macedonians whom he pretends to have beenhis progenitors; who were yet very well affected towards us:for the third of those Ptolemies, who was called Euergetcs,when he had gotten possession of all Syria by force, did notoffer his thank-offerings to the Egyptian gods for his victory,but came to Jerusalem, and, according to our own laws, offeredmany sacrifices to God, and dedicated to him such gifts aswere suitable to such a victory : and as for Ptolemy Philome-tcr and his wife Cleopatra, they committed their whole king­dom to Jews, when Onias and Dosithcus, both Jews, whosenames are laughed at by Apion, were the generals of theirwhole army. But certainly, instead of reproaching them, heought to admire their actions, and return them thanks forsaving Alexandria, whose citizen he pretends to be : for whenthese Alexandrians were making war with Cleopatra the queen,and were in danger of being utterly ruined, these Jews broughtthem to terms of agreement, and freed them from the miseriesof a civil war. " But then," says Apion, " Onias brought asmall army afterward upon the city, at the .time when Ther-mus the lloman ambassador was there present." Yes, do Iventure to say, and that he did rightly and very justly in sodoing; for that Ptolemy who was called Physco, upon thedeath of his brother Philometor, came from Cyrene, and wouldhave ejected Cleopatra as well as her sons out of their king­







OCR Output








DISSERTATION III. 523


of the nones of July, with that eagerness that they would notstay for his son Titus, who was then on the road, returningout of Syria, chap, lxxix. Vespasian delivered over thestrongest part of his forces to Titus, to enable him to finishwhat remained of the Jewish war. Hist, book iv. chap. li.
During those months in which Vespasian continued atAlexandria, waiting for the usual set time of the summergales of wind, and staid for settled fair weather at sea, manymiraculous events happened, by which the good-will ofheaven, and a kind of inclination of the Deity in his favorwas declared.
A certain man of the vulgar sort at Alexandria, wellknown for the decay of his eyes, kneeled down by him, andgroaned, and begged of him the cure of his blindness, as bythe admonition of Serapis, that God which this superstitiousnation worships above others. He also, desired that theemperor would be pleased to put some of his spittle upon theballs of his eyes. Another infirm man there, who was lameof his hand, prayed Coesar, as by the same god's suggestion,to tread upon him with his foot. Vespasian at first beganto laugh at them, and to reject them; and when they wereinstant with him, he sometimes feared he should have thereputation of a vain person, and sometimes upon the solicita­tion of the infirm, ho flattered himself, and others flatteredhim, with the hopes of succeeding. At last he ordered thephysicians to give their opinion, whether this sort of blindnessand lameness were curable by the art of man or not ? Thephysicians answered uncertainly, that the one had not hisvisual faculty utterly destroyed, and that it might be restored,if the obstacles were removed; that the other's limbs weredisordered, but if a healing virtue were made use of, they werecapable of being made whole. Perhaps, said they, the godsare willing to assist, and that the emperor is chosen by divine
Josephus implies, and the place where now Vespasian was, which was noother than Judea, requires also, though the inauguration day might becelebrated afterward from his first proclamation at the great city Alexandria,only then the nones or ides in Tacitus and Suetonius must be of June, andnot of July.







OCR Output








54 VESPASIAN. [B. III.


8. Thus Josephus escaped in the war with the Romans andin this his own war with his friends, and was led by Nicanorto Vespasian. But now all the Romans ran together to seehim; and as the multitude pressed one upon another abouttheir general, there was a tumult of a various kind; whilesome rejoiced that Josephus was taken, and some threatenedhim, and some crowded to see him very near; but those thatwere more remote cried out to have this their enemy put todeath, while those that were near called to mind the actionshe had done, and a deep concern appeared at the change ofhis fortune. Nor was there any of the Roman commanders,how much soever they had been enraged at him before, butrelented when he came to the sight of him. Above all therest, Titus's own valor, and Josephus's own patience underhis afflictions, made him pity him, as did also the commisera­tion of his age, when he recalled to mind that but a littlewhile ago he was fighting, but lay now in the hands of hisenemies, which made him consider the power of fortune, andhow quick is the turn of affairs in war, and how no state ofmen is sure: for which reason he then made a great manymore to be of the same pitiful temper with himself, andinduced them to commiserate Josephus. He was also ofgreat weight in persuading his father to preserve him. How­ever, Vespasian gave strict orders that he should be keptwith great caution, as though he would, in a very little time,send him to Nero.
9. When Josephus heard him give these orders, he saidthat he had somewhat in his mind that he would willingly sayto himself alone. When, therefore, they were all ordered towithdraw, excepting Titus and two of their friends, he said:" Thou, O Vespasian, thinkest no more than that thou hasttaken Josephus himself captive; but I am come to thee as amessenger of greater tidings; for had not I been sent byGod to thee, I knew what was the law1 of the Jews in this


1 I do not know where to find the law of Moses here mentioned by Jose­phus, and aftorward by Elcazar, B. vii. ch. viii. sect. 7; and almost impliedin B. i. ch. xiii. sect. 10, by Josephus's commendation of Phasaelus for doingbo; I mean whereby Jewish generals and people were obliged to kill them­







OCR Output








434 FLAVIUB JOSEPHUS [B. II.


ascribing the authority and the power to God, and by per­suading all the people to have a regard to him as the authorof all the good things that were enjoyed either in commonby all mankind, or by each one in particular, and of all thatthey themselves obtained, by praying to him in their greatestdifficulties. He informed them, that it was impossible toescape God's observation, even in any of our outward actions,or in any of our inward thoughts. Moreover, he representedGodl as unbegotten and immutable, through all eternity,superior to all mortal conceptions in pulehritude; and thoughknown to us by his power, yet unknown to us as to hisessence. I do not now explain how these notions of God arethe sentiments of the wisest among the Grecians, and howthey were taught them upon the principles that he affordedthem. However, they testify, with great assurance, thatthese notions are just, and agreeable to the nature of God,and to his majesty: for Pythagoras, and Anaxagoras, andPlato, and the stoic philosophers that succeeded them, andalmost all the rest, are of the same sentiments, and had the


it be Ycry obsorvnblo withal, that he never uses such expressions in hisbooks Of the War, written originally for the Jews beyond Euphrates, andin their language, in all these cases. However, Josephus directly supposesthe Jewish settlement under Moses to be a divine settlement, and, indeed,no other than a real Theocracy.
1 These excellent accounts of the divine attributes, and that God is not tobe at all known in his essence, as also some other clear expressions aboutthe resurrection of the dead, and the state of departed souls, &c, in thislate work of Josephus's, look more like the exalted notions of the Esscns,or, rather, Ebionite Christians, than of a more Jew or Pharisee. The fol­lowing largo accounts also of the laws of Moses seem to me to show a regardto the higher interpretations and improvements of Moses's laws, derivedfrom Jesus Christ, than to the bare letter of them in the Old Testament,whence alone Josephus took them when ho wrote his Antiquities: nor, as Ithink, can some of theso laws, though generally excellent in their kind, beproperly now found either in the copies of the Jewish Tentateuch, or inPhilo, or in Josephus himself, beforo he became a Nazarene or EbioniteChristian, nor even all of them among the laws of Catholic Christianitythemselves. I desire, therefore, the learned reader to consider, whethersome of these improvements or interpretations might not be peculiar to theEssens among the Jews, or, rather, to tho Nazarenes or Ebionites amongthe Christians; though we have, indeed, but imperfect accounts of thoseNazarene or Ebionite Christians transmitted down to us at this day.







OCR Output








C. IV.] COME TO JERUSALEM. 103


this so suddenly; because certainly you would not take allyour armor on the behalf of robbers, and against a peopleof kin to you, without some very great cause for your so do­ing. But we have an item that the Romans are pretended,and that we are supposed to be going to betray this city tothem ; for some of your men have lately made a clamor aboutthose matters, and have said they are come to set their me­tropolis free. Now wo cannot but admire at these wretchesin their devisjng such a lie as this against us; for they knewthere was no other way to irritate against us men that werenaturally desirous of liberty, and on that account the bestdisposed to fight against foreign enemies, but by framing atale as if we were going to betray that most desirable thing,liberty. But you ought to consider what sort of people theyare that raise this calumny, and against what sort of peoplethat calumny is raised, and to gather the truth of things notby fictitious speeches, but out of the actions of both parties;for what occasion is there for us to sell ourselves to the Ro­mans 1 while it was in our power not to have revolted fromthem at the first, or, when we had once revolted, to have re­turned under their dominion again ; and this while the neigh­boring countries were not yet laid waste: whereas it is notan easy thing to be reconciled to the Romans, if we were de­sirous of it, now they have subdued Galilee, and are therebybecome proud and insolent; and to endeavor to please them,at the time when they are so near us, would bring such a re­proach upon us as were worse than death. As for myself,indeed, I should have preferred peace with them before death ;but now wc have once made war upon them, and fought withthem, I prefer death, with reputation, before living in capti­vity under them. But farther, whether do they pretend thatwe, who are the rulers of the people, have sent thus privatelyto the Romans, or hath it been done by the common suffragesof the people ? If it bo ourselves only that have done it, letthem name those friends of ours that have been sent, as ourservants, to manage this treachery. Hath any one beencaught as he went out on this errand, or seized upon as hocame back ? Are they in possession of our letters ? How







OCR Output








C. VIII.] VESPASIAN. 53


he were ready to smite him; but he called to one of them byname, and looking like a general to another, and taking athird by the hand, and making a fourth ashamed of himself,by praying him to forbear, and being in this condition dis­tracted with various passions (as he well might in the greatdistress he was then in,) he kept off every one of their swordsfrom killing him, and was forced to do like such wild beastsas arc encompassed about on every side, who always turnthemselves against those that last touched them. Nay, somoof their right hands were debilitated by the reverence theybare to their general in these his fatal calamities, and theirswords dropped out of their hands, and not a few of themthere were who, when they aimed to smite him with theirswords, they were not thoroughly cither willing or able todo it.
7. However, in this extreme distress, he was not destituteof his usual sagacity; but trusting himself to the providenceof God, he put his life into hazard [in the manner following.]"And now," said he, "since it is resolved among you thatyou will die, come on, let us commit our mutual deaths todetermination by lot. He whom the lot falls to first, let himbe killed by him that hath the second lot, and thus fortuneshall make its progress through us all; nor shall any of usperish by his own right hand; for it would be unfair, if, whenthe rest are gone, somebody should repent and save himself."This proposal appeared to them to be very just; and whenhe had prevailed with them to determine this matter by lots,he drew one of the lots for himself also. He who had thefirst lot laid his neck bare to him that had the next, as sup­posing that the general would die among them immediately;for they thought death, if Josephus might but die with them,sweeter than life: yet was he with another left to the last,whether we must say it happened so by chance, or whetherby the providence of God. And as he was very desirous,neither to be condemned by the lot, nor, if he had been leftto the last, to imbrue his right hand in the blood of his coun­trymen, he persuaded him to trust his fidelity to him, and tolive as well as himself.


5*







OCR Output








230 GREAT SLAUGHTERS [B. V.


3. In the mean time Josephus, as ho was going round thecity, had his head wounded by a stone that was thrown athim, upon which he fell down as giddy; upon which fall ofhis the Jews made a sally, and he had been hurried into thecity, if Caesar had not sent men to protect him immediately;and as these men were fighting, Josephus was taken up, thoughhe heard little of what was done. So the seditious supposedthey had now slain that man whom they were the most de­sirous of killing, and made thereupon a great noise in wayof rejoicing. This accident was told in the city; and themultitude that remained became very disconsolate at the news,as being persuaded that he was really dead, on whose accountalone they could venture to desert to the Romans. But whenJosephus's mother heard in prison that her son was dead, shesaid to those that watched about her, that " she had alwaysbeen of opinion, since the siege of Jotapata, [that he wouldbe slain,] and she should never enjoy him alive any more."She also made great lamentation privately to the maid ser­vants that were about her, and said,—" This was all the ad­vantage she had of bringing so extraordinary a person asthis son into the world, that she should not be able even tobury that son of hers, by whom she expected to have beenburied herself." However, this false report did not put hismother to pain, nor afford merriment to the robbers long,for Josephus soon recovered of his wound, and came out, andcried out aloud,—" That it would not be long ere they shouldbe punished for this wound they had given him." He alsomade a fresh exhortation to the people to come out upon thesecurity that would be given them. This sight of Josephusencouraged the people greatly, and brought a great conster­nation upon the seditious.
4. Hereupon some of the deserters, having no other way,leaped down from the wall immediately, while others of themwent out of the city with stones, as if they would fight them;but thereupon they fled away to the Romans. But hero aworse fate accompanied these than what they had found with­in the city; and they met with a quicker dispatch from thetoo great abundance they had among the Romans than they







OCR Output








112 CRUKLTY OF [B. IV.


burial, although the Jews used to take so much care of theburial of men, that they took down those that were condemnedand crucified, and buried them before the going down of thesun. I should not mistake if I said that the death of Ananuswas the beginning of the destruction of the city, and thatfrom this very day may be dated the overthrow of her walland the ruin of her affairs, whereon they saw their high-priest, and the procurer of their preservation, slain in themidst of their city. He was on other accounts also a vene­rable and a very just man ; and besides the grandeur of thatnobility, and dignity, and honor, of which he was possessed,he had been a lover of a kind of parity, even with regard tothe meanest of the people: he was a prodigious lover ofliberty, and an admirer of democracy in government, and didever prefer the public welfare before his own advantage, andpreferred peace above all things; for he was thoroughlysensible that the Romans were not to be conquered. Healso foresaw that of necessity a war would follow; and thatunless the Jews made up matters with them very dexterously,they would be destroyed: to say all in a word, if Ananushad survived, they had certainly compounded matters ; for hewas a shrewd man in speaking and persuading the people,and had already gotten the mastery of those that opposedhis designs, or were for the war. And the Jews had then putabundance of delays in the way of the Romans, if they hadhad such a general as he was. Jesus was also joined withhim, and although he were inferior to him upon the com­parison, he was superior to the rest; and I cannot but thinkthat it was because God had doomed this city to destructionas a polluted city, and resolved to purge his sanctuary byfire, that he cut off these their great defenders and well-wishers ; while those that a little before had worn the sacredgarments, and had presided over the public worship,1 and hadbeen esteemed venerable by those that dwelt on the wholehabitable earth when they came into our city, wero cast out


1 KoiriiiKh Spi)»«i-o, or worldly worship, as the author to the Hebrews calls thesanctuary, ayiov *o<T/iuoi-, a worldly sanctuary.







OCR Output








440 FLAVIUSJOSEPHUS [B. II.


preserve it. Now the law has appointed several purificationsat our sacrifices, whereby wo are cleansed after a funeral,after what sometimes happens to us in bed, and after ac­companying with our wives, and upon many other occasionswhich it would be too long now to set down. And this is ourdoctrine concerning God and his worship, and is the same thatthe law appoints for our practice.
25. But, then, what are our laws about marriage ? Thatlaw owns no other mixtures of sexes but that which naturehath appointed, of a man with his wife, and that this be usedonly for the procreation of children. But it abhors the mix­ture of a male with a male: and if any one do that, death isits punishment. It commands us also, when we marry, notto have regard to a portion, nor to take a woman by violence,nor to persuade her deceitfully and knavishly, but to demandher in marriage of him who hath power to dispose of her, andis fit to give her away by the nearness of his kindred; for,says the Scripture, A woman is inferior to her husband inall things.1 Let her, therefore, be obedient to him : not so,that he should abuse her, but that she may acknowledge herduty to her husband : for God hath given the authority to thehusband. A husband, therefore, is to lie only with his wifewhom he hath married ; but to have to do with another man'swife is a wicked thing, which, if any one ventures upon, deathis inevitably his punishment: no more can he avoid the samewho forces a virgin betrothed to another man, or enticesanother man's wife. The law, moreover, enjoins us to brin;;up all our offspring, and forbids women to cause abortion ofwhat is begotten, or to destroy it afterward : and if any womanappears to have so done, she will be a murderer of her child,by destroying a living creature, and diminishing human kind ;if any one, therefore, proceeds to such fornication or murder,he cannot be clean. Moreover, the law enjoins, that afterthe man and wife have lain together, in a regular way, theyshall bathe themselves; for there is defilement contractedthereby, both in soul and body, as if they had gone intoanother country; for, indeed, the soul by being united to the


1 This text is nowhere in our present copies of the Oil Testament.







OCR Output








570 INDEX.


^


Zachariah, son of Jehoiada, a pro­phet, is stoned, ii. 124.
Zachariah, the prophet, ii. 217, et seg.
Zachariah, son of Ahaz, is slain byMaaseiah, ii. 139.
Zacharias, son of Baruch, iv. 114;he is murdered in the temple, 115.
Zacharias, son of Phalck, iv. 100.
Zamaris, iii. 75.
Zealots, iv. 92, 96, 108, et seg. 329.
Zedekiah, or Sedecias, a false pro­phet, ii. 88.
Zedekiah, or Sedecias, king of Ju-dah, ii. 167; revolts, 168; callsfor Jeremiah's advice, 171 ; is car­ried captive to Babylon, 174; hiadeath, 176.
Zebina (Alexander,) conquered byAntiochus Grypus, and dies, ii.376.
Zeno, styled Cotylas, tyrant of Phi­ladelphia, ii. 370.
Zenodorus, ii. 550; iii. 392; hitdeath, ii. 553.
Zerah defeated by Asa, ii. 66.
Zeuxis, ii. 282.
Zimri, prince of the Simeonites, i.288; his speech against Moses,
- 289.
Zimri kills Elah, ii. 69; his death,! ib.
Zipporah, Moses's wife, i. 213.I Zizon, an Arabian, ii. 397.
Zoilus, a tyrant, ii. 387.
Zorobabel, ii. 207, et seg.
Zur, king of the Midianites, i. 291.


War (laws of) among the Jews, i.318; W. 442.
War (Jewish) whence begun, iii. 497,et leg.; 509, et seg.
Water of Bethlehem offered to Godby David, i. 528.
Witch, or necromantic woman of En-dor, i. 456, et seq..
Women's power, ii. 209; their cun­ning in preventing accusations, i.145; their dress forbidden men,318; when divorced, cannot marrywithout their former husband'sconsent, 309; Persian women orwives not to bo seen by strangers,ii. 233 ; not allowed to be witnesses,i. 303.
Xanthiccs, the Syro- Macedonian
name of the Jewish month Nisan,
i. 85.Xerxes succeeds Darius, ii. 221; his
letter to Ezra, ib.Xylophoria, a festival, when they
carried wood to the temple for tho
sacrifices, iii. 524.
Year, two beginnings of Jewish
years, i. 85.Great Year, a period of six hundred
common years, i. 90.
Zabdikl, ii. 348.Zabidus, an Idumean, iv. 424.Zachariah, king of Israel, ii. 133;his death, 136.
THE END.
. '







OCR Output








492 DISSERTATION IT.


and to remove them from one state or place in this his greatpalace of the universe to another as he pleases ; and thatall those rational creatures are bound in duty and interestto acquiesce under the divine disposal, and to resign them­selves up to the good providence of God in all such his dis­pensations towards them. I do not mean to intimate thatGod may, or ever does, act in these cases after a mere arbi­trary manner, or without sufficient reason, believing, accord­ing to the whole tenor of natural and revealed religion, thathe hateth nothing that he hath made;' that whatsoever hedoes, how melancholy soever it may appear at first sight tous, is really intended for the good of his creatures, and atthe upshot of things will fully appear so to be; but that stillhe is not obliged, nor does in general give his creatures anaccount of the particular reasons of such his dispensationstowards them immediately, but usually tries and exercisestheir faith and patience, their resignation and obedience, intheir present state of probation, and reserves those reasonsto tho last day, the day of the revelation of the righteousjudgment of God.2
2. That the entire histories of the past ages, from the daysof Adam till now, show, that Almighty God has ever exer­cised his power over mankind, and that without giving theman immediate account of the reasons of such his conduct; andthat withal the best and wisest men in all ages, heathens aswell as Jews and Christians, Marcus Antoninus as well as thepatriarch Abraham and St. Paul, have ever humbly submittedthemselves to this conduct of divine providence, and alwaysconfessed that they were obliged to the undeserved goodnessand mercy of God for every enjoyment, but could not demandany of them of his justice, no not so much as the continuanceof that life whereto those enjoyments do appertain. WhenGod was pleased to sweep the wicked race of men away by aflood, tho young innocent infants as well as tho guilty oldsinners; when he was pleased to shorten the lives of menafter the flood, and still downward till the days of David andSolomon: when he was pleased to destroy impure Sodom and
• Wisd xi 24. » Rom. ii. 5.







OCR Output













OCR Output








516 INDEX.


title given him by Demetrius Soter,
350.Buckle, or button, sent to Jonathan
by Alexander, king of Syria, ii.
346; and by Demetrius, 353.Burrhus, iii. 292.
Cj:sar (Julius) makes war in Egypt,ii. 430: his decrees in favor of theJews, 441 ; he is murdered, 454.
Coesarca built by Herod, ii, 548.
Cesarean games instituted, ii. 536;iii. 396; begun at the finishing ofCa>sarea Augusta, iii. 29.
Coescnnius Petus, iv. 323.
Ceesonia, killed by Lupus, iii. 233.
Cain murders Abel, i. 80 ; his punish­ment, 81 ; peoples the laud of Nod,ib.
Caius is made emperor, iii. 176; putsTiberius to death, 175; his beha­vior, 181; orders his statue to beerected in the temple, 182 ; grati­fies Agrippa, and forbids its erec­tion, 189; his letter to Petronius,ib.; rages against the Jews, 203;calls himself the brother of Jupi­ter. 204 ; a conspiracy against him,206; the conspirators increase,211 ; his death, 219; his threaten­ing letter to Petronius retardedtill he was dead, iii. 486 ; his cha­racter, 234.
Caleb, one that searched the land ofCanaan, i, 25S, 348.
Calf (golden) near Daphne or Dan,iv. 72.
Callimander, ii. 378.
Callinicus, iv. 324.
Callistus, iii. 213.
Carnbyses succeeds Cyrus, ii. 205;dies, 206.
Camp of the Jews, i. 254; of theAssyrians, iv. 225.
Canaan, land of, its description anddivision, i. 338.
Canaanites distress the tribe of Dan,i. 356; spared contrary to thecommand of God, 348; war de­nounced against them by Judahand Simeon, ib.
Candlestick in the tabernacle, i. 227.
Cantherns removed from the high-priesthood, iii. 264.
Capellus, i. 26.
Capito, iii. 503.


Captives of the Jews, how many kill­ed, &c, iv. 292; captives carriedin triumph, 311, et ieq.
Captivities of the ten and of the twotribes, ii. 182.
Cassander governs Macedonia afterAlexander's death, ii. 258.
Cassius Longinus, ii. 454, 561; iii.262; favors Antipater and Herod,ii. 455; repels the Parthian?, andthen retires to Judea, ii. 429: iii.347 ; defeated at Pbilippi, ii. 459.
Castles or Citadels, two at Jerusalem,ii. 317, 532, 540.
Castors cunning trick, iv. 199.
Castration forbidden by the law ofMoses, i. 316; young men castratedby Nebuchadnezzar's order, andamong others Daniel, ii. 182.
Catullus, iv. 349; his calumny againstthe Jews, 350; his death, ib.
Cecilius Bassus, murderer of SextusCicsar, ii. 454; iii. 354.
Cecinna, iv. 151 ; sent to Vespasian,152.
Celadus. iii. 132, 470.
Celer put to death, iii. 283.
Celtic legion, iii. 221.
Cendebeus, ii. 368; iii. 321.
Cerealis sent against the Samaritans,iv. 44; marches towards Hebron,140; is ordered to attack the tem­ple, 252; called to a council of war,266.
Cestius Gallus, i. 45; iii. 500; ga­thers an nrmy against the Jews,iii. 537 ; enters Jerusalem, 540; isbeaten, 542.
Chereas (Cassius) is stirred up againstCaius, iii. 206; draws others intothe conspiracy, 211; gives Caiusthe first blow, 219; is beheaded,245.
Chargiras, iv. 221.
Chalaman, i. 492.
Cham, or Ham, the son of Noah, i.90; his posterity, 94.
Chanaan, or Canaan, the son of Ham,i. 94; his posterity, 95.
Chares, iv. 74; dies, 80.
Chatnra, or Keturah, i. 114.
Chebron, king of Egypt, iv. 371.
Chebron, or Hebron, older than Mem­phis [Tanis,] iv. 138; taken by theIsraelites, i. 340.
Chclbes, iv. 380.







OCR Output








CXI.] AFFAIRS AT ROME. 151


vince, and made haste, in order to fight Vitellius ; whereuponVitellius sent away Cecinna, with a great army, having amighty confidence in him, because of his having beaten Otho.This Cecinna marched out of Rome in great haste, and foundAntonius about Cremona in Gall, which city is in the bordersof Italy; but when he saw there that the enemy were numer­ous and in good order, he durst not fight them, and as hethought a retreat dangerous, so he began to think of betray­ing his army to Antonius. Accordingly, he assembled thecenturions and tribunes that were under his command, andpersuaded them to go over to Antonius, and this by dimin­ishing the reputation of Vitellius, and by exaggerating thepower of Vespasian. He also told them that " with the onethere was no more than the bare name of dominion, but withthe other was the power of it. And that it were better forthem to prevent necessity and gain favor, and, while theywere likely to be overcome in battle, to avoid the danger be­forehand, and to go over to Antonius willingly: that Vespa­sian was able of himself to subdue what had not yet submittedwithout their assistance, while Vitellius could not preservewhat he had already with it."
3. Cecinna said this, and much more to the same purpose,and persuaded them to comply with him, and both he and hisarmy deserted; but still the very same night the soldiers re­pented of what they had done, and a fear seized on them, lest,perhaps, Vitellius, who sent them, should get the better: anddrawing their swords, they assaulted Cecinna in order to killhim ; and the thing had been done by them, if the tribuneshad not fallen upon their knees, and besought them not to doit: so the soldiers did not kill him, but put him in bonds asa traitor, and were about to send him to Vitellius. When[Antonius] Primus heard of this, he raised up his men imme­diately, and made them put on their armor, and led themagainst those that had revolted; hereupon they put them­selves in order of battle, and made a resistance for a while,but were soon beaten, and fled to Cremona: then did Primustake his horsemen, and cut off their entrance into the city,and encompassed and destroyed a great multitude of them







OCR Output








172 TITUS THREATENS HIS S0LDIEK8. [B. V


gave them as many blows again, and at last repelled thosethat had encompassed them about, while the Jews pursuedthem as they retired, and followed them, and threw darts atthem as far as the monuments of Queen Helen.
4. After this, these Jews, without keeping any decorum,grew insolent upon their good fortune, and jested upon theRomans for being deluded by the trick they had put uponthem, and making a noise with beating their shields, leapedfor gladness, and made joyful exclamations ; while these sol­diers were received with threatenings by their officers, andwith indignation by Caesar himself, [who spake to them thus:]—" These Jews, which are only conducted by their madness,do every thing with care and circumspection; they contrivestratagems and lay ambushes, and fortune gives success totheir stratagems, because they are obedient, and preservetheir good-will and fidelity to one another ; while the Romans,to whom fortune uses to be ever subservient, by reason oftheir good order, and ready submission to their commanders,have now had ill success by their contrary behavior; and bynot being able to restrain their hands from action, they havebeen caught; and that which is the most to their reproach,they have gone on without their commanders in the very pre­sence of Ca;sar. Truly (says Titus,) the laws of war cannotbut groan heavily, as will my father also himself, when heshall be informed of this wound that hath been given us,since he who is grown old in wars, did never make so great amistake. Our laws of war do also ever inflict capital punish­ment on those that in the least break into good order, whileat this time they have seen an entire army run into disorder.However, those that have been so insolent shall be made im­mediately sensible, that even they, who conquer among theRomans without orders for fighting, are to be under disgrace."When Titus had enlarged upon this matter before the com­manders, it appeared evident that he would execute the lawagainst all those that were concerned ; so these soldiers' mindssunk down in despair, as expecting to be put to death, andthat justly and quickly. However, the other legions camoround about Titus, and entreated his favor to these their fel­







OCR Output








DISSEKTATION III. 521


was condemned for those flagitious actions, of which both heand Felix had been guilty, and peace was restored to theprovince.1
HISTORY, book v. chap. x.
However, the Jews had patience till Gessius Florus wasmade procurator. Under him it was that the war began.Then Cestius Gallus the president of Syria, attempted toappease it, tried several battles, but generally with ill success.
Upon his death,2 whether it camo by fate, or that he wasweary of his life, is uncertain, Vespasian had the goodfortune, by his reputation and excellent officers, and avictorious army, in the space of two summers, to make him­self master of all the open country, and of all the cities,Jerusalem excepted.
[Flavius Vespasianus, whom Nero had chosen for hisgeneral, managed the Jewish war with three legions. Histor.b. i. chap, x.]
The next year, which was employed in a civil war at[home,] so far as the Jews were concerned, passed over inpeace. When Italy was pacified, the care of foreign partswas revived. The Jews were the only people that stood out,which increased the rage [of the Romans.] It was alsothought most proper that Titus should stay with the army,to prevent any accident or misfortune which the new govern­ment might be liable to.
[Vespasian had put an end to the Jewish war: the siegeof Jerusalem was the only enterprise remaining, which was awork hard and difficult, but rather from the nature of themountain, and the obstinacy of the Jewish superstition, thanbecause the besieged had strength enough to undergo thedistresses [of a siege.] We have already informed the reader


1 Here seems to be a great mistake about the Jewish i.flairs in Tacitus.See of the War, b. ii. ch. xii. sect. 8.
2 Josephus says nothing of the dcath of Cestius; so Tacitus seems to haveknown nothing in particular about it.


44*







OCR Output








II.] VESPASIAN.


CHAPTER II.
A GREAT SLAUGHTER OF THE JEWS ABOUT ASCALON. VESPA­SIAN COMES TO PTOLEMAIS.
§ 1. Now the Jews, after they had beaten Cestius, were somuch elevated with their unexpected success, that they couldnot govern their zeal, but like people blown up into a flameby their good fortune, carried the war to remoter places.Accordingly, they presently got together a great multitudeof all their most hardy soldiers, and marched away for Asca-lon. This is an ancient city that is distant from Jerusalemfive hundred and twenty furlongs, and was always an enemyto the Jews; on which account they determined to make theirfirst effort against it, and to make their approaches to it asnear as possible. This excursion was led on by three men,who were the chief of them all both for strength and sagacity.Niger, called the Peraite, Silas of Babylon, and, besidesthem, John the Essene. Now Ascalon was strongly walledabout, but had almost no assistance to be relied on [near them,]for the garrison consisted of one cohort of footmen, and onetroop of horsemen, whose captain was Antonius.
2. These Jews, therefore, out of their anger, marched fasterthan ordinary, and, as if they had come but a little way,approached very near the city, and were come even to it;but Antonius, who was not unapprized of the attack theywere going to make upon the city, drew out his horsemenbeforehand, and being neither daunted at the multitude norat the courage of the enemy, received their first attacks withgreat bravery ; and when they crowded to the very walls, hebeat them off. Now the Jews were unskilful in war, but wereto fight with those that were skilful therein ; they were foot­men to fight with horsemen; they were in disorder to fightthose that were united together; they were poorly armed tofight those that were completely so; they were to fight moreby their rage than by sober counsel, and were exposed tosoldiers that were exactly obedient, and did every thing they







OCR Output








0. VII.] THE ALANS. 325


would not Antiochus, upon this conclusion of the fight, con­tinue there by any means, but took his wife and his daugh­ters, and fled away with them to Cilicia, and by so doing,quite discouraged the minds of his own soldiers. Accordinglythey revolted, and went over to the Romans, out of the des­pair they were in of his keeping the kingdom ; and his casewas looked upon by all as quite desperate. It was thereforenecessary that Epiphanes and his soldiers should get clear oftheir enemies, before they became entirely destitute of anyconfederates: nor were there any more than ten horsemenwith him, who passed with him over Euphrates, whence theywent undisturbed to Vologeses, the king of Parthia, wherethey were not disregarded as fugitives, but had the samerespect paid them as if they had retained their ancientprosperity.
3. Now when Antiochus was come to Tarsus, in Cilicia,Petus ordered a centurion to go to him, and send him in bondsto Rome. However, Vespasian could not endure to have aking brought to him in that manner, but thought it fit ratherto have a regard to the ancient friendship that had been be­tween them, than to preserve an inexorable anger upon thepretence of this war. Accordingly, he gave orders that theyshould take off his bonds while he was still upon the road, andthat he should not come to Rome, but should now go and liveat Lacedemon: he also gave him large revenues, that hemight live not only in plenty, but like a king also. WhenEpiphanes, who before was in great fear for his father, wasinformed of this, their minds were freed from that great andalmost incurable concern they had been under.- He alsohoped that Caesar would be reconciled to them, upon the in­tercession of Vologeses ; for although he lived in plenty, hoknew not how to bear living out of the Roman empire. SoCaesar gave him leave after an obliging manner, and he cameto Rome; and as his father came quickly to him from Lace­demon, he had all sorts of respects paid him there, and therehe remained.
4. Now there was a nation of the Alans, which we haveIV. — 28







OCR Output








536 DISSERTATION III.


he solemnly pronounces, De Emend. Temp. Prolegom. p.17, — that " Josephus was the most diligent and the greatestlover of truth of all writers;" and is not afraid to affirm,that " it is more safe to believe him, not only as to the affairsof the Jews, but also as to those that are foreign to them,than all the Greek and Latin writers, and this because hisfidelity and compass of learning are everywhere conspicuous."


*







OCR Output








326 THE ALANS. [B. VII.


formerly mentioned1 somewhere as being Scythians, and in­habiting at the lake Mcotis. This nation about this time laida design of falling upon Media, and the parts beyond it, inorder to plunder them ; with which intention they treated withthe king of Hyrcania, for he was master of that passage whichKing Alexander [the Great] shut up with iron gates. Thisking gave them leave to come through them: so they camein great multitudes, and fell upon the Medes unexpectedly,and plundered their country, which they found full of people,and replenished with abundance of cattle; while nobody durstmake any resistance against them; for Pacorus, the king ofthe country, had fled away for fear into places where theycould not easily come at him, and had yielded up every thinghe had to them, and had only saved his wife and his concu­bines from them, and that with difficulty also, after they hadbeen made captives, by giving them an hundred talents fortheir ransom. These Alans, therefore, plundered the countrywithout opposition, and with great ease, and proceeded as faras Armenia, laying all waste before them. Now Tridates wasking of that country, who met them, and fought them, buthad like to have been taken alive in the battle ; for a certainman threw a net over him from a great distance, and had soondrawn him to him, unless he had immediately cut the cordwith his sword, and ran away, and prevented it. So the Alansbeing still more provoked by this fight, laid waste the coun­try, and drove a great multitude of the men, and a greatquantity of the other prey they had gotten out of both king­doms, along with them, and then retreated back to their owncountry.


1 This is now wanting.







OCR Output








B. II.] AGAINST APION. 433


God is tne inspector of their lives, will not permit themselvesin any sin. And this is the character of our legislator; hewas no impostor, no deceiver, as his revilers say, though un­justly, but such a one as they brag Minos' to have beenamong the Greeks, and other legislators after him ; for someof them suppose that they had their laws from Jupiter, whileMinos said, that the revelation of his laws was to be referredto Apollo and his oracle at Delphi, whether they reallythought they were so derived, or supposed, however, thatthey could persuade the people easily that so it was. Butwhich of these it was who made the best laws, and which hadthe greatest reason to believe that God was their author, itwill be easy upon comparing those laws themselves togetherto determine; for it is time that we come to that point. 2[ jNow there arc innumerable differences in the particular cus­toms and laws that are among all mankind, which a man maybriefly reduce under the following heads : — Some legislatorshave permitted their governments to be under monarchies,others put them under oligarchies, and others under a re­publican form; but our legislator had no regard to any ofthese forms: but he ordained our government to be, what,by a strained expression, may be termed a Theocracy? by
1 That is, Moses really was, what the heathen legislators pretended to be,under a divine direction; nor does it yet appear that these pretensions to asupernatural conduct, cither in these legislators or oracles, were mere de­lusions of men, without any demoniacal impressions, nor that Josephus tookthem so to be, as the ancicntest and contemporary authors did still believethem to be supernatural.
3 This whole very largo passage from [ ] to *»*, is corrected by Dr.Hudson, from Eusebius's citation of it, Proep. Evangel, viii. 8, which is herenot a little different from the present MSS. of Josephus.
s This expression itself, QcoKpariav dirf-Jeife to noMrsvpa, That Moses ordainedthe Jewish government to be a Theocracy, may be illustrated by that parallelexpression in the Antiquities, B. iii. ch. viii. sect. 9, that " Moses left it toGod to be present at his sacrifices when he pleased, and when he pleased tobe absent. Both ways of speaking sound harsh in the ears of Jews andChristians, as do several others which Josephus uses to the heathens; butstill they were not very improper in him, when he all along thought fit tonccommodatc himself, both in his Antiquities and in these his books againstApion, all written for the use of the Greeks and Romans, to their notionsand language, and this as far as ever truth would give him lcave. Though
IV. — 37







OCR Output








422 FLAVIUS JOSEPH CS [b. II.


reigncr, and fat him thus up every year, and then lead himto a certain wood, and kill him, and sacrifice with their ac­customed solemnities, and taste of his entrails, and take anoath upon this sacrificing a Greek, that they would ever beat enmity with the Greeks: and that then they threw the re­maining parts of the miserable wreteh into a certain pit."Apion adds farther, — " That the man said there were but afew days to come ere he was to be slain, and implored Antio-chus that, out of the reverence he bore to the Grecian gods,he would disappoint the snares the Jews laid for his blood,and would deliver him from the miseries with which he wasencompassed." Now this is such a most tragical fable, as isfull of nothing but cruelty and impudence; yet does it notexcuse Antiochus of his sacrilegious attempts, as those whowrite it in his vindication are willing to suppose : for he couldnot presume beforehand that he should meet with any suchthing in coming to the temple, but must have found it unex­pectedly. He was, therefore, still an impious person, thatwas given to unlawful pleasures, and had no regard to Godin his actions. But [as for Apion] he hath done whateverhis extravagant love of lying hath dictated to him, as it ismost easy to discover by a consideration of his writings; forthe difference of our laws is known not to regard the Greciansonly, but they are principally opposite to the Egyptians, andto some other nations also: for while it so falls out, that menof all countries come sometimes and sojourn among us, howcomes it about that we take an oath, and conspire only againstthe Grecians ? and that by the effusion of their blood also ?Or how is it possible that all the Jews should get together tothese sacrifices, and the entrails of one man should be suffi­cient for so many thousands to taste of them, as Apion pre­tends ? Or why did not the king carry this man, whosoeverhe was, and whatsoever was his name (which is not set downin Apion's book,) with great pomp back into his own country ?when he might thereby have been esteemed a religious personhimself, and a mighty lover of the Greeks, and might therebyhave procured himself great assistance from all men againstthat hatred the Jews bore to him. But I leave this matter;







OCR Output








THE JEWISH WAR.


BOOK III.
CONTAINING
THE INTERVAL OF ABOUT ONE YEAR.
FROM VESPASIAN'S COMING TO SUBDUE THE JEWS TO THETAKING OF GA3IALA.


CHAPTER I.
VESPASIAN IS SENT INTO SYRIA BY NERO, IN ORDER TO MAKEWAR WITH THE JEWS.
§ 1. When Nero was informed of the Romans' ill successin Judea, a concealed consternation and terror, as is usual insuch cases, fell upon him; although he openly looked verybig, and was very angry, and said, that what had happenedwas rather owing to the, negligence of the commander thanto any valor of the enemy : and as he thought it fit for him,who bare the burden of the whole empire, to despise suchmisfortunes, ho now pretended so to do, and to have a soulsuperior to all such sad accidents whatsoever. Yet did thedisturbance that was in his soul plainly appear by the solici­tude he was in [how to recover his affairs again.]
2. And as he was deliberating to whom he should committhe care of the east, now it was in so great a commotion,and who might be best able to punish the Jews for their re­bellion, and might prevent the same distemper from seizingupon the neighboring nations also, ho found no one but


(7)







OCR Output








INDEX. 565


thereof the beginning of the Jew­ish war, 521; offerings of foreign­ers usually received by the Jews,but now prohibited by the sedi­tious, ib.; what parts were clue tothe priests, i. 275; none but Jewsto overlook the sacrifices in thetemple, iii. 293; not to be tastedtill the oblation is over, ii. 290;not to be bought by hire of an har­lot, i. 300; meat-offerings joined tobloody sacrifices, 243, et seq.; notto be abused to luxury, iv. 439;ought to be without blemish, i. 252;what were burnt offerings, 243;animals not offered till the eighthday after their birth, 245; wineand oil reserved for sacrifices con­sumed by the seditious, iv. 233.
SaiUlnc stirs up sedition, iii. 138.
Sadducces deny fate, ii. 358; contraryto the Pharisees, 381; observe onlythe written law, ib.; opinions, iii.139, 480; the rich meu on theirside, ii. 381.
Sages or wise men among the Israel­ites, ii. 13.
Salatis, king of Egypt, iv. 369.
Salmanezer, or Shalmanezer, invadesSyria and Phoenicia, and carriesthe ten tribes away, ii. 145.
Salome charges her husband withadultery, ii. 505; sends a bill ofdivorce to her second husband,534 ; envies Herod's sons and theirwives, iii. 8, 17; clears herself, 18;Herod forces her to be married toAlexas, 73.
Salome, granddaughter of Herod theGreat, iii. 161 ; married to Philipthe tetrarch, and afterwards toAristobulus, ib.
Salt sown upon the ruins of a demo­lished town, i. 368.
Samacha, iii. 266.
Samaria built, ii. 69; whence itsname derived, ib.; besieged by theSyrians, and wonderfully relievedii 105,108; besieged again, suffersfamine, is taken, and levelled withthe ground, 378; iii. 323.
Samaritans, a colony from Cutha, ii.147, 182; pretend to be the pos­terity of Joseph, 257; sometimesdeny and sometimes profess them­selves Jews, 147, 256, 299; harass
IV. —48


the Jews under Onias, 283; pre­tend to be Sidonians, 299; theirtemple upon Mount Gerizzim, ib.;pollute the temple of Jerusalem,iii. 142; are enemies to the Jews,ii. 220; iii. 280; dispute with theJews in Egypt about their temple,ii. 341; call Antiochus a god, ii.299.
Sameas, ii. 438, 491. 555; his speechagainst Herod, 438; is honored byHerod, 439.
Sampsigeramus, king, iii. 256.
Samson's birth, i. 375; marries aPhilistine womau, ib.; kills a lion,ib.; proposes a riddle, 376; burnsthe corn, 377; is delivered up tothe Philistines, ib. ; slays themwith the jawbone of an ass; carriesthe gate of Gaza away, ib.; falls inlove with Delila, 379; is betrayedby her, and his eyes put out, 380;pulls a house down upon the Philis­tines, ib.
Samuel born, and consecrated to God,i. 385; God calls him, ib.; con­quers the Philistines, 395; his sonsprove bad judges, 397; is offendedat the people's demanding a king,ib.; tells the people the mannersof a king, 398, et seg.; threatensSaul with the loss of his kingdom,421; anoints David, 422; dies,448; is raised, and foretells Saul'sdeath, 456.
Sanhedrim, their power, ii. 438.
Sapinius, iii. 48.
Sapphora. See Zippora. '
Sarni, or Sarah. Abraham's wife, i.98; goes with him into Egypt, 99:the king falls in love with her,100; her death, 114.
Saramalla, ii. 466; iii. 363.
Sardians, their decree in favor of theJews, ii. 452.
Sarepta, its widow, ii. 71.
Sarmatians invade Mysia, iv. 308.
Saturninus (Sentius,) iii. 61, 65, 87,423.
Saul, i. 399; seeks his father's asses,ib.; Samuel anoints him, 401; ismade king, 403; promises to assistthe Gilcadites, 405; is inauguratedagain, 407; conquers the Philis­tines, 414; his wars and family,416; makes war on the Amale-







OCR Output








-566 INDEX.


kites, 417; spares Agag againstGod's command, 418; for whichSamuel foretels the loss of hiskingdom, 421 ; his cruel order formurdering Ahimelcch and thepriests, 442; he consults with anecromantic woman, 455; hisdeath, 464.
P uilus, iii. 297.
Scaurus, iii. 335, 341; returns intoSyria, ii. 413; raises the siego ofJerusalem, ib.; expedition intoArabia, 422.
Scopas defeated by Antiochns, ii.279.
Sea divided, i. 197.
Sebas, or Shcba, the son of Ilus, i.528.
Sects of the Jews, i. 18; ii. 357; iii.138, 472.
Sedition among the priests, iii. 292;sedition of Korah and his follow­ers, i. 263 ; of the Israelite?. 257 ;quelled by Joshua, 258; at Coesa-rca, iii. 291.
Sejanus put to death, iii. 168.
Seleucus Nicator possesses Syria, ii.258; his bounty towards the Jews,277.
Seleucus Soter, ii. 293.
Seleucus, son of Antiochus Grypus.ii. 393; his death, 394.
Solium, or Shallum, ii. 136.
Sem, or Shem, i. 90; his posterity. 96.
Semei, or Shimei, i. 507, 518, 543;is put to death, ii. 8.
Semelius, ii. 205.
Sempronius (Cuius,) ii. 375.
Sennacherib makes war on Hezckiah,ii. 148; his death, 152.
Senate of Rome's decree concerningthe Jews, ii. 325; they renew theirleague with the Jews, 433; anotherdecree of theirs concerning theJews, 448.
Sepphoiis burnt, iii. 123 ; taken byjosephus, 164.
Screboeus, ii. 214.
Seron, general, ii. 305.
Serpent deprived both of speech andfeet, i. 79.
Servilius (Publius,) his letter to theMilesians in favor of the Jews, ii.449.
Seth, son of Adam, i. 82; his poste­rity's pillars, ib.


Sethos, king of Egypt, iv. 395.
Sethosis, or Sesostris, iv. 372.
Seventy-two interpreters sent byEleazar with the books of the law,ii. 267; arrive at Alexandria, 272;bring with them the law, ib.: theywash in the sea before they begin,275; they finish in seventy-twodays, ib.
Sextus Caesar, ii. 438; iii. 351 ; isslain by Cecilius Bnssus, 354.
Shallum, ii. 136.
Shalmanezer. See Salmanassar.
Shamegar succeeds Ehud, i. 360.
Sheba, i. 521, 528.
Shechemites meet Alexander thoGreat, ii. 256.
Shekel, a coin, i. 236.
Shom, i. 90; his posterity, 96.
Shield, a token of a league betweentho Jews and the Romans, ii. 433.
Shimoi, i. 507, 518, 543; put to death,ii. 8.
Ships sent to Pontus and Thrace un­der Ahaziah, ii. 95.
Shishack, or Sesac, king of Egvpt, i.487 ; ii. 48, 57.
Sibns, or Ziba, i. 490, 507; Saul'sfrced-man, 518.
Sibbochai, the Hittite, i. 525.
Sicarii, or banditti, flee to Alexandria,iv. 345; cannot be forced to ownCcesar, 346.
Sichon, or Sihon, conquered, i. 279.
Sidon, i. 95.
Signs appearing before the destruc­tion of Jerusalem iv. 273.
Silas, governor, i. 29, 52.
Silas, tyrant of Lysias, ii. 415.
Silas, an attendant on king Agrippasenior, iii. 172, 254; becomes trou­blesome to the king, ib. ; is killed,259.
Silo, the Roman captain, ii. 475.
Silo, or Shiloh, a town where tho ta­bernacle was fixed, i. 337.
Silva, governor of Judea, iv. 327;besieges Masada, 329.
Silver of little value in the days ofSolomon, ii. 42.
Simeon, iv. 92.
Simon, son of Bocthus, made bigh-priest, ii. 546; his daughter mar­ried to Herod, ib.; he is deprived,iii. 85.
Simon the Just, ii. 265, 283.







OCR Output








C. VI.] THE ROHAN ENSIGNS. 277


Jews took this prediction to belong to themselves in particular,and many of the wise men were thereby deceived in their de­termination. Now this oracle certainly denoted the govern­ment of Vespasian, who was appointed emperor in Judea.However, it is not possible for men to avoid fate, althoughthey seo it beforehand. But these men interpreted someof these signals according to their own pleasure, and someof them they utterly despised^ until their madness was de­monstrated both by the taking of their city and their owndestruction.
CHAPTER VI.
HOW THE ROMANS CARRIED THEIR ENSIGNS TO THE TEMPLE,AND MADE JOYFUL ACCLAMATIONS TO TITUS. THE SPEECHTHAT TITUS' MADE TO THE JEWS WHEN THEY MADE SUPPLI­CATION FOR MERCY. WHAT REPLY THEY MADE THERETO,AND HOW THAT REPLY MOVED TITUS'S INDIGNATION AGAINSTTHEM.
§ 1. And now the Romans, upon the flight of the seditiousinto the city, and upon the burning of the holy house itself,and of all the buildings round about it, brought their ensignsto the temple,' and set them over against its eastern gate;and there did they offer sacrifices to them, and there did theymake Titus Imperator2 with the greatest acclamations of joy.And now all the soldiers had such vast quantities of the spoilswhich they had gotten by plunder, that in Syria a poundweight of gold was sold for half its former value. But as forthose priests that kept themselves still upon the wall of the holy
'Take Havercamp's note here. — "This," says he, "is a remarkableplace:" and Tcrtullian truly says in his Apologetic, ch. xvi. p. 162, that " thoentire religion of tho Roman camp almost consisted in worshipping the en­signs, in swearing by the ensigns, and in preferring the ensigns before allthe [other] gods." See what Havercamp says upon that place of Tertullian.
5 This declaring Titus Imperator by the soldiers, upon such signal success,and the slaughter of such a vast number of enemies, was according to theusual practice of the Romans in like cases, as Reland assures ua on thisplace.
IV. —24







OCR Output








162 TITUS MARCHES [b. V.


CHAPTER II.
HOW TITUS MARCHED TO JERUSALEM, AND HOW HE WAS INDANGER AS HE WAS TAKING A VIEW OF THE CITY. OF THEPLACE ALSO WHERE HE PITCHED HIS CAMP.
§ 1. Now, as Titus was upon his march into the enemies'country, the auxiliaries that were sent by the kings marchedfirst, having all the other auxiliaries with them : after whomfollowed those that were to prepare the roads and measureout the camp; then came the commander's baggage, andafter that the other soldiers, who were completely armed, tosupport them; then came Titus himself, having with himanother select body, and then came the pikemen ; after whomcame the horse belonging to that legion. All these camebefore the engines; and after these engines came the tribunesand the leaders of the cohorts, with their select bodies; afterthese came the ensigns, with the eagle; and before thoseensigns came the trumpeters belonging to them; next to thesecame the main body of the army in their ranks, every rankbeing six deep: the servants belonging to every legion camoafter these, and before these last their baggage; the merce­naries came last, and those that guarded them brought upthe rear. Now Titus, according to the Roman usage, wentin the front of the army after a decent manner, and marchedthrough Samaria to Gophna, a city that had been formerlytaken by his father, and was then garrisoned by Romansoldiers; and when he had lodged there one night, he marchedon in the morning; and when he had gone so far as a day'smarch, he pitched his camp at that valley which the Jews,in their own tongue, call the Valley of Thorns, near a certainvillage called Gabaothsaul, which signifies the Hill of Saul,being distant from Jerusalem about thirty furlongs. Thereit was that he chose out six hundred select horsemen, andwent to take a view of the city, to observe what strength itwas of, and how courageous the Jews were; whether whenthey saw him, and before they came to a direct battle, they







OCR Output








432 FLAVIUS JOSEPH US [B. II.


of many desperate distresses, and brought them home insafety. And certainly it was here necessary to travel overa country without .water, and full of sand, to overcome theirenemies, and, during these battles, to preserve their children,and their wives, and their prey; on all which occasions hebecame an excellent general of an army, and a most prudentcounsellor, and one that took the truest care of them all: hoalso so brought it about that the whole multitude dependedupon him. And while he had them always obedient to whathe enjoined, he made no manner of use of his authority forhis own private advantage, which is the usual time whengovernors gain great powers to themselves, and pave the wayfor tyranny, and accustom the multitude to live very dis­solutely : whereas, when our legislator was in so great au­thority, he, on the contrary, thought he ought to have regardto piety, and to show his great good-will to the people; andby this means he thought he might show the great degree ofvirtue that was in him, and might procure the most lastingsecurity to those who had made him their governor. Whenhe had, therefore, come to such a good resolution, and hadperformed such wonderful exploits, we had just reason tolook upon ourselves as having him for a divine governor andcounsellor. And when he had first persuaded himself thathis actions and designs were agreeable to God's will, hethought it his duty to imprint above all things that notionupon the multitude; for those who have once believed that


1 This language, that Moses r.imai lamr, persuaded himself that what hedid was according to God's will, can mean no more by Josephus's own con­stant notions elsewhere, than that he was firmly persuaded, that he had fullysatisfied himself that so it was, vfc., by the many revelations he had receivedfrom God, and the numerous miracles God had enabled him to work, as hoboth in these very two books against Apion and in his Antiquities mostclearly and freouently assures us. This is farther evident from several pas­sages lower, where he affirms that Moses was no impostor nor deceiver, andwhero ho assures us that Moses's constitution of government was no otherthan a Theocracy ; and where he says, they are to hope for deliverance outof their distresses by prayer to God, and that withal it was owing in partto this prophetic spirit of Moses, that the Jews expected a resurrection fromthe dead. See almost as strange a use of the like words xcia9uv roi- Gs6r, topersuade God. Antiq. B. vi. ch. v. sect. 0.







OCR Output








C. IV.] IS BURNED. 2G9


some of them were distracted with fighting, and others withpassion. But as for the legions that came running thither,neither any persuasions nor any threatenings could restraintheir violence; but each one's own passion was his commanderat this time; and as they were crowding into the temple to­gether, many of them were trampled on by one another,while a great number fell among the ruins of the cloisters,which were still hot and smoking, and were destroyed in thesame miserable way with those whom they had conquered:and when they were come near the holy house, they made as;f they did not so much as hear Caesar's orders to the con­trary ; but they encouraged those that were before them toset it on fire. As for the seditious, they were in too greatdistress already to afford their assistance [towards quenchingthe fire:] they were every where slain, and every where beat­en; and as for a great part of the people, they were weak,and without arms, and had their throats cut wherever theywere caught. Now round about the altar lay dead bodiesheaped one upon another, as at the stepsl going up to it rana great quantity of their blood, whither also the dead bodiesthat were slain above [on the altar] fell down.
7. And now, since Caesar was no way able to restrain theenthusiastic fury of the soldiers, and the fire proceeded onmore and more, he went into the holy place of the temple,with his commanders, and saw it, with what was in it, whichhe found to be far superior to what the relations of foreignerscontained, and not inferior to what wc ourselves boasted ofand believed about it. But as the flame had not as yetreached to its inward parts, but was still consuming the roomsthat were about the holy house, and Titus supposing, whatthe fact was, that the house itself might yet be saved, he camoup in haste, and endeavored to persuade the soldiers to
These steps to the altar of burnt-offering, seem here cither an improperand inaccurate expression of Josephus, since it was unlawful to make laddersteps (see the description of the temples, chap. xiii. and note ou Antiq. 15.iv. ch. viii. sect. 5,) or else those steps or stairs we now use were inventedbefore the days of Herod the Great, and had been here built by him; thoughthe later Jews always deny it, and say, that even Herod's altar was ascendedto by an acclivity only.


23 *







OCR Output








284 TAKING* OF THE LOWER CITY. [B. VI.


off all their effects, and were retired into the upper city; forthey did not yet at all repent of the mischiefs they had done,but were insolent as if tbey had done well; for as they sawthe city on fire, they appeared cheerful, and put on joyfulcountenances, in expectation, as they said, of death to endtheir miseries. Accordingly, as the people were now slain,the holy house was burnt down, and the city was on fire,there was nothing farther left for the enemy to do. Yet didnot Joscphus grow weary, even in this utmost extremity, tobeg of them to spare what was left of the city: he spakelargely to them about their barbarity and impiety, and gavethem his advice in order to their escape, though he gainednothing thereby more than to be laughed at by them; andas they could not think of surrendering themselves up, be­cause of the oath they had taken, nor were strong enough tofight with the Romans any longer upon the square, as beingsurrounded on all sides, and a kind of prisoners already, yetwere they so accustomed to kill people, that they could notrestrain their right hands from acting accordingly. So theydispersed themselves before the city, and laid themselves inambush among its ruins, to catch those that attempted todesert to the Romans; accordingly many such deserters werecaught by them, and were all slain; for these were too weak,by reason of their want of food, to fly away from them ; sotheir dead bodies were thrown to the dogs. Now, everyother sort of death was thought more tolerable than thefamine, insomuch that though the Jews despaired now ofmercy, yet would they fly to the Romans, and would them­selves, even of their own accord, fall among the murderousrebels also. Nor was there any place in the city that had nodead bodies in it, but was entirely covered with those thatwere killed either by the famine or the rebellion ; and all wasfull of the dead bodies of such as hail perished either by thatsedition or by that famine.
3. So now the last hope which supported the tyrants andthat crew of robbers which were with them, was in the cavesand caverns under ground, whither if they could once fly,they did not expect to be searched for, but endeavored, that







OCR Output








THE JEWISH WAR?


OR,


THE HISTORY


OF THE


DESTRUCTION OF JERUSALEM.
(CONTINUED.)
(5)


1*







OCR Output








286 SIEGE OF THE UPPER CITY. [B. VI.


himself against John, when they were at war with oneanother.
2. It was at this time that the commanders of the Idumeansgot together privately, and took counsel about surrenderingup themselves to the Romans. Accordingly, they sent fivemen to Titus, and entreated him to give them his right handfor their security. So Titus thinking that the tyrants wouldyield, if the Idumeans, upon whom a great part of the wardepended, were once withdrawn from them, after some re-luctancy and delay complied with them, and gave them secu­rity for their lives, and sent the five men back. But as theseIdumeans were preparing to march out, Simon perceived it,and immediately slew the five men that had gone to Titus,and took their commanders, and put them in prison, of whomthe most eminent was Jacob, the son of Sosas; but as for themultitude of the Idumeans, who did not at all know what todo, now their commanders were taken from them, he hadthem watched, and secured the walls by a more numerousgarrison. Yet could not that garrison resist those that weredeserting; for although a great number of them were slain,yet were the deserters many more in number. These wereall received by the Romans, because Titus himself grew negli­gent as to his former orders for killing them, and becausethe very soldiers grew weary of killing them, and becausethey hoped to get some money by sparing them; for theyleft only the populace, and sold1 the rest of the multitude,with their wives and children, and every one of them for avery low price, and that because such as were sold were verymany and the buyers very few: and although Titus had madeproclamation beforehand, that no deserter should come alone


1 Tbis innumerable multitude of Jews that were sold by tho Romans, werean eminent completion of God's ancient threatening by Moses, that, if theyapostatized from the obedience to his laws, they should bo sold unto theirenemiss for bondmen and bondwomen, Deut. xxviii. 68. See more especiallythe note on ch ix. sect. 2. But one thing here is peculiarly remarkable, thatMoses adds, Though they should be sold for slaves, yet no maa should buythem f i. e. cither they should have none to redeem them from this sale intoslavery; or, rather, that the slaves to be sold should be more than were thepurchasers for them, and so they should be sold for little or nothing; whichis what Josephus here affirms to have been the case at this time.







OCR Output








438 flaviusjosephus [b. n.


but he intrusted the principal management of divine worshipto those that exceeded others in an ability to persuade men,and in prudence of conduct. These men had the main careof the law, and of the other parts of the people's conductcommitted to them; for they were the priests who wereordained to be inspectors of all, and the judges in doubtfulcases, and the punishers of those that were condemned tosuffer punishment.
23. What form of government then can be more holy thanthis ? What more worthy kind of worship can be paid toGod than we pay, where the entire body of the people areprepared for religion; where an extraordinary degree of careis required in the priests, and where the whole polity is soordered as if it were a certain religious solemnity? For,what things foreigners, when they solemnize such festivals,are not able to observe for a few days' time, and call themmysterious and sacred ceremonies, we observe with greatpleasure and an unshaken resolution during our whole lives.What are the things then that we are commanded or for­bidden? They are simple, and easily known. The firstcommand is concerning God, and afiirms that God containsall things, and is a being every way perfect and happy, self-sufficient, and supplying all other beings ; the beginning, themiddle, and the end of all things. He is manifest in hisworks and benefits, and more conspicuous than any otherbeing whatsoever; but as to his form and magnitude he ismost obscure. All materials, let them be ever so costly, areunworthy to compose an image for him; and all arts areunartful to express the notion we ought to have of him. Wecan neither see nor think of any thing like him, nor is itagreeable to piety to form a resemblance of him. We seehis works, the light, the heaven, the earth, the sun, and themoon, the waters, the generations of animals, the productionsof fruits. These things hath God made, not with hands, notwith labor, not as wanting the assistance of any to co-operatewith him ; but as his will resolved they should be made, andbe good also, they were made, and became good immediately.All men ought to follow this being, and to worship him in the







OCR Output
















OCR Output








DISSERTATION I. 471


who appeared to his disciples after the third day from hisdeath, alive again, according to the writings of the prophets,who foretold these and innumerable other miraculous eventsconcerning him; from whom began the congregation ofChristians, and hath penetrated among all sorts of men : nordoes there remain any nation in the Roman world, whichcontinues strangers to his religion. If the Jews do not be­lieve us, let them at least believe their own writers. Josephus,whom they esteem a very great man, hath said this, and yethath he spoken truth after such a manner, and so far was hismind wandered from the right way, that even he was not abeliever, as to what he himself said: but thus he spake inorder to deliver historical truth, because he thought it notlawful for him to deceive, while yet he was no believer, be­cause of the hardness of his heart, and his perfidious intention.However, it was no prejudice to the truth that he was not abeliever; but this adds more weight to his testimony, thatwhile he was an unbeliever, and unwilling this should be true,he has not denied it to be so.
About A. D. 400. Hieronym. de Vir. lllustr. in Jose-pho. — Josephus, in the eighteenth book of Antiquities, mostexpressly acknowledges, that Christ was slain by the Phari­sees on account of the greatness of his miracles; and thatJohn the Baptist was truly a prophet; and that Jerusalemwas demolished on account of the slaughter of James theapostle. Now he wrote concerning our Lord after this man­ner : — At the same time there was Jesus, a wise man, if yetit be lawful to call him a man, for he was a doer of wonderfulworks, a teacher of those who willingly receive the truth. Hohad many followers both of the Jews and of the Gentiles ; hewas believed to be Christ. And when, by the envy of ourprincipal men, Pilate had condemned him to the cross, thisnotwithstanding, those who had loved him at first persevered,for he appeared to them alive on the third day, as the oraclesof the prophets had foretold many of these, and other won­derful things concerning him: and the sect of Christians, souamed from him, are not extinct at this day.
About A. D. 410. Isodorus Pelusiota, the Scholar of







OCR Output








0. IV.] THE TEMPLE GATES. 2G7


house, and fight us thence, yet ought we not to revenge our­selves on things that are inanimate instead of the men them­selves ; and that he was not in any case for burning down sovast a work as that was, because this would be a mischief tothe Romans themselves, as it would be an ornament to theirgovernment while it continued." So Fronto, and Alexander,and Cerealis, grew bold upon that declaration, and agreed tothe opinion of Titus. Then was this assembly dissolved,when Titus had given order to the commanders that the restof their forces should lie still, but that they should make useof such as were most courageous in this attack. So he com­manded that the chosen men that were taken out of thecohorts should make their way through the ruins, and quenchthe fire.
4. Now, it is true, that on this day the Jews were so weary,and under such consternation, that they refrained from anyattacks. But on the next day they gathered their whole forcetogether, and ran upon those that guarded the outward courtof the temple very boldly through the east gate, and thisabout the second hour of the day. These guards receivedthat their attack with great bravery, and by covering them­selves with their shields before, as if it were with a wall, theydrew their squadrons close together; yet was it evident thatthey could not abide there very long, but would be ovcrbornoby the multitude of those that sallied out upon them, and bythe heat of their passion. However, Caesar seeing, from thetower of Antonia, that this squadron was likely to give way,he sent some chosen horsemen to support them. Hereuponthe Jews found themselves not able to sustain their onset,and, upon the slaughter of those in the forefront, many ofthe rest were put to flight. But as the Romans were goingoff, the Jews turned upon them, and fought them; and asthose Romans came back upon them, they retreated again,until about the fifth hour of the day they were ovcrborne, andshut themselves up in the inner [court of the] temple.
5. So Titus retired into the tower of Antonia, and resolvedto storm the temple the next day, early in the morning, withhis whole army, and to encamp round about the holy house.







OCR Output








DISSERTATION III. 519


Chap. IX.] The first of the Romans that conquered theJews was Cneius Pompeius, who entered the temple by rightof victory. Thence the report was every where divulged,that therein was no image of a god, but an empty place, andmysteries, most secret places that have nothing in them. Thewalls of Jerusalem were then destroyed, but the temple con­tinued still. Soon afterward arose a civil war among us;and when therein these provinces were reduced under MarcusAntonius, Pacorus, king of the Parthians, got possession ofJudea, but was himself slain by Paulus Ventidius, and theParthians were driven beyond Euphrates; and for the Jews,Caius Socius subdued them. Antonius gave the kingdom toHerod; and when Augustus conquered Antonius, ho stillaugmented it.
After Herod's death, one Simon, without waiting for thedisposition of Cacsar, took upon him the title of King, who wasbrought to punishment by [or under] Quintilius Varus, whenhe was president of Syria. Afterward the nation was re­duced, and the children of Herod governed it in three par­titions.
Under Tiberius the Jews had rest. After some time they jwere enjoined to place Caius Caesar's statue in the temple ;but rather than permit that, they took up arms;' which se­dition was put an end to by the death of Caesar.
Claudius, after the kings were either dead or reduced tosmaller dominions, gave the province of Judea to Romanknights, or to freedmen, to be governed by them. Amongwhom was Antonius Felix, one that exercised all kind ofbarbarity and extravagance, as if he had royal authority, butwith the disposition of a slave. He had married Drusilla,the granddaughter of Antonius, so that Felix was the grand­daughter's husband, and Claudius the grandson of the sameAntonius.


1 They came to Petronius, the president of Syria, in vast numbers, butwithout arms, and as humble supplicants only. See Tacitus presently, where heafterwards sets this matter almost right, according to Josephus, and by wayof correction, for that account is in his annals, which were written after thiswhich is in his histories.







OCR Output








404 FLAVICSJOSEPHUS [B. I.


perished; whether they fell in war or went over to Ramesses.And what is the strangest of all, it is not possible to learnout of him who they were whom he calls Jews, or to whichof these two parties he applies that denomination: whetherto the hundred and fifty thousand leprous people, or to thethree hundred and eighty thousand that were about Pelusium.But, perhaps, it will be looked upon as a silly thing in me tomake any larger confutation of such writers as sufficientlyconfute themselves; for had they been only confuted by othermen, it had been more tolerable.
34. I shall now add to these accounts about Manetho andCheremon, somewhat about Lysimachus, who had taken thesame topic of falsehood with those forementioned, but hathgone far beyond them in the incredible nature of his forgeries,which plainly demonstrates that he contrived them out of hisvirulent hatred of our nation. His words are these :—" Thepeople of the Jews being leprous, and scabby, and subject tocertain other kinds of distempers, in the days of Bocchoris,king of Egypt, they fled to the temples, and got their foodthere by begging; and as the numbers were very great thatwere fallen under these diseases, there arose a scarcity inEgypt. Hereupon Bocchoris, the king of Egypt, sent someto consult the oracle of [Jupiter] Hammon about this scarcity.The god's answer was this, that he must purge his templesof impure and impious men, by expelling them out of thosetemples into desert places; but as to the scabby and leprouspeople ho must drown them, and purge his temples, the sunhaving an indignation at these men's being suffered to live;and by this means the land will bring forth its fruits. UponBocchoris's having received these oracles, he called for theirpriests and .the attendants upon their altars, and orderedthem to make a collection of the impure people, and to deliverthem to the soldiers, to carry them away into the desert, butto take the leprous people and wrap them in sheets of lead,and let them down into the sea. Hereupon the scabby andleprous people were drowned, and the rest were gotten to­gether and sent into desert places, in order to be exposed todestruction. In this case they assembled themselves together,







OCR Output








DISSERTATION I. 479


derful works, and a teacher of men, of such especially as wil­lingly hear the truth. On this account he drew over to himmany, both of the Jews and Gentiles: he was Christ. Butwhen Pilate, instigated by the principal men of our nation,had decreed that he should be crucified, yet did not those thatloved him from the beginning forsake him: and besides, heappeared to them the third day after his death, alive, as thedivinely-inspired prophets had foretold, that these, and innu­merable other miracles, should come to pass about him. Andthe famous name of Christians, taken from him, as well astheir sect, do still continue in being.
The same Josephus also affirms that John the Baptist, atrue prophet, and on that account one that was had in esteem byall men, was slain by Herod, the son of Herod the Great, alittle before the death of Christ, in the castle Macherus; notbecause he was afraid for himself and his kingdom, as thesame author says, but because he had incestuously marriedHerodias, the sister of Agrippa, and the wife of that excellentperson his brother Philip.
About A.J). 1480. Trithemius Abbas de Scriptor. Eccles.— Josephus the Jew, although he continued to be a Jew, didfrequently commend the Christians; and, in the eighteenthbook of Antiquities, wrote down an eminent testimony con­cerning our Lord Jesus Christ.


OBSERVATIONS FROM THE FOREGOING EVIDENCEAND CITATIONS.
I. The style of all these original testimonies belonging toJosephus is exactly the style of the same Josephus, and espe­cially the style about those parts of his Antiquities wherein wefind these testimonies. This is denied by nobody as to the other,concerning John the Baptist, and James the Just, and is nowbecome equally undeniable as to that concerning Christ.
II. These testimonies, therefore, being confessedly and un­deniably written by Josephus himself, it is next to impossiblethat he should wholly omit some testimony concerning Jesus







OCR Output








444 FLAVIUSJOSEPIIUS [b. II.


rent notions of God, and had continued a long time in thefirm observance of such laws as ours, I cannot but supposethat all men would admire them, on a reflection upon the fre­quent changes they had therein been themselves subject to ;and this while those that have attempted to write somewhat ofthe same kind for politic government and for laws arc accusedas composing monstrous things, and are said to have under­taken an impossible task upon them. And here I will saynothing of those other philosophers who have undertaken anything of this nature in their writings. But even Plato him­self, who is so admired by the Greeks on account of thatgravity in his manners, and force in his words, and thatability he had to persuade men beyond all other philosophers,is little better than laughed at, and exposed to ridicule onthat account, by those that pretend to sagacity in politicalaffairs ; although he that shall diligently peruse his writingswill find his precepts to be somewhat gentle, and pretty nearto the customs of the generality of mankind. Nay, Platohimself confesseth, that it is not safe to publish the true notionconcerning God among the ignorant multitude. Yet do somemen look upon Plato's discourses as no better than certainidle words set off with great artifice. However, they admireLycurgus as the principal lawgiver: and all men celebrateSparta for having continued in the firm observance of his lawsfor a very long time. So far, then, we have gained that it isto be confessed a mark of virtue to submit to laws.1 Butthen, let such as admire this in the Lacedemonians comparethat duration of theirs with more than two thousand yearswhich our political government hath continued; and let themfarther consider, that though the Lacedemonians did seem toobserve their laws exactly, while they enjoyed their liberty,yet that when they underwent a change in their fortune theyforgot almost all those laws; while we having been under ten


1 It may not be amiss to set down hero a. very remarkable testimony oftho great philosopher Cicero as to the preference of laws to philosophy. " I-will," says he, " bol dly declare my opinion, though the whole world beoffended at it. I prefer this little book of the Twelve Tables alone to all thevolumes of the philosophers. I find it to be not only of more weight, butalso much more useful."—lis Oratore.







OCR Output








C. IX.] SIMON OF GEUASA. 141


retire to Jerusalem; he followed them himself also to thecity, and encompassed the wall all around again; and whenhe lighted upon any laborers that were coming thither out ofthe country, he slew them. Now this Simon, who was with­out the wall, was a greater terror to the people than the Ro­mans themselves, as were the zealots who were within it moreheavy upon them than both of the other; and during thistime did the mischievous contrivances and courage [of John]corrupt the body of the Galileans; for these Galileans hadadvanced this John, and made him very potent, who madethem a suitable requital from the authority he had obtainedby their means; for he permitted them to do all things thatany of them desired to do, while their inclination to plunderwas insatiable, as was their zeal in searching the houses ofthe rich; and for the murdering of the men and abusing ofthe women it was sport to them. They also devoured whatspoils they had taken, together with their blood, and indulgedthemselves in feminine wantonness, without any disturbancetill they were satiated therewith; while they decked theirhair, and put on women's garments, and were besmeared overwith ointments; and, that they might appear very comely,they had paints under their eyes, and imitated not only theornaments, but also the lusts of women, and were guilty ofsuch intolerable uncleanness, that they invented unlawfulpleasures of that sort; and thus did they roll themselves upand down the city, as in a brothel-housc, and defiled it en­tirely with their impure actions; nay, while their faces lookedlike the faces of women, they killed with their right hands;and when their gait was effeminate, they presently attackedmen and became warriors, and drew their swords from undertheir finely dyed cloaks, and ran every body through whomthey alighted upon. However, Simon waited for such as ranaway from John, and was the more bloody of the two; andho who had escaped the tyrant within the walls was destroyedby the other that lay before the gates; so that all attemptsof flying and deserting to the Romans were cut off as to thosethat had a mind so to do.
11. Yet did the army that was under John raise a sedition







OCR Output








C. V.J TRIUMPH OF THE ROMAN EMPERORS. 315


temple of Jerusalem, they made the greatest figure of themall; that is, the golden table of the weight of many talents;the candlestick also, that was made of gold, though its con­struction were now changed from that which we made use of:for its middle shaft was fixed upon a basis, and the smallbranches were produced out of it to a great length, havingthe likeness of a trident in their position, and had every onea socket made of brass for a lamp at the tops of them. Theselamps were in number seven, and represented the dignity ofthe number seven among the Jews; and the last of all thespoils were carried the laws of the Jews. After these spoilspassed by a great many men carrying the images of victory,whose structure was entirely either of ivory or of gold. Afterwhich Vespasian marched in the first place, and Titus followedhim ; Domitian also rode along with them, and made a glori­ous appearance, and rode on a horse that was worthy of ad­miration.
6. Now the last part of this pompous show was at thetemple of Jupiter Capitolinus, whither when they were comethey stood still; for it was the Romans' ancient custom tostay till somebody brought the news that the general of theenemy was slain. This general was Simon, the son of Gioras,who had then been led in this triumph among the captives;a rope had also been put upon his head, and he had beendrawn into a proper place in the forum, and had withal beentormented by those that drew him along; and the law of theRomans required that malefactors condemned to die shouldbe slain there. Accordingly, when it was related that therewas an end of him, and all the people had set up a shout forjoy, they then began to offer those sacrifices which they hadconsecrated, in the prayers used in such solemnities, which,when they had finished, they went away to the palace. Andas for some of the spectators, the emperors entertained themat their own feast; and for all the rest there were noble pre­parations made for their feasting at home; for this was a
arch. (3.) That the Law or Pentateuch does not appear on that arch at all,though Josephus, an eye witness, assures us it was carried in this processionMl which things deserve the consideration of tho ioquisitivo reader.







OCR Output








01 I INDEX.


Pygmallan, king of Tyre, iv. 376.Pythian, or Apollo's temple, built byllei'uu, iii. 30.
Qcadratis (Ummidius), iii. 282.Quails full upon the camp of Israel,
i. 206.Queen of Egypt nnd Ethiopia comes
to Solomon, ii. 39, 40.Quirinus, or Cyrenius, sent by Coesar
to tax Syria, iii. 136.
Rabsases (Thema8ius), ii. 210.
Rachel, i. 127; steals and concealsher father's idols, 131.
Raguel, i. 213; his advice to Moseslor the government of the Israel­ites, 214.
Ruhah, nn inn-keeper at Jericho, i.825; her life saved, 329.
Rainbow, i. 89.
Ramesses, king of Egypt, iv. 371.
Rapsaces, or Rabshakch, ii. 149; hisspeech to the people of Jerusalem,ib.
Rnthumus, or Rheum, ii. 205.
Rationale, or breast-plate of judg­ment of the high-priest, i. 230, 241.
Raven sent out of the ark, i. 87.
Rcbekah, i. 97 ; demanded for a wifeto Isaac, 115; bears twins, 119;imposes upon her husband, 121.
Recent, or Rekem, king, i. 292.
Records of the Tyrians, iv. 373.
Regulus (Emilius), iii. 206.
Rehoboam succeeds Solomon, ii. 49;ten tribes revolt, 51 r builds andfortifies several towns, 06; haseighteen wives and thirty concu­bines, 57; dies, 60.
Revenues of Celesyrin, Phoenicia, Ju-dea, and Samaria, ii. 28(1.
Rezin, king of Syria, ii. 139.
Rezon, Solomon's enemy, ii. 47.
Riches deposited in David's monu­ment, i. 543.
Rod of Aaron, i. 273.
Roman army described, iv. 16.
Roman senate's decree in favor of theJews, ii. 433.
Rubrius Callus, iv. 308.
Rue of a prodigious magnitude, iv.319.
Rufus, iii. 120, 461, 464.
Rufus (an Egyptian) takes Eleazarprisouer, iv. 321.


Rufus (Terentius or Turnus) left with
an army at Jerusalem, takes Simon,
iv. 300.Ruth gleans in Booz's field, i. 381 ;
married to Booz, and is the mother
of Obed, 383.
Sabbath day kept very strictly bythe Essens, iii. 477; Sabbath, socalled from the Egyptian wordSabo, iv. 410; superstitiously ob­served by the Jews, ii. 302; iii.339; they are advised by Matthiasto defend themselves on the Sab­bath day, ii. 302; and by Jonathan,331; allowed to repel, but not toattack nn enemy on that day, iii.193; Antiochus forces the Jews tobreak the Sabbath, iv. 303; spentin reading the law, iii. 13; usheredin and ended witii the sound of atrumpet, iv. 143; Jew?, on thntday dined nt the sixth hour, i. 53;the seditions kill the Romans onthe Sabbath day, iii. 528; unlaw­ful to travel far on the Sabbathday, ii. 373 ; pretended to be un­lawful either to make war or peaceon the Sabbath day, iv. 84; notallowed by some, even in case ofnecessity, to take arms either ontho Sabbath day, or the eveningbefore, i. 38.
Sabbatic river, iv. 309.
Sabbcus, ii. 341.
Sabbion discovers Alexander's designto Hcrod, ii. 419.
Sabinus, Coesar's steward in Judea,iii. 111,459; he accuses Arehelnus,112; falls heavy upon the Jews,117.
Sabinus, one of the murderers ofCuius, iii. 244 ; kills himself, 246.
Sabinus, the brother of Vespasian,takes the Capitol, iv. 152; is killedby Vitellius, ib.
Sabinus, by birth a Syrian, a man ofgreat valor, iv. 242.
Sacrifices were either private or pub­lic, i. 243; all or part only burnt,ib.; how offered, ib.; how sin-offer­ings were offered, ib.; those ofswine forbidden, ii. 298; Titus de-sires John not to leave off the sa­crifices, iv. 247; sacrifices for Coe­sar's prosperity, iii. 485; omission







OCR Output













OCR Output








B.I.] AGAINST APION. 395


them as occasion should require, and would easily reduce thecountry under their dominion. These shepherds were allvery glad of this message, and came away with alacrityaltogether, being in number two hundred thousand men;and in a little time they came to Avaris. And now Ameno-phis, the king of Egypt, upon his being informed of theirinvasion, was in great confusion, as calling to mind whatAmenophis, the son of Papis, had foretold him; and, in thefirst place, he assembled the multitude of the Egyptians, andtook counsel with their leaders, and sent for their sacredanimals to him, especially for those that were principallyworshipped in their temples, and gave a particular charge tothe priests distinctly, that they should hide the images oftheir gods with the utmost care. He also sent his son Sethos,who was also named Harnesses, from his father, Rhampses,being but five years old, to a friend of his. He then passedon with the rest of the Egyptians, being three hundredthousand of the most warlike of them, against the enemy,who met them. Yet did he not join battle with them; butthinking that would be to fight against the gods, he returnedback, and came to Memphis, where he took Apis and theother sacred animals which he had sent for to him, and pre­sently marched into Ethiopia, together with his whole armyand multitude of Egyptians; for the king of Ethiopia wasunder an obligation to him; on which account he receivedhim, and took care of all the multitude that was with him,while the country supplied all that was necessary for the foodof the men. He also allotted cities and villages for thisexile, that was to be from its beginning during those fatallydetermined thirteen years. Moreover, he pitched a campfor his Ethiopian army as a guard to king Amenophis, uponthe borders of Egypt. And this was the state of things inEthiopia. But for the people of Jerusalem, when they camedown together with the polluted Egyptians, they treated themen in such a barbarous manner, that those who saw howthey subdued the forementioned country, and the horridwickedness they were guilty of, thought it a most dreadfulthing; for they did not only set the cities and villages on fire,







OCR Output








452 FLAVIUSJOSEPHCS [b. II.


their contempt of matrimony ? And why do not the Eleansand Thcbans abolish that unnatural and impudent lust, whichmakes them lie with males ? For they will not show a suffi­cient sign of their repentance of what they of old thought tobe very excellent, and very advantageous in their practices,unless they entirely avoid all such actions for the time tocome: nay, such things are inserted into the body of theirlaws, and had once such a power among the Greeks, that theyascribed these sodomitical practices to the gods themselves asa part of their good character ; and, indeed, it was accordingto the same manner that the gods married their own sisters.This the Greeks contrived as an apology for their own absurdand unnatural pleasures.
39. I omit to speak concerning punishments, and how manyways of escaping them the greatest part of the legislatorshave afforded malefactors, by ordaining that, for adulteries,fines in money should be allowed, and for corrupting [vir­gins '] they need only marry them :2 as also what excusesthey may have in denying the facts, if any one attempts toinquire into them; for amongst most other nations it is astudied art how men may transgress their laws. But no suchthing is permitted amongst us ; for though we be deprived ofour wealth, of our cities, or of the other advantages we have,our law continues immortal: nor can any Jew go so far fromhis own country, nor be so affrighted at the severest lord, asnot to be more affrighted at the law than at him. If, there­fore, this be the disposition we are under with regard to theexcellency of our laws, let our enemies make us this conces­sion, that our laws are most excellent; and if still they ima­gine, that though wc so firmly adhere to them, yet are they


1 Why Joscphus here should blame some heathen legislators when theyallowed so easy a composition for simple fornication, as an obligation tomarry the virgin that was corrupted, is hard to say, seeing he had himselftruly informed us that it was a law of the Jews, Antiq. B. iv. chap. viii.seet. 23, as it is the law of Christianity also; seo Iloreb Covenant, page CI.I am almost ready to suspect that for y«/i«(, we should hero read ya/iour, andthat corrupting wedlock, or other men's wives, is the crime for which theseheathens wickedly allowed this composition in money.
2 Or for corrupting other men's wives the same allowance.







OCR Output








C. IV.] COME TO JERUSALEM. 109


such an unexpected attempt of theirs, especially as the greaterpart of them were unarmed and unskilled in affairs of war ;and that besides the multitude of the citizens would not beeasily gathered together, but confined to their houses by thestorm; and that if there were any hazard in their under­taking, it became them to suffer any thing whatsoever them­selves, rather than to overlook so great a multitude as weremiserably perishing on their account. But the more prudentpart of them disapproved of this forcible method, becausethey saw not only the guards about them very numerous, butthe walls of the city itself carefully watched, by reason ofthe Idumeans. They also supposed that Ananus would beevery where, and visit the guards every hour; which, indeed,was done upon other nights, but was omitted that night, notby reason of any slothfulness of Ananus, but by the over­bearing appointment of fate, that so both he might himselfperish, and the multitude of the guards might perish withhim; for truly as the night was far gone, and the storm veryterrible, Ananus gave the guards in the cloisters leave to goto sleep ; while it came into the heads of the zealots to makeuse of the saws belonging to the temple, and to cut the barsof the gates to pieces. The noise of the wind, and that notinferior sound of the thunder, did here also conspire with theirdesigns, that the noise of the saws was not heard by theothers.
7. So they secretly went out of the temple to the wall ofthe city, and made use of their saws, and opened that gatewhich was over against the Idumeans. Now at first therecame a fear upon the Idumeans themselves which disturbedthem, as imagining that Ananus and his party were comingto attack them, so that every one of them had his right handupon his sword, in order to defend himself; but they sooncame to know who they were that came to them, and wereentered the city. And had the Idumeans then fallen uponthe city, nothing could have hindered them from destroyingthe people every man of them, such was the rage they werein at that time: but as they first of all made haste to get thezealots out of custody, which those that brought them inIV. —10







OCR Output








526 DISSERTATION III.


into the city. The Romans then betook themselves to thesiege, for it did not seem honorable to stay till the enemieswere reduced by famine.1 The soldiers were very eager toexpose themselves to dangers, part of them out of true valor,many out of a brutish fierceness, and others out of a desireof rewards.
Titus had Rome, and the riches and pleasures of it, beforehis eyes, all which seemed to be too long delayed, unlessJerusalem could be soon destroyed.
The city2 stood on a high elevation, and it had great worksand ramparts to secure it, such indeed as were sufficient forits fortification, had it been on plain ground ; for there weretwo hills, of a vast height, which were enclosed by walls madecrooked by art, or [naturally] bending inwards, that theymight flank the besiegers, and cast darts on them sideways.The extreme parts of the rock were craggy, and the towers,when they had the advantage of the ground, were 60 feethigh: when they were built on the plain ground, they werenot built lower than 120 feet: they were of uncommon beauty,and to those who looked at them at a great distance, theyseemed equal. Other walls there were beneath the royalpalace, besides the tower of Antonia, with its top particularlyconspicuous. It was called so by Herod, in honor of MarcusAntonius.
Chap. XII.] The temple was like a citadel, having wallsof its own, which had more labor and pains bestowed on themthan the rest. The cloisters wherewith the temple was en­closed were an excellent fortification.
They had a fountain of water that ran perpetually; andthe mountains were hollowed under ground ; they had more­over pools3 and cisterns for the preservation of rain-water.


1 Such a deliberation and resolution, with this very reason, that it wouldbe dishonorable to stay till the Jews were starved out by famine, is in Jose-phus, Antiq. b. v. ch. xii. sect. 1.
* This description of the city of Jerusalem, its two hills, its three walls,and four towers, &c, are in this place at large in Josephus, Antiq. b. v. ch.iv. See also Pompey's siege, b. xiv. ch. iv. sect. 2.
s Of these pools, seo Josephus, b. v. ch. xi. sect. 4. The cisterns are notmentioned by him here, though they be mentioned by travellers. See Re-land's Palestine, torn. i. p. 304.







OCR Output








B. I.] AGAINST APION. 387


says, that " the land in which the Jews inhabit contains threemillions of arourae,1 and is generally of a most excellent andmost fruitful soil; nor is Judea itself of lesser dimensions."The same man describes our city Jerusalem also itself as of amost excellent structure, and very large, and inhabited fromthe most ancient times. He also discourses of the multitudeof men in it, and of the construction of our temple, after thefollowing manner. — " There are many strong places and vil­lages," says he, " in the country of Judea, but one strong citythere is, about fifty furlongs in circumference, which is in­habited by a hundred and twenty thousand men, or thereabout:'they call it Jerusalem. There is about the middle of the citya wall of stone, whose length is five hundred feet, and breadtha hundred cubits, with double cloisters; wherein there is asquare altar, not made of hewn stone, but composed of whitestones gathered together, having each side twenty cubits long,and its altitude ten cubits. Hard by it is a large edifice,wherein there is an altar and a candlestick, both of gold,


1 This manner of arouno or Egyptian acres, 3,000,000, each aroura con­taining a square of 100 Egyptian cubits, (being about three quarters of anEnglish acre, and just twice tho arca of the court of the Jewish tabernacle,)as contained in tho country of Judea, will be about one-third of the entirenumber of arourae in the whole land of Judea, supposing it 160 measuredmiles long, and 70 such miles broad; which estimation for the fruitful partsof it, as, perhaps, here in Hecateus, is not, therefore, very wide from thotruth. The 50 furlongs in compass for the city Jerusalem presently, are notvery wide from the truth also, as Josephus himself describes it, who, Of theWar, B. v. ch. iv. sect. 3, makes its wall 33 furlongs, besides the suburbsand gardens; nay, he says, B. v. ch. xii. sect. 2, that Titus's wall about itat some small distance after the gardens and suburbs were destroyed, wasnot less than 39 furlongs. Nor, perhaps, wero its constant inhabitants in thodays of Hecateus many more than these 120,000, because room was alwaysto be left for vastly greater numbers which came up at the three great fes­tivals ; to say nothing of the probable increase in their number between thedays of Hecateus and Josephus, which was at least 300 years. But see nmore authentic account of some of these measures in my description of theJewish temples. However, we are not to expect that such heathens as Cho-rilus or Heca'.eus, or the rest that arc cited by Josephus and Eusebius, couldavoid making many mistakes in the Jewish history, while yet they stronglyconfirm the same history in the general, and are most valuable attestationsto those more authentic accounts we have in the Scriptures and Josephusconcerning them.







OCR Output













OCR Output








44 VESPASIAN. [B. III.


males now remaining besides infants, which, with the women,were carried as slaves into captivity: so that the number ofthe slain both now in the city and at the former fight wasfifteen thousand, and the captives were two thousand onehundred and thirty. This calamity befell the Galileans onthe twenty-fifth day of the month Desius [Sivan.]
32. Nor did the Samaritans escape their share of misfor­tunes at this time; for they assembled themselves togetherupon the mountain called Gerizzim, which is with them aholy mountain, and there they remained : which collection oftheirs, as well as the courageous minds they showed, couldnot but threaten somewhat of war; nor were they renderedwiser by the miseries that had come upon their neighboringcities. They also, notwithstanding the great success the Ro­mans had, marched on in an unreasonable manner, dependingon their own weakness, and were disposed for any tumultupon its first appearance. Vespasian, therefore, thought itbest to prevent their motions, and to cut off the foundationof their attempts; for although all Samaria had ever garrisonssettled among them, yet did the number of those that werecome to Mount Gerizzim, and their conspiracy together, giveground for fear what they would be at: he, therefore, sentthither Cerealis, the commander of the fifth legion, with sixhundred horsemen and three thousand footmen, who did notthink it safe to go up the mountain and give them battle, be­cause many of the enemy were on the higher part of theground ; so he encompassed all the lower part of the mountainwith his army, and watched them all that day. Now it hap­pened that tho Samaritans, who were now destitute of water,were inflamed with a violent heat (for it was summer-time,and the multitude had not provided themselves with necessa­ries,) insomuch that some of them died that very day withheat, while others of them preferred slavery before such adeath as that was, and fled to the Romans ; by whom Cerealisunderstood that those which still stayed there were very muchbroken by their misfortunes. So he went up tho mountain,and having placed his forces round about the enemy, he, inthe first place, exhorted them to take the security of his right







OCR Output








0. III.] THE HIGH-PRIEST ANANUS. 91


the temple of God a strong-hold for them, and a place whitherthey might resort, in order to avoid the troubles they fearedfrom the people: the sanctuary was now become a refugeand a shop of tyranny. They also mixed jesting among themiseries they introduced, which was more intolerable thanwhat they did; for, in order to try what surprise the peoplewould be under, and how far their own power extended, theyundertook to dispose of the priesthood by casting lots for it,whereas, as we have said already, it was to descend by suc­cession in a family. The pretence they made for this strangeattempt was an ancient practice, while they said that of oldit was determined by lot; but, in trutb, it was no better thanthe dissolution of an undeniable law, and a cunning contrivanceto seize upon the government, derived from those that pre­sumed to appoint governors as they themselves pleased.
8. Hereupon they sent for one of the pontifical tribes,which is called Eniachim,1 and cast lots which of it shouldbe the high-priest. By fortune the lot so fell as to demon­strate their iniquity after the plainest manner; for it fellupon one whose name was Phannias, the son of Samuel, ofthe village Aphtha. He was a man not only unworthy ofthe high-priesthood, but that did not well know what thehigh-priesthood was, such a mere rustic was he; yet did theyhale this man, without his own consent, out of the country,as if they were acting a play upon the stage, and adornedhim with a counterfeit face : they also put upon him the sacredgarments, and upon every occasion instructed him what hewas to do. This horrid piece of wickedness was sport andpastime with them, but occasioned the other priests, who, ata distance, saw their law made a jest of, to shed tears, andsorely to lament the dissolution of such a sacred dignity.
9. And now the people could no longer bear the insolenceof this procedure, but did all together run zealously in orderto overthrow that tyranny: and, indeed, they were Gorion


1 This tribe or course of the high-priests here called Eniakim, seems to thelearned Mr. Lowtb, one well versed in Josephus, to be that 1 Chron. xxiv.12, the course of Jakim, where some copies have the course of Eliakim; and Ithink this to be by no means an improbable conjecture.







OCR Output








312 TRIUMPH OF THE ROMAN EMPERORS, [b. VII.


mense multitude was left in the city, but every body wentout so far as to gain only a station where they might stand,and left only such a passage as was necessary for those thatwere to be seen to go along it.
4. Now all the soldiery marched out beforehand, by com­panies, and in their several ranks, under their several com­manders, in the night-time, and were about the gates, not ofthe upper palaces, but those near the temple of Isis; forthere it was that the emperors had rested the foregoing night.And as soon as ever it was day, Vespasian and Titus camoout, crowned with laurel, and clothed in those ancient purplehabits which were proper to their family, and then went asfar as Octavian's walks: for there it was that the senate andthe principal rulers, and those that had been recorded as ofthe equestrian order, waited for them. Now, a tribunal hadbeen erected before the cloisters, and ivory chairs had beenset upon it, when they came and sat down upon them. Where­upon the soldiery made an acclamation of joy to them imme­diately, and all gave them attestations of their valor; whilethey were themselves without their arms, and only in theirsilken garments, and crowned with laurel: then Vespasianaccepted of these shouts of theirs ; but while they were stilldisposed to go on in such acclamations, he gave them asignal of silence. And when every body entirely held theirpeace, he stood up, and covering the greatest part of hishead with his cloak, he put up the accustomed solemnprayers ; the like prayers did Titus put up also : after whichprayers Vespasian made a short speech to all the people, andthen sent away the soldiers to a dinner prepared for themby the emperors. Then did he retire to that gate which wascalled the Gate of the Pomp, because pompous shows doalways go through that gate : there it was that they tastedsome food; and when they had put on their triumphal gar­ments, and had offered sacrifices to the gods that were placedat the gate, they sent the triumph forward, and marchedthrough the theatres, that they might be the more easily seenby the multitudes.
5. Now it is impossible to describe the multitude of tho







OCR Output








488 DISSERTATION I.


any one Jew but Josephus, who in a sort of compliance withthe Romans and the catholic Christians, who thought him aGod, would say any thing like his being a God.
(4.) How came Origen to affirm twice, so expressly, thatJosephus did not himself own, in the Jewish and Christiansense, that Jesus was Christ, notwithstanding his quotationsof such eminent testimonies out of him for John the Baptisthis forerunner, and for James the Just his brother, and oneof his principal disciples? There is no passage in all Jose­phus so likely to persuade Origen of this as is the famoustestimony before us, wherein, as he and all the ancients un­derstood it, he was generally called Christ indeed, but notany otherwise than as the common name whence the sect ofChristians was derived, and where he all along speaks ofthose Christians as a sect then in being, whose author was awonderful person, and his followers great lovers of him andof the truth, yet as such a sect as he had not joined himselfto ; which exposition, as it is a very natural one, so was it, Idoubt, but too true of our Josephus at that time; nor can Idevise any other reason but this, and the parallel languageof Josephus elsewhere, when he speaks of James as the bro­ther, not of Jesus who was Christ, but of Jesus tvho wascalled Christ, that could so naturally induce Origen andothers to be of that opinion.
IX. There are two remarkable passages iu Suidas andTheophylact, already set down, as citing Josephus; theformer, that Jesus officiated with the priests ia the temple,and the latter, that the destruction of Jerusalem, and miseriesof the Jews, were owing to their putting Jesus to death,which arc in none of our present copies, nor cited thence byany ancienter authors; nor, indeed, do they seem altogetherconsistent with the other more authentic testimonies: how­ever, since Suidas cites his passage from a treatise of Jose-phus's called Memoirs of the Jews' Captivity, a book neverheard of elsewhere, and since both citations are not at alldisagreeable to Josephus's character as a Nazarene orEbionite. I dare not positively conclude they are spurious,







OCR Output








C. IX.] VESPASIAN. 59


6. But as the truth came out in time, it appeared how theaffairs of Jotapata really stood; yet was it found that thedeath of Josephus was a fiction; and when they understoodthat he was alive, and was among the Romans, and that thecommanders treated him at another rate than they treatedcaptives, they were as vehemently angry at him now as theyhad showed their good-will before, when he appeared to havebeen dead. He was also abused by some as having been acoward, and by others as a deserter: and the city was fullof indignation at him, and of reproaches cast upon him;their rage was also aggravated by their afnictions, and moreinflamed by their ill success; and what usually becomes anoccasion of caution to wise men, I mean affliction, became aspur to them to venture farther on calamities, and the endof one misery became still the beginning of another; they,therefore, resolved to fall on the Romans the more vehe­mently, as resolving to be revenged on him in revengingthemselves on the Romans. And this was the state of Jeru­salem as to the troubles which now came upon it.
7. But Vespasian, in order to see the kingdom of Agrippa,while the king persuaded him himself so to do (partly in or­der to his treating the general and his army in the best andmost splendid manner his private affairs would enable him todo, and partly that he might, by their means, correct suchthings as were amiss in his government,) he removed fromthat Ccesarea which was by the sea-side, and went to thatwhich is called Csesarea Philippi;1 and there he refreshedhis army for twenty days, and was himself feasted by kingAgrippa, where he also returned public thanks to God for thegood success he had in his undertakings. But as soon as hewas informed that Tiberias was fond of innovations, and thatTaricheae had revolted, both which cities were parts of thekingdom of Agrippa, and was satisfied within himself thatthe Jews were every where perverted [from their obedienceto their governors,] he thought it seasonable to make an ex­


1 Of this Caesarea Philippi (twice mentioned in our New Testament, Mat­thew, xiT. 13; Mark, viii. 27, there are coins still extant, as Spanheim heroinforms us.







OCR Output








5C2 DISSERTATION III.


me that the main of their fault, or of their mistake, was this—that they were wont, on a stated day, to meet together beforeit was light, and to sing a hymn to Christ, as a god, alter­nately ; and to oblige themselves by a sacrament [or oath,]not to do any thing that was ill, but that they would commitno theft, or pilfering, or adultery ; that they would not breaktheir promises, or deny what was deposited with them, whenit was required back again: after which it was their customto depart, and to meet again at a common but innocent meal,1which yet they had left off upon that edict which I publishedat your command, and wherein I had forbidden any such con­venticles. These examinations made me think it necessaryto inquire by torments what the truth was, which I did of twoservant maids, which were called deaconesses ; but still I dis­covered no more than that they were addicted to a bad andan extravagant superstition. Hereupon I have put off anyfarther examinations, and have recourse to you; for the affairseems to be well worth consultation, especially on account ofthe number of those that are in danger;2 for there are manyof every age, of every rank, and of both sexes, which are nowand hereafter likely to be called to account, and to be indanger; for this superstition is spread like a contagion, notonly into cities and towns, but irrtrrcountry villages also, whichyet there is reason-toTiopc may be stopped and corrected. Tobe sure, the temples, which were almost forsaken, begin alreadyto be frequented ; and the holy solemnities, which were longintermitted, begin to be revived. The sacrifices begin to sellwell everywhere, of which very few purchasers had of lateappeared; whereby it is easy to suppose how great a multi­tude of men may be amended, if place for repentance beadmitted.


1 This must most probably be the/«aj< of charily.
* Some of late are very loath to believe that the Christians were numerousin the second century ; but this is such an evidence that they were very nu­merous, at least in Bithynia, even in the beginning of that century, as iswholly undeniable.







OCR Output








C.X.] BRIEF HISTORY OF JERUSALEM. 295


the Canaanites, and is in our tongue called [Melchisedek,~\The righteous king, for such he really was; on which accounthe was [there] the first priest of God, and first built a temple[there,] and called the city Jerusalem, which was formerlycalled Salem. However, David, the king of the Jews, ejectedthe Canaanites, and settled his own people therein. It wasdemolished entirely by the Babylonians four hundred andseventy-seven years and six months after him. And fromking David, who was the first of the Jews who reigned therein,to this destruction under Titus, were one thousand one hundredand seventy-nine years; but from its first building till thislast destruction were two thousand one hundred seventy-seven years: yet hath not its great antiquity, nor its vastriches, nor the diffusion of its nation over all the habitableearth, nor the greatness of the veneration paid to it on areligious account, been sufficient to preserve it from beingdestroyed. And thus ended the siege of Jerusalem.


relating, as compared with their exact completions in Josephus's history:upon which completions, as Dr. Whitby well observes, Annot. on Matt,xxiv. 2, no small part of the evidence for the truth of the Christian religiondoes depend; and as I have, step by step, compared them together in myLiteral Accomplishment of Scripture Prophecies. The reader is to observefarther, that the true reason why I havo so seldom taken notice of thosecompletions in the courso of these notes, notwithstanding their being so veryremarkable, and frequently so very obvious, is this, that I had entirely pre­vented mysclfin that treatise beforehand; to which, therefore, I must here,once for all, seriously refer every inquisitive reader.







OCR Output








B.I.] AGAINST APION. 379


in that history which he composed, where he mentions thesiege of Tyre; as does Megasthenes also, in the fourth bookof his Indian history, wherein he pretends to prove that theforementioned king of the Babylonians was superior to Her­cules in strength and the greatness of his exploits, for he saysthat he conquered a great part of Libya, and conquered Iberiaalso. Now, as to what I have said before about the templeof Jerusalem, that it was fought against by the Babylonians,and burnt by them, but was opened again when Cyrus hadtaken the kingdom of Asia, shall be now demonstrated fromwhat Berosus adds farther upon that head ; for thus he saysin his third book — " Nabuchodonosor, after he had begunto build the forementioned wall, fell sick, and departed thislife, when he had reigned forty-three years; whereupon hisson Evilmerodach obtained the kingdom. He governed publicaffairs after an illegal and impure manner, and had a plot laidagainst him by Neriglissor, his sister's husband, and was slainby him when he had reigned but two years. After he wasslain, Neriglissor, the person who plotted against him, suc­ceeded him in the kingdom, and reigned four years; his sonLaborosoarchod obtained the kingdom, though he were but achild, and kept it nine months ; but by reason of the very illtemper and ill practices he exhibited to the world, a plot waslaid against him also by his friends, and he was tormented todeath. After his death, the conspirators got together, and,by common consent, put the crown upon the head of Nabon-ncdus, a man of Babylon, and one who belonged to that insur­rection. In his reign it was that the walls of the city ofBabylon were curiously built with burnt brick and bitumen ;but when he was come to the seventeenth year of his reign,Cyrus came out of Persia with a great army, and, havingalready conquered all the rest of Asia, he came hastily toBabylonia. When Nabonnedus perceived he was coming toattack him, he met him with his forces, and joining battle withhim, was beaten and fled away with a few of his troops withhim, and was shut up within the city Borsippus. HereuponCyrus took Babylon, and gave order that the outer walls ofthe city should be demolished, because the city had proved







OCR Output








406 FLAVIUS JOSEPHOS j,i$. I.


desert, and get the land which we now dwell in, and buildour city, and that temple which hath been so famous amongall mankind? And, besides, he ought to have spoken moreabout our legislator than by giving us his bare name ; andto have informed us of what nation he was, and what parentshe was derived from ; and to have assigned the reasons whyhe undertook to make such laws concerning the gods, audconcerning matters of injustice with regard to men duringthat journey: For, in case the people were by birth Egyp­tians, they would not on a sudden have so easily changed thecustoms of their country: and in case they had been foreign­ers, they had for certain some laws or other, which had beenkept by them from long custom. It is true, that with regardto those who had ejected them, they might have sworn neverto bear good-will to them, and might have had a plausiblereason for so doing: but if these men resolved to wage animplacable war against all men, in case they had acted aswickedly as he relates of them, and this while they wantedthe assistance of all men, this demonstrates a kind of madconduct indeed; but not of the men themselves, but verygreatly so of him that tells such lies about them. He hathalso impudence enough to say, that a name implying robbers1of the temples was given to their city, and that this name wasafterward changed. The reason of which is plain, that theformer name brought reproach and hatred upon them in thetimes of their posterity, while it seems those that built thecity thought they did honor to the city by giving it such aname. So we see that this fine fellow had such an unboundedinclination to reproach us, that he did not understand thatrobbery of temples is not expressed by the same word andname among the Jews as it is among the Greeks. But whyshould a man say any more to a person that tells such impu­dent lies ? However, since this book is arisen to a competentlength, I will make another beginning, and endeavor to addwhat still remains to perfect my design in the following book.


'That is the meaning of Hierosyla in Greek, not in Hebrew.







OCR Output








170 IHS JIWS CONTRIVE [B. V.


the holy house; while the people, Who had no concern in thesedition, supposed that this assault was made against all with­out distinction ; as the zealots thought it was made againstthemselves only. So these left off guarding the gates anylonger, and leaped down from their battlements before theycame to an engagement, and fled away into the subterraneancaverns of the temple; while the people that stood tremblingat the altar and about the holy house were rolled on heapstogether, and trampled upon, and were beaten both withwooden and with iron weapons without mercy. Such also ashad differences with others slew many persons that were quiet,out of their own private enmity and hatred, as if they wereopposite to the seditious; and all those that had formerlyoffended any of these plotters were now known, and werenow led away to the slaughter: and when they had doneabundance of horrid mischief to the guiltless, they granted atruce to the guilty, and let those go off that came out of thecaverns. These followers of John also did now seize uponthis inner temple, and upon all the warlike engines therein,and then ventured to oppose Simon. And thus that seditionwhich had been divided into three factions, was now reducedto two.
2. But Titus, intending to pitch his camp nearer to thecity than Scopus, placed as many of his choice horsemen andfootmen as he thought sufficient opposite to the Jews, to pre­vent their sallying out upon them, while he gave orders forthe whole army to level the distance, as far as the wall of thecity. So they threw down all the hedges and walls which theinhabitants had made about their gardens and groves of trees,and cut down all the fruit-trees that lay between them andthe wall of the city, and filled up all the hollow places andthe chasms, and demolished the rocky precipices with ironinstruments: and thereby made all the place level, fromScopus to Herod's monuments, which adjoined to the poolcalled the Serpent's Pool.
3. Now at this very time the Jews contrived the followingstratagem against the Romans. The bolder sort of the sedi­tious went out at the towers called the Women's Towers, as







OCR Output








C. V.] THE TEMPLE. 187


natural magnanimity. In the first place, the rock itself wascovered over with smooth pieces of stone, from its foundation,both for ornament, and that any one, who would either tryto get up or to go down it, might not be able to hold his feetupon it. Next to this, and before you come to the edifice ofthe tower itself, there was a wall three cubits high; but with­in that wall all the space of the tower of Antonia itself wasbuilt upon, to the height of forty cubits. The inward partshad the largeness and form of a palace, it being parted intoall kinds of rooms and other conveniences, such as courtsand places for bathing, and broad spaces for camps; inso­much that, by having all conveniencies that cities wanted, itmight seem to be composed of several cities, but by itsmagnificence it seemed a palace ; and as the entire structureresembled that of a tower, it contained also four other dis­tinct towers at its four corners ; whereof the others were butfifty cubits high, whereas that which lay upon the south-eastcorner was seventy cubits high, that from thence the wholetemple might be viewed: but on the corner where it joinedto the two cloisters of the temple, it had passages down tothem both, through which the guards (for there always layin this tower a Roman legion,) went several ways among thecloisters, with their arms, on the Jewish festivals, in order towatch the people, that they might not there attempt to makeany innovations; for the temple was a fortress that guardedthe city, as was the tower of Antonia a guard to the temple;and in that tower were the guards1 of those three. Therewas also a peculiar fortress belonging to the upper city, whichwas Herod's palace; but for the hill Bezetha, it was dividedfrom the tower of Antonia, as we have already told you; andas that hill on which the tower of Antonia stood was thehighest of these three, so did it adjoin to the new city, andwas the only place that hindered the sight of the temple onthe north. And this shall suflice at present to have spokenabout the city, and the walls about it, because I have pur­posed to myself to make a more accurate description of itelsewhere.


1 Those three gnards that lay in the tower of Antonia must be those thatguarded the city, the temple, and the tower of Antonia.







OCR Output








538 JEWISH WEIGHTS, COINS, AND MONTHS.


Of the Jewish Weights aad Coins.
Sterting. American
£ s. d. $ ctl.Statur, Siclus, or shekel of the sanctuary, the
standard 0 2 0 0 55 +
Tyrian coin, equal to the shekel 0 2 6 0 05 +
Bekah, half of the shekel 0 13 0 27 +
Drachma Attica, one-fourth 0 0 7} 0 13 +
Drachma Alexandria, or Darchmon, or Adarch-
mon, one-half 0 13 0 27 +
Gerah, or Obolos, one-twentieth 0 0 1J 0 2 6
Maneh, or Mna,—100 shekels in weight —
21900 Grains Troy.
Maneh, Mna, or Mina, as a Coin,—CO shekels.. 7 10 0 30 30 0
Talent of Silver,—3000 shekels 375 0 0 1666 00 ]
Drachma of Gold not more than Oil 24 0
Shekel of gold not more than 0 4 4 96 0
DaricofGold 10 4 4 61 2
Talent of gold not more than 018 0 0 2880 00 0


Table of (he Jewish. Months in Josephus and others, with the Syro-MacedonianKama which Josephus gives them, and of the Julian or Romaa Months cor­responding to them.
Hebrew Names. Syro-Macedonian Names. Roman Names.


(1.
(2-(3.
(t.(5.(6.
(7-(8.(9.
(10.
(11.
(12.


Nisan Xanthicus March and April.
Jyar Artemisius April and May.
Sivan Dicsius May and June.
Tamuz Panemus June and July.
Ab Lous July and August.
Elul Gorpijcus August and September.
Tisri Hyperbcretaeus September and October.
Marhesvan Dius October and November.
Caslcu Appelloens November and December
Tcbeth Audintcns December and January.
Shebat Peritius January and February.
Adar Dystrus February and March.
Vo Adar, or the second Adar, intercalated.







OCR Output








C. Vn.] THB ZEALOTS AT MASADA. 123


ancient kings, both as a repository for their effects in thehazards of war, and for the preservations of their bodies atthe same time. It was called Masada. Those that werecalled Sicarii had taken possession of it formerly; but at thistime they overran the neighboring countries, aiming only toprocure to themselves necessaries, for the fear they were thenin prevented their further ravages. But when once they wereinformed that the Roman army lay still, and that the Jewswere divided between sedition and tyranny, they boldlyundertook greater matters; and at the feast of unleavenedbread, which the Jews celebrate in memory of their deliver­ance from the Egyptian bondage, when they were sent backinto the country of their forefathers, they came down bynight, without being discovered by those that could have pre­vented them, and overran a certain small city called Engaddi.In which expedition they prevented those citizens that couldhave stopped them, before they could arm themselves, andfight them. They also dispersed them, and cast them out ofthe city: as for such as could not run away, being womenand children, they slew of them above seven hundred. After­ward, when they had carried every thing out of their houses,and had seized upon all the fruits that were in a flourishingcondition, they brought them into Masada. And, indeed,these men laid all the villages that were about the fortresswaste, and made the whole country desolate; while therecame to them every day from all parts not a few men, ascorrupt as themselves. At that time all the other regionsof Judea, that had hitherto been at rest, were in motion, bymeans of the robbers. Now as it is in a human body, if theprincipal part be inflamed, all the members are subject tothe same distemper, so by means of the sedition and disorderthat was in the metropolis had the wicked men that were inthe country opportunity to ravage the same. Accordingly,when every one of them had plundered their own villages,they then retired into the desert: yet were these men thatnow got together, and joined in the conspiracy by parties, too6mall for an army, and too many for a gang of thieves; and







OCR Output








C. VII.] VESPASIAN. 41


could no way get free from this burning oil; they could onlyleap and roll about in their pains, as they fell down from thebridges they had laid. And as they thus were beaten back,and retired to their own party, who still pressed them for­ward, they were easily wounded by those that were behindthem.
29. However, in this ill success of the Romans their cou­rage did not fail them, nor did the Jews want prudence tooppose them ; for the Romans, although they saw their ownmen thrown down, and in a miserable condition, yet werethey vehemently bent against those that poured the oil uponthem, while every one reproached the man before him as acoward, and one that hindered him from exerting himself;and while the Jews made use of another stratagem to preventtheir ascent, and poured boiling senegreek upon the boardsin order to make them slip and fall down: by which meansneither could those that were coming up nor those that weregoing down stand on their feet, but some of them fell back­ward upon the machines on which they ascended, and weretrodden upon; many of them fell down on the bank they hadraised, and when they were fallen upon it were slain by theJews: for when the Romans could not keep their feet, theJews being freed from fighting hand to hand, had leisure tothrow their darts at them. So the general called off thoseEoldiers in the evening that had suffered so sorely, of whomthe number of the slain was not a few, while that of thewounded was still greater; but of the people of Jotapata nomore than six men were killed, although more than threehundred were carried off wounded. This fight happened onthe twentieth day of the month Desius [Sivan.]
30. Hereupon Vespasian comforted his army on occasionof what had happened; and as he found them angry indeed, butrather wanting somewhat to do than any farther exhortations,he gave orders to raise the banks still higher, and to erectthree towers, each fifty feet high, and that they should coverthem with plates of iron on every side, that they might beboth firm by their weight, and not easily liable to be set onfire. These towers he set upon the banks, and placed upon


4*







OCR Output








302 DANGER OF THE JEWS AT ANTIOCII. [B. vll.


2. It happened also about this time that the Jews who re­mained at Antioch were under accusations, and in dangerof perishing, from tho disturbances that were raised againstthem by the Antiochians, and this both on account of theslanders spread abroad at this time against them, and on ac­count of what pranks they had played not long before, whichI am obliged to describe without fail, though briefly, that Imay the better connect ray narration of future actions withthose that went before.
3. For as the Jewish nation is widely dispersed over allthe habitable earth among its inhabitants, so it is very muchintermingled with Syria, by reason of its neighborhood, andhad the greatest multitudes in Antioch, by reason of the large­ness of the city, wherein the kings, after Antiochus, hadafforded them a habitation with the most undisturbed tran­quility ; for though Antiochus, who was called Epiphanes,laid Jerusalem waste, and spoiled the temple, yet did thosethat succeeded him in the kingdom restore all the donationsthat were made of brass to the Jews of Antioch, and dedi­cated them to their synagogue, and granted them the enjoy­ment of equal privileges of citizens with the Greeks them­selves ; and as the succeeding kings treated them after thesame manner, they both multiplied to a great number, andadorned their temple l gloriously by fine ornaments, and withgreat magnificence, in the use of what had been given them.They also made proselytes of a great many of the Greeksperpetually, and thereby after a sort brought them to Iw aportion of their own body. But about this time, when thepresent war began, and Vespasian was newly sailed to Syria,and all men had taken up a great hatred against the Jews, thenit was that a certain person whose name was Antiochus, beingone of the Jewish nation, and greatly respected on accountof his father, who was governor2 of the Jews at Antioch. came


1 i. e., their synagogue. See the note on 13. vi. ch. x. sect. 1.
* The Jews at Antioch and Alexandria, the two principal cities in all theeast, had allowed them, both by the Macedonians, and afterward by the Ro­mans, a governor of their own, who was exempt from the jurisdiction of theother civil governors. He was called sometimes barely governor, sometimesethnarch, and [at Alexandria] alabarch, as Dr. Hudson takes notice on this







OCR Output








272 CONFLAGRATIONS. [B. \L


the echo, as well as the mountains round about [the city,]and augmented the force of the entire noise. Yet was themisery itself more terrible than this disorder; for one wouldhave thought that the hill itself, on which the temple stood,was seething hot, as full of fire on every part of it; that theblood was larger in quantity than the fire, and those thatwere slain more in number than those that slew them; forthe ground did nowhere appear visible, for the dead bodiesthat lay on it; but the soldiers went over heaps of thosebodies, as they ran upon such as fled from them. And nowit was that the multitude of the robbers were thrust out [ofthe inner court of the temple] by the Romans, and had muchado to get into the outward court, and from thence into thecity, while the remainder of the populace fled into the cloisterof that outer court. As for the priests, some of them pluckedup from the holy house the spikesl that were upon it, withtheir bases, which were made of lead, and shot them at theRomans instead of darts. But then, as they gained nothingby so doing, and as the fire burst out upon them, they re­tired to the wall, that was eight cubits broad, and there theytarried; yet did two of these of eminence among them, whomight have saved themselves by going over to the Romans,or have borne up with courage, and taken their fortune withthe others, throw themselves into the fire, and were burnt,together with the holy house: their names were Meirug, theson of Belgas, and Joseph, the son of Daleus.
2. And now the Romans, judging that it was in vain tospare what was round about the holy house, burnt all thoseplaces, as also the remains of the cloisters and the gates, twoexcepted; the one on the cast side and the other on thesouth; both which, however, they burnt afterward. Theyalso burnt down the treasury-chambers, in which was auimmense quantity of money, and an immense number ofgarments, and other precious goods there reposited; and, to


1 Reland, I think, here judges well, when he interprets these spikes (ofthose that stood on the top of the holy house) with sharp points: they werefixed into lead to prevent the birds from sitting there, and defiling the holyhouse; for such spikes there were now upon it, as Josephus himself hathalready assured us, B. v. eh. v. sect. 6.







OCR Output








20 TUE ROMAN ARMIES [B. IIL


with three or more darts that are borne in their quiver,having broad points, and not smaller than spears. Theyhave also head-pieces and breast-plates, in like manner ashave all the footmen. And for those that are chosen to beabout' the general, their armor no way differs from that of thehorsemen belonging to other troops; and he always leadsthe legions forth to whom the lot assigns that employment.
6. This is the manner of the marching and resting of theRomans, as also these are the several sorts of weapons theyuse. But when they are to fight they leave nothing withoutforecast, nor to be done off-hand, but counsel is ever firsttaken before any work is begun, and what hath been thereresolved upon is put into execution presently: for whichreason they seldom commit any errors, and if they have beenmistaken at any time, they easily correct those mistakes.They also esteem any errors they commit upon taking counselbeforehand to be better than such rash success as is owingto fortune only: because such a fortuitous advantage temptsthem to be inconsiderate, while consultation, though it maysometimes fail of success, hath this good in it, that it makesmen more careful hereafter; but for the advantages thatarise from chance, they are not owing to him that gains them,and as to what melancholy accidents happen unexpectedly,there is this comfort in them, that they had however takenthe best consultations they could to prevent them.
7. Now they so manage their preparatory exercises oftheir weapons, that not the bodies of the soldiers only, buttheir souls may also become stronger: they are moreoverhardened for war by fear; for their laws inflict capitalpunishments, not only for soldiers running away from theirranks, but for slothfulness and inactivity, though it be butin a lesser degree; as are their generals more severe thantheir laws: for they prevent any imputation of crueltytowards those under condemnation, by the great rewardsthey bestow on the valiant soldiers; and the readiness ofobeying their commanders is so great, that it is very orna­mental in peace; but when they come to a battle, the wholearmy is but one body, so well coupled together are their







OCR Output








c. vm.] eleazar's speeches. 33'J


duct them to their death more readily than do any of the restof mankind conduct their fellow-citizens when they are goinga very long journey, who at the same time weep on their ownaccount, but look upon the others as happy persons, as sosoon to be made partakers of the immortal order of beings.Are not we, therefore, ashamed to have lower notions thanthe Indians ? and by our own cowardice to lay a base reproachupon the laws of our country, which are so much desired andimitated by all mankind ? But put the case that wo had beenbrought up under another persuasion, and thought that lifeis the greatest good which men are capable of, artd that deathis a calamity; however, the circumstances we are now in oughtto be an inducement to us to bear such calamity courageously,since it is by the will of God and by necessity that we are todie; for it now appears that God hath made such a decreeagainst the whole Jewish nation, that we are to be deprivedof this life which [he knew] we would not make a due use of:for do not you ascribe the occasion of your present conditionto yourselves, nor think the Romans are the true occasionthat this war we have had with them is become so destructiveto us all: these things have not come to pass by their power,but a more powerful cause hath intervened, and made us af­ford them an occasion of their appearing to be conquerorsover us. What Roman weapons, I pray you, were those bywhich the Jews of Caesarca were slain ? On the contrary,when they were no way disposed to rebel, but were all thewhile keeping their seventh day festival, and did not so muchas lift up their hands against the citizens of Caesarca, yet didthose citizens run upon them in great crowds, and cut theirthroats and the throats of their wives and children, and thiswithout any regard to the Romans themselves, who nevertook us for their enemies till we revolted from them. Butsome may be ready to say, that truly the people of Caesareahad always a quarrel against those that lived among them,and that, when an opportunity offered itself, they satisfied theold rancor they had against them. What, then, shall we sayto those of Scythopolis, who ventured to wage war with uson account of the Greeks ? Nor did they do it by way of re­







OCR Output








C. VIII. j THE GREAT PLAIN. 131


earth and a succession of children; and that this prolificwater might never fail them while they continued to herighteous." To these prayers Elisha joined proper opera­tions of his hands after a skilful manner, and changed thefountain; and that water, which had been the occasion ofbarrenness and famine before, from that time did supply anumerous posterity, and afford great abundance to the coun­try. Accordingly, the power of it is so great in watering theground, that if it do but once touch a country, it affords asweeter nourishment than other waters do when they lie solong upon them, till they are satiated with them. For whichreason the advantage gained from other waters when theyflow in great plenty is but small, while that of this water isgreat when it flows even in little quantities. Accordingly, itwaters a larger space of ground than any other waters do,and passes along a plain of seventy furlongs long and twentybroad; wherein it affords nourishment to those most excellentgardens that are thick set with trees. There are in it manysorts of palm-trees that are watered by it, different from eachother in taste and name ; the better sort of them, when theyare pressed, yield an excellent kind of honey, not much in­ferior in sweetness to other honey. This country withal pro­duces honey from bees ; it also bears that balsam which is themost precious of all the fruits in that place, cypress-treesalso, and those that bear myrobalanum ; so that he who shouldpronounce this place to be divine would not be mistaken,wherein is such plenty of trees produced as arc very rare,and of the most excellent sort. And, indeed, if we speak ofthose other fruits, it will not be easy to light on any climatein the habitable earth that can well be compared to it: whatis here sowed comes up in such clusters, the cause of whichseems to me to be the warmth of the air and the fertility ofthe waters : the warmth calling forth the sprouts, and makingthem spread, and the moisture making every one of themtake root firmly, and supplying that virtue which it stands inneed of in summer-time. Now this country is then so sadlyburnt up that nobody cares to come at it; and if the waterbe drawn up before sun-rising, and after that exposed to tho







OCR Output








260 TEERIBLE FAMINE. [B. VI.


every one of them that perished were worthy of a memorial,this man appeared to deserve it beyond all the rest. Nowthe Jews admired this man for his courage, and were fartherdesirous of having him slain; so they persuaded him to comedown to them upon security given him for his life. But Cor­nelius his brother persuaded him on the contrary not to tar­nish their own glory, nor that of the Roman army. Hecomplied with this last advice, and lifting up his sword beforeboth armies, he slew himself. Yet was there one Artoriusamong those surrounded with the fire who escaped by hissubtilty; for when he had with a loud voice called to himLucius, one of his fellow-soldiers that lay with him in thesame tent, and said to him, — "I do leave thee heir of all Ihave, if thou wilt come and receive me." Upon this he camerunning to receive him readily : Artorius then threw himselfdown upon him, and saved his own life, while he that receivedhim was dashed so vehemently against the stone pavement bythe other's weight, that he died immediately. This melan­choly accident made the Romans sad for a while, but still itmade them more upon their guard for the future, and was ofadvantage to them against the delusions of the Jews, by whichthey were greatly damaged, through their unacquaintednesswith the places and with the nature of the inhabitants. Nowthis cloister was burnt down as far as John's tower, which hebuilt in the war he made against Simon, over the gates thatled to the Xystus. The Jews also cut off the rest of thatcloister from the temple, after they had destroyed those thatgot up to it. But the next day the Romans burnt down thenorthern cloister entirely as far as the east cloister, whosecommon angle joined to the valley that was called Cedron,and was built over it; on which account the depth was fright­ful. And this was the state of the temple at that time.
3. Now of those that perished by famine in the city thenumber was prodigious, and the miseries they underwent werounspeakable; for if so much as the shadow of any kind offood did any where appear, a war was commenced presently,and the dearest friends fell a fighting one with another aboutit, snatching from each other the most miserable supports of







OCR Output








C.X.] INCLINATIONS OF THE PEOPLE. 213


am sensible that this danger will extend to my mother andwife, and to that family of mine which hath been by no meansignoble, and, indeed, to one that hath been very eminent inold time; and, perhaps you may imagine that it is on theiraccount only that I give you this advice: if that be all, killthem; nay, take my own blood as a reward, if it may butprocure your preservation; for I am ready to die, in caseyou will but return to a sound mind after my death."


CHAPTER X.
HOW A GREAT MANY OF THE PEOPLE EARNESTLY ENDEAVOREDTO DESERT TO THE ROMANS; AS ALSO, WHAT INTOLERABLETHINGS THOSE THAT STAYED BEHIND SUFFERED BY FAMINE,AND THE SAD CONSEQUENCES THEREOF.
§ 1. As Josephus was speaking thus with a loud voice, theseditious would neither yield to what he said, nor did theydeem it safe for them to alter their conduct; but as for thepeople, they had a great inclination to desert to the Romans;accordingly, some of them sold what they had, and even themost precious things that had been laid up as treasures bythem, for a very small matter, and swallowed down pieces ofgold that they might not be found out by the robbers; andwhen they had escaped to the Romans, went to stool, andhad wherewithal to provide plentifully for themselves: forTitus let a great number of them go away into the countrywhither they pleased. And the main reasons why they wereso ready to desert were these, that now they should be freedfrom those miseries which they had endured in that city, andyet should not be in slavery to the Romans: however, Johnand Simon, with their factions, did more carefully watchthese men's going out, than they did the coming in of theRomans; and if any one did but afford the least shadow ofsuspicion of such an intention, his throat was cut immediately.
2. But as for the richer sort, it proved all one to themwhether they stayed in the city or attempted to get out of it;







OCR Output








372 FLAVIUSJOSEPHUS [». L


and six months; after him came Sethosis and Ramesses, whohad an army of horse, and a naval force. This king ap­pointed his brother Armais to be his deputy over Egypt.[In another copy it stood thus. — After him came Sethosisand Ramesses, two brethren, the former of which had a navalforce, and in a hostile manner destroyed those that met himupon the sea: but as he slew Ramesses in no long time after­ward, so he appointed another of his brethren to be his deputyover Egypt.] He also gave him all the other authority of aking, but with these only injunctions, that he should not wearthe diadem, nor be injurious to the queen, the mother of hischildren; and that he should not meddle with the other con­cubines of the king, while he made an expedition against Cy­prus and Phoenicia, and besides against the Assyrians andthe Medes. He then subdued them all, some by his arms,some without fighting, and some by the terror of his greatarmy; and, being puffed up by the great successes he hadhad, lie went still on the more boldly, and overthrew the citiesand countries that lay in the eastern parts. But after someconsiderable time, Armais, who was left in Egypt, did allthose very things, by way of opposition, which his brotherhad forbid him to do, without fear; for he used violence tothe queen, and continued to make use of the rest of the con­cubines, without sparing any of them : nay, at the persuasionof his friends, he put on the diadem, and set up to oppose hisbrother. But then he who was set over the priests of Egyptwrote letters to Sethosis, and informed him of all that hadhappened, and how his brother had set up to oppose him ; he,therefore, returned back to Pelusium immediately, and re­covered his kingdom again. The country also was calledfrom his name Egypt: for Manetho says, that Sethosis washimself called Egypt us, as was his brother Armais calledDanawi." '


1 Of this Egyptian chronology of Manetho, as mistaken by Josepbus, andof these Diocnioian shepherds, as falsely supposed by him, and others afterhim, to have been the Israelites in Egypt, sec Essay on the Old Testament,Appendix, page 182-188. And noto here, that when Josephus tells us thatthe Greeks or Argives looked on this Danaus as apxailnics, a ">ost ancieat, or







OCR Output








16 THE ROMAN ARMIES [B. III.


2. But as to Titus, he sailed over from Achaia to Alexan­dria, and that sooner than the winter season did usually permit;so he took with him those forces he was sent for, and march­ing with great expedition, he came suddenly to Ptolemais, andthere finding his father, together with the two legions, the fifthand the tenth, which were the most eminent legions of all, hejoined them to that fifteenth legion which was with his father:eighteen cohorts followed these legions: there came also fivecohorts from Caesarea, with one troop of horsemen, and fiveother troops of horsemen from Syria. Now these ten cohortshad severally a thousand footmen, but the other thirteen co­horts had no more than six hundred footmen a-piece, with ahundred and twenty horsemen. There were also a consider­able number of auxiliaries got together, that came from thekings Antiochus and Agrippa, and Sohemus, each of themcontributing one thousand footmen that were archers, and athousand horsemen. Malehus also, the king of Arabia, senta thousand horsemen, besides five thousand footmen, thegreatest part of which were archers : so that the whole army,including the auxiliaries sent by the kings, as well horsemenas footmen, when all were united together, amounted to sixtythousand, besides the servants, who, as they followed in vastnumbers, so because they had been trained up in war with therest, ought not to be distinguished from the fighting men ; foras they were in their masters' service in times of peace, sodid they undergo the like dangers with them in times of war,insomuch that they were inferior to none cither in skill or instrength, only they were subject to their masters.
CHAPTER V.
A DESCRIPTION OF THE ROMAN AKMIES AND ROMAN CAMPS;AND OF OTIIER PARTICULARS FOR WHICH THE ROMANS ARECOMMENDED.
§ 1. Now here one cannot but admire at the precautionof the Romans, in providing themselves of such householdservants as might not only serve at other times for the common







OCR Output








234 GREAT SLAUGHTERS AND SACRILEGE. [B. V.


cast them out of the city. After this man there ran away toTitus many of the eminent citizens, and told him the entirenumber, of the poor that were dead, and that no fewer thansix hundred thousand were thrown out at the gates; thoughstill the number of the rest could not be discovered: and theytold him farther, that, when they were no longer able tocarry out the dead bodies of the poor, they laid their corpseson heaps in very large houses, and shut them up therein; asalso that a medimnus of wheat was sold for a talent, and thatwhen a while afterward, it was not possible to gather herbs,oy reason the city was all walled about, some persons weredriven to that terrible stress as to search the common sewersand old dunghills of cattle, and to eat the dung which they gotthere; and what they of old could not endure so much as tosee, they now used for food. When the Romans barely heardall this, they commiserated their case; while the seditious,who saw it also, did not repent, but suffered the same distressto come upon themselves; for they were blinded by that fatewhich was already coming upon the city, and upon themselvesalso.







OCR Output








C. II.] TITUS AT JERUSALEM. 165


and very properly named Scopus [the prospect,] and was nomore than seven furlongs distant from it. And here it wasthat Titus ordered a camp to be fortified for two legions thatwere to be together ; but ordered another camp to be fortified,at three furlongs farther distance behind them, for the fifthlegion; for he thought that, by marching in the night, theymight be tired, and might deserve to be covered from theenemy, and with less fear might fortify themselves; and asthese were now beginning to build, the tenth legion, whichcame through Jericho, was already come to the place, wherea certain party of armed men had formerly lain, to guardthat pass into the city, and had been taken before by Ves­pasian. These legions had orders to encamp at the distanceof six furlongs from Jerusalem, at the mount called the Mountof Olives,'' which lies over against the city on the east side,and is parted from it by a deep valley interposed betweenthem, which is named Cedron.
4. Now, when hitherto the several parties in the city hadbeen dashing one against another perpetually, this foreignwar, now suddenly come upon them after a violent manner,put the first step to their contentions one against another:and as the seditious now saw with astonishment the Romanspitching three several camps, they began to think of an awk­ward sort of concord, and said one to another, — "What dowe here, and what do we mean when we suffer three fortifiedwalls to be built to coop us in, that we shall not bo able tobreathe freely ? while the enemy is securely building a kindof city in opposition to us, and while we sit still within ourown walls, and become spectators only of what they are doing,with our hands idle, and our armor laid by, as if they wereabout somewhat that was for our own good and advantage.We are, it seems (so did they cry out,) only courageousagainst ourselves, while the Romans are likely to gain thecity without bloodshed by our sedition." Thus did they en­


1 This situation of the Mount of Olives on the east of Jerusalem, at about.the distance of five or six furlongs, with the valley of Cedron interposedbetween that mountain and the city, are things well known, both in the Oldand New Testament, in Josophus elsewhere, and in all the descriptions ofPalestine.







OCR Output








INDEX. 563


captive woman, ii. 380; to marrya virgin, and not to touch a deadbody, i. 252; the prophets, andsanhedrim, wcro to determine dif­ficult causes, 302 ; several at thesame time in later ages, iv. 92,228; to succeed by birth, 230:elected by lot among the seditious,91; abolish the regular succession,ib.; Herod mado the high-prieststill his death, iii. 204; a seriesfrom Aaron to the destruction ofthe temple by Titus, 300; anotherseries, from tho building of thetemple to the captivity, ii. 176;high-priests' robes kept by the Ko-mans, iii. 264; where they werelaid up, ii. 601; iii. 153; high-priest's ornaments described, i.230; iv. 186.
High-priesthood translated from onefamily to another, i. 388; of Oniasat Heliopolis, ii. 320, 379; iii. 301;vacant at Jerusalem for four years,ii. 336; Herod, Antiochus Epi-phanes and Aristobulus deprivehigh-priests of their office whichothers held for life, ii. 497 ; takenfrom Jesus, and given to Simon,646; settled upon the family ofAaron, iii. 299.
Priests' lands in the days of Josephfree from tax, i. 1 08.
Primogeniture, its privileges sold byEsau, i. 136.
Primus (Antonius,) marches againstVitellius, and kills him, iv. 134,150.
Priscus (Tyrannins,) iii. 542.
Priscus kills Jonathan, iv. 258.
Privileges granted the Jews by Alex­ander the Great, iv. 412.
Prophecies of the destruction of Jeru­salem, iv. 121, 276.
Prophecy of Isaiah, accomplished, ii.310.
Prophecies could not agree to theevents, if the world were governedby chance, ii. 200, et seg.
Prophets, excepting Daniel, chieflyforetold calamities, ii. 198; greatlyto be esteemed, 90.
Prophets (false ones) suborned bythe Jewish tyrants, iv. 273.
Proscuchae, or houses of prayer,among the Jews, i. 53.


Prostitution of the body, a most
heinous crime, i. 300.Providence asserted, ii. 200.Pseud-Alexander, iii. 469.Ptolemy, the administrator of Herod's
kingdom, iii. 39, 58; i. 38.Ptolemy, the brother of Clecpatra,
poisoned by her, ii. 607.Ptolemy, the brother of Nicolaus of
Damascus, iii. 110.Ptolemy Epiphanes, ii. 279; he dies,
295.Ptolemy Euergetes, Philopatcr, or
Eupator, ii. 279, 284; iv. 414.Ptolemy, tho son of Jamblicis, ii.
430; iii. 348.Ptolemy Lathyrus, ii. 378; iii. 331;driven out of his kingdom, ii. 391;makes an alliance with Alexander,and breaks it, 389; defeats Alex­ander's army, 390; his cruelty, ib.Ptolemy, son of Lagus, obtains Egyptafter the death of Alexander thoGreat, ii. 258; takes Jerusalem,and carries many Jews into Egypt,259.Ptolemy Philadelphus, the secondking of Egypt of that race, Tref.i. lxix.; his skill in mechanic arts,ii. 208; procures a translation ofthe law of Moses, 261; iv. 414;sets a vast number of the Jewsfree, 202; sends a letter to thehigh-priest, 266; his liberal obla­tions and presents, 268, et seg.Ptolemy Philometer, ii. 295, 339; iv.414 ; he and his queen Cleopatrapermit Onias to build the templeUnion, ii. 341 ; expedition intoSyria, 346; is wounded and dies,349.Ptolemy, son of Mcncus, ii. 404, 415,458; prince of Chalcis, 430; homarries Alexaudrn, ib.Ptolemy, the murderer of Simon theMaccabce, ii. 369; murders JohnHyrcanus's mother and brothers,370.Ptolemy Physcon, ii. 295, 376; iv.
414.Pudens engages in a duel with Jona­than, and is killed, iv. 258.Purple robes worn by Chaldean kings,ii. 193; by the Persian kings, 207,243; Joseph is clothed in purpleby Pharaoh, i. 151.







OCR Output








c. vni.] VESPASIAN. 47


been a centurion, Antonius, who was slain at the taking of thecity. His death was occasioned by the foMowing treachery.For there was one of those that were fled into the caverns,which were a great number, who desired that this Antoniuswould reach him his right hand for his security, and wouldassure him that he would preserve him, and give him hisassistance in getting up out of the cavern; accordingly, heincautiously, reached him his right hand, when the other manprevented him, and stabbed him under his loins with a spear,and killed him immediately.
.36. And on this day it was that the Romans slew all themultitude that appeared openly: but on the following daysthey searched the hiding-places, and fell upon those that wereunder ground and in the caverns, and went thus throughevery age, excepting the infants and the women, and of thesethere were gathered together as captives twelve hundred: andas for those that were slain at the taking of the city and inthe former fights, they were numbered to be forty thousand.So Vespasian gave order that the city should be entirely de­molished, and all the fortifications burnt down. And thuswas Jotapata taken, in the thirteenth year of the reign ofNero, on the first day of the month Panemus [Tamuz.]


CHAPTER VIIL


IXO TO DELIVER HIMSELF UP TO THE ROMANS ; AND WHATDISCOURSE HE HAD WITH HIS OWN MEN WHEN THEY EN­DEAVORED TO HINDER HIM; AND WHAT HE SAID TO VES­PASIAN WHEN HE WAS BROUGHT BEFORE HIM ; AND AFTERWHAT MANNER VESPASIAN USED HIM AFTERWARDS.
§ 1. And now the Romans searched for Josephus, both outof the hatred they bore him, and because their general wasvery desirous to have him taken; for he reckoned that if howere once taken, the greatest part of the war would be over.They then searched among the dead, and looked into the most







OCR Output








42 VESPASIAN. [B. III.


them such as could shoot darts and arrows, with the lighterengines for throwing stones and darts also; and, besidesthese, he set upon them the stoutest men among the slingers,who not being to be seen by reason of the height they stoodupon, and the battlements that protected" them, might throwtheir weapons at those that were upon the wall, and wereeasily seen by them. Hereupon the Jews, not being easilyable to escape those darts that were thrown down upon theirheads, nor to avenge themselves on those whom they couldnot see, and perceiving that the height of the towers was sogreat, that a dart which they threw with their hand couldhardly reach it, and that the iron plates about them made itvery hard to come at them by fire, they ran away from thewalls, and fled hastily out of the city, and fell upon those thatshot at them. And thus did the people of Jotapata resistthe Romans, while a great number of them were every daykilled, without their being able to retort the evil upon theirenemies, nor could they keep them out of the city withoutdanger to themselves.
31. About this time it was that Vespasian sent out Trajanagainst a city called Japha, that lay near to Jotapata, andthat desired innovations, and was puffed up with the unex­pected length of the opposition of Jotapata. This Trajanwas the commander of the tenth legion, and to him Vespasiancommitted one thousand horsemen and two thousand footmen.When Trajan came to the city he found it too hard to betaken ; for besides the natural strength of its situation, it wasalso secured by a double wall; but when he saw the peopleof this city coming out of it, and ready to fight him, he joinedbattle with them, and after a short resistance which theymade, he pursued after them, and as they fled to their firstwall, the Romans followed them so closely, that they fell intogether with them ; but when the Jews were endeavoring toget again within their second wall, their fellow-citizens shutthem out, as being afraid that the Romans would force them­selves in with them. It was certainly God, therefore, whobrought the Romans to punish the Galileans, and did thenexpose the people of the city every one of them manifestly to







OCR Output








328 MASADA AND THE SICARII. [B. VII.


evil deeds were then left undone; nor could any one so muchas devise any bad thing that was new, so deeply were theyall infected, and strove with one another in their singlecapacity, and in their communities, who should run thegreatest lengths in impiety towards God, and in unjust ac­tions towards their neighbors, the men of power oppressingthe multitude, and the multitude earnestly laboring to destroythe men of power. The one part were desirous of tyrannizingover others, and the rest of offering violence to others, andof plundering such as were richer than themselves. Theywere the Sicarii who first began these transgressions, andfirst became barbarous towards those allied to them, and leftno words of reproach unsaid, and no works of perdition un­tried, in order to destroy those whom their contrivancesaffected. Yet did John demonstrate by his actions that theseSicarii were more moderate than he was himself; for he notonly slew all such as gave him good counsel to do what wasright, but treated them worst of all, as the most bitter enemiesthat he had among all the citizens; nay, he filled his entirecountry with ten thousand instances of wickedness, such as aman, who was already hardened sufficiently in his impietytowards God, would naturally do; for the food was unlawfulthat was set upon his table, and he rejected those purificationsthat the law of his country had ordained: so that it was nolonger a wonder if he, who was so mad in his impiety towardsGod, did not observe any rules of gentleness and commonaffection towards men. Again, therefore, what mischief wasthere which Simon the son of Gioras did not do ? or whatkind of abuses did he abstain from, as to those very free menwho had set him up for a tyrant ? What friendship orkindred were there that did not make him more bold in hisdaily murders ? for they looked upon the doing of mischief tostrangers only as a work beneath their courage, but thoughtthat their barbarity towards their nearest relations would bea glorious demonstration thereof. The Idumeans also strovewith these men which should be guilty of the greatest mad­ness ; for they [all,] vile wretehes as they were, cut thethroats of the high-priests, that so no part of a religious







OCR Output








152 AFFAIRS AT ROME. [B. IV.


before the city, and fell into the city, together with the rest,and gave leave to his soldiers to plunder it. And here it wasthat many strangers who were merchants, as well as manyof the people of that country, perished, and among them Vi-tellius's whole army, being thirty thousand and two hundred,while Antonius lost no more of those that came with him fromMysia than four thousand and five hundred : he then loosedCccinna, and sent him to Vespasian, to tell him the good news.So he came, and was received by him, and covered the scandalof his treachery by the unexpected honors he received fromVespasian.
4. And now, upon the news that Antonius was approaching,Sabinus took courage at Rome, and assembled those cohortsof soldiers that kept wateh by night, and in the night-timeseized upon the Capitol; and as the day came on, many menof character came over to him, with Domitian his brother'sson, whose encouragement was of very great weight for thecompassing the government. Now Vitcllius was not muchconcerned at this Primus, but was very angry at those thathad revolted with Sabinus; and thirsting, out of his ownnatural barbarity, after noble blood, he sent out that part ofthe army which came along with him to fight against theCapitol; and many bold actions were done on this side, andon the side of those that held the temple. But at last the sol­diers that came from Germany, being too numerous for theothers, got the hill into their possession, where Domitian, withmany other of the principal Romans, providentially escaped,while the rest of the multitude were entirely cut to pieces,and Sabinus himself was brought to Vitcllius, and then slain ;the soldiers also plundered the temple of its ornaments, andset it on fire. But now, within a day's time, came Antonius,with his army, and were met by Vitcllius and his army, andhaving had a battle in three several places, the last were alldestroyed. Then did Vitcllius come out of the palace in h.1scups, and satiated with an extravagant and luxurious meal, asin the last extremity; and being drawn along through themultitude, and abused with all sorts of torments, had his headcut off in the midst of Rome, having retained the government







OCR Output








50 VESPASIAN. [b. ni.


many hast thou persuaded to lose their lives for liberty ?Thou hast heretofore had a false reputation for manhood,and a like false reputation for wisdom, if thou canst hopefor preservation from those against whom thou hast foughtso zealously, and art, however, willing to be preserved bythem, if they be in earnest. But although the good fortuneof the Romans hath made thee forget thyself, we ought totake care that the glory of our forefathers may not betarnished. We will lend thee our right hand and a sword;and if thou wilt die willingly, thou wilt die as general of theJews ; but if unwillingly, thou wilt die as a traitor to them."As soon as they said this, they began to thrust their swordsat him, and threatened they would kill him if he thought ofyielding himself to the Romans.
5. Upon this Josephus was afraid of their attacking him,and yet thought he should be a betrayer of the commands ofGod, if he died before they were delivered. So he began totalk like a philosopher to them, in the distress he was thenin, when he said thus to them.—" O my friends, why are weso earnest to kill ourselves ? and why do we set our soul andbody, which are such dear companions, at such variance?Can any one pretend that I am not the man I was formerly ?Nay, the Romans are sensible how that matter stands wellenough. It is a brave thing to die in war, but so that it beaccording to the law of war, by the hand of conquerors. If,therefore, I avoid death from the sword of the Romans, I amtruly worthy to be killed by my own sword and my ownhand: but if they admit of mercy, and would spare theirenemy, how much more ought we to have mercy upon our­selves, and to spare ourselves ? for it is certainly a foolishthing to do that to ourselves which we quarrel with them fordoing to us. I confess freely, that it is a brave thing to diefor liberty, but still so that it be in war, and done by thosewho take that liberty from us; but in the present case ourenemies do neither meet us in battle, nor do they kill us.Now, ho is equally a coward who will not die when he isobliged to die, and he who will die when ho is not obliged soto do. "What are we afraid of when we will not go up to







OCR Output








14 SAMARIA AND JUDEA. [b. HI.


called Ginea, and ends at the Acrabene toparchy, and is en­tirely of the same nature with Judea; for both countries aremade up of hills and valleys, and are moist enough for agri­culture, and are very fruitful. They have abundance oftrees, and are full of autumnal fruit, both that which growswild and that which is the effect of cultivation. They arenot naturally watered by many rivers, but derive their chiefmoisture from rain-water, of which they have no want; andfor those rivers which they have, all their waters arc exceed­ing sweet: by reason also of the excellent grass they have,their cattle yield more milk than do those in other places;and, what is the greatest sign of excellency and of abundance,they each of them arc very full of people.
5. In the limits of Samaria and Judea lies the village An-uath, which is also named Borceos. This is the northernboundary of Judea. The southern parts of Judea, if they bemeasured lengthways, are bounded by a village adjoining tothe confines of Arabia; the Jews that dwell there call it Jor­dan. However, its breadth is extended from the river Jor­dan to Joppa. The city Jerusalem is situated in the verymiddle ; on which account some have, with sagacity enough,called that city the navel of the country. Nor, indeed, isJudea destitute of such delights as come from the sea, sinceits maritime places extend as far as Ptolemais: it was partedinto eleven portions, of which the royal city Jerusalem wasthe supreme, and presided over all the neighboring country,as the head does over the body. As to the other cities thatwere inferior to it, they presided over their several toparchies;Gophna was the second of those cities, and next to thatAcrabatta; after them Thamna, and Lydda, and Emmaus,and Pella, and Idumea, and Engaddi, and Herodium, andJericho ; and after them came Jamnia and Joppa, as presidingover the neighboring people : and besides these there was theregion of Gamala, and Gaulanitis, and Batanea, and Tracho-nitis, which are also parts of the kingdom of Agrippa. This[last] country begins at Mount Libanus and the fountains ofJordan, and reaches breadthways to the lake of Tiberias;and in length is extended from a village called Arpha as







OCR Output








480 DISSERTATION I.


Christ; nay, while his testimonies of John the Baptist andof James the Just are so honorable, and give them so greatcharacters, it is also impossible that his testimony concerningChrist should be other than very honorable, or such as affordedhim a still greater character also. Could the very same author,who gave such a full and advantageous character of John theBaptist, the forerunner of Jesus of Nazareth, all whose disci­ples were by him directed to Jesus of Nazareth, as to the trueMessias, and all of whom became afterwards the disciples ofJesus of Nazareth, say nothing honorable of that Jesus of Na­zareth himself; and this in a history of those very times inwhich he was born and lived, and died, and that while thewriter lived but a little after him in the same country in whichhe was born, and lived, and died ? This is almost incredible.And further, could the very same author, who gave such anadvantageous character of James the Just, and this under thevery appellation of James the brother of Jesus, who was calledChrist, which James was one of the principal disciples orapostles of this Jesus Christ, and had been many years theonly Christian bishop of the believing Jews of Judea and Je­rusalem, in the very days, and in the very country of thiswriter; could he, I say, wholly omit any, nay, a very honor­able account of Jesus Christ himself, whose disciple and bishopthis James most certainly was ? This is also almost incredible.Hear what Ittigius, one of the wisest and learnedest of all thosewho have lately inclined to give up the testimony concerningChrist, as it stands in our copies, for spurious, says upon thisoccasion:—"If any one object to me, that Josephus hathnot omitted John the Baptist, the forerunner of Christ, norJames the disciple of Christ, and that therefore he could nothave done the part of a good historian, if he had been entirelysilent concerning Christ, I shall freely grant that Josephuswas not entirely silent concerning Christ; nay, I shall furthergrant, that when Josephus was speaking of Christ, he did notabstain from his commendation; for we are not to determinefrom that inveterate hatred which the modern Jews bear toChrist, what was the behavior of those Jews, upon whom themiracles that were daily wrought by the apostles in the nameof Christ imprinted a sacred horror."







OCR Output








320 LUCILIUSBASSUS. [b. VII.


those that met them, in which conflicts they were many ofthem slain, as they therein slew many of the Romans. Butstill it was the opportunities that presented themselves whichchiefly gained both sides their victories; these were gained bythe Jews, when they fell upon the Romans as they were offtheir guard; but by the Romans, when upon the other's salliesagainst their banks they foresaw their coming, and were upontheir guard when they received them. But the conclusion ofthis siege did not depend upon these bickerings; but a certainsurprising accident, relating to what was done in this siege,forced the Jews to surrender the citadel. There was a certainyoung man among the besieged, of great boldness, and veryactive of his hand; his name was EUazar: he greatly sig­nalized himself in those sallies, and encouraged the Jews togo out in great numbers, in order to hinder the raising of thebanks, and did the Romans a vast deal of mischief when theycame to fighting. He so managed matters, that those whosallied out made their attacks easily, and returned back with­out danger, and this by still bringing up the rear himself.Now it happened, that on a certain time, when the fight wasover, and both sides were parted and retired home, he in wayof contempt of the enemy, and thinking that none of themwould begin the fight again at that time, stayed without thegates, and talked with those that were upon the wall, and hismind was wholly intent upon what they said. Now a certainperson belonging to the Roman camp, whose name was Rufus,by birth an Egyptian, ran upon him suddenly, when nobodyexpected such a thing, and carried him off, with his armoritself; while, in the mean time, those that saw it from thewall were under such an amazement, that Rufus preventedtheir assistance, and carried Eleazar to the Roman camp.So the general of the Romans ordered that he should botaken up naked, set before the city to be seen, and sorelywhipped before their eyes. Upon this sad accident that be­fell the young man, the Jews were terribly confounded, andthe city, with one voice, sorely lamented him, and the mourn­ing proved greater than could well be supposed upon thecalamity of a single person. When Bassus perceived that,







OCR Output








INDEX. 553


ii. 492; marries the famous Mari-amne, 495; iii. 381; causes biswife's brother Aristobulus to bedrowned, ii. 501; is summoned totake his trial for it, 502; brings An­tony over to his interest by bribes,504; puts Joseph to death, 506; issolicited to adultery by Cleopatra,507; makes war against the Ara­bians, 509; iii. 385; his speech tothe army in distress, ii. 512; iii.387 ; beats the Arabians, ii. 514;iii. 389; puts Hyrcanus to death,ii. 520; his commentaries, ib.; or­ders Mariamne to be put to death,if he himself come to an ill end,522; his presence of mind beforeAugustus, ib. ; is confirmed in hiskingdom, 524; entertains Caesarmagnificently, ib. ; receives morefavors from Coesar, and has his do­minions enlarged, 527 ; iii. 391 ;puts Mariamne to death, 402; isvery uneasy at her death, ii. 531 ;iii. 402 ; is afflicted with a kind ofmadness, 97, 446; departs fromthe manners and customs of theJews, ii. 536; builds theatres, andexhibits shows, ib. ; a conspiracyagainst him, 539; builds a templeat Samaria, 541 ; a palace at Jeru­salem, 545; and a citadel, 546;relieves the people in a famine,544; marries Simon's daughter,546; his policy, ib.; builds Ca;sa-rea, 548; sends his sons to Rome,550; builds a temple to Cresar,554; eases the people of a thirdpart of their taxes, ib.; forbidsthem to meet privately, ib.; keepsspies, and becomes one himself,ib.; honors the Eascns, 555; re­builds the temple, 556; iii. 393 ;makes a new law concerningthieves, 7; goes to Caesar, bringshome his sons, and marries them,8, 9; entertains Marcus Agrippa,9; is in great favor with Agrippa,10; eases his subjects of the fourthpart of their taxes, 17 ; quarrels inhis family, ib.; favors Antipater,19; impeaches his sons at Rome,21; is reconciled to them. 27; iii.405; celebrates giimes in honor ofCoesar, 29; builds towns and cas-
IV. —47


ties, 30; builds Apollo's temple,and renews the Olympic games,31; iii. 396; his temper described,31; opens David's sepulchre, 36;suspects his kindred, 37; is ac­cused by Sylleus, 53; his crueltyto his sons, 64; accuses them incouncil, ib. ; orders them to bestrangled, 68; provides for theirchildren, 73; his wives and chil­dren, 74, 160; contracts marriagesfor Mariamne's children, 74, 426;alters those contracts, 428; sendsAntipater to Cossar, 80, 430; ismade to believe that his brotherwas poisoned, 82, 432; finds thepoison was for himself, 433; triesAntipater, and puts him in chains,87; his bitterness in his old age,97; makes his will, ib.; his terri­ble sickness, 101, 446; his orderfor murdering the principal of thoJews, 102; attempts to murderhimself, 104; alters his will, ib. *,his character, 105; death and bu­rial, 106, 450; his will opened andread, 106; not to take place tillconfirmed by Ccesar, ib.
Herod, son of Herod, made tetrarch,iii. 141, 178, 480; builds towns inhonor of Coosar, 481 ; sends a let­ter to Coesar, 155; makes war uponAretas, 156; is banished, 483.
Herod, Agrippa senior's brother, iii.278; marries Mariamne, 160; hasthe power over the temple givenhim by Claudius, 264; his deathand children, 278, 489.
Hcrodias envies Agrippa's royal dig­nity, iii. 178, 483 ; follows her hus­band in his banishment, 180; mar­ried to Herod, son of Herod theGreat, 161; afterward married toHerod, the former husband's bro­ther, 163.
Hezekiah, king of Judah, ii. 142;his speech to his people, ib.; hissolemn celebration of tho passover,144; makes war upon the Philis­tines, ib. ; defends himself fromSennacherib, 149; recovers fromsickness, 153; dies, 156.
Hiram, David's friend, i. 479; sendsambassadors to Solomon, ii. 14.
Hiram, king of Tyre, iv. 374.







OCR Output








98 T II E III G II - P R I E S T A N A N U S . [b. IV.
six thousand armed men, and placed them as guards in thecloisters: so there was a succession of such guards one afteranother, and every one was forced to attend in his course;although many of the chief of the city were dismissed by thosethat then took on them the government, upon their hiringsome of the poorer sort, and sending them to keep the guardin their stead.
13. Now it was John who, as we told you, ran away fromGischala, and was the occasion of all these heing destroyed.He was a man of great craft, and bore about him in his soula strong passion after tyranny, and at a distance was theadviser in these actions; and, indeed, at times he pretendedto be of the people's opinion, and went all about with Ananus,when he consulted the great men every day, and in the night­time also when he went round the watch; but he divulgedtheir secrets to the zealots, and every thing that the peopledeliberated about was by his means known to their enemies,even before it had been well agreed upon by themselves. Andby way of contrivance how he might not be brought into sus­picion, he cultivated the greatest friendship possible withAnanus and with the chief of the people; yet did this over­doing of his turn against him, for he nattered them so extrava­gantly, that he was but the more suspected; and his constantattendance every where, even when he was not invited to bepresent, made him strongly suspected of betraying their se­crets to the enemy; for they plainly perceived that they un­derstood all the resolutions taken against them at their con­sultations. Nor was there any one whom they had so muchreason to suspect of that discovery as this John; yet was itnot easy to get quit of him, so potent was he grown by hiswicked practices. He was also supported by many of thoseeminent men, who were to be consulted upon all considerableaffairs; it was, therefore, thought reasonable to oblige him togive them assurance of his good-will upon oath: accordingly,John took such an oath readily, that he would be on the peo­ple's side, and would not betray any of their counsels or prac­tices to their enemies, and would assist them in overthrowingthose that attacked them, and that both by his hand and his







OCR Output








76 8 I E G B 0 F G A M A L A . [B. IV.


away; for they were so unacquainted with the ways, and thedust was so thick, that they wandered about without knowingone another, and fell down dead among the crowd.
5. Those, therefore, that were able to find the ways outof the city, retired. But now Vespasian always stayed amongthose that were hard set; for he was deeply affected withseeing the ruins of the city falling upon his army, and forgotto take care of his own preservation. He went up graduallytowards the highest parts of the city be/ore he was aware, andwas left in the midst of dangers, having only a very few withhim ; for even his son Titus was not with him at that time,having been then sent into Syria to Mucianus. However, hethought it not safe to fly, nor did he esteem it a fit thing for himto do; but calling to mind the actions he had done from hisyouth, and recollecting his courage, as if he had been excitedby a divine fury, he covered himself and those that were withhim with their shields, and formed a testudo over both theirbodies and their armor, and bore up against the enemies'attacks, who came running down from the top of the city;and without showing any dread at the multitude of the menor of their darts, he endured all, until the enemy took noticeof that divine courage that was within him, and remitted oftheir attacks; and when they pressed less zealously upon him,he retired, though without showing his back to them, till hewas gotten out of the walls of the city. Now a great numberof the Romans fell in this battle, among whom was Ebutius,the decurion, a man who appeared not only in this engage­ment, wherein he fell, but every where, and in former engage­ments to be of the truest courage, and one that had done verygreat mischief to the Jews. But there was a centurion whosename was Gallus, who during this disorder being encompassedabout, he and ten other soldiers privately crept into the houseof a certain person, where he heard them talking at supperwhat the people intended to do against the Romans, or aboutthemselves (for both the man himself and those with him wcroSyrians.) So he got up in the night-time, and cut all theirthroats, and escaped, together with his soldiers, to the Romans.
6. And now Vespasian comforted his army, which was much







OCR Output








226 THE FAMINE, [B. V,


3. So all hope of escaping was now cut off from the Jews,together with their liberty of going out of the city. Thendid the famine widen its progress, and devoured the peopleby whole houses and families; the upper rooms were full ofwomen and children that were dying by famine, and the lanesof the city were full of the dead bodies of the aged; thechildren also and the young men wandered about the market­places like shadows, all swelled with the famine, and fell downdead, wheresoever their misery seized them. As for buryingthem, those that were sick themselves were not able to do it,and those that were hearty and well were deterred from doingit by the great multitude of those dead bodies, and by theuncertainty there was how soon they should die themselves;for many died as they were burying others, and many wentto their coffins before that fatal hour was come. Nor wasthere any lamentations made under these calamities, nor wereheard any mournful complaints; but the famine confoundedall natural passions; for those that were just going to dielooked upon those that were gone to their rest before themwith dry eyes and open mouths. A deep silence also, and akind of deadly night, had seized upon the city; while yet therobbers were still more terrible than these miseries were them­selves ; for they brake open those houses which were no otherthan graves of dead bodies, and plundered them of what theyhad, and carrying off the coverings of their bodies, went outlaughing, and tried the points of their swords in their deadbodies ; and in order to prove what metal they were made of,they thrust some of those through that still lay alive upon theground ; but for those that entreated them to lend them theirright hand and their sword to dispatch them, they were tooproud to grant their requests, and left them to be consumedby the famine. Now every one of these died with their eyesfixed upon the temple, and left the seditious alive behindthem. Now the seditious at first gave orders that the deadshould be buried out of the public treasury, as not enduringthe stench of their dead bodies. But afterwards, when theycould not do that, they had them cast down from the wallsinto the valleys beneath.







OCR Output








C. XII.] TITUS WALLS UP THE CITY. 223


from hearing one another, that neither side could discern anenemy from a friend. However, the Jews did not flinch,though not so much from their real strength as from theirdespair of deliverance. The Romans also would not yield,by reason of the regard they had to glory, and to their repu­tation in war, and because Caesar himself went into the dangerbefore them ; insomuch that I cannot but think the Romanswould in the conclusion have now taken even "the whole multi­tude of the Jews, so very angry were they at them, had thesenot prevented the upshot of the battle, and retired into thocity. However, seeing tho banks of the Romans were de­molished, these Romans were very much cast down upon theloss of what had cost them so long pains, and this in onehour's time. And many, indeed, despaired of taking thecity with their usual engines of war only.


CHAPTER XII.
TITUS THOUGHT FIT TO ENCOMPASS THE CITY ROUND WITH AWALL ; AFTER WHICH THE FAMINE CONSUMED THE PEOPLEBY WHOLE HOUSES AND FAMILIES TOGETHER.
§ 1. And now did Titus consult with his commanders whatwas to be done. Those that were of the warmest tempersthought he should bring the whole army against the city, andstorm the wall; for that hitherto no more than a part of theirarmy had fought with the Jews ; but that in case the entiroarmy was to come at once, they would not be able to sustaintheir attacks, but would be overwhelmed by their darts. Butof those that were for a more cautious management, somewere for raising their banks again, and others advised to letthe banks alone, but to lie still before the city, to guardagainst the coming out of the Jews, and against their carry­ing provisions into the city, and so to leave the enemy to thefamine, and this without direct fighting with them; for thatdespair was not to be conquered, especially as to those whoarc desirous to die by the sword, while a more terrible misery







OCR Output








78 S I E G E 0 F G A M A L A . [B. IV.


troyed, and punish those that have killed them. For myself,I will endeavor, as I have now done, to go first before youagainst your enemies in every engagement, and to be the lastthat retires from it."
7. So Vespasian encouraged his army by this speech; butfor the people of Gamala, it happened that they took couragefor a little while upon such great and unaccountable successas they had had. But when they considered with themselvesthat they had now no hopes of any terms of accommodation,and reflecting upon it that they could not get away, and thattheir provisions began already to be short, they were exceed­ingly cast down, and their courage failed them: yet did theynot neglect what might be for their preservation, so far asthey were able, but the most courageous among them guardedthose parts of the wall that were beaten down, while the moreinfirm did the same to the rest of the wall that still remainedround the city. And as the Romans raised their banks, andattempted to get into the city a second time, a great manyof them fled out of the city through impracticable valleys,where no guards were placed, as also through subterraneouscaverns; while those that were afraid of being caught, andfor that reason stayed in the city, perished for want of food;for what food they had was brought together from all quarters,and reserved for the fighting-men.
8. And these were the hard circumstances the people ofGamala were in. But now Vespasian went about anotherwork, by-tho-by, during this siege, and that was to subduethose that had seized upon Mount Tabor, a place that lies inthe middle between the great plain and Scythopolis, whosetop is elevated as high as thirty furlongs,1 and is hardly to be


1 These numbers in Joscphus of 30 furlongs ascent to the top of MountTabor, whether we estimate it by winding and gradual, or by the perpendi­cular altitude, and of 26 furlongs in circumference upon the top, as also the15 furlongs for this ascent to Polybius, with Geminus's perpendicular altitudeof almost 14 furlongs, here noted by Dr. Hudson, do none of them agree withthe authentic testimony of Mr. Maundrel, an eye-witness, p. 112, who sayshe was not an hour in getting up to the top of this Mount Tabor, and thatthe arca of the top is an oval of about two furlongs in length and one inbreadth. So I rather suppose Joscphus wroto 3 furlongs for the ascent oraltitude, instead of 30; and 6 furbngs for the circumference at the top, in­







OCR Output








250 DESERTIONS FROM [b. VI.


with him, they were but the more exasperated against theRomans on this account, and were desirous to get Josephusalso into their power : yet did that discourse influence a greatmany of the better sort; and truly some of them were soafraid of the guards set by the seditious, that they tarriedwhere they were, but still were satisfied that both they andthe city were doomed to destruction. Some also there were,who, watching a proper opportunity when they might quietlyget away, fled to the Romans, of whom were the high-priestsJoseph and Jesus, and of the sons of high-priests three, whosefather was Ishmael, who was beheaded in Cyrene, and foursons of Matthias, as also one son of the other Matthias, whoran away after' his father's death, and whose father wasslain by Simon, the son of Gioras, with three of his sons,as I have already related; many also of the other nobilitywent over to the Romans, together with the high-priests.Now Caesar not only received these men very kindly in otherrespects, but, knowing they would not willingly live after thecustoms of other nations, he sent them to Gophna, and de­sired them to remain there for the present, and told them,that when he was gotten clear of this war, he would restoreeach of them to their possessions again: so they cheerfullyretired to that small city which was allotted them, withoutfear of any danger. But as they did not appear, the seditiousgave out again that these deserters were slain by the Romans,which was done in order to deter the rest from running away,by fear of the like treatment. This trick of theirs succeedednow for a while, as did the like trick before; for the restwere hereby deterred from deserting, by fear of the liketreatment.
3. However, wheu Titus had recalled those men fromGophna, he gave orders that they should go round the wall


1 Josephus had before told us, B. v. ch. xiii. sect. I, that this fourth sonof Matthias ran away to the Romans before his father's and brethren-sslaughter, and not after it, as here. The former account is, in all probability,the truest; for had not that fourth eon escaped before the others were caughtand put to death, he had been caught and put to death with them. Thislast account, therefore looks like an instance of a small inadvertence of Jo­sephus in the place before us.







OCR Output








528 DISSERTATION III.


Chap. XIII.] Such prodigies' had happened as this nation,-which is superstitious enough in its own way, would not agreeto expiate by the ceremonies of the Roman religion, norwould they atone to the gods by sacrifices and vows, as theseused to do on the like occasions. Armies were seen to fightin the sky, and their armor looked of a bright red color,and the temple shone with sudden flashes of fire out of theclouds. The doors of the temple were opened on a sudden,and a voice greater than human was heard, that the godswere retiring; and at the same time was there a great motionperceived, as if they were going out of it, which some esteemedto be causes of terror. The greater part had a firm beliefthat it was contained in the old sacerdotal books, that at thisvery time the cast would prevail, and that some that cameout of Judea should obtain the empire of the world, whichebscure oracle foretold Vespasian and Titus; but the gene­rality of the common people, as usual, indulged their owninclinations, and when they had once interpreted all to fore­bode grandeur to themselves, adversity itself could not per­suade them to change their minds, though it were from false­hood to truth.5
We have been informed that the number of the besieged,of every age, and of both sexes, male and female, was sixhundred thousand.3 There were weapons for all that couldcarry them, and more than could be expected, for theirnumber were bold enough to do so. The men and thewomen were equally obstinate; and when they supposedthey were to be carried captive, they were more afraid oflife than of death.
Against this city and nation Titus Caesar resolved to fight,


1 These prodigies, and more, arc at large in Joscphus, Antiq. b. vi. chap.v. sect. 3.
2 This interpretation and reflections are in Josephus, Antiq. b. vi. chap,v. seet. 4.
8 The number 000,000 for the besieged is nowhere in Josephus, but is therefor the poor buried at the publio charge, Antiq. b. v. chap. xiii. sect. 7,which might be about the number of the besieged under Cestius Gallus,though they were many more afterward at Titus's siege, as Joscphusimplies, Antiq. b. vi. ch. ix. sect. 3.







OCR Output








86 JOHN OF G ISC HA LA. [B. IV.


men to pursue after John, but they could not overtake him,for he was gotten to Jerusalem before; they also slew sixthousand of the women and children who went out with him,but returned back and brought with them almost three thou­sand. However, Titus was greatly displeased that he hadnot been able to bring this John, who had deluded him, topunishment; yet he had captives enough, as well as the cor­rupted part of the city, to satisfy his anger, when it missedof John. So he entered the city in the midst of acclamationsof joy; and when he had given orders to the soldiers to pulldown a small part of the wall, as of a city taken in war, herepressed those that had disturbed the city rather by threat-enings than by executions; for he thought that many wouldaccuse innocent persons, out of their own private animositiesand quarrels, if he should attempt to distinguish those thatwere worthy of punishment from the rest; and that it wasbetter to let a guilty person alone in his fears, than to destroywith him any one that did not deserve it; for that probablysuch a one might be taught prudence by the fear of thepunishment he had deserved, and have a shame upon him forhis former offences, when he had been forgiven; but that thepunishment of such as have been once put to death couldnever be retrieved. However, ho placed a garrison in thecity for its security, by which means he should restrain thosethat were for innovations, and should leave those that werepeaceably disposed in greater security. And thus was allGalilee taken, but this not till after it had cost the Romansmuch pains before it could be taken by them.
CHAPTER III.
CONCERNING JOHN OF GISCHALA. CONCERNING THE ZEALOTS,AND THE HIGH-PRIEST ANANUS ; AS ALSO HOW THE JEWSRAISED SEDITIONS ONE AGAINST ANOTHER [iN JERUSALEM.]
§ 1. Now, upon John's entr}' into Jerusalem, the wholebody of the people were in an uproar, and ten thousand ofthem crowded about every one of the fugitives that were







OCR Output








C. V.] AND ROMAN CAMPS. 21


ranks, so sudden are their turnings about, so sharp theirhearing as to what orders are given them, so quick theirsight of the ensigns, and so nimble are their hands whenthey set to work : whereby it comes to pass, that what theydo is done quickly, and what they suffer they bear with thegreatest patience. Nor can we find any examples wherethey have been conquered in battle, when they came to aclose fight, either by the multitude of the enemies, or bytheir stratagems, or by the difficulties in the places theywere in, no, nor by fortune neither; for their victories havebeen surer to them than fortune could have granted them.In a case, therefore, where counsel still goes before action,and where, after taking the best advice, that advice is fol­lowed by so active an army, what wonder is it that Euphrateson the cast, the ocean on the west, the most fertile regionsof Libya on the south, and the Danube and Rhine on thenorth, are the limits of this empire ? One might well say,that the Roman possessions are not inferior to the Romansthemselves.
8. This account I have given the reader, not so much withthe intention of commending the Romans, as of comfortingthose that have been conquered by them, and for the deter­ring others from attempting innovations under their govern­ment. This discourse of the Roman military conduct mayalso perhaps be of use to such of the curious as are ignorantof it, and yet have a mind to know it. I return now fromthis digression.
CHAPTER VI.
PLACIDCS ATTEMPTS TO TAKE JOTAPATA, AND IS BEATEN OFF.VESPASIAN MARCHES INTO GALILEE.
§ 1. And now Vespasian with his son Titus, had tarriedsome time at Ptolemais, and had put his army in order. Butwhen Placidus, who had overrun Galilee, and had besidesslain a number of those whom he had caught (which wereonly the weaker part of the Galileans, and such as were of







OCR Output








B. II.] AGAINST APION. 441


body, is subject to miseries, and is not freed therefrom againbut by death : on which account the law requires this purifi­cation to be entirely performed.
26. Nay, indeed, the law does not permit us to make fes­tivals at the births of our children, and thereby afford occa­sion of drinking to excess ; but it ordains, that the very be­ginning of our education should be immediately directed tosobriety. It also commands us to bring those children up inlearning, and to exercise them in the laws, and to makethem acquainted with the acts of their predecessors, in orderto their imitation of them, and that they might be nourishedup in the laws from their infancy, and might neither trans­gress them, nor have any pretence for their ignorance ofthem.
27. Our law hath also taken care of the decent burial ofthe dead, but without any extravagant expenses for the fune­rals, and without the erection of any illustrious monumentsfor them ; but hath ordered that their nearest relation shouldperform their obsequies; and hath showed it to bo regular,that all who pass by when any one is buried should accompanythe funeral, and join in the lamentation. It also ordains, thatthe house and its inhabitants should be purified after the fu­neral is over, that every one may thence learn to keep at agreat distance from the thoughts of being pure, if he hathbeen once guilty of murder.
28. The law ordains also, that parents should be honoredimmediately after God himself; and delivers that son, whodoes not requite them for the benefits he hath received fromthem, but is deficient on any such occasion, to be stoned. Italso says, that the young men should pay due respect toevery elder, since God is the eldest of all beings. It doesnot give leave to conceal any thing from our friends, becausethat is not true friendship which will not commit all things totheir fidelity: it also forbids the revelation of secrets, eventhough an enmity arise between them. If any judge takesbribes, his punishment is death: he that overlooks one thatoffers him a petition, and this when he is able to relieve him,he is a guilty person. What is not by any one intrusted to







OCR Output








B. II.] AGAINST A PI ON. 449


left desolate, and others are built anew, according to the plea­sure of men : whereas they ought to have preserved theiropinion about God, and that worship which is due to him,always and immutably the same.
37. But now this Apollonius Molo was one of these foolishand proud men. However, nothing that I have said was un­known to those that were real philosophers among the Greeks;nor were they unacquainted with those frigid pretences of alle­gories [which had been alleged for such things;] on whichaccount they justly despised them, but have still agreed withus as to the true and becoming notions of God; whence it wasthat Plato would not have political settlements admit of anyone of the other poets, and dismisses even Homer himself,with a garland on his head, and with ointment poured uponhim, and this because he should not destroy the right notionsof God with his fables. Nay, Plato principally imitated ourlegislator in this point, that he enjoined his citizens to havethe main regard to this precept, that every one of them shouldlearn their laws accurately. He also ordained that they shouldnot admit of foreigners intermixing with their own people atrandom; and provided that the commonwealth should keepitself pure, and consist of such only as persevered in theirown laws. Apollonius Molo did no way consider this, whenhe made it one branch of his accusation against us, that wedo not admit of such as have different notions about God, norwill we have fellowship with those that choose to observe away of living different from ourselves; yet is not this methodpeculiar to us, but common to all other men; not among theordinary Grecians only, but among such of those Grecians asare of the greatest reputation among them. Moreover, theLacedemonians continued in their way of expelling foreigners,and would not, indeed, give leave to their own people to travelabroad, as suspecting that those two things would introduce adissolution of their own laws: and, perhaps, there may bosome reason to blame the rigid severity of the Lacedemonians;for they bestowed the privilege of their city on no foreigners,nor, indeed, would give leave to them to stay among them:whereas we, though we do not think fit to imitate other insti­


38*







OCR Output








26 VESPASIAN. [B. III.


rias, and went into Jotapata, and raised the drooping spiritsof the Jews. And a certain deserter told this good news toVespasian, that Josephus had removed himself thither, whichmade him make haste to the city, as supposing that withtaking that he should take all Judea, in case he could butwithal get Josephus under his power. So he took this newsto be of the vastest advantage to him, and believed it to bebrought about by the providence of God, that he who appearedto be the most prudent man of all their enemies, had of hisown accord shut himself up in a place of sure custody. Ac­cordingly, he sent Placidus with a thousand horsemen, andEbutius a decurion, a person that was of eminency both incounsel and in action, to encompass the city round, that Jo­sephus might not escape away privately.
4. Vespasian also, the very next day, took his whole armyand followed them, and by marching till late in the evening,arrived then at Jotapata; and bringing his army to thenorthern side of the city, he pitched his camp on a certainsmall hill which was seven furlongs from the city, and stillgreatly endeavored to be well seen by the enemy, to putthem into a consternation; which was, indeed, so terrible tothe Jews immediately, that no one of them durst go outbeyond the wall. Yet did the Romans put off the attack atthat time, because they had marched all the day, althoughthey placed a double row of battalions round the city, with athird row beyond them round the whole, which consisted ofcavalry, in order to stop up every way for an exit; whichthing making the Jews despair of escaping, excited them toact more boldly; for nothing makes men fight so desperatelyin war as necessity.
5. Now when the next day an assault was made by theRomans, the Jews at first stayed out of the walls, andopposed them, and met them, as having formed themselves acamp before the city walls. But when Vespasian had setagainst them the archers and slingers, and the whole mul­titude that could throw to a great distance, he permittedthem to go to work, while he himself with the footmen gotupon an acclivity, whence the city might easily be taken.







OCR Output








204 THUS RESUMES [B. V.


did not go on in the defence of the city, they thought it muchbetter to die in war. Fate also prevailed so far over them,that the innocent were to perish with the guilty, and the citywas to be destroyed with the seditious that were in it.
2. Thus did the Romans spend four days in bringing thissubsistence-money to the several legions. But on the fifthday, when no signs of peace appeared to come from the Jews,Titus divided his legions, and began to raise banks both atthe tower of Antonia and at John's monument. Now, hisdesigns were to take the upper city at that monument, andthe temple at the tower of Antonia; for if the temple werenot taken, it would be dangerous to keep the city itself; so ateach of these parts he raised him banks, each legion raisingone. As for those that wrought at John's monument, theIdumeans, and those that were in arms with Simon, madesallies upon them, and put some stop to them; while John'sparty, and the multitude of zealots with them, did the like tothose that were before the tower of Antonia. These Jewswere now too hard for the Romans, not only in direct fight­ing, because they stood upon the higher ground, but becausethey had now learned to use their own engines ; for their con­tinual use of them one day after another, did by degrees im­prove their skill about them; for of one sort of engines fordarts they had three hundred, and forty for stones, by themeans of which they made it more tedious for the Romans toraise their banks. But then Titus, knowing that the citywould be either saved or destroyed for himself, did not onlyproceed earnestly in the siege, but did not omit to have theJews exhorted to repentance: so he mixed good counsel withhis works for the siege. And being sensible that exhortationsare frequently more effectual than arms, he persuaded themto surrender the city, now in a manner already taken, andthereby to save themselves, and sent Josephus to speak tothem in their own language; for he imagined they might yieldto the persuasion of a countryman of their own.
3. So Josephus went round about the wall, and tried tofind a place that was out of the reach of their darts, and yetwithin their hearing, and besought them, in many words, —







OCR Output








C. V.] TRIUMPH OF THE ROMAN BMPERORS. 311


that was had been by him taken by force; nay, he frequentlycursed those that had been the authors of their revolt, andhad brought such a punishment upon the city; insomuch thatit openly appeared, that he did not desire that such a calamityas this punishment of theirs amounted to should be a demon­stration of his courage. Yet was there no small quantity ofthe riches that had been in that city still found among itsruins, a great deal of which the Romans dug up; but thegreatest part was discovered by those who were captives, andso they carried it away : I mean the gold and the silver, andthe rest of that most precious furniture which the Jews had,and which the owners had treasured up under ground againstthe uncertain fortunes of war.
3. So Titus took the journey he intended to Egypt, andpassed over the desert very suddenly, and came to Alexan­dria, and took up a resolution to go to Rome by sea. Andas he was accompanied by two legions, he sent each of themagain to the places whence they had before come; the fifthhe sent to Mysia and the fifteenth to Pannonia: as for theleaders of the captives, Simon and John, with the other sevenhundred men, whom he had selected out of the rest, as beingeminently tall and handsome of body, he gave order that theyshould be soon carried to Italy, as resolving to produce themin his triumph. So when he had had a prosperous voyage tohis mind, the city of Rome behaved itself in his reception,and their meeting him at a distance, as it did in the case ofhis father. But what made the most splendid appearance inTitus's opinion was, when his father met him and receivedhim; hut still the multitude of the citizens conceived thegreatest joy when they saw them all three' together, as theydid at this time: nor were many days overpast when theydetermined to have but one triumph, that should be commonto both of them, on account of the glorious exploits they hadperformed, although the senate had decreed each of them aseparate triumph by himself. So when notice had been givenbeforehand of the day appointed for this pompous solemnityto be made on account of their victories, not one of the im-
1 Vespasian, and bis two sons, Titus and Domitian.







OCR Output








74 SIEGE OF GAM ALA. [b. IV.


is a spring of warm water, useful for healing,) and came toGamala; yet was his situation such that he was not able toencompass it all around with soldiers to watch it; but wherethe places were practicable, he sent men to watch it, andseized upon that mountain which was over it. And as thelegions according to their usual custom were fortifying theircamp upon that mountain, he began to cast up banks at thebottom, at the part toward the east, where the highest towerof the whole city was, and where the fifteenth legion pitchedtheir camp: while the fifth legion did duty over against themidst of the city, and whilst the tenth legion filled up theditches and valleys. Now at this time it was that as kingAgrippa was come nigh the walls, and was endeavoring tospeak to those that were on the walls about a surrender, hewas hit with a stone on his right elbow by one of the slingers;he was then immediately surrounded with his own men. Butthe Romans were excited to set about the siege by their in­dignation on the king's account, and by their fears on theirown account, as concluding that those men would omit nokinds of barbarity against foreigners and enemies, who wereso enraged against one of their own nation, and one that ad­vised them to nothing but what was for ther own advantage.4. Now when the hanks were finished, which was done onthe sudden, both by the multitude of hands and by their beingaccustomed to such work, they brought the machines; butChares and Joseph, who were the most potent men in thecity, set their armed men in order, though already in a fright,because they did not suppose that the city could hold outlong, since they had not a sufficient quantity either of water,or of other necessaries. However, these their leaders encour­aged them, and brought them out upon the wall, and for awhile, indeed, they drove away those that were bringing themachines; but when those machines threw darts and stonesat them, they retired into the city; then did the Romansbring battering-rams to three several places, and made thewalls shake [and fall.] They then poured in over the partsof the wall that were thrown down, with the mighty sound oftrumpets and noise of armor, and with a shout of the soldiers,







OCR Output








CXI.] ANTIOCHUS EPIPHANES. 219


followed by his deeds. In answer to which the seditious castreproaches upon Caesar himself, and upon his father also, andcried out with a loud voice, that " they contemned death, anddid well in preferring it before slavery; that they would doall the mischief to the Romans they could while they hadbreath in them ; and that for their own city, since they were,as he said, to be destroyed, they had no concern about it, andthat the world itself w;is a better temple to God than this:that yet this temple.would bo preserved by him that inhabitedtherein, whom they still had for their assistant in this war,and did, therefore, laugh at all his threatenings, which wouldcome to nothing; because the conclusion of the whole dependedupon God only." These words were mixed with reproaches,and with them they made a mighty clamor.
3. In the mean time Antiochus Epiphanes came to the city,having with him a considerable number of other armed men,and a band called the Macedonian Band about him, all ofthe same age, tall and just past their childhood, armed, andinstructed after the Macedonian manner, whence it was thatthey took that name. Yet were many of them unworthy ofso famous a nation; for it had so happened that the king ofCommagena had nourished more than any other kings thatwere under the power of the Romans, till a change happenedin his condition; and when he was become an old man, hedeclared plainly, that we ought not to call any man happybefore he was dead. But this son of his, who was then comethither before his father was decaying, said, that " he couldnot but wonder what made the Romans so tardy in makingtheir attacks upon the wall." Now he was a warlike man,and naturally hold in exposing himself to dangers; he wasalso so strong a man, that his boldness seldom failed ofhaving success; upon this Titus smiled, and said: " Hewould share the pains of an attack with him." However,Antiochus went as he then was, and with his Macedoniansmade a sudden assault upon the wall; and, indeed, for hisown part, his strength and skill were so great, that he guardedhimself from the Jewish darts, and yet shot his darts at them,while yet the young men with him were almost all sorely







OCR Output








C. VII.] VESPASIAN. 43


be destroyed by their bloody enemies; for they fell upon thegates in great crowds, and earnestly calling to those thatkept them, and that by their names also, yet had they theirthroats cut in the very midst of their supplications; for theenemy shut the gates of the first wall, and their own citizensshut the gates of the second, so they were enclosed betweentwo walls, and were slain in great numbers together: manyof them were run through by swords of their own men, andmany by their own swords, besides an immense number thatwas slain by the Romans. Nor had they any courage to re­venge themselves; for there was added to the consternationthey were in from the enemy, their being betrayed by theirown friends, which quite broke their spirits; and at last theydied, cursing not the Romans, but their own citizens, till theywere all destroyed, being in number twelve thousand. SoTrajan gathered that the city was empty of people that couldfight, and, although there should a few of them be therein, hesupposed that they, would be too timorous to venture uponany opposition; so he reserved the taking of the city to thegeneral. Accordingly, he sent messengers to Vespasian, anddesired him to send his son Titus to finish the victory he hadgained. Vespasian hereupon imagining there might be somepains still necessary, sent his son with an army of five hun­dred horsemen, and one thousand footmen. So he camequickly to the city, and put his army in order, and set Trajanover the left wing, while he had the right himself, and ledthem to the siege; and when the soldiers brought ladders tobe laid against the wall on every side, the Galileans opposedthem from above for a while, but soon afterward they leftthe walls. Then did Titus's men leap into the city, andseized upon it presently; but when those that were in it weregotten together, there was a fierce battle between them: forthe men of power fell upon the Romans in the narrow streets,and the women threw whatsoever came next to hand at them,and sustained a fight with them for six hours' time ; but whenthe fighting-men were spent, the rest of the multitude hadtheir throats cut, partly in the open air and partly in theirown houses, both young and old together. So there were no







OCR Output








254 DESPERATE RESISTANCE [O. VI.


seem to one another to be enemies: for every one of themreceived those of their own men that came back in the darkas Romans, and made an assault upon them ; so that moroof them were wounded by their own men than by the enemy,till, upon the coming on of the day, the nature of the fightwas discerned by the eye afterward. Then did they standin battle-array in distinct bodies, and cast their darts regularly,and regularly defended themselves. Nor did either side yieldor grow weary. The Romans contended with each other whoshould fight the most strenuously, both single men and entireregiments, as being under the eye of Titus: and every oneconcluded that this day would begin his promotion, if hefought bravely. What were the great encouragements of theJews to act vigorously, were their fear for themselves andfor the temple, and the presence of their tyrant, who exhortedsome, and beat and threatened others, to act courageously.Now, it so happened that this fight was for the most part astationary one, wherein the soldiers went on and came backin a short time and suddenly: for there was no long spaceof ground for either of their flights or pursuits. But stillthere was a tumultuous noise among the Romans from thetower of Antonia, who loudly cried out upon all occasions totheir own men to press on courageously, when they were toohard for the Jews, and to stay, when they were retiring back­ward ; so that here was a kind of theatre of war; for whatwas done in this fight could not bo concealed either fromTitus or from those that were about him. At length it ap­peared that this fight, which began at the ninth hour of thenight, was not over till past the fifth hour of the day, andthat in the same place where the battle began neither partycould say they had made the other to retire; but both thearmies left the victory almost in uncertainty between them ;wherein those that signalized themselves on the Roman sidewere a great many, but on the Jewish side, and of those thatwere with Simon, Judas the son of Merto, and Simon the sonof Josias ; of the Idumeans, James and Simon, the latter ofwhom was the son of Cathlas, and James was the son ofSosas; of those that were with John, Gyptheus and Alexas,and of the zealots Simon the son of Jairus.







OCR Output








446 FLAVIUS JOSEPHUS [B. II.


not at random, or at every one's pleasure, or being under in­violable rules in lying with our wives, in magnificent furni­ture, and again in the observation of our times of rest; whilethose that can use their swords in war, and can put theirenemies to flight when they attack them, cannot bear to sub­mit to such laws about their way of living : whereas our beingaccustomed willingly to submit to laws in these instances,renders us fit to show our fortitude upon other occasions also.34. Yet do the Lysimachi and the Molones, and some otherwriters (unskilful sophists as they are,) and the deceivers ofyoung men, reproach us as the vilest of all mankind. Now Ihave no mind to make an inquiry into the laws of other na­tions ; for the custom of our country is to keep our own laws,but not to bring accusations against the laws of others. And,indeed, our legislator hath expressly forbidden us to laugh atand revile those that are esteemed gods by other people,1 onaccount of the very name of God ascribed to them. Butsince our antagonists think to run us down upon the compa­rison of their religion and ours, it is not possible to keepsilence here, especially while what I shall say to confute thesemen will not be now first said, but hath been already said bymany, and these of the highest reputation also: for who isthere among those that have been admired among the Greeksfor wisdom, who hath not greatly blamed both the most fa­mous poets, and most celebrated legislators for spreadingsuch notions originally among the body of the people con­cerning the gods ? such as these, that they may be allowed tobe as numerous as they have a mind to have them ; that theyare begotten one by another, and that after all the kinds ofgeneration you can imagine. They also distinguish them intheir places and ways of living, as they would distinguishseveral sorts of animals: as some to be under the earth; assome to be in the sea; and the ancientest of them all to bebound in hell: and for those to whom they have allottedheaven, they have set over them one, who in title is theirfather, but in his actions a tyrant ;md a lord ; whence it cameto pass that his wife, and brother, and daughter (which


1 Sec Antiq. B. iv. ch. viii. sect 10, mid its note.







OCR Output








116 DEFECTION OF THE IDUMEANS. [B. IV.


no indication of any such treachery; but that they bad suc­cored those that had pretended to believe such a thing, whilethey did themselves the works of war and tyranny after aninsolent manner. It had been, indeed, their business to havehindered them from such their proceedings at the first; butseeing they had once been partners with them in shedding theblood of their own countrymen, it was high time to put a stopto such crimes, and not continue to afford any more assistanceto such as arc subverting the laws of their forefathers; forthat if any had taken it ill that the gates had been shut againstthem, and they had not been permitted to come into the city,yet that those who had excluded them have been punished,and Ananus is dead, and that almost all those people had beendestroyed in one night's time: that one may perceive manyof themselves now repenting for what they had done, andmight see the horrid barbarity of those that had invited them;and that they had no regard to such as had saved them : thatthey were so impudent as to perpetrate the vilest things underthe eyes of those that had supported them; and that theirwicked actions would be laid to the charge of the Idumeans,and would be so laid to their charge till somebody obstructstheir proceedings, or separates himself from the same wickedaction: that they, therefore, ought to retire home, since theimputation of treason appears to be a calumny, and that therewas no expectation of the coming of the Romans at this time,and that the government of the city was secured by such wallsas cannot easily be thrown down, and, by avoiding any fartherfellowship with these bad men, to make some excuse for them­selves, as to what they had been so far deluded as to havebeen partners with them hitherto."







OCR Output








BOOK VI.


CONTAINING
THE INTERVAL OF ABOUT ONE MONTH.
FROM THE GREAT EXTREMITY TO WHICH THE JEWS WEREREDUCED TO THE TAKING OF JERUSALEM BY TITUS.


CHAPTER I.
THAT THE MISERIES OF THE JEWS STILL GREW WORSE; ANDHOW THE ROMANS MADE AN ASSAULT UPON THE TOWEROF ANTONIA.
§ 1. Thus did the miseries of Jerusalem grow worse andworse every day, and the seditious were still more irritated bythe calamities they were under, even while the famine preyedupon themselves after it had preyed upon the people. And,indeed, the multitude of carcasses that lay in heaps one uponanother was a horrible sight, and produced a pestilential stench,which was a hindrance to those that would make sallies out ofthe city, and fight the enemy : but as those were to go in battlearray, who had been already used to ten thousand murders,and must tread upon those dead bodies as they marchedalong, so were they not terrified, nor did they pity men asthey marched over them; nor did they deem this affrontoffered to the deceased to be any ill omen to themselves; butas they had their right hands already polluted with the mur­ders of their own countrymen, and in that condition ran outto fight with foreigners, they seem to me to have cast a re­proach upon God himself, as if he were too slow in punishing
them : for the war was not now gone on with, as if they had
(285) *







OCR Output








242 THE ROMANS ASSAULT [B. VI.


thrown down is easily to be ascended, and for the new-builtwall it is easily destroyed. Do you, therefore, many of you,pull up your courage, and set about this work, and do youmutually encourage and assist one another; and this yourbravery will soon break the hearts of your enemies ; and, per­haps, such a glorious undertaking as yours is may be accom­plished without bloodshed. For although it be justly to bosupposed that the Jews will try to hinder you, at your firstbeginning, to go up to them, yet when you have once con­cealed yourselves from them, and driven them away by force,they will not be able to sustain your efforts against them anylonger, though but a few of you prevent them, and get overthe wall. As for that person who first mounts the wall, Ishould blush for shame if I did not make him to be enviedof others, by those rewards I would bestow upon him. If sucha one escape with his life, he shall have the command of othersthat are now but his equals, although it be true, also, that thegreatest rewards' will accrue to such as die in the attempt."6. Upon this speech of Titus, the rest of the multitude wereaffrighted at so great a danger. But there was one whosename was Sabinus, a soldier that served among the cohorts,and a Syrian by birth, who appeared to be of very great for­titude, both in the actions he had done and the courage of hissoul he had showed; although any body would have thought,before he came to his work, that he was of such a weak con­stitution of body, that he was not fit to bo a soldier; for hiscolor was black, his flesh was lean and thin, and lay close to­gether; but there was a certain heroic soul that dwelt iu thissmall body, which body was, indeed, much too narrow for thatpeculiar courage which was in him. Accordingly, he was thefirst that rose up, when he thus spake : — "I readily surren­der up myself to thee, O Caesar! I first ascend the wall, andI heartily wish that my fortune may follow my courage andmy resolution. And if some ill fortune grudge mo the successof my undertaking, take notice that my ill success will not beunexpected, but that I choose death voluntarily for thy sake.""When he had said this, and spread out his shield over his


'See note on preceding page.







OCR Output








DISSERTATION I. 489


but must leave them in suspense, for the farther considerationof the learned.
X. As to that great critic, Photius, in the ninth century,who is supposed not to have had this testimony in his copyof Josephus, or else to have esteemed it spurious, because inhis extracts out of Josephus's Antiquities it is not expresslymentioned; this is a strange thing indeed! that a sectionwhich had been cited out of Josephus's copies all alongbefore the days of Photius, as well as it has been all alongcited out of them since his days, should be supposed not tohe in his copy, because he does not directly mention it incertain short and imperfect extracts, no way particularlyrelating to such matters. Those who lay a stress on thissilence of Photius seem little to have attended to the natureand brevity of those extracts. They contain little or nothing,as he in effect professes at their entrance, but what concernsAntipater, Herod the Great, and his brethren and family,with their exploits, till the days of Agrippa^wn. and Cumanus,the governor of Judea, fifteen years after the death of ourSaviour, without one word of Pilate, or what happened underhis government, which yet was the only proper place inwhich this testimony could come to be mentioned. However,since Photius seems, therefore, as we have seen, to suspectthe treatise ascribed by some to Josephus, of the Universe,because it speaks very high things of the eternal generationand divinity of Christ, this looks very like his knowledgeand belief of somewhat really in the same Josephus, whichspake in a lower manner of him, which could be hardly anyother passage than this testimony before us. And since, aswe have also seen, when he speaks of the Jewish history ofJustus of Tiberias, as infected with the prejudices of the Jews,in taking no manner of notice of the advent, of the acts, andof the miracles of Jesus Christ, while yet he never speaksso of Josephus himself, this most naturally implies also, thatthere was not the like occasion here as there, but that Jose­phus had not wholly omitted that advent, those acts, ormiracles, which yet he has done everywhere else, in the books







OCR Output








C. V.J THE TEMPLE. 183


midst [of the inmost court.] that most sacred part of thetemple, it was ascended to by twelve steps; and in front itsheight and its breadth were equal, and each a hundred cubits,though it was behind forty cubits narrower; for on its frontit had what may be styled shoulders on each side, that passedtwenty cubits farther. Its first gate was seventy cubits highand twenty-five cubits broad : but this gate had no doors, forit represented the universal visibility of heaven, and that itcannot be excluded from any place. Its front was coveredwith gold all over, and through it the first part of the house,that was more inward, did all of it appear, which, as it wasvery large, so did all the parts about the more inward gateappear to shine to those that saw them: but then, as the en­tire house was divided into two parts within, it was only thefirst part of it that was open to our view. Its height extendedall along to ninety cubits in height, and its length was fiftycubits, and its breadth twenty. But that gate which was atthe end of the first part of the house was, as we have alreadyobserved, all over covered with gold, as was its whole wallabout it: it had also golden vines above it, from which clus­ters of grapes hung as tall as a man's height. But then thishouse, as it wns divided into two parts, the inner part waslower than the appearance of the outer, and had golden doorsof fifty-five cubits altitude and sixteen in breadth; but beforethese doors there was a veil of equal largeness with the doors.It was a Babylonian curtain, embroidered with blue, and finelinen, and scarlet, and purple, and of a contexture that wastruly wonderful. Nor was this mixture of colors without itsmystical interpretation, but was a kind of image of the uni­verse ; for by the scarlet there seemed to be enigmaticallysignified fire, by the fine flax the earth, by the blue the air,and by the purple the sea; two of them having their colorsthe foundation of this resemblance; but the fine flax and thepurple have their own origin for that foundation, the earthproducing the one, and the sea the other. This curtain hadalso embroidered upon it all that was mystical in the heavens,excepting that of the [twelve] signs, representing livingcreatures.







OCR Output













OCR Output








36 VESPASIAN. [B. III.


upon him, and fell down together with the head of the ram.Next to him two brothers showed their courage; their nameswere Netir and Philip, both of them of the village of Ruma,and both of them Galileans also: these men leaped upon thesoldiers of the tenth legion, and fell down upon the Romanswith such a noise and force as to disorder their ranks, and toput to flight all upon whomsoever they made their assaults.
22. After these men's performances, Josephus, and therest of the multitude with him, took a great deal of fire, andburnt both the machines and their coverings, with the worksbelonging to the fifth and to the tenth legion, which they putto flight; when others followed them immediately, and buriedthose instruments, and all the materials under ground. How­ever, about the evening the Romans erected the battering-ram against that part of the wall which had suffered before;where a certain Jew that defended the city from the Romanshit Vespasian with a dart in his foot, and wounded him alittle, the distance being so great that no mighty impressioncould be made by the dart thrown so far off. However, thiscaused the greatest disorder among the Romans; for whenthose who stood near him saw his blood, they were disturbedat it, and a report went abroad through the whole army thatthe general was wounded, while the greatest part left thesiege, and came running together with surprise and fear tothe general; and before them all came Titus, out of the con­cern he had for his father, insomuch that the multitude werein great confusion, and this out of the regard they had fortheir general, and by reason of the agony that the son wasin. Yet did the father soon put an end to the son's fear,and to the disorder the army was under; for being superiorto his pains, and endeavoring soon to be seen by all that hadbeen in a fright about him, he excited them to fight the Jewsmore briskly; for now everybody was willing to expose him­self to danger immediately, in order to avenge their general,and then they encouraged one another with loud voices, andran hastily to the walls.
23. But still Josephus and those with him, although theyfell down dead upon one another by the darts and stones







OCR Output








392 FLAVIUS JOSEPH US [B. I.


themselves from the beginning to have such bad notions con­cerning their gods, and could not think of imitating that de­cent form of divine worship which we made use of, though,when they saw our institutions approved of by many others,they could not but envy us on that account; for some of themhave proceeded to that degree of folly and meanness in theirconduct, as not to scruple to contradict their own ancient re­cords ; nay, to contradict themselves also in their writings,and yet were so blinded by their passions as not to discern it.26. And now I will turn my discourse to one of theirprincipal writers, whom I have a little before made use of asa witness to our antiquity; I mean Manctho.1 He promisedto interpret the Egyptian history out of their sacred writings,and premised this — that "our people had come into Egyptmany ten thousands in number, and subdued its inhabitants ;"and when he had farther confessed, that " we went out ofthat country afterward, and settled in that country which isnow called Judea, and there built Jerusalem and its temple."Now thus far he followed his ancient records; but after thishe permits himself, in order to appear to have written whatrumors and reports passed abroad about the Jews, and intro­duces incredible narrations, as if he would have the Egyptianmultitude that had the leprosy and other distempers to havebeen mixed with us, as he says they were; and that theywere condemned to fly out of Egypt together ; for he mentionsAmenophis, a fictitious king's name, though on that accounthe durst not set down the number of years of his reign,which yet he had accurately done as to the other kings he


1 In reading this, and the remaining sections of this book, and pome partsof the next, one may easily perceive that our usually cool and candid author,Josephus, was too highly oft-ended with the impudent calumnies of Manctho,and the other bitter enemies of the Jews, with whom he had now to deal,and was thereby betrayed into a greater heat and passion than ordinary,and that by consequence he does not here reason with his usual fairness andimpartiality: he seems to depart sometimes from the brevity and sincerityof a faithful historian, which is his grand character, and indulges the pro­lixity and colors of n pleader and a disputant: accordingly, I confess I alwaysread these sections with less pleasure than I do the rest of his writings,though I fully believe the reproaches oast on the Jews, which he hereendeavors to confute and expose, wore wholly groundless and unreasonable.







OCR Output








0. VIII.] TAKING OF THE UPPER CITT. 289


mans, when they had taken such great pains about weakerwalls, get by good fortune what they could never have gottenby their engines ; for three of these towers were too strongfor all mechanical engines whatsoever, concerning which wehave treated above.
5. So they now left these towers of themselves, or, rather,they were ejected out of them by God himself, and fled im­mediately to that valley which was under Siloam, where theyagain recovered themselves out of the dread they were in fora while, and ran violently against that part of the Romanwall which lay on that side; but as their courage was toomuch depressed to make their attacks with suflicient force,and their power was now broken with fear and affliction, theywere repulsed by the guards, and, dispersing themselves atdistances from each other, went down into the subterraneancaverns. So the Romans being now become masters of thewalls, they both placed their ensigns upon the towers, andmade joyful acclamations for the victory they had gained, ashaving found the end of this war much lighter than its be­ginning: for when they had gotten upon the last wall, with­out any bloodshed, they could hardly believe what they foundto be true; but seeing nobody to oppose them, they stood indoubt what such an unusual solitude could mean. But whenthey went in numbers into the lanes of the city, with theirswords drawn, they slew those whom they overtook withoutmercy, and set fire to the houses whither the Jews were fled,and burnt every soul in them, and laid waste a great manyof the rest; and when they were come to the houses to plun­der them, they found in them entire families of dead men,and the tipper rooms full of putrid corpses, that is, of such a3died by the famine; they then stood in horror at this sight,and went out without touching any thing. But although theyhad this commiseration, for such as were destroyed in thatmanner, yet had they not the same for those that wore stillalive, but they ran every one through whom they met with,and obstructed the very lanes with their dead bodies, andmade the whole city run down with blood, to such a degree,indeed, that the fire of many of the houses was quenchedIV. — 25







OCR Output








B. I.] AGAINST APION. 385


contemporary with king Alexander in his youth, and after­wards was with Ptolemy the son of Lagus: he did not writeabout the Jewish affairs by the by only, but composed anentire book concerning the Jews themselves, out of whichbook I am willing to run over a few things, of which I havebeen treating, by way of epitome. And, in the first place,I will demonstrate the time when this IIecateus lived; for hementions the fight that was between Ptolemy and Demetriusabout Gaza, which was fought on the eleventh year after thedeath of Alexander, and on the hundred and seventeenthOlympiad, as Castor says in his history. For when he hadset down this Olympiad, he says farther, — "That on thisOlympiad, Ptolemy, the son of Lagus, beat in battle Deme­trius, the son of Antigonus, who was named Poliorcetes, atGaza." Now it is agreed by all, that Alexander died on thehundred and fourteenth Olympiad ; it is, therefore, evident,that our nation flourished in his time and in the time of Alex­ander. Again, Hecateus says, to the same purpose, as fol­lows :—" Ptolemy got possession of the places in Syria afterthat battle at Gaza; and many, when they heard of Ptolemy'smoderation and humanity, went along with him to Egypt,and were willing to assist him in his affairs: one of which,"Hecateus says, "was Hezekiah,1 the high-priest of the Jews;a man of about sixty-six years of age, and in great dignityamong his own people. He was a very sensible man, andcould speak very movingly, and was very skilful in themanagement of affairs, if any other man ever were so;although, as he says, all the priests of the Jews took tithesof the products of the earth, and managed public affairs, andwere in number not above fifteen hundred at the most."Hecateus mentions this Hezekiah a second time, and says,that " as he was possessed of so great a dignity, and was be­come familiar with us, so did he take certain of those that


1 This Hezekiah, who is here called a high-priest, is not named in Jose-phus's catalogue; the real high-priest at that time being rather Onias, asArchbishop Usher supposes. However, Josephus often uses the word high-priest in the plural number, as living many at the same time. Sec the not*on Antiq. B. xx. ch. viii. sect. 8.
IV. —33







OCR Output








524 DISSERTATION III.


interposition : however, they said at last, that if the cures suc­ceeded, Caesar would have the glory, if not, the poor miserableobjects would only be laughed at. Whereupon Vespasianimagined that his good fortune would be universal, and thatnothing on that account could bo incredible, so he lookedcheerfully, and, in the sight of the multitude, who stood ingreat expectation, he did what they desired him : upon whichthe lame hand was recovered, and the blind man saw imme­diately. Both these cures' are related to this day by thosethat were present, and when speaking falsely, will get noreward.
book v. CHAP. I.
At the beginning of the same year, Titus Coesar, who waspitched upon by his father to finish the conquest of Judea,and while both he and his father were private persons, wascelebrated for his martial conduct, acted now with greatervigor and hopes of reputation, the kind inclinations both ofthe provinces and of the armies striving one with another whoshould most encourage him. He was also himself in a dispo­sition to show that he was more than equal to his fortune;and when he appeared in arms, he did all things after such aready and graceful way, treating all after such an affablemanner, and with such kind words, as invited the good-willand good wishes of all. He appeared also in his actions andin his place in the troops ; he mixed with the common soldiers,
/ l 1'he miraculous cures done by Vespasian arc attested to both by Sueto­nius iu Vespasian, sect. 7, and by Dio, p. 217, and seem to me well attested.Uur Savior stems to have overruled the hcathen oracle of Serapis, to procure■ the divine approbation to Vespasian's advancement to the empire of Rome,I as he suggested the like approbation to the advancement both of Vespasianand Titus to Josephus, which two were to be his chosen instruments in bring­ing on that terrible destruction upon the Jewish nation, which he had threat­ened to execute by theso Roman armies. Nor could any other Roman gen­erals than Vespasian and Titus, at that time, in human probability, haveprevailed over the Jews, and destroyed Jerusalem, as this whole history inJosephus implies. Josephus also everywhere supposes Vespasian and Titugraised up to command against Judea and Jerusalem, and to govern the Ro­man empire by divine providence, and not in the ordinary way: as also, healways supposes this destruction a divine judgment on the Jews for their sins.







OCR Output








C. IV.] TO THE JEWS. 279


connected the upper city to the temple. This bridge it wasthat lay between the tyrants and Caesar, and parted them;while the multitude stood on each side; those of the Jewishnation about Simon and John, with great hopes of pardon,and the Romans about Caesar, in great expectation how Tituswould receive their supplication. So Titus charged his sol­diers to restrain their rage, and to let their darts alone, andappointed an interpreter between them, which was a sign thathe was the conqueror, and first began the discourse, and said,— "I hope you, sirs, are now satiated with the miseries ofyour country, who have not had any just notions either ofour great power or of your own great weakness, but have,like madmen, after a violent and inconsiderate manner, madesuch attempts as have brought your people, your city, andyour holy house to destruction. You have been the men thathave never left off rebelling since Pompey first conqueredyou, and have since that time made open war with the Ro­mans. Have you depended on your multitude, while a verysmall part of the Roman soldiery have been strong enoughfor you ? Have you relied on the fidelity of your confederates?And what nations are there, out of the limits of our dominion,that would choose to assist the Jews before the Romans ? Areyour bodies stronger than ours ? Nay, you know that the[strong] Germans themselves are our servants. Have youstronger walls than we have ? Pray, what greater obstacleis there than the wall of the ocean, with which the Britonsare encompassed, and yet do adore the arms of the Romans.Do you exceed us in courage of soul and in the sagacity ofyour commanders ? Nay, indeed, you cannot but know thatthe very Carthaginians have been conquered by us. It can,therefore, be nothing certainly but the kindness of the Ro­mans which hath excited you against us; who, in the firstplace, have given you this land to possess; and, in the nextplace, have set over you kings of your own nation ; and, inthe third place, have preserved the laws of your forefathersto you, and have withal permitted you to live either by your­selves or among others, as it should please you; and, what isour chief favor of all, we have given you leave to gather up







OCR Output








80 SIEGE OF GAM ALA. [B. lV


near them, and undermined it, without making any ncise;nor when they either came to it, which was in the night-time,nor when they were under it, did those that guarded it per­ceive them. These soldiers then upon their coming avoidedmaking a noise, and when they had rolled away five of itsstrongest stones, they went away hastily; whereupon thetower fell down upon a sudden, with a very great noise, andits guard fell headlong with it; so that those that kept guardat other places were under such disturbance that they ranaway: the Romans also slew many of those that ventured tooppose them, among whom was Joseph, who was slain by adart, as he was running away over that part of the wall thatwas broken down: but as those that were in the city weregreatly affrighted at the noise, they ran hither and thither,and a great consternation fell upon them, as though all theenemy had fallen in at once upon them. Then it was thatChares, who was ill, and under the physician's hands, gaveup the ghost, the fear he was in greatly contributing to makehis distemper fatal to him. But the Romans so well remem­bered their former ill success, that they did not enter thecity till the three and twentieth day of the forementionedmonth.
10. At that time Titus, who was now returned, out of theindignation he had at the destruction the Romans had under­gone while he was absent, took two hundred chosen horse­men, and some footmen with him, and entered without noisointo the city. Now as the watch perceived that he was com­ing, they made a noise, and betook themselves to their arms;and as that his entrance was presently known to those thatwere in the city, some of them caught hold of their childrenand their wives, and drew tbem after them, and fled away tothe citadel, with lamentations and cries, while others of themwent to meet Titus, and were killed perpetually; but so manyof them as were hindered from running up to the citadel, notknowing what in the world to do, fell among the Romanguards, while the groans of those that were killed were pro­digiously great every where, and blood ran down over all thelower parts of the city from the upper. But then Vespasian







OCR Output








252 TITUS RENEWS [B. VI.


at due distances, and on it to engrave in Greek, and in yourown letters, this prohibition, — That no foreigner should gobeyond that wall ? have not we given you leave to kill suchas go beyond it, though ho were a Roman ? And what do youdo now, you pernicious villains ? Why do you trample upondead bodies in this temple ? and why do you pollute this holyhouse with the blood of both foreigners and Jews themselves ?I appeal to the gods of my own country, and to every godthat ever had any regard to this place (for I do not supposeit to be now regarded by any of them;) I also appeal to myown army, and to those Jews that are now with me, and evento you yourselves, that I do not force you to defile this yoursanctuary ; and if you will but change the place whereon youwill fight, no Roman shall either come near your sanctuary,or offer any affront to it; nay, I will endeavor to preserveyou your holy house whether you will or no." l
5. As Josephus explained these things from the mouth ofCaesar, both the robbers and the tyrant thought that theseexhortations proceeded from Titus's fear, and not from hisgood-will to them, and grew insolent upon it. But whenTitus saw that these men were neither to be moved by com­miseration towards themselves, nor had any concern uponthem to have the holy house spared, he proceeded unwillinglyto go on with the war again against them. He could not,indeed, bring all his army against them, the place was sonaiTow; but choosing thirty soldiers of the most valiant outof every hundred, and committing a thousand to each tri­bune, and making Cerealis their commander-in-chief, he gaveorders that they should attack the guards of the templeabout the ninth hour of that night. But as he was now inhis armor, and preparing to go down with them, his friendswould not let him go, by reason of the greatness of the danger,and what the commanders suggested to them; for they said,that " ho would do more by sitting above in the tower of An­


1 That these seditious Jews were the direct occasions of their own destruc­tion, and of the conflagration of their city and temple, and that Titusearnestly and constantly labored to save both, is here and everywhere mostevident in Josephus.







OCR Output








C.X.] THE RIVER JORDAN. 67


country adjoining to it. Its breadth is forty furlongs; andits length one hundred and forty; its waters are sweet, andvery agreeable for drinking, for they are finer than the thickwaters of other fens: the lake is also pure, and on every sideends directly at the shores and at the sand: it is also of atemperate nature when you draw it up, and of a more gentlenature than river or fountain water, and yet always coolerthan one would expect in so diffuse a place as this is : nowwhen this water is kept in the open air, it is as cold as thatsnow which the country people are accustomed to make bynight in summer. There are several kinds of fish in it,different both to the taste and the sight from those elsewhere.It is divided into two parts by the river Jordan. NowPanium is thought to be the fountain of Jordan, but in realityit is carried thither after an occult manner from the placecalled Phiala: this place lies as you go up to Trachonitis,and is a hundred and twenty furlongs from Caesarea, and isnot far out of the road on the right hand; and, indeed, ithath its name of Phiala [vial or bowl] very justly, from theroundness of its circumference, as being round like a wheel;its water continues always up to its edges, without eithersinking or running over. And as this origin of Jordan wasformerly not known, it was discovered so to be when Philipwas tetrarch of Trachonitis; for he had chaff thrown intoPhiala, and it was found at Panium, where the ancientsthought the fountain-head of the river was, whither it hadbeen, therefore, carried [by the waters.] As for Paniumitself, its natural beauty had been improved by the royalliberality of Agrippa, and adorned at his expenses. NowJordan's visible stream arises from this cavern, and dividesthe marshes and fens of the lake Semechonitis; and when ithath run another hundred and twenty furlongs, it firstpasses by the city Julias, and then passes through the middleof the lake Gennesareth; after which it runs a long way overa desert, and then makes its exit into the lake Asphaltitis.
8. The country also that lies over against this lake haththe same name of Gennesareth; its nature is wonderful aswell as its beauty; its soil is so fruitful that all sorts of trees







OCR Output








558 INDEX.


the feast of tabernacles, 301; to belearned by children, ib. ; order arebellious son to be stoned, iii. 05;martiai laws, iv. 442; the tables ofthe law, i. 219; law of Moses trans­lated into Greek, Pref. i. lxix.; ii.261; law made by Herod to sellthieves, iii. 7 ; law carried in tri­umph at Home, iv. 316, and note.
Lentulus's decree in favor of the Jews,ii. 448.
Lepidus killed by Caius, iii. 206.
Leprous persons obtain places of ho­nor, i. 200; are to live out of cities,ii. 107.
Letters of Solomon, and Hiram, andthe Tyrians, ii. 10; of Xerxes toEzra, 221 ; of Artnxorxes to thegovernors near Judea. 246; of An-tiochus the Great to 1'toleniy, 280;of the Samaritans to Antiochus,299; of Alexander Baias to Jona­than, 335; of Onias to Ptolemyand Cleopatra, 339; of Ptolemyand Cleopatra to Onias, 341; ofDemetrius to Jonathan and theJews, 300; of Julius Caesar to theHomaii magistrates nnd to the Si-donians, 441; of Mark Antony tothe Tyrians, 401.
Levites exempted from military func­tions, i. 253.
Levite's concubine abused, i. 351.
Levitical tribe consecrated, i. 248;their allowance, and how manycities belonged to them, 274.
Liberius Maximus, iv. 322.
Liberty granted the Jews by Deme­trius, ii. 337.
Libya, i. 95.
Longinus's bravery, iv. 198.
Longus kills himself, iv. 259
Lot, i. 98; his wife, IOC.
Lupus Julius put to death, iii. 245.
Lupus, governor of Alexandria, iv.348.
Lycurgue, iv. 444.
Lydda burnt, iii. 637.
Lysanias is put to death, ii. 500.
Lysias, ii. 306, et seq.
Lysimacbus obtains the governmentof the Hellespont, ii. 268.
Maccabeus, ii. 301.Macedonians governed by a Romanproconsul, iii. 614.


Machcras, ii. 480; iii. 375.
Macherus surrenders to Bassus, iv.321.
Machines of the Romans, iv. 191;for casting stones, 37.
Madai, or Medes, i. 93.
Madianites, or Midianites, bring Is­rael into subjection, i. 362; Mosesmakes war upon them and beatsthem, 291 ; their women seducethe Israelites, 286.
Magician, an Egyptian one, iii. 496
Magog, i. 93.
Mahlon, son of Elimclech, i. 381.
Malchus, ii. 361, 471; iii. 367.
Malichus, a Jewish commander, iii.355; poisons Antipater, ii. 450; agreat dissembler, ib. is killed by adevice of Herod, 407.
Manaem, or Manahem, ii. 130.
Manahem, an Esscnc, ii. 650.
Manahem, son of Judas, i. 20; iii.525, et seq.
Manassch, king, carried into capti­vity, ii. 157; is sent back, anddies, ib.
Manassch marries Sanballet's daugh­ter, ii. 252; high-priest of the Sa­maritans, 283.
Manna from heaven, i. 206.
Mnnneus, son of Lazarus, iv. 233.
Manoah, i. 373.
Manslaughter, suspected, howpurged,i. 303.
Marcus, or Murcus, president ofSyria, ii. 454; iii. 350.
Marcus, iii. 253, et teq.
Mariamne, Agrippa senior's daughter,iii. 100, 489; married to Archelaus,284; divorced, 471; married toDemetrius, 280.
Mariamne, or Miriam, Moses' sister,dies, 275.
Mariamne married to Herod, iii. 359;grows angry with Herod, ii. 626;iii. 401; is put to death, ii. 630;her eulogium, ib.; her sons stran­gled, iii. 425.
Mariamne, daughter of Josephus andOlympias, iii. 100.
Mariamne, daughter of Simon thehigh-priest, iii. 427.
Marion, tyrant, ii. 458.
Marriage of freemen with slaves un­lawful, i. 307.
Marsyas, iii. 164, 172, 170.







OCR Output








52 VESPASIAN. [B. III.


lutions of ages, they are again sent into pure bodies; whilothe souls of those whose hands have acted madly againstthemselves are received by the darkest place in Hades, andwhile God, who is their father, punishes those that offendagainst either of them in their posterity; for which reasonGod hates such doings, and the crime is punished by ourmost wise legislator. Accordingly, our laws determine, thatthe bodies of such as kill themselves should be exposed tillthe sun be set, without burial, although at the same time itbe allowed by them to be lawful to bury our enemies [sooner].The laws of other nations also enjoin such men's hands to becut off when they are dead, which had been made use of indestroying themselves when alive, while they reckoned, thatas the body is alien from the soul, so is the hand alien fromthe body. It is, therefore, my friends, a right thing to reasonjustly, and not add to the calamities which men bring uponus, impiety towards our Creator. If wo have a mind to pre­serve ourselves, let us do it; for to be preserved by those ourenemies to whom we have given so many demonstrations ofour courage, is no way inglorious ; but if we have a mind todie, it is good to die by the hand of those that have conqueredus. For my part, I will not run over to our enemies' quarters,in order to be a traitor to myself; for certainly I shouldthen be much more foolish than those that deserted to theenemy, since they did it in order to save themselves, and Ishould do it for destruction, for my own destruction. How­ever, I heartily wish the Romans may prove treacherous inthis matter; for if, after their offer of their right hand forsecurity, I be slain by them, I shall die cheerfully, and carryaway with me the sense of their perfidiousness, as a conso­lation greater than victory itself."
6. Now these and many the like motives did Josephus useto these men to prevent their murdering themselves; butdesperation had shut their ears, as having long ago devotedthemselves to die, and they were irritated at Josephus.They then ran upon him with their swords in their hands,one from one quarter and another from another, and calledhim a coward, and every one of them appeared openly as if







OCR Output








INDEX.


54; speech to Vespasian, ib.;honored by Vespasian and Titng, i.69; iv. 55; by Domitian and Do-mitia, i. 71 ; is set at liberty, iv.150; advises the Jews to surrender,205, 248 ; accused of conspiracy,iv. 350; Titus gives him lands inJudea, i. 70; had three wives, 71 ;his children, ib. ; was greatly skill­ed in learning, 18; was a Pharisee,19; goes to Home, ib.; frees theSepphorites from fear, 22; staysin Galilee, 25; his moderation, 2b';when he finished the Antiquities,iii. 304; when he was born, 18;appeals to Vespasian, Titus, andothers, for the truth of his history,iv. 365.
Joshua, son of Nun. See Jesus, ii.160.
Josiah, king of Judah, his piety, ii.160; his death, 163.
Jotapata, besieged aud demolished,iv. 26, et seq.
Jotham, his parable, i. 366.
Jotham, king of Judah, his death, ii.139.
Ircueus the pleader, iii. 112.
Isaac, i. 104.
Isaiah. See Esaiah.
Isbbosheth is made king, i. 468; mur­dered by treachery, 475.
Ishmael, i. 104.
Ishmael murders Gedaliah, ii. 179.
Isis, her temple polluted and demo­lished, iii. 150.
Israelites carried captivo into Mediaand Persia, ii. 145.
Istob or Ishtob, king, i. 491.
Ithamar, i. 235; his family loses thehigh-priesthood, ii. 7.
Jubal, i. 82.
Jubilee, i. 253.
Jucundus calumniates Alexander, iii.57.
Jucundus, enptain of horse, iii. 502.
Judadas, or Dedan, i. 95.
Judas, the Essene, ii. 363; iii. 326.
Judas, a Galilean, author of a fourthsect among the Jews, iii. 136, 140,472.
Judas, son of Jairus, is slain, iv.322.
Judas, the Maccabee, ii. 301; suc­ceeds his father, 304; iii. 319;speech to his men before a battle,


ii. 307; is victor, ib.; comes toJerusalem, and restores the templeworship, 309; takes vengeance onthe Idumeans and others, 311; be­sieges the citadel at Jerusalem,317; made high-priest, 325; al­liance with the Komans, ib.; fightsBacchides, 327; is killed, 328.
Judas, son of Saripheus or Scppho-reus, iii. 97, 446.
Judas, son of Ezekias, ringleader ofthe robbers, iii. 120, 462.
Judea, it begins at Core;?, ii. 416; agreat earthquake in, 512; its fer­tility, iv. 387; its description, 12;length, breadth, and limits, 14;but lately known to the Greeks,366; annexed to Syria, iii. 136;parted into five jurisdictions, ii.424; made tributary to the Ro­mans, 421.
Judges of the Hebrews, ii. 221.
Judges of the council in Syria andPhoenicia, ii. 211; seven inferiorJudges in every city, but an appealfrom them to the great Sanhedrimat Jerusalem, i. 302, 303.
Julian of Bithynia, iv. 245.
Justus of Tiberias, i. 60; when hepublished his history, 62; con­demned by Vespasian, but saved,00.
Justus, son of Pistus, stirs up sedi­tion, i. 22.
Izates, embraces the Jewish religion,iii. 265; is circumcised, 269; suc­ceeds Monobazus, 266; dies, 276:his children and brethren besiegedin Jerusalem, iv. 282.
Ketubah, Abraham's wife, i. 114.King Solomon's palace, ii. 31.Kings of David's race, ii. 174.Kittim, or Cethim, i. 94.Korah raises a sedition, i. 264 ; pe­rishes with his followers, 271.
Laban, his fraud, i. 127.Laborosoarchod, or Labosordacus, ii.
191; iv. 379.Lamcch, i. 82.
Languages confounded, i. 92.Laodiceans, their letter in favor of
the Jews, ii. 449.Laws given the Israelites upon Mount
Sinai, i. 220, 296; to be read on


47*







OCR Output








DISSERTATION II. 508


" Behold the fire and the wood, hut where is the lamb for aburnt-offering ? And Abraham said, My son, God will pro­vide himself a lamb for a burnt-offering." Both these pas­sages look to me somewhat like such an expectation.
9. However, it appears most evident that Abraham, and Isuppose Isaac also, firmly believed, that if God should permitIsaac to he actually slain as a sacrifice, he would certainlyand speedily raise him again from the dead. This, to besure, is supposed in the words already quoted, that both heand his son would go and worship, and come again to theservants; and is clearly and justly collected from this his­tory by the author to the Hebrews, chap. xi. 17-19. " Byfaith Abraham when he was tried offered up Isaac: and hethat had received the promises offered up his only begotten,of whom it was said, that in Isaac shall thy seed be called,accounting or reasoning that God was able to raise him fromthe dead." And this reasoning was at once very obvious,and wholly undeniable, that since God was truth itself, andhad over and over promised that he would' " multiply Abra­ham exceedingly; that he should be a father of many nations;that his name should be no longer Abram, but Abraham, be­cause a father of many nations God had made him, &c.; thatSarai his wife should be called Sarah ; that he would blessher, and give Abraham a son also of her; and that he wouldbless him; and she should become nations, and kings of peo­ple should be of her, &c.; and that2 "in Isaac should hisseed be called." And since withal it is here supposed thatIsaac was to be slain as a sacrifice, before he was married,'or had any seed, God was, for certain, obliged by his pro­mises, in these circumstances, to raise Isaac again from thedead, and this was an eminent instance of that faith whereby3 Abraham believed God, and it was imputed to him forrighteousness, viz. that if God should permit Isaac to be sa­crificed, he would certainly and quickly raise him up againfrom the dead, 4from whence also he received him in a figure,as the author to the Hebrews here justly observes.
1 Gen. xvii. 2-6, 10. » Gen. xxi. 12. • Gen. xv. 6. « Heb. xi. 19.







OCR Output








BOOK IV.
CONTAINING
THE INTERVAL OF ABOUT ONE YEAR.
FIIOM THE SIEGE OF GAil ALA TO THE COMING OF TITUS TOBESIEGE JERUSALEM.


CHAPTER I.
THE SIEGE AND TAKING OF GAMALA.
§ 1. Now all those Galileans who, after the taking of Jota-pata, had revolted from the Romans, did, upon the conquestof Taricheae, deliver themselves up to them again. And theRomans received all the fortresses and the cities, exceptingGischala and those that had seized upon Mount Tabor; Ga-mala also, which is a city over against Taricheae, but on theother side of the lake, conspired with them. This city layupon the borders of Agrippa's kingdom, as also did Soganaand Seleucia. And these were both parts of Gaulanitis; forSogana was a part of that called the Upper Gaulanitis ; aswas Gamala of the Lower; while Seleucia was situated at thelake Semechonitis, which lake is thirty furlongs in breadthand sixty in length; its marshes reach as far as the placeDaphne, which, in other respects is a delicious place, andhath such fountains as supply water to what is called LittleJordan, under the temple of the golden calf,1 where it is sent


1 Here we have the exact situation of one of Jeroboam's golden calves, atthe exit of Little Jordan into Great Jordan, near a place called Daphne, butof old Pan. See the note on Antiq. B. viii. ch. Tiii. sect 4. But Relandsuspects that even here we should read Dan instead of Daphne, there beingno where else any mention of a place called Daphne hereabouts.


(72)







OCR Output








58 VESPASIAN. [b. m.


thus thrown out of the sea was four thousand and two hundred.The Komans also took the city without opposition, and utterlydemolished it.
4. And thus was Joppa taken twice by the Romans in alittle time; but Vespasian, in order to prevent these piratesfrom coming thither any more, erected a camp there, wherethe citadel of Joppa had been, and left a body of horse in it,with a few footmen, that these last might stay there andguard the camp, and the horsemen might spoil the countrythat lay round it, and might destroy the neighboring villagesand smaller cities. So these troops overran the country, asthey were ordered to do, and every day cut to pieces, andlaid desolate the whole region.
5. But now, when the fate of Jotapata was related at Jeru­salem, a great many at the first disbelieved it, on account ofthe vastness of the calamity, and because they had no eye­witness to attest the truth of what was related about it;for not one person was saved to be a messenger of that news,but a fame was spread abroad at random, that the city wastaken, as such fame usually spreads bad news about. How­ever, the truth was known by degrees from the places nearJotapata, and appeared to all to be too true. Yet were therefictitious stories added to what was really done; for it wasreported that Josephus was slain at the taking of the city,which piece of news filled Jerusalem full of sorrow. In everyhouse, also, and among all to whom any of the slain wereallied, there was a lamentation for them ; but the mourningfor the commander was a public one, and some mourned forthose that had lived with them, others for their kindred,others for their friends, and others for their brethren, butall mourned for Josephus ; insomuch that the lamentationdid not cease in the city before the thirtieth day, and a greatmany hired mourners,1 with their pipes, who should begintheir melancholy ditties for them.


1 These public mourners, hired upon the supposed death of Josephus, andthe real death of many more, illustrate some passages in the Bible, whichsuppose the same customs, as Matt. xi. 17, where the reader may consultthe note of Grotius.







OCR Output








368 FLA VIUS JOSEPH US [B. I.


13. Let us now put the case, therefore, that we made useof this argument concerning the Grecians, in order to provethat their nation was not ancient, because nothing is said ofthem in our records ; would not they laugh at us all, andprobably give the same reasons for our silence that I havenow alleged, and would produce their neighbor nations aswitnesses to their own antiquity? Now, the very same thingwill I endeavor to do ; for I will bring the Egyptians and thePhoenicians as my principal witnesses, because nobody cancomplain of their testimony as false, on account that theyare known to have borne the greatest ill-will towards us: Imean this as to the Egyptians in general all of them, whileof the Phoenicians it is known the Tyrians have been mostof all in the same ill disposition towards us : yet do I confess,that I cannot say the same of the Chaldeans, since our firstleaders and ancestors were derived from them, and they domake mention of us Jews in their records, on account of thekindred there is between us. Now, when I shall have mademy assertions good, so far as concerns the others, I will de­monstrate that some of the Greek writers have made mentionof us Jews also, that those who envy us may not have eventhis pretence for contradicting what I have said about ournation.
14. I shall begin with the writings of the Egyptians; not,indeed, of those that have written in the Egyptian language,which it is impossible for me to do. But Manctho was a manwho was by birth an Egyptian ; yet had he made himselfmaster of the Greek learning, as is very evident; for he wrotethe history of his own country in the Greek tongue, by trans­lating it, as he saith himself, out of their sacred records: healso finds great fault with Herodotus for his ignorance andfalse relation of Egyptian aff;iirs. Now this Manetho, in thesecond book of his Egyptian history, writes concerning us inthe following manner. I will set down his very words, as ifI were to bring the very man himself into a court for a wit­ness—" There was a king of ours whose name was Timaus.Under him it came to pass, I know not how, that God wasaverse to us, and there came after a surprising manner, men







OCR Output








560 INDEX.


books laid up in the temple, ii.159; what they contain, iv. 364;called by Manetho, Oiartiph, 396,401; allowed by the Egyptians tobe a divine inan, 400; the age inwhich he lived, 431; his virtue andgreat actions, ib. ; his posterityhonored by David, i. 539.
Mosoch, or Meshech, i. 93.
Mucianus, president of Syria, iv. 76,134, 147, 149, 150.
Mundus ravishes Paulina, iii. 149,et eeq.
Musical instruments of the Jews de­scribed, i. 527.
Mysian war, iv. 308.
Mytgonus, king, iv. 380.
Naamaii, daughter of Lantech, i. 12.
Naash, or Nuhash, king, i. 490; warsagainst the Israelites, 404.
Nabal, a foolish man, i. 419.
Nabolassar, or Nnbopollassar, kingof Babylon, iv. 377.
Naboth, ii. 77.
Nabuchodonosor, or Nabuchndnezznr,iv. 377 ; conquers a great part ofSyria, ii. 164; lays a tux upon theJews, 165; sacks Jerusalem, I(i6,173; his famous dream, 184; hisgolden image, 187; lives amongthe beasts, 188; dies, 189.
Nabuzaradan plunders and burns thetemple, ii. 175.
Nacebus, iii. 52, 62.
Nadab, king of Israel, ii. 65.
Nahum, ii. 138; his prophecy con­cerning Nineveh, ib.
Naomi, Elimclech's wife, i. 381.
Nathan the prophet, i. 484, 495, 536.
Nazarites, i. 274 ; iii. 250.
Ncchao, or Necho, ii. 162 ; conqueredby Nebuchadnezzar, 164.
Nehemiah, ii. 227; his lovo to hiscountry, ib.; exhorts the people torebuild the walls of Jerusalem,229.
Neriglissor, king, iv. 379.
Nero made emperor, iii. 287; hisdeath, iv. 134.
Nctir, a Galilean, iv. 36.
Nicanor, ii. 300; iv. 48; sent againstJudas, ii. 323; defeated and killed,324.
Nicanor, a friend of Titus, woundedwith an arrow, iv. 189.


Nicaso married to Manassoh, ii. 252.
Nicaule, or Nitocris, ii. 37.
Niccteria, or festival for the victoryover Nicanor, ii. 324.
Nicolaus of Damascus, the Jews' ad­vocate, ii. 279; iii. 12; is sent toHerod by Augustus, iii. 54; hisspeech before Augustus, ii. 114,128; iii. 458; exaggerates Antipa-ter's crimes, 90, 444; his brotherPtolemy, 456.
Niger of Perea, iii. 538, 545; ir.9, 117; his wonderful escape,11.
Niglissar, ii. 191.
Nimrod, or Nebrodes, i. 91.
Nisroch, or Araske, a temple at Nine­veh, ii. 152.
Noah, or Noe, i. 84; is saved in theark, 85, et trg.; invocates God afterthe deluge, 88; God answers, 89;laws given to him, ib.; genealogy,96; death, 89.
Norbanus Flaccus's letter in behalfof the Jews, iii. 34.
Norbanus (another) slain, iii. 222.
Obadiaii, a protector of the true pro­phets, ii. 73, et eeq.
Obed, the prophet, ii. 140.
Og, his iron bed, i. 279.
Oil used in the oblations, i. 244; con­sumed by the seditious, iv. 233;prepared by the foreigners not usedby the Jews, ii. 278; iii. 550.
Olympias, Herod's daughter, iii. 74;is married to Joseph, son of Herod'sbrother, 427.
Olympius, Jupiter's image, iii. 204.
Olympus sent to Rome, i. 63; iii. 59,422.
Omri, king of Israel, ii. 69.
On, the son of Peleth, i. 264.
Onias, son of Jaddus, succeeds in thehigh-priesthood, ii. 257.
Onias, the son of Simon, made high-priest, ii. 283; causes great trou­bles, 295.
Onias, brother of Jesus, or Jason,made high-priest, ii. 498.
Onias and Dositheus saved Egyptfrom ruin, iv. 414.
Onias. son of Onias, flies into Egypt,ii. 339; iii. 318; iv. 347; his le"tterto Ptolemy and Cleopatra, 339;their answer, 341 ; he builds the







OCR Output








C. VI.] TITUS PRESSES THE SIEGE. 193


leave, by proclamation, to go upon the wall; John also him­self, though he could not believe that Simon was in earnest,gave them the same leave. So, on both sides, they laid asidetheir ffatred and their peculiar quarrels, and formed them­selves into one body; they then ran round the walls, andhaving a vast number of torches with them, they threw themat the machines, and shot darts perpetually upon those thatimpelled those engines which battered the wall; nay, thebolder sort leaped out by troops upon the hurdles that coveredthe machines, and pulled them to pieces, and fell upon thosethat belonged to them, and beat them, not so much by anyskill they had, as principally by the boldness of their attacks.However, Titus himself still sent assistance to those thatwere the hardest set, and placed both horsemen and archerson the several sides of the engines, and thereby beat off thosethat brought the fire to them ; he also thereby repelled thosethat shot stones or darts from the towers, and then set theengines to work in good earnest: yet did not the wall yieldto these blows, excepting where the battering-ram of the fif­teenth legion moved the corner of a tower, while the wallitself continued unhurt; for the wall was not presently in thesame danger with the tower, which was extant far above it:nor could the fall of that part of the tower easily break downany part of the wall itself together with it.
6. And now the Jews intermitted their sallies for a while;but when they observed the Romans dispersing all abroad attheir works, and in their several camps (for they thought theJews had retired out of weariness and fear,) these all at oncemade a sally at the tower Hippicus, through an obscure gate,and at the same time brought fire to burn the works, andwent boldly up to the Romans, and to their very fortificationsthemselves, where, at the cry they made, those that werenear came presently to their assistance, and those farther offcame running after them; and here the boldness of the Jewswas too hard for the good order of the Romans; and as theybeat those whom they first fell upon, so they pressed uponthose that were now gotten together. So this fight aboutIV. —17







OCR Output








156 SEDITIONS AT JERUSALEM. [B. V.


2. For Eleazar, the son of Simon, who made the first se­paration of the zealots from the people, and made them retireinto the temple, appeared very angry at John's insolent at­tempts, -which he made every day upon the people; for thisman never left off murdering: but the truth was that he couldnot bear to submit to a tyrant who was set up after him. Sche being desirous of gaining the entire power and dominionto himself, revolted from John, and took to his assistanceJudas, the son of Chcleias, and Simon, the son of Ezron, whowere among the men of greatest power. There was also withhim ITezekiah, the son of Chobar, a person of eminence.Each of these was followed by a great many of the zealots;these seized upon the inner court1 of the temple, and laidtheir arms upon the holy gates, and over the holy fronts ofthat court. And because they had plenty of provisions, theywere of good courage; for there was great abundance of whatwas consecrated to sacred uses, and they scrupled not themaking use of them ; yet were they afraid on account of theirsmall number, and when they had laid up their arms there,they did not stir from the place they were in. Now, as toJohn, what advantage he had above Eleazar in the multitudeof his followers, the like disadvantage he had in the situationhe was in, since he had his enemies over his head; and as hecould not make any assault upon them without some terror,so was his anger too great to let him be at rest: nay, althoughhe suffered more mischief from Eleazar and his party thanhe could inflict upon them, yet would not he leave off assault­ing them, insomuch that there were continual sallies madeone against another, as well as darts thrown at one another,and the temple was defiled every where with murders.
3. But now the tyrant Simon, the son of Gioras, whom thepeople had invited in, out of the hopes they had of his assist­


1 This appears to be the first time that the zealots ventured to pollute thismost sacred court of the temple, which was the court of the priests, whereinthe temple itself and the altar stood. So that the conjecture of those thatwould interpret that Zacharias, who was slain "between the temple and thoaltar" several months before, I3. iv. ch. v. sect. 4. as if he were shun tbcroby these zealots, is groundless, as I have noted on that place already.







OCR Output








C. VII.] THE END OF THE SEDITIOUS. 283


CHAPTER VII.
WHAT AFTERWARDS BEFELL THE SEDITIOUS, WHEN THEY HADDONE A GREAT DEAL OF MISCHIEF, AND SUFFERED MANYMISFORTUNES; AS ALSO HOW CESAR BECAME MASTER OFTHE LOWER CITY.
§ 1. And now the seditious rushed into the royal palace,into which many had put their effects, because it was so strong,and drove the Romans away from it. They also slew all thepeople that had crowded into it, who were in number eightthousand four hundred, and plundered them of what theyhad. They also took two of the Romans alive ; the one wasa horseman and the other a footman. They then cut thethroat of the footman, and immediately had him drawn throughthe whole city, as revenging themselves upon the whole bodyof the Romans by this one instance. But the horseman saidhe had somewhat to suggest to them, in order to their preser­vation ; whereupon he was brought before Simon; but hehaving nothing to say when he was there, he was deliveredto Ardalas, one of his commanders, to be punished, whobound his hands behind him, and put a riband over his eyes,and then brought him out over against the Romans, as in­tending to cut off his head. But the man prevented thatexecution, and ran away to the Romans, and this while theJewish executioner was drawing out his sword. Now, whenho was gotten away from the enemy, Titus could not think ofputting him to death ; but because he deemed him unworthyof being a Roman soldier any longer, on account that he hadbeen taken alive by the enemy, he took away his arms, andejected him out of the legion whereto he belonged; which,to one that had a sense of shame, was a penalty severer thandeath itself.
2. On the next day the Romans drove the robbers out ofthe lower city, and set all on fire as far as Siloam. Thesesoldiers were, indeed, glad to see the city destroyed; butthey missed the plunder, because the seditious had carried







OCR Output








4755 DISSERTATION I.


About A. D. 1360. Nicephorus Callistus Hist. Eccles. lib.i. p. 90, 91.—Now this [concerning Herod the tetrarch] isattested to, not only by the book of the holy gospels, but byJosephus, that lover of truth ; who also makes mention of He-rodias, his brother's wife, whom Herod had taken away fromhim, while he was alive, and married her, having divorced hisformer lawful wife, who was the daughter of Aretas, king ofthe Petrean Arabians. This Herodias he had married, andlived with her: on which account also, when he had slainJohn, ho made war with Aretas, because his daughter hadbeen dishonorably used; in which war he relates that allHerod's army was destroyed, and that he suffered this onaccount of the most unjust slaughter of John. He also addsthat John was a most righteous man. Moreover, he makesmention of his baptism, agreeing in all points thereto relatingwith the gospel. He also informs us that Herod lost his king­dom on account of Herodias, with whom also he was con­demned to be banished to Vienna, which was their place ofexile, and a city bordering upon Gaul, and lying near theutmost bounds of the west.
About A. D. 1450. Hardmannus Schedelius Chron. p.110.—Josephus the Jew, who was called Flavius. a priest,and the son of Mattathias, a priest of that nation, a most cele­brated historian, and very skilful in many things: he wascertainly a good man, and of an excellent character, who hadthe highest opinion of Christ.
About A. D. 1480. Platina de Vitis Pontificum in Christo.— I shall avoid mentioning what Christ did until the 30thyear of his age, when he was baptised by John, the son of Za-charias, because not only the gospels and epistles are fullof those acts of his, which he did in the most excellent andmost holy manner, but the books of such as were quite remotefrom his way of living, and acting, and ordaining, arc alsofull of the same. Flavius Josephus himself, who wrote twentybooks of Jewish Antiquities in the Greek tongue, when he hadproceeded as far as the government of the emperor Tiberius,says, there was in those days Jesus, a certain wise man, if atleast it be lawful to call him a man, for he was a doer of won­







OCR Output








380 FLATIUS JOSEPHUS [B. 1.


very troublesome lo him, and cost him a great deal of painsto take it. He then marched away to Borsippus, to besiegeNabonnedus; but as Nabonnedus did not sustain the siege,but delivered himself into his hands, he was at first kindlyused by Cyrus, who gave him Carmania as a place for him toinhabit in, but sent him out of Babylonia. Accordingly,Nabonnedus spent the rest of his time in that country, andthere died."
21. These accounts agree with the true history in our books:for in them it is written that Nebuchadnezzar, in the eigh­teenth ' year of his reign, laid our temple desolate, and so itlay in that state of obscurity for fifty years; but that, in thesecond year of the reign of Cyrus, its foundatians were laid,and it was finished again in the second2 year of Darius. Iwill now add the records of the Phoenicians; for it will not besuperfluous to give the reader demonstrations more than enowon this occasion. In them we have this enumeration of thotimes of their several kings. — " Nabuchodonosor besiegedTyre for thirteen years in the days of IthobaJ, their king;after him reigned Baal ten years ; after him were judges ap­pointed, who judged the people. Ecnibalus, the son of Bas-lacus, two months; Chelbes, the son of Abdeus, ten months;Abbar, the high-priest, three months ; Mitgonus and Gcras-tratus, the sons of Abdelemus, were judges six years; afterwhom Balatorus reigned one year; after his death, they sentand fetched Merbalus from Babylon, who reigned four years:after his death they sent for his biother Hirom, who reignedtwenty years. Under his reign Cyrus became king of Persia."So that the whole interval is fifty-four years besides threemonths; for on the seventh year of the reign of Nebuchad­


1 This number in Josephus, that Nebuchadnezzar destroyed the temple inthe 18th year of his reign, is a mistake in the nicety of chronology: for ityi:\s in the 19th.
2 The true number here for the year of Darius, on which the second templowas finished, whether the 2d with our present copies, or the 0th with thatof Syncellus, or the tenth with that of Eusebius, is very uncertain: so wehad best follow Josephus's own account elsewhere, Antiq. B. xi. ch. iii. sect.4, which shows us that, according to his copy of the Old Testament, after thesecond of Cyrus, that work was interrupted till the 2d of Darius, when inecven years it was finished, on the 9th of Darius.







OCR Output








460 FLAVIUSJOSEPHUS [B. H.


tutions, yet do we willingly admit of those that desire to par­take of ours, which, I think, I may reckon to be a plainindication of our humanity, and at the same time of our mag­nanimity also.
38. But I shall say no more of the Lacedemonians. Asfor the Athenians, who glory in having made their city to becommon to all men, what their behavior was Apollonius didnot know, while they punished those that did but speak oneword contrary to their laws about the gods without any mercy:for on what other account was it that Socrates was put todeath by them ? For certainly he neither betrayed their cityto its enemies, nor was he guilty of any sacrilege with regardto any of their temples ; but it was on this account that heswore certain new oaths,1 and that he affirmed either in earnest,or, as some say, only in jest, that a certain demon used tomake signs to him [what he should not do.] For these rea­sons he was condemned to drink poison, and kill himself. Hisaccuser also complained that he corrupted the young men, byinducing them to despise the political settlement and laws oftheir city ; and thus was Socrates, the citizen of Athens, pun­ished. There was also Anaxagoras, who, although he was ofClazomeno?, was within a few suffrages of being condemned todie, because he said the sun, which the Athenians thought tobe a god, was a ball of fire. They also made this public pro­clamation, that they would give a talent to any one who wouldkill Diagorus of Melos, because it was reported of him that helaughed at their mysteries. Protagorus also, who was thoughtto have written somewhat that was not owned for truth by theAthenians about the gods, had been seized upon and put todeath, if he had not fled immediately away. Nor need wc atall wonder that they thus treated such considerable men, whenthey did not spare even women also; for they very latelyslew a certain priestess because she was accused by somebodythat she initiated people into the worship of strange gods, it


1 St


-,j what these uuvel oaths were in Dr. Hudson's note, viz.: To swear byan oak, by a goat, and by a dog, as also by a gander, as says Philostratui andothers. This swcaring strangu oaths w:is also forbidden by the Tyrians, B. isect. 22, ns Spanheim hero notes.







OCR Output








C. II.J VESPASIAN. 11


numbers, to Ascalon. But their former ill fortune followedthem, as the consequence of their unskilfulness, and otherdeficiencies in war; for Antonius laid ambushes for them inthe passages they were to go through, where they fell intosnares unexpectedly, and where they were compassed aboutwith horsemen, before they could form themselves into aregular body for fighting, and were above eight thousand ofthem slain : so all the rest of them ran away, and with themNiger, who still did a great many bold exploits in his flight.However, they were driven along together by the enemy, whopressed hard upon them, into a certain strong tower belongingto a village called Bezedel. However, Antonius and his party,that they might neither spend any considerable time aboutthis tower, which was hard to be taken, nor suffer their com­mander, and the most courageous man of them all, to escapefrom them, they set the wall on fire; and as the tower wasburning, the Romans went away rejoicing, as taking it forgranted that Niger was destroyed; but he leaped out of thotower into a subterraneous cave, in the innermost part of it,and was preserved ; and on the third day afterwards he spakeout of the ground to those that, with great lamentation, weresearching for him, in order to give him a decent funeral: andwhen he was come out, he filled all the Jews with an unex­pected joy, as though he were preserved by God's providenceto be their commander for the time to come.
4. And now Vespasian took along with him his army fromAntioch (which is the metropolis of Syria, and, without dis­pute, deserves the place of the third' city in the habitableearth that was under the Roman empire, both in magnitudeand other marks of prosperity,) where he found KingAgrippa, with all his forces, waiting for his coming, andmarched to Ptolemais. At this city also the inhabitants ofSepphoris of Galilee met him, who were for peace with theRomans. These citizens had beforehand taken care of theirown safety, and being sensible of the power of the Romans,


1 Spanheiui and It eland both agree, that the two cities here esteemedgreater than Antioch, the metropolis of Syria, were Rome and Alexandria;nor is there any occasion for doubt in so plain a case.







OCR Output








C. VI.] OF VESPASIAN. 119


done, as those that, upon the theatre, love to make a showof their hands and of their weapons, but do it to their ownhazard, without considering what was for their advantage andfor their security; for that if they now go and attack the cityimmediately, they shall but occasion their enemies to unitetogether, and shall convert their force, now it is in its height,against themselves ; but if they stay awhile, they shall havefewer enemies, because they will be consumed in this sedition:that God acts as a general of the Romans better than he cando, and is giving the Jews up to them without any pains oftheir own, and granting their army a victory without anydanger: that, therefore, it is their best way, while their ene­mies are destroying each other with their own hands, andfalling into the greatest of misfortunes, which is that of sedi­tion, to sit still as spectators of the dangers they run into,rather than to fight hand-to-hand with men that love murder­ing, and are mad one against another. But if any one ima­gines that the glory of victory, when it is gotten withoutfighting, will be more insipid, let him know this much, that aglorious success quietly obtained is more profitable than thedangers of a battle; for we ought to esteem those that dowhat is agreeable to temperance and prudence no less gloriousthan those that have gained great reputation by their actionsin war: that he shall lead on his army with greater forcewhen their enemies are diminished, and his own army re­freshed after the continual labors they had undergone. How­ever, that this is not a proper time to propose to ourselves theglory of victory ; for that the Jews are not now employed inmaking of armor or building of walls, nor, indeed, in gettingtogether auxiliaries, while the advantage will be on their sidewho gave them such opportunity of delay; but that the Jewsare vexed to pieces every day by their civil wars and dissen­sions, and arc under greater miseries than, if they were oncetaken, could bo inflicted on them by us. Whether, therefore,any one hath regard to what is for our safety, he ought tosuffer these Jews to destroy one another, or whether ho hathregard to the greater glory of the action, we ought by nomeans to meddle with these men, now they are afflicted with







OCR Output








498 DISSERTATION II.


He from the Gods this dreadful answer Irought,
O Grecians, when the Trojan shores you sought,
Your passage with a virgin's blood was bought;
So must your safo return be bought again,
And Grecian blood once more atone the main. Dbyden.
These bloody sacrifices were, for certain, instances of thegreatest degree of impiety, tyranny, and cruelty in the world,that either wicked demons, or wicked men, who neither madenor preserved mankind, who had therefore no right over them,nor were they able to make them amends in the next worldfor what they thus lost or suffered in this, should, after so in­human a manner, command the taking away the lives of men,and particularly of the offerer's own children, without thecommission of any crime. This was, I think, an abominationderived from him who was 1a murderer from the beginning;a crime truly and properly diabolical.
5. That, accordingly, Almighty God himself, under theJewish dispensation, vehemently condemned the Pagans, andsometimes the Jews themselves, for this crime; and for this,among other heinous sins, cast the idolatrous nations (nay,sometimes the Jews too) out of Palestine. Take the principaltexts thereto relating, as they lie in order in the Old Testament.
"2Thou shalt not let any of thy seed pass through the fireto Molech. Defile not yourselves in any of these things, forin all these the nations are defiled, which I cast out beforeyou," &c.
"3 Whosoever he be of the children of Israel, or of thestrangers that sojourn in Israel, that giveth any of his seedunto Molech, he shall surely be put to death: the people ofthe land shall stone him with stones."
'"Take heed to thyself, that thou be not snared by follow­ing the nations, after that they be destroyed from before thee;and that thou inquire not after their gods, saying, How didthese nations serve their gods ? even so will I do likewise.Thou shalt not do so unto the Lord thy God; for every abomi­nation of the Lord, which he hateth, have they done untc


1 John viii. 44. * Lev. xviii. 21.
» Lev. xx. 2. « Deut. xiii. 30, 31.







OCR Output








C. IX.] THE SIEGE. 211


your hands ! Did your king [Hezekiah] lift up such handsin prayer to God against the king of Assyria, when he de­stroyed that great army in one night ? And do the Romanscommit such wickedness, as did the king of Assyria, that youmay have reason to hope for the like vengeance upon them 1Did not that king accept of money from our king on this con­dition, that he should not destroy the city ? and yet contraryto the oath he had taken, he came down to burn the temple ;while the Romans do demand no more than that accustomedtribute which our fathers paid to their fathers ; and if theymay but once obtain that, they neither aim to destroy thiscity nor to touch this sanctuary; nay, they will grant youbesides, that your posterity shall be free, and your possessionssecured to you, and will preserve your holy laws inviolate toyou. And it is plain madness to expect that God shouldappear as well disposed towards the wicked as towards therighteous, since he knows when it is proper to punish menfor their sins immediately ; accordingly, he brake the powerof the Assyrians the very first night that they pitched theircamp. Wherefore, had he judged that our nation wasworthy of freedom, or the Romans of punishment, he hadimmediately inflicted punishment upon those Romans, as hedid upon the Assyrians, when Pompey began to meddle withour nation, or when, after him, Sosius came up against us, orwhen Vespasian laid waste Galilee, or, lastly, when Tituscame first of all near to this city ; although Magnus andSosius did not only suffer nothing, but took the city by force ;as did Vespasian go from the war he had made against youto receive the empire; and as for Titus, those springs thatwere formerly almost dried up' when they were under yourpower, since he has come, run more plentifully than theydid before: accordingly, you know that Siloam, as well as


1 This drying up of the Jerusalem fountain of Siloam, when the Jewswanted it, and its flowing abundantly when the enemies of the Jews wantedit, and these both in the days of Zedekiah and of Titus, (and this last as acertain event well known by the Jews at that time, as Josephus here tellsthem openly to their faces,) are very remarkable instances of a divine Provi­dence for the punishment of the Jewish nation when they were grown verywicked, at both those times of the destruction of Jerusnlem.







OCR Output








C. I.] THE TOWER OF ANTONIA. 245


combatants trod upon the bodies and the armor of those thatwere dead, and dashed them to pieces. Accordingly, to whichside soever the battle inclined those that had the advantageexhorted one another to go on, as did those that were beatenmake great lamentation. But still there was no room forflight nor for pursuit, but disorderly revolutions and retreats,while the armies were intermixed one with another; but thosethat were in the first ranks were under the necessity of kill­ing or being killed, without any way for escaping; for thoseon both sides that came behind forced those before them togo on, without leaving any space between the armies. Atlength the Jews' violent zeal was too hard for the Romanskill, and the battle already inclined entirely that way; forthe fight had lasted from the ninth hour of the night to theseventh hour of the day, while the Jews came on in crowds,and had the danger the temple was in for their motive; theRomans having no more here than a part of their army; forthose legions on which the soldiers on that side dependedwere not to come up to them. So it was at present thoughtsufficient by the Romans to take possession of the tower ofAntonia.
8. But there was one Julian, a centurion, that came fromBithynia, a man he was of great reputation, whom I had for­merly seen in that war, and one of the highest fame, both forhis skill in war, his strength of body, and the courage of hissoul. This man seeing the Romans giving ground, and in asad condition, for he stood by Titus at the tower of Antonia,leaped out, and of himself alone put the Jews to flight, whenthey were already conquerors, and made them retire as faras the corner of the inner court of the temple: from him themultitude fled away in crowds, as supposing that neither hisstrength nor his violent attacks could be those of a mere man.Accordingly, he rushed through the midst of the Jews, asthey were dispersed all abroad, and killed those that hecaught. Nor, indeed, was there any sight that appeared morewonderful in the eyes of Caesar, or more terrible to others,than this. However, he was himself pursued by fate, which


21 * '







OCR Output








306 REVOLT OF THE GERMANS. [B. VII.


met him at first related with what good humor he receivedevery one that came to him, then it was that the whole multi­tude that had remained in the city, with their wives and chil­dren, came into the road, and waited for him there; and forthose whom he passed by, they made all sorts of acclamationson account of the joy they had to see him, and the pleasant­ness of his countenance, and styled him their benefactor andsavior, and the only person who was worthy to be ruler ofthe city of Rome. And now the city was like a temple, fullof garlands and sweet odors; nor was it easy for him tocome to the royal palace, for the multitude of people thatstood about him; where yet at last he performed his sacrificesof thanksgiving to his household gods, for his safe return tothe city. The multitude did also betake themselves to feast­ing; which feasts and drink offerings they celebrated bytheir tribes, and their families, and their neighborhoods, andstill prayed God to grant that Vespasian, his sons, and alltheir posterity might continue in the Roman government fora very long time, and that his dominion might be preservedfrom all opposition. And this was the manner in whichRome so joyfully received Vespasian, and thence grew im­mediately into a state of great prosperity.
2. But before this time, and while Vespasian was aboutAlexandria, and Titus was lying at the siege of Jerusalem,a great multitude of the Germans were in commotion, andtended to rebellion ; and as the Gauls in their neighborhoodjoined with them, they conspired together, and had therebygreat hopes of success, and that they should free themselvesfrom the dominion of the Romans. The motives that in­duced the Germans to this attempt for a revolt, and for be­ginning the war, were these. — In the first place, the nature[of the people,] which was destitute of just reasonings, andready to throw themselves rashly into danger upon smallhopes: in the next place, the hatred they bore to those thatwere their governors, while their nation had never been con­scious of subjection to any but to the Romans, and that bycompulsion only. Besides these motives, it was the oppor­tunity that now offered itself which above all the rest pre­







OCR Output








324 ANTIOCIIUS, KING OF COMMAOENE. [B. VH.


care about the matter, since this discovery was made; for theneighborhood of the kingdoms made this affair worthy of agreater regard: for Samosata, the capital of Commagene, liesupon Euphrates, and upon any such design could afford aneasy passage over it to the Parthians, and could also affordthem a secure reception. Petus was, accordingly, believed,and had authority given him of doing what he should thinkproper in the case; so he set about it without delay, and fellupon Commagene before Antiochus and his people had theleast expectation of his coming: he had with him the tenthlegion, as also some cohorts and troops of horsemen. Thesekings also came to his assistance, Aristobulus, king of thecountry called Chaleidene, and Sohemus, who was called kingof Emesa. Nor was there any opposition made to his forceswhen they entered the kingdom; for no one of that countrywould so much as lift up his hand against them. When An­tiochus heard this unexpected news, he could not think in theleast of making war with the Romans, but determined to leavehis whole kingdom in the state wherein it now was, and toretire privately, with his wife and children, as thinking therebyto demonstrate himself to the Romans to be innocent as tothe accusation laid against him. So he went away from thatcity as far as a hundred and twenty furlongs, into a plain,and there pitched his tents.
2. Petus then sent some of his men to seize upon Samosata,and by their means took possession of that city, while he wenthimself to attack Antiochus with the rest of his army. How­ever, the king was not prevailed upon by the distress he wasin to do any thing in the way of war against the Romans, butbemoaned his own hard fate, and endured with patience whathe was not able to prevent. But his sons, who were youngand unexperienced in war, but of strong bodies, were noteasily induced to bear this calamity without fighting. Epi-phanes, therefore, and Callinicus, betook themselves to mili­tary force: and as the battle was a sore one, and lasted allthe day long, they showed their own valor in a remarkablemanner, and nothing but the approach of night put a periodthereto, aud that without any diminution of their forces: yet







OCR Output








C. IV.] THE TEMPLE GATES. 265


backwards headlong: others of them they met and slew: theyalso beat many of those that went down the ladders again,and slew them with their swords before they could bring theirshields to protect them; nay, some of the ladders they threwdown from above when they were full of armed men ; a greatslaughter was made of the Jews also at the same time, whilethose that bare the ensigns fought hard for them, as deemingit a terrible thing, and what would tend to their great shame,if they permitted them to be stolen away. Yet did the Jewsat length get possession of these engines, and destroyed thosethat had gone up the ladders, while the rest were so intimida­ted by what those suffered who were slain that they retired,although none of the Romans died without having done goodservice before his death. Of the seditious, those that hadfought bravely in the former battles did the like now; as be­sides them did Eleazar, the brother's son of Simon the tyrant.But when Titus perceived that his endeavors to spare aforeign temple turned to the damage of his soldiers, and madethem be killed, he gave order to set the gates on fire.
2. In the mean time there deserted to him Ananus, whocame from Emmaus, the most bloody of all Simon's guards,and Archilaus, the son of Magadatus, they hoping to be stillforgiven, because they left the Jews at a time when they werethe conquerors. Titus objected this to these men as a cun­ning trick of theirs; and as he had been informed of theirother barbarities towards the Jews, he was going in all hastoto have them both slain. He told them, "that they wereonly driven to this desertion because of the utmost distressthey were in, and did not come away of their own good dis­position ; and that those did not deserve to be preserved, bywhom their own city was already set on fire, out of whichfire they now hurried themselves away." However, thesecurity he had promised deserters overcame his resentments,and he dismissed them accordingly, though he did not givethem the same privileges that he had afforded to others. Andnow the soldiers had already put fire to the gates, and thesilver that was over them quickly carried the flames to thewood that was within it, whence it spread itself all on theIV. —23







OCR Output








C. VI.] LUCILIUS BASSUS. 321


he began to think of using a stratagem against the enemy,and was desirous to aggravate their grief, in order to prevailwith them to surrender the city for the preservation of thatman. Nor did he fail of his hope; for he commanded themto set up a cross, as if he were just going to hang Eleazarupon it immediately : the sight of this occasioned a sore griefamong those that were in the citadel, and they groaned vehe­mently, and cried out, that they could not bear to see himthus destroyed. Whereupon Eleazar besought them not todisregard him, now he was going to suffer a most miserabledeath, and exhorted them to save themselves, by yielding tothe Roman power and good fortune, since all other peoplewere now conquered by them. These men were greatlymoved with what he said, there being also many within thecity that interceded for him, because he was of an eminentand very numerous family; so they now yielded to theirpassion of commiseration, contrary to their usual custom.Accordingly, they sent out immediately certain messengers,and treated with the Romans, in order to a surrender of thecitadel to them, and desired that they might be permitted togo away, and take Eleazar along with them. Then did theRomans and their general accept of these terms ; while thatmultitude of strangers that were in the lower part of the city,hearing of the agreement that was made by the Jews forthemselves alone, was resolved to fly away privately in thenight-time; but as soon as they had opened their gates, thosethat had come to terms with Bassus told him of it; whetherit were that they envied the others' deliverance, or whetherit were done out of fear lest an occasion should be takenagainst them upon their escape, is uncertain. The mostcourageous, therefore, of those men that went out preventedthe enemy, and got away, and fled for it; but for those menthat were caught within, they were slain, to the number ofone thousand seven hundred, as were the women and thechildren made slaves. But as Bassus thought he must per­form the covenant he had made with those that had surren­dered the citadel, he let them go, and restored Eleazar tothem.







OCR Output








34 VESPASIAN. [B. III.


19. When, therefore, Vespasian looked upon himself as ina manner besieged by these sallies of the Jews, and when hisbanks were not now far from the walls, he determined to makeuse of his battering-ram. This ram is a vast beam of wood,like the mast of a ship; its forepart is armed with a thickpiece of iron at the head of it, which is so carved as to be likethe head of a ram, whence its name is taken. This ram isslung in the air by ropes passing over its middle, and is hunglike the balance in a pair of scales from another beam, andbraced by strong beams that pass on both sides of it in thenature of a cross. When this ram is pulled backward by agreat number of men with united force, and then thrust for­ward by the same men with a mighty noise, it batters the wallwith that iron part which is prominent. Nor is there anytower so strong or walls so broad that one can resist any morethan its first batteries, but are all forced to yield to it at last.This was the experiment which the Roman general betookhimself to, when he was eagerly bent upon taking the city;but found lying in the field so long to be to his disadvantage,because the Jews would never let him be quiet. So theseRomans brought the several engines for galling an enemynearer to the walls, that they might reach such as were uponthe walls, and endeavored to frustrate their attempts ; thesethrew stones and javelins at them; in the like manner didthe archers and slingers come both together closer to thewalls. This brought matters to such a pass that none of theJews durst mount the walls; and then it was that the otherRomans brought the battering-ram, which was cased withhurdles all over, and in the upper part was secured by skinsthat covered it, and this both for the security of themselvesand of the engine. Now at the very first stroke of this en­gine the wall was shaken, and a terrible clamor was raisedby the people within the city, as if they were already taken.
20. And now when Josephus saw this ram still batteringthe same place, and that the wall would quickly be throwndown by it, he resolved to elude for a while the force of theengine: with this design he gave orders to fill sacks withchaff, and to hang them down before that place where they







OCR Output








344 RESULT OF ELEAZAR'S ADVICE. [B. VII.


bear the grief they were under for what they had done anylonger, and esteeming it an injury to those they had slain tolive even the shortest space of time after them, they presentlylaid all they had upon a heap, and set fire to it. They thenchose ten men by lot out of them to slay all the rest; everyone of which laid himself down by his wife and children onthe ground, and threw his arms about them, and they offeredtheir necks to the stroke of those who by lot executed thatmelancholy office : and when these ten had, without fear,slain them all, they made the same rule for casting lots forthemselves, that he whose lot it was should first kill the othernine, and after all should kill himself. Accordingly, all thesehad courage sufficient to be no way behind one another indoing or suffering: so, for a conclusion, the nine offered theirnecks to the executioner; and he who was the last of all tooka view of all the other bodies, lest perchance some or otheramong so many that were slain should want his assistance tobe quite dispatched ; and when he perceived that they wereall slain, he set fire to the palace, and, with the great forceof his hand, ran his sword entirely through himself, and felldown dead near to his own relations. So these people diedwith this intention, that they would not leave so much as onesoul among them alive to be subject to the Romans. Yetwas there an ancient woman, and another who was of kin toEleazar, and superior to most women in prudence and learn­ing, with five children, who had concealed themselves in cav­erns under ground, and had carried water thither for theirdrink, and were hidden there when the rest were intent uponthe slaughter of one another. Those others were nine hun­dred and sixty in number, the women and children beingwithal included in that computation. This calamitous slaughterwas made on the fifteenth day of the month Xanthicus [Ni-san.]
2. Now for the Romans, they expected that they shouldbe fought in the morning, when, accordingly, they put ontheir armor, and laid bridges of planks upon their laddersfrom their banks, to make an assault upon the fortress, whichthey did : but saw nobody as an enemy, but a terrible solitude







OCR Output








C. III.] THE ZEALOTS. 89


bringing on of the war, they were the occasions of seditionand famine therein.
4. There were besides these other robbers that came out ofthe country, and came into the city, and joining to them thosethat were worse than themselves, omitted no kind of barbarity;for they did not measure their courage by their rapines andplundcrings only, but proceeded as far as murdering men;and this not in the night-time or privately, or with regard toordinary men, but did it openly in the day-time, and beganwith the most eminent persons in the city: for the first manthey meddled with was Antipas, one of the royal lineage, andthe most potent man in the whole city, insomuch that thepublic treasures were committed to his care: him they tookand confined, as they did in the next place to Levias a personof great note, with Sophas the son of Raguel; both whichwere of royal lineage also. And besides these they did thesame to the principal men of the country. This caused aterrible consternation among the people, and every one con­tented himself with taking care of his own safety, as theywould do if the city had been taken in war.
5. But these were not satisfied with the bonds into whichthey had put the men forementioned; nor did they think itsafe for them to keep them thus in custody long, since theywere men very powerful and had numerous families of theirown that were able to avenge them. Nay, they thought thevery people would, perhaps, be so moved at these unjust pro­ceedings, as to rise in a body against them : it was, therefore,resolved to have them slain. Accordingly, they sent oneJohn, who was the most bloody-minded of them all, to do thatexecution : this man was also called the son of Dorcas^ in thelanguage of our country. Ten more men went along withhim into the prison, with their swords drawn, and so they cutthe throats of those that were in custody there. The grand


1 This name Dorcas in Greek was Tabitha in Hebrew or Syriac, as Acts,ix. 30. Accordingly, some of the manuscripts set it down here Tabetha, orTabcta. Nor can the context in Josephus be made out by supposing thoreading to have been this, the son of Tabitha, which in the language of ourcountry denotes Dorcas [or a doe.]


8*







OCR Output








C. VII.] VESPASIAN. 25


cities that were round about it; some of which were quitedestitute of inhabitants, and out of some of them he carriedthe inhabitants as slaves into captivity.
2. As to Josephus, his retiring into that city which hechose as the most fit for his security, put it into great fear;for the people of Tiberias did not imagine that he would havorun away, unless he had entirely despaired of the success ofthe war. And, indeed, as to that point, they were not mis­taken about his opinion; for he saw whither the affairs of theJews would tend at last, and was sensible that they had butone way of escaping, and that was by repentance. However,although he expected that the Romans would forgive him,yet did he choose to die many times over rather than to be­tray his country, and to dishonor that supreme command ofthe army which had been intrusted with him, or to live hap­pily under those against whom he was sent to fight. Hedetermined, therefore, to give an exact account of affairs tothe principal men at Jerusalem by a letter, that he mightnot by too much aggrandizing the power of the enemy makethem too timorous, nor by relating that their power beneaththe truth might encourage them to stand out, when theywere, perhaps, disposed to repentance. He also sent themword, that if they thought of coming to terms, they mustsuddenly write him an answer; or if they resolved upon war,they must send him an army sufficient to fight the Romans.Accordingly, he wrote these things, and sent messengers im­mediately to carry his letters to Jerusalem.
3. Now Vespasian was very desirous of demolishing Jota-pata, for he had gotten intelligence that the greatest part ofthe enemy had retired thither, and that it was, on other ac­counts, a place of great security to them. Accordingly, hesent both footmen and horsemen to level the road, which wasmountainous and rocky, not without difficulty to be travelledover by footmen, but absolutely impracticable for horsemen.Now these workmen accomplished what they were about infour days' time, and opened a broad way for the army. Onthe fifth day, which was the twenty-first of the month Arte-misius [Jyar,] Josephus prevented him, and came from Tibe-
IV. —3







OCR Output








134 ROMAN AFFAIRS. [B. IV.


going out of the city; for as to such as had a mind to desert,they were watched by the zealots; and as to such as were notyet on the side of the Romans, their army kept them in, byencompassing the city round about on all sides.
2. Now as Vespasian was returned to Caesarca, and wasgetting ready with all his army to march directly to Jerusa­lem, he was informed that Nero was dead, after he hadreigned thirteen years and eight days; but as to any narra­tion after what manner he abused his power in the government,and committed the management of affairs to those vilewretches, Nymphidius and Tigellinus, his unworthy freedmen;and how he had a plot laid against him by them, and was de­serted by all his guards, and ran away with four of his mosttrusty freedmen, and slew himself in the suburbs of Rome;and how those that occasioned his death were in no Ions: timebrought themselves to punishment; how also the war in Gallended; and how Galba1 was made emperor, and returned outof Spain to Rome; and how he was accused by the soldiersas a pusillanimous person, and slain by treachery in the mid­dle of the market-place at Rome, and Otho was made empe­ror ; with his expedition against the commanders of Vitcllius,and his destruction thereupon; and besides what troublesthere were under Vitellius, and the fight that was about theCapitol; as also, how Antonius Primus and Mucianus slewVitellius and his German legions, and thereby put an end tothat civil war, I have omitted to give an exact account ofthem, because they are well known by all, and they are de­scribed by a great number of Greek and Roman authors: yetfor the sake of the connexion of matters, and that my historymay not be incoherent, I have just touched upon every thingbriefly. Wherefore Vespasian put off at first his expeditionagainst Jerusalem, and stood waiting whither the empirewould be transferred after the death of Nero. Moreover,


1 Of these Roman affairs and tumults under Gnlba, Otto, and Vitellius,here only touched upon by Josephus, see Tacitus, Suetonius, and Dio, morelargely. However, we may observe Vfith Ottius, that Josephus writes thename of the second of them not Otto, with many others, but Otho, with thacoins. Sec also the note on ch. xi. sect. 4.







OCR Output








C. VII.] VESPASIAN. 45


hand, and come to terms with him, and thereby save them­selves ; and assured them, that, if they would lay down theirarms, he would secure them from any harm; but when hocould not prevail with them, he fell upon them, and slew themall, being in number eleven thousand and six hundred. Thiswas done on the twenty-seventh day of the month Desius[Sivan.] And these were the calamities that befell the Sa­maritans at this time.
33. But as the people of Jotapata still held out manfully,and bore up under their miseries beyond all that could behoped for, on the forty-seventh day [of the siege] the bankscast up by the Romans were become higher than the wall;on which day a certain deserter went to Vespasian, and toldhim how few were left in the city, and how weak they were :and that they had been so worn out with perpetual watching,and also perpetual fighting, that they could not now opposeany force that came against them, and that they might betaken by stratagem, if any one would attack them ; for thatabout the last watch of the night, when they thought theymight have some rest from the hardships they were under,and when a morning sleep used to come upon them, as theywere thoroughly weary, he said the watch used to fall asleep ;accordingly, his advice was, that they should make their at­tack at that hour. But Vespasian had a suspicion about thisdeserter, as knowing how faithful the Jews were to oneanother, and how much they despised any punishments thatcould be inflicted on them; this last, because one of the peo­ple of Jotapata had undergone all sorts of torments, andthough they made him pass through a fiery trial of his ene­mies in his examination, yet would he inform them nothingof the affairs within the city, and as he was crucified smiledat them. However, the probability there was in the relationitself did partly confirm the truth of what the deserter toldthem, and they thought he might probably speak truth.However, Vespasian thought they should be no great sufferersif the report was a sham : so he commanded them to keep theman in custody, and prepared the army for taking the city.
34. According to which resolution they marched without







OCR Output








180 THE TEMPLE, [B. V".


new banks, and the hill became a larger plain. They thenbroke down the wall on the north side, and took in as muchas sufficed afterward for the compass of the entire temple.And when they had built walls on three sides of the templeround about, from the bottom of the hill, and had performeda work that was greater than could bo hoped for (in whichwork long ages were spent by them, as well as all their sacredtreasures were exhausted, which were still replenished bythose tributes which were sent to God from the whole habit­able earth,) they then encompassed their upper courts withcloisters, as well as they [afterward] did the lowest [court ofthe] temple. The lowest part of this was erected to theheight of three hundred cubits, and in some places more; yetdid not the entire depth of the foundations appear; for theybrought earth, and filled up the valleys, as being desirous tomake them on a level with the narrow streets of the city,wherein they made use of stones of forty cubits in magnitude:for the great plenty of money they then had, and theliberality of the people, made this attempt of theirs to succeedto an incredible degree. And what could not be so much ashoped for as ever to be accomplished, was, by perseveranceand length of time, brought to perfection.
2. Now for the works that were above these foundations,these were not unworthy of such foundations ; for all the clois­ters were double, and the pillars to them belonging weretwenty-five cubits in height, and supported the cloisters.These pillars were of one entire stone each of them, and thatstone was white marble; and the roofs were adorned withcedar curiously graven; the natural magnificence, and excel­lent polish, and the harmony of the joints in these cloisters,afforded a prospect that was very remarkable; nor was it on


for the other courts, &e. is without all foundation in the scriptures, and notat all confirmed by his exacter account in the Antiquities. All that is or canbe true here is this, that when the court of the Gentiles was long afterwardsto be encompassed with cloisters, the southern foundation for these cloisterswas found not to be large or firm enough, and was raised, and that additionalfoundation supported by great pillars and arches under ground, which Jo-sephus speaks of elsewhere, Antiq. B. xv. ch. xi. sect. 3; and which Mr.Maundrel saw, and describes, p. 100 as extant under ground at this day.







OCR Output








C. VII.] ANTIOCIIUS, KING OF COMMAGENE. 323


which he gave them for their habitation: it is called Emmausj-and is distant from Jerusalem threescore furlongs. He alsopaid a tribute upon the Jews wheresoever they were, andenjoined every one of them to bring two drachmae every yearinto the capitol, as they used to pay the same to the templeat Jerusalem. And this was the state of the Jewish affairsat this time.
CHAPTER VII.
CONCERNING THE CALAMITY THAT BEFELL ANTIOCIIUS, KINGOF COMMAGENE; AS ALSO CONCERNING THE ALANS, ANDWHAT OREAT MISCHIEFS THEY DID TO THE MEDES ANDARMENIANS.
§ 1. And now, in the fourth year of the reign of Vespasian,it came to pass that Antiochus, the king of Commagene, withall his family, fell into very great calamities. The occasionwas this. — Cecennius Petus, who was president of Syria atthis time, whether it were done out of regard to truth, orwhether out of hatred to Antiochus (for which was the realmotive was never thoroughly discovered,) sent an epistle toCaesar, and therein told him that " Antiochus, with his sonEpiphanes, had resolved to rebel against the Romans, and hadmade a league with the king of Parthia to that purpose: thatit was, therefore, fit to prevent them, lest they prevent us,and begin such a war as may cause a general disturbance inthe Roman empire." Now Caesar was disposed to take some


1 That the city of Emmaus or Ammaus in Josephus and others, which wasthe place of the government of Julius Africanus, in the beginning of thethird century, and which he then procured to bo rebuilt, and after whichrebuilding it was called Nicopolis, is entirely different from that Ernmauswhich is mentioned by St. Luke, xxiv. 17; see Reland's Faloestina, lib. ii.page 429, and under tho same name Ammaus also. But he justly thinksthat in St. Luke may well bo tho same with this Ammaus before us, espe­cially since the Greek copies here usually make it 0O furlongs distant fromJerusalem, as does St. Luke, though the Latin copies say only 30. The placealso allotted for these 800 soldiers, as for a Roman garrison, in this place,would most naturally be not so remote from Jerusalem as was the otherEmmaus of Nicopolis.







OCR Output








DISSERTATION III. 533


TRAJAN'S EPISTLE TO PLINY.
My Pliny—You have taken the method which you ought,in examining the causes of those that had been accused asChristians; for, indeed, no certain and general form of judg­ing can be ordained in this case. These people are not to besought for; but if they be accused, and convicted, they areto be punished, but with this caution, that he who denies him­self to be a Christian, and makes it plain that he is not so bysupplicating to our gods, although he had been so formerly,may be allowed pardon, upon his repentance. As for libelssent without an author, they ought to have no place in anyaccusation whatsoever, for that would be a thing of very illexample, and not agreeable to my reign.


OBSERVATIONS
UPON THE PASSAGES TAKEN OUT OF TACITUS.
I. AVe see here what great regard the best of the Romanhistorians of that age, Tacitus, had to the history of Jose-phus, while, though he never names him, as he very rarelynames any of those Roman authors whence he derives otherparts of his history, yet does it appear that he refers to hisseven books of the Jewish Wars several times in a very fewpages, and almost always depends on his accounts of theaffairs of the Romans and Parthian?, as well as of the Jews,during no fewer than 240 years, to which those booksextend.
II. Yet does it appear that when he now and then followedother historians or reports concerning the Romans, the Par-thians, or the Jews, during that long interval, he was com­monly mistaken in them, and had better have kept close toJosephus, than hearken to any of his other authors or in­formers.
III. It also appears highly probable that Tacitus had seen


45 *







OCR Output








B. I.] A GAINST A PI ON. 403


was Phritiphantes. As to the numbers of the multitude thatwere expelled, they agree exceedingly well,1 the formerreckoning them eighty thousand and the latter about twohundred and fifty thousand. Now, for Manetho, he describesthese polluted persons as sent first to work in the quarries,and says that after that the city Avaris was given them fortheir habitation. As also he relates, that it was not till afterthey had made war with the rest of the Egyptians, that theyinvited the people of Jerusalem to come to their assistance;while Cheremon says only, that they were gone out of Egypt,and lighted upon three hundred and eighty thousand menabout Pelusium, who had been left there by Amenophis, andso they invaded Egypt with them again; that thereuponAmenophis fled into Ethiopia. But, then, this Cheremoncommits a most ridiculous blunder in not informing us whothis army of so many ten thousands were, or whence theycame ; whether they were native Egyptians, or whether theycame from a foreign country. Nor, indeed, has this man,who forged a dream from Isis, about the leprous people, as­signed the reason why the king would not bring them intoEgypt. Moreover, Cheremon sets down Joseph as drivenaway at the same time with Moses, who yet died four2 gene­rations before Moses, which four generations make almostone hundred and seventy years. Besides all this, Ramesses,the son of Amenophis, by Manetho's account was a youngman, and assisted his father in this war, and left the countryat the same time with him, and fled into Ethiopia. But Che­remon makes him to have been born in a certain cave, afterhis father was dead, and that he then overcame the Jews inbattle, and drove them into Syria, being in number abouttwo hundred thousand. O the levity of the man! For hehad neither told us who these three hundred and eighty thou­sand were, nor how the four hundred and thirty thousand


1 By way of irony, I suppose.
-' Here we see that Josephus esteemed a generation between Joseph andMoses to be about 42 or 43 years; which, if taken between the earlier chil­dren, well agrees with the duration of human life in those ages. Sec Authent.Rec. Part II. p. 906, 1019, 1020.







OCR Output








C. XI.] JONATHAN. 351


afflicted in body, but the distemper in his mind was moreheavy upon him than the other: for he was terribly disturbed,and continually cried out,—" That he saw the ghosts of thosemen whom he had slain standing before him." Whereuponhe was not able to contain himself, but leaped out of his bed,as if both torments and fire were brought to him. This hisdistemper grew still a great deal worse and worse continually;and his very entrails were so corroded, that they fell out ofhis body, and in that condition he died. Thus he became asgreat an instance of divine providence as ever was, and de­monstrated that God punishes wicked men.
5. And here we shall put an end to this our history;wherein we formerly promised to deliver the same, with allaccuracy, to such as should be desirous of understandingafter what manner this war of the Romans with the Jewswas managed. Of which history how good the style is mustbe left to the determination of the readers: but as for itsagreement with the facts, I shall not scruple to say, and thatboldly, that truth hath been what I have alone aimed atthrough its entire composition.







OCR Output








B. I.] AGAINST APION. 873


16. This is Manetho's account. And evident it is, fromthe number of years by him set down belonging to thisinterval, if they be summed up together, that these shepherds,as they are licre called, who were no other than our fore­fathers, were delivered out of Egypt, and came thence, andinhabited this country, three hundred and ninety-three yearsbefore Danaus came to Argos; although the Argives lookupon him' as their most ancient king. Manetho, therefore,bears this testimony to two points of the greatest consequenceto our purpose, and those from the Egyptian records them­selves. In the first place, that we came out of anothercountry into Egypt, and that withal our deliverance out ofit was so ancient in time as to have preceded the siege ofTroy almost a thousand years;1 but then, as to those thingswhich Manetho adds, not from the Egyptian records, but, ashe confesses himself, from some stories of an uncertainoriginal, I will disprove them hereafter particularly, andshall demonstrate that they are no better than incrediblofables.
17. I will now, therefore, pass from these records, andcome to those that belong to the Phoenicians, and concernour nation, and shall produce attestations to what I have saidout of them. There are, then, records among the Tyrians,that take in the history of many years, and these are publicwritings, and are kept with great exactness, and include ac­counts of the facts done among them, and such as concerntheir transactions with other nations also, those I mean whichwere worth remembering. Therein it was recorded, that thetemple was built by king Solomon at Jerusalem one hundred
the mott ancient king of Argos, he need not be supposed to mean, in thestrictest sense, that they had no one king so ancient as ho ; for it is certainthey owned nine kings before him, and Inachus at the head of them; seeAuthentic Records; Part ii. p. 983, as Josephus could not but know verywell; but that he was esteemed as very ancient by them, and that they knewthey had been first of all denominated Daaai, from this very ancient kingDanaus. Nor does this superlative degree always jmply the most ancieat ofall without exception, but is sometimes to be rendered very ancient only, asis the case in the like superlative degrees of other words also.1 See the preceding note.
IV. — 82







OCR Output








310 PETITION OF THE ANTIOCHIANS. [B. VII.


but a multitude of women also, with their children, did thesame, and when they saw him coming up to them, they stoodon both sides of the way, and stretched out their right hands,saluting him, and making all sorts of acclamations to him,and turned back together with him. They also, among allthe acclamations they made to him, besought him all the waythey went to eject the Jews out of their city; yet did notTitus at all yield to this their petition, but gave them thebare hearing of it quietly. However, the Jews were in a greatdeal of terrible fear under the uncertainty they were in whathis opinion was, and what he would do to them: for Titus didnot stay at Antioch, but continued his progress immediatelyto Zeugma, which lies upon the Euphrates, whither came tohim messengers from Vologeses king of Parthia, and broughthim a crown of gold upon the victory he had gained over theJews; which he accepted of, and feasted the king's messen­gers, and then came back to Antioch. And when the senateand people of Antioch earnestly entreated him to come upontheir theatre, where their w:hole multitude was assembled, andexpected him, he complied with great humanity; but whenthey pressed him with much earnestness, and continuallybegged of him that he would eject the Jews out of their city,he gave them this very pertinent answer : — " How can thisbe done, since that country of theirs, whither the Jews mustbe obliged then to retire, is destroyed, and no place will re­ceive them besides ?" Whereupon the people of Antioch,when they had failed of success in their first request, madehim a second; for they desired that he would order thosetables of brass to be removed on which the Jews' privilegeswere engraven. However, Titus would not grant that neither,but permitted the Jews of Antioch to continue to enjoy thevery same privileges in that city which they had before, andthen departed for Egypt; and as he came to Jerusalem inhis progress, and compared the melancholy condition he sawit then in with the ancient glory of the city, and called tomind the greatness of its present ruins, as well as its ancientsplendor, he could not but pity the destruction of the city, sofar was he from boasting that so great and goodly a city as







OCR Output








C. IX.] VESPASIAN. 57


attacked, and were afraid of it; yet did they not endeavorto keep the Romans out, but fled to their ships, and lay atsea all night out of the reach of their darts.
3. Now Joppa is not naturally a haven, for it ends in arough shore, where all the rest of it is straight, but the two ends,bend towards each other, where there are deep precipices, andgreat stones that jet out into the sea, and where the chainswherewith Andromeda was bound have left their footsteps,which attest to the antiquity of that fable. But the northwind opposes and beats upon the shore, and dashes mightywaves against the rocks which receive them, and renders thehaven more dangerous than the country they had deserted.Now as these people of Joppa were floating about in thissea, in the morning there fell a violent wind upon them; itis called by those that sail there the black north wind, andthere dashed their ships one against another, and dashedsome of them against the rocks, and carried many of themby force, while they strove against the opposite waves, intothe main sea; for the shore was so rocky, and had so manyof the enemy upon it, that they were afraid to come to land;nay, the waves rose so very high that they drowned them :nor was there any place whither they could fly, nor any wayto save themselves: while they were thrust out of the sea,by the violence of the wind, if they stayed where they were,and out of the city by the violence of the Romans; andmuch lamentation there was when the ships were dashedagainst one another, and a terrible noise when they werebroken to pieces; and some of the multitude that were inthem were covered with the waves, and so perished, and agreat many were embarrassed with shipwrecks ; but some ofthem thought, that to die by their own swords was lighterthan by the sea, and so they killed themselves before theywere drowned; although the greatest part of them werecarried by the waves, and dashed to pieces against the abruptparts of the rocks, insomuch that the sea was bloody a longway, and the maritime parts were full of dead bodies; forthe Romans came upon those that were carried to the shore,and destroyed them; and the number of the bodies that were







OCR Output













OCR Output








120 FURTHER CRUELTIES. [B. IV.


a distemper at home; for should we now conquer tliem, itwould be said the conquest was not owing to our bravery, butto their sedition."
3. And now the commanders joined in their approbationof what Vespasian had said, and it was soon discovered howwise an opinion he had given. And, indeed, many there wereof the Jews that deserted every day, and fled away from thezealots, although their flight was very difficult, since they hadguarded every passage out of the city, and slew every onethat was caught at them, as taking it for granted they weregoing over to the Romans; yet did he who gave them moneyget clear off, while he only that gave them none was voted atraitor. So the upshot was this, that the rich purchased theirflight by money, while none but the poor were slain. Alongall the roads also vast numbers of dead bodies lay on heaps,and even many of those that were so zealous in deserting atlength chose rather to perish within the city; for the hopesof burial made death in their own city appear of the two lessterrible to them. But these zealots came at last to that de­gree of barbarity, as not to bestow a burial either on thoseslain in the city or on those that lay along the roads; but asif they had made an agreement to cancel both the laws oftheir country and the laws of nature, and at the same timethat they defiled men with their wicked actions, they wouldpollute the divinity itself also, they left the dead bodies toputrefy under the sun : and the same punishment was allottedto such as buried any, as to those that deserted, which wasno other than death; while he that granted the favor of agrave to another would presently stand in need of a gravehimself. To say all in a word, no other gentle passion wasso entirely lost among them as mercy; for what were thegreatest objects of pity did most of all irritate these wretches,and they transferred their rage from the living to those thathad been slain, and from the dead to the living. Nay, theterror was so very great, that he who survived called themthat were first dead happy, as being at rest already; as didthose that were under torture in the prisons declare, that,upon this comparison, those that lay unburied were the happi­







OCR Output













OCR Output








244 THE ROMANS ASSAULT [B. VI.


were on the fore-front, and kept watch upon the banks, gottogether, and called to them the standard-bearer of the fifthlegion, and two others of a troop of horsemen, and one trum­peter : these went without noise, about the ninth hour of thenight, through the ruins, to the tower of Antonia ; and whenthey had cut the throats of the first guards of the place, asthey were asleep, they got possession of the wall, and orderedthe trumpeter to sound his trumpet: upon which the rest ofthe guard got up on the sudden, and ran away, before anybody could see how many there were that were gotten up;for partly from the fear they were in, and partly from thesound of the trumpet which they heard, they imagined agreat number of the enemy were gotten up. But as soon asCaesar heard the signal, he ordered the army to put on theirarmor immediately, and came thither with his commanders,and first of all ascended, as did the chosen men that werewith him. And as the Jews were flying away to the temple,they fell into that mine which John had dug under the Romanbanks. Then did the seditious of both the bodies of theJewish army, as well that belonging to John as that belong­ing to Simon, drive them away; and, indeed, were no waywanting as to the highest degree of force and alacrity; forthey esteemed themselves entirely ruined, if once the Romansgot into the temple, as did the Romans look upon the samething as the beginning of their entire conquest. So a terri­ble battle was fought at the entrance of the temple, while theRomans were forcing their way in order to get possession ofthat temple, and the Jews were driving them back to thetower of Antonia; in which battle the darts were on bothsides useless, as well as the spears, and both sides drew theirswords, and fought it out hand to hand. Now, during thisstruggle, the positions of the men were undistinguished onboth sides, and they fought at random, the men being inter­mixed one with another, and confounded, by reason of thenarrowness of the place; while the noise that was made fellon the car after an indistinct manner, because it was so veryloud. Great slaughter was now made on both sides, and the







OCR Output








GENERAL INDEX
TO THE FOUR VOLUMES.
The first number is that of the respective Volume, the second r'fers to the page.


Aaron, i. 186; made high-priest,234; his sons, 235; his death, 276.
Abdastartus, iv. 375.
Abdomon, ii. 35 ; iv. 375.
Abdenago, or Abedncgo, ii. 183.
Abdon succeeds Elon, i. 373.
Abel, i. 30; his sacrifice, ib.
Abiathar, tho son of Ahimelceh, i.442; flies to David, 444; is high-priest, 461, 489, 506, 518; deprivedof the high-priesthood, ii. 7.
\bibalus, iv. 375.
Abigail, i. 450; married to David,451.
Abihu, the son of Aaron, i. 235.
Abijah, or Abia, i. 512; ii. 57; suc­ceeds his father, ii. 60; conquersthe ten tribes, ii. 64.
Abilamaradochus, or Evil-Mcrodach,ii. 191.
Abimael, i. 97.
Abimclech tyrannizes over the She-chemites, i. 366; expelled, 367;destroys them all, ib.; killed, 36'.'.
Abiram, i. 265.
Abishag, David's nurse, i. 535.
Abishai, i. 452.
Abner, i. 416, 467, et leq.; Saul'skinsman, 416; general of his army,467; reconciles the Israelites toDavid, 471; is killed, 472.Abram, or Abraham, leaves Chaldea,goes to Canaan, i. 9S; lives at Da­mascus, 99; at Hebron, 101; ad­vises his sons to plant colonies, 115;instructs the Egyptians in the ma­thematical sciences, 100; dividesthe country between himself andLot, 101 ; God promises him a son,103; beats the Assyrians, 102;dies, 118.
Absalom flies to Geshur, i. 502; re­called by a stratagem of Joab's,


503; robels against David, 505;
pursues him, 513 ; his army put tc
flight, 514; hangs on a tree by his
hair, ib.; is stabbed by Joab, and
dies, ib.Achar, or Achan, is guilty of theft, i.
330; is punished, 332.Achitophcl, or Ahitophel, i. 505; gives
evil counsel, 509; hangs himself,
512.Aeme, iii. 444; her letters to Anti-pater and Herod, iii. 95; her death,
103.Aemon, attacks David, i. 525; is
killed by Abishai, ib.Acrathcus, or llatach, ii. 238.Actium, battle at, ii. 509, 518; iii.
3*5.Ada, the wife of Lamech, i. 82.Adad, a king of Damascus, i. 486.Adam created, i. 76; his fall, 78.Ader, or Hadad, i. 486.Adonias, or Adonijah, pretends to the
crown, i. 535; takes sanctuary,
538; is refused Abishag to wife,
ii. 6; killed, ii. 7.Adonibesek, made prisoner, his hands
and feet cut off, and dies, i. 347.Adoram, ii. 17.
Adrasar, or Hadadezer, i. 487; ii. 47..Ebutius, a decurion, i. 32.yEgypt, whence named, iv. 372.yEgvptian kings called Pharaohs for
1300 years, ii. 37..Egyptians, famous for wisdom, ii. 13;
learned mathematies of Abraham,
100; their sacred scribes or priests,
172; held it unlawful to feed cattle,
168.-Egyptian false prophet put to flight
by Felix, iii. 290, 496.jElius Gallus, ii. 545.yEmilius Regulus, iii. 206.


'539)







OCR Output








DISSERTATION III. 525


yet without any stain to his honor as a general.1 He wasreceived in Judea by three legions, the fifth and the tenth,and the fifteenth, who were Vespasian's old soldiers. Syriaalso afforded him the twelfth, and Alexandria soldiers out ofthe twenty-second and twenty-third legions. Twenty cohorts26f auxiliaries accompanied him, as also eight troops of horse.
King Agrippa also was there, and King Sohemus, and theauxiliaries of King Antiochus, and a strong body of Arabians,who, as is usual in nations that are neighbors to one another,went with their accustomed hatred against the Jews, withmany others out of the city of Rome, as every one's hopesled him of getting early into the general's favor, before othersshould prevent them.
He entered into the borders of the enemies' country withthese forces, in exact order of war: and looking carefullyabout him, and being ready for battle, he pitched his campnot far from Jerusalem.
Chap. X.] When, therefore, he had pitched his camp, aswe said just now, before the walls of Jerusalem, he pompouslyshowed3 his legions ready for an engagement.
Chap. XI.] The Jews formed their camp under the verywalls4 [of the city,] and if they succeeded, they resolved toventure farther, but if they were beaten back, that was theirplace of refuge. When a body of cavalry5 were sent againstthem, and with them cohorts, that were expedite and nimble,the fight was doubtful; but soon afterwards the enemies gaveground, and on the following days there were frequent skir­mishes before the gates, till after many losses they were driven


1 This character of Titus agrees exactly with the history of Josephus uponall occasions.
- These twenty cohorts anil eight troops of horse are not directly enume­rated by Josephus, Autiq. b. v. chap. i. sect. 0.
a This word in Tacitus, pompously showed his legions, looks as if that pom­pous show, which was some months afterward, in Josephus, ran in his mind,Antiq. b. v. chap. ix. sect. 1.
4 These first bickerings and battles near the walls of Jerusalem are at largoin Josephus, Antiq. b. v. chap. ii.
4 Josephus distinctly mentions these horsemen or cayalry, 600 in number,among whom Titus had like to have been slain or taken prisoner, Antiq. b.v. chap. ii. sect. 1-3.







OCR Output








IX.] RESULT OF ELKAZAR'S ADVICE. 343


CHAPTER IX.
HOW THE PEOPLE THAT WERE IN THE FORTRESS WERE PRE­VAILED ON BY THE WORDS OF ELEAZAR, TWO WOMEN ANDFIVE CHILDREN ONLY EXCEPTED, AND ALL SUBMITTED TOBE KILLED BY ONE ANOTHER.
§ 1. Now, as Eleazar was proceeding on in this exhorta­tion, they all cut him off short, and made haste to do thework, as full of an unconquerable ardor of mind, and movedwith a demoniacal fury. So they went their way as one stillendeavoring to be before another, and as thinking that thiseagerness would be a demonstration of their courage and goodconduct if they could avoid appearing in the last class; sogreat was the zeal they were in to slay their wives, and chil­dren, and themselves also. Nor indeed, when they came tothe work itself did their courage fail them, as one mightimagine it would have done; but they then held fast the sameresolution without wavoring, which they had upon the hearingof Eleazar's speech, while yet every one of them still retainedthe natural passion of love to themselves and their families,because the reasoning they went upon appeared to them tobe very just, even with regard to those that were dearest tothem; for the husbands tenderly embraced their wives, andtook their children into their arms, and gave the longestparting kisses to them, with tears in their eyes. Yet at thesame time did they complete what they had resolved on, asif they had been executed by the hands of strangers; and theyhad nothing else for their comfort but the necessity they werein of doing this execution, to avoid that prospect they had ofthe miseries they were to suffer from their enemies. Nor wasthere at length any one of these men found that scrupled toact their part in this terrible execution, but every one of themdispatched his dearest relations. Miserable men, indeed,were they! whose distress forced them to slay their ownwives and children with their own hands, as the lightest ofthose evils that were before them. So they being not able to







OCR Output








CXI.] JEWS CRUCIFIED. 217


the temple which they seemed to think came too slowly; and,indeed, when they saw that temple burning from the uppercity, they were neither troubled at it, nor did they shed anytears on that account, while yet these passions were discoveredamong the Romans themselves. "Which circumstances we shallspeak of hereafter in their proper place, when we come to treatof such matters.
CHAPTER XI.
HOW THE JEWS WERE CRUCIFIED BEFORE THE WALLS OF THECITY. CONCERNING ANTIOCIIUS EPIPHANES ; AND HOW THEJEWS OVERTHREW THE BANKS THAT HAD BEEN RAISED BYTHE ROMANS.
§ 1. So now Titus's banks were advanced a great way, not­withstanding his soldiers had been very much distressed fromthe wall. He then sent a party of horsemen, and orderedthey should lay ambushes for those that went out into thevalleys to gather food. Some of these were, indeed, fighting-men, who were not contented with what they got by rapine;but the greater part of them were poor people, who were de­terred from deserting by the concern they were under for theirown relations ; for they could not hope to escape away, to­gether with their wives and children, without the knowledgeof the seditious; nor could they think of leaving these rela­tions to be slain by the robbers on their account; nay, theseverity of the famine made them bold in thus going out: sonothing remained but that when they were concealed from therobbers, they should be taken by the enemy ; and when theywere going to be taken, they were forced to defend themselvesfor fear of being punished, as after they had fought, theythought it too late to make any supplications for mercy: sothey were first whipped, and then tormented with all sortsof tortures, before they died, and were then crucified1 before
'Reland very properly takes notice here, how justly this judgment cameupon the Jews, wheu they were crucified in such multitudes together, thatthe Romans wanted room for the crosses, and crosses for the bodies of thoseJews, since they had brought this judgment on themselves by the crucifixionof their Messiah.
IV. —19







OCR Output








C. V.] DISTRESS OF THE JEWS. 271


CHAPTER V.
THE GREAT DISTRESS THE JEWS WERE IN UPON THE CON­FLAGRATION OF THE HOLY HOUSE. CONCERNING A FALSEPROPHET, AND THE SIGNS THAT PRECEDED THIS DESTRUCTION.
§ 1. While the holy house was on fire, every thing wasplundered that came to hand, and ten thousand of those thatwere caught were slain: nor was there a commiseration ofany age, or any reverence of gravity, hut children and oldmen, and profane persons, and priests, were all slain in thesame manner; so that this war went round all sorts of men,and brought them to destruction, and as well those that madesupplication for their lives as those that defended themselvesby fighting. The flame was also carried a long way, andmade an echo, together with the groans of those that wereslain; and because this hill was high, and the works at thetemple were very great one would have thought the wholecity had been on fire. Nor can one imagine any thing eithergreater or more terrible than this noise; for there was atonce a shout of the Roman legions, who were marching alltogether, and a sad clamor of the seditious, who were nowsurrounded with fire and sword. The people also that wereleft above were beaten back upon the enemy, and under agreat consternation, and made sad moans at the calamitythey were under: the multitude also that was in the cityjoined in this outcry with those that were upon the hill: and,besides, many of those that were worn away by the famine,and their mouths almost closed, when they saw the fire ofthe holy house, they exerted their utmost strength, and brakeout into groans and outcries again: Perea1 did also return


1 This Perec, if the word be not mistaken in the copies, cannot well bethat Perea which was beyond Jordan, whose mountains were at a con­siderable distance from Jordan, and much too remote from Jerusalem tojoin this echo at the conflagration of the temple; but Perea must be rathersome mountains beyond the brook Cedron, as was the mount of Olives, orRome others, about such a distance from Jerusalem: which observation is soobvious, that it is a wonder our commentators here take no notice of it.







OCR Output








100 THE IDUMEANS [B. IV.


upon the actors: that the friends and kindred of those thathad been destroyed would always be laying plots against them;and that a large body of people were very angry on accountof their gross breaches of their laws and [illegal] judicatures,insomuch that although some part might commiserate them,those would be quite overborne by the majority."


CHAPTER IV.
THE IDUMEANS, BEING SENT FOR BY THE ZEALOTS, CAME IM­MEDIATELY TO JERUSALEM; AND WHEN THEY WERE EX­CLUDED OUT OF THE CITY, THEY LAY ALL NIGHT THERE.JESUS, ONE OF THE HIGH-PRIESTS, MAKES A SPEECH TOTHEM ; AND SIMON THE IDUMEAN MAKES A REPLY TO IT.
§ 1. Now by this crafty speech John made the zealotsafraid; yet durst he not directly name what foreign assistancehe meant, but in a covert way only intimated at the Idumeans.But now that he might particularly irritate the leaders of thezealots, he calumniated Ananus, that he was about a piece ofbarbarity, and did in a special manner threaten them. Theseleaders were Eleazar the son of Simon, who seemed the mostplausible man of them all, both in considering what was fit tobe done, and in the execution of what ho had determinedupon, and Zacharias the son of Phalek, both of whom derivedtheir families from the priests. Now when these two menhad heard not only the common threatenings which belongedto them all, but those peculiarly levelled against themselves,and, besides, how Ananus and his party, in order to securetheir own dominion, had invited the Romans to come to them,for that also was part of John's lie, they hesitated a greatwhile what they should do, considering the shortness of thetime by which they were straitened; because the people wereprepared to attack them very soon, and because the sudden-ness of the plot laid against them had almost cut off all theirhopes of getting any foreign assistance; for they might beunder the height of their afflictions before any of their con­federates could be informed of it. However, it was resolved







OCR Output








c. vn.] VESPASIAN. 31


water would in no long time be emptied, and that they wouldbe forced then to deliver up the city to him: but Josephusbeing minded to break such his hope, gave command that theyshould wet a great many of their clothes, and hang them aboutthe battlements, till the entire wall was of a sudden all wetwith the running down of the water. At this sight the Ro­mans were discouraged and under consternation, when theysaw them able to throw away in sport so much water, whenthey supposed them not to have enough to drink themselves.This made the Roman general despair of taking the city bytheir want of necessaries, and to betake himself again to arms,and to try to force them to surrender, which was what theJews greatly desired: for as they despaired of either them­selves or the city's being able to escape, they preferred a deathin battle before one by hunger and thirst.
14. However, Josephus contrived another stratagem besidesthe foregoing to get plenty of what they wanted. Therewas a certain rough and uneven place that could hardly beascended, and on that account was not guarded by the sol­diers : so Josephus sent out certain persons along the westernparts of the valley, and by them sent letters to whom hepleased of the Jews that were out of the city, and procuredfrom them what necessaries soever they wanted in the city inabundance: he enjoined them also to creep generally alongby the watch, as they came into the city, and to cover theirbacks with such sheep-skins as had their wool upon them, thatif any one should spy them out in the night-time, they mightbe believed to be dogs. This was done till the watch per­ceived the contrivance, and encompassed that rough placeabout themselves.
15. And now it was that Josephus perceived that the citycould not hold out long, and that his own life would be indoubt if he continued in it; so he consulted how he and themost potent men of the city might fly out of it. When themultitude understood this, they came all round about him,and begged of him " not to overlook them, while they entirelydepended on him, and him alone; for that there was stillhope of the city's deliverance if he would stay with them, be­







OCR Output








366 - FiAVins josEPnns [u. i.


those deserve to be esteemed, that undertake to contradictme about the true state of those affairs ? who, although theypretend to have made use of both the emperor's own memoirs,vet could not they be acquainted with our affairs who foughtagainst them.
11. This digression I have been obliged to make out ofnecessity, as being desirous to expose the vanity of those thatprofess to write histories; and I suppose I have sufficientlydeclared, that this custom of transmitting down the historiesof ancient times hath been better preserved by those nationswhich arc called barbarians, than by the Greeks themselves.I am now willing in the next place, to say a few things tothose that endeavor to prove that our constitution is but oflate time, for this reason, as they pretend, that the Greekwriters have said nothing about us; after which I shall pro­duce testimonies for our antiquity out of the writings offoreigners; I shall also demonstrate, that such as cast re­proaches upon our nation do it very unjustly.
12. As for ourselves, therefore, we neither inhabit a mari­time country, nor do we delight in merchandise, nor in sucha mixture with other men as arises from it; but the cities wedwell in are remote from the sea; and having a fruitful coun­try for our habitation, we take pains in cultivating that only.Our principal care of all is this, to educate our children well;and we think it to be the most necessary business of our wholelife to observe the laws that have been given us, and to keepthose rules of piety that have been delivered down to us.Since, therefore, besides what we have already taken noticeof, wc have had a peculiar way of living of our own, therewas no occasion offered us in ancient ages, for intermixingamong the Greeks, as they had for mixing among the Egyp­tians, by their intercourse of exporting and importing theirseveral goods; as they also mixed with the Phoenicians, wholived by the sea-side, by means of their love of lucre in tradeand merchandise. Nor did our forefathers betake themselves,as did some others, to robbery; nor did they in order to gainmore wealth, fall into foreign wars, although our countrycontained many ten thousands of men of courage sufficient







OCR Output








430 flaviusjosephus [b. ir.


ous, I have a mind to discourse briefly according to myability, about our whole constitution of government and aboutthe particular branches of it. For I suppose it will thencebecome evident, that the laws we have given us are disposedafter the best manner for the advancement of piety, formutual communion with one another, for a general love ofmankind, as also for justice, and for sustaining labors withfortitude, and for a contempt of death. And I beg of thosethat shall peruse this writing of mine to read it without par­tiality ; for it is not my purpose to write an encomium uponourselves, but I shall esteem this as a most just apology forus, and taken from those our laws, according to which welead our lives, against the many and the lying objections thathave been made against us. Moreover, since this Apolloniusdoes not do like Apion, and lay a continued accusationagainst us, but docs it only by starts, and up and down hisdiscourse, while he sometimes reproaches us as atheists andman-haters, and sometimes hits us in the teeth with our wantof courage, and yet sometimes, on the contrary, accuses usof too great boldness and madness in our conduct; nay, hesays that we are the weakest of all the barbarians ; and thatthis is the reason why we are the only people which havemade no improvements in human life. Now I think I shallhave then sufficiently disproved all these his allegations, whenit shall appear that our laws enjoin the very reverse of whathe says, and that we very carefully observe those laws our­selves. And if I be compelled to make mention of the lawsof other nations that are contrary to ours, those ought de­servedly to thank themselves for it, who have pretended todepreciate our laws in comparison of their own ; nor willthere, I think, be any room after that for them to pretendeither that we have no such laws ourselves, an epitome ofwhich I will present to the reader, or that we do not, aboveall men, continue in the observation of them.
16. To begin, then, a good way backward, I would advancothis in the first place, that those who have been admirers ofgood order, and of living under common laws, and who beganto introduce them, may well have this testimony, that they







OCR Output








282 SPEECH OF TITUS. [B. VI.


in my hands ? And do you still deem it a part of valor todie ? However, I will not imitate your madness. If you willthrow down your arms, and deliver up your bodies to me, Igrant you your lives; and I will act like a mild master of afamily; what cannot be healed shall be punished, and therest I will preserve for my own use."
3. To that offer of Titus they made this reply, that " theycould not accept of it, because they had sworn never to doso; but they desired they might have leave to go through thewall that had been made about them, with their wives andchildren; for that they would go into the desert, and leavethe city to him." At this Titus had great indignation, that,when they were in the case of men already taken captives,they should pretend to make their own terms with him, as ifthey had been conquerors. So he ordered this proclamationto be made to them, that " they should no more come out tohim as deserters, nor hope for any farther security; for thathe would henceforth spare nobody, but fight them with hiswhole army ; and that they must save themselves as well asthey could; for that he would from henceforth treat themaccording to the laws of war." So he gave orders to thesoldiers both to burn and to plunder the city, who did nothing,indeed, that day; but on the next day they set fire to thorepository of the archives, to Acra, to the council-house, andto the place called Ophlas ; at which time the fire proceededas far as the palace of Queen Helena, which was in themiddle of Acra: the lanes also were burnt down, as werealso those houses that were full of the dead bodies of suchas were destroyed by famine.
4. On the same day it was that the sons and brethren ofIzates the king, together with many others of the eminentmen of the populace, got together there, and besought Caesarto give them his right hand for their security : upon which,though he were very angry at all that were now remaining,yet did he not lay aside his old moderation, but received thesemen. At that time, indeed, he kept them all in custody, butstill bound the king's sons and kinsmen, and led them withhim to Rome, in order to make them hostages for their coun­try's fidelity to the Romans.







OCR Output








JOSEPHUS AGAINST APION.


EXTRACT
FROM
JOSEPHUS'S DISCOURSE
CONCERN ISO
HADES.


30 * (353)







OCR Output








C. III.] THE HIGH-PEIEST ANANUS. 97


less they could cut off the robbers that were in it. The zea­lots also thought that, unless they prevailed, there would beno punishment so bad but it would be inflicted on them. Sotheir conflicts were conducted by their passions, and at thefirst they only cast stones at each other in the city and beforethe temple, and threw their javelins at a distance ; but wheneither of them were too hard for the other, they made use oftheir swords; and great slaughter was made on both sides,and a great number were wounded. As for the dead bodiesof the people, their relations carried them out to their ownhouses; but when any of the zealots were wounded, he wentup into the temple, and defiled that sacred floor with his blood,insomuch that one may say it was their blood alone that pol­luted our sanctuary. Now, in these conflicts the robbersalways sallied out of the temple, and were too hard for theirenemies; but the populace grew very angry, and becamemore and more numerous, and reproached those that gaveback ; and those behind would not afford room to those thatwere going off, but forced them on again, till at length theymade their whole body to turn against their adversaries, andthe robbers could no longer oppose them, but were forcedgradually to retire into the temple: when Ananus' and hisparty fell into it at the same time together with them. Thishorribly affrighted the robbers, because it deprived them ofthe first court; so they fled into the inner court immediately,and shut the gates. Now Ananus did not think fit to makeany attack against the holy gates, although the other threwtheir stones and darts at them from above. He also deemedit unlawful to introduce the multitude into that court beforethey were purified; he therefore chose out of them all by lot
1 It is worth noticing here, that this Ananus, the best of the Jews at thistime, anil the high-priest, who was so very uneasy at the profanation of thoJewish courts of the temple by the zealots, did not, however, scruple the pro­fanation of the court of the Gentiles, as in our Savior's days it was very muchprofaned by the Jews, and made a market-place, nay, a den of thieves, with­out scruple. Matt. xxi. 12, 13; Mark xi. 15-17. Accordingly, Josephushimself, when he spcaks of the two inner courts, calls them both aym, or holyplaces, but, so far as I remember, he never gives that character of the courtof the Gentiles. See I!, v. ch. ix. sect. 2.
IV. — 9







OCR Output








C. VII.] VESPASIAN. 27


Josephus was then in fear for the city, and leaped out, andall the Jewish multitude with him: these fell together uponthe Romans in great numbers, and drove them away fromthe wall, and performed a great many glorious and bold ac­tions. Yet did they suffer as much as they made the enemysuffer ; for as despair of deliverance encouraged the Jews, sodid a sense of shame equally encourage the Romans. Theselast had skill as well as strength; the other had only courage,which armed them and made them fight furiously. Andwhen the fight had lasted all day, it was put an end to bythe coming on of the night. They had wounded a greatmany of the Romans, and killed of them thirteen men; of theJews' side seventeen were slain, and six hundred wounded.
6. On the next day the Jews made another attack uponthe Romans, and went out of the walls, and fought a muchmore desperate battle with them than before : for they werenow become more courageous than formerly, and that onaccount of the unexpected good opposition they had madethe day before; as they found the Romans also to fight moredesperately; for a sense of shame inflamed these into apassion, as esteeming their failure of a sudden victory to bea kind of defeat. Thus did the Romans try to make an im­pression upon the Jews, till the fifth day continually, whilethe people of Jotapata made sallies out, and fought at thewalls most desperately; nor were the Jews affrighted at thestrength of the enemy, nor were the Romans discouraged atthe difficulties they met with in taking the city.
7. Now Jotapata is almost all of it built on a precipice,having on all the other sides of it every way valleys im­mensely deep and steep, insomuch that those who would lookdown, would have their sight fail them before it reaches tothe bottom. It is only to be come at on the north side,where the utmost part of the city is built on the mountain,as it ends obliquely at a plain. This mountain Josephushad encompassed with a wall when he fortified the city, thatits top might not be capable of being seized upon by theenemies. The city is covered all round with other mountains,and can no way be seen till a man comes just upon it. Andthis w»« **"* -* -:*—*:«-, of Jotapata.







OCR Output








22 PLACIDU8. [B. III.


timorous souls,) saw that the warriors ran always to thosecities whose walls had been built by Josephus, he marchedfuriously against Jotapata, which was of them all thestrongest, as supposing he should easily take it by a suddensurprise, and that he should thereby obtain great honor tohimself among the commanders, and bring a great advantageto them in their future campaign ; because, if this strongestplace of them all were once taken, the rest would be soaffrighted as to surrender themselves. But he was mightilymistaken in his undertaking; for the men of Jotapata wereapprized of his coming to attack them, and came-out of thecity, and expected him there. So they fought the Romansbriskly when they least expected it, being both many innumber, and prepared for fighting, and of great alacrity, asesteeming their country, their wives, and their children to bein danger, and easily put the Romans to flight, and woundedmany of them, and slew seven' of them; because their re­treat was not made in a disorderly manner; because thestrokes only touched the surface of their bodies, which werecovered with their armor in all parts, and because the Jewsdid rather throw their weapons upon them from a great dis­tance, than venture to come hand to hand with them, andhad only light armor on while the others were completelyarmed. However, three men of the Jews' side were slain,and a few wounded; so Placidus, finding himself unable toassault the city, ran away.
2. But as Vespasian had a great mind to fall upon Galilee,he marched out of Ptolemais, having put his army into thatorder wherein the Romans used to march. He ordered those


1I cannot but here observe an eastern way of speaking, frequent amongthem, but not usual among us, where the word only or alone is not set down,but, perhaps, someway supplied by the pronunciation. Thus Josephus heresays, that those of Jotapata slew seven of the Romans, as they were march­ing off; because the Romans' retreat was regular, their bodies were coveredover with their armor, and the Jews fought at some distance: his meaningis clear, that these were the reasons why they slew only, or no more thanseven. I have met with many the like examples in the Scripture inJosephus, &c, but did not note down the particular places. This obser­vation ought to be borne in mind upon many occasions.







OCR Output








64 S I E 6 K 0 F T A K I C H E M. [c. III.


bo on greater motives than those of the Jews; for althoughthey run the hazard of war for liberty and for their country,yet what can be a greater motive to us than glory? and thatit may never be said, that after wo have got dominion of thehabitable earth, the Jews are able to confront us. We mustalso reflect upon this, that there is no fear of our sufferingany incurable disaster in the present case; for those that areready to assist us are many, and at hand also: yet is it inour power to seize upon this victory ourselves, and I think weought to prevent the coming of those my father is sending tous for our assistance, that our success may be peculiar toourselves, and of greater reputation to us. And I cannotbut think this an opportunity wherein my father, and I, andyou shall be all put to the trial, whether he be worthy of hisformer glorious performances, whether I be his son in reality,and whether you be really my soldiers; for it is usual for myfather to conquer; and for myself, I should not bear thethoughts of returning to him if I were once taken by theenemy. And how will you be able to avoid being ashamed,if you do not show equal courage with your commander,when he goes before you into danger ? for you know very wellthat I shall go into the danger first, and make the first attackupon the enemy. Do not you, therefore, desert me, but per­suade yourselves that God will be assisting to my onset.Know this also before we begin, that we shall now havebetter success than we should have, if we were to fight at adistance."
3. As Titus was saying this, an extraordinary fury fellupon the men; and as Trajan was already come before thefight began, with four hundred horsemen, they were uneasyat it, because the reputation of the victory would be dimin­ished by being common to so many. Vespasian had also sentboth Antonius and Silo, with two thousand archers, and hadgiven it them in charge to seize upon the mountain that wasover against the city, and repel those that were upon thewall; which archers did as they were commanded, and pre­vented those that attempted to assist them that way. Andnow Titus made his own horse march first against the enemy,







OCR Output








102 .. -t"he idumeans [b. iv.


to Ananus or -f&ilic guards, but the approach of the Idumeanswas known fo"liim ; for as he knew of it before they came, heordered .ths"gates to be shut against them, and that the wallsshould be';guardcd. Yet did not he by any means think offighting against them, but before they came to blows, to trywhat .persuasions would do. Accordingly Jesus, the eldestof";the high-priests next to Ananus, stood upon the towervrViat was over against them, and said thus :—"Many troubles,- indeed, and those of various kinds, have fallen upon this city,yet in none of them have I so much wondered at her fortuneas now, when you are come to assist wicked men, and thisafter a manner very extraordinary ; for I see that you arecome to support the vilest of men against us, and this withso great alacrity, as you could hardly put on the like in caseour metropolis had called you to her assistance against bar­barians. And if I had perceived that your army was com­posed of men like unto those who invited them, I had notdeemed your attempt so absurd: for nothing does so muchcement the minds of men together as the alliance there isbetween their manners. But now for these men who have in­vited you, if you were to examine them one by one, every oneof them would be found to have deserved ten thousand deaths;for the very rascality and offscouring of the whole country, whohave spent in debauchery their own substance, and by wayof trial beforehand have madly plundered the neighboringvillages and cities, in the upshot of all have privately runtogether into this holy city. They are robbers, who, by theirprodigious wickedness, have profaned this most sacred floor,and who arc to be now seen drinking themselves drunk inthe sanctuary, and expending the spoils of those whom theyhave slaughtered upon their insatiable bellies. As for themultitude that is with you, one may see them so decentlyadorned in their armor, as it would become them to be, had theirmetropolis called them to her assistance against foreigners.What can a man call this procedure of yours but the sportof fortune, when he sees a wholo nation coming to protect asink of wicked wretches ? I have for a good while been indoubt what it could possibly be that should move you to do







OCR Output








458 JOSEPflUS'S DISCOURSE ABOUT HADES.


all men from the dead; not procuring a transmigration ofsouls from one body to another, but raising again those verybodies which you Greeks, seeing to be dissolved, do notbelieve [their resurrection.] But learn not to disbelieve it;for while you believe that the soul is created, and yet is madeimmortal by God, according to the doctrine of Plato, andthis in time, be not incredulous; but believe that God is able>when he hath raised to life that body which was made as acompound of the same elements, to make it immortal; for itmust never be said of God, that he is able to do some thingsand unable to do others. We have, therefore, believed thatthe body will be raised again; for although it be dissolved,it is not perished; for the earth receives its remains, andpreserves them; and while they are like seed, and are mixedamong the more fruitful soil, they flourish ; and what is sownis, indeed, sown bare grain, but at the mighty sound of God,the Creator, it will sprout up, and be raised in a clothed andglorious condition, though not before it has been dissolvedand mixed [with the earth.] So that we have not rashlybelieved the resurrection of the body; for although it bedissolved for a time on account of the original transgression,it exists still, and is cast into the earth as into a potter'sfurnace, in order to be formed again, not in order to riseagain such as it was before, but in a state of purity, and soas never to be destroyed any more. And to every bodyshall its own soul be restored. And when it hath clotheditself with that body, it will not be subject to misery; butbeing itself pure, it will continue with its pure body, andrejoice with it; with which it having walked righteouslynow in this world, and never having had it as a snare, it willreceive it again with great gladness. But as for the unjust,they will receive their bodies not changed, not freed fromdiseases or distempers, nor made glorious, but with the samediseases wherein they died; and such as they were in theirunbelief, the same shall they be when they shall be faith­fully judged.
6. For all men, the just as well as the unjust, shall bobrought before God the Word; for to him hath the Father







OCR Output








C. VII.] THE TYRANNY OF JOHN. 121


est. These men, therefore, trampled upon all the laws ofmen, and laughed at the laws of God; and for the oracles ofthe prophets, they ridiculed them as the tricks of jugglers;yet did these prophets foretell many things concerning [therewards of] virtue and [punishments of] vice, which whenthese zealots violated, they occasioned the fulfilling of thosevery prophecies belonging to their own country : for there wasa certain ancient oracle of those men, that "the city shouldthen be taken, and the sanctuary burnt, by right of war,when a sedition should invade the Jews, and their own handsshould pollute the temple of God." ' Now while these zealotsdid not [quite] disbelieve these predictions, they made them­selves the instruments of their accomplishment.


CHAPTER VII.
HOW JOHN TYRANNIZED OVER THE REST; AND WHAT MIS­CHIEFS THE ZEALOTS DID AT MASADA. HOW ALSO VES­PASIAN TOOK GADARA ; AND WHAT ACTIONS WERE PER­FORMED BY PLACIDUS.
§ 1. By this time John was beginning to tyrannize, andthought it beneath him to accept of barely the same honorsthat others had; and joining to himself by degrees a partyof the wickedest of them all, he broke off from the rest of thefaction. This was brought about by his still disagreeing with
1 This prediction, that " the city [of Jerusalem] should then be taken, andthe sanctuary burnt, by right of war, when a sedition should invade theJews, and their own hands should pollute that temple:" or, as it is, B. vi.cb. ii. sect. 1,—" When any one shall begin to slay his countrymen in thecity,'' is wanting in our present copies of the Old Testament. See Essay onthe Old Test. p. 104-112. But this prediction, as Josephus well remarksheTe, though, with the other predictions of the prophets, it was now laughedat by the seditious, was by their very means soon exactly fulfilled. How­ever, I cannot but here take notice of Giotius's positive assertion upon Matt.xxvi. 9, here quoted by Dr. Hudson, that "it ought to be taken for granted,as a certain truth, that many predictions of the Jewish prophets were pre­served not in writing, but by memory." Whereas, it seems to me, so farfrom certain, that I think it has no evidence or probability at all.
IV. —11







OCR Output








C.III.] JEWS SLAIN BY TITUS. 301


to escape it, on account of their not being punished imme­diately.1 Simon was mado sensible of this by falling underthe indignation of the Romans. This rise of his out of theground did also occasion the discovery of a great number ofothers of the seditious at that time, who had hidden them­selves under ground. But for Simon, ho was brought to Ciesarin bonds, when he was come back to that Coesarea which wason the sea-side, who gave order that he should be kept againstthat triumph which he was to celebrate at Rome upon thisoccasion.
CHAPTER III.
HOW TITUS, UPON THE CELEBRATION OF niS BROTHER'S ANDFATHER'S BIRTH-DAYS, HAD MANY OF THE JEWS SLAIN. CON­CERNING THE DANGER TnE JEWS WERE IN AT AXTIOCH BYMEANS OF THE TRANGRESSION AND IMPIETY OF ONE ANTIO-
cnus A JEW.
§ 1. Whtle Titus was at Cresarea, he solemnized the birth­day of his brother [Domitian] after a splendid manner, andinflicted a great deal of the punishment intended for the Jewsin honor of him ; for the number of those that were now slainin fighting with the beasts, and were burnt, and fought withone another, exceeded two thousand five hundred. Yet didall this seem to the Romans, when they were thus destroyedten thousand several ways, to be a punishment beneath theirdeserts. After this, Caesar came to Berytus,2 which is a cityof Phoenicia, and a Roman colony, and stayed there a longertime, and exhibited a still more pompous solemnity about hisfather's birth-day, both in the magnificence of the shows, andin the other vast expenses he was at in his devices theretobelonging; so that a great multitude of the captives were heredestroyed after the same manner as before.


1 See Eccles. viii. 11.
' This Berytus was certainly a Roman colony, and has coins extant thatwitness the same, as Hudson and Spanheim inform us. See the noto onAntiq. B. in. oh. xi. sect. 1.
IV. —26







OCR Output








198 EVENTS OF THE SIEGE. [B. V.


and while both parties were throwing their darts at eachother, Longinus, one of the equestrian order, leaped out ofthe army of the Romans, and leaped into the very midst ofthe army of the Jews ; and as they dispersed themselves uponthis attack, he slew two of their men of the greatest courage;one of them he struck in his mouth, as he was coming to meethim ; the other was slain by him by that very dart which hedrew out of the body of the other, with which he ran thisman through his side, as he was running away from him;and when he had done this, he first of all ran out of themidst of his enemies to his own side. So this man signalizedhimself for his valor, and many there were who were am­bitious of gaining the like reputation. And now the Jewswere unconcerned at what they suffered themselves from theRomans, and were only solicitous about what mischief theycould do them ; and death itself seemed a small matter tothem, if at the same time they could but kill any one of theirenemies. But Titus took care to secure his own soldiers fromharm, as well as to have them overcome their enemies. Healso said, that inconsiderate violence Was madness, and thatthis alone was the true courage that was joined with goodconduct. He, therefore, commanded his men to take care,when they fought their enemies, that they received no harmfrom them at the same time, and thereby show themselves tobe truly valiant men.
4. And now Titus brought one of his engines to the middletower of the north part of the wall, in which a certain craftyJew, whoso name was Castor, lay in ambush, with ten otherslike himself, the rest being fled away by reason of the archers.These men lay still for a while, as in great fear, under theirbreast-plates; but when the tower was shaken, they arose,and Castor did then stretch out his hand, as a petitioner, andcalled for Caesar, and by his voice moved his compassion, andbegged of him to have mercy upon them; and Titus, in theinnocency of his heart, believing him to be in earnest, andhoping that the Jews did now repent, stopped the working ofthe battering-ram, and forbade them to shoot at the petition­ers, and bid Castor say what he had a mind to say to him.







OCR Output








0. I.J SIEGEOFGAMALA. 79


ascended on its north side; its top is a plain of twenty-sixfurlongs, and all encompassed with a wall. Now Josephuserected this so long a wall in forty days' time, and furnished:t with other materials, and with water from below ; for theinhabitants only made use of rain-water: as, therefore, therewas a great multitude of people gotten together upon thismountain, Vespasian sent Placidus with six hundred horsementhither. Now, as it was impossible for him to ascend themountain, he invited many of them to peace, by the offer ofhis right hand for their security, and of his intercession forthem. Accordingly they came down, but with a treacherousdesign, as well "as he had the like treacherous design uponthem on the other side; for Placidus spoke mildly to them, asaiming to take them when he got them into the plain; theyalso came down as complying with his proposals, but it was inorder to fall upon him when he was not aware of it: however,Placidus's stratagem was too hard for theirs; for when theJews began to fight, he pretended to run away, and when theywere in pursuit of the Romans, he enticed them a great wayalong the plain, and then made his horsemen turn back;whereupon he beat them, and slew a great number of them,and cut off the retreat of the rest of the multitude, and hin­dered their return. So they left Tabor, and fled to Jerusa­lem, while the people of the country came to terms with him,for their water failed them, and so they delivered up themountain and themselves to Placidus.
9. But of the people of Gamala those that were of thebolder sort fled away and hid themselves, while the more in­firm perished by famine; but the men of war sustained thesiege till the two and twentieth day of the month Hyperbe-reteus [Tisri,] when three soldiers of the fifteenth legion,about the morning watch, got under a high tower that was


stead of 26: since a mountain of only 3 furlongs perpendicular altitude mayeasily require near an hour's ascent, and the circumference of an oval of theforegoing quantity is near 6 furlongs. Nor certainly could such a vast cir­cumference ns 20 furlongs or 3 and a quarter miles, at that height, be en­compassed with a wall, including a trench and other fortifications, perhapsthose still remaining, ibid, in the small interval of 40 days, as Josephus hereeays they were by himself.


<







OCR Output








314 TRIUMPH OF THE ROMAN EMPERORS, [fi. VII.


or even four stories one above another. The magnificencealso of their structure afforded one both pleasure and surprise;for upon many of them were laid carpets of gold. There wasalso wrought gold and ivory fastened about them all, andmany resemblances of the war, and those in several ways,and variety of contrivances, affording a most lively portraitureof itself, for there was to be seen a happy country laid waste,and entire squadrons of enemies slain; while some of themran away, and some were carried into captivity, with wallsof great altitude and magnitude overthrown, and ruined bymachines, with the strongest fortifications taken, and thewalls of most populous cities upon the tops of hills seized on,and an army pouring itself within the walls; as also everyplace full of slaughter, and supplications of the enemies whenthey were no longer able to lift up their hands in way ofopposition. Fire also sent upon temples was here represented,and houses overthrown, and falling upon their owners: riversalso, after they came out of a large and melancholy desert,ran down, not into a land cultivated, nor as drink for men orfor cattle, but through a land still on fire upon every side;for the Jews related that such a thing they had undergoneduring this war. Now, the workmanship of these representa­tions was so magnificent and lively in the construction of thethings, that it exhibited what had been done to such as didnot see it, as if they had been there really present. On thetop of every one of these pageants, was placed the commanderof the city that was taken, and the manner wherein he wastaken. Moreover, there followed those pageants a greatnumber of ships ; and for the other spoils they were carriedin great plenty. But for those' that were taken in the


1 Seo the representations of these Jewish vessels, as they still stand onTitus's triumphal arch at Kome, in Reland's very curious book, de SpoliitTempli throughout. Rut what things are chiefly to be noted are these. —(1.) That Josephus says, the candlestick here carried in this triumph wasnot thoroughly like that which was used in the temple, which appears in thenumber of the little knops and flowers in that on the triumphal arch not wellagreeing with Moses' description, Exod. xxv. 31-36. (2) The smallness ofthe branches in Josephus, compared with the thickness of those on that







OCR Output








60 VESPASIAN. [B. III.


pedition against these cities, and that for the sake of Agrippa,and in order to bring his cities to reason. So ho sent awayhis son Titus to [the other] Caesarea, that he might bring thearmy that lay there to Scythopolis, which is the largest cityof Decapolis, and in the neighborhood of Tiberias, whither hecame, and where he waited for his son. He then came withthree legions, and pitehed his camp thirty furlongs off Tibe­rias, at a certain station easily seen by the innovators; it isnamed Sennabris. He also sent Valerian, a decurion, withfifty horsemen, to speak peaceably to those that were in thecity, and to exhort them to give him assurances of theirfidelity; for he had heard that the people were desirous ofpeace, but were obliged by some of the seditious part to joinwith them, and so were forced to fight for them. When Vale­rian had marched up to the place, and was near the wall, healighted off his horse, and made those that were with him dothe same, that they might not be thought to come to skirmishwith them ; but before they could come to discourse one withanother, the most potent men among the seditious made asally upon them armed; their leader was one whose namewas Jesus, the son of Saphat, the principal head of a bandof robbers. Now Valerian, neither thinking it safe to fightcontrary to the commands of the general, though he weresecure of a victory, and knowing that it was a very hazardousundertaking for a few to fight with many, for those that wereunprovided to fight those that were ready, and being on otheraccounts surprised at this unexpected onset of the Jews, heran away on foot, as did five of the rest in like manner, andleft their horses behind them; which horses Jesus led awayinto the city, and rejoiced as if they had taken them in battle,and not by treachery.
8. Now the seniors of the people, and such as wore ofprincipal authority among them, fearing what would be theissue of this matter, fled to the camp of the Romans: theythen took their king along with them, and fell down beforeVespasian, to supplicate his favor, and besought him not tooverlook them, nor to impute the madness of a few to th*whole city; to spare a people that have been ever civil and







OCR Output








B. II.] AGAINST APION. 407


BOOK II.
§ 1. In the former book, most honored Epaphrcditus, Ihave demonstrated our antiquity, and confirmed the truth ofwhat I have said from the writings of the Phoenicians, andChaldeans, and Egyptians. I have, moreover, producedmany of the Grecian writers as witnesses thereto. I havealso made a refutation of Manetho and Cheremon, and ofcertain others of our enemies. I shall now,1 therefore, begina confutation of the remaining authors who have written anything against us; although I confess I have had a doubt upon *me about Apion2 the grammarian, whether I ought to takethe trouble of confuting him or not; for some of his writingscontain much the same accusations which the others havelaid against us; some things that he hath added are veryfrigid and contemptible; and for the greatest part of whathe says, it is very scurrilous, and to speak no more than theplain truth, it shows him to be a very unlearned person; andwhat he lays together looks like the work of a man of verybad morals, and of one no better in his whole life than amountebank. Yet because there are a great many men sovery foolish, that they arc rather caught by such orationsthan by what is written with care, and take pleasure in re­proaching other men, and cannot abide to hear them com­mended, I thought it to be necessary not to let this man gooff without examination, who had written such an accusationagainst us, as if ho would bring us to make an answer inopen court: for I also have observed, that many men arevery much delighted, when they see a man who first beganto reproach another, to be himself exposed to contempt onaccount of the vices he hath himself been guilty of. How-


1 The former part of this second book is written against the calumnies ofApion, Mid then, more briefly, against the like calumnies of ApolloniusMolo. But after that, Josephus leaves off any more particular reply tothose adversaries of the Jews, and gives us a large and excellent descriptionand vindication of that theocracy which was settled for the Jewish nation,by Moses, their great legislator.
8 Called by Tiberius, Cymbalum Mundi, The drum of the world.







OCR Output








192 TITUS PRESSES THE SIEGE. [B. V.


stood off, and threw themselves down upon the ground; bywhich means, and by their thus guarding themselves, the stonefell down, and did them no harm. But the Romans contrivedhow to prevent that by blacking the stone, who then couldaim at them with success, when the stone was not discernedbeforehand, as it had been till then; and so they destroyedmany of them at one blow. Yet did not the Jews, under allthis distress, permit the Romans to raise their banks in quiet;but they shrewdly and boldly exerted themselves, and repelledthem both by night and by day.
4. And now, upon the finishing the Roman works, the work­men measured the distance there was from the wall, and thisby lead and line, which they threw to it from their banks;for they could not measure it any otherwise, because the Jewswould shoot at them, if they came to measure it themselves;and when they found that the engines could reach the wall,they brought them thither. Then did Titus set his engines atproper distances, so much nearer to the wall, that the Jewsmight not be able to repel them, and gave orders they shouldgo to work: and when thereupon a prodigious noise echoedround about from three places, and that, on the sudden, therewas a great noise made by the citizens that were within thecity, and no less a terror fell upon the seditious themselves;whereupon both sorts, seeing the common danger they werein, contrived to make a like defence. So those of differentfactions cried out one to another, that they acted entirely asin concert with their enemies; whereas they ought, however,notwithstanding God did not grant them a lasting concord,in their present circumstances to lay aside their enmities oneagainst another, and to unite together against the Romans.Accordingly, Simon gave those that came from the temple


hut a very small degree of probability. If I were to make an emendation,by mere conjecture, I would read nETPOi- instead of YIOS, though the like­ness be not so great as in IOE; because that is the word used by Josephusjust before, as I have already noted, on this very occasion, while IOs, anarrow or dart, is only a poetical word, and never used by Josephus elsewhere,and is, indeed, no way suitable to the occasion, this engine not throwingarrows or darts, but great stones, nt this time.







OCR Output








IV CONTENTS OF VOL. IV.


FLAVIUS JOSEPHUS AGAINST APION 353
AN EXTRACT OUT OF JOSEPHUS'S DISCOURSE TO
THE GREEKS CONCERNING HADES 456


APPENDIX.
DISSERTATION I.
THE TESTIMONIES OP JOSEPHUS CONCERNING JESUS CHRIST,
JOHN THE BAPTIST, AND JAMES THE JUST, VINDICATED .... 465
DISSERTATION II.
Concerning qod's command to Abraham to offer up
isaac, nis son, for a sacrifice 491
DISSERTATION III.
TACITUS'S ACCOUNTS OF THE ORIGIN OF THE JEWISH NATION,
AND OP THE PARTICULARS OF TnE LAST JEWISH WAR;
THAT TnE FORMER WAS PROBABLY WRITTEN IN OPPOSI­
TION TO JOSEPnUS's ANTIQUITIES, AND THAT THE LATTER
WAS FOR CERTAIN ALMOST ALL DIRECTLY TAKEN FROM
JOSEPHUS'S HISTORY OF THE JEWISH WAR 508
TABLE OF THE JEWISH WEIGHTS AND MEA­
SURES, PARTICULARLY OF THOSE MENTIONED
IN JOSEPHUS'S WORKS 538
TABLE OF TnE JEWISH MONTHS, IN JOSEPHUS
AND OTHER AUTHORS 538
INDEX 539







OCR Output








B. I.] AGAINST APIOK. - 365


escaped my knowledge; for what happened in the Romancamp I saw and wrote down carefully; and what informationthe deserters brought [out of the city,] I was the only manthat understood them. Afterward I got leisure at Rome;and when all my materials were prepared for that work, Imade use of some persons to assist me in learning the Greektongue, and by these means I composed the history of thosetransactions. And I was so well assured of the truth of whatI related, that I first of all appealed to those that had thesupreme command in that war, Vespasian and Titus, as wit­nesses for me; for to them I presented those books first ofall, and after them to many of the Romans who had been inthe war. I also sold them to many of our own men who un­derstood the Greek philosophy; among whom were JuliusArchelaus; Herod [king of Chaleis,] a person of great gra­vity, and king Agrippa himself, a person that deserved thegreatest admiration. Now all these men bore their testimonyto me, that I had the strictest regard to truth ; who yet wouldnot have dissembled the matter, nor been silent, if I, out ofignorance, or out of favor to any side, either had given falsecolors to actions or omitted any of them.
10. There have been, indeed, some bad men who have at­tempted to calumniate my history, and took it to be a kindof scholastic performance for the exercise of young men. Astrange sort of accusation and calumny this ! since every onethat undertakes to deliver the history of actions truly, oughtto know them accurately himself in the first place, as eitherhaving been concerned in them himself, or been informed ofthem by such as knew them. Now, both these methods ofknowledge I may very properly pretend to in the compositionof both my works; for, as I said, I have translated the Anti­quities out of our sacred books, which I easily could do, sinceI was a priest by my birth, and have studied that philosophywhich is contained in those writings; and for the History ofthe War, I wrote it as having been an actor myself in manyof its transactions, an eye-witness in the greatest part of therest, and was not unacquainted with any thing whatsoeverthat was either said or done in it. How impudent, then, must


31*







OCR Output








C. VIII.] THE SECOND WALL. 201


people, he had them of a long time ready to comply with hisproposals; but as to the fighting-men, this humanity of hisseemed a mark of his weakness, and they imagined that hemade these proposals because he was not able to take the restof the city. They also threatened death to the people, if theyshould any one of them say a word about a surrender. They,moreover, cut the throats of such as talked of a peace, andthen attacked those Romans that were come within the wall.Some of them they met in the narrow streets, and some theyfought against from their houses, when they made a suddensally out at the upper gates, and assaulted such Romans aswere beyond the wall, till those that guarded the wall were soaffrighted that they leaped down from their towers, and re­tired to their several camps: upon which a great noise wasmade by the Romans that were within, because they were en­compassed round on every side by their enemies, as also bythem that were without, because they were in fear for thosothat were left in the city. Thus did the Jews grow more nu­merous perpetually, and had great advantages over the Ro­mans by their full knowledge of those narrow lanes; and theywounded a great many of them, and fell upon them, and drovethem out of the city. Now these Romans were at presentforced to make the best resistance they could, for they werenot able, in great numbers, to get out at the breach in thowall, it was so narrow. It is also probable that all those thatwere gotten within had been cut to pieces, if Titus had notsent them succors, for he ordered the archers to stand at theupper ends of these narrower lanes, and ho stood himselfwhere was the greatest multitude of his enemies, and with hisdarts he put a stop to them, as with him did Domitius Sabinusalso, a valiant man, and one that in this battle appeared soto be. Thus did Caesar continue to shoot darts at the Jewscontinually, and to hinder them from coming upon his men,and this until all his soldiers had retreated out of the city.
2. And thus were the Romans driven out, after they hadpossessed themselves of the second wall: whereupon the fight­ing-men that were in the city wore lifted up in their minds,and wero elevated upon this their good success, and began to







OCR Output








62 SIEfiE OF TARICnE^!. [b. III.


eheae, as relying upon the strength of the city, and on tholake that lay by it. This lake is called by the people of thecountry the lake of Grennesareth. The city itself is situated,like Tiberias, at the bottom of a mountain; and on thosesides which are not washed by the sea had been stronglyfortified by Josephus, though not so strongly as Tiberias;for the wall of Tiberias had been built at the beginning ofthe Jews' revolt, when he had great plenty of money, andgreat power, but Taricheae partook only the remains of thatliberality. Yet had they a great number of ships gottenready upon the lake, that, in case they were beaten at land,they might retire to them ; and they were so fitted up, thatthey might undertake a sea-fight also. But as the Romanswere building a wall about their camp, Jesus and his partywere neither affrighted at their number, nor at the good orderthey were in, but made a sally upon them; and at the veryfirst onset the builders of the wall were dispersed, and thesepulled what little they had before built to pieces ; but as soonas they saw the armed men getting together, and before theyhad suffered any thing themselves, they retired to their ownmen. But then the Romans pursued them, and drove theminto their ships, where they launched out as far as might givethem the opportunity of reaching the Romans with what theythrew at them, and then cast anchor, and brought their shipsclose, as in a line of battle, and thence fought the enemy fromthe sea, who were themselves at land. But Vesrjasian hear­ing that a great multitude of them were gotten together inthe plain that was before the city, he thereupon stnt his son,with six hundred chosen horsemen, to disperse them.
2. But when Titus perceived that the enemy was very nu­merous, ho sent to his father, and informed him that he shouldwant more forces. But as ho saw a great many of the horse­men eager to fight, and that before any succors could cometo them, and that yet some of them were privately under asort of consternation at the multitude of the Jews, he stoodin a place whence he might be heard, and said to them, —" My brave Romans ! for it is right for me to put you in mindof what nation you are, in the beginning of my speech, that







OCR Output








C. Vm.J TO FINISH THE WAR. 129


strong-holds all about Idumoa; and when ho had seized upontwo villages which were in the very midst of Idumea, Betarisand Capartobas, ho slew above ten thousand of the people,and carried into captivity above a thousand, and drove awaythe rest of the multitude, and placed no small part of hisown forces in them, who overran and laid waste the wholemountainous country ; while he, with the rest of his forces,returned to Emmaus, whence he came down through thecountry of Samaria, and hard by the city, by others calledNcapolis (or Sichem,) but by the people of that countryMabortha, or Corea, where he pitched his camp, on the se­cond day of the month Desius [Sivan;] and on the day fol­lowing he came to Jericho; on which day Trajan, one of hiscommanders, joined him with the forces he brought out ofPerca, all the places beyond Jordan being subdued already.
2. Hereupon a great multitude prevented their approach,and came out of Jericho, and fled to those mountainous partsthat lay over against Jerusalem, while that part which wasleft behind was in a great measure destroyed; they also foundthe city desolate. It is situated in a plain; but a naked andbarren mountain, of a very great length, hangs over it, whichextends itself to the land about Scythopolis northward, butas far as the country of Sodom and the utmost limits of thelake Asphaltitis southward. This mountain is all of it veryuneven, and uninhabited by reason of its barrenness: thereis an opposite mountain that is situated over against it onthe other side of Jordan ; this last begins at Julias and thenorthern quarters, and extends itself southward as far asSomorrhon,1 which is the bounds of Petra in Arabia. Inthls ridge of mountains there is one called the Iron Moun­tain, that runs in length as far as Moab. Now the regionthat lies in the middle between these ridges of mountains iscalled the Great Plain ; it reaches from the village Ginnabris


1 Whether tins Somorrhon or Somorrah ought not to bo hero written Go­morrah, as some MSS. in a manner have it (for the place meant by Josophusseems to be near Segor or Zoar, at the very south of the Dead Sea, hard bywhich stood Sodom and Gomorrah,) cannot now be certainly determined,but seems by no means improbable.







OCR Output








DISSERTATION III. 515


are put to death for their crimes, as eternal. Hence comestheir love of posterity and contempt of death.
They derive their custom of hurying, instead of burning,their dead, from the Egyptians:' they have also the samecare of the dead with them, and the same persuasion aboutthe invisible world below: but of the gods above, their opinionis contrary to theirs. The Egyptians worship abundance ofanimals, and images of various sorts.
The Jews have no notion of any more than one divinebeing,2 and that known only by the mind. They esteem suchto bo profane who frame images of gods, out of perishablematter, and in the shape of men. That this being is supremeand eternal, immutable and unperishable, is their doctrine.Accordingly, they have no images in their cities, much lessin their temples: they never grant this piece of flattery tokings, or this kind of honor to emperors.3 But because theirpriests, when they play on the pipe and the timbrels, wearivy round their head, and a golden vine' has been found intheir temple, some have thought that they worshipped ourfather Bacchus, the conqueror of the East; whereas the cere­monies of the Jews do not at all agree with those of Bacchus;for he appointed rites that were of a jovial nature, and fit forfestival?, while the practices of the Jews are absurd andsordid.
Chap. VI.] The limits of Judea easterly are bounded byArabia: Egypt lies on the south: on the west are Phoenicia


1 This custom is at least as old among the Hebrews as the dnys of Abra­ham, and the cave of Muchpelab, long before the Israelites went into Egypt.Gen. xxiii. 1-20: xxv. 8-10.
2 These are valuable concessions, which Tacitus here makes, as to the un­spotted piety of the Jewish nation, in the worship of one infinite, invisibleGod, and absolute rejection of all idolatry, and of all worship of images,nay, of the image of the emperor Caius himself, or of affording it a place intheir temple.
' All these concessions were to be learned from Josephus, and almost onlyfrom him; out of whom, therefore, I conclude Tacitus took the finest partof his character of the Jews.
* This particular fact, that there was a golden vine in the front of theJewish temple, was in all probability taken by Tacitus out of Josephus: butas the Jewish priests were never adorned with ivy, the signal of Bacchus,how Tacitus came to imagine this, I cannot tell.







OCR Output








246 A BRA VB ROMAN. [D. VI.


it was not possible that he, who was but a mortal man, shouldescape ; for as he had shoes' all full of thick and sharp nails,as had every one of the other soldiers, so when he ran on thepavement of the temple, he slipped, and fell down upon his backwith a very great noise, which was made by his armor. Thismade those that were running away to turn back ; whereuponthose Romans that were in the tower of Antonia set up agreat shout, as they were in fear for the man. But the Jewsgot about him in crowds, and struck at him with their spearsand with their swords on all sides. Now he received a greatmany of the strokes of these iron weapons upon his shield,and often attempted to get up again, but was thrown downby those that struck at him j yet did he, as he lay along,stab many of them with his sword. Nor was he soon killed,as being covered with his helmet and his breast-plate in thoseparts of his body where he might be mortally wounded: healso pulled his neck close to his body till all his other limbswere shattered, and nobody durst come to defend him, andthen he yielded to his fate. Now Caesar was deeply affectedon account of this man of so great fortitude, and especiallyas he was killed in the sight of so many people ; he was de­sirous himself to come to his assistance, but the place wouldnot give him leave, while such as could have done it were toomuch terrified to attempt it. Thus, when Julian had strug­gled with death a great while, and had let but few of thosethat had given him his mortal wound go off unhurt, he hadat last his throat cut, though not without some difficulty, andleft behind him a very great fame, not only among the Ro­mans and with Caesar himself, but among his enemies also ;then did the Jews catch up his dead body, and put the Ro­mans to flight again, and shut them up in the tower of An­tonia. Now those that most signalized themselves, and foughtmost zealously in this battle of the Jewish side, were oneAlexis and Gyphtheus of John's party, and of Simon's party


1 No wonder that this Julian, who had so many nails in his shoes, slippedupon the pavement of the temple, which was smooth, and laid with marbleof different colors.







OCR Output








B. II.] AGAINST APION. 409


avoided all such needless decorations as Apion hath here de­vised. He says farther, — "How he had heard of the ancientmen, that Moses was of Heliopolis." To be sure that wasbecause being a younger man himself, he believed those thatby their elder age were acquainted and conversed with him !Now this grammarian as he was could not certainly tellwhich was the poet Homer's country, no more than he couldwhich was the country of Pythagoras, who lived comparativelybut a little while ago; yet does he thus easily determine theage of Moses, who preceded them such a vast number ofyears, as depending on his ancient men's relation, which showshow notorious a liar he was. But then as to this chronologicaldetermination of the time when he says he brought the leprouspeople, the blind and the lame out of Egypt, see how well thismost accurate grammarian of ours agrees with those thathave written before him. Manetho says, that the Jews de­parted out of Egypt in the reign of Tethmosis, three hundredand ninety-three years before Danaus fled to Argos; Lysi-machus says it was under king Bocchoris, that is, one thousandseven hundred years ago; Molo and some others determinedit as every one pleased ; but this Apion of ours, 33 deservingto be believed before them, hath determined it exactly to havebeen in the seventh Olympiad, and the first year of thatOlympiad; the very same year in which he says that Carthagewas built by the Phoenicians. The reason why he added thisbuilding of Carthage was, to bo sure, in order, as ho thought,to strengthen his assertion by so evident a character of chro­nology. But he was not aware that this character confuteshis assertion; for if we may give credit to the Phoenicianrecords as the time of the first coming of their colony toCarthage, they relate, that Hirom their king was above ahundred and fifty years earlier than the building of Carthage,concerning whom I have formerly produced testimonials outof those Phoenician records; as also that this Hirom was afriend of Solomon when he was building the temple at Jeru­salem, and gave him great assistance in his building thattemple; while still Solomon himself built that temple sixhundred and twelve years after the Jews came out of Egypt.IV. —35







OCR Output








C. XI.] JONATHAN. 349


tions there, and threatened the priests severely if they didnot bring them all out; nor did he permit any who were de­sirous of worshipping God there so much as to come near thewhole sacred place. But when he had shut up the gates, hemade it entirely inaccessible, insomuch that there remainedno longer the least footsteps of any divine worship that hadbeen in that place. Now the duration of the time from thebuilding of this temple till it was shut up again was threohundred and forty-three years.
CHAPTER XI.
CONCERNING JONATHAN, ONE OF THE SICARII, THAT STIRREDUP A SEDITION IN CYPRESS, AND WAS A FALSE ACCUSER [OFTHE INNOCENT.]
§ 1. And now did the madness of the Sicarii, like a dis­ease, reach as far as the cities of Cyrene; for one Jonathan,a vile person, and by trade a weaver, came thither, and pre­vailed with no small number of the poorer sort to give ear tohim: he also led them into the desert, upon promising themthat he would show them signs and apparitions. And as forthe other Jews of Cyrene, he concealed his knavery fromthem, and put tricks upon them; but those of the greatestdignity among them informed Catullus, the governor of theLibyan Pentapolis, of his march into the deserts, and of thepreparations he had made for it. So he sent out after himboth horsemen and footmen, and easily overcame them, be­cause they were unarmed men ; of these many were slam inthe fight, but some were taken alive and brought to Catullus.As for Jonathan, the head of this plot, he fled away at thattime; but upon a great and very diligent search which wasmade all the country over for him, he was at last taken. Andwhen he was brought to Catullus, ho devised a way wherebyhe both escaped punishment himself, and afforded an occasionto Catullus of doing much mischief; for he falsely accusedthe richest men among the Jews, and said that they had puthim upon what he did,TV. — 30







OCR Output








C. IX.] SIMON AND JOHN. 293


two hundred fifty-six thousand and five hundred, which, uponthe allowance of no more than ten that feast togother,amounts to two millions seven hundred thousand and twohundred persons that were pure and holy; for as to thosethat have the leprosy or the gonorrhoea, or women that havetheir monthly courses, or such as are otherwise polluted, it isnot lawful for them to be partakers of this sacrifice; nor,indeed, for any foreigners neither, who come hither to worship.4. Now this vast multitude is, indeed, collected out ofremote places; but the entire nation was now shut up byfate, as in a prison, and the Roman army encompassed thecity when it was crowded with inhabitants. Accordingly,the multitude of those that therein perished exceeded all thedestructions that either men or God ever brought upon theworld: for to speak only of what was publicly known, theRomans slew some of them, some they carried captives, andothers they made a search for under ground, and when theyfound where they were, they broke up the ground, and slewall they met with. There were also found slain there abovetwo thousand persons, partly by their own hands and partlyby one another, but chiefly destroyed by the famine : but thenthe ill-savor of the dead bodies was most offensive to thosethat lighted upon them, insomuch that some were obliged toget away immediately, while others were so greedy of gain,that they would go in among the dead bodies that lay onheaps, and tread upon them ; for a great deal of treasurewas found in these caverns, and the hope of gain made everyway of getting it to be esteemed lawful. Many also of thosethat had been put in prison by the tyrants were now broughtout; for they did not leave off their barbarous cruelty at thevery last: yet did God avenge himself upon them both, in amanner agreeable to justice. As for John, he wanted food,together with his brethren, in these caverns, and begged thatthe Romans would now give him their right hand for hissecurity, which he had often proudly rejected before ; but forSimon, he struggled hard with the distress he was in, till hewas forced to surrender himself, as we shall relate hereafter;


25*







OCR Output








150 AFFAIRS AT ROME. [B. IV.


whereupon the commanders promised themselves gloriousthings from this requital Vespasian made to a stranger.Titus was then present with his father, and said,—" O father,it is but just that the scandal [of a prisoner] should be takenoff Josephus together with his iron chain: for if we do notbarely loose his bonds, but cut them to pieces, he will be likea man that hath never been bound at all:" for that is theusual method as to such as have been bound without a cause.This advice was agreed to by Vespasian also; so there camea man in, and cut the chain to pieces, while Josephus re­ceived this testimony of his integrity for a reward, and wasmoreover esteemed a person of credit as to futurities also.


CHAPTER XI.
TIIAT LTON THE CONQUEST AND SLAUGHTER OF VITELLIUS,VESPASIAN HASTENED HIS JOURNEY TO ROME, BUT TITUSHIS SON RETURNED TO JERUSALEM.
§ 1. And now when Vespasian had given answers to thoembassages, and had disposed of tho places of power1 justly,and according to every one's deserts, he came to Antioch,and consulting which way he had best take, he preferred togo to Rome, rather than to march to Alexandria, because hesaw that Alexandria was sure to him already, but that theaffairs at Rome were put in disorder by Vitellius; so he sentMucianus to Italy, and committed a considerable army bothof horsemen and footmen to him ; yet was Mucianus afraidof going by sea, because it was the middle of winter, and sohe led his army on foot through Cappadocia and Phrygia.
2. In the mean time Antonius Primus took the third of thelegions that were in Mysia, for he was president of that pro­


1 This is well observed by Josephus, that Vespasian, in order to secure hissuccess, and establish his government at first, distributed his offices andplaces upon the foot of justice, nnd bestowed them on such as best deservedthem, nnd were best fit for them. Which wise conduct in a mere heathenought to put those rulers nnd ministers of state to shame, who, professingChristianity, act otherwise, and expose themselves nnd their kingdoms tovice and to destruction.







OCR Output








502 INDEX.


Phasaelus, son of Antipatcr, ii. 429;iii. 346; his death, ii. 470; iii.305.Phasaelus, son of Hero d, iii. 76.
Pheroras, ii. 429; iii. 340; hatesSalome's children, 39; makes Alex­ander jealous of his wife Glaphyra,40; provokes Herod to anger, ib.,4'J; lays the blamo upon Salome,41; enters into friendship withAntipater, 77; hated by Herod, 79;ordered to retire to his tetrarchy,81.
Pheroras's wife pays the fine laid uponthe Pharisees, iii. 78; associateswith the other court ladies, 77;charged with getting poison, 82;her confession, 84.
Philip, Herod's son by Cleopatra, iii.75, 428; brother of Archelaus, 408;what Herod left him by his will,105; what Cojsar gave him, 128;tetrarch of G aulanitis and Tracho-nitis, and Paneas, 105; he dies,155; his eulogium, 150.
Philip, a Galilean, iv. 30.
Philip made regent of Syria duringEupator's minority, ii. 310.
Philip, king of Syria, ii. 394, 398.
Philip of Macedon slain, ii. 251.
Philippion marries Alexandra, and iskilled by his father, ii. 430; iii.347.
Philo, chief deputy of the Jews to(Jains, iii. 182.
Philostephauus, ii. 390.
Phincas, son of Clusothus, iv. 101.
Phineas, son of Eleazar, slays Zimriand Cosbi, i. 290; leads the Israe­lites against the Midianites, 291; hisspeech to the Jews, 343 ; is madehigh-priest, 345; the high-priest­hood returns to his family, ii. 7.
Phincas, son of Eli, i. 384; high-priest, 387; is slain, ib.
Phraates, king of the Parthians, ii.494; his death, iii. 143.
Phraataces, son of Phraates, iii. 143.
Phul, or l'ul, king, ii. 130.
Phurim, a festival, ii. 249.
Phut, the planter of Libya, i. 94.
Pilate (Pontius.) occasions tumultsamong the Jews, iii. 146; causes agreat slaughter of them, 482 ; andof the Samaritans, 152; is accusedfor it and sent to Home, ib.


Pillars erected by the children ofSeth, i. 83; Corinthian pillars inSolomon's palace, ii. 32; in Herod'stemple, iv. 180.
Piso, governor of Rome, iii. 100.
Pitholaus, ii. 423, 429; iii. 346.
Placidus skirmishes with Josephus. i.45, 09; his other actions, iv. 21,22, 46, 79, et seq.
Plague among the Israelites, i. 531,532.
Polemo, king of Cilicia, iii. 285.
Polemo, king of Pontus, iii. 250.
Polity of the Jews after the captivity,ii. 219.
Pollio, a Pharisee, ii. 491, 555.
Pompedius, iii. 208.
Pompey the Great goes to Damascus,ii. 414; iii. 336; to Jerusalem, ii.418; iii. 338; the city deliveredup to him, ii. 418; takes the tem­ple by force. 420; iii. 340; theJews send him a golden vine, ii.414; goes into the holy of holies,ii. 421; iii. 340; meddles withnothing in the temple, ii. 421;hears the cause between Hyrcanusand Aristobulus, 415; determinesit in favor of Hyrcanus, and makeswar upon Aristobulus, 416; fliesinto Epirus, 430.
Poppea favors the Jews, iii. 294.
Porcius Festus. See Festus.
Presents sent to Joseph, i. 150.
Priests, if maimed, are excluded fromthe altar and temple, i. 252; iv.401; not to marry several sorts ofwomen, i. 302, 252; washed theirhands and feet before they minis­tered, i. 223 ; succeed one anotheraccording to their courses, iv. 423;their allowances, i. 243, st seq.;274; their courses twenty-four,638; very numerous, iv. 423; twofamilies from Aaron's two sons, i.388; their offices and employments,iv. 423, 437; their sacred garments,i. 228; iv. 185; priests and Levi tesexempted from taxes by Xerxes, ii.222; none but priests of the pos­terity of Aaron might buru incenseat the temple, ii. 134; not to drinkwine in their sacred garments, i.252 ; priesthood a mark of nobilityamong the Jews, 17.High-priest not to be the son of a







OCR Output








0. I.] SIEGE OF GAM ALA. 73


into Great Jordan. Now Agrippa had united Sogana andSeleucia by leagues to himself at the very beginning of therevolt from the Romans ; yet did not Gamala accede to them,but relied upon the difficulty of the place, which was greaterthan that of Jotapata; for it was situated upon a rough ridgeof a high mountain, with a kind of neck in the middle; whereit begins to ascend it lengthens itself, and declines as muchdownward before as behind, insomuch that it is like a camelin figure, from whence it is so named, although the people ofthe country do not pronounce it accurately : both on the sideand the face there are abrupt parts divided from the rest, andending in vast deep valleys; yet are the parts behind, wherethey are joined to the mountain, somewhat easier of ascentthan the other; but then the people belonging to the placehave cut an oblique ditch there, and made that hard to beascended also. On its acclivity, which is straight, houses arebuilt, and those very thick and close to one another. Thecity also hangs so strangely, that it looks as if it would falldown upon itself, so sharp is it at the top. It is exposed tothe south, and its southern mount, which reaches to an im­mense height, was in the nature of a citadel to the city; andabove that was a precipice, not walled about, but extendingto an immense depth. There was also a spring of waterwithin the wall, at the utmost limits of the city.
2. As this city was naturally hard to be taken, so had Jo-sephus, by building a wall about it, made it still stronger, asalso by ditches and mines underground. The people thatwere in it were made more bold by the nature of the placethan the people of Jotapata had been, but it had much fewerfighting-men in it; and they had such a confidence in thesituation of the place, that they thought the enemy could notbe too many for them ; for the city had been filled with thosethat had fled to it for safety on account of its strength; onwhich account they had been able to resist those whomAgrippa sent to besiege it for seven months together.
3. But Vespasian removed from Emmaus, where he hadlast pitched his camp before the city Tiberias (now Emmaus,if it be interpreted, may be rendered A warm bath, for therein
IV. —7







OCR Output








142 SIMON 01 GEEASA. [B. IV.


against him; and all the Idumeans separated themselves fromthe tyrant, and attempted to destroy him, and this out oftheir envy at his power and hatred of his cruelty ; so theygot together, and slew many of the zealots, and drove therest before them into that royal palace that was built byGrapte, who was a relation of Izates, the king of Adiabene:the Idumeans fell in with them, and drove the zealots outthence into the temple, and betook themselves to plunderJohn's effects; for both he himself was in that palace, andtherein he had laid up the spoils he had acquired by histyrants. In the mean time the multitude of those zealotsthat were dispersed over the city ran together to the temple,unto those that had fled thither: and John prepared to bringthem down against the people and the Idumeans, who werenot so much afraid of being attacked by them, because theywere themselves better soldiers than they, as at their mad­ness, lest they should privately sally out of the temple, andget among them, and not only destroy them, but set the cityon fire also. So they assembled themselves together, andthe high-priests with them, and took counsel after what man­ner they should avoid their assault. Now it was God whoturned their opinions to the worst advice, and thence theydevised such a remedy to get themselves free as was worsethan the disease itself. Accordingly, in order to overthrowJohn, they determined to admit Simon, and earnestly to desirethe introduction of a second tyrant into the city; which reso­lution they brought to perfection, and sent Matthias, the high-priest, to beseech this Simon to come into them, of whomthey had so often been afraid. Those also that had fled fromthe zealots in Jerusalem joined in this request to him, out ofthe desire they had of preserving their houses and theireffects. Accordingly, he, in an arrogant manner, grantedthem his lordly protection, and came into the city in order todeliver it from the zealots. The people also made joyful ac­clamations to him, as their savior and their preserver: butwhen he was come in with his army, he took care to securehis own authority, and looked upon those that had invitedhim in to be no less his enemies than those against whom theinvitation was intended.







OCR Output








C. I.] THE TOWER OP ANTONIA. 243


head with his left hand, and had with his right hand drawnhis sword, he marched up to the wall, just about the sixthhour of the day. There followed him eleven others, and nomore, that resolved to imitate his bravery; but still this wasthe principal person of them all, and went first, as excited bya divine fury. Now those that guarded the wall shot at themfrom thence, and cast innumerable darts upon them fromevery side; they also rolled very large stones upon them,which overthrew some of those eleven that were with him.But as for Sabinus himself, he met the darts that were castat him; and though he were overwhelmed with them, yet didhe not leave off the violence of his attack before he had gottenup on the top of the wall-, and had put the enemy to flight:for as the Jews were astonished at his great strength and thebravery of his soul, and as, withal, they imagined more ofthem had got upon the wall than really had, they were putto flight. And now one cannot but complain here of fortune,as still envious at virtue, and always hindering the perform­ance of glorious achievements : this was the case of the manbefore us, when he had just obtained his purpose; for he thenstumbled at a certain large stone, and fell down upon it head­long, with a very great noise: upon which the Jews turnedback, and when they saw him to be alone, and fallen downalso, they threw darts at him from every side. However, hegot upon his knee, and covered himself with his shield, andat the first defended himself against them, and wounded manyof those that came near him: but he was soon forced to relaxhis right hand, by the multitude of the wounds that had beengiven him, till, at length, he was quite covered over with darts,before he gave up the ghost. Ho was one who deserved abetter fate, by reason of his bravery; but, as might be ex­pected, he fell under so vast an attempt. As for the rest ofhis partners, the Jews dashed three of them to pieces withstones, and slew them, as they were gotten up to the top ofthe wall; the other eight being wounded, were pulled down,and carried back to the camp. These things were done upon'he third day of the month Panemus [Tamuz.]
7. Now, two days afterward, twelve of those men that







OCR Output








C.X.] SIEGE OF TARlCIIK*. 61


obliging to the Romans, but to bring the authors of this re­volt to due punishment, who had hitherto so watched them,that though they were zealous to give them security of theirright hands for a long time, yet could they not accomplishthe same. With these supplications the general complied,although he were very angry at the whole city about the carry­ing off his horses, and this because he saw that Agrippa wasunder a great concern for them. So when Vespasian andAgrippa had accepted of their right hands by way of secu­rity, Jesus and his party thought it not safe for them to con­tinue at Tiberias, so they ran away to Taricheae. The nextday Vespasian sent Trajan before with some horsemen to thocitadel, to make trial of the multitude, whether they were alldisposed for peace ; and as soon as he knew that the peoplewere of the same mind with the petitioner, he took his army,and went to the city; upon which the citizens opened to himtheir gates, and met him with acclamations of joy, and calledhim their savior and benefactor. But as the army was a greatwhile in getting in at the gates, they were so narrow, Vespa-Bian commanded the south wall to be broken down, and somade a broad passage for their entrance. However, he chargedthem to abstain from rapine and injustice, in order to gratifythe king, and on his account spared the rest of the wall, whilethe king undertook for them that they should continue [faith­ful to the Romans] for the time to come. And thus did horestore this, city to a quiet state, after it had been grievouslyafflicted by the sedition.


CHAPTER X.
HOW TARICHEAE WAS TAKEN. A DESCRIPTION OF THE RIVERJORDAN AND OF THE COUNTRY OF GENNESARETH.
1. And now Vespasian pitched his camp between this cityand Taricheae, but fortified his camp more strongly, as sus­pecting that he should be forced to stay there, and have along war; for all the innovators had gotten together at Tari-IV. — 6







OCR Output








82 VESPASIAN. [B. III.


cause every body would undertake any paius with great cheer­fulness on his account; and in that case there would be somecomfort for them also, though they should be taken: that itbecame him neither to fly from his enemies, not to desert hisfriends, nor to leap out of that city, as out of a ship that wassinking in a storm, into which he came when it was quiet andin a calm; for that by going away ho would be the cause ofdrowning the city, because nobody would then venture tooppose the enemy when he was once gone, upon whom theywholly confided.
16. Hereupon Josephus avoided letting them know that hewas to go away to provide for his own safety, but told themthat " he would go out of the city for their sakes ; for that ifhe stayed with them he should be able to do them little good,while they were in a safe condition, and that if they wereonce taken he should only perish with them to no purpose; butthat if he were once gotten free from this siege, he should beable to bring them very great relief; for that he would thenimmediately get the Galileans together out of the country ingreat multitudes, and draw the Komans off their city by an­other war: that he did not see what advantage he could bringto them now by staying among them, but only provoke theRomans to besiege them more closely, as esteeming it a mostvaluable thing to take him; but that if they were once in­formed that he was fled out of the city, they would greatlyremit of their eagerness against it." Yet did not this pleamove the people, but inflamed them the more to hang abouthim. Accordingly, both the children, and the old men,and the women, with their infants, came mourning to him,and fell down before him, and all of them caught hold of hisfeet, and held him fast, and besought him, with great lamen­tations, that he would take his share with them in their for­tune : and I think they did this, not that they envied mydeliverance, but that thev hoped for their own; for they couldnot think they should suffer any great misfortune, providedJosephus would but stay with them.
17. Now Josephus thought that if he resolved to stay, itwould be ascribed to their entreaties, and if he resolved to go







OCR Output








94 THE HIGH-PRIEST ANANUS. [B. IV.


your minds withal ? Perhaps you wait for the Romans, thatthey may protect our holy places: Are our matters thenbrought to that pass ? and are we come to that degree ofmisery, that our enemies themselves are expected to pity us ?
O wretched creatures! will not you rise up, and turn uponthose that strike you ? which you may observe in wild beaststhemselves, that they will avenge themselves on those thatstrike them. Will not you call to mind every one of you thecalamities you yourselves have suffered ? nor lay before youreyes what afflictions you yourselves have undergone? Andwill not such things sharpen your souls to revenge ? Is, there­fore, that most honorable and most natural of our passionsutterly lost, I mean the desire of liberty ? Truly we are inlove with slavery, and in love with those that lord it over us,as if we had received that principle of subjection from ourancestors; yet did they undergo many and great wars forthe sake of liberty; nor were they so far overcome by thepower of the Egyptians or the Modes, but that still they didwhat they thought fit, notwithstanding their commands tothe contrary. And what occasion is there now for a warwith the Romans ? (I meddle not with determining whether itbe an advantageous and profitable war or not:) What pre­tence is there for it ? Is it not that we may enjoy our liberty ?Besides, shall we not bear the lords of the habitable earth tobe lords over us, and yet bear tyrants of our own country ?although I must say that submission to foreigners may beborne, because fortune hath already doomed us to it, whilesubmission to wicked people of our own nation is too unmanly,and brought upon us by our own consent. However, since
1 have had occasion to mention the Romans, I will not con­ceal a thing that, as I aui speaking, comes into my mind, andaffects me considerably; it is this, that though we should betaken by them (God forbid the event should be so,) yet canwe undergo nothing that will be harder to be borne than whatthese men have already brought upon us. How then can weavoid shedding of tears, when wo see the Roman donationsin our temple, while we withal see those of our own natioDtaking our own spoils and plundering our glorious metropolis.







OCR Output













OCR Output








88 -TUB ZEALOTS. [B. IV.


upon nis giving them his right hand for their preservation.There were besides disorders and civil wars in every city,and all those that were at quiet from the Romans turnedtheir hands one against another. There was also a bittercontest between those that were fond of war and those thatwere desirous of peace. At the first, this quarrelsome tempercaught hold of private families, who could not agree amongthemselves ; after which those people that were the dearestto one another brake through all restraints with regard toeach other, and every one associated with those of his ownopinion, and began already to stand in opposition one to an­other ; so that seditions arose every where, while those thatwere for innovations, and were desirous of war, by theiryouth and boldness, were too hard for the aged and prudentmen. And, in the first place, all the people of every placebetook themselves to rapine; after which they got togetherin bodies, in order to rob the people of the country, inso­much that for barbarity and iniquity those of the same nationdid no way differ from the Romans; nay, it seemed to be amuch lighter thing to be ruined by the Romans than bythemselves.
3. Now the Roman garrisons which guarded tho cities,partly out of their uneasiness to take such trouble uponthem, and partly out of tho hatred they bare to the Jewishnation, did little or nothing towards relieving the miserable,till the captains of these troops of robbers, being satiatedwith rapines in the country, got all together from all parts,and became a band of wickedness, and all together crept intoJerusalem, which was now become a city without a governor,and, as the ancient custom was, received without distinctionall that belonged to their nation; and these they then re­ceived, because all men supposed that those who came so fastinto the city, came out of kindness, and for their assistance,although these very men, besides the seditions they raised,were otherwise the direct cause of the city's destruction also;for as they were an unprofitable and a useless multitude, theyspent those provisions beforehand which might otherwise havebeen sufficient for the fighting-men. Moreover, besides the







OCR Output








C. IV.] JERUSALEM. 175


Now that wall began on the north, at the tower called Eip-picus, and extended as far as the Xistus, a place so called,and then joining to the council-house, ended at the westcloister of the temple. But if we go the other way westward,it began at the same place, and extended through a placecalled Bethso to the gate of the Essens; and after that itwent southward, having its bending above the fountain Siloam,where it also bends again towards the east at Solomon's pool,and reaches as far as a certain place which they calledOphlas, where it was joined to the eastern cloister of thetemple. The second wall took its beginning from that gatewhich they called Gennath, which belonged to the first wall;it only encompassed the northern quarter of the city, andreached as far as the tower Antonia. The beginning of thothird wall was at the tower Hippicus, whence it reached as faras the north quarter of the city and the tower Psephinus, andthen was so far extended till it came over against the monu­ments of Helens, which Helena was queen of Adiabene, thedaughter of Izates; it then extended farther to a great length,and passed by the sepulehral caverns of the kings, and bentagain at the tower of the corner, at the monument which iscalled the Monument of the Fuller, and joined to the wall atthe valley called the Valley of Cedron. It was Agrippa whoencompassed the parts added to the old city with this wall,which had been all naked before; for as the city grew morepopulous, it gradually crept beyond its old limits; and thoseparts of it that-stood northward of the temple, and joinedthat hill to the city, made it considerably larger, and occa­sioned that hill, which is in number the fourth, and is calledBezetha, to be inhabited also. It lies over against the towerAntonia, but is divided from it by a deep valley, which wasdug on purpose, and that in order to hinder the foundationsof the tower of Antonia from joining to this hill, and therebyaffording an opportunity for getting to it with ease, and hin­dering the security that arose from its superior elevation; forwhich reason also that depth of the ditch made the elevationof the towers more remarkable. This new-built part of thecity was called Bezetha, in our language, which, if interpreted



