


OCR Output








B.VI. THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. 193


monians. Hitherto they had only exercised robberiesupon them from Pylus; and, making descents ratheron any other coast of Peloponnesus than Laconia itself,had left it to the Argives and Mantineans to make waragainst them. Nay, though the Argives had frequent­ly pressed them, that with an armed force they wouldbarely land on the Laconic coast, afnd, after committingnever so small ravage in their company, immediately toretire, they had positively refused. But now, underthe command of Pythodorus, and Læfpodias, and De-maratus, they made a descent at Epidaurus-Limera andPrasia, committed large devastation on the adjacentcountry, and afforded the Lacedæmonians a most spe­cious and justisiable pretext to act offensively against A-thens.
"When the Athenian fleet was sailed homewards fromArgos, and the Lacedæmonians also were withdrawn,the Argives broke into Phliasia, where they laid wastepart of the Lacedæmonian territory, and made someslaughter of the people, and then returned to Argos.


Vol. II.


O THE







OCR Output








B.V. THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. 75


cedaemon. A battle was fought within the precinctsof Argos, in which the people was the victor: Someof their opponents they flew, and others they doomedto perpetual exile. The Lacedæmonians, when theiradherents implored their succour, were too dilatory inmoving; but at last they adjourned the games, andmarched away to their support; and hearing, whenthey were come to Tegea, that "the few were vanquish-
ed," they determined to proceed no farther, maugreall the intreaties of the new exiles; but, retreating forth­with toSparta,they resumed the celebration of the games.Yet, being afterwards attended by deputations fromthose in Argos, as well as by such as had been latelybanished, in the presence of the whole confederacy, af­ter many arguments had been urged on both sides, theycame to a resolution, that *' the Argives in the city** were guilty of injustice;" and a decree was pasted,that "they should march against Argos." But, afterall, their proceedings were dilatory and remiss.
In the mean time, the people of Argos, dreading theLacedæmonian strength, and re-addresling themselves3gain to Athens for a renewal of alliance, and proceed­ing to execute a plan which they thought the strongestexpedient of preservation, built long walls quite downto the sea, that, in case they should be blocked up byJand, all proper supplies might be thrown into the cityby sea, through the good offices of the Athenians. Tothis scheme of new fortifications some cities also of Pe­loponnesus were privy underhand. The whole bodyof the Argives without distinction, the citizens, theirwives, and their servants, forwarded the work; andfrom Athens they were supplied with carpenters andmasons. And here the summer ended.
Winter now succeeding, the Lacedæmonians, whenadvertised of these new fortifications, marched their for­ces against Argos, their own, and all those of their al.lies, excepting the Corinthian. Some new projects infheir favour were now also in agitation within Argos it­self.







OCR Output








.4 ,
1 v".







OCR Output








372 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. B.VI1I.


only of the weakest ships, and those ranged at too greata distance from one another; especially as in numberof vessels they were quite inferior, and as the coastround the Cynos-sema was sharp, and in an acute angleruns out into the water, so that part of the line on oneside was out of fight of the other. The Peloponne-sians, therefore, charging the center, drove at once theships of the Athenians upon the beach; and, being sofar manifestly victors, leaped boldly on shore to pursuethem. But neither those under Thrasybulus could assistthe center from the right, because of the multitudeof ships that stood in to awe them; nor couldthose under Thrasyllus do it from the left, be­cause the interposition of cape Cynos-sema hid from himthe view of what had passed; and at the same time theSyracusans and others, who, equal in strength, lay hardupon him, prevented his moving. At length, the Pe-loponnesians, presuming the victory their own, broketheir order to give different chace to single ships, andin too heedless a manner threw confusion upon a part oftheir own line. And now those under Thrasybulus,finding the squadron opposed to them began to slacken,stopped all farther extension of their line a-head; and,tacking upon them, resolutely engaged, and put themto flight. Charging next the dispersed ships of the Pe-loponnesians, which composed the squadron that pre­sumed itself victorious, they made havoc; and, by stri­king them with a panic, routed the greater part withoutresistance. Now also the Syracusans were beginning togive way before the squadron under Thrasyllus ; and,feeing others in open flight, were more easily temptedto follow their example. The defeat now being mani­festly given, and the Peloponnesians flying away forshelter, first towards the river Pydius, and afterwardsto Abydus, the Athenians made prize of only an incon­siderable number of shipping; for the Hellespont, be­ing narrow, afforded short retreats to the enemy. How­ever they-gained a victory by sea, most opportune in­deed







OCR Output








182 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. B.V1.


"now met together to form resolutions on points of the"highest importance, I conjure you without hesitation"to carry you: arms at once into Sicily and Attica; to"the end that, in the former, by the presence of a"small part of your forces, you may work out signal"preservations, and at home pull down the present and** even the future growth of the Athenians; that, for"ages to come, yourselves may reap security and*' peace, and preside at the helm of united Greece,"which will cheerfully acquiesce under your guidance,** and pay you a free, uncompelled, obedience."
To this purpose Alcibiades spoke.' And the Lace­dæmonians, who had before some sort of intention totake the field against Athens, though hitherto they pro­tracted its execution, were now more than ever anima­ted lo it when Alcibiades had given them such a detail6f affairs, whom they judged to have the clearest insightin them. Thereupon ihcy turned their attention imme­diately on fortifying Decelea, and sending out a bodyos succour for the present service of Sicily. They alsoappointed Gylippus, the son of Cleandridas, to go andtake upon him ihe command at Syracuse; with orders,by concerting measures with the Syracusans and Corin­thians, to draw up a plan for the most effectual and mostready conveyance of succours thither.'
Gylippus accordingly issued out his orders to the Co­rinthians, to attend him, without loss of time, at A sine,with two ships; and also to expedite the equipmentof the fleet which they designed for this service, and tokeep them in readiness to fail when opportunity shouldrequire. Having so far concerted measures, the embas­sadors departed from Lacedæmon.
The Athenian trireme, also, dispatched from Sicilyby the generals on that post to demand supplies of mo­ney and a body of horse, was by this time arrived at A*thens. And the Athenians, on hearing their demands,
drew







OCR Output








|68 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. B. VI.


"OUR journey hither was intended for the renewal** of a former alliance; but, as this Syracusan hath ta-"ken the liberty to be severe upon us, we lie under an"obligation to flhew the justice of our title to that share** of dominion which we now possess. And the strong-"tst evidence of this he himself hath been pleased to** give, by affirming, that lonians have been eternal
foes to Dorians. The fact is incontestibly true:"Since we, who are lonians, have been necessitated to"stand ever upon our guard against the incroaching** designs of the Pcloponnesians, who are Dorians, who** are our superiors in number, and are seated upon our** borders. When, therefore, in the close of the Per-f* sian invasion, we saw ourselves masters of a navy, we** asserted our own independence from the government*f and guidance of the Lacedæmonians, since no sha-** dow of reason could be found why we should be obe-** dient to them any more than they to us, save only." that in this critical period their strength was greater,*^ We were afterwards appointed, by free election, the** leaders of those lonians who had sormerly been sub-"ject to the monarch. And the preference awarded to
us we continue to support; assured that on'y thus wef shall escape subjection to the Peloponnesian yoke, by** keeping possession of a power which can effectually"awe all their incroachments. And, farther, (that we"may come to particulars,) it was not with injustice** that we exacted subjection from those lonians, and in-"habitants of the isles, whom the Syracusans fay wef* thought proper to inflave, though connected with us** by the ties ot blood: For they marched, in companyV with the Mcde, against their mother-country, against** us, their founders. They had not the courage to ex-** pose their own homes to ruin and devastation by any honest revolt, though we with magnanimity aban-"doned even Athens itself. They made slavery theirK choice, and in the same miserable fate would have
** been.







OCR Output








B.V. THE PELOPONNESIAN WAI*. 99


"low your plea, from that moment we become your"slaves."
Athenian s.
"TO what purpose this? If here you are met to-*' gether to retail your suspicions of future events, or to"talk of any thing but the proper means of extricating"and preserving your State from the present and mani-*' fest dangers which environ it, we had better be si-"lent: But, if the latter be your purpose, let us come*' to the point." .
Melians.
"T H E R E is reason for it, and there ought to be*' forgiveness, when men, so situated as we are, are li-** able to much distraction both in speech and thought.
The point for which we are assembled is, it is true,"no less than our future preservation: If, therefore,"it must be so, let the conference proceed in the me-"thod you require."


Athenians.
** AS, therefore, it is not our purpose to amuse you"with pompous details, — how, after completely van-'* quishing the Mede, we had a right to assume the so-"vereignty, or how, provoked by the wrongs received"from you, we come hither to earn redress,— we shalltc wave all parade of words that have no tendency to-*' wards conviction: And, in return, insist from you,"that you reject all hopes of persuading us by frivo-** lous remonstrances, — that, as a colony of the Lace-** dæmonians, you were incapacitated from accompa-"nying our arms, or that wrongs in any fliape you'** have never done us. — But, these things apart, Ictus*' lay all stress on such points as may really on both
*' sides







OCR Output








I N D E X.


C baric Us, II. 210, 216.
Ckarnunus, an Athtnian comman­der, II. 306. deseated by thePeloponnesians, 315. helps tbeoligarchical party atSamos, 342.
Cbarceadas, son of Euphilitsu, I.288. killed, 291.
Cbionis, II. 19,22.
Cbians, suspected, II. 189. re­volt from the Athenians, 293.their war, 299.
Chryfis, I. 123, 421.
Ciliciant, I. 86.
Cimon, son of Miltiades, takes £-Van, I. 76. beats the Persiansat Eurymedon, 77. dies in theexpedition to Cyprus, 86.
Clear thus, II. 348.
Clearidas, commands in Amphi-polis, I. 421. II. 7. conquersClean with Brasidas, 11, endea­vours to break the peace, zo.
Cleippides, I. 218.
Cleobulus, II. 33,
Ciecmedes, II. 77.
Cleomenes, I. 100.
Cleon, his speech, I. 243. hiscommand at Pylus, 337, 339,346. his command in Thrace,II. 1, 5. conquered by Brafi-. sidas, and killed, 11.
Cleapompus, I. 170.
Cnemus, the Spartan, commandsa squadron against Zacynthus,I. 181. sent into Acarnania,193. retires from Stratus, 195.
Canon, II. 221.
Capiensians, .1. 389.
Corcyreans, founders of Epidam-nus, I. 19. were themselves aCorinthian colony, 20. makewar on Epidamnus, 21. beat theCorinthians at sea, 23. beg thealliance of Athens, 25. theirspeech at Athens, z6. their suc­cess, 36. engage the Corinthiansat sea, 38. their sedition, 276,353. aid the Athenians in thewar of Sicily, II. 247.
Qorintbians, first built ihips of war.


I. 11. their quarrel with theCorcyreans about Epidamnus, 20,their speech at Athens, 30. con*tinuation of their war with theCorcyreans, 37. send aid to Po-tidæa, 45. hate the Athenians,49. their first speech at Lace­dæmon, 50, their second, 93.excite discontent in Peloponne­sus, II. 23, 25. make allianceswith the Elsans and Argives, 30.aid the Syracu/aus, 182,207.
Coroneans, I. 389.
Cranians, I. 15 I.
Cranonians, I. 144.
Cratiemenes, II. 95.
Creftonians, I. 402.
Cretans, II. 248.
Craesits, I. 13.
Cyclops, II. 92.
C;>/a», the history of him, I. 98.Cynes, I. 215.Cyrus the elder, I. 12, 13.Cyrus the younger, I. 80.
Dditbus, II. 19.
Damagetus, ibid. , .
Damagon, I. 293.
Damotimus, I. 410.
Darius, king of Persia, succeedsCamby/es, I. 12. reduces theisles, 13.
Darius, son of Artaxerxes, II. 285.his leagues with the Lacedæmo­nians, 295, 310,329.
Da/con, II. 96.
Delians, removed out of ZWe.r bythe Athenians, II. I. broughtthither again, 30.
Demaratus, II. 193.
Demarcbus, II. 351.
Demodocus, I. 374.
Demosthenes, I. 291. his war inÆiolia,2g$. his seizure os andexploits at Pylus, 317,319. bisharangue, ibid, his attempt onMegara, 366. carries op a re­inforcement igninRSyracu/e,! I.zio. arrives at Syracuse, 231.
. repulsed at Epipole, 233. is forraising







OCR Output








33& THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. B.VIIL


few, as it kept alive that mutual distrust which reignedamong the people.
Pisander, therefore, and his associates, arriving atthis very juncture, gave the finishing stroke without de­lay. In the first place, having called an assembly of thepeople, they moved for a decree, —" That a commit-*' tee of ten mould be elected with full discretionary** power. This committee of ten mould draw up the*' form of a decree, to be reported to the people on a*' day presixed, in what manner the State may be best"administered." In the next place, when that daycame, they summoned an assembly of the people at Co-lonus: This is a temple of Neptune without the city,and distant from it about * ten stadia. And here thecommittee reported no other proposal than this, — That*' it be lawful for any Athenian to deliver whatever o-*' pinion he himself thought proper." They then en­acted heavy penalties against any man who hereaftermould accuse the speaker of a breach of law, or shouldbring him into any trouble whatever.
This being done, it was now, without the least re­serve or ambiguity, moved, — That *' no magistrate** whatsoever should continue in his post upon the old** establishment, nor receive a public salary; but that** five f presidents be chosen, who should choose one** hundred persons, and each of these hundred should*' name three persons for associates: That these per-** sons should enter into the senate, be invested abso-** lutely with the administration, and should farther be*' impowered to convene the five thousand whenever*' they should deem it proper."
Pisander was the person who made this proposal, andwho also in other respects shewed himself openly oneof the most zealous to pull down the democracy. Buthe, who contrived the whole of the plan, and by whatsteps the affair should be thus carried into execution,
• One English mile.
was







OCR Output








B.VI. THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR; 93


suffice, or such information as every man picks up forhis own use.
The Sicanians appear to be the first people who,next to those, inhabited this country; though, accord­ing to their own accounts, they are prior-, because theyclaim to themselves the original tenure: But, accordingto the truest discoveries, they are found to have been I-berians, who were compelled to remove from the banksof the Sicanus, in Iberia, by the Libyans. And fromthem, at that time, this island received the name of Si-cania, having before been called Trinacria. They con­tinue, to this day, to inhabit the western parts of Sicily.
After the taking of Troy, some of the Trojans, whohad escaped the Achæans, arrive in their vessels uponthe Sicilian shore, and, forming a settlement adjacent tothe Sicanians, they all took jointly the name of Ely mi;and their cities were Eryx and Egesta. They were alsoincreased by the accession of some Phocians from Troy,who, having first been driven to Libya by a storm,passed over afterwards from thence into Sicily*
The Siculi passed over first into Sicily from Italy, forthere they originally dwelled. They fled before the O-pici; and, as the story is told, not without probability,having observed how the current set within the straitand seized a favourable gale, they crossed over uponrafts, and perhaps by some other methods. There are,even to this very day, a people in Italy called Siculi;and that region, in a similar manner, obtained its nameof Italy from a certain Arcadian king, who bore thename of Italus. These, crossing into Sicily with for­midable numbers, and vanquishing the Sicanians in bat­tle, drove them into the southern and western parts,caused the name of the island to be changed from Sica-nia to Sicily, settled themselves in, and kept possessionof, the richest tracts in the country, since their passagehither was near three hundred years earlier than thelanding of any Grecians in Sicily. Nay, they continue,


 







OCR Output








B.VIII. THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. 361


patrole assigned for Munichia; and, what was of mostimportance, it was openly countenanced by the wholebody of the heavy-armed. The news of it was imme­diately carried to the four hundred, who were this mo­ment assembled together in council; and all, except­ing those dissatisfied with their measures, were ready torun to arms, and vented terrible threats against Thera-menes and his associates.
But he, apologizing for himself, declared his readi­ness to take up arms along with them, and attend themto the rescue of Alexicles; and, taking with him oneof the generals who was in his secret, he hurried downto the Piræus. Aristarchus also ran down to assist; asdid, farther, the young men belonging to the cavalryof the State.
Great, in truth, was the tumult, and full of horror:For those who were left in the upper-city imagined thatthe Piræus was already seized, and that Alexicles was/lain; and they in the Piræus each moment expected anassault from those in the city. Not without difficultycould the men of years and experience stop such as werewildly running up and down the streets, and rushingto arms. And Thucydides, the Pharsalian, public hostof the State, who happened then to be at Athens, threwhimself with lively zeal in the way ot all who were flock­ing down; conjuring them earnestly " not to finishf' the ruin of their country, when the enemy lay so"near to strike the blow." But thus, at length, theirfury abated, and the effusion of one another's blood wasprevented.
As for Theramenes, he was no sooner got down tothe Piræus, than, assuming authority, (for he himselfwas at this time a general,) he pretended to rate theheavy-armed for this piece of mutiny, at least so far asmere making a noise could do it; whilst Aristarchus andall the opposite faction were angry with them in earnest.But the bulk of the heavy-armed drew together in abody, and betray no sign of regret for what they had
done.







OCR Output








B.V. THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. 45


diately conceived the warmest indignation: And, look­ing upon themselves as highly abused, Alcibiades in­troducing the Argives and their associates, who werestill at Athens, they entered into treaty and an allianceoffensive and defensive with them, as followeth:
. "THE Athenians, and Argives, and Eleans, and"Mantineans, for themselves and their respective de-"pendents on all sides, have made a peace, to conti-"nue for the term of a hundred years, without fraud"and without violence, both at land and at sea.
** Be it unlawful to take up offensive arms, ei-
*' ther by the Argives, and Eleans, and Mantineans,"or their dependents, against the Athenians and*' dependents of the Athenians, ' • or by
*' the Athenians, and their dependents, against-the*' Argives, and Eleans, and Mantineans, and their de-"pendents, without any artifice or evasion whatsoever.M On these conditions the Athenians, and Argives,*' and Eleans, and Mantineans, to be confederates for'* one hundred years. . ,
*' Provided that, in case an enemy invade the terri-** tory of the Athenians, the Argives, and Eleans, and, ** Mantineans, march to the succour of the Athenians,"in strict conformity to a summons received from A-*' thens, in the most vigorous manner they may be a-** ble, to the fulness of their abilities.
*' But if the enemy, after ravaging, be again whin ,"drawn, the State under which they acted to be decla-!*' red an enemy to the Argives, and Mantineans, and
Eleans, and Athenians; and to be pursued with the** offensive arms of all those confederate States.
*' And farther, that it be not lawful for any of the"contracting States to lay down their arms against that** State, which hath so offended, without the consent** of all the rest. -o — • *
The Athenians also to march to thesuctour of Ar­


 







OCR Output








B. VIII. THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. 355


absent. Various accounts are vented about this step inor can it certainly be known with what view he re­paired to Aspendus, or why, when there, he did notbring up the fleet. That a Phœnician fleet, confidingof one hundred forty-seven sail was now come up toAspendus, is allowed on all sides; but, why they didnot come forwards, is variously conjectured. Somethink he went out of sight merely to carry on his oldscheme of wearing away the Peloponnesians ; and, inconsequence of this, Tamas paid in their subsistencewhich he was ordered to pay, not better but even worsethan Tissaphernes. Others fay it was, that, since he


save large sums by dismissing them there, as he neverhad sincerely designed to make use of their service.Others, again, attribute it to a desire to quiet the cla­mours against him at Lacedæmon, and to get himselfrepresented there as one abounding in good faith, andwho is actually gone to bring up a fleet fairly and ho­nestly fitted out for service.
But, in my opinion, the true solution of the mysteryis this: He would not bring them up, merely to wearout and to balance the strength of the Grecians, that,during his absence and this studied prolongation, thelatter might be running into ruin and, farther, for thefake of balancing, to join with neither party, for fearof making them too strong; for, had he once determi­ned to join heartily in the war, the consequence was cer­tain beyond a doubt. Had he brought them up to jointhe Lacedæmonians, he must in all probability have gi­ven them the victory, since already their naval strengthwas rather equal than inferior to that of their opponents.But, that their ruin alone was designed by him is plainfrom the excuse he made for not bringing up that fleet:He pretended they were fewer in number than the kingbad ordered to be assembled: yet, if this were so, hemight have ingratiated himself more abundantly withthe kingy if he made a great saving of money for his mas*


 


Phœnicians to Aspendus, he might


A a 2


ter,







OCR Output








B.VII. THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. 203


*' darters, we have been forced to retire wirhin our in-** trenchments. Being therefore obliged, by the su-"perior numbers of the enemy, to discontinue our*' circumvallation, we are this moment lying upon the"defensive. Nor indeed are we able to draw out our"whole force for action, as detachments of our heavy-*' armed are remotely employed in the guard of our"works. They have farther run up a single wall to"cut our lines; so that there remains no longer a pos-"sibility for us to complete the circumvallation, un-"less, reinforced by a numerous body of troops, we*.* are enabled to assault and demolish the counter-*' work. And, in consequence of this, we, who de-"signed to besiege others, may with much more pro-** priety be said to suffer a siege ourselves, at least by"land: for we dare not make any distant excursions*' into the adjacent country, for fear of the horse.
"What is more; they have sent embassadors to Pe-*' loponnesus, to solicit reinforcements. Gy!ippus also"is making the tour of the Sicilian States, with a view"to obtain the concurrence of such as are at present*' neutral, and to prevail with the rest to intrust their*' additional levies for the service both of land and sea"under his command: and, according to my present"intelligence, they are fully bent to attack, at one and*' the same time, our intrenchments, with their land-** forces by land, and with their ships by sea. And,** though I say, by Sea, let not the iound be too ter-*' rible in your ears: for they know very well the pre-"sent state of our navy; which, though at first a mostcomplete equipment, for the cleanness of the ships"and the health and vigour of the seamen, yet at pre-"sent hath scarce a ship which is not leaky ; so long** have they been necessitated to keep the sea, whilst** their hands have daily been mouldering away: for,*' in fact, we have no opportunity to lay them dry and"careen them; as we are under continual apprehen-±* sions of being attacked by the ships of the enemy,
?* equal







OCR Output








324 THE PELOPONNESIAM WAR. B. VIII.


** a surprise: Of this he had gained the most certain*' informations; and therefore Samos ought necessarily ,"to be put into a posture of defence with the utmost*' expedition, and proper guards in every respect be"appointed." He himself commanded, and conse­quently was impowered to see this put in execution.All hands were instantly at work on the fortification;and Samos, though otherwise intended soon to be, wasby this piece of artifice immediately, secured. And, nolong time after, came letters from Alcibiades, import­ing that " the army was betrayed by Phrynichus, and"in pursuance of it the enemy was coming to surprise"them." Their opinion of the good faith of Alci­biades was not in the least established by this: It was ar­gued, that, as he was privy to the plans of the enemy,from a principle of enmity he had fastened upon Phry­nichus the charge of being their accomplice. By thelast notification, therefore, he was so far from hurtinghim, that he only confirmed his evidence.
Yet, subsequent to this, Alcibiades continued tomake use of all his address and persuasion with Tula-phernes to gain him over to the Athenians, who in sact:stood most in terror of the Peloponnesians, because theyhad a larger fleet at hand than the Athenians; but wasinwardly inclined, were it any how feasible, to complywith his suggestions; especially as, ever since the jar atCnidus about the treaty of Theramenes, he had beenexasperated against the Peloponnesians: For that jarhad already happened at the time of their expedition toRhodes; and the suggestion of Alcibiades, formerlymentioned, that " the views of the Lacedæmonians"were to set the cities free," was yet more verified bythe behaviour of Lichas, who had affirmed, that " it"was an article never to be suffered in treaty, that the"king should have those cities of which either himself"or his ancestors had at any time been possessed." Andin truth Alcibiades, as one who had important concerns
at







OCR Output








370 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. B.VIII.


at Harmatus, which lies facing Methymne, and havingcat their dinner there, they passed with the utmost speedby Lectus, and Larissa, and Amaxitus, and other ad­jacent places, and reach Rhætium of the Hellespontbefore midnight. Not but that some ships of the fleetgot up no farther than to Sigæum and some other adja­cent places on that coast.
The Athenians, who were lying with eighteen fail atSestus, when the lights were waved by their own friendsfor signals, and they beheld numerous fires kindled ona sudden on the hostile coast, were well assured that thePeloponsesians are approaching. The fame night,therefore, under favour of the dark, and with the ut­most expedition, they crept along under the Chersone-sus, and reached Eleus, desirous to put out to sea andavoid the enemy; and, for the sixteen ships at Abydus,they stole away unperceived of the Abydians, thoughnotice had been sent them from their friends just arrived,to keep a good look-out, and not suffer them to stealoff. Yet morning no sooner appeared, than, findingthemselves in sight of the fleet under Mindarus, andthat they were actually chaced, they could not all getoff. The greater part, indeed, fled safe to the conti­nent and Lemnos; but four, that got last under fail,are overtaken by the enemy near Eleus; one, also,that ran ashore at the temple of Protesilaus, they seizewith all her hands ; and two more, the crews of whichescaped. One, sarther, but abandoned, they burn «tImbrus.
This done, the ships from Abydus having joinedthem, and the whole fleet being now increased to four­score and six sail, they spent the rest of the day in inves­ting Eleus; but, as it would not surrender, they drewosf to Abydus.
The Athenians, who had been deceived by theirscouts, and never imagined that so large a number ofhostile ships could pass along undelcried, were verycoolly carrying on their siege; but yet were no sooner
informed







OCR Output








iSi THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. B. VI.


ans had not thought proper, during their first panicand consternation, to tall instantly upon them, such aprotraction re-inspired them day after day with new re­viving courage: Since, farther, by cruizing on the otherfide of Sicily, they seemed to affect a remoteness fromthem; and, though shewing themselves b fore Hybla,and attempting the place, they had not been able tocarry it, the Syracusans began now to treat them withan open contempt. They even insisted, as might be ex­pected from a populace who are high in spirits, "that** their generals should lead out towards Catana, since** the enemy durst not venture to march against them.'*The Syracusan horsemen also, sent daily out toobserve their motions, rode boldly up to the campof the Athenians, insulting them in other respects butespecially with this sneering demand, " Whether they"were not rather come to gain a settlement for them-"selves on a foreign shore than to replace the Leon-** tines in their old possessions?"
The Athenian generals, informed of these bravadoes,were desirous to seduce the whole strength of Syracuseto as great a distance as possible from that .city, thatthey might snatch an opportunity of transporting thithertheir own forces by favour of the night, and seize aproper spot whereon to six their incampment, withoutany obstruction from the enemy. They were well con­vinced, that their point could not be so easily accomplish­ed, should they endeavour to force a descent in the faceof the enemy, or by a land-march should give them anearly notice of their design. For, in such cases, their ownlight-armed, and that cumbersome train which mustattend, as they had no horse to cover their motions,must suffer greatly from the numerous cavalry of theSyracusans: But, by the other scheme, they mightpre-occupy a spot of ground, where the cavalry couldnot give them any considerable annoyance. Nay,what is more, the Syracusan exiles, who. followed their
camp,







OCR Output








14B THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. B. VI.


- -erect an oligarchical and tyrannic power. And, astheir passions were inflamed by such apprehensions,"many worthy and valuable citizens were alreadythrown into prison. Nay, it seemed as it their inquisi­tion was to have no end, since from day to day theirindignation gave into more increasing severity, andnumbers were constantly arrested. Here, one of those* who had been imprisoned on suspicion (and a suspi­cion too of being most deeply concerned in the crime)is persuaded, by one of his fellow-prisoners, to turn anevidence, no matter whether of truth or falsehood. Manyconjectures have passed on both sides; but no one,neither at that time nor since, hath been able to dis­cover the men who were really concerned in the affair. Theargument which prevailed upon this person was, " the ne-'* cessuy for his taking such a step, even though he had*' no hand in the commission, since by this he would in-"fallibly procure hisown safety,and deliver thecityfrom"its present confusions. For he must be much more*' secure of saving his life by such voluntary confession"on a promise of indemnity, than he could possibly"be should he persist in an avowal of his innocence, and"be brought to a trial." In short, this man becamean evidence, both against himself and against others, inthe affair of the Mercuries.
Great was the joy of the Athenian people at this (as itwas thought) undoubted discovery. And, as they hadbeen highly chagrined before at their inability to detectthe criminals, who had so outrageously insulted the mul­titude, they immediately discharged this informer, andall other prisoners, whom he did not name as accom­plices. Upon such as he expressly named the judicialtrials were held. Some of them they put to death, as
many
* This person, according to Plutarch in Ahihiada, was Andocides the orator, aman always reckoned of the oligarchical faction. And one Timæus, his intimatefriend, who was a man of small consideration at Athens but remarkable for a pene-'tratirjg and enterprising genius, was the person who persuaded him to turn informer.







OCR Output








B.VI.; THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. i9c


After this, the Athenians erected a trophy, and, inpursuance of a truce, delivered up their flam to the Sy-racusans, and received in exchange the body of Lama-chus, and of those who fell with him.
The junction of their whole armament, both of theirland and naval force, being now completed, they be­gan again, from Epipolæ and the crag, to invert theSyracusans with a double wall, which they were tocontinue quite down to the sea. The necessary provi­sions to supply their army were brought in from all thecoasts of Italy. Many also of the Siculi, who had hi­therto stood aloof, declared now for the Athenians, andcame into their alliance, who were farther joined bythree vessels with fisty oars from Hetruria.
All other points equally contributed to elevate theirhopes. For the Syracusans had begun to despair of be­ing able to sustain the siege, as they had no glimpse of a-ny approaching succour from Peloponnesus. Theywere toffing to and fro amongst themselves some propo­sals for an accommodation, and had even sounded Ni-cias upon that head, who, by the death of Lamachus.'was left invested with the sole command. Nothing de­finitive was however concluded, though (as might rea­sonably be expected from men in high perplexity, andmore straitly besieged than ever) many proposals weremade to him, and many more were agitated within thecity. The distresses, also, which environed them acpresent, struck into them mutual suspicions of one ano­ther: Nay, they even divested of their charge the ge­nerals who were in authority when these distresses cameupon them, as if all was owing to their misconduct ortreachery, and chose in their stead Heraclides, and Eu-cles, and Tellias.
In the mean time, Gylippus, the Lacedæmonian,and the ships from Corinth, were come up to Leucas,designing with the utmost expedition to .pass over fromthence to Sicily. But terrible accounts came thick up­on them here, and all agreed in broaching the fame un­truth,







OCR Output








268 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. B. VII.


"life. Upon the strength of this, when I look for-** wards to the future, my mind is enlivened with invi-"gorating hope; though I own these misfortunes, so*' far undeserved, strike no little terror on my"thoughts. But better times, perhaps, may be ap-*' proaching; for sure our enemies have been blessed<i with an ample measure of success; and, though some*' deity may have frowned at first on this our expedi-** tion, yet by this time his wrath must be fully wreaked"upon us. We are not the first instance of a people** who have wantonly invaded the possessions of ano-"ther; many such offences have taken their rife from"the impulse of human passions, and have been pu-*' nished with such a measure of vengeance as human"nature was able to endure. Good reason, therefore,*' have we now to hope for a milder fate from the of-"fended deity, who, depressed as we are, seem objects"of compassion more than of resentment. Cast, there-*' fore, your eyes on the fine bodies of heavy-armed,"and the goodly numbers, which even now compose*' your retreat; and let the sight revive and cheer your"drooping spirits. Conclude that, wherever you choose"to halt,you areof yourselves that instant a mighty com-*' munity ; such as no other Sicilian people can presume*, to stand before, should you attack; hor to dispossess,"wherever you think proper to settle. But, that your*' march be orderly and safe, be that the care of each"individual amongst your ranks, made warm and ear-*' nest by the thought, — that, on whatever spot you"may be compelled to fight, on that, if crowned with"victory, you regain a country and a bulwark of your"own. But then, our march must be continued both day*' and night, with unabating speed, because our stock"of provision is but scanty; and, can we but reach"some friendly territory belonging to the Siculi, who,"from their excessive diead of the Syracusans, will ever"preserve their attachment to us, conclude yourselves"that moment to be beyond the reach of danger:.:" ' "Send,







OCR Output








B.VII. THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. 253


"not less than to the seamen; fince this method of"engagement is more particularly your province, and"since it still remains within your power to earn a"glorio.us victory, by putting your land-method into"practice. But the seamen I exhort, and with my"exhortations mingk my intreaties, not to shrink too"much under the sensibility of pall defeats, as your"decks are now better armed in all respects than they"were before, and as the number of the shipping is"enlarged. Recal the idea of that heart-delighting"privilege, of which you are now to secure the con-v ** tinuance:-— To you I speak, who, though not of** Athenian extraction, have hitherto been regarded"and honoured as Athenians; and, for speaking well"our language, and appropriating our manners, have"been admired through the whole extent of Greece,"have participated the benefits of our large-extended"empire, not less than ourselves in point of profit,"and much more than ourselves in striking awe into"your vassals, and being exempted from the attacks"of injustice. Since, therefore, you alone have freely"shared our empire with us, you are bound by all the"ties of honour by no means to desert its present vin-"dication. Then, in open despight of those Corin-"thians whom you have so often conquered, and of"those Sicilians not one of whom durst look us in the** face so long as the vigou/ of our fleet was unim-.** paired, drive your foes before you, and strike into** them the plain conviction — that your military skill,** though struggling with weakness and misfortunes, is"yet far superior to all their strength and luck united.
"But to the native citizens of Athens amongst you** 1 must once more suggest, that you have now no"longer in your docks such another fleet as this, nor** have left behind you such another body of heavy-"armed. If, therefore, your immediate fate be any** thing less than victory, your enemies will fail and be** directly at Athens; and' the remainder os our forces
"there







OCR Output








»98 THE PELOPCWNESIAN WAR. B.VIU,


but the sleet was under the order* of Deixiadas, a nativeof chose parts. And thole ships, steering first towards andarriving at Mcchymne, cause its rerolt.+ *****But Astyochus, the Lacedæmonian admiral in chief*putting to sea from Cenchmeæ, where he had taken up­on him the command, with four foil of shipping, ar­rives at Chios. And, the third day after his arrivalthere, twenty-five fail of Athenians, commanded byLeon and Diomedon, reachtd the tfle of Leflbos i forLeon had ibeen lately Hem from Athens with a nei®tsonce-tnentof tern. On the very eiœ»tng of that day, Asty©»chus pot out again to sea, with the addition olione Chj-an strip, and stood away for Lesbos to give then M0 theassistance an his power. Accordbgily he *oucheth first «Pyrrba, proceeding from thence the day following toEreffus, whore information meets hint .tlhat Muyse«ehad been taken by the Athenians at a jbout; far thelatter, as their arrival was krrtirefy unexpected, staodifigboldly into the harbour, seized at once all (the Chian•veflek; and then landing, and gaining a victory overfuoh as made head -against them, became masters of thecity. Astyochus, informed of this -event by the Eres-'sians, and thcChian flarps under the coentnanid of £u-bulus from Methymne— which, hawing been ioft in.the harbour of that place, had fled at once whem M.ity-lene was taken ; thEee of them eame urp sase to Astyo­chus, but one had falkn inco the hands -of she .Athe­nians; — Astyochus now desisted 'from proceeding toMrtyiene. iHaving efsectuated the revolt of Epeffus,and provided the inhabitants with arms, be ordered thesoldiers from on-board his own 1squadron to march byland, under the command of Eteonicus, towards An-tissa and Methymnef; whilst himself, with his own stiipsand the three Chian, advanced along the shore towards
f From what follows it looks as if some words were wanting here. The
Latin translators have endeavoured to supply it, thus: . "And the Chians, lei-
"ving four ships here fur the defence of the place, stood away with the ret"toMitylene, and caused it to rt?oit,"
the







OCR Output








B.VI. THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. 183


drew up a derree, to send away supplies to chat arma­ment, and a body of horsemen.
And here the winter ended; and the seventeenth yearof this war, of which Thucydides hath compiled thehistory, came also to an end.
YEAR XVIII. J
O N the earliest approach of the spring which led onthe following summer, the Athenians in Sicily, hoist­ing from Catana, shewed themselves on the coast of Me-gara in Sicily, of Which the Syracusans, having dispos­sessed the inhabitants in the time of Gelon, the tyrant,(as I have already related,) continued mailers of thefoil. Having landed here, they ravaged the country;till, approaching a fortress belonging to the Syracusans,and attempting it without success, they retired, someby land and the rest on-board the fleet, into the riverTereas; from whence going again on-shore, they rava­ged the plains and. set fire to the growing corn. Thryalso fell in with a small party of Syracusans, someof whom they flew; and then, erecting a trophy, wentagain on-board. They next returned to Catana; and,aster victualling there, proceeded from thence, withtheir whole force, to the attack of Centoripa, a strongfort belonging to the Siculj j and, having made them­selves masters of it by a capitulation, they stood away,burning down in their passage the corn of the Inesseansand Hybleans. Upon returning to Catana, they findthere two hundred and fifty horiemen arrived from A-thens, though without horses, yet with all the properfurniture, as if they could be better supplied with theformer in Sicily; as also thirty archers, mounted, and•three hundred talents in silver.


X Before Christ 414,


II







OCR Output








76 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. B.V.


self. The whole army was commanded by Agis, thefon of Archidamus, king of the Lacedæmonians. Thenew turns th£y expected for their service took not effectwithin the city, but they made themselves masters of thenew-erected walls, and levelled them with the ground.They also took Hysiæ, a town in Argia; and, havingput all the freemen found within that place to the sword,they drew off, and dispersed to their several cities.
After this, the Argives marched their force into Phli-asia; and, after ravaging that district, because the ex-ilcs from Argos had met with a reception there, theyagain retired: For many of those exiles had taken uptheir residence at Phlius.
In the fame winter, the Athenians, exasperated againstPerdiccas, prevented all manner of importations intoMacedonia. They charged him " with taking part in"the late treaty, confirmed by the sanction of oaths,"between the Argives and Lacedæmonians; that, far."ther, when they had made great preparations against"the Chalcideans of Thrace and Amphipolis, and Ni-"cias, the son ofNiceratus, was appointed to command"in that service, he had violated his obligations to act** in concert, and that expedition came to nothing pure-"ly through his secession: He was therefore an enemy"to Athens." ...
The winter expired in this manner; and with it thefifteenth year of the war came also to an end.
YEAR XVI.J
WHEN summer came on, Alcibiades, with twentyfail, arrived at Argos, where he leized three hundredof the citizens, whose fidelity to the Athenians, and ad­herence to the Lacedæmonian interest, was still suspect­ed; and these the Athenians secured in the neighbouringislands, which were subject to their dominion.
I Before Christ 416.
The







OCR Output








82t THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. B.Vfl,


The embassadors from Syracuse, who were sent roundto the Sicilian cities after the surprisal of Plemmyrium,had succeeded in their negotiations; and, having as­sembled a large body of succours, were intent on bring­ing them up. Nicias, who had gained an early intel­ligence of their motion, sends to such of the Siculi aslay upon their route and were in his alliance, (namely,the Centoripes and Halycyæans and others, " by no*' means to yield a free passage to the enemy, but to*' assemble in a body and obstruct their march." Itwas impossible for them to reach Syracuse by any otherroute; for the Agrigentines had refused them a passagethrough their territories. Now, therefore, the Sicili­ans being on their march, the Siculi, in compliancewith the request of the Athenians, had placed threedifferent ambuscades in their way. From these rustl­ing suddenly upon them, as they were advancing in acareless manner, they destroyed about eight hundredmen, and all the embassadors, excepting one Corin­thian. And this Corinthian brought up afterwards toSyracuse all those who escaped by flight, the numberof whom amounted to fifteen hundred.
About the same time the Camarineans also send up abody of succours, consisting of five hundred heavy-armed, three hundred darters, and three hundred ar­chers. The Geloans also sent them a squadron of aboutfive sail, beside four hundred darters and two hundredhorsemen.
Now almost all Sicily except the Agrigentines, (forthese still adhered to their neutrality,) all the rest of theisland, I say, who hitherto had stood aloof to observeevents, united themselves against the Athenians, in be­half of Syracuse: though the Syracusans, after theblow they had just received from the Siculi, thoughtit not proper to attack the Athenians again upon a sud­den.
But Demosthenes and Eurymedon, having now com­pleted their embarkations at Corey ra and on the conti­nent,







OCR Output








B.VII. THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. 269


"Send, therefore, your messengers beforehand to them,"with orders to meet us on our route and bring us the"needful supplies of food. On the whole, myfellow-"soldiers, rest assured that the last necessity injoins you"to. be resolutely brave; since to cowardice now no"place of shelter is any longer open; and only if you"stem the efforts of your foes—can you again be happy"in the enjoyment of those scenes your eyes so fondly"regret; arid can Athenians re-erect the extensive pow-"er of the Athenian State, how low" soever it may be"fallen at present: For they are men who make a State,"not wails nor (hips by men abandoned." ''
With these words of encouragement Nicias ran regu­larly through all the ranks of the whole army; careful,at the same time, if he saw any parties strangling fromthe main body, and quitting the order of the march, tofetch them up and replace them, Demostnenes exertedhimself as diligently in his own department, encoura­ging his troops with the same energy and ardour of ad­dress. The body under Nicias, drawn up in a square,led the van of the march; that under Demosthenes.brought up the rear; whilst the baggage-men, and thenumerous crowd that attended the camp, marched with­in the center of the heavy-armed.
When they were advanced to the place of fording theAnapus, they find a body of Syracusans and allies drawnup in battalia there to oppose the passage. But, puttingthese to flight, they gained the passage of that river,and advanced into the country beyond; though theirmarch was terribly harrassed by the incursions of theSyracusan horse, and by the missive weapons which thelight-armed of the enemy poured in from time to timeamongst them. And yet, in this day's march, the A-ihenians wrought about * forty stadia, and halted for thenight upon an eminence. . .
* About sour miles,
On







OCR Output








B.VIII. THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. 293


safe resort for themselves, in case obliged to quit thelittle isle they occupied at present. All the revolters,in short, were warmly employed in fortifying theirtowns, and making preparations for war.
At Athens soon the news arrives of the revolc ofChios. They were now convinced that horrid and ap­parent dangers already environed them about, and thatthe rest of their dependents would not long be quiet,when the most powerful State amongst them had thrownoff the yoke. Now, therefore, the * thousand talents,which through all the course of the war they had reli­giously refrained from touching, the penalties beingdischarged which the law inflicted upon him who shouldmove, or^whoever should vote it, amidst their presentconsternation, they decreed .** should be employed in
the public service, and that a large number of ships"should by this means be equipped ; — that, sarther,** from the squadron which blocked up Piræus eight"ships should immediately be detached'" which, ac­cordingly, quitting the blockade, pursued the squadronunder Chalcideus, bur, being unable to come up withthem, returned again. This detachment was com­manded by Strombichides, the son of Diotimus — that** soon after twelve others, under the orders of Thra-** fycles, should repair to Chios, there also to be de-** tached from the same blockade." Having, more­over, fetched off the seven vessels belonging to the Chi-ans, which assisted in forming the blockade at Piræus,they set at liberty the slaves who were on-board them,and threw all the freemen into prison. But, to replacethe whole number detached from the blockade of thePeloponnesians, they lost no time in fitting out othervessels and sending them to that post. They had also3. scheme for the expeditious equipment of thirty more.Great, indeed, was th:ir ardour; and nothing of small


193750/, Stirling.
V 3 importance







OCR Output








 


B.VL THE PELOPONNEStAN WAR. 127


"It is my firm opinion, that, amidst that great per-*' plexity of thought which must result from these ob-"structions, they will never presume to sail from Cor-"cyra; or, at least, whilst they are agitating the forms"of procedure and sending out spy-boats to discover*' our numbers and position, the season of the year must"be protracted to winter; or, utterly dispirited at so"unexpected a resistance, they will give up the voyage."This I more readily expect, as I am informed that'"their most experienced commander hath been forced"into office against his inclination, and would gladly'* lay hold of the pretext to desist, if such a show of** resistance could be made by us as would preserve his"honour from suspicion. And I am perfectly convin-"ced that rumour will increase and aggravate our"strength. Now the sentiments of mankind are con-"stantly adjusted by rumours: Parity of danger is"supposed, when an enemy declares he is ready to be-"gin the attack; and such an enemy is always more*' dreaded than he, who betrays an intention merely to*' defend himself against an enemy's assaults. "Such ex-"cess of fear must now fall to the lot of the Athenians."They are invading us, with the fond presumption"that we shall not fight. They think they have** grounds for such a presumption, because we have not"concurred with the Lacedæmonians in their demoli-"tion. But when, to their bitter disappointment, they"find we have the courage to act offensively, the sud-"denness of our efforts will terrify them more than all** the reality of our expected strength could have done.
"Determine therefore to execute with bold and rea-"dy resolution the plan I have proposed or, if this*' must not prevail, with the utmost expedition to gee*' all things at home in readiness for war. And let*' each Syracusan be firmly convinced, that contempc«' of an enemy ought never to be shewn but in the heat«* of action; that the conduct of those men must tend'* most highly to the public preservation, who, alarmedT by







OCR Output








B.VI. THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. 149


many as were prevented by timely arrests from flyingfrom justice; but they pronounced the sentence of deathagainst the fugitives, and set a price on their heads.Yet all this while it was by no means clear, that thosewho suffered were not unjustly condemned. Thus muchhowever is certain, that by such proceedings the public'tranquillity was restored.
In regard to Alcibiades; the Athenians were highlyincensed against him, since the party, which were hise-nemies, and had made their attacks upon him before hisdeparture, continued still to inflame them. And now,as they presumed the truth had been detected in relati­on to the Mercuries, it appeared to them, beyond ascruple, that he must also have been guilty of thecrimes charged against him about the mysteries, uponthe fame ground of a secret combination against thedemocracy. ,
At this critical period of time, when the public con­fusion was in all its height, it farther happened, that aLacedæmonian army, though by no means large, ad­vanced as far as to the Isthmus, to execute some schemealong with the Bœotians. This was interpreted to theprejudice of Alcibiades, as if they had now taken thefield at his instigation, and not on any account of obli­ging the Bœotians; and that, " had they not happily"apprehended in time such as had been informed*f against, Athens had now been infallibly betrayed."Nay, for the space of a night, they kept guard underarms, within the city, in the temple of Theseus.; About the fame time, also, the friends of Alcibiadesat Argos were suspected of a design to assault the people.And those hostages of the Argives, who were kept incustody among the iflands, the Athenians on this occa­sion delivered up to the people of Argos, to be put todeath on these suspicions. . ''
Thus reasons flowed in from every quarter for sus-1pecting Alcibiades. Desirous therefore to bring him toa trial and to execution, they accordingly dispatched the
L 3 Salaminian







OCR Output








fc.V. THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. 49


two thousand *min<s, at the rate of two minœ for everyheavy-armed soldier, agreeably to the letter of the law.
The Lacedæmonians, upon this, dispatched an cm-bassy, to remonstrate against the injustice of the sen­tence; that " the cessation had not been notified at La-*' cedæmon when they threw in their heavy-armed."
The Eleans replied, that "the cessation was already"in force: For they proclaim it first amongst them-"selves i and so, whilst they were quiet, and expected"no such usage, they had been wronged by a surprise."
The Lacedæmonians retorted, thar, " if so, it was*' needless for them to proceed to a publication of it in"Lacedæmon, if the Eleans had already judged them-"selves wronged. But the fact was far different in the'* light they saw it, and trespass had not been commit-"ted in any stiape whatever."
But the Eleans adhered to their first charge, that'"they could not be persuaded the Lacedæmonans had"not wronged them; yer, in case they were willing to."* surrender Lepreum to them, they are ready to remit"their share of the fine, and to pay for them that part"of it which was due to the god."
But, when this would not content, it was urged againby the Eleans, that, " if they were unwilling to part"with it, they should by no means surrender Lepre-
um; but then, as they were desirous to have the use,*' of the temple, they must go up to the altar of Olym-"pian Jupiter, and swear, in the presence of the Gre-"cians, that they would hereafter pay the fine."—But,as they also refused to comply with this, the Lacedæ­monians were excluded the temple, the sacrifice, and thegames, and performed their own sacrifices at home.Yet the rest of the Grecians, except the Lepreatæ, wereadmitted to assist at the solemnity.
The Eleans however, apprehensive they would sacri­fice by force, set a guard of their armed youths aroundthe temple. These were reinforced by the Argives and
* 2000 minse ~ 64581. 6>. Zi. lie.ling.
Vol. II. . E Mantineans,







OCR Output








B.V. THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. 77


The Athenians also undertook the reduction of Me-los with a naval force, consisting of thirty fail of Athe­nians, six of Chians, and two of Lesbians; on-boardof which were transported twelve hundred heavy-armedAthenians, three hundred archers, and twenty who drewthe bow on horseback. The number also of their depen­dents, from the continent and islands, which attended, wasabout fifteen hundred heavy-armed. The Melians* area colony of the Lacedæmonians, and had therefore refu­sed to receive law from the Athenians in the fame manneras the inhabitants of the other islands received it. Atfirst,however, they observed a strict neutrality; but, in procelsof time, when the Athenians, by ravaging their country,would have obliged them to act osfensively, they open­ly took part in the war against them.
With a force so strong as hath been described, Cleo-medes, the son of Lycomedes, and Tisias, the. son of Ti-
* The original of this colony is curious, according to the account given of it byPlutarch.-—" When the Tyrrhenes were masters of Lemnos and Imbrus, and made•* a practice of ravishing the wives of the Athenians at Brauron, a mixed breed was"the consequence; whom, as half-barbarjan*, the Athenians drove out of the iflts.u Thus exiled, they repaired to Tænarus, and were useful to the Spartans in their*« war against the Heloss. They were afterwards rewarded for their good service*"with the freedom of Sparta and liberty of intermarriage. Yet, not being al-"lowed the honour of serving the offices of the state, or a scat in the council, they"became afterwards suspected, as caballing together for bad designs, and projecting"to overthrow the constitution: The Lacedæmonians therefore apprehended them*« all 5 and, throwing them into prison, kept them confined under a strong guard,u till they could find out clear and incontestable evidence against them. The wives"of the prisoners came in a body to the prison, and, after much prayer and intreaty,.** were at length admitted by the guard to the sight and discourse of their husbands."When once they had gained access, they ordered them immediately to strip, and** change clothes with them; to leave them their own, and, dressed in those of their"wives, to make their escape d:'rectly-in that disguise. It was done; the women"staid behind, determined to endure whatever might be the consequence; and the"guards, deceived by appearances, let out the hulbands instead of the wives. Theymarched off and seized Taygeta; then seduced the Helots to revolt, and promised'* to support them; which struck a great terror amongst the Spartans. They sent to".treat with them, and made up the matter on these conditions: That they siiould(e have their wives restored safe to them; should be furnilhed with money and vessels"for removal j and, when fettled in another, country, should be reckoned a colony"and kinsmen of the Lacedæmonians. — A body of them settled some time after in** the ifle of Melos." Of tit ,virtues us •ujimm,
> • * fimachus,







OCR Output








3i6 THE PELOPOMNESIAN WAR. B.VIII.


** subjection on, the Grecians. He insisted, therefore,** that a better treaty should be made, or at least the** former (hould be instantly disannulled; for on terms** like the present they would scorn to take pay from** the king." Nettled at this, Tissaphernes went fromthem in a fit of choler, without bringing affairs to anykind of settlement.
The scheme now next in agitation was a voyage toRhodes, which the most powerful persons there had byembassies solicited them to undertake. They were fullof hopes to bring into their subjection an island by nomeans inconsiderable either for number of mariners orsoldiers; and at the fame time judged themselves able,by their present alliances, to defray the expence of theirfleet without requesting pay from Tiflaphemes. Ac­cordingly, this winter, with great dispatch, they put tosea from Cnidus; and, arriving first at Camirus, onthe Rhodian coast, with ninety-four ships, they strucka consternation into the multitude, who knew nothingof past transactions, and were the sooner tempted to a-bandon their dwellings as the city was not guarded bythe least fortification. The Lacedæmonians, after­wards, summoning to a conference these, and the Rho-dians also from two other cities, Lindus and lelysus,persuaded them to revolt from the Athenians. Rhodesaccordingly went over to the Peloponnesians.
At the fame juncture of time, the Athenians, whohad discovered their design, put out with their fleetfrom Samos, earnestly bent on'preventing the scheme.They were seen indeed out at sea by the enemy, butmade their appearance a little too late. For the present,therefore, they put back to Chalce, and from thence toSamos; and asterwards, making frequent trips fromChalce, and Cos, and Samos, they warred againstRhodes.
The Peloponnesians exacted from the Rhodians asum amounting to about * two and thirty talents; and,
* 6zoo/. Sterling.


having







OCR Output








B:VII. THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. 357


"themselves upon the decision of fortune; that either,*' if the passage can be forced, they may launch out to*' sea; or, that project sailing, may attempt a retreat"by land;—as if to a worse condition than their present** it were not in the power of fortune to reduce them.*' Warmed, therefore, with brave resentment, let us*' also try the encounter against such wild confusion,** and against the fortune of our inveterate foes now*' treacherously bent to finish their destruction. Let us*' charge with the full conviction, that on an enemy,** who would justify their invasion on the principle"of redressing wrongs, it is most fair and equitable to** satiate all the fury of revenge; nay more, that ven-*' geance on a foe is an appetite of our nature, and** commonly said to be the sweetest of all human enjoy-'* ments. But that those men yonder are our foes, our*' most bitter unrelenting foes, you need no farther*< proofs since, bent on inslaving this our country,* they first made the voyage; and,, had this their o-*? dious project been fuccelsful, on our citizens they« had inflicted, the most cruel torments, on our wives"and children the most indecent enormities, and on"Syracuse the most ignominious appellation. In a"work of so just retaliationj to indulge a tenderness"-of mindj or to think it gain to let them depart with-"out additional revenge, will be a matter of just re-"proach; for the latter is all they will be able to ef-'' sect, even though at length they maybe victors.** But 10 us, could we execute the fair and equitable"wishes of our hearts, by inflicting upon them the pu-*f nishment they well deserve, and in setcing the liberty


'* yond the reach of any future insults, how glorious'* must such achievements be! For such critical mo-"merits of adventure are most rarely to be met with;"which, if unsuccessful, can do the least disservices*' but, if*successful, draw after them the most valuable*' acquisitions." '-'


of all Sicily, as it hath been


 


Vol. II.


s


When







OCR Output








22 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. B. V.


** the possible means of redress, and with their whole u-*' nited force.
"And, in case such invaders shall have withdrawn"themselves, that the State under which they acted be"declared an enemy both to Lacedæmonians and Athe-*' nians, both which are to join in acting offensively a-"gainst that State, nor to lay down their arms without"the mutual consent of both the contracting States.
"These terms also to be observed with honour, with"alacrity, and without any fraud whatever.
"Provided, farther,—That, if there happen any"insurrection among the Helots, the Athenians march."to the succour of the Lacedæmonians with their whole"strength, to the full extent of their power.
"The same persons, on both sides, shall swear to the"observance of these articles, who swore to the former"treaty.
"The oaths to be annually renewed; for which pur-"pose, ,.he Lacedæmonians shall give their attendance"at Athens, at the Bacchanalian festival; and the A-"thenians theirs at Lacedæmon, at the Hyacinthian.
"Both parties to erect their pillar; one at Lacedæ-"mon, near Apollo's, in the Amycleum; the other at"Athens, near Minerva's, in the citadel.
"And, in case the Lacedæmonians and Athenians"think proper to make any additions or alterations in"the terms of this alliance, the fame lawfully to be"done by both, at their joint discretion.'"The oath of observance was sworn,
*' On the Lacedæ-7 *Pieistionax, *Agis, Pleistolas,monian side, by J Damagetus, Chionis, Metage-nes, Acanthus, Daithus, Ischa-goras, Philocharidas, Zeuxidas,Anthippus, Alcinadas, Tellis,Empedias, Menas, Laphilus.


* The kings sign this allianc*, but did not sign the former treaty,
"On







OCR Output








INDEX.


carries the fleet to AJta,U. 302. Tiffaphernes, lieutenant of


Theffalians, drive the Bœotians 295,305,310,315,327,328.
Xt,'. from Ame, I. 11. consederate is conquered at Miletus by the
with the Athenians, 79. fend Athenians, 301. fortifies K/ki,
them aids, 83, 144. theirform 305. pays the Lacedænanitn
of government, 376. ships, ibid, lessens their pay by
Tbeudes, founder of Naxus, II.94. the advice of Alciblades, 319.
Thracians, overthrow the Atheni- wants to be reconciled to the
ans, I. 77, 396. are free, Lacedæmonians, 328. inveighed
148. their sordid custom, 211. against by the mariners, 346,
fight with thcThebans after the 350. why he did not bring up
massacre at Mycalejsus, II. 220. the Phœnician fleet, 354.'
Tbrasybulus, II. 342. supports the Tlepolemus, I. 91.
democracy, ibid, made a com- Tolmidas, fon of TaiSw/**/, 1.84,871
mander, 345. brings back isV- Tolopbonians, I. 299.
tibiades, 348. beats the iVa- Trachinians, I. 293.
ponnestans at sea, 371. Trerians, I. 210.
Thrasyclts, II. 19,23. Triballians, conquer Sitalcts, king
Tbrajyllus, the Argime, II. 56.' of the Odryfians, I. 396.
Tbrajyllus, the Athenian, II. 342, Tritarenfians, I. 299.' ''.
345, 368. . Trojans, how unable to resist the
Tbrajymelidas, I. 321. Gr«& for ten years, 1.1 o. some
Tbutles. See Theudes. of them settled in Sz'«ij> afterthe
Tbucydiies, son of Olorus, why he taking of Try, II. 93.
wrote the history of this war, I. Tydeus, II. 311.
;, 16, 17, 19. II. 24. had the Tyndarus, I. 7.
plague, I 16 i. his goldmines, Tyrrhenes, II. 243, 248.
and great credit in Thrace, 398. U.
commands in Thrace, ibid, ar- Vlyjfes, I. 331.
rives too late to save Amphipolis, X.
399. secures ibid, was an Xenares, Ephoras at Sparta, II. 33-
exile for twenty years, II. 25. Xenares, commander of the /lira-
Thucydides, the collegue of ^»oa rfof/, killed, II. 50.
and Phormio, I. 91. Xenoclides, I. 37, 311.
Tbucjdides,thePbarJalian,Il.$6l. Xene, II. 209.
Thymocharis, II. 364. Xenopharttidas, II. 327.
Tilataans, I. 210. Xenophon, son of Euripides, I.lS^i
Timagoras of Cyzicus, II. 2 86,288. 19 2.
Timagoras, of 7"^ea, I. 181. Xerxes, I. 13, 92. his letter to
Timanor, I. 23. Paufanias, 102.
Timocrates, I. 198. kills himself, Z.
206. Zacynthians, a colony of
Ti/amenus, I. 293. I. 181. aid the Athenians
Tifander, I. 299. in the Sicilian war, II. 247.


Thermo, II. 290.*T^»/, I. 137,


 


STjÆw, II. 77.'


Zeuxidas, II. 19, 22.


ATHE END*







OCR Output








B.V, THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. 8*


"member, again and again, that your country now** calleth for all your prudence, since, by the single de-** liberation of this single day, as either it taketh a prof."perous or sinister turn, her fate will be determi-"ned."
Here the Athenians withdrew from the conference;and the Melians, after being some time alone, and re­solving finally to reject what they had already refused,gave in their answer thus: .. , ,
"WE continue, Athenians, in the very fame senti-'* ments we have already declared. We shall not in*' an instant of time abandon that liberty, which, in the"free possession of our own State., we have enjoyed for"the space of seven hundred years; which still we shall*' spare no endeavours to preserve, intrusting it to that"fortune which, by divine permission, hath hitherto*' preserved it, and to that redress we expect from hu-*f man aid and the Lacedæmonians. But thus much"again we offer:—To be friends to you, enemies to** neither, on condition you quit our lands, after an'* accommodation ratified between us to our reciprocal*' satissaction."
The Melians in this manner delivered their final an­swer. But the Athenians, the very moment they quit­ted the place of conference, uttered themselves thus:
»* YOU, Melians, alone, of all mankind, are the"persons, so far as we can judge, who regard future*' contingencies as an over-balance for instant dangers,*f and, through mad presumption, value things yet in-"visib!e as really actual. But, the greater your depen-*' dence, the more rash your considence, upon Lace-*f dæmonians, upon tortune, and upon hope, the more*l abundantly fatal your delusions will prove."
And,







OCR Output








328 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. B.VIIL


since he stood in great awe of the Peloponnesians, andadhered to that rule of policy he had learned from him,"to war both fides out," • • — Alcibiades now had re­course to another piece of resinement, causing Tissa-phernes to insist upon such exorbitant terms that no ac-. commodation could ensue, Tissaphernes, truly, seemsto me to have proceeded in this manner from his ownvoluntary motives, because fear was predominant inhim: But in Alcibiades it was purely art; since, as hefound the other would not agree upon any terms whate­ver, he affected to strike the conceit into the Atheniansthat it really was in his power to manage him at plea,sure, and that he was already wrought to their purposeand willing to come to terms, whereas the Athenianswould not offer enough. For Alcibiades himself madesuch extravagant demands, (since, though Tissaphernesassisted at the conference, the other managed it,) that,though the Athenians had yielded to the far greaterpart, yet the breaking off the treaty would be thrownat their doors. It was insisted, beside other demands,that " all Ionia should be given up;" and, what ismore, "all the islands on the Ionian coast;" and otherpoints. The Athenians seeming to acquiesce in these,at length, upon the third meeting, lest the smallnessof his own influence should be plainly detected, he de­manded leave " for the king to build a fleet, and to fail*' along the Athenian coasts, wherever, and with what-"ever force, he pleased." Here all accommodationwas over: The Athenians, concluding these points insu­perable, and that they were abused by Alcibiades,broke off in indignation, and return to Samos.
In the same winter, immediately after breaking off theconference, Tissaphernes repairs to Caunus, with inten­tion to bring the Peloponnesians again to Miletus, andto form Other compacts with them the best he shouldbe able, to supply them farther with pay, and by all meansto staveoff an open rupture. He was in fact apprehensive,that, should so large a fleet be deprived of subsistence,
or,


-







OCR Output








U2 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. B. VI.


"for want of exercise, must infallibly droop and pine"away, and the whole of her skill grow old and obso-"lete; but, when inured to uninterrupted conflict, ic"is continually improving by practice, and will gain a"persect habit of surmounting every obstacle j not by"a parade of words, but by active perseverance.
"Upon the whole 1 am firmly convinced, that a"State, which hath been accustomed to full employ,"must soon droop into destruction if it resigns itself to"stoth v and that such persons take the best method"of infallibly securing their welfare, who adhere most"steadily to their present customs and laws, though** possibly better might be substituted in their stead."
In this manner Alcibiades spoke. And the Athe­nians, moved by his arguments, which were also se­conded by the intreaties of the Egestean and Leontineexiles, who, standing forth in the assembly, imploredtheir protection, and, reminding them of their oaths,adjured them to redress their wrongs, — declared for theexpedition with a warmer zeal than at any time before.Nicias was convinced by this, that whatever dissuasionhe could alledge would be quite incapable to changetheir refolves. Yet as possibly, by a minute detailof the immense preparations he was going to demand,he might caule them at once to change their sentiments,he stood up again, and re-addressed them as follows:
"I PERCEIVE, Athenians, that your resolutions"are fixed on this expedition beyond the power of dis-
"suasion; and may its event be such as your wishes
"portend! But I shall once more beg leave to com-** municate to you my own sense of the affair.
"According to the best informations I have been a-** ble to procure, we are now going to invade a num-"ber of powerful cities, cities independent ofonean-** other, nor standing in need of public revolutions,"which people who cringe under the yoke of slavery'** mighe







OCR Output








2?4 THE FE'LOPONNESIAN WAlt. B. VII.


suaded them that thus they might effectually subdtte and


ftfre, for the whole remainder of the day, they hadgalled them on all fides with missive weapons, and nowperceived that the Athenians and their allies were re­duced to a miserable plight by the wounds which theyhad received and the other calamities which lay hardvp6n them, Gylippus, in concert With the Syracusatfsarid allies, causeth a herald to proclaim: — First, that*' such inhabitants of the isles as would come over to*' them should rest in the secure enjoyment of their h-** berty ." -~ upon which, some cities, though notmany, went over to them : — And, in the next place,after ibme time, a surrender is agreed on of the wholebody of troops commanded by Demosthenes, on thererms, that " they mould deliver up their arms, and*' no one should suffer death, either by public execu-** tion, or the miseries of a prison, or the want of ste-^ cessary subsistence." Thus this whole body, to thbnumber of six thousand men, surrendered themselvesprisoners, and produced all the silver they ha'd aboutthem, which they were commanded to throw into thehollows of shields, four of which in this manner werefilled full with spoil; and these prisoners the victorsimmediately led away to Syracuse.
But Nicias and the column under his cdWimand ar­rived the same day on the banks of the Erineus; and,having passed that river, halted on an eminence. Theday following, the Syracusans, coming up to his post,notified to Nicias, that *' those under Demosthenes hadsurrendered," and summoned him to follow theirexample. Incredulous of the fact, he begs leave toTend out a horseman to discover the truth; who uponhis return affirming that " they had actually soften-'' dered," Nicias fends an intimation to Gylippus andthe Syracusans, that he was ready to stipulate, in thename of the Athenians, that " whatever sums she Sy-«' racusans had expended in t,h:s war should 'be fairly
?* reimburfedj


 







OCR Output








162 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. B.VL


tory of the Cataneans; and, after burning the tents andcamp of the Athenians, they returned home.
Having also had intelligence, that the Athenians hadsent an embassy to Camarina, under favour of a treatymade formerly with them by Laches, to try if it werepossible to procure their concurrence; they also dis­patched an embassy thither, to traverse the negotiation.For, the Camarineans were suspected by them, as ifthey had not cordially sent in their quota of assistancefor the first battle, and lest for the future they mightbe totally averse from acting in their support, as in thatbattle they had seen the Athenians victorious, and so,induced by the former treaty they had made with thelatter, might now declare openly on their side.
Whtn therefore Hermocrates and others were arri­ved at Camarina from Syracuse, and, from the Athe­nians, Euphemus and his colleagues in the embassy,an assembly of the Camarineans was held; in which,Hermocrates, desirous to give them a timely distaste,against the Athenians, harrangued them thus ; —
"OUR embassy hither, ye men of Camarina, hath** not been occasioned by any fears we were under, that"you might be too much terrified at the great equip-*' ment with which the Athenians have invaded us;
but rather by our knowledge with what kind of*' arguments they would impose on your understanding,"by which, before we had an opportunity to remon-** strate, they might seduce you into a concurrence.M Sicily in fact they have invaded, upon such pretext"as you have heard them give out; but with such"intentions as we have all abundant reason to"suspect. And to me it is clear, that their schemes,*' have no tendency to replant the Leontines, but ra-*' ther to supplant us all. For, how is it reconcileable'* with common-fense, that a people, who have ever"been employed in the ruin of the States which are*' neighbouring to Athens, should be sit.cere in re-
'* establishing







OCR Output








B*.V. THE !PELOPONNESIAN WAR. ag


bute of a *talent to Olympian Jove. This was regular­ly paid till the Athenian war; but, that war being thenmade a pretence of its discontinuance, the Eleans wouldhave exacted it by force. The others had recourse tothe Lacedæmonians. The dispute was referred to theLacedæmonian arbitration i but the Eleans, taking upa suspicion that they should not have justice, would notabide the reference, but began to ravage the territoryof the Lapreatæ. The Lacedæmonians, notwithstand­ing this, proceeded to a sentence :—that " theLeprea-
tæ were masters of their own conduct, and that the"Eleans were guilty of injustice;" and, as the latterwould not abide by their arbitration, they threw a gar­rison of heavy-armed into Lepreum; but the Eleans,regarding this step as the reception of a city by the La­cedæmonians which had revolted from them, and alled­ging the treaty in which it was stipulated, — that, "of"whatever places the parties were possessed upon the*' commencement of the Attic war, the same they"should continue to hold at its expiration," as if theyhad met with injustice, they revolt to the Argives; andthe Eleans entered into that league offensive and defen-iive as hath been already related.
The Corinthians soon followed their example, and,with the Calcideans, also of Thrace, became the alliesof Argos. But the Bœotians and Megareans, thoughthey had threatened the same thing, thought proper todrop it. They had been ill used by the Lacedæmo^nians, but judged however that the democracy of theArgives would be less compatible with their interests,whose form of government was oligarchical, than thepolity of the Lacedæmonians.
About the same time of this summer, the Athenians,becoming masters of the Scioneans after a long block­ade, put all who were able to bear arms to the sword,and made their wives and children staves, and gave theland to be cultured by the Platæans.
* 193I. 15s. sterling.
They







OCR Output








34+ THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. B. VIIL


own wives and children daily felt the insolence of those"tyrants; nay, they have it now in agitation, that** if any on duty at Samos shall presume to oppose their"pleasure, immediately to arrest and imprison the whole"of their kindred; and, in case the former will not** submit, to put the latter to death." On many otherpoints he also expatiated, all aggravated with false­hoods.
His audience, in the first instant of their passion,were fully bent on the destruction of all those who hadappeared most active for an oligarchy, and in short of allwho had any hand in its promotion; but, being stop-ped by the interposition of others more moderate, andlistening to the remonstrance, that " they ought not to** accelerate the ruin of their country, now that a fleet"of the enemy lay almost ranged against them for bat-** tie," they desisted. And, afterwards, those whohad openly avowed the design of restoring the democra-tical form at Samos, namely, Thrasybulus the son of Ly-cus, and Thrasyllus, (for these had the principal agen­cy in this new revolution,) caused every soldier to swearthe most solemn oaths, more especially such as were foran oligarchy, that " they would submit to no form but** the democracy, and would act in this cause with gene-"ral unanimity; and, farther, would zealously prose-"cute the war against the Pcloponnesians; that eternal"enemies they would remain to the four hundred, and"would enter into no treaty of accommodation with"them." All the Samians, farther, that were old e-nough to bear arms, took the fame oaths; and hence­forth the army communicated all their asfairs to the Sa­mians, and gave them an insight into all the dangerswhich might attend the sequel; convinced that other-wise no sase resource remained for either* but, if the fourhundred or the enemy at Miletus proved too hard forthem, their ruin was unavoidable.
Terrible were the present embroilments of the times,whilst those at Samos were striving to re-establish the de-
n - mocracy







OCR Output








B.VII. THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. 245


cle of power: And yet, finding themselves unable togive any measure of luccess-to their projects by intro*during dissentions amongst them through political em­broilments, nor even by a powerful force, superior tothat of their foes, able to ward off the many blows theyhad received, they had fallen beforehand into great anxi­eties; and now, sadly beaten as they were at sea, onethought of which they never could hitherto have con­ceived, their despondency became more violent than e-ver.
From this time the Syracusans scoured the wholeharbour without having any thing to fear. They hadalso formed a scheme of barring up its mouth; that theAthenians, though never so intent upon it, might forthe future not have it in their power to steal away.Their care and diligence were no longer employed onthe view alone of their own preservation, but on thelarger view of ruining the Athenians. They conclu­ded, and justly too, that the latter turns in their favourhad given them the ascendant over these invaders; and,could they but compass the total overthrow of this bodyof Athenians and their allies, the grand atchievementwould strike all Greece with admiration. Nay more,all other Grecians must reap the fruits of such success;of whom some would in an instant recover freedom, andothers be delivered from the fear of losing it: For theremaining strength of Athens would never be able tostand against that weight of war with which she must besoon incompassed about. And thus, could they (Syra-cusans) be the. glorious authors of luch desirable events,they must infallibly become objects of wonder, not onlyto all the present age, but to latest posterity. And of atruth, considered in such a light, it was great and glo­rious ambition, to aim at the conquest, not only of theAthenians, but also of their whole extensive and combi­ned alliance; and this, not merely to earn laurels forthemselves, but for the auxiliaries also who had engagedin their cause; since, exposed in the front of the war
R 3 with .







OCR Output








B.V1I. THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. tlf


been inlarged, whilst their annual revenue was constant­ly decreasing.
Unwilling, therefore, in the present ebb of their trea­sures, to defray the charge of this body of Thracians,who came too late for Demosthenes, they sent themback to their own country with all possible haste. Dii-trephes was the person pitched upon to conduct themhome; and was instructed, that, " in the passage, (for'* they were to go through theEuripus,) he should em-"ploy them, if opportunity offered, against the ene-** my." He landed therefore near Tanagra, and in a-hurrying manner carried off a booty from thence. A-bout the shut of evening he also crossed the Euripusfrom Chalcis of Eubœa; and, having landed his Thra­cians in Bœotia, led them against: Mycalessus. His de­sign was not discovered that night, though he halted atthe temple of Mercury, which is distant from Mycales­sus but * sixteen stadia at most. But, early the nextmorning he assaulted this city, which is of large extent:He carries it on the first attack, as there was no guardto resist him, and the inhabitants could never have ima­gined that a maritime body would have marched so farinto the country to make attempts upon them. Thewall, besides, was weak; in some places it was fallen,and the remaining part of it was low; and the gates,from too great a considence of security, had been left o-pen. No sooner were the Thracians broke into Myca­lessus, than they gutted both houses and temples; theymassacred the inhabitants, shewing no regard to eitherold-age or youth, but venting their fury on all thatcame in their way; they butchered even the women andthe children; nay, all the labouring cattle, and everycreature that had life which came before their eyes: Forthe Thracians, when once their fury is inflamed, are asinsatiable of blood as any other the greatest savages inthe barbarian world. On this occasion the confusionwas terrible, and every ghastly method of destruction
• More thin a mile and a halt".







OCR Output








B.V. THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. 59


it into their hands, but more particularly because thehostages from Arcadia were lodged in that city by theLacedæmonians.
The Orchomenians, terrisied at the weakness of theirwalls and the multitude of their besiegers, and lest, asno relief appeared, they should soon be exhausted,thought proper to capitulate on these conditions; —" to** be received into the confederacy,— to give hostages of"their own body, — and to deliver up to the Mantine-** ans those whom the Lacedæmonians had lodged with* * them."
Having thus got possession of Orchomenus, the con­federates, in the next place, held a consultation, ** a-t* gainst what other city, in their plan of conquest,M they should next proceed." The Eleans exhortedthem to march against Lepreum, but the Mantineansagainst Tegea; and the Argives and Athenians adheredto the Mantineans. The Eleans, upon this, were of­fended that they had not voted for the siege of Lepreum,and separated to their own home. But the, rest of theconfederates set about preparations at Mantinea, as sul­ly bent on the siege of Tegea j and even some of thecitizens of Tegea were exerting their efforts within thatcity to betray it to them.
But the Lacedæmonians, after they were withdrawnfrom Argos, in pursuance of the suspension of arms forfour months, laid heavy charges upon Agis, for notconquering Argos at so sair an opportunity, fairer thanever they had reason to expect, —" since so numerous** and so gallant a body of consederates could never a-** gain, without greater difficulty, be assembled toge-** ther." And, when afterwards the news arrived thatOrchomenus was taken, their indignation became moreviolent than ever. In such a serment, they instantly re­folved, though not consistently with the calm Lacedæ­monian temper, that " his house must needs be demo-** lished, and a fine of * one hundred thousand drach-
f 32291. 3s. 4<i. sterling,
** mas







OCR Output








B.VI. THE PEI.OPONNESIAN WAR. 1+3


 


parchus the son of Pisistratus, he rejected his solicitati­ons, and discovers the whole affair to Aristogiton.The latter received the account with all that anguishwhich a warm affection fee|s; and, alarmed at thegreat power of Hipparchus, lest by force he might seizethe youth, he instantly forms a project, a project asnotable as his rank in life would permit, to demolishthe tyranny. And, in the mean time, Hipparchus, who,after making a second attempt upon Harmodius, wasequally unsuccessful in his suit, could not prevail uponhimself to make use of force; but, however, determined,upon some remote occasion which might cover his realdesign from detection, and was actually studying anopportunity, to dishonour the youth. — For, the power-he had was never exerted in such a manner as to drawupon him the popular hatred, and his deportment wasneither invidious nor distasteful. Nay, for the mostpare, this set of tyrants were exact observers of the rulesof virtue and discretion. They exacted from the Athe­nians only a twentieth of their revenue; they beautifiedand adorned the city; took upon themselves the wholeconduct of the wars; and presided over the religioussacrifices. In other respects, the State was governedby the laws already established, except that they alwaysexerted their influence to place their own creatures inthe first offices of the government. Several of theirown family enjoyed the annual office of 4r<:hon atAthens; and, amongst others, Pisistratus, the son ofJ-Iippias the tyrant, who bore the same name with hisgrandfather, and, in his archon[hip, dedicated the altarof the twelve Gods in the public forum, and that of.Apollo in the temple of the Pythian. The people ofAthens, having since made additions to it in order toinlarge the altar in the forum, by that means effaced
xhe inscription: But that in the Pythian is yet legible,though the letters are wearing out apace, and runs
thus:







OCR Output








352 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. B. VIII.


ried in a spot of ground which the Lacedæmonianswho were amongst them had chose for his interment.
Whilst asfairs were thus sadly embroiled, between thefoldiery on one side, and Astyochus and Tissaphernes onthe other, Mindarus arrived from Lacedæmon, as suc­cessor to Astyochus in the chief command of the fleer.Accordingly he takes the command upon him, andAstyochus sailed away for home. But with him, asembassador, Tissaphernes sent one of his own creatures,by name Gaulites, aCarian, who spoke both languages,to accuse the Milesians about the seizure of the fort, andalso to make apologies for his conduct. He knew thatthe Milesians were already set out with an outcry, chieflyagainst him; and that Hermocrates was gone withthem, well armed with proofs that Tissaphernes, inconcert with Alcibiades, basfled all the Peloponnesianschemes, and basely tampered with both the warringparties. But an enmity had always subsisted betweenthese two about the payments of subsistence. And atlength, when Hermocrates was banished from Syra­cuse, and other Syracusans came to Miletus to takeupon them the command of the Syracusan vessels,(namely, Potamis, and Myscon, and Demarchus,)Tissaphernes vented his choler more bitterly than everagainst Hermocrates, now an exile; and, amongst hisother accusations of him, asfirmed, that " he had de-"manded a sum of money, which being refused him,"he had ever since declared himself his enemy." As­tyochus, therefore, and the Milesians, and Hermo­crates, are now sailed for Lacedæmon.
By this time also Alcibiades had repassed from Tissa­phernes to Samos: And from Delos the deputationlent from the four*hundred on the late revolution, tosoothe and gain the concurrence of those at Samos, ar­rive also whilst Alcibiades is there. Upon which, anassembly being called, they endeavoured to open thecause. The soldiers at first refused to hear them, andioared aloud for the murder of those who had over­turned







OCR Output








B.VI. THE PELOPONNESlAN WAR. 175


most awed by the Syracusans, stood resolutely out; butthe generality of those who were seated in the midlandparts, as they were now, and had ever kept themselves,uncontrouled, sided at once with the Athenians. Theyfurnished them with corn for the service of the army,and there were some who supplied them with money.And then the Athenians, taking the field against suchas refused to accede, forced some to a compliance, andprevented others from receiving garrisons and aids fromSyracuse. During winter also they removed againfrom Naxus to Catana; and, having repaired theircamp, which had been burned by the Syracusans, choseto pass the remainder of the winter there.
They also dispatched a trireme to Carthage, to asktheir friendship, and whatever assistance could possiblybe obtained. They sent also to Tuscany, as some ci­ties on that coast had made them voluntary offers of as­sistance. And, farther, they circulated their orders a-mong the Siculi, and dispatched in particular one to theEgesteans, " to send them as large a number of horses*> as they could possibly procure." They busied them­selves in collecting materials for circumvallation, suchas bricks and iron, and all other necessary stores; beingdetermined to carry on the war with vigour on the firstapproach of spring.
The embassadors, who from Syracuse were sent toCorinth and Lacedæmon, endeavoured in their passageto prevail with the Italians " not to look with uncon-** cern on the Athenian proceedings, since they also** were equally involved in the danger." But, whenarrived at Corinth, they were admitted to an audience,in which they insisted on a speedy supply, upon theplea of consanguinity; and the Corinthians came atonce to a resolution, by way of precedent to others,that, " with all possible ardour, they would join in
their defence." They even appointed an embassy oftheir own to accompany them to Lacedæmon, whoseinstructions were to second them in soliciting the Lacedæ­monians







OCR Output








THE


HISTORY
OF THE
PELOPONNESIAN WAR,
TRANSLATED FROM THE GREEK OF
THUCYDIDES.
TO WHICH ARE ANNEXED
THREE PRELIMINARY DISCOURSES.
L On the Life of Thucydides.
II. On his Qualifications as an Historian.
III. A Survey of the History.
BY WILLIAM SMITH, A. M.
RECTOR OF THE PARISH OF THE HOLY TRINITY IN CHESTER,AND CHAPLAIN TO THE RT. HON. THE EARL OF DERBY.
A NEW EDITION.VOLUME THE SECOND.
LONDON:
Printed for T. EVANS, near York Buildings, Strand.MDCCLXXXI.







OCR Output








B.VIII. THE PELOPONNESIAN W^R. 339


made use of all the solemn invocations of the deities andthe sacrifices with which the presiding magistrates exe­cute their office. By their subsequent proceedings theyintroduced considerable alterations in the popular formof government \ excepting that, on account of Alci-biades, they refrained from recalling exiles: But, in allother respects, they ruled with all possible severity.Some persons, whose removal was deemed convenient,though sew in number, they got assassinated; somethey threw into prison, and some they banished. TpAgis, also, king of the Lacedæmonians, who was stillac Decelea, they dispatched a deputation; notifying"their readiness to accommodate all disputes; and that"with greater considence he might proceed to make** up matters with them than with a democracy which"was not to be trusted."
Agis, full of the imagination that the city would notquietly submit to these changes, and that the peoplewould not thus tamely pare with their ancient liberty;or, should they now behold his numerous army ap­proaching, that public combustions must ensue amongstthem; unable to persuade himself that at the presentjuncture they could possibly be kept from tumult*,Agis, I say, returned no proposal of terms to the depu­tation which came to him from the four hundred. Buc,having sent for a numerous reinforcement from Pelo­ponnesus, he advanced soon after, with the garrison ofDecelea and the frestj reinforcements, up to the verywalls of Athens. He took this step on the presump­tion that " thus, either thrown into utter confusion,*'. they might be mastered whenever he gave the word,'* or even at the first sight of his approach, through
the great confusion which in all probability must fol-** low both within and without: Since, to make hirn-"self master of their long-walls, as there could not be*' hands at leisure for their defence, he could not fail."
But when, upon his nearer approach, the Athenianswithin were thrown into no stir or bustle at all; when
£ 2 even







OCR Output








3so THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. B.VIII.


the universe. Nay, they were ready this very moment,upon the strength of what Alcibiades had said, to flightthe enemy now at hand, and steer directly for the Pi­ræus. But, though numbers with vehemence recom­mended the step, he stopped their ardour by remon­strances, that " they ought by no means to think of"steering for the Piræus, and leave their nearer ene-"mies upon their backs: But, in relation to the ope-*' rations of war, since he was elected a general, (he"said,) he would first go and confer with Tissaphernes,


the assembly was no sooner dissolved than he immedi­ately departed, that he might appear in all respects tobe perfectly united with Tissaphernes ; desirous also toraise himself in his esteem, and give him a sensible proofthat he was appointed a general; and, by virtue of this,enabled either to do him service or to do him harm.It was the peculiar fortune of Alcibiades to awe theAthenians by Tissaphernes, and Tissaphernes by theAthenians.
The Peloponnesians at Miletus had no sooner heardof the recal of Alcibiades, than, as before they suspectedtreachery in Tissaphernes, they, now loudly vented in­vectives against him. What more inflamed them was,that, ever since the Athenians shewed themselves beforeMiletus and they had refused to put out to sea and en­gage them, Tissaphernes had flackened more than everin his payments; and thus, hated by them for thatreason sufficiently before, he now became more odiouson account of Alcibiades. The soldiery again, as onformer occasions, ran together in parties, and enume­rated their grievances. Nay, some of higher ranks,persons of real importance, and not merely the privatemen, were full of remonstrances, that ** they had at*' no time received their full subsistence; his paymentsu had been always scanty, and even those had never*' been regular: In snort, unless they were led di-*' rectly against the enemy, or carried to some other


and would then proceed to action.


»


 


»* station







OCR Output








 







OCR Output








232 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. B. VII.


could not now be able to withstand the Athenianstrength j — he determined therefore to put this projectin execution; judging that, in case it succeeded, itwould be a means of bringing the war to a speedy con­clusion: for, if the scheme took place, the surrender ofSyracuse must loon sollow; at worst, he would draw osfthe army, and not waste the lives of those Athenianswho were employed in this service, and the strength ofthe whole State, to no manner of purpose.
Now, therefore, the Athenians began to act offen­sively; and, in the first place, sallying out from theircamp, they ravaged the country along the banks of theAnapus, and were now again, as on the first approach,masters without controul both by land and sea: for inneither element durst the Syracusans any longer comeout to check their motions, abating what small resist­ance was made by the cavalry and darters from Oh/m*piæum.
In the next place, Demosthenes thought proper totry what could be done against the works of the enemyby the help of machines. But when, upon applyingthem, those machines were fired by the Syracusans,who from the top of their works made a gallant de­sence; and, though the army attacked in several quar­ters at once, they were every where repulsed; he de­termined to waste no longer time upon the trial: but,having prevailed with Nicias and his other coljegues incommand to assent to the scheme he had formed to re­cover Epipolæ, he proceeded to put it in execution.Yet, by day-light, it was judged impossible sor themeither to march or to mount the aicent without beingdiscovered. Upon this, having issued out his orders,that every man should take with him subsistence forfive days, and that all the masons and carpenters shouldattend the march, with proper store of missive weapons,and all needsul materials for raising new works in casethe attempt was successful, he put himself, about thefirst sleep, a; the head of the whole army, and, assisted
by







OCR Output








B. VII. THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. 247


as by mere compulsion, (hey now followed their mas­ters against; Dorians. To these were added Æolians;the Methymneans, for instance, who were to furnishshipping, but were exempted from tribute; the Tene-dians, farther, and Ænians, who were tributaries: Butthese, being Æolians, were now compelled to fight a-gainst other Æolians; namely, their own founders, theBœotians, who adhered to the Syracusans. The Pla-tæans. did the same, and were the only Bœotians thatacted against Bœotians upon the justisiable pretext of las­ting enmity. The Rhodians, farther, and Cytherians,attended, though both of Doric descent: The Cythe­rians, truly, who are a Lacedæmonian colony, borearms at this juncture on the Athenian side, against theLacedæmonians under the command of Gylippus andthe Rhodians, Argives by descent, were obliged toturn their arms against the Doric Syracusans; nay, a-gainst the Geloans, a colony of their own, now acting inconcert with the Syracusans. Of the people of the lfleson the coast of Peloponnesus came the Cephalleniansand Zacynthians independent in fact, but throughtheir situation controuled in some measure by the Athe­nians, who are masters of the sea. The Corcyreans,farther, who were not only of Doric, bur, what is more,were even of Corinthian, original, as being a colony of thelatter, and by blood allied to the former, from compul­sion, as they gave out for a colour, though in truthfrom deliberate malice, since opposing the Corinthians,whom they hated, followed the Athenians with an ar­dour inferior to none. The Messenians also, now stiledMeflenians of Naupactus, and those from Pylus, whichwas still held by the Athenians, were brought along tothe war; to whom must be added a small party of Me-garean exiles, who by a sad reverse of fortune now tookpart against the Selinuntians, who were also Megarean.The residue of the confederates were engaged rather up­on free and spontaneous choice. The Argives, for in­stance, not more from obligations of lubsilting treaties,
R 4 than







OCR Output








ao6 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. B.VII.


*' are not sufficient to keep the enemy in play, they*' must either be recalled, or be reinforced with a body
not inferior to the first equipment, with both a land*' and a naval force, and a large pecuniary supply."For myself, I must insist that a successor be sent me;"since I am quite disabled, by a nephritic disorder,"from continuing in the command: And I think I*' have just title to expect my dismission from you;"since, in the vigour of my life, I have been intrusted"by you with several commands, in which I did you"some signal services.
"Whatever you determine, put it in execution on,* the first approach of spring; and, above all things,*' keep clear of delays: for the ready supplies, given"the enemy in Sicily, will soon enable them to act;"and those expected from Peloponnesus, though they"must be longer in coming up, yet, depend upon it,*' that, unless you exert your utmost vigilance, some*' of them will steal hither, as before, through all your*' guards, and some will infallibly be here before you."
Such were the advices brought them by the letter ofNicias. The Athenians, however, when they hadheard it read, would not so far comply with the requestof Nicias as to give him his dismission; but that, af­flicted as he was in body, the whole burden of affairsmight not lie too heavily upon him, they appointedtwo persons, already in Sicily, Menander and Euthyde-mus, to assist him in the command, till those, who bythe public vote should be joined with him in the com­mission, can arrive. They also decreed him a rein­forcement, consisting both of a land and naval force, tobe levied amongst the Athenians upon the roll andtheir dependents; and, for colleagues to share in thecommand, Demosthenes the son of Alcistenes, and Eu-rymedon the son of Thucles. Eurymedon, by order,began his passage for Sicily about the winter-solstice, atthe head of ten fail of ships, and with a supply of
twenty







OCR Output








B.VI. THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. 179


"needful stores, adequate to this extensive plan, the** cities to be conquered in those remoter parts would"with all proper expedition have supplied us, without"any demands on our own domestic revenues. Such
were to be the atchievements of that grand armament** which is now abroad ; such, you may rest assured"upon the evidence of a person who was privy to every"step, was its original plan; and the generals who are** left in the command will yet, if they are able, carry"it into execution. And I must farther beg leave to** tell you, that, if with timely succours you do not** interpose, nothing in those parts will be able to stand** before them.
"The Sicilians are a people unexperienced in war;"and yet, would they unite and combine together in"their mutual defence, they might possibly even now"be too hard for the Athenians. But then the Syra-"cusans, abandoned as they are by the rest, and who** already have leen their whole force defeated in battle,** and who are blocked up in their own harbours by the"enemy's fleet, will be unable long to resist the great** force of the Athenians which is already there. If,"therefore, Syracuse be taken, all Sicily is vanquished** at a stroke, and Italy becometh instantly their prey;f* and then the storm, which, as I intimated before,** was to be directed against you from that quarter,"will in a short time gather, and come pouring down** upon you.
"Let no one therefore imagine that the end of your** present deliberation is the lasety of Sicily, when Pe-"loponnesus itself will be endangered, unless some"measures of prevention be execuced with speed ; —** unless you send out a naval force, for the preferva-"tion .of Sicily, so dexterously appointed, that the"hands, who man the ships and ply the oar, may,"on the instant of their landing, become a body of** heavy-armed; and,, what in my judgement is better"than an army, a citizen of Sparta to take upon him
N 2 * * the







OCR Output








334 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. B.VIff.


The present alteration, therefore, fell out exactly totheir own wish; their State was restored to its ancientform without any trouble; and the people, who alonewere able to disconcert them, were divested of theirpower. In Thasus, therefore, the event took an op­posite turn to what those Athenians who labcired theoligarchy had at heart ; and, in my judgement, thecafe was the fame with many other of their dependentStates: For, having now their eyes open to their ownwelfare, and being exempted from the dread of suffer­ing for what others did, they ran into the scheme of atotal independence, which they preferred before theprecarious situation of being well governed by the A-thenians.
Pisander and his collegues in the course of their voy­age observed their instructions, and dissolved the populargovernments in the cities where they touched. Fromsome of these they also procured parties of heavy-armedto aid them in the grand project, and so landed at A-thens. Here they find affairs in great forwardness,through the activity of their accomplices: For, some ofthe younger fort having combined together in a plotagainst Androcles, who had the greatest sway amongftthe 'people, and had also been deeply concerned in ba­nishing Alcibiades, they secretly dispatch him. Oilhim, for a double reason, because of his influence withthe people, and with the thought that it might obligeAlcibiades, whose recallment was now expected, andthrough his interest the friendsliip of Tiflaphernes, theychose first to wreak their fury. Of some others also,whose instability they doubted, they had rid them­selves by the same practices. A specious harangue had,farther, been dresled up for the purpose, that " none"ought to receive the public money but such as served*» the State in war with their persons; that affairs of*' state ought not to be communicated to more than** five thousands and those to be * men who were best. .. ** qualified,







OCR Output








 


r







OCR Output








nB THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. B.Vl-,


** commission of any other impiety of the fame nature,** he should boldly inform the public of it, whether he*: were a citizen, or a foreigner, or a stave."
This accident in truth made a deep impression on theirminds. For it was construed as a bad omen in regardto the expedition in hand, and as an evidence of fometerrible combination to introduce innovations and anoverthrow of the democracy.
An information was at length given in by some fo-journers and their footmen, relating indeed not at all tothe Mercuries, but to the defacements of other imagescommitted sormerly by some young men in a frolicsomeand drunken mood ; and how, farther, ** they had cele-"braced * the Mysteries in private houses by way of'* mockery," and amongst others they also accusedAlcibiades. The party most inveterate against himcaught readily at this charge. As he was the main ob­stacle to the advancement of their own popularity andcredit, they concluded, that, in case they could rid them­selves of him, they might at once become leaders of theState. Hence they aggravated the charge, and bellowedaloud, that "those mystic frolics, and the defacements of*' the Mercuries, struck at the very foundations of the*( democracy ; and, that none of these outrageous acts** had been committed without his participation." Theyalledged, as a circumstance that corroborated the charge,the whole tenor of his behaviour, flagrantly licentious,and quite inconsistent with a democratical constitution.
Alcibiades endeavoured forthwith to clear himself thebest he could from all appearances of guilt, and declaredhimself ready, before he entered upon the voyage, tosubmit to a trial, (for the armament was now almost com­pleted,) and, if proved to be guilty, to suffer the pe-
• The sacred Mysteries celebrated by the Athenians at Eleusis. Plutarch relates,that the informers were brought in by one Androcles, a demagogue, a virulent foe ofAlcibiadea. They deposed, that one Theodorus acted the part of the Crier, Polycionof the lurch-bearer, Alcibiades that of the Hieropbant, aji<j m,aoy of his intimateszUiltcd and were initiated in solemn and fornial mockery,
nalties







OCR Output








102 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. B.VI.


"the strength of Sicily, whose accession to their for-"mer confederacy they would have been glad to pur-*' chase at any price. On these possibilities we are"bound sedately to reflect, that we may not plunge a"State, so highly exalted, into superfluous dangers, nor1' fondly covet to wrest their empire from the hands*' of others before we have adequately insured our?* own: Since the Chalcideans of Thrace, though so*< many years are now elapsed since they first revolted,** are not yet reduced; and some other States on the"continent render us only a precarious obedience.
"Yet—" to the Egesteans, our old allies, who are"injuriously oppressed, we are bound in honour to send
*' a most speedy succour." And, in the mean time,
** we continue to defer avenging ourselves upon those,** whose revolt from us is of long standing now, and"whose injustice we are still obliged to suffer. Though"the Utter, could we once bring them back to their"duty, we might easily controul for the suture: But"the former, should we ever become their masters, re-"mote and numerous as they are, we should not with-"out difficulty be able to awe. It must be madness,"therefore, to invade that people, whom, though con-"quered, you can . never retain in. their obedience;"and who, in case the attempt against them miscarry,"will for the future be much more disaffected towards"you than they were before that attempt was made.
"But it is farther my real opinion, that the Sicilians,
as their affairs are now circumstantiated, would be-** come less formidable to us, if once reduced to the"Syracusan yoke \—and yet on this remote contingen-
cy the Egesteans have chiefly insisted, in order to a-"larm us. Perhaps nozv it may come to pass, that its"single States may combine against us to gratify the*' Lacedæmonians: But, in the other case, it is quite"improbable that an united empire would hazard its"own welfare to demolish another. For if, acting** from a political precaution, they may side with the
** Peloponnelians







OCR Output








160 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. B.Vs.


"the multiplicity of commands which was thence occa-** fioned, (tor the number of those who commanded** was fifteen,) whilst the bulk of their army observed"no discipline, and obeyed no orders at all: But,"were only a few skilful generals selected for the trust,*.* would they only be intent this winter on trainingV their bodies of heavy armed, and furnish others with"arms who had none for themselwes, in order to en-** large their number as much as possible and inure** them to settled exercise and use, — he assured them,** thus, in all probability, they must upon the whole be** too hard for their foes, as their natural portion of"valour was great, and skill would be attained by"practice: That both of these would progressively be-"come more perfect | discipline, by being exercised** through a scries of danger; and inward bravery** would merely of itself increase in gallant considence,"when assured of the support of skill: As to generals,>* that few only, and those invested with absolute"power, ought to be elected and confirmed by a"solemn oath from the people, — that they were per-** mined to lead the army where and how they judged"best for the public service. For, by this means,** what ought to be concealed would be less liable to"detection, and all the schemes of war might be di*** rested with order and a certainty of success."
The Syracusans, who had listened to this discourse,decreed whatever he proposed. They elected Hermo-crates himself to be a general, and Heraclides the fonof Lysimachus, and Sicanus the son of Hexeccstus;these three. They also appointed embassadors to go toCorinth and Lacedæmon, to procure the alliance ofthose States, and to persuade the Lacedæmonians tomake hotter war upon the Athenians, with an openavowal that they acted in behalf of the Syracusans;that, by this means, they might either be obliged torecal their fleet from Sicily, or might be less able to sen4any reinforcements to the army already there,
The







OCR Output








,'B.Vl. THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. 147


attempt was executed by Harmodius and Aristogiton,from the impulse of a sudden consternation. But, afterthis, the tyranny became more grievous upon the Athe­nians. Hippias, who was now more than ever alarmed,.put many os the citizens to death; and cast his thoughtsabout towards foreign powers, to secure himself anasylum abroad in case of a total reverse at home. ToÆantidas therefore; the son of Hippoclus, tyrant ofLampsacus, — to a Lampsacene though he himself wasan Athenian, — he married his daughter Archedice,knowing that family to have a powersul interest withking Darius. And the monument of that lady is nowat Lampsacus, and hath this inscription:
From Hippias sprung, with regal pow'r array'd,- 'Within this earth Archedice is lay'd $
By father, husband, brothers, sons, ally'dTo haughty thrones, yet never stain'd with pride.
For the space of three years after this, Hippias con­tinued in possession of the tyranny at Athens; but, beingdeposed in the fourth by the Lacedæmonians, and theexiled Aicmæotnidæ, he retired by agreement to Si-gæum: from thence, to Æantidas at Lampsacus; and,from thence, to king Darius: and, with a command un­der him, he marched twenty years aster to Marathon; and,though much advanced in years, ierved in that war withthe Medes.
The People of Athens, reflecting on these past trans­actions, and recollecting all the dilmal narratives aboutthem which tradition had handed down, treated withgreat severity, and deep suspicions, all such as were in­formed against, in relation to the mysteries: and they con­strued the whole procedure as the dawning of a plot to
Plutarch hath preserved a smart reply of Antipho the orator, who will appear inthis history, to the elder Dionyfius, tyrant of Syracuse. The latter had put the ques­tion, which was the finest kind of brass? ".That, replied Antipho, of which the** fbtucs of HaraK'dms and Arifiofiton were made."'
L 2 erect







OCR Output








27o THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. B. VI!.


On the ensuing day, by early dawn, they were againin motion, and advanced about f twenty stadia; when,descending into a certain plain, they halted and formed anincampment. Thrir design in this was to fetch in someprovisions, for the adjacent country was inhabited, andto get a proper supply of water to carry along withthem far in the country beyond, through which theirroute was fixed, no springs were to be met with for theJength of several stadia. But, during this halt, the Sy-racuiansv advancing beyond them, throw up a work a-cross their route to stop their fartheir progress. Thespot chosen for this was a strong eminence, Banked onboth sides by an inaccessible crag, and known by thename of Acræum-Lepas.
On the day following the Athenians resumed theirmarch but the horse and numerous darters of the Sy-raculans and allies stopped their advance, the latterpouring in their weapons upon, and the former ridingup and disordering, their ranks. For a long time, it istrue, the Athenians maintained the skirmishes againstthem i but at length they retreated again to their last in­campment. And now all farther supplies of provisions weretotally cut off-, it being no longer possible to fetch; i» a*ny, for fear of the horle.
But, decamping early in the morning, they continuedtheir march, and forced their progress to the eminencewhich was fortified by the new work. Here they foundthe Syracusan infantry drawn up before them in firm anddeep battalia, posted also on the strong eminence theyhad occupied on purpose; for the pals was very narrow.The Athenians marched up and assaulted the work;but, being pelted by showers of darts from the emi­nence, which was very steep, and so gave those upon ka great advantage in throwing their weapons home, andfinding themselves unable to force it, they again drewoff, and attempted it no farther. It happened, at the
f Two miles.
fame







OCR Output








B.V. THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. 81


"are to establish. We are desirous to have our power"extended over you without obstruction; and your"preservation to be amply secured for the Common be-** nefit of us both."
Melians.
*' AND how can it turn out as beneficial For us to be-"come your slaves as it will for you to be our mas-** ters?1'
Athenians.
** PLAiNLY thus: — Because, Instead of suffering"the extremities of conquest, you may merely become"our subjects; and we, by exempting you from af total destruction, shall gain your service."
t - Melians.
"BtJT will not these terms content you :— That we*' be permitted to persevere in quiet; to be friends to"you, instead of enemies; but, in regard to war, to** be strictly neutral?"
; • . • i
Athenians.
"NO: For all your enmity cannot hurt us so much"as the acceptance of such friendship from you. The*' latter, to those over whom we rule, would suggest in-** timations of our weakness: Your enmity is a proof** of our power1."  
Melians.
,- **' ARE1 your subjects then such sorry judges of e-** quity and right, as to place upon the same level those,Vol. II. G who







OCR Output








i3o THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. B. VI.


*' a total destruction. And what therefore, in all human*' probability, must be their fate, when all Sicily to a*' man will' be combined to oppose them? For nowf' their war must issue from a camp on the beach of the
sea, of which their ships must form the ramparts.M They will not be able to make long excursions from"their tents and magazines of needful stores^ as our"cavalry will bridle and controul them. But, in short,*1 it is my firm opinion that they never will be able to*' accomplish a descent, so far am I convinced that our** force is in all respects superior.
"I am well persuaded, that all those obstacles, which"I have hitherto recited, their own wise reflexions"have suggested to the remembrance of the Athenians,"and deterred them from hazarding their own ruin 5"and that our own malcontents amuse us with ficti-** tious accounts of things, that neither have nor can"have existence. This is by no means the first occafi-** on, oq which I have been able to detect their*' schemes. I am no stranger to their constant attempts"of fomenting faction, ever intent as they are, by"forgeries like these, or more malicious than these, or"even by the open efforts of sedition, to strike a panic** amongst the Syracusan people, and to seize the helm"of your government. And I have reason to apprehend,"that, amongst the many projects they attempt, some"one at length may be fatally successful. But thisic must be charged to our own pusillanimity, who ex-"ert no precautions to avert impending miseries, nor"bravely oppose the storm, though we perceive it to be"gathering around us. And from hence it unavoida-** bly results, that our Stale is seldom blessed with a*' season of tranquillity, but feels the bitter lot of scdi-*' tion on sedition, of more numerous strugglesagainstfac-*' tionswithin than public hostilities without; nay, some-*' times tyranny and despotic rulehave been our portion.
"To guard the present times from such disastrous*' contingencies shall be my constant endeavour; and,







OCR Output








B.VI. THE PELOPONNESlAN WAR* i6|


** establishing a Sicilian people; or, by the bonds"of consanguinity, hold themselves obliged to protect"the Leontines, who are of Chalcidic descent, whilst** on the Chalcideans of Eubœa, from whom these o-* * thers are a colony, they hold fast-rivetted the yoke"of flavery? No j it is the fame cruel policy, that** subjugated the Grecians in that part of the world,** which now exerts itself to glut their ambition in this.
** These are those very Athenians, who formerly, ha-** ving been elected their common leaders by the well.** designing Ionians and that confederate body which** derived from them their descent, on the glorious pre-** tence of avenging themselves on the Persian mo-** narch, abused their trust by inflaving thole who pla-* * ced considence in them; charging some with deiert-** ihg the common cause, others with their mutual em-** broilments, and all, at length, wich difserent but fpe-** cious criminations. And, on the whole, these Athe-"nians waged war against the Mede, not in the cause"of Grecian liberty, as neither did the other Grecians** in the defence of their own: The former fought, not'* indeed to subject the rest of Greece to the Mede, but** to their own selves; the latter, merely to obtain a"change of master j a master not inferior in policy, but** far more abundant in malice.
"But, though Athens, on manifold accounts, be ob-** noxious to universal censure and reproach, yet we are"not come hither to prove how justly she deserveth it,** since your own conviction precludes the long detail.** We are much more conceined at present to censure** and reproach ourselves, since, with all the example*** before our eyes of what the'Grecians in those parts** have sufsered, who, for want of guarding against their** incroachments, have fallen victims to their ambition,** . 'since, with the certain knowledge that they are** now playing the fame sophistries upon us,—" there-
plantation of their kindred Leontines," —" the sup.
** port of the Egesteans, their allies," .— ■ we shew
Ma "no







OCR Output








B. VI. THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. 107


"tacked me;—-and I also judge myself deserving of the** trust. In regard to those things which have caused"me to be so loudly censured; those very things give"splendor to my ancestors and to myself, and are of"public emolument also to my country. The great"magnisicence I displayed at the Olympic solemnities"hath raised in the Grecians an idea of Athens far be-** yond its actual strength; though, previous to this,"they entertained the hope of being able totally to war"her down, For I am the man who brought seven** chariots thither, more than any private person ever"furnished out before; who carried off the first, and** ;the second, and the fourth, prize; and, in all other"respects, supported my quality as a victor. Such"things, it must be owned, are declared to be honour**. by the laws of Greece; and, whenever atchieved,* * they leave a high opinion of power behind them.** The splendid figure I have made at home, whether'** in exhibiting entertainments for the public, or any o-** ther method of munificence, may naturally excite the"envy of Athenians, but are to strangers instances of** our grandeur. And that man's extravagant spirit is** not useless to the public, who, at his own private** expence, does service not merely to himself, but to** a whole community. Nor can it imply injustice, for** a person, whose sentiments are generous and exalted,"to soar above the ordinary level; since, should he af-** terwards be reduced to a state of depression, no man** is to share in his reverse of fortune. As therefore in"calamity we are not to expect even civil salutations,** let others in the mean time submit, as in justice they"ought, to that assuming behaviour which prosperity** inspireth; or, at least, let equality of demeanor be"first shewn by him who demands it as a debt from an-"other. 1 am indeed aware, that persons of such un-** common elevation, and all in general, who, in some**, splendid qualities* outshine the crowd, must, so long*' as they live, be the objects of spleen, chiesly to those
"who







OCR Output








B.Vil. THE PELOFONNESUN: WAfL m


of the Sicilians and Italians as had joined with them inthe invasion, were fold out for slaves. §
What the whole number of prisoners w^s* it is hardexactly to relate j but» however, they could not befewer than seven thousand. And this proved to be thegreatest Grecian exploit of all that happened in thecourse of this war; and, in my opinion, of all that oc*cur in the whole history of Greece; since the event tothe victors was most glorious, and to the vanquishedmost calamitous: For in every respect they were totallyoverpowered, and their miseries in no respect had anymitigation i In short, root and branch, as is commonlysaid, their land-armies and their shipping Were now ru­ined 5 nay, nothing belonging to them was exemptedfrom destruction; and few, out of all their numbers*had the good fortune to revisit their native country*
Such were the transactions in Sicily. []
§ " The decent and engaging behaviour of the Athenians was of great service to"them ; for by it they either soon obtained their liberty, or were highly esteemed"and caressed by their masters. Some of them were indebted for their freedom to"Euripides. The Sicilians, it seems, were fonder of the muse of Euripides tharf"were even the people who lived in Greece itself. If the strangers, who were often"resorting to Sicily, brought them any specimens or morsels of his poetry, they*• learned them by heart, and with high delight communicated them to their friends."It is said, that several, who by this means earned their liberty, went afterwards"to wait upon Euripides) in token of their gratitude; assuring him, some of ihtm,"that they had been released from slavery for teaching their masters what pieces of"his writing they were able to repeat j and others, that, when vagabonds after the*« defeat, they had been supplied with meat and drink sot singing some of his lines."This is not to be wondeted at; since even a Caunian vessel, which, brihg hard"chased by pirates, and endeavouring to get for refuge into a Sicilian harbour, was"however kept off by force; till at length, being asked whether they could repeat*• any of Euripides's Verses, they answered in the affirmative; upon which they obJ"tained immediate reception and refuge." Plutarch in the Life of Nicias.
|| Some Iambic verses of an unknown author are found at the end of this book inthe latter Grtek edition) j and I beg the reader to accept the following translation of-them.
The pride of glory, the exalted height,The frequent-trophies on the land and sea,The long career of well-deserv'd success,On which their great forefathers tow Yd aloft,
T 4 Whilst







OCR Output








B.VL THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR, 13s


f


 


them into the temple of Venus at Eryx, they shewedthem the offerings repofited there, the cups, the flagons,and the censers, and the other furniture of the temple,in quantity by no means small. These, being all of silver,presented to the eye a vast show of wealth, far beyondtheir intrinsic value. Having also made entertainmentsin private houses, for those who came in the vessels ofthe embassy, they amassed together all the gold andsilver cups of Egesta; they borrowed others from the ad­jacent cities, as well Phœnician as Grecian; they carri­ed their guests about from one house of seasting to ano­ther; and each exhibited them as his own property.Thus, all of them displaying generally the same vessels,and great abundance appearing at every place, theAthenians who made the voyage were prodigiously sur­prised at the splendid shows. Hence it was that, ontheir return to Athens, they inlarged, with a kind ofemulation which should magnify it most, on the immen­sity of wealth they had seen at Egesta. In this manner,being deceived themselves, they obtruded the lame fal­lacy upon others; but now, when the true account wasspread amongst them, that" there was no such wealth*' at Egesta," they were much censured and reproachedby the soldiers.
The generals, however, held a consultation about themethods of proceeding. And here it was the opinion,of Nicias; " That with their whole armament they"should stand immediately against Selinus, the reduc-"tion of which was the principal motive of the expediti-** on; and, in case the Egesteans would furnish the
whole armament with the proper supplies of mo-** ney, their councils then might be regulated accor-** dingly: But, otherwise, they should insist on their"maintaining the sixty sail of ships, which had been,*c sent expressly at their own request; then, abiding by** them, they should reconcile their differences with the"Selinuntians, either by force of arms or negotiation:** They afterwards might visit other cities, and display
"besore







OCR Output








84 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. B,V,


"to those which superiority of numbers gave reason to** expect; and, in regard to ourselves, that, if we yield"at once, eternal despair must be our fate; but, by"acting resolutely in our own desence, we may yet en*"tertain a hope of success."
Athenians.
"HOPE in this manner is ever applied to be the so-"lace of danger. And truly, in situations which can"afford to be disappointed, though ever prejudicial,** it is not always fatal. But such, as idly lavish their** last resource, their very all, upon hope, (for it is
prodigal by nature,) are only by their own ruin con-** vinced of its delusion; nay, when its delusion is thus** by fad experience discovered, and men should guard"themselves against it, it will not yet let go its hold in** the human heart. Choose hot, therefore, so fatal a"resource for yourselves in your present destitute situ*-** tion, hanging as you are on the very brink of ruin."Let not your conduct resemble the foolish behaviour"of the mob of mankind; who, though by human** means their safety might be earned, yet, when cala-
mity hath chased away all visible hopes of redress,** betake themselves to others of a darker cast, to divi-"nations and to oracles, and all such vain expedients** as hope suggesteth, to draw them to their destruc-"tion."
.. .. . .t ......'
'Me LI ANS.
"DIFFICULT indeed, as we apprehend, and yoti"well know, the contest must prove to us against your"strength and fortune, matched as we are fo unequally"together. Yet the confidence still supporteth us,"that in fortune, since of divine disposal, we shall not.** be inferior", as with innocence on our side we stand a-** gainst injustice; that, farther, our desiciencies in
"strength







OCR Output








B.VI. THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. 153


camp, had informed them of a piece of ground, con­venient for their purpose, near Olympiæum.
In order therefore to accomplish the point, the gene­rals have recourse to the following artifice. — They dis­patch an emissary, of whose sidelity they were wellassured, and who might also pass with the generals ofSyracuse as well affected to their cause. The personemployed was a Catanean. He told them " he was"sent by their friends in Catana," with whose namesthey were acquainted and knew well to be of that num­ber in Catana, which persisted in stedfast attachment tothem: He said farther, that, " the Athenians reposed** themselves by night within the city at a distance** from their arms; and that in case they (the Syra-** cusans) on a day presixed, would with all the forces** of their city appear by early dawn before the Athe-** nian camp, the Cataneans would shut up those with-"in the city and set fire to their shipping, by which** means they might force the intrenchments and ren-** der themselves masters of the camp; that, farther, the** party of Cataneans, that would co-operate with them** in this scheme, was very large, and already prepared"to execute these points he was now sent to propose."
The Syracusan generals, whose ardour other contin­gencies had already inflamed, and who had formed aresolution, even previous to such encouragement, tomarch their forces towards Catana, without the leastreserve gave implicit credit to this emissary; and,having instantly pitched upon a day for execution, dis­missed him. They also (for by this time the Selinun-tian and some other auxiliaries had joined them) issuedout their orders for the whole military strength of Syra­cuse to march out on the day appointed. No soonertherefore were all the needful preparations adjusted, andthe time at hand at which they were to make their ap­pearance, than — on the march for Catana, they haltedone night upon the banks of the Symæchus, in theLeontine district. But the Athenians, when assured







OCR Output








B.V. THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. 43


ence upon the multitude, and an alliance with the Ar-gives might prove abortive.
But Alcibiades now contriveth to baffle them by art.He prevaileth upon the Lacedæmonians, by solemnlypledging his faith to them, that, ** in case they would** disown, before the people, the full powers with which"they were invested, he would engage for the restitu-"tion ofPylus; for he himself would then persuade** the Athenians to it with as much zeal as he now dis-"suaded, and would get all other points adjusted to"their satisfaction." His view in acting thus was todetach them from Nicias, and to gain an opportunityof inveighing against them, in the assembly of the people,as men who had nothing sincere in their intentions, andwhose prosessions were dissonant with themselves; andso to persect an alliance with the Argives, and Eleans,and Mantineans. And this artifice in the sequel tookeffect: For, when they were admitted to an audiencebefore the people, and replied to the demand, when put,contrary to what they had said in the senate, that;"they had no such powers," the Athenians in an in­stant lost all patience. And now, Alcibiades roaringout aloud against the Lacedæmonians with much moreVehemence than he had ever done before, they listenedgreedily to all he said, and were ready instantly to callin the Argives and their companions, and to make themconfederates. But, the shock of an earthquake beingfelt before any thing could be formally concluded, theassembly was adjourned.
At the next day's assembly, Nicias, though the
Lacedæmonians had been thus overreached, and hehimself ensared by their public acknowledgement thatthey had no full powers,—spoke, however, on the Lace­dæmonian side, insisting ** on the necessity os maintain-** ing a good correspondence with them, and deserring** all agreement with the Argives, till they could send** to the Lacedæmonians, and be distinctly informedf* of their final resolutions." — "It maketh, said he,
lor







OCR Output








B.VII. THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. aa3


nent, at the head of this united and powerful arma­ment, crossed over the Ionian to cape Iapygia; and,standing away from thence, reach the Chærades, islandsof Iapygia. Here they take on-board their fleet aparty of Iapygian darters to the number of fifty, andone hundred more of the Messapian nation: and, afterthey had renewed a friendship of ancient date with Ar-tas, (who, being lord of these islands, supplied themwith the darters,; they proceed to Metapontium in Italy.Upon the plea of an alliance subsisting between them,they prevail upon the Metapontians to furnish them outthree hundred more, and two triremes, with whichaugmentation they stood along the coast to Thuria;where, on their arrival, they find that the party, whohad acted against the Athenian interest, had in a latesedition been driven out of the city. Desirous here totake a view of the whole armament, and to know whe­ther any part had straggled and was left behind; ho­ping, farther, to prevail upon the Thurians to jointhem with their forces in the most cordial manner, and,since their welfare was connected with that of Athens,to declare the friends and foes of the Athenians to beequally their own; they staid some time at Thuria,and completed their designs.
To return to the Peloponnesians. About the fameportion of time, their squadron of five and twenty sail,•which, to favour the passage of the transports to Sicily,Jay ranged in opposition to the fleet at Naupactus, ha­ving now made all things ready for an engagement, andequipped out some additional vessels, which had almostequalized their number to that of the Athenian ships,take their station in Rhypica, near Erineus of Achaia^.As the place in which they rode was bent in the formof a crescent, the land-force of the Corinthians and ad­jacent confederates, who marched to their assistance,was posted upon each wing of the squadron, on thejutting necks of land, whilst the ships drawn up close-J together







OCR Output








B.VII. THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. *n


another, (all calling out aloud for it ac the fame instantof time,) they heightened the general distraction, andclearly discovered their own word to the enemy. Butthen they had not equal opportunities to discover thatof the enemy because, as the latter were now the vic­tors and kept more in bodies, it was less liable to de­tection. Hence it came to pals, that, though a strongerparty of the Athenians fell in with a weaker party oftheir foes, yet they judged it best to fly; because theywere sensible that their own word was divulged ; and,as they could not return the word of the Syracusans,they must unavoidably be cut to pieces. But whathad the greatest effect, and did most hurt to the Athe­nians, was the singing the faan; since that used onboth sides, being nearly the same, raised the utmostconfusion. And, when the Argives and Corcyreans,and all others of Doric descent, who were with the A-thenians, began from time to time their pæan, it struckthe fame alarm into the Athenians as when the enemythemselves sang it: so that, in short, falling in amongstone another in different quarters of the army, whenonce the confusion was rose to a height, (friends againstfriends, and citizens against fellow-citizens,) they notonly impress a reciprocal terror, but proceed to blowswith so much fury that they could not easily be parted.The pursuit was briskly followed; in which many ofthem, plunging headlong down the precipices, weredashed in pieces, because the pals downwards from E-pipolæ was too narrow for their numbers. But, ofthose who from the heights got down into the plain,many, and all in general who came in the first arma­ment, since better experienced in the country, escapedin safety to the camp: whereas, of the last comers,some, straggling into by-ways, were bewildered in acountry to which they were utter strangers, and at breakof day were cut to pieces by the Syractnan horse, who


 


 







OCR Output








B.VI. THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. 157


 


himself in their company. The Syracusans, to do themjustice, were not desicient in alacrity or courage, neitherin the present battle nor any of the following.They maintained their ground gallantly so long as -their competence of skill enabled them; but, whenthat failed them, they were forced, though with re­luctance, to slacken in their ardour. However, thoughfar from imagining that the Athenians would presumeto begin the attack, and though obliged in a hurry tostand on their defence, they took up their arms, andadvanced immediately to meet their foe.
In the first place, therefore, the stingers of stones witheither the hand or the sling, and the archers, on bothsides, began the engagement; and alternately chasedone another, as is generally the cafe among the bodiesof the light-armed. In the next place, the soothsayersbrought forwards and immolated the solemn victims;and the trumpets summoned the heavy-armed to closefirm together, and advance. t'
All sides now began to face; the Syracusans to fightfor their countrv; each soldier amongst them for hisnative foil, to earn, for the present his preservation, andfor the future his liberty. — On their enemies side; theAthenians, to gain possession of a foreign country, andnot to damage their own by a dastardly behaviour:The Argives, and voluntary part of the confederates,to procure for the Athenians a happy accomplishment oftheir schemes, and again to visit their own country, to•which they were endeared, victorious and triumphant;and that part of the confederacy, which attended inobedience to the orders of- their masters, were highlyanimated by the thought, that they must earn theirsafety now at once, or, is defeated now, must for the furture deipair, and then, secretly actuated perhaps by thedistant hope, that, were others reduced to the Athenianyoke, their own bondage might be rendered more lightand easy.
.1 •. i.-.:..... The







OCR Output








416 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. B.VII.


** an end." Such schemes were now in agitation in Si­cily.
But Demosthenes, when he had assembled the wholeof the armament with which he was to pass over to therelief of those in Sicily, weighing from Ægina, andstanding over to Peloponnesus, he completes his junctionwith Charicles and the squadron of thirty sail of Athe­nians under his command; and, as a body of heavy-armed had been taken on-board the latter from Argos,they steered together for the coast of Laconia. Andhere first they ravaged in part Epidaurus Limera; and,proceeding from thence to that part of Laconia whichlies over-against Cythera, and where stands the templeof Apollo, having ravaged part of the adjacent country,they inclosed and fortified a neck of land which mightserve as a receptacle to such of the Helots as deserted theLacedæmonians; from thence, banditti-like, as was donefrom Pylus, to infest the country. This convenientspot was no sooner taken in than Demosthenes stood a-way for.Corcyra, that he might take on-board the auxi­liaries there, and make the best of his way to Sicily.But Charicles stayed till he had put the place into a stateof secure defence, and sixed a garrison in it. Thisbeing done, he carried back his squadron of thirty sailto Athens; and the Argives at the same time receivedtheir dismifiion. •
This summer there arrived at Athens thirteen hundredThracian targeteers, of those called Machæropbori, andwho are originally Dians. This body was intended to havebeen sent wit h Demosthenes into Sicily; but, as they arrivednot till after his departure, the Athenians had resolved tosend them back again to their own homes in Thrace. Toretain them merely for the sake of the war waged againstthem from Decelea, they thought, would plunge them intoo large an expence, since the pay of every soldier was* a drachma a day. For now, since Decelea, which had
been







OCR Output








B.V. THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. 71


Lichas, son of Arcesilaus, the public host of the Ar­gives, accordingly arriveth at Argos, charged to maketwo demands in the name of the Lacedæmonians: Theone, " whether war be still their option?" the other,how? if their choice be peace." Upon this a strongdebate arose, for Alcibiades was present. But the par­ty, who acted in the Lacedæmonian interest, prevailedwith the Argives to accept their proposals of an accom­modation i which were as followeth:
** THUS resolved, by the Lacedæmonian council,** to compound with the Argives.
"These to restore their children to the Orchome-"nians, and their men to the Mænalians; to restore"also to the Lacedæmonians their citizens now detain-"ed at Mantinea 5 to evacuate Epidaurus and demo-"lish their works.'
"And the Athenians, if they will not quit Epidau-v rus, to be declared enemies to the Argives and to theV Lacedæmonians, and to the consederates of the La-"cedæmonians and to the consederates of the Argives.
** And, if the Lacedæmonians have in their power* * any young men, to release them to all the States.
** In relation to the god, * we consent that an oath"be administered to the Epidaurians, and we grant"the form to be prescribed by the Argives,
The States of Peloponnesus, both small and grear,** to be, none excepted, free, according to their own** primitive constitutions.
** And, if any State without Peloponnesus shall .en­s* ter offensively into the lands of Peloponnesus, suc-** cours to be united, in pursuance of a general consult
of Peloponnesians about the determinate and most*' expedient methods.
tl All confederates of the Lacedæmonians whatever,"without Peloponnesus, shall enjoy the same privileges
* The Pythian Apollo. This article seems designed to adjust the quarrel aboutthe victim, related in the transactions of the last year.


F 4 as







OCR Output








3t» THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. B.Vlft


ranged against them; and the Milesians did the someby the Atgives. But now, after erecting a trop&y, asthe town was seated on an isthmus, the Athenians werepreparing to cut it off by a work of circi*mva>latioa;concluding that, " if they once could get possession of*' Miletus, they should easily complete she reduction"of the other Slates"
It was now about the Chut of evening, and advice isbrought them that " five and fifty fail of ships from*' Peloponnesus and Sicily are only not at hand." For,from Sicily, where Hermocrates the Syracusao strenu­ously advised to go on with what yet remained in re­gard to the total demolition of the Athenians, twentyfail of Syracusans and two of Selingntians came over.The Peloponnesian fleet, which had been fitting e,ut,was now ready for service; and both these were sentout in conjunction, under the orders of Theramenes theLacedæmonian, who was to carry them to Astyochusthe admiral in chief. They arrived first at Eleus, anisland before Miletus. Being there informed that theAthenians lay before Miletus, they departed thence;and, steering first into the gulf of Iisus, were desirousto pick up information how things went at Miletus.Alcibiades had now rode to Teichiussa in the Milesian;in which quarter of the gulph the fleets had come toanchor for the night, and receive there a full accountof the battle. Alcibiades had been present at it, andhad given his assistance to the Milesians and Tissapher*nes. He therefore earnestly pressed them, "unless*' they were desirous to see all Ionia lost, and all their*' great expectations blasted at once, to repair with all*' possible expedition to the succour of Miletus, and by"no means to suffer it to be invested by a circumval-** lation." In pursuance of this it was resolved, that atthe first dawn of day they would stand away to its suc­cour.
But Phrynichus, the Athenian commander, whenadvised from Lerus of the certain arrival of this united
fleet.







OCR Output








B.V. THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. n


though Cleon, who from the sirst had never intended to. stand an engagement, flies instantly awayand, beingintercepted by a Myrcinian targeteer, is slain. But hisheavy-armed, embodying together and gaining an emi­nence, repulsed Clearidas, who twice or thrice attackedthem, and maintained their ground till the Myrcinianand Chalcidic cavalry and the targeteers, 'surroundingand pouring in their darts upon them, compelled themto fly. Thus the whole Athenian army was distressed ina laborious flight: They ran different ways amongst themountains; numbers had been destroyed in the charge,others by the Chalcidic horse and targeteers; but theremainder escaped in safety to Ei'on.
Those who took up Brasidas, when he dropped inthe action, and bore him osf, carried him into the cityyet alive. His senses remained till he heard his partywere victorious, and soon after that he expired.*
The rest of the army with Clearidas, being comeback from the pursuit, rifled the dead and erected atrophy.
This done, all the confederates assisted under arms atthe funeral of Brafidas, whom they interred at the pub­lic expence within the city, near the place where the fo­rum now standeth. And afterwards the Amphipolitans,having inclosed his monument, performed sacrisice tohim as a hero. They also enacted solemn games in hishonour and annual sacrifices. Nay, they ascribed theircolony to him as founder, after demolishing the edisicesof Agnon, and defacing every memorial which mightcontinue the memory of his foundation. They actedthus, partly out of real gratitude to Brafidas, whom theyregarded as their deliverer, and partly at this juncture
* The first embassy, which came from the Grecians in Thrace to Sparta, afterthe death of Brafidas, made a visit to his mother Argileonis. The first queston sheasked them was, Didmy fin die bravely? And when the embassadors expatiatedlargely in his praise, and said, at last. There was not such another Spartan left alive,—* You mistake, gentlemen, said the mother, my fin was a good man j but there are manyteller men than be in Sparta, Plutarch's Laconic Apophthegms.
to







OCR Output








176 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. B.VI.


monians " to declare open war at home against the** Athenians, and to fit out an aid for the service of* * Sicily."
At the time that these joint-embassies arrived at La­cedæmon from Corinth, Alcibiades was also there.He had no sooner made his escape, attended by hiscompanions in exile, than in a trading-vessel he pastedover from Thuria to Cyllene in Elea; and from thencehe repaired to Lacedæmon. But, as the Lacedæmo­nians had pressed to see him, he went thither under theprotection of the public faith; for he had with reasondreaded his reception there, since he had acted so largea part in the affair of Mantinea.
It happened farther, that, when a public assemblywas convened at Sparta, the Corinthians, and the Sy-racusans, and Alcibiades, all urged the fame request,and were successful. Nay, though the College of E-phori,and those who presided at the helm os theStaie,haddressed up a plan, in pursuance of which they were on­ly to send their embassadors to Syracuse, to hinder allaccommodations with the Athenians, and were quite a-verle to the supplying them with real succours,—yet Al­cibiades, standing up, inflamed the Lacedæmonian fu­ry, and wrought them to his purpose by the followingharangue:
"I LIE under a necessity, in the beginning of my"discourse, to vindicate myself srom the calumny** which hath been charged against me, lest a jealousy"of me might divert your attention from those points"which equally affect the common cause. My ances-"tors, therefore, having, upon some reasonable"grounds of complaint, renounced the privilege of be-** ing the public hosts of your embassies at Athens, I1* am the man who again re-established this hospitable"intercourse; who in many other respects endeavour*** ed with great assiduity to oblige you, and particular**.* ly in the calamity which fell to your share at Pylus.
J* I cheer­







OCR Output








»i8 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. B.VIL


the horsemen, mounted guard by night. The latter, e-'ver under arms without, the rest on the constant guardof the city-walls, and this for a summer and winterwithout any intermission, were reduced to a very lowcondition. But the point which pressed hardest uponthem was having two wars at once upon their hands;and yet their obstinacy had rose to so high a pitch, as,had it not been visible to all the world, the bare men­tion of its possibility would hare been quite incredible:For who would have believed, that this people, foclosely blocked up at home by the Peloponnesians,should scorn to give up Sicily? nay, should perseverewith unabating zeal, to carry on the siege of Syracuse,a city in no respect inserior even to Athens itself? thatthey should exhibit such an astonishing proof of theirstrength and their courage to the eyes of Greece; where,upon the first breaking out of the war, some people hadimagined, that, in case the Peloponnefians invaded Atti­ca, they could not hold out above one year intire,though others had allowed them two, and others three,but nobody a longer space? and that, in the seventeenthyear after the first invasion of this kind, they should at­tempt the conquest of Sicily; and, when deeply gashedin every parr, by one war already upon their hands,should wilfully plunge into another, as formidable inall respects as that waged against them from Peloponne­sus? But now, when, besides what they had sufferedalready, they were terribly annoyed from Decelea, andother incidents had exacted from them very large dis­bursements, their finances were reduced to a very lowebb. At this period, therefore, instead of the tributepaid them by their dependents, they exacted a twentiethof the value of all commodities imported and exported,which they thought would replenish their cofsers fasterthan the former method: For, their disbursements werenot as they had been in preceding times, but had beeninflamed in the fame proportion as the scenes of war had
been







OCR Output








264 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. B.VII.


"day they were performing the anniversary sacrifice to** Hercules,) in all probability would refuse to march;** because, transported as they were with success, the"generality no doubt were celebrating the sestival with"good cheer and wine; and any thing might sooner be** hoped from them, than obedience to an order for ta-"king up their arms and sallying forth at a minute's"notice." As the magistrates were convinced thatthings would so turn out, the scheme was judged im­practicable, and Hermocrates could in no wife prevail.But he thought of an artifice to play off against the foe:Afraid lest the Athenians, dislodging quietly by night,might possess themselves of the most difficult passes be­fore any opposition could reach them, he dispatchethsome of his most trusty friends, under an efcorte of horse,to the Athenian camp so soon as it was dark; who, ri­ding up so near to the intrenchments that their wordsmight be distinctly heard, and calling out aloud onsome persons to come forth, since they were a party sentfrom his friends in Syracuse to bring Nicias some intelli­gence, charged them to carry word immediately to Ni­cias, u by no means to draw off the army by night,"because the Syracusans had beset the roads; but to*' defer his march till day-light, when he had leisure to*' make the proper dispositions." And after deliveringthis message they rode off, whilst those who received itwent and reported it faithfully to the Athenian generals.
Wrought upon by this piece of intelligence, in whichthey were far from suspecting any fraud, they continuedall night in their posts; and then, as they had not dis­lodged at once in a hurry, they thought it adviseable tostay there but one day longer, ,that the soldiers mightpack up and carry away with them as large a part as waspossible of their necessary stores. The rest of the baggageit was agreed should be abandoned to the enemy; theywere only to carry off, each person for himself, whatwas absolutely necessary for food and raiment.
• But,







OCR Output








B.VI. THE PELGPONNESIAN WAR. 151


the present posture of the Selinuntians; and to learn thestate of their quarrels with the Egesteans. In theircourse, keeping on the left that part of Sicily whichlies on the Tyrrhene gulf, they arrived at Himera,which is the only Grecian city in this part of Sicily; and,when denied reception here, they resumed their course.Touching afterwards at Hyccara, a Sicanian fortressbut an annoyance to the Egesteans, they surprise it; forit was situated close upon the sea; and having doomedthe inhabitants to be slaves, they delivered the placeinto the hands of the Egesteans, whose cavalry wasnow attending on the Athenian motions. The land-forces marched away from hence through the territoriesof the Siculi, till they had again reached Catana; butthe vessels, on-board of which were the staves, cameback along the coasts.
Nicias had proceeded from Hyccara directly toEgesta, where, after transacting other points and receivingthirty * talents, he rejoined the grand armament at Ca­bana. And here they set up the slaves to sale f, andraised by the money paid sor them J one hundred andtwenty talents.
They also sailed about to their Sicilian allies, sum­moning them to send in their reinforcements. With adivision also of their force they appeared before Hybla,a hostile city in the district of Gela, bur were not ableto take it. And here the summer ended.
Winter now succeeding, the Athenians began imme­diately to get all things in readiness for an attempt uponSyracuse. The Syracusans were equally intent onmaking an attack upon them. For, since the Atheui-
* 5812/. IOJ. Stirling.
•f Among the reft, Nicias sold at this sale Lais the famous courtezan, at thistime a tery young girl, whom her purchasers carried to. Corinth, where Bu set up 1and drove a prodigious trade indeed. Plutarch in Nicias.
J 43250/, Sierling.
L 4 ans







OCR Output








THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. ,6s


** for the many injuries a neighbouring State, unrelent-"ing in its enmity, had done them."
But, to the Athenians, That, in honour, they
"were obliged to signalize their valour in a conspicu-"ous manner, in the company of numerous and gal-"lant allies: That, should they gain a victory over*' the Lacedæmonians on Peloponnesian ground, their*' own empire would be established and inlarged, and"no enemy would ever again presume to invade their"territories."
And in this manner were the Argives and their con­federates animated to the fight.
But the Lacedæmonians were encouraging: one ano-ther, and, during martial strains injoined by their disci­pline, like men of bravery as they were, each animatedhis neighbour with the recital of the gallant acts theyhad performed together. They were persons, whoknew that a long experience in the toils of war condu-ceth more to preservation, than a short verbal harangue,how finely soever delivered.
And now the armies were mutually approaching:The Argives and their allies advanced in a brisk and an­gry manner; but the Lacedæmonians moved slowly for­wards to the found of many flutes, the music whichtheir laws ordain; not from any religious motive, butfor advancing with equal steps, keeping time with thenotes, to prevent all disorders in the ranks; accidentsvery frequent in large armies whilst drawing to an en­counter.*
Vol. II. F But,
* Milton hath made use of this Lacedæmonian march to adorn and raise his ownnoble poetry. It was full and strong in his imagination, when he wrote the followinglines. Paradise Icjl, book J.
—— Anon they moveIn prtrfect phalanx, to the Dorian moodOf flutes and soft recorders; such as rais*dTo height of noblest temper heroes old,


Arming







OCR Output








B.VI. THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. 173


rineans, that neither yourselves nor others be decei-** ved by a too credulous belief of the bold calumnia-** tions these Syracusans utter. We have now laid be-"fore you the true ground of all those sad suspicions"which are fomented against us; but shall again recal** them to your remembrance by a short recapitulation,"that they may have the proper influence upon you.
"We declare, therefore, that we rule in Greece"merely to prevent our being inflaved; but are intent"on vindicating liberty in Sicily, to suppress that an-** noyance which might otherwise be given us from"hence ;— that mere necessity obligeth us to embark int* many undertakings, because we have many sinister** incidents to guard against; — that now and formerly** we came hither to support those Sicilians who have"been unjustly oppressed; not uninvited, but solemnly** conjured to take such steps. Attempt not, there-** fore, to divert our pursuits, either by erecting your-"stives into censors of our proceedings, or into correc-"tors of our politics, a point too disficult for you to"manage. But, so much of our activity or conduct** as you can mould into a consistency with your own** welsare, lay hold of that, and employ it to your best** advantage; and never imagine that our politics are"equally prejudicial to all the world besides, but high-"ly benesicial to the bulk of the Grecians. For,** through every quarter, even those which we cannot** pretend to controul, both such as dread impending** mischiefs and such as meditate incroachments,— lay-"ing hold on both sides of the ready expectation; the** former, that redress may be obtained by our interpo-"fition; the latter, that, if we think proper to oppose** them, their own sasety will be greatly endangered;—'** both sides, I fay, are hence obliged; the latter, to** practise moderation, though with regret; the former*** to enjoy tranquillity without previous embroilments"of the public peace. The security, therefore, which** now offers itself to your acceptance, and is always
V ready







OCR Output








 


:







OCR Output








B.VIII. THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. 365


ing compelled to sheer off, they are pursued to land;and as many of them as ran for sasety to the city of theEretrians suffered the most cruel treatment, in beingmurdered by the hands of men whom they supposedtheir friends. Such, indeed, as could reach the fortof Eretria, which was garrisoned by Athenians, arcsafe as also the vessels which could make Chalcis.
But the Peloponnesians, after making prizes of twoand twenty Athenian vessels, and either butchering ormaking prisoners all on-board them, erected a trophy.And, no long time after, they caused all Eubœa to re­volt, excepting Oreus, which an Athenian garrison se­cured, and then settled the state of that island at theirown discretion.
When advice of what was done at Eubœa reachedAthens, the greatest consternation ensued of all that-had to this day been known. Not even the dreadfulblow received in Sicily, though great concern, in truth,it gave them, nor any other public disaster, caused soterrible an alarm amongst them. For, at a time whentheir army at Samos was in open revolt, when they hadno longer either shipping in store or mariners to go on­board, when they were distracted with intestine sedi­tion, and ready each moment to tear one another topieces; — and on the neck of all these this great cala­mity supervened, in which they lost their fleet, and(what was more of consequence) Eubœa, which hadbetter supplied their necessities than Attica itself, — hadthey not ample reason now to fall into utter dejection?But what alarmed them most was the proximity ofruin, in case the enemy, flushed with their late success,should stand immediately into the Piræus, now utterlydestitute of ships. Not a moment passed but they ima­gined they were only not in the very harbour; which,in truth, had they been a little more daring, they mighteasily have been. Nay, had they made this step andblocked up the city, they must infallibly have increasedthe seditions within it; must have necessitated the fleet
to







OCR Output








B.VII. THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. 231


the annoyance which Decelea, now fortified, gave them,the Athenians were arrived before Syracuse with ano­ther armament as great and as formidable as the for­mer *, and that, in every view, the strength of Athensmust be quite unsurmountable. And now also the A-thenians, who remained of the former armament, re­spired from that dejection of spirit into which a series ofmisfortunes had plunged them.
Demosthenes, after taking a view of the present pos­ture of affairs, thought it absolutely necessary to avoiddelays, and keep clear of those errors which had doneso much prejudice to Nicias: for Nicias, at his first ap­pearance, struck an universal consternation ; and yet,by declining the immediate attack of Syracuse, and loi­tering a whole winter away at Catana, he became an ob­ject of contempt; and Gylippus had time to land a suc­cour from Peloponnesus, which disconcerted all hismeasures. That succour, however, the Syracusanscould never have lent for, had Nicias assaulted them onhis first approach: for, deluding themselves with thethought that they were a match for their foes, theywould have found, by sad experience, that they hadindulged a cruel mistake, and must the same momenthave been invested on all sides: and, in such a state,though they had invited those succours, yet no effectualrelief could have been obtained from them.
Demosthenes, therefore, reflecting on these past mis­takes, and sensible that he himself, this very moment,on the first day of his arrival, appeared most terrible inthe eyes of the enemy, resolved' without loss of time toimprove the present consternation which his reinforce­ment had struck amongst them. He farther took no­tice, that the counterwork of the Syracusans, by whichthe Athenians had been excluded from perfecting theircireumvallation, consisted only of a single wall ; and,in case the heights of Epipolæ could again be regained,with the camp which at first had been occupied there,that work might easily be carried, since the defendants
Q^4 could







OCR Output








B.VI. THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. 155


 


them, they again retreated: And, having crossed the.road to Heiorum, reposed themselves for the night.
The succeeding day, the Athenians and allies pre­pared for engagement, and their order of battle wasformed, as follows: — The Argives and Mantineanshad the right, the Athenians the center, and the rest ofthe line was formed by the other confederates. Onehalf of the whole force, which was ranged in the firstline, was drawn up by eight in depth. The other half,being potted near the tents, formed a hallow square, inwhich the men were also drawn up by eight. The latterwere ordered, if any part of the line gave way, to keepa good look out and advance to their support. Andwithin this hallow square they posted all the train who at­tended the service of the army.
But the Syracusans drew up their heavy-armed,which body consisted of the whole military strength ofSyracuse and all the confederates who had joined them,in files consisting of sixteen. Those, who had joinedwith auxiliary quotas, were chiefly the Selinuntians; andnext, she horse of the Geloans, amounting in the wholeto about two hundred: The horse also of the Camari-neans, about twenty in number, and about fifty archers.But their horsemen they posted to the right, being notfewer in number than twelve hundred; and, next tothem, the darters.
The Athenians being now intent on advancing to thecharge, Micias, addressing himlelf in regular order tothe troops of the several States, animated them to thefight by the following harangue, repeated in turn to thewhole army.
.
"WHAT need, my fellow-soldiers, of a long ex-"hortation, since we are here, determined, and refo-** lute for action? For this our present arrangement"> seems to me a stronger confirmation of your courage,** than any words could be, how eloquently, soever de-t* livered, if we were inferior in strength. But when,
^ Argives,







OCR Output








B.VI. THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. ill


 


every mariner was a * drachma a day. The number ofnew ships for the battle and chace was sixty; that oftransports for the heavy-armed, forty. The severalcaptains of the triremes were very choice in making uptheir crews, and gave to such of the mariners as rowedon the uppermost bench, and to the sailors, a gratuity outof their own pockets over and above the public pay.They had farther adorned their vessels with images andall kind of sumptuous decorations. It was the highambition of every single captain, to have his own shipexcel all the rest of the fleet in splendor and in swiftness.
The land-force was distinguished by the choiceness oftheir levies and their arms and all the individuals viedwith one another in the goodness of their accoutrementsand equipage whatsoever. It happened also on the sameaccount that a warm contention was kindled amongst:them, under what officers they should be ranged; andopportunity afforded, to the rest of Greece, to construethe whole into a mere ostentation of their power andopulence rather than an effective equipment against afoe. For, were a computation to be formed, both ofthe public disbursements of the State on this occasion,and the private expences of the whole soldiery ; — of theState, what prodigious sums they had already advanced,and what additional sums the generals were to carry alongwith them; — of the soldiery, what each had expen­ded on his own equipage, every captain on the decora­tion of his vessel, and to how much greater charges hewas still liable; — without taking into the account thevast list of necessaries which, over and above the publicallowance, each private person was obliged to lay in forso long a voyage, or the goods which a soldier or tradermight take with himon-board for the sake of traffic;-—the amount of talents now carried out of Athens wouldturn out exceeding large.
Nor was it merely for the strangeness of the enterprizeor the splendor of its shew, that the armament was noised
abroad,







OCR Output








B.V. THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR.


* * On the Athenian 7 Lampo, Isthmionicus, Laches,side, by 3 Nicias, Euthydemus, Procles,
Pythodorus, Agnon, Myrtilus,Thrasycles, Theagenes, Aristo-crates, Iolcius, Timocrates, Leo,Lamachus, Demosthenes."
This alliance was concluded in a very little time afterthe treaty of peace; and the Athenians now released tothe Lacedæmonians their Spartans, who were made pri­soners at Sphacteria. The summer also of the eleventhyear was now begun; and so far the transactions of thesefirst ten years of this war, closely carried on, have beenregularly compiled.
YEAR XI.J
AFTER the treaty of peace and the alliance, of­fensive and desensive, between the Lacedæmonians andAthenians; both which were concluded after the tenyears war, at the time when Pleistolas presided in thecollege of Ephori at Sparta, and Alcæus was Archon atAthens; the peace became in force amongst the accedingparties. But the Corinthians and some of the Pelopon-nesian States were endeavouring the overthrow of allthese proceedings: And immediately there arose ano­ther great combustion, amongst the confederates, againstLacedæmon. More than this, as time advanced, theLacedæmonians became suspected by the Athenians, asthey shewed no great punctuality in executing the con­ditions of the peace. For the space of six years and tenmonths, they refrained indeed from entering one ano­ther's territory in a hostile manner; but, during such acorrespondence which abounded in suspicions, theyWere, in all other respects, active in a reciprocal annoy
J Before Christ 421,
C 4 ance.







OCR Output








fe;V\ THE PELOPONNESIAN WAfc. 17


*' on the other, without fraud and without molestation,*' both at land and sea.
"Be it farther unlawful for either party to take up"arms to the detriment of the other*—— neither the"Lacedæmonians and their allies against the Athenians** and their allies,——nor the Athenians and their al-"lies against the Lacedæmonians and their allies,—
without any fraud or evasion whatsoever* And, if any"difference intervene between the contracting parties,"let it be adjusted according to equity and upon oath,"in such manner as they shall agree.
'*' Agreed, farther,—That the Lacedæmonians and** allies deliver up Amphipolis to the Athenians.
"That, whatever cities the Lacedæmonians deliver** up to the Athenians, leave be given to the inhabi-*' tants to remove, at their own discretion, with all"their effects.
"That the cities, which pay the assessments rated by*' Aristides, enjoy all their rights and privileges what-*' ever.
"And,—be it unlawful for the Athenians and their*' allies to take up arms, to the annoyance of those ci-*c ties which pay that assessment, from the time that this*' treaty be in force. Those cities are, Argilus, Stagi-"rus, Acanthus, Scolus, Olynthus, Spartolus: —
These cities to observe a strict neutrality, forming no"engagements with either Lacedæmonians or Atheni-"ans.—Provided, that, if the Athenians can by fair*' means prevail upon these cities, it be lawful for the*' Athenians to admit them confederates at their own"free choice.
"That the Mecyberneans, and Saneans, and Singe-*' ans, shall inhabit their own cities in the same man-
ner as the Olynthians and Acanthians.
Agreed, farther,—That the Lacedæmonians and"allies restore Panactum to the Athenians.


Vol. II,


"That







OCR Output








B.VI. THE PELOPOtfNESIAN WAR. fft


 


*' Because every hostile force is always most terrible on"its first approach; and, in case it protract- tlve time of"encountering the eyes of its foes, they twist recover"their courage through familiarity with danger, and"then the sight of an enemy is more apt to inspire»' contempt: — But, should they assault them on a sud-"den whilst yet their approach is with terror expected,** the victory must insallibly be their own: — In this"cafe, all things would co-operate with them to terrify"the foe; such as, the sight of their numbers, which"now only could appear in their greatest inlargement;*' the forebodings of their heaits what miseries were like"to ensue; andj above all, the instant necessity they*' must lie under of hazarding a battle: Thar, moreover,"it was likely* that numbers of the enemy might be""surprised yet roaming abroad in the adjacent country,'* as still they were incredulous of the approach of the*' Athenians: Or, even though the Syracusans were safely*' retired with all their effects into the city, the army*' must needs become masters of prodigious wealth, if** they should besiege the city and awe all around it:*' That, by taking this step, the other Sicilians would be"more discouraged from succouring the Syracusans,"and more easily inclined to concur with the Athenians,"and all shifts and delays to keep clear of the contest,** till one side was manifestly superior, would be pre-"eluded." He added farther, that "they should take"care to possess themselves of Megara, which was now** deserted and not far from Syracuse either by sea or** land, as it would afford a fine station for their ships-*' to lie in, would shelter them upon a retreat, and give"expedition to their approaches."
But, though Lamachus delivered his sentiments thus, hesoon gave up his own opinion and went over to that ofAlcibiades. And, in pursuance of this, Alcibiades withhis own single ship passed over to Mesiene; and, havinggained a conserence with the Mesienians about an allianceoffensive and defensive, when no arguments he broughe
i;ould


l







OCR Output








I N E E X.


Sixgeans, II. 17.Simians, I. ZI I.
Sitalces, king of Thrace, I. 148,
181. ally to the Athenians, 148.
invades the Macedonians, 209.
his power, 211. conquered by
the Triballians, 396.Socrates, son of Antigenes, I. 14;.Sophocles, son of Sojlratidet, I. 311.
sent to .S/oVy, 314. his acts at
Corcyra, 351. banished from
Athens, 366.Stefagoras, I. 90.Stheneldidas, his speech, I. 67.Stratonice, I. 214.Stratians, conquer the Chaonians,
Strombichides, II. .294. his ex­ploits, 306, 347.
Styphcm, I. 345.
Styrenjians, II. 246^
Syracu/ans, at war with the/<««, I. 288. are deseated bythe Athenians, 331. draw up a-gainst the Athenians, II. 15 5.prepare for battle, ibid, aredeseated, 158. fortify their ci­ty, 161. send embassadors toCamarina, 162. to Corinth andSparta, 175. engage and aredeseated by the Athenians, 185,189. raise their counterworks,187. are about treating withNicias, 191. prepare their fleet,2H. attack the Athenians byland and sea, 212. erect twotrophies, 236. prepare againfor an engagement, 242. de­feat them again, 243. preparefor the last battle, 249. engage,259. are victorious, 262. stopthe Athenians by a stratagem,264. pursue them and takethem all prisoners, 269. sendaid to the Pelcponnesians, 302,37'-
T.
TageS, II. 294.


Tamus, II. 307.
Tantalus, a Lacedæmonian com­mander, I. 359.
Taurus, 1. 409.
TegeatÆ, fight with the Mdnti-
neans, I. 422.Telles, II. 19, 22.Tellias, II. 191.Temenidæ, I. 212.Tenedians, I. 218. II. 247.Teians, I. 239. II. 246, 294,Teres, father of Sitalces, T. 148.
how he got the kingdom of
Odry/æ, ibid, enlarged it, ib.Teutiaplus, I. 238. his advice to
Ak 1 das and the Pe/opon/ie/uins,
ibid.
Tharyps, king of the Molojfiaxs,I. 194.
Thafians, revolt from Athens, 1.77.deseated, ibid, beg aid from theLacedæmonians ,\h.{wKX\isr
Theænetus, I. 23 I.
Theagenes, I. 98.
Thebans, surprise Platiea, I. I 25.their speech to the Lacedæmoni­ans against the Platæani, 268.demolish the walls of Tlxespiæ,421.
Themistocles, I. 57, 107, 112. byhis advice the battle was foughtin the strait of Salamis, 57. issent embassador to Sparta, 69-deludes the Lacedæmonians, 70.gets the Long-u/alls and Piræusfecured,7i. banished Athens bythe estraciftn, 107. resides atArgos, ibid, accused by the La­cedæmonians, ibid, flies to Cer-cyra, 108. to Admetus, 109. thedanger he escaped, ibid, hisletter to the king ot Persia, ib.his character, 110.
Theramenes, the Athenian, II. 337.one of those who overturned thedemocracy, ibid, turns to theother side, 356.
Theramenes, the Lacedæmcmait,Ærries







OCR Output








INDEX.


tht Tegeatee, 422. make al­liance with the tirgives, II. 26.at war with the Lacedæmonians,31. renew the peace with them,74. mercenaries, 248.
Megahetts, I. 100.
Megabaxus, the Persian, I. 84,ion of Zopyrui, ibid.
Megareans, aid the Corinthians a-
fainst Corcyra, I. 21. prohi-ited the harbours and marketsof Athens, 50, 112. scheme tobetray their city to the Atheni­ans, 366. demolish their Ung-ivalls, 402.Melt ans, II. 5.Melanehridas, II. 287.Melanthus, II. 285.Meleas, I. 220.Melesandtr, I. 183.Meliant, their conference withthe Athenians, II. 78. besieged,90. reduced, 91.Mtlitnfians, I. 292. fight with the
Heracleots, II. 50.Menander, an Athenian commander
in Sicily, II. 206, 259.Men as, II. 19, 22.Mendeans, 1. 413. .Meneeolus, II. 96.Menetrates, I. 410.Metion, I. 145.
Mejsenians of Peloponnesus, ejectedby the Lacedæmonians, I. 78.settled by the Athenians at A*»-pailus, 79. take Phia, 146.replaced at 347.
Mejstniam of SjV/'/y, at war withthe Naxians, I. 332.
Met agents, II. 19, 22.
Metapontians, II. 248.
Methymneans, I. 230. II. 247.
Miciades, I. 37.
Milesians, their war with the 5*-mians, I. 88. beat the Argines,II. 302. demolish the fortbuilt by Tiffaphernes, 35 I.
Mindarus, the Lacedæmonian admi­ral, II. 352,368.defeated, 371.
Minn, his naval power, I. 4, 6.


Mityleneans, revolt from the ^.thenians, I. 218. their speechat Olympia, 222. reduced, 237.ordered to be massacred, 242.
MoloJJians, I. 194.
MycaleJJians, massacred, II. 219.
Myonenstans, I. 299.
Myrcinians, II. 6.
Myronides, I. 81, 83, 390.
Myrrhine, II. 144.
Myrtilus, II. 19, 23.
My/con, II. 352. ,N.
Nauclides, I. 124.
Naxians, favour the Athenians,
II. 140, 248. vanquish the
Messenians, I. 332.Nicanor, I. 194.
Nicias, son of Nicer at us, I. 258,
336t 3+7, 35St 4>9, his sPee"ches, II. 100, 112,155,251,267. takes Minoa, I. 258. at­tacks Me/os, 292. invades theCorinthians, 347. takes Cythe-ra, 356. and Mende, 420. be­sieges Scione, ibid, author of thepeace, II. 14, 44. named forthe command in Sicily, 99. hisopinion at a council of war,137, defeats the Syracu/ans,15-6, 199. his stratagem, 190.left in the sole command, 191.his letter to the Athenians, 202.resuseth to raise the siege of Sy­racuse, 237. raiseth the siege,265. surrenders to Gylippus,276. put to death, 278.
Nicias,theCretanofGcrtyna, 1.199.
Nicolaus, I. 181.
Nicomachus, I. 385.
Nicodemes, I. 82.
Nicon, II. 209.
Niconidas, I. 376.
Nicostratus, aids the popular fac­tion at Corcyra, I. 279. takesCythera, 355. takes Mende, 4 20.besieges Scione, ibid. II. 58.
Nymphodorus, I. 148.
O. •
Odomantians, I. 214. II. 5.
Odryjtans,







OCR Output








ai2 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. B.VII,


the whole was ready for service, Gylippus, by favourof the night, at the head of his land-army, marcheddown to the forts at Plemmyrium, intending to assaultthem on the land-side. The triremes of the Syracu-sans, at the fame instant of time, as had been concertedbeforehand, to the number of thirty-five, are sailing upout of the great harbour, whilst forty-five were goingabout out of the lesser harbour where their dock lay.The latter went round, designing to complete theirjunction with the other squadron, and then in a body tostand against Plemmyrium, that the Athenians on bothfides might be thrown into confusion. The Athenianslost no time, but instantly manned out sixty vessels.With twenty-five of the number they engaged the thirty-five Syracusan in the great harbour; with the rest theywent to meet the other squadron, that was coming a-bout from the dock. A smart engagement immedi­ately ensued, in the mouth os the great harbour. Thedispute was a long time obstinately maintained; one sideexerting themselves to clear the passage, but the otherto obstruct it.
In the the mean time, Gylippus, — as the Atheniansposted at Plemmyrium had flocked down to the sea-side,and with their utmost attention were looking at the bat­tle on the water, — Gylippus seizeth the opportunity;and, no sooner had the morning dawned, than, to thegreat surprise of the enemy, he attacks the forts. Hefirst makes himself master of the largest of the three,and afterwards carries the two lesser, the desendantsof which, seeing the largest so easily taken, had aban­doned their posts: Nay, on the surprisal of the first,those who had manned it, throwing themselves on-boardthe boats and a transport that lay at hand, found nosmall disficulty in getting away to the camp; for, asthe Syracusans had now the better of the engagementwith their squadron in the great harbour, they detachedone of their nimblest triremes to pursue the fliers. But,at the time the other two forts were carried, the Syra­cusans







OCR Output








358 THE PELOPONNES1AN WAR. B.VHI.


his employment as general at Samos, had embroiledhimself with Alcibiades; and Aristarchus, one of themost violent and also most inveterate opponents of thepeople; and Pisander, and Antipho, and others of thegreatest influence amongst them; who formerly, uponestablishing themselves first in the government, and eversince the army at Samos had dissented from them in fa­vour of the democracy, had bestirred themselves, in send^ing embassies to Lacedæmon, in more firmly establish­ing the oligarchy, and erecting a new fortification onthe spot which is called Eetionela these, I fay, exer­ted themselves with much greater ardour than ever,since the return of the deputies from Samos, as theyplainly saw the inclinations os numbers, and some of theirown body, on whose perseverance they had highly de­pended, were intirely changed. They even caused An­tipho, and Phrynichus, and ten others, to set out withall expedition; so apprehensive were they of fresh op­position, both in Athens itself and from Samos; andcharged them with instructions to strike up an accom­modation with the Lacedæmonians upon any tolerableterms they could possibly procure. They also carriedon with redoubled diligence the new works at EetioneKa.These works were intended, as was given out by Thera-menes and his party, not se much to keep out of the Piræ­us those from Samos, should they endeavour to attemptit, as to enable themselves, at their own discretion, toreceive both the ships and land-forces of the enemy \for Eetioneia is the mole of the Piræus^ and the entrance:into it opens at the end of this mole. The new workwas therefore joined in such a manner to that whichguarded it before, on the side of the land, that a smallparty posted behind could command the entrance. Forthe extremities of it were continued down to the fort inthe very mouth of the harbour, which was narrow j andboth the old wall, which was built on the land-side, andthis new fortification within, reached down to the sea.They also enlarged arid secured the great portico, which
adjoined







OCR Output








3i* THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. B.VIII.


And to this situation were brought the Athenian affairsat Chios.
Their squadron also at Samos made several visits tothe squadron of the enemy at Miletus; but, as the lat­ter refused to come out to engage them, they returnedagain to Samos, wirhout committing any hostilities.
From Peloponnesus, in the same winter, twenty-seven sail of ships, equipped by the Lacedæmoniansfor Pharnabazus, at the instances of his agents, Calli-gitus the Megarean and Timagoras the Cyzicene, putout to sea, and made over to Ionia, about the solstice.Antisthenes the Spartan was onboard as admiral. Withhim the Lacedæmonians sent also eleven Spartans, tobe a council to Aflyochus; in the number of whom wasLichas, the son of Arcesilaus. To these an order wasgiven, that, " when arrived at Miletus, they should.** in concert act in all respects as might be best for the*' service; and this squadron, or one equal in strength,*' or larger or smaller, at their own discretion, should"proceed to Hellespont for the service of Pharnabazus,
and be sent away under the command of Clearchus"the son of Ramphias, who accompanied them in the'* voyage; and, in cafe it was judged expedient by the'* council of eleven, to dismiss Astyochus from the chief,f command, and substitute Antisthenes." On accountof the letters of Pædaritus, they began to suspect theformer. This squadron, therefore, standing out tosea from Malea, arrived first at Melos; and, falling inwith ten sail of Athenians, they take and burn three ofthem, which their crews had abandoned. But, appre­hensive that those Athenian ships which had escapedmight advertise the fleet at Samos of their approach, aswas actually the case, they stretched away for Crete;and, for better security, keeping a good look-out, andtaking more time, they made land first at Caunus ofAsia. From thence, as being now beyond the reach ofdanger, they dilpatch a messenger to the fleet at Mile-Jus., to attend and bring them up,







OCR Output








iS THE PELOPONNESIAN XVA&. B.V,


"That the Athenians restore to the Lacedæmonians*'' *Coryphafium, and Cythera, and Methone, and*' Pteleum> and Atalanta, and all the Lacedæmonians,
now prisoners of the state at Athens, or public pri-"soners, in any quarter soever within the dominions of"Athens; and to give leave of departure to all the"Peloponnesians blocked up in Scione, and to all the"confederates of the Peloponnesians whatever in Sci-*' one, and to all persons whatever whom Brasidas pla-"ced there.-:——This article also to extend to any con-"federates of the Lacedæmonians, now public priso-v ners at Athens, or public prisoners in any other quar-"ter of the Athenian dominions.
"That, in return, the Lacedæmonians and allies"release all the prisoners, both Athenians and confede-"rates, which are now in their hands.'
"That, in regard to the Scioneans, Toroneans, andv Sermylians, and any other city belonging, of right,"to the Athenians, the Athenians to proceed with the"cities specified, and all the others, at their own dif-V cretion.
"That the Athenians shall swear observance to the"Lacedæmonians and their allies, separately, according"to their cities. Let both sides swear, in the most so-"Iemn manner, according to the forms of each separate*' Stale-, and the oath to be conceived in these words;
"• / abide by my compacts and the present articles, ho-
"nestly, and without equivocation. Be an oath taken,
"to the Athenians, by the Lacedæmonians and allies,*i to the same purport.
"Be this oath renewed annually by the contracting
parties.
"Be pillars erected at Olympias, at Pythus, at the"Isthmus, and at Athens in the citadel, and at Lace-M dæmon in the Amycleum, with this treaty inscribed"upon them.
* This includes the fort of Pylus, seated on the cape of Coryphasium,


"If







OCR Output








2+ THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR: B.V.


ance. And at length, necessitated to dissolve the treatyconcluded at the ten years period, they engaged afreshin open war.
The same Thucydides, an Athenian, hath alsocompiled an account of these latter transactions in a re­gular series, according to the summers and winters,down to that period of time when the Lacedæmoniansand their allies put an end to the empire of Athens, andbecame masters of the Icng-walls and the Piræus. Thewhole continuance of the war to this period was twenty*seven years. And, if any man be inclined to think thatthis intervening accommodation mould not be reckonedas war, he will find no arguments to support his opini­on: For, let him only survey the transactions as they aredistinctly related, and he will find it an absurdity to pro?nounce that an interval of peace, in which neither allthe restitutions were made, nor the benesits obtained,which the mutual stipulations required. And, settingthese considerations aside, in the Mantinean and Epidau-ric and other wars, transgressions were committed onboth sides. The confederates also of Thrace continuedstill to be as great enemies as ever. And the Bœotiansnever agreed to more than a bare cessation of arms, re*newable every tenth day.
Including, therefore, the first war, which lasted tenyears, and that suspicious interval which ensued, andended at last in a second open rupture, the whole conti­nuance, if computed by summers and winters, will turnout, upon enquiry, to have been so many years, andsome few additional days. And such as laid stress up*on the predictions of oracles can assent only to this com­putation as genuine. For my own part, I perfectlywell remember that, not only at the commencement,but even during the whole course, of the war, manysuch predictions were gi ^:n out, that " it must needs"continue three times nine years." I also lived through. jts whole extent, jn the very flower of my understand­ing and strength, and with a close application of my
thoughts







OCR Output








B. VII. THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. aor


rinthian. By these the Syracusans were now assisted incarrying on their work, till it was completely joined tothe traverse-wall.
Gylippus now made a circuit over Sicily, in order topromote the common cause; and to procure additionalforces tor the services both of land and sea; and to soli--cit the concurrence ot such States as hitherto had mani­fested, either no great inclination, or an open repug­nance, to join in the present war. Other embassadorsalso were dispatched, by the Syracusans and Corinthians,to Lacedæmon and Corinth, instructed to solicit a spee­dy reinforcement, to be transported into Sicily either intrading-vessels, or in boats, or by any other expeditiousmethods, since the Athenians had also sent for reinforce­ments from Athens. The Syracusans also assigned com­plements of men to their shipping, and sedulously train­ed them to the service of the sea, as designing on this e-lement also to try their fortune; nay, they labouredwith alacrity and application to increaie their strength inall respects.
Nicias, being sensible of this, and conscious that thestrength of the enemy and his own inability becamedaily greater, dispatched his messengers also to Athens,a custom he had ever observed, and upon all occasions,to report the particulars of his proceedings. But in hispresent situation it was more requisite than ever; sincenow he was convinced that he was environed with dan­gers; and unless, with the utmost expedition, they ei-called their troops, or sent them another, and that astrong, reinforcement, no hopes of preservation remain­ed. Apprehensive, farther, that the persons he shouldfend, either through want of proper address, or throughdefect of courage, or a passion to soothe the populace,might suppress the truth, he sent a true account os thingsin a letter wrote with his own hand. By this methodhe concluded that his own sentiments of things couldnot be concealed or invalidated by messengers; that theAthenians would be informed of the truth, and might
accordingly







OCR Output








32 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. B.V,


them from offices, and from buying and selling. Yet*in a short time ascerwards, they were again restored totheir full privileges.
The fame summer also the Dictideans took Thyssus,a town seated upon the Athos, and consederate withthe Athenians.
Through the whole course of the summer, the com­munication was open between the Peloponneflans andAthenians. Not but that the Athenians and LacedaMmonians began to be jealous of one another immediatelyafter the peace, as the reciprocal restitution of places wasnot punctually performed. For, though it had fallento the Lacedæmonians lot to begin these restitutions, yetthey had not restored Amphipolis and other cities. Theyhad compelled neither their consederates in Thrace, northe Bœotians, nor the Corinthians, to accept the peace,always pretending, that, ** should they refuse it, they** were ready to join with the Athenians in their com-"pulfionnay, they limited to them a time, thoughnot by a regular written notice, " within which, such as** did not accede were declared enemies to both." TheAthenians, therefore, seeing none of these points wereput in actual execution, became jealous of the Lacedæ­monians, as men who acted insincerely in every step; in­somuch, that, when Pylus was re-demanded, they re­fused its restitution, and heartily repented that they hadreleased the prisoners taken at Sphacteria. They alsokept possession of other places, and intended to do so,till the other side had performed their engagements.BUt the Lacedæmonians alledged " they had done eve-** ry thing in their power; that, for instance, they had** released such Athenians as were prisoners amongst** them, had recalled their soldiers from Thrace, and,"wherever they were masters of the execution, had"performed it. As to Amphipolis," they said, " they*? were not so far masters of it as to make an actual sur-** render. They had omitted no endeavours to bring"the Bœotians and Corinthians to a compliance, tore­


"cover







OCR Output








50 THE PEtOPONNESIAN WAR. B.V,


Mantineans, a thousand of each, and a party of Athe­nian horse who were at Argos in readiness to attend thefestival. But a great consternation had seized the wholeassembly of united Greece, lest the Lacedæmoniansshould return with an armed force; more especially,when Lichas, the son of Archesilaus, a Lacedæmonian,was scourged in the course by the under-osficers, be­cause, when his chariot had gained the prize, and thechariot of the Bœotian State was proclaimed victor,pursuant to the exclusion of the Lacedæmonians sromthe race, he stepped into the midst of the assembly, andcrowned the charioteer, desirous to make it knownthat the chariot belonged to him. Upon this, thewhole assembly was more than ever alarmed, and it wasfully expected that some strange event would follow:The Lacedæmonians, however, made no bustle > andthe festival passed regularly through its train.
After the Olympics, the Argives and their consede­rates repaired to Corinth, in order to solicit the concur­rence of that State. A Lacedæmonian embassy hap­pened also to be there. Many conserences were held,and nothing finally determined; but, upon feeling theshock of an earthquake, they parted each to their re­spective cities. And here the summer ended.
In the ensuing winter, a battle was fought, by theHaracleots of Trachis, against the Ænianians, and Do-lopians, and Meliensians, and some of the Thessalians.For the bordering nations were enemies to the cityof Heraclea, as this latter place had been fortified fortheir more especial annoyance. From its foundationthey had ever opposed it, preventing its growth to theutmost of their power; and at this time they deseated theHeracleots in a battle, in which Xenares, the son of Cni-dis, the Lacedæmonian commandant, was stain; anumber also of the Heracleots perished. And thus thewinter ended: and the twelfth year of the war came al­so to an end.
YEAR







OCR Output








B.VI. THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. 105


*' but most frequently from calm and prudent delibera-"tion. In behalf, therefore, of your country, which"is now on the brink of more critical dangers than e-"ver it was known before, hold up your hands in op-*' position, and support what I am going to move;"namely,—That " the Sicilians, confining themselves*' within their present limits, which we do not pretend** to abridge, with free navigation along the coast"of the Ionian gulf, and transacting their own affairs*' at large through the whole extent of the Sicilian seas,"be at liberty to take care of their own concerns with-'* out any molestation ."—And, in particular, to return
"the Egesteans the following answer: "Since,
"without the privity of the Athenians, they have al-'' ready involved themselves in a war against the Seli-"nuntians, let them also, without the concurrence"of the Athenians, bring it to a conclusion: That,*' moreover, we shall form no alliance for the future,*' as hath formerly been the case, with men whose indi-*' rest behaviour we must be forced to abet, though,"when we stand in need of reciprocal assistance from** them, we shail get none at all."
"And you, sir, who at present preside in this assem-"bly, if you are conscious that it is your dury to su-"perintend the public welfare, if you are desirous to"behave like a worthy patriot, put the question, and"call upon the Athenians once more to give their"votes. And, in cafe you are afraid to act contrary"to order, in proposing what is counter to a former"decree; reflect that, when so great a crowd of wit-"nesses are at hand to justify the ltep, you only act the*' part of a physician to your country, which hath fwal-** lowed down pernicious counsels; and that he best"dilchargeth the duty of first magistrate, who will"render to his country all the service he is able; at"least, with his eyes open, will never suffer it to be*' hurt."
In







OCR Output








34o THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. B.VIII.


even they caused their cavalry, and detachments of theirheavy-armed, light-armed, and archers, to sally outinto the field, who made a slaughter of such as were toofar advanced, and became masters of their arms anddead bodies ; — finding then he had proceeded upon'wrong presumptions, he again drew oft7 his army. Af­ter this, he himself, with the former garrison, conti­nued in the post of Decelea j but the late reinforce­ment, after some continuance in the country, was sentback to Peloponnesus.
Yet, subsequent to this, the four hundred persisted insending deputies to Agis with as much eagerness as e-ver j and, he now receiving them in a better manner,with encouragements to proceed, they even send an em­bassy to Lacedæmon to propose a treaty, being of allthings desirous to obtain an accommodation.
They also send to Samos a deputation of ten, in or­der to satisfy the army, and give them ample assurancethat " the oligarchy was not set up for the prejudice ei-"ther of the State or any individuals, but as the only"expedient left to preserve the whole community; —"that the number of those, who now had the manage-* * ment, was. five thousand and not barely four hundred;*1 and yet on no occasion whatever had the Athenians,"partly through employs in their armies abroad or o-* * ther foreign avocations, ever met together, to consulton affairs of state, in a number so large as five thou-** sand." Having instructed them to insert some otheralleviating pleas, they sent them away upon the first in­stant of the change they had made; apprehensive of whatactually came to pass, that the bulk of their seamenwould never quietly submit to an oligarchical govern­ment, and an opposition beginning there might over­turn all that had hitherto been done.
For at Samos some stirs had already arose about theoligarchy, and that which is now to be recited happenedexactly at the time that the four hundred seized the admi­nistration at Athens.
The







OCR Output








2io THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. B.VII.


a Corinthian, to command them. The Sicyonians alsosent two hundred heavy-armed along with the Corin­thians, and at their head Sargeus, a Sicyonian.
But the five and twenty sail of Corinthians, whichlaunched out to sea in the depth of winter, lay rangedin an opposite station to the twenty Attic at Naupactus,to give leisure for the embarkation of the heavy-armedon-board the transports from Peloponnesus. On thisaccount, principally, they were manned and fitted outto lea, that they might divert the attention of the A.thenians from the transport-fleet that was now puttingout, and fasten it wholly upon the hostile appearance ofthese triremes.
In the mean time, the Athenians, even during th«fortifications in hand at Decelea, and at the earliest ap­proach of spring, sent out thirty sail to cruize on thecoasts of Peloponnesus, under the command of Cha-ricles, the son of Apollodorus. His instructions were,farther, to touch at Argos, and to summon them, inconformity to the treaty of alliance, to embark a bodyof heavy-armed on-board the fleet.. Demosthenes also, according to promise, they sentaway for Sicily, with a numerous fleet, consisting ofsixty ships of Athens and five of Chios, on-board ofwhich were twelve hundred enrolled Athenians, and aslarge a number of islanders as with the utmost industrythey had been able to draw together. They had alsoamassed, from their other confederates subject: to A*thens, all manner of supplies they were able to furnishfor carrying on the war with vigour. But Demostheneswas farther instructed to sail at first in company withCharicles, and assist him in the cruize on the coasts ofLaconia. Demosthenes therefore, having stood over toÆgina, continued there, till the remainder of his force,which was yet behind, had completely joined him, andCharicles had taken on-board the Argive auxiliaries.
About the fame time in this spring Gylippus also re­turned to Syracuse, at the head of as large a force as
he







OCR Output








346 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. B.VIII.


"dons, for the sake of which alone the troops abroad"were submissive to the orders of the State at home.** Nay, in some points those at Athens had most egre-"gioufly offended, since they had overturned the Jaws** of their country, which those here had preserved, and** were exerting their efforts to compel others to the oh.".servance of them; and therefore, in every method"of valuation, the men, who here provided well for"the public welfare, were in no respect worse patriots*' than the men at Athens. Even Alcibiades, sliould*' they grant him an indemnity and a <afe return,*' would readily procure them the king's alliance. And,** what had the greatest weight, should they mifcarry.** in every branch of their present designs, many pla-** ces of refuge lay always open to men possessed of so4' considerable a fleet, in which they might find fresh"cities and another country."
After such occurrences in the aflembly convened bythe soldiery, and theconclusion of their mutual exhor­tations, they continued their preparations for war withunremitting diligence. But the deputation of ten, sentfrom the four hundred to Sacnos, being informed of theseproceedings when they were advanced in their voyageio far as Dek>s, thought proper to proceed no farther.
About 'this very time, the iPelopownesiaos on-boardthe fleet stationed at Miletus clangoured loudly amongstthemselves, that *' they are betrayed toy Aftyocbus and** Tifiaphernes; as the former had already .refused to*' engage, when themselves were hearty and in fine"condition, and the fleet of the Athenians was small j** nor would do so even now, when <the latter are repor-M ted lo be embroiled with intestine seditions, andtheir*' own ships are daily impairing; but, under pretextof a** Phœnician fleet to be brought up by Tifiaphernes,"an aid merely nominal, and which would never join•** them, he was ruining all by dilatory measures. And,•*' as for Tifiaphernes, it was never his intention to bring** up chat Atti't but^»e was p-lainly undermining the
** strength







OCR Output








THE
PELOPONNESIAN WAR.
BOOK VII.


(JYLIPPUS and Pythen, when they had refittedtheir ships, stood along the coast from Tarentum toLocri Epizephyrii. Here they received more certaininformation, that Syracuse was not yet completely in­vested, and that a succour of force.might be throwninto the town by the way of Epipolæ. They went nextto consultation, — whether, "keeping Sicily on the** right, they should endeavour at all hazards to enter*' Syracuse by sea; or, with Sicily on their left, should*' steer first to Himera from whence, attended by"the forces of that State and whatever additional"strength they could persuade to join them, they should"march thither over-land." It was determined to gofirst to Himera, especially as the four Athenian vesselswere not yet arrived at Rhegium, which Nicias at last,upon the certain intelligence that they were now atLocri, had detached to observe them. To be before­hand, therefore, with this detachment, they passthrough the straits, and, having touched only at Rhe­gium and Messene, arrive at Himera: whilst, in thelatter place, they prevailed upon the Himereans to con­cur with them in the war, and not only to entrust theirtroops under their command, but even to supply witharms such of the mariners as had navigated the vessels,and were therefore unprovided; for, their shippingthey had drawn ashore, and laid up at Himera. The
Selinuntians


•







OCR Output








3i6 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. B.VIII.


proceeded to make them this plain declaration —" And"yet this turn in your favour can never take place,** unless we temper our form of government with*' greater moderation, and intrust the administration in*' the hands of the few, that the king may have room- * to place confidence in us: For we are at present toif consult about the very being of the State, and not to"litigate the forms of its administration. The sequel*' may again enable us to return to the primitive form,"if we find it expedient; and we (hall recover Alci-"biades, the only man alive who is able to accomplish"the point."
The people, in fact, upon the first mention of anoligarchy, were stung to the heart: Yet, afterwards,convinced by Pisander that no other resource was left,dispirited by fear, and encouraged at the same time bya distant hope that another change might in the sequelbe brought about, they yielded up the point to the ne-ceffity of the State. Accordingly they pasted a decree,that " Pisander and the ten joined with him in theM deputation mould pass the sea, and negotiate the af-"fair with Tissaphernes and Alcibiades, in the method*( judged by them most conducive to the public ser-"vice." At the same time, as Pisander had preferreda charge of maladministration against Phrynichus, theydischarged him and his collegue Skirondas from theircommands, and sent away Diomedon and Leon to takeupon them the command of the fleet. The article, withwhich Pisander charged Phrynichus, was the betrayingof lasus and Amorges. The truth is, he thought himby no means a proper person to be let into-a share oftheir intrigues with Alcibiades.
And thus Pisander — after visiting in order all theseveral juntos of the accomplices, already formed in thecity with the view to thrust themselves into the feats ofjudicature and the great offices of state; and exhortingthem severally to act with unanimity, and by generalconcurrence to labour the demolition of the popular gor
vernmenc .,







OCR Output








INDEX.


Goaxis, I. 400.
Gongylus, the Eretrian, I. 101. .
Gongylnt,thcCorintbiaft, 11. 195.
Graœans, I. 2IO.
Grecians, account of the old, 1.2.how they undertook the Trojanexpedition, 7. applied them­selves to maritime affairs, 12,1 j.
Gjlippus, sent to command at Sy­racuse, II. 182. arrives there,196. his battles, 199. takesPlemmyrium,i\z. procures suc­cours, 24O. fights the Athe­nian, 243. stop their decamp­ment, 265. takes Niciat priso­ner, 276. brings home thefleet from Sicily, 292.
Gyrtonians, I. 144.
H.
Haliartians, I. 3?9-
liar mod us, history ofhim., II. 142.
Hege/ander, II. 209.
Hegefandrida;, II. 359, 363.
Hegefippidas, II. 51.
Helen, I. 7.
Hellanicus, \. f5. \
Hellen, son of Deucalion, I. 3.
Helots, their revolt from, and warwith, the Lacedæmonians, 1. 78.are seared, and 2000 of themmade away with, 378.
Heracleots, II. 50.
Hiradidtc, kill Euryftheus, I. 7.
Heraclides, the Syracu/an, II. 160,191.
H're ans, II. 63.
Hermaondas, 1. 220.
Hermocrates, his speech to the S/V/-I. 360. to the Syracusans,II. 123. his character, 159. en­courages the Syracusans, ibid,made a commander, 160. hisspeech ac Camarina, 162. hisstratagem, 264. banished, 352.
Herman, II. 360.
Hefiod, I. 296.
Hejsians, I. 299.
Heftiaans, I. 88. II. 246.
Heftiodorus, I. 184.
Hierenjians, I. 293.


Hieropion, I. 304.
Hippagretes, I, 34J.
Hipparchus, histpry ofhim.II.142.
Hippias,ixCan offisistrat us ,11.25 5
Hippias, the eldest son of Pj/^ra-ra/, history of him, II. 143.
Hippias, the Arcadian, I. 241.
Hippoclus, tyrant of Lamp/ecus,II. 147.
Hippoclus, son of Menippvs, II.49:.
Hippocrates, the Athenian, I. 3^6.his attempton Megara, 367. bisharangue, 390. killed at thebattle of Delium, 395. tyrantofGela, I.I. 96.
Hippocrates, the Spartan, I. 309.
Hippolocbidas, I. 376.
Hipponicus, I. 292.
Hipponoidas, II. 67.
Homer, I. 3, 8, 303.
Hyæans, I. 299.
Hybleans, II. 183.
Hyilon, II. 95.
Hyperbolas, II. 341.
I.
llerians, II. 93, 178.
lllyrians, I. 21, 414.
Imbrians, I. 220. II. 246.
Inarus, an African king, revolt!from the Persian monarch, !•80. crucified, 85.
Jolcius, II. 19, 23.
Iomans, had a great fleet in thereign of C;rux, and were mas­ters at sea, I. 11. subdued byCyra/, 12. revolt, 73. enemiesto the Dorians, 11. 168. usedto assemble at I. 298.
Ippensians, I. 299.
J/archidas, I. 23.
Jfchagoras, I. 421. II. 19, 22-
I/ocrates, I. 197.
Isthmionicus, II. 19, 23.
Italus, II. 93.
Itamanes, I. 241.
Italians, II. 5.
Zirjw, I. 148.
Ii.
Lacedamonians, their power inPeloponnesus, I. 9. their dress,$.
were







OCR Output








B.V. THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. 33


** cover the disposal of Panactum, and to obtain the"dismission of those Athenians who were prisoners of** war in Bœotia. Pylus however," they insisted,"should be immediately restored to them; at least that"the Messenians and Helots should be withdrawn, asct their people had been from Thrace; and then the** Athenians, if they pleased, might continue to garri-** fon that fortress themselves." Many meetings wereheld, and much argumentation passed between themthis summer; and, at last, they prevailed upon the A-thenians to withdraw from Pylus the Messenians and o-thers, as well Helots as all deserters whatever out of La-conia. These they transplanted to Crania of Cephalle-ne. This summer, therefore, was a seafon of inaction,and the intercourse was open between them.
In the ensuing winter, — for other Ephori were in of­fice, as the authority of those, under whom the peacewas made, was now expired, and some who were averseto the peace had succeeded,—embassies, attending from the'whole consederacy, the Athenians, and Bœotians, andCorinthians, also being present, and, after much reci­procal altercation, coming to no regular agreement, therest of them separated to their own homes without ef­fect. But Cleobulus and Xenares, those two of theEphori who were most inclined to dissolve the peace, de­tained the Bœotians and Corinthians for a private con­ference. In this they exhorted them "to act unani-** mously in promotion of their scheme; in pursuance of"which the Bœotians should first make themselves a"party in the Argive league, and then employ their"good offices to form an alliance between the Argives"and Lacedæmonians: For, by these methods, the"Bœotians could least of all be necessitated to take"part in the Attic peace y as the Lacedæmonians** would preser the renewal of friendship and alliance** with the Argives to the enmity of the Athenians and** the dissolution of the peace; since, to their certain"knowledge,, the Lacedæmonians had ever been desi-Vot.II. D "rous







OCR Output








B. VIH. THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. 327


vernment; and, after adjusting all previous measuresto guard the best against dilatory proceedings — re-passeth the sea to Tissaphernes, accompanied by his tenassociates in the deputation.
In the fame winter, Leon and Diomedon, being ar­rived at their post, at the head of the Athenian fleet,made an expedition against Rhodes; and there they findthe ships of the Peloponnesians hauled ashore. Theymade a descent upon the coast; and, after defeating inbattle such of the Rhodians as made head against them,they stood away for Chalce, and for the future carriedon the war more from thence than from Cos; for inthat station they were better enabled to watch the mo­tions of the Peloponnesian fleet. ,
But at Rhodes arrived Xenophantidas, a Lacedæ­monian, dispatched by Pædaritus from Chios, with ad­vice, that *' the works of the Athenians were almost"perfected; and, unless with the whole of their Ihip-"ping, they come over to relieve them, all is lost at'* Chios." A resolution accordingly was taken to en­deavour their relief; but, in the mean time, Pædaritus,at the head of his body of auxiliaries and the Chians,with all the force he could assemble together, sallied outagainst the rampart which the Athenians had raised a-rouod their ships, demolished a part of it, and madehimself master of those vessels which were hauled a-shore. The Athenians ran from all quarters to theirdefence; and, having first engaged and put to flightthe Chians, the rest of the forces under Pædaritus arealso defeated. Pædaritus is killed, as were numbers al­so of the Chians, and many arms were taken. And,after this, the Chians were blocked up by sea and landmore closely than ever, and a terrible famine raged a-mongst them.
The Athenian deputation, headed by Pisander, ha­ving reached Tissaphernes, enter into conference about
terms of accommodation. Alcibiades now, as the
conduct of Tissaphernes was still dubious and wavering,
Y 4 since







OCR Output








B.VIIL THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. 341


The party which at this juncture was subsisting atSa-mos against the nobility, and were of the popular side,having now altered their schemes, and followed the sug­gestions of Pilander ever since his return from Athens,and gained the concurrence of Athenians at Samos,combined together by oath to the number of about threehundred, and resolved to fall upon their antagonists, asfactious on the side of the people. Accordingly, theymurder one * Hyperbolus, an Athenian, a scurvy fel-
Z 3 low,
* Thii wai the person whom the ostracism made in some measure famous, andwho made the ostracism quite infamous. Plutarch hath repeated the story thrice.The following extract is taken from the life of Nicias.
"When the opposition wai very hot at Athena between Alcibiades and Nicias,
*' and the day for ostracixtng was drawing on, which at certain intervals the peu-
'* pie of Athens were used to inforce, and fend away into a ten years exile some"one citizen suspected of designs against their liberty, or odious for being too il-"lustrious or rich, —— each of these grand competitors was under grievous appre.« hensions, and with reason too, that it might be hit own lot to be exiled on this"occasion. Alcibiades was hated for his way of life, and for his bold and enter-"prising genius. Nicias was envied on account of his wealth; hit way of living"was neither sociable nor popular; as he avoided a crowd, and herded with a few"intimates, he gave great distaste ; besides, as he had often opposed the caprices of"the people, and constrained them to pursue their real interest, he was deep in** their displeasure. In short, the contest ran high between the young and military"men on one side, and the old pacific Athenians on the other, whilst each"were endeavouring to throw the ostracism upon the hated object. But,
"Parties ran high, and scoundrels got renown,
"Such distensions in the community gave scope to knaves and incendiaries. There*' was one Hyperbolus, of Ferithadae, very assuming without the least reason to be"fo; however, by dint of impudence working himself into power, and the disgrace*' of his country so soon as he had made himself conspicuous in it. On this oc-"canon Hyberbolus could have no suspicion of becoming himself the butt of an"eftratijm; he had a much better title to the gallows. Presuming, on the contrary,"that, when either of these great men were exiled, he himself could easily make"head against the other, he manifested great pleasure at the contest, and irritated"the fury of the people against them both. Nicias and Alcibiades, perceiving hla"roguish intent, conferred privately together; and, getting their several factions to"unite, secured one another, and threw the votes on Hyperbolus. Such a turn"at first gave the Athenians much pleasure and diversion j yet soon after they were*' highly chagrined, by reflecting that making such a scoundrel the object of it was"fluming the ostraeijm for ever. There was dignity even in punishments: The- ostracism was of such a nature u to suit a Thucydides, an Aristides, and men of


"iuch







OCR Output








26p THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. B. VII.


because room was wanting for tacks and passages; butboardings were frequent, as the vessels were continu­ally running Foul on one another, or in sheering off metwith others which were coming on. And, so long as avessel was in her approach, thole on the hatches pouredplentifully against her whole showers of javelins, andarrows, and stones; but, when they were once come tograppling, the soldiers, closing in firm battalion, en­deavoured by force to board one another. Nay, itmost frequently happened, through the straitness of sea-room, that, the very moment one party boarded theenemy, the very same moment they were also boardedthemselves, as two vessels lay often along-side of anenemy; nay, sometimes more, by necessity mingledand squeezed sast together. In the mean time, the careof the officers was not confined to one single point, butdistracted < n all sides by a whole round of perils: theywere here intent on their own defence, and there on theannoyance of the enemy. And, farther, the prodi­gious crash that was made by such a number of strips,running at the same instant upon one another, strucksuch dismay and loss of hearing, that the voices of thosewho issued out orders could no longer be distinguished.Loud, besides, were the exhortations and shouts of theofficers on both sides, partly in conformity to rule,though swelled at present by the ardour of contention.Amongst the Athenians it was shouted amain — *' To*'• force the passage, and now or never to exert their"utmost stretch of bravery to earn a safe return to"their native country :" — Amongst the Syracusansand their allies —- " How glorious it would be to hin-"der their escape, and by present victory for every one"amongst them to increase the growing honours of his"country!" The commanders also, on both sides, ifthey saw a vessel dropping off before it was overpow­ered by the enemy, called out aloud by name on thecaptain, demanding, on the Athenian side, " Did they*' retire on the wild presumption that yonder most hostile
"shore







OCR Output








4 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. B. V.


board Phæax, the son of Erasistratus, with'whom twoother persons were joined in commission, to execute anembassy there. For the Leontines, after the departureof the Athenians from Sicily, in consequence of thejoint-accommodation, had inrolled many strangers asdenizens of their city, and the populace had a plan in z-gitation for a distribution of the lands. The noble,alarmed at this, gain the concurrence of the Syracusansand eject the commons. They were dispersed, and wan­dered up and down as fo many vagabonds; whilst thenoble, striking up an agreement with the Syracusans, a-bandoned and left in desolation their own city, settlingat Syracuse as free citizens of that place. And yet,foon after, some of this number, dissatisfied even here,forsook Syracuse again, and seize upon Phoceæ, a quar­ter of the old city of the Leontines, and upon Bricin-niæ, which is a fortress in the Leontine. Hither thegreater part of the ejected commons resorted to them jand, adhering firmly together, from these strong holdsthey annoyed the country by their hostilities.
"When the Athenians had intelligence of this, theyfend out Phæax, to persuade, by all proper methods,their old allies in that country, and to gain, if possible,the concurrence of the other Sicilians, to take up arms,for the preservation of the people of Leontium, againstthe incroaching power of the Syracufans. Phæax, up­on his arrival, recommendeth the scheme successfully tothe Camarineans and Agrigentines. But his negotiationsmeeting with fome obstacles at Gela, he desisted fromaddressing himself to the rest, since he was assured hecould not possibly succeed. Retiring therefore through,the district of the Siculi to Catane, and calling on hisroad at Bricinniæ, and having encouraged the malcon­tents there totpersevere, he departed. Not but that,in this Sicilian voyage, both passing and repaffing, andalso upon the coast of Italy, he had urged to several ci­ties " how expedient for them was the Athenian"friendship."







OCR Output








62 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR: 6.V,


withdrawn, and quite out of their view, after lying in­actively in their posts, and no orders received sor apursuit, they began a second time to lay heavy imputa­tions on their own commanders;—that, "on the for-"mer occasion, the Lacedæmonians, when fairly* * caught near Argos, had been susfered to escape y** that now again, though they were openly flying, not"a soul must pursue them, but, through shameful in-* * dolence, their enemies are preserved, and themselves** are treacherously betrayed." The commanders, up­on the first noise of these clamours, were highly chagri­ned, but afterwards they marched them down srom theeminence, and, advancing into the plain, encampedthem there, as determined to fight the enemy. Theday following, the Argives and allies were drawn upto be in readiness for action, should the enemy appear.And the Lacedæmonians, marching away from thestream, to re-occupy their former camp near the tem­ple of Hercules, on a sudden perceived that the wholebody of their foes were ready drawn up in order of bat­tle, and had quitted their strong post on the eminence.
At this crisis, the Lacedæmonians were struck with agrearer astonishment than the memory of man couldparallel. For now, in an interval os time excee­ding short, they were bound to get every thing in rea­diness for fight: Yet, such was their diligence, that inan instant they were formed into a beautiful array, A-gis, their kingjissuing all the necessary orders, according tolaw; for, when a king leadeth their armies, all ordersare given by him: He himself declareth what he willethto be done to the * general-officers; they carry his ordersto the -f colonels; these to the J captains; who after­wards forward them to the § subalterns; by whom theyare communicated to all the private men under their re-
* Poltroarch».•\ Lochages,J Pentecontators,§ Enomatarchj.
spective







OCR Output








?8 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. B.V;


before they proceeded to hostilities, they sent a deputa­tion from the army to demand a conference; whom theMelians refused to introduce into the assembly of thepeople, but, in the presence only of the magistrates andthe few, commanded them to deliver their instructions.Upon this the Athenian deputation expressed them­selves as followeth:
** SINCE to the people in full assembly we are pre-*w eluded from speaking, lest the many,— hearing their"true interest declared at once by us in a continued"discourse, and proved by arguments fitted to per-"suade and tod strong to be refuted, ■ • might be*' wrought into our vie^i, for such, we are sensible, is"the plain construction of this our guarded audience by"the few: To you also, who now fit here, we recom-*' mend a method of making that point yet more se-"cure, — that, to the reasons we offer, you reserve not"your objections for one formal deliberate reply, but,"in cafe we offer any seeming incongruity, you imme-** diately interrupt us, and discuss the point. And tell"us, first, whether or not this proposal be agreeable."
The Melians, who composed the synod, answeredthus:
"THE candour of such leisurely debate, for mutual"information, is not to be disapproved: And yet there"seemeth to be great inconsistency between such can-"dour and those warlike preparations, with which you"no longer intend hereafter, but in present act have al-** ready beset us. For we perceive, that hither you arc*' come to be authoritative judges of your own plea,"and that the decision must needs prove fatal to us:*' Since if, superior in debate, we for that reason refuse
submission, our portion must be war t and, if we al-


 


:d upon the ifland. Yet,


"low







OCR Output








B.VI. THE PELOPONNESIAN WA&. i6t


The Athenian forces, which lay at Catana, soonmade $p excursion from thence to Messene, expectingto have it betrayed inro their power. But all the steps,taken previously for the purpose, were totally discon­certed. For Alcibiades, upon his quitting the com­mand when recalled to Athens, being convinced withinhimself that exile must be his portion, betrayed thewhole project (as he had been in the secret) to suchpersons at Messene as were attached to the Syracufans.The first step this party took was to put to death allthe persons against whom he informed. And, at thetime of this attempt being quite in a ferment and underarms, they carried their point, lo that those who wish­ed to give it were obliged to refuse admission to theAthenians. The Athenians therefore, after thirteertdays continuance on that coast, when the weather be­gan to be tempestuous, when their provisions failed*and no hope of success appeared, returned to Naxus* *, -fwhere, having thrown up an intrenchment roundtheir camp, they continued the rest of the winter*They also dispatched a trireme to Athens, to forwarda supply of money and horsemen to join them withoutfail by the beginning of the spring.
The Syraculans employed themselves this winter infortifying their city. They inclosed Temenites withintheir new works, and carried their wall through all_ that length of ground which faceth Epipolæ, that, incase they should be unable to keep the field, the enemymight have as little room as possible to raise counter­works of annoyance. They also placed a garrison atMegara, and another in Olympiæum. And all alongthe sea they drove rows of piles, wherever the groundwas convenient for descents. Knowing, also, that theAthenians wintered at Naxus, they marched out withall their force against Catana. They ravaged the terri-
-J- In the original is added xa.) Oqaxtcf. But all the editor! and note-writersgive it up, and opn they can make nothing ot' it.
Vol. II. M tory







OCR Output








jo4 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. B. VII.


"equal nay superior in number to our own. That"they will attempt it we have most certain ground to** believe, but the seasons of doing it are intirely in** their own option; which also enables them to preserve** their vessels ever fit for service, as they are not neces-** sitated to be continually in action to strike awe into"others: Nay, we should hardly be able to do the** like, though the number of our stripping were much** larger than it is, or though we were exempted from** the necessity we now lie under of keeping guard with*' them all. For, in case we make the least abatement** of our vigilance, We should be distressed for want"of necessaries, which even now we setch in with diffi-** culty in the very teeth of the enemy. To this must* * be ascribed the great waste of our seamen which hathalready been made, and whose number lessens from** day to day; since, obliged to fetch wood, and water,** and forage, from remote places, they are intercepted"by the enemy's horse. Even our servants, who have"nothing to dread from our ruinated condition, desert** us daily. And such foreigners, as were forced on-"board our fleet, depait with impunity to their own** cities; whilst others, who were allured to the service** by the greatntss of our pay, and imagined they were** rather come to plunder than to fight, when, contrary"to their hopes, they behold the ei;emy possessed of a** numerous fleet, and making a brave resistance in e-** very quarter, some catch at the least pretext to goo-** ver to the enemy, and others make shift to skulk a-** way, — never again to be retrieved in ib wide a coun-** try as Sicily. Nay, some of those, who, having at-** tended us hither from Athens, and since prevailed** with the captains of triremes to accept of the service"of Hyccarian slaves in redemption of their own, have"by this means iubverted our naval discipline.
** I am writing to men well-mlightened in naval as-"sairs, and perfectly convinced, trtat the flower of an e-** quipment is but of short duration, and how few of those
on-boand







OCR Output








Contents of the Second Volume.


CONTENTS of Book V,
YEAR X. The truce endeth. Cleon sent commander IntoThrace; his proceedings there. The battle of Arophipolis,
in which Brasidas and Cleon are killed. A general peace, Ailed
the Nician. An alliance, offensive and defensive, between the
Athenians and Lacedæmonians. — — P, I
Year Xs. The peace merely nominal; and Thucydides proceedeth
in his history of the Peloponnesian war. The Corinthians prac­
tise against the Lacedæmonians. An Argive league. No confi­
dence between the principal States. A train of negotiations,
A separate alliance between the Lacedæmonians and Bœotians,
contrary to article. Panactum demolished. — P. 23
Year XII, The demolition of Panactum and the separate alliance
highly resented'at Athens. Many are scheming a rupture, but
especially Alcibiades. By his means a negotiation is brought on
at Athens, and an alliance formed with the Argives. The La­
cedæmonians forbidden to assist at the Olympic games. P. 36
Year XIII. War between the Argives and Epidaurians. The La­
cedæmonians throw a garrison into Epidaurus; and the Atheni­
ans replace the Helots and Messenians in Pylus. P. 51
Year XIV. The Lacedæmonians take the field against the Argives.
Two large Arm/es face one another within sight of Argos, yet
part without engaging. The Lacedæmonians take the field a
second time. The battle of Mantinea, The Argives enter into
leagu* with the Lacedæmonians. — — ^* 54-
Year XV. Fresh stirs at Argos in favour of the Athenians. P. 74.
Year XVI. Expedition of the Athenians against the isli of Melos.
The conserence in form, by way of dialogue. The Athenians
become masters of that island. — — P. 76
CONTENTS of Book VI.
The Athenians resolve on the expedition to Sicily. Description of
that island. — — — — P. 92
Year XVII. The debate in the assembly of the people at Athens a-
bout the expedition. The generals nominated with full powers.
The affair of the Mercuries. Departure of the grand fleet for Si­
cily. Proceedingsat Syracuse. The Athenian fleet arrives on
the coast of Italy. Alcibiades recalled, to take his trial about
the Mercuries and profanation of the Mysteries. A digression,—
containing the true account of a former revolution at Athens, be­
gun by Harmodius and Aristogiton. Alcibiades flies, and is
proclaimed a traitor. . The Athenians land at Syracuse. A battle
ensues, in which the Athenians are victorious; but, soon after,
they return to Catana. The negotiations at Camarina. Alcibi­
ades at Sparta. — — — P. 99
Year XVIII. The Athenians land again at Syracuse, take Epipolæ
by surprize, and begin to invest Syracuse in form. Battles: The
Athenians carry on their works; counterwork of the Syracusans.
Aid sent to Syracuse from Peloponnesus, under the command of
. . . Gylippus;







OCR Output













OCR Output








B.VI. THE PELOPONNESIAN WA?. 95


 


protection of his party; yet, being ejected by them,and then having founded Thapsus, he dies. His fol­lowers, upon this, removed from Thapsus; and, Hy-blon, a Sicilian king, betraying another pjace into theirhands, and becoming himself their conductor, they fet­tled those Megareans who are called Hyblæan; and, af­ter a continued possession of two hundred forty-five years,they were expeljed out of their city and territory by Ge»Ion, tyrant of the Syracusans. Yer, before this eject­ment, about a hundred years after thejr settlementthere, they-had sent out Pammilus, and built the citypf Selinus. Pammilus had come thither more latelyfrom Megara, their mother-city, and assisted them inmaking this new settlement at Selinus.
Antiphemus from Rhodes, and Entimus from Crete,each leading a separate colony, founded Gfcla in con­junction, in the forty-fifth year after the foundation ofSyracuse. The name of this npw city was taken fromthe river Gela: Yet the spot where the city now stands,and which was first walled round, is called Lindii. Buttheir polity was framed upon the Doric model.
In the hundred and eighth year, as near as possible,after this last settlement, the Geloans built Acragas, gi­ving the city its name from the river Acragas. Theydeclared Aristonous and Pystilus to be its founders, andgave it the civil institutions of Gela.
Zancle was originally founded by a band of pirates,who arrived there from Cyme, a Chalcidic city in Opi-cia; though afterwards a numerous reinforcement, fromChalcis and the rest of Eubcea, joined them, and pos­sessed that district in community. The founders werePerieres and CratæmeneSi one of them from Cyme,the other from Chalcis. But the name of Zancle wasfirst of all gi ven it by the Sicilians, becauie in shape itbears relemblance to a scythe, and the Sicilians call nscythe zamlum. But, in procels of time, these peoplewere driven from thence by the Samians and other Io-nians, who, flying from the Medes, had landed in Sici­







OCR Output








B.VL THE PELOPONNESTAN WARj 109


"soil, or to secure even personal safety, nor is the re-gion supplied with the needful stores of resistance.** It is the habit of each, either to execute his purpose"by artful language, or to wrest it from the public by"sedition. These arc all his resources; and, if they"fail, at the worst, he barely shifts his habitation. 1cis therefore improbable that a rabble, so jumbled to-gether, will ever be. unanimousty guided by one con-"certed plan, or combine together for its just execu-"tion. Each moment they will be veering about to"such expedients as happen most to soothe their ca-"price; and the more, upon account of these seditions,"in which, we are informed, they are already em-** broiled.
"Their number of heavy-armed, it must also be ob-** served, is not so large as the pompous accounts of"fame have made it; nor does the sum total of the"Grecians amongst them turn out so considerable as each** city hath computed for her own. But Greece, in"this manner ever addicted most terribly to belie her**' own numbers, hath been sound, in the present war,"scarce able to provide hersels with arms. *
"Such, according to the best informations I have** been able to collect, is the present condition of af-"fairs in Sicily. Nay, there are means within our"reach still more to facilitate its reduction. For we"shall obtain the concurrence of many barbarians seat-"ed there, who, from inveteracy against the Syracu-** sans4 will join us to attack them. Neither can any** obstacles accrue from the situation of our affairs near-** er home, if you only view it in the just and proper* * light.
** The bravery of our fathers, though opposed by the"very same enemies, who at present, it is urged,** should we fail for Sicily, must be left behind us,"though opposed by all the power of the Mede, erected** this our empire, by the sol; refource of their superi-** ority in naval power. The Pcloponnesians, farther,


"have







OCR Output








a88 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. B.VIII.


from the other sea into that which lies towards Athens,that all in a body,might stand away for Chios; as wellthose which Agis had destined for the service of Lesbosas the rest. The whole number of shipping belongingto the'alliance, now assembled together there, amount­ed to thirty-nine.
But Calligitus, truly, and Timagoras refused, in thename of Pharnabazus, to have any participation in theexpedition to Chios; nor would part with the moneythey had brought with them, which was * five andtwenty talents, to disburse this equipment. They in­tended to get another fitted out, which should sail awayunder their own orders.
As for Agis, when now he perceived that the Lace­dæmonians were determined to go first to Chios, he nolonger suffered his own projects to clash with those of theState; but the confederates now assembling at Corinthproceeded to draw up a plan of operations. It was ac­cordingly agreed, that they should go first to Chios,under the command of Chalcideus, who fitted out thefive ships in Laconia; from thence to Lesbos, underthe command of Alcamenes, whom Agis had destinedfor that service; in the last place they should proceedto Hellespont, and in this service it was agreed before*hand, that Clearchus, the son of Ramphias, shouldtake upon him the command. But the first step shouldbe the transportation of a moiety of their shipping acrossthe isthmus, which were immediately to stand out tosea, that the attention of the Athenians might be lessengaged upon such as were already in their course thanon those which were to follow; for now they determi­ned to cross the sea in an open insulting manner, asthey contemned the present impotence of the Athenians,because they had no considerable force any where at sea.
When these resolutions were formally completed,they immediately transported one and twenty ships.
* 4845/. 151. Sterling.
Expeditious







OCR Output








B.VI. THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. 133


v.


** But, if not one tittle of these intended invasions be true,"which is my firm opinion, the State will not be struck** into a panic by your rumours, will never place the** command of her forces in your hands, so as to rivet"a voluntary servitude upon herself. She, on the con-"trary, will exert her own vigilance and discretion j she"will interpret the rumours you have spread as so many*S acts against her welfare, and will not give up her"liberty to accounts expressly forged to terrify the ear j"but, aware in time, by no means to intrust herself into"your managements will leave no possible method of*4 defence untried/' < 1 '-*
Thus spoke AthenagoraS. But here one of the gene-sals rising up prevented any other person from continu­ing the debate, and put an end to the present heats bydelivering himself thus":
"I T is contrary to all decorurn, both for those who** speak to pourforth calumniations against one another,** or for those who hear to receive them with attention.** At present, we are rather concerned to yield regard** to the informations which are brought us, that every*c individual and this community may be timely prepa-** red to repel the invaders. Andj if this should prove** at last to be mere superfluity of care, yet what harm** can possibly accrue from such an equipment of the"State with horses, and arms, and such other habili-** ments as are the glory of war? We ourselves shall** take all proper care os the provisions of war and the** levy of soldiers j and at the fame time shall circulate"our messengers to the cities around us, and to watch** the appearance of the foe; and shall expedite every** point judged needful in the present emergence Some** care of these points hath already been taken, and,** what more we shall perceive to be expedient, we shall** on the proper occasions communicate to you."
When the general had expressed himself thus, theSyracusans broke up the assembly and departed.
K 3 The







OCR Output








THE


PELOPONNESIAN WAR.BOOK VIII.


W HEN the news was reported at Athens, no be­lief tor a long time was given, — even though the mostcreditable part of the soldiery, who had made their es­cape from this disastrous business, proved it by a cir­cumstantial relation, — that so total a destruction wasbecome their lot. But no sooner were they convincedof its *reality, than their resentments burst forth againstthose of the orators who had advised and recommendedthe expedition, as if their own suffrages had never con­curred to its execution. They farther vented their gallagainst those retailers of oracles and foretellers of futureevents, against all in general, who, pretending privity
* P.'utarcb, from report, tells an odd story on this occasion.—" A stranger, wh*"(it seems) had come ashore at the Piræus, and had set him down in a bar-"ber's /hop, began to talk about the overthrow in Sicily, as of a point well"known at Athens. The barber, hearing it before any other person had the*' news, ran with all speed up into the city; and, having first informed the"magistrates of it, spread the report in an instant all over the forum. Consterna-"tion and tumult at once ensued. The magistrates convened an assembly of the'' people, and produced the barber before them. He was called upon to tell from"whom he had the news; and, when he could not name the person, being looked— upon as an idle fellow and a disturber of the public peace, he was immediately*' tied upon the wheel, and a long time whirled round upon it, till several per-'* sons arrived who gave a minute and circumstantial account of the whole."Life of Niciat.


 


to







OCR Output








fc.VI. THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. n9


nalties of law; and only, if acquitted, to take upon him thecommand. He conjured them, farther, ** to receive no"calumnious accusations against him in his absence;"but if he was really guilty to put him instantly to-'* death $ — that, in common prudence it could not"be justified, to intrust a person, so heavily charged,** with the command of so large an armament, before"his innocence had been regularly explored."
But his enemies — apprehensive that, in case he wasbrought to an immediate trial, he would be supportedby all the favour of the soldiery; and, that the people,whose idol he was, might possibly relent, because in com­pliment to him the Argives and some of the Mantineansaccompanied the expedition, — opposed and put osf theprosecution. They put the management of this point iinto the hands of a set of orators, who urged that ** for** the present he might proceed in his voyage, that the* * expedition ought not to be deferred on his account,"and upon his return a day mould be assigned for his"trial." Their design was to gather more heavy mat­ter against him, which in his absence could be moreeasily effected, and then to recal him and force him tohis trial. In short it was resolved that" Alcibiades** should go the voyage." 1
Things being thus determined, and the year nowadvanced to the middle of summer, the fleet set sailfor Sicily. Orders had been iffued before for the bulkof the consederates, and victualling-ships, and smallcraft, and all the tenders in general, , to repair to andassemble together at Coreyra; that, from thence, in abody, they, might cross the Ionian to the cape of Japygia.But such .as were subjects of Athens, and such of theconfederates as were then in the city, marching down tothe Piræus on the appointed day by morning's dawn;went on-board the ships in order to weigh and be gone.They were conducted thither by a great crowd, it maybe laid by the whole crowd of Athens, both citizensand strangers. The former attended, to perform the., I 4 parting







OCR Output








B.VIir. THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. 3rr


*' in cafe an accommodation be taken in hand, be it*' settled by both parties acting in conjunction.
"But, whatever army be brought info the territo-** ries of the king at the request, and summons of the"king, the king to defray the expence.
*' And, if any of the States, comprehended in this"league with the king, invade the territories of the"king, the others to oppose and act with all their power** in defence of the king.
"And, if any province belonging to the king, or"subject to his dominion, invade the territory of the"Lacedæmonians or confederates; the king to oppose,** and with all his power to defend the party invaded."
When the finishing-hand was put to this treaty,Theramenes, after delivering up the fleet to Astyo-chus, puts to sea in a fly-boat, and entirely disappears.-
But the Athenians from Lesbos, having now madetheir passage and landed their forces in Chios, and be­ing masters of the coast and sea, fortified Delphinium;a place remarkably strong by nature towards the land,abounding, farther, with harbours, and seated at noconsiderable distance from the city of the Chians. And,now the Chians, dispirited by the many defeats theyhad already received, and, what is worse, far from be­ing actuated by general unanimity, (bur, on the con­trary, Tydeus the Ionian and his adherents havingbeen lately put to death by Pædaritus for atticizing,and the rest of the citizens obliged by necessity to sub­mit to the few, each individual amongst them suspect­ing his neighbour,) — the Chians now remained quiteinactive. Thus, for the reasons above-mentioned, theyneither looked upon themselves, nor the auxiliaries un­der Pædaritus, as a match for the enemy. Yet, astheit last resource, they send to Miletus, requesting As-tyochus to come over to their succour. But, as he wasdeaf to their intreaties, Pædaritus fends a letter to La­cedæmon about him, which accused him of injustice.
X 4 And







OCR Output








180 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. B.VI.


"the command, that those who are ready he maydis-*' cipline to service, and force such to join as on choice"would refuse their concurrence: for, by such a step,'* those who are already your friends will be animated"with higher degrees of resolution, and those who"fluctuate at present will join you with a smaller sense"of fear.
"It behoves you also to make war upon the Athe-*' nians at home in a more declared and explicit man-"ner that the Syracusans, convinced that you have"their welfare at heart, may make a more obstinate*' resistance, and the Athenians be rendered less able to"fend reinforcements to their troops in Sicily.
"It behoves you farther to raise fortifications at De-"celea in Attica; a step which the Athenians have*' ever most terribly apprehended, and think that in"that point alone you have not put their resolution to"its utmost trial in the present war; and that assuredly.*' must be pronounced the most effectual method ofdis-"tresfing an enemy, to discover what he dreads most,"and then know how to afflict him in his most tender*' part: For it is a reasonable conclusion, that they will"tremble most at incidents which, should they take** place, they are inwardly convinced must most senfi-"bly affect them. As to the benefits which you your-"selves shall reap by fortifying Decelea, and of what*' they shall be debarred, I shall pass over many, and


"this, ail the natural commodities of the country will"fall into your hands; some by way of booty, the rest*' by voluntary contributions. They will instantly be"deprived of the profits cf the silver-mines at Laurium,*' as well as of the rents of their estates and the fees"of their courts. The tributes from their dependents"will allo be paid with less punctuality; since the lat-"ter (hall no sooner perceive that you are earnestly"bent on war, than they will shew an open disregard*' for Athens.


only concisely point out the most i


 


By


"That







OCR Output








B.VIII. THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. 313


But, about the fame juncture of time, the Chiansand Pædaritus, not bearing to acquiesce under the di­latory answers of Astyochus, pressed him, by repeatedmessages, " to come over with the whole of his force,and relieve them from the present blockade; and by** no means to look indolently about him, whilst the*' .most important of the confederate States in Ionia was"shut up by sea, and by land exposed to rapines."For, the domestics of the Chians, —- being many innumber, nay, the largest that any one community ex­cept the Lacedæmonians kept, and accustomed, be­cause of their multitude, to be punished with extraor­dinary severity for their misdemeanors, —- no foonerjudged that the Athenian forces, by throwing up works,had gained a sure footing in the island, than large num­bers of them at once deserted to the enemy, and wereafterwards the persons who, as persectly well acquaintedwith the country, committed the heaviest depredations.The Chians, therefore, urged, that ** the last necessity*l called upon him, whilst yet there was hope or a pol-** Ability of success remaining, (the works round Del-** phinium yet incomplete, and a larger circle even still** to be taken in and fortified for the security of the** camp and the fleet,) to undertake their relief." Uponthis, Astyochus, who, to verify his threats, had neverbefore thought seriously about it, being now convincedthat the whole consederate body was bent on their pre­servation, determined in person to go to their succour.
But, just at this crisis, advice is brought him fromCaunus, that " twenty-seven sail of ships and the af-"sistant-council of Lacedæmonians are arrived." Con­cluding, upon this, that every other point ought to bepostponed to this large reinforcement, that his junctionwith it might be effected in order to invest them withthe sovereignty of the sea, and that the Lacedæmonianswho came to inspect his own conduct might securelyfinish their voyage; throwing up immediately all con­cern for Chios, he sailed away for Caunus. But, ha­







OCR Output








B.VI. THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. 131


 


** if favoured with your concurrence, my care mall be"successful. To this end I must prevail upon you,"who are the many, to co-operate with me, whilst I"inflict, upon these artificers of faction, the punishment"they deserve, not barely for overt commissions, (fog*' in these they are not easily caught,) but for all the"treacherous plots which, how desirous soever, they** are not able to execute. For we ought not only to"award our vengeance on the open outrages of an ene-*' my, but to disarm his malice by wife precaution;"because the man, who will not thus in time disarm"it, will feel its blow before he is aware.
"On the few I have also to bestow, partly some re-*' proofs, partly some cautions, and partly some in-** structions. For chiefly by these methods I judge itc* feasible to deter them from their factious designs.*' Let me therefore request from you, ye youths of*' Syracuse, the solution of a point which hath frequent-*' ly occurred to my own imagination. —What is it*' you would have? — An immediate possession of the"government of your country ? — Why, the very"laws of that country declare you incapable of it.** And these very laws were intended, rather to exclude** you, so long as you are unequal, than to give you a** disgraceful rejection when you shall be equal, to the*' trust. But, farther, — Are you not piqued in heart"at being placed upon the same rank and level with"the bulk of your fellow-citizens? And where wouldM be the justice in awarding distinctions of honour and** trust to those, who are in no respect differenced from*' others? It may perhaps be urged, that a democracy'' is repugnant to the dictates both of wisdom and*' justice; that the .most opulent members of a StateM are intitled to its highest honours, are best able to** superintend the public welfare. But to this I reply,** that, in the first place, by the word people is signifiedff a whole community, including its every individual *
K 2 ** but







OCR Output








12+ THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. B.VL


** our own Syracuse, which, if once reduced, they are"well assured that nothing will be able afterwards to** give a check to their arms. Taking it therefore for** grarfted that they will be immediately upon us, delibe-** rate in what manner you may make the most gallantdefence in the present posture of your strength; care-ful that through contempt you be not taken unprovi-** ded, nor through incredulity abandon the means of** preservation. Nor, farther, let those, who are con-** vinced of their immediate appearance, be terrified at** the boldness or strength of their undertaking. For"they will not be able to hurt us more than we shaH"be enabled to retaliate upon them. Nor are they"more beyond our reach, because they invade us with** so vast an armament; since this, in regard to the'* other Sicilians, will plead more abundantly in our** cause; for, terrified at the foe, they will be disposed


"us. And if thus, in the train of affairs, we are eitherenabled to defeat their arms, or merely to force their** return, their schemes unexecuted and their ambition"disappointed, (for I am not in the least afraid that"their sanguine expectations can be glutted with suc-** cess,) such events would reflect the highest glory upon"you, and complete what I firmly hope.
** It is a truth evinced by facts, that few considerable"armaments of either Grecians or Barbarians, which** have been sent out on remote expeditions, have rc-"turned successful. Nor, farther, are our present in-"vaders more numerous than the Syracusans them-** selves or their friends of theneighbouring States, whose"strength mere hostile dread will cement and bind fast"together. If therefore, though merely for wantof need-"ful supplies, they incur miscarriages on a foreign shore i** if they prove unsuccessful, though chiefly throughtheir own misconduct; the whole honour must how-* * ever rest with us, as if we had ruined their projectsby art and management. Even these very Athenians


** with higher warmth of friendihi


 


with


were







OCR Output








Ui THE PELOFONNESIAN WA$. B. VI.


others of the soldiery who attended him in the expedi­tion, against whom informations had been given thatthey were guilty of impiety in the affair of the Mysteries,and against some of them in that of the Mercuries. For,the Athenians, after the departure of the fleet, continu­ed to make as strict an inquisition as ever into the crimescommitted in regard to the Mysteries, and also in regardto the Mercuries. What fort of persons the informerswere was no part of their concern, but, in the heightof jealousy, giving credit indiscriminately to all,through too great a deference to men of profligate andabandoned lives, they apprehended and threw into prisonthe most worthy citizens of Athens; esteeming it moreprudent by pains and tortures to detect the fact, thanthat a person of irreproachable character, when onceaccused through the villany of an informer, shouldescape without the question. For, the people, havinglearned by tradition how grievous the tyranny of Pisi-strams and his sons became at last; and, what is more,that it was not overthrown by themselves and Har-modius, but by the industry of the Lacedæmoni­ans; lived in a constant <iread of such another usur­pation, and beheld all these incidents now with mostsuspicious eyes. But, in fact, the bold attempt of Har-inodius and Aristogiton, took its rife merely from acompetition in love. The particulars of which I shallhere unfold more largely, to convince the world, thatno other people, no not even the Athenians themselves,have any certain account, either relating to their own,tyrants or the transactions of that period. , ,
_ The truth is, that Pisistratus dying possessed of thetyranny in a good old age, not Hipparchus (as is gene­rally thought) but Hippias, the eldest of his sons, washis successor in power. Harmodius being at this timein the flower of his youth and beauty, Aristogiton acitizen of Athens, nay a citizen of the middle rank,doated upon and had him in his possession. But, someattempts having been made upon,Harmodius, by Hip-, parchus


 







OCR Output








 







OCR Output








B.VI. THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. 141


 


soldiers, without giving any alarm, pulled down a littlegate of a very sorry structure, and then, entering thecity, walked up and down in the market. But, such ofthe Cataneans as were of the Syracusan party nosooner found that the army was got in, than, struck intoa sudden consternation, they stole presently out of thecity. The number of these was but trifling. The restof the inhabitants decreed an alliance with the Athenians,and encouraged them to fetch over the remainder oftheir armament from Rhegium.
This point being carried, the Athenians, having pas­sed to Rhegium, were soon with the whole of their fleetunder sail for Catana, and, on their arrival there, theyformed a proper station for their ships and men.
But now intelligence was brought them from Cama-rina that" if they would come to countenance them,"that city would declare on their sidei" and that"the Syracusans are busy in manning their fleet."With the whole armament therefore they steered alongthe coast, touching first at Syracuse. And, when theyfound that no fleet was there in readiness to put to sea,they stood off again for Camarina; and there, approach­ing the shore, they notified their arrival by the voiceof a herald. Admittance was however refused them,the Camarineans alledging that" they were bound byu solemn oaths to receive only one single ship of"the Athenians, unless of their own accord they should"require a larger number." Thus disappointed they putout again to sea; and, having made a descent on somepart of the Syracusan territory, they picked up a booty,till the Syracusan cavalry making head against therfland cutting off some of their light-armed who were strag­gled to a distance, they re-embarked, and went againto Catana.
On their return thither they find the Salaminian ar-rived from Athens to fetch back Alcibiades, by pub­lic order of the State, to take his trial for the crimescharged against him by his country, and also soms


Gihtfs







OCR Output








B.VIT. THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. 197


the herald to move off. And now both sides were busyin marshalling and disposing their men for battle.
But Gylippus, who had made an observation thatthe Syracusans were in great confusion and could noteasily be formed into proper order, made his army fallback into more open ground. Nicias gave them nodisturbance whilst they were making this motion; but,without advancing, stood close under his works: and,when Gylippus found that the enemy would not moveforwards to attack him, he made his forces wheel off tothe high-ground called Temenites, where they reposedthemlelves for the night.
The next morning he drew up the greatest part ofhis army before the works of the Athenians, to preventtheir sending out succours to more distant posts: for hehad detached a party to attack the fort of Labdalum,which he carried by storm, and put all the garrisonfound within it to the sword. Labdalum was so situ­ated, in regard to the Athenian posts, that they couldhave no view of what was transacting there. The sameday also an Athenian trireme, as it was entering theharbour, is taken by the Syracusans.
After so much success, the Syracusans and allies setabout raising a counterwork along Epipolæ. Begin-ning at the city, they carried it upwards towards thesingle wall which had an oblique inclination; and in­tended that, in cafe the Athenians could not stop itscompletion, it mould entirely exclude them from per­fecting their circumvallation, The Athenians, havingperfected their works to the sea, had now remountedthe eminence; and, as some parts of their work werebut weak, Gylippus drew out his army by night, andwas marching to demolish those: but the Athmians,•who passed the night without their worus, were nosooner aware of it, ihan they also marched away to de­fend them. Upon which, Gylippus, finding them a-larmtd, desisted, and made his army retreat to theirformer posts. This however occasioned the Atheni-
O 3 ans







OCR Output








-330 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. B.VIII.


"But the Lacedæmonians and confederates, so soon*' as the king's fleet shall be come up, shall have it in*' their own option to maintain, if they please, their"own fleet; or, in case they choose to take subsist-*f ence from Tissaphernes, he is bound to supply them.*' Yet the Lacedæmonians and confederates, at the ex-"piration of the war, shall repay to Tissaphernes"whatever sums they may thus receive from him.
*' When the king's fleet cometh up, let the ships"of the Lacedæmonians, and those of the confede-"rates, and those of the king, carry on the war in con-"cert, by the joint counsels of Tissaphernes and of the** Lacedæmonians and confederates. .
"And, whenever a peace with the Athenians be"thought adviseable, it shall be concluded hy the joint"consent of both parties."
The treaty was made and ratified in these terms.And, after this, Tissaphernes employed himself withdiligence to bring up the Phœnician fleet, as hath beenmentioned, and duly to perform all the branches what­ever of his engagements. At least he was willing toconvince the Peloponnesians, by the measures he took,that he was heartily in earnest.
In the close of this winter the Bœotians got possessionof Oropus by treachery, though an Athenian garrisonwas in it. The business was effectuated by the ma­nagement of a party of Eretrians, and those Oropianswho were plotting the revolt of Eubœa. For, as thistown was situated over-against Eretria, it was impossiblebut, whilst in Athenian hands, it must terribly annoyboth Eretria and the rest of Eubœa. Having thereforethus gained Oropus, the Eretrians repair to Rhodes,inviting the Peloponnesians to come over to Eubœa;but their inclinations were rather to relieve Chios, howsadly distressed. Putting therefore from Rhodes withthe whole of their fleet, they stood away to sea; and,having gained the height of Triopium, they descry the
Athenian







OCR Output








126 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. B.Vf,


"which,' though perhaps, inured as you are to domesticindolence, ic may not gain your ready approbation,rt I (hall however boldly recommend. Would all of"us in general who are inhabitants of Sicily, or at least** would only we Syracusans, with what other people"we Can get to assist us, put out instantly to sea with** all the ships we have in readiness, and victualled** but for the space of two months;— would we then** giVe'these Athenians the meeting either at Tarentum** or cape Japygia, and there convince them, that, be-"fore they enter the lists of war for the conquest of« Sicily, they must fight for their passage across the"Ionian ; — we should then strike them with the utmost** terror, and infinitely perplex them with the thought** * that from a friendly port we shall sally forth to guard** our out-works, (for Tarentum will readily receive us,}** whilst they have a long tract of sea to pass with all** their cumbersome train, and must find it hard,


** the regular order.' As their course must thus be slow,'"and must advance only in exact conformity to orders,"we shall have a thousand opportunities to attack them.** If again they clear their ships for action, and in a
body bear down expeditiously upon us"* they must** ply hard at their oars; and, when spent with their** toil, "we'can fall upon them. Or, in case that may** not be judged adviseable, we have it always in our"power to retire into the harbour of Tarentum. And** thus the Athenians, if, in constant expectation of be-"ing fought with at sea they must make their passage** with a small portion only of their stores, will be re-
duced to great distress on coasts, which will afford** them no supply. Should they choose to continue in** their station, they must infallibly be blockedupin.it."Should they venture a passage, they must unavoidably** leave their tenders and storeships behind; and, as** they have no assurance of a hearty reception from the** cities on the coasts, must be terribly dismayed.


 


"It







OCR Output








a4i THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. B.VII.


The Syracusans, who had soon an intelligence of theirdesigns, were now more animated than ever to pressbriskly on the Athenians, as on men who had givenprools of their own inward conviction that they wereno longer a match for their foes cither by sea or onland; fincei with other thoughts, they never couldhave projected a re-embarkation. Apprehensive, atthe lame time, that, mould they remove to any otherquarter of Sicily, they would become more disficult ofreduction, they saw the necessity of engaging them bysea without a moment's loss, whilst yet they had anadvantage in compelling them to sight. Upon this,they ordered the complements of men on-board theirships, and exercised their crews as many days as Wasjudged susficient. But, when opportunity offered ofacting with advantage, on the first day they assaultedthe Athenian intrenchments; and, a party of heavy-armed and horsemen, though not numerous, sallyingout at some of the ports to beat them off, they cut offsome of the heavy-armed from the rest of that party,


As the spot, farther, on which the assault is made, wasnarrow, the Athenians lose seventy horses and a smallnumber of their heavy-armed. Nothing more hap­pened on this day, as the army of the Syracusans nowmade their retreat.
"a sleilfu) soothsayer with him; for his intimate, Stilbidet, who had cured much"of his superstition, had died a little before j since this portent (as Philochoru*"fays) was not a bad one, but an excellent good one, for a flying army; since act,"which are accompanied with fear stand in need of concealment, and light it ever"an adversary to them. Besides, after eclipses of the son or moon, it was the u-« soat custom (as Autoclidrs hath informed us) to hold only a three days cessation"from business. But Nicias persuaded himself that a complete revolution of the"moon ought to be waited for; as if with his own eyes he had not seen her shine"bright again, when the had passed the sliadow and the earth's interposition. Yet,"throwing up all attention to other points, he minded nothing hot sacrificing, till


and, having


 


them to flight, follow the pursuit.


"his enemies attacked him." Life of Nie'uu.


But,







OCR Output








12 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. B.V.


to shew their high respect fdr the Lacedæmonian a!li-'ance, as they stood in great dread of the Athenians.For, considering their hostile embroilments with theAthenians, they thought it neither for their interest norsatisfaction to continue the honours of Agnon.
To the Athenians they also delivered the bodies oftheir dead. The number of them, on the Athenianside, amounted to six hundred, whereas the enemy lostbut seven men. This was owing to the nature of thefight, which had not been carried on in a regularvman-ner, but was rather a Daughter, in consequence of asurprise and sudden consternation. After the receptionof cheir dead, the Athenians sailed away for Athens;but those under the orders of Clearidas applied them­selves to re-settle and secure Amphipolis.
About the same time, in the close of this summer,Ramphias, and Autocharidas, and Epicydidas, Lace­dæmonians, were conducting up, for the Thracian ser­vice, a reinforcement consisting of nine hundred heavy-armed. Being arrived at Heraclea, in Trachis, theyregulated there such things as seemed to require an a-mendment; and, during the season they halted here,the battle of Amphipolis was fought, and the summerended.
But, early as possible in the succeeding winter, thereinforcement under Ramphias proceeded on their routeas far as Pierium of Thessaly. But, the Thessalians op­posing their farther passage, and Brasidas being nowdead, to whom they were conducting this supply, theyreturned home. They imagined that their aid was nolonger wanting, as the Athenians, in consequence oftheir overthrow, had quitted that country, and them­selves had not sufficient ability to carry the plans intoexecution which Brasidas had been meditating. But theprincipal motive of their return was their own conscious­ness, at setting out, that the Lacedæmonians were moreinclined to peace.







OCR Output








B.VIII. THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. 331


Athenian squadron out at sea in a course from Chalce;yet, neither making any motion to bear down upon theother, one fleet pursued their course to Samos, the o*ther put into Miletus. They were now convinced, that,without fighting at sea, they could not possibly relieveChios.
Here this winter ended: And the twentieth yearof this war expired, the history of which Thucydide«hath compiled.
YEAR XXI. J
I N the ensuing summer, upon the first commence­ment of the spring, Dercylidas, a Spartan, at the headof an army not considerable for numbers, was senr. over­land to Hellespont to effectuate the revolt of Abydus:They are a colony of the Milesians. The Chians also,whilst Astyochus was perplexed about thejmethod of re­lieving them, were necessitated, by the intolerablecloseness of the blockade, to hazard an engagement acsea. It happened, whilst Astyochus was yet in Rhodes,that Leon, a Spartan, who came over with Anrislenes,though merely as a passenger, had arrived at Chios fromMiletus, to act as governor after the death of Pædaritus,with twelve sail of (hipping draughted from the squa­dron stationed at Miletus: Of thelc, five were Thurian,four Syxacusan, one belonged to Anæa, another wasMilesian, and one was Leon's own. Upon this, theChiang having sallied out with all their force and carrieda strong post from the enemy, and at the same timetheir fleet, consisting of six and thirty sail, launchingforth against the thirty-two Athenian, an engagementfollowed; and, after a battle hotly maintained on bothsides, the Chians and allies, who had not the worst of thedispute, sheered off again into harbour; for by thistime it began to grow dark.
I Before Cbiifl 411,


Instantly







OCR Output








B.VIU. THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. 349


repaired immediately to Tissaphernes, and brought Al­cibiades back with him to Samos; convinced their lastresource depended on his being able to alienate Tissa­phernes from the Peloponnesians. Hereupon, an as­sembly being called, Alcibiades at large expatiated uponand deplored the malignity of his fate, in having beenexiled from his country: And then, having amply runover every topic relating to the present posture of af­fairs, he raised their expectations high in regard to thefuture. He magnified, with a mighty parade of words,his own interest in Tissaphernes i from the view, notonly to intimidate the patrons of the oligarchical go­vernment at Athens, and put a stop to their cabals, butalso to render himself more respectable to these at Sa-mos, and to raise up their considence in him as high aspossible; — to give the enemy, farther, as many han­dles as he was able to calumniate Tissaphernes, and tolower all their present sanguinary expectations. Thesewere the schemes of Alcibiades, when, with all imagi­nable ostentation, he gave the strongest assurances tohis audience, that " Tissaphernes had pledged his word"to him, that, could he once firmly depend upon the"Athenians, they never should be distressed for want"of supplies whilst he had any thing left, nay thoughM at last he should be forced to turn into ready cash the** very bed be lay on; and the Phœnician fleet, already"come up to Alpendus, he would join with the Athe-"nians, but never with the Peloponnesians: The only*' pledge of fidelity he required from the Athenians*' was, for Alcibiades to be recalled and pass his word*' for their future conduct."
The army, delighted with these and many othersoothing topics, proceed immediately to associate himwith the rest of the commanders, and implicitly trustedevery thing to their management. Not a man was anylonger to be found amongst them who would haveparted with his present considence of certain securityAnd revenge on the four-hundred for all the treasure in







OCR Output








B. VIII. THE. PELOPONNESIAN WAR. 335


** qualified, by their estates and personal bravery, to"serve the public."
This with the majority of the city had a fair outside,since such as should concur in the change bid fairest fora share in the administration. Yet still the assemblyof the people and the *council of the bean continued theirmeetings; but then they only passed such decrees aswere approved by the cabal. Nay, of this numberwere all who spoke, and who had previously consideredtogether what should be said upon every occasion. Noother person presumed at any time to oppose their mo­tions through dread of a cabal which they saw waslarge; or, did any one venture to open his mouth, bysome dextrous contrivance he was certainly put todeath. Who were the agents in these murders, no en­quiry at all; and of who were suspected, no kind of jus­tification. The people, on the contrary, looked onwith stupid gaze, and such a fit of consternation as tothink it clear gain not yet to have suffered violence, e-ven though they held their tongues; imagining, be­sides, that the conspiracy had spread much farther thanit really had, they were quite dispirited. To discoverany certainty of their numbers they were quite unable,because of the great extent of the city and their igno­rance how far their neighbours might be concerned.On the fame account it was also impossible for him, whodeeply resented his condition, to bemoan himself in thehearing of another, or to participate counsels for reci­procal desence; he must either have opened his mind toone whom he did not know, or to an acquaintance inwhom he durst not conside; for all the popular partyregarded one another with jealous eyes, as in somemeasure involved in the present machinations. Some infact were concerned who could never have been suspec­ted of oligarchical principles; and these men gave riseto the great disfidence which spread amongst the many,and drew after ic the highest security tothefchemes of the


* Tb* senate.


 







OCR Output








B.V. THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. 63


spective commands. The orders, when any such are re­quisite, are in this method dispersed and circulated withthe greatest expedition: For, in the Lacedæmonianarmies, almost the whole soldiery, few only excepted,have a command assigned in regular subordination;and the care of executing orders is incumbent uponnumbers.
In their present array, the left wing consisted os theSkiritæ, who, of all the Lacedæmonians, ever claimthis post as their peculiar right; next them were postedthe Brasidean soldiers who had served in Thrace, accom­panied by those who had lately been honoured with thefreedom of Sparta; then, along the line, were regularlyposted all the troops which were composed of pure La­cedæmonians; next to them stood the Hereans of Arca­dia, and beyond them the Mænalians. In the rightwing were the Tegeatæ, but in the utmost extent of iesome sew Lacedæmonians. Their cavalry was equallyposted on both the wings: And in this form was theLacedæmonian disposition made.
On the side of the enemy, the Mantineans had theright wing, because the business fell upon their ground;next to them were the allies from Arcadia; then a pick­ed body of Argives, to the number of a thousand, wholong had been exercised in the study of arms at the pub­lic school at Argos; and next to them stood the rest ofthe Argive forces: These were followed by their ownconsederates, the Cleoneans and Orneatæ. The Athe­nians were ranged in the outermost body, and composedthe left wing, supported by their own cavalry. Suchwas the order and disposition on both sides.
The army of the Lacedæmonians had the appearanceof superior numbers: But exactly to write the number,either of the several bodies on each side, or of theirwhole force, I own myself unable. The amount of theLacedæmonians was not known, because of the profoundsecrecy observed in their polity, and the amount of theirenemies, because of the ostentation ordinary to mankind
in







OCR Output








98 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. B.VL


"the Selinuntians." And, in pursuance of this, theembassadors from the Athenians were sent to Sicily.
The Lacedæmonians, in the same winter, joined bytheir allies, those of Corinth excepted, and marchinginto Argia, ravaged a small part of that territory, andcarried off the corn, having brought carriages for thatpurpose. They also removed the Argive exiles to Or-nea, and left them a small detachment from their mainarmy for the security of their persons. A temporarytruce being also made, during which the Orneatæ andArgives were to abstain from all hostilities against oneanother, they drew off the army to their respectivehomes.
However, not long after this, the Athenians arrivedwith thirty sail of ships and six hundred heavy-armed.The Argives, in conjunction with the Athenians, tookthe field with all their strength, and besieged those inGrnea for the space of a day. But, as at night the be­siegers removed to a distance in order for repose, thoseof Ornea made their escape. On the day following,the Argives, when sensible of their escape, levelled Or­nea with the ground, and then withdrew. And after­wards the Athenians re-embarked for Athens.
The Athenians also threw in by sea a party of horse-'men into Methone, a frontier-town on Macedonia."With these, consisting of their own citizens and suchMacedonians as had refuged among them, they harras-sed the country belonging to Perdiccas. But the Lace­dæmonians sent a summons of aid for Perdiccas to theChalcideans of Thrace, who kept terms with the Athe­nians by truces renewed every tenth day: These howe­ver refused to march. Thus ended the winter, and withit the sixteenth year of the war, of which Thucydideshath compiled the history.


YEAR







OCR Output








B.VIIL THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. 35s


** station where they might be sure of subsistence, the"crews would abandon their vessels. And the whole"blame of all that befel ought to be charged upon"Astyochus, who for private lucre endured patiently"the caprices of Tissaphernes." Employed as theywere in thus enumerating grievances, a tumult actuallybroke out against Astyochus: For the mariners belong­ing to the Syracusan and Thurian vessels, by how muchthey enjoyed the greatest liberty of all others in the fleet,by so much the more heightened confidence did theyflock about him and demand their pay. Upon this,Astyochus returned an answer too full of spirit, threat­ening hard * that Dorian, who seconded and encoura­ged the demands of his men, and even lifting up hisstars and shaking it at him. This was no sooner per­ceived by the military croud, than, seamen as theywere, with a loud uproar, they rushed at Astyochus toknock him down: But, aware of their design, he fliesfor refuge to an altar. He escaped, indeed, withoutany blows, and the fray was ended without any harmcommitted. '' .
The Milesians also made themselves •masters, by fur-prise, of a fort erected by Tissaphernes at Miletus,and oblige the garrison left in it to evacuate the place.These things pleased the rest of the allies, and not leastof all the Syracusans. Lichas, however, was by nomeans satisfied with these proceedings. Ht insisted** the Milesians were obliged in duty to be submissive** to Tissaphernes; and that all others who lived in the*' dominions of the king lay under the same obligation,"and were bound to pay due regard to his juct autho-** rity, till such time as the war was handsofnely com-*' pleted." This drew upon him the re sent mem of the.Milesians; and., because of these expressions and someothers of the fame nature, when he afterwards died ofa natural disease, they woutd not suffer him to be bu-
* Hermortate;, , , . ,
ried







OCR Output








I N D E X.


were the first who stripped inthe public games, ibid, demo­lished tyrants, 14. deluded byThemfiocles, 70. accuse him,107. war agajnst their Helots,
78. at war with she Athenian!,
79. and the Dorians, ibid, beatthe Athenians at Tanagra, 8 3.make a truce for five years, 86.begin the holy -war, ibid, snakea thirty years truce with theAthenians, 88. consultabautthePekponnestan war,62. determinefor it, 68, 98, fendembaffies toAthens to spin out time, 98,invade Attica, 13;. assign Ti>y-rea to the Æginette, 147. invadeAttica, 161. make war on Za-cynthus, \ 81. march to Platæa,and besiege it, 18,5. invade A-carn*nia,tgj. fight at sea, 1,97.their project to seize the Pirmus,207. invade Attica, 227. resolveto succour the Mitylentans, ib.become masters of Plateea, 260.put the Platœans to death, 275.beat the Cor eyre ans ax. sea, 281.send a colony to Heraciea, 292.theu-expedition against theAm-phihehians, 303. invade Attica,314. thei r endeavours to recoverPylus, 316. send an embassy toAthen, to solicit a peace, 324.vanquished in Sphacleria, 345.make away with 2000 Helots,378. take Ampbipolis, 400. makepeace with the Athenians, 407.march into Arcadia, If. 31.forbid to affill at the Olympicgames, 48. succour the Epj-daurians, 54. gain a victory atMautinea,bS. determine to suc­cour the Syracu/ans, 182. for­tify Decela, 209. succour theChians, 292. enier into leaguewith the Perfian monarch, 295,.310, 329. take7ii/«/,304. fightwith and beat theAthenians, 314.ieize Rhodes, 316. fight with theAthens ensf 474, ar« beat ac the


sea-fight of Cynot'fima, 371.
Lacedemonius, son oiCinton, I. 36.
Laches, commander of the Athenianfleet in Si city, I. 288. J I. 19,23, 58. makes war on My}œ,L288.de seats the Locriani, 298.
Iftico, T. s6i.
Lœspodias, II. 193, 354.
Lœjlrigmt, II. 92. .., .
Lamacbus, loseth a squadtou, I.374. one of the three com.roandersin5;aij>,II.99.his opi­nion at a council of war, 138.killed, 189.
Lams, 11. 94.
Lamphilus, II. 19, 22.
Lampo, II. 1.9, z.3.
Lfteans, I. 210.'
Learcbus, I. 18 I.
Lemnians, I. 22a. H. 7. accom­pany the Athenians to SUily, 246.
Leocrates, I. 81.
Z«s, the Lacedæmonian, I. 293.
Zfo»,.the/#/&B;'fi»,IL298,299,327
Leontines, I. 333. at war with theSyracusans, I. 288. in sedition,If. 4.
Leotychides, I. 69.
Lejbians, 1. 220.
Leucadians, aid the Corinthians a-gainst the Corcyreans, I. 20.join the Ambracicts, 193.
Licbas, an Olympic victor, butscourged, II. 50. hisembaflies,21, 71. public host of the ^/r-gi-ves, 71. his dispute with •7V-J'apbernts, 315, 351, his death,s;t.
Locrians, Orvlian, I. 5. lose .A/aa-pacius, 7.9. confederate withthe Athenians, 297. .
Lsiirians, Epizephyrian, II. 194.
Lycophron, i. 19.8, 348, 349*
Lynctftians, i. 212, 389, 413.
Lyfichs, I. 231.
Lysiftratus, 1. 403.
M.
Macarius, I. 299, 306.Machon, I. 197.
Maniineans, 1. 305,307. war with
the







OCR Output








3+1 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. B.VIIL


low, and banished by the ostracism, not from a dreadof his influence or weight, but for the profligacy of hislife and his being a public disgrace to his country. Inthis they were countenanced by Charminus, one of thecommanders, and some of the Athenians afibciated withthem, to whom they gave this pledge of their sidelity.Some other acts of the fame nature they committed byinstructions from them, and had it in agitation to multi­ply their blows>, but those marked out for destruction,getting wind of their design, communicate the whole toLeon and Diomedon, who thought of an oligarchy withhigh regret, because their credit was high with the peo­ple; to *Thrasybulus also andThrasyllus, the.former*captain of a trireme, and the latter of a band of heavy-armed; and to such others as were judged most likelyto stem the fury of the conspirators. These they con-
"such exalted characters. It was dear honour to Hyperbolus; and gave him"room to boast, that, though a scoundrel, he had been distinguistied like the greats*"and best Athenians; as Plato, the comic poet, fays of him,
"He always acted worthy of himself,
"But quite unworthy of luch high reproof:'
"The jhtll was ne'er design'd to honour scoundrels.
"In a word, no person was ever banished by the ostracism after Hyperbolus j it"was he who closed the list."
* Thrasybulus, whose name now first occurs, acts a very high-spirited and nobleyart in the close of this history. "If virtue could be weighed merely by itself,"without any regard to outward circumstance, I should not hesitate (fays Cor-"nelius Nepos) to prefer him before all the great men in Greece. But I aver,"that not one of them ever surpassed him in integrity, in resolution, in grandeur"of soul, and true patriotism. —Yet, 1 know not how it it, though nobody
"excelled him in real merit, many have outstripped him in point of fame. In"the Peloponnesian war, (ibi tpart if it vibicb n<m rtmaim,) Thrasybulus did
many things without Aleibiades; Aleibiades did nothing without Thrasybulus;"and yet the other, through a happiness peculiar to himself, reaped the glory and"benefit os all." So far this elegant Roman writer. The reader will soon see someof Thrasybulus his exploits, separately fronvsnd in concert with Akibiades: But theiglory of his lite was ridding Athens some year's after of thirty tyrants at a blow; ferwhich he was rewarded by a wreath of olive, the most honourable recompence hisgrateful countrymen could bestow upon him. He-was ever a firm, intrepid, disin­terested, patriot j an d lost his life at last in the service of his country.







OCR Output








20a THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. B.VH.


accordingly adjust their resolutions. These messrn :erstherefore departed, instructed to deliver the letterwhich he intrusted to their care, and what farther theywere to add by word of mouth. Nicias in the meantime kept within the limits of his camp, more anxiousto guard his shattered forces from annoyance than toplunge into fresh and spontaneous dangers.
In the close of this summer, Euetion, an Atheniangeneral, marched, in conjunction with Perdiccas and alarge body of Thracians, against Amphipolis; yet couldnot render himself master of that city. But then, set­ting out from Imereum, he brought his triremes aboutinto the Strymon, and blocked it up on the side of theriver. And here this summer ended.
In the beginning ot winter the messengers fiom Ni­cias arrived at Athens; where they gave such accountsof things as he had charged them to give, and resolvedsuch questions as were asked them. They also deli­vered his letter; which the clerk of the State stood upand read aloud to the Athenians. The contents werethese.
r
"Athenians,
"THE many letters from time to time received"from me have given you all proper information, so*' far as relates to past transactions ; and it is now high*' time you should be made acquainted with our pre-*' sent situation, that your councils may be adjusted in*' a proper manner.
"After, therefore, we had defeated, in several en-*' gagements, the Syracusans, against whom you sent"us out, and when we had thrown up those works be-*' fore their city within which we are this moment ly-'* ing, Gylippus the Lacedæmonian came upon us, at*t the head ot an army, brought from Peloponnesus,
and augmented by the troops of some Sicilian States."In the first battle he is routed by us; but, in the"last, pressed hard by their numerous cavalry and
*l darters,







OCR Output








 







OCR Output








B.VIH. THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. 323


he pleaded " the candour of Astyochus in his own ex-"cuse, if he desired in this manner to ruin his mortal** foe, though with some prejudice to the welfare of his*' country." But Astyochus had given up all thoughts"of putting Alcibiades to death, especially as now henever came within his reach; yet, on this occasion,making a visit to him and Tissaphernes at Magnesia,he communicates to them the advices sent him from Sa­mos, and becomes himself an informer. He is accu­sed by report, not only on this but many other occa­sions, to have made court to Tissaphernes for his ownprivate lucre; and, for the fame reason, when the paywas not fully rendered before, he suffered it much morepliantly than in duty he ought to have done. Alcibia­des fends away immediate notice to the managing partyat Samos, that the treachery of Phrynichus was detect­ed by his own letter, and insists upon it that he be putto death. Phrynichus, terribly alarmed and pushed tothe very brink of destruction by such a discovery, sendsagain to Astyochus, blaming his indiscretion on theformer1 occasion in not keeping his secret, and assuringhim that " now he was ready to deliver up to his fury** the whole force of the Athenians at Samos," (dis­tinctly reciting to him the particulars by which, as Sa­mos was unfortified, the whole scheme might be ac­complished,) and that " undoubtedly he ought not to"be censured, if, when his unrelenting foes had re-*' duced him to such extremity of danger, he chose to*' do this, or even more than this, rather than be de-** stroyed by their rancour." But this proposal alsoAstyochus communicates to Alcibiades.
Phrynichus, perceiving in time that Astyochus be­trayed him, and that notice each moment was only notarrived from Alcibiades about the contents of his last,anticipated the discovery, and becomes himself informerro the army, that, " the . enemy had resolved, as Sa-*' mos was unfortified and the whole of their fleet not** securely stationed within the harbour, te endeavour







OCR Output








INDEX.


leaders of the colony to Hera-clea, 293.
Alcinidas, II. 19, 22.
Alcipbron, II. 56.
Alcmaon, I. 216.
Alcmaonidæ, II. 147.
Alex arc bus, II. 209.
Alexicles, put under arrest, II.361. flies to Decelea, 367.
Ahxippidat, II. 329.
Almopians, I. 112.
Ambraciots, aid the Corinthiansagainst the Corcyr'eans, I. 20,21. make war on the Amphilo-chians, 182. and the Acarna-nians, 193. make another ex­pedition against both, 300.take O/p*, 303. are deseated,30;. make peace, 310. fendaid to the Syracu/ans, II. 249.
Ameinias, I. 421.
Ameiniades, I. 181.
Aminocles, I. 11.
Amorges, revolts from the kingof Persia, II. 286. is takenprisoner by the Peltponnestans,and delivered to Fifapbernes,304.
Ampelidas, II. 21.Ampbias, I. 410.Ampbilocbians, I. 182, 309.Ampbiflhnjians, I. 299.Amyntas, I. 209.Amyrtaus, I. 84.Anaxarchus, II. 369.Anaxilas, II. 96.Andocides, I. 41.Androcles, II. 334.Andromenes, II. 39.Androjihenes, II. 48.Andriam, II. 246.Antbippus, II. 19, 22.Articles, I. 91.Antimenidas, II. 39.Aitiocbus, king of the Oreftians,
I. 194.Antipbemus, II. 95.Antipbo, II. 337, 358.Antifthenes, II. 312, 33 I.Antitauiam, I. 194.


Apodoti, I. 29;.
Arcadians, furniflied with ship*by Agamemnon in the Trojanexpedition, I. 8. mercenaries,II. 248.
Arcbedice, II. 147.
Arcbelaus, I. 213.
Archeftratus, I. 44.
Archetimus, I. 23.
Archias or Camarina, I. 332.
Arcbas, the Corinthian, founderof Syracuse, II. 94.
Archidamus, king of Sparta, hisspeech about the war, I. 62.commands in the invasion ofA-/»'«, 131. his speech, ibid, com-mands in another invasion,161. and against Plat tea, 185.
Archnnides, II. 195.
Argilians, a colony of Andrians,*' 397-
Argives, have thirty years truceswith the Lacedæmonians, II.13. are irritated by the Corin-thians against the Lacedæmo­nians, 25. aim at being a lea­ding state, 26. make war uponthe Epidaurians, 51. are sur­rounded by the Lacedæmonians,but let go, 56. are defeated atMantinea, and make peace,67,71.
Arianthidas, I. 386.
Ariftagoras, I. 396.
Aristarchus, II. 358, 361, 367.
Arifteus, son of Petlicas, I. 23.
Arifteus, son of Adimantus, I. 45,49, 181,182.
Arifteus, the Lacedæmonian, I. 421.
Ariftides, son of Lyjimachus, 1.71.
A'iftides, son of Arcbippus, I.
354. 374-Ariftocles, II. 15,67.Ariftocates, II. 19.Anftocrates, II. 23, 357, 360.Jrijiogiton, I. 16. II. 142.^r//?a, II. 228.
Aristonous, of Lariffa, I. 145. thefounder of Agngentum, 11. 95.Ariftopbon, II. 354.
Jfi'ftotle,







OCR Output








B.VIL THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. 199


appointed to cruize about Locri, and Rhegium, andthe capes of Sicily, in order to intercept them.
Gylippus in the mean time was employed in buildingthe counter-wall along EpipoJæ, making uie of thestones which the Athenians had laid ready in heaps forthe continuation of their own work. It was also hisdaily custom to draw up the Syracusans and allies inorder of battle, and lead them out beyond the point ofthe counter-wall; which obliged the Athenians to drawup likewise, to observe their motions. And, whenGylippus judged he could attack them with advantage,he instantly advanced; and, the charge being givenand received, a battle ensued in the space between theirrespective works; but so narrow, that no use could bemade of the Syracusan and confederate horse. The Sy­racusans and allies were accordingly defeated. Theyfetched off their slain by truce i and the Athenians e-rected a trophy. But Gylippus, having assembled ihearmy round him, thought proper to make this declara­tion in the presence of them all: — That " the deseat"was not to be charged on their want of bravery, but*' on his own indiscretion: he had deprived them of*' the service of their own cavalry and darters, by"ranging his battle in too confined a spot between the*' works: that he would now again lead them out in a** more judicious manner.* He exhorted them there­fore "to imprint it strong on their remembrance,'* that, as in real strength they were not interior, it"would be intolerably disgraceful, if they, who to a"man were Peloponnesians and Dorians, should not"manifest themselves so resolutely brave, as to con-*' quer and drive out of their country a parcel of Ioni-*' ans and islanders, and a promiscuous rabble of hun-"gry adventurers." Having addressed them thus, helay on the watch to seize a proper opportunity; and, assoon as he had gained it, led them on again to thecharge.


O 4 It







OCR Output








 







OCR Output








B.VI. THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. 129


"But you, Syracusans, I exhort, to apply your good"sense on this occasion, and search after probability;"not by considering such accounts as these men have
pompousiy detailed, but such enterprises as a wise and4t abundantly-enlightened people (for such I esteem the"Athenians) are likely to undertake. For, whatpro-"babilky is there, that, leaving the Peloponnesians on** their backs, when the war at home is not yet brought** to any settled conclusion, they would wilfully embark** into another of no less importance? For my part,** I am persuaded they rest well contented, that, so"many and so powerful States as we Sicilians are, we** have not yet thought proper to invade them.
** But, allowing these informations true, and that** they are actually coming, — I am firmly persua-** ded, that Sicily is better able than Poloponnefus to** war them down, by how much in all respects it is<l better furnished with every resource of war; and** that this our Syracuse alone is far superior in strength** to that, nay double that armament, which by report** now threatens its invasion. For I know, assuredly,** that no horse can follow in their train; that, farther,** none can be procured for them in this country, if we
abate an inconsiderable party which the Egesteans** may furnish. And I know, that a body of heavy-** armed, equal in number to our own, can never be'* transported by them across such a length of sea.-** The enterprize is bold indeed, to attempt so long a** voyage hither with only light and nimble ships, and to
bring all those military stores, the roll of which mult** be excessively large, in order to attack so great a city.'** Shall I therefore be terrified at vain reports? I, who
am firmly persuaded, that, if the Athenians were** possessed of a city on our coasts as considerable in all"respects as Syracuse itself, and should dare to pro-** voke us; if masters of the neighbouring territory,** they should from thence make war upon us; — even• f * with such advantages they would with difficulty escape
Vol. II. K, "a total







OCR Output








B. VIII. THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. 197


When the land-army had quitted Teos, Tiflaphernesin person came thither with a body, and, after com­pletely demolishing those parts of the wall before Teoswhich were yet left standing, marched away.
Not long after his departure, Diomedon, arrivingthere with ten fail of Athenians, in order to gain a re­ception, made a truce with the Teians. From thencehe coasted along to Eras, and assaulted the place; but,not being able to take it, he sailed away.
Coinciding with this in point of time, an insurrectionwas made at Samos by the people against the nobility.The Athenians, who with three ships were then lyingat Samos, assisted the former. On this occasion theS&m'ian people massacred about two hundred persons, allof the nobility. Four hundred others they condemnedto exile; and, having divided amongst themselves theirlands and houses, and obtained from the Athenians adecree of being governed by their own constitutions, asmen whose sidelity was no longer to be suspected, theyassumed the whole civil administration, leaving no shareof it in the hands ofthe landed gentry, and absolutelyprohibiting to the people all alliance for the future withthem, so as neither to give their daughters to them norever to marry theirs. . - .
After these transactions, during the same summer,the Chians, proceeding with unabating ardour, left no­thing undone to compass the revolt of the cities. Evenwithout Peloponnesian aid they made them visits withtheir own single force; and, desirous at the same timeto involve as large a number as possible in their owndangers, they undertake a voyage with thirteen failof ships to Lesbos. This squared exactly with the La­cedæmonian plan 1 which was to make the second ac-tempt upon that island, and from thence to proceed toHellespont. The land-force, at the same time, of suchPeloponnesians as were at hand, and their adjacent allies,attended their motions by the route of Clazomenæ andCyme: These were commanded by Eualas, a Spartan;







OCR Output








i7o THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. B.VI.


"own security in concert with that of our friends; so*' far from the view of instaving them to ourselves, that*' we are solely intent on preserving them from being** inslaved by others. *
** Let no man here retort upon us,— that all our so."licitude for you is unmerited and superfluous. Such"an one must know, that, so long as you are safe, so"long as you are able to employ the Syracusans, the*' less liable they will be to send reinforcements from"hence to the Peloponnesians for our annoyance:** And, as this is the real state of things, our concern"should most largely be bestowed upon you. By pari-*' ty of rtalon it also highly concerns us to replant the*' Leontines; not in order to render them vassals to*' ourselves, as their relations of Eubœa are, but to"make them as strong and powerful as we are able;*' that, seated as they then will be on her confines,*' they may compensate our remote situation in afford-*' ing a diversion to Syracuse. For, if the view be car-*' ricd back to Greece, we ourselves are there a match*' for our foes. The Chacidean there, whom after un-"justly inslaving we are taxed with absurdity for pre-"tending to vindicate here, is highly serviceable to us;"because he is disarmed, and because he furnisheth us** with a tribute. But, here in Sicily, our interest de-*' mandeth, that the Leontines, and the whole body"of our friends, be restored to the fujl enjoyment of all"their liberty and strength.
"Now, to a potentate invested with superior pow-"er, or to a State possessed of empire, nothing that"is profitable can be deemed absurd; nothing secure"that cannot be safely managed. Incidents will arise"with which we must temporize, and determine accor-"dingly our enmity or our friendship. But the latter"makes most for our interest here, where we ought by*' no means to weaken our friends, but, through the"strength of our friends, to keep down and disable our** enemies. Of this you ou^ht not to rest incredulous,







OCR Output








t7a THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR: B.V1.


** tertain an endless distrust of them. The truth is this,"that without your concurrence we are not able tocofl-** tinue here. And in case, with perfidy open and a-** vowed, we make seizure of your cities, yet we are** unable to retain their possession, remote as they lie** from Athens; as cities fo large we never could gar-** rison; and as they are farther provided in all respects** as well as any on the continent. But, on the contra-** ry, the Syraculans will not rush upon you from a** camp upon the beach; but, posted in a city more** formidable in strength than the" whole of our arma-ment, they are ever meditating your ruin, and, whenthey have seized a proper oppoitunity, will strike the** blow. They have afforded you instances of this al-"ready, and a flagrant one indeed in the cafe of theLeontines. And yet they have the effrontery now,by words, as if you were so to be deluded, to exas-"perate you against us, who have hitherto comrouled"their views, and deterred them to this moment from** making all Sicily their prey.
Our arguments have a tendency directly opposite.** We have nothing in view but your certain and affu-** red prelervation, when we earnestly conjure you notwilfully to betray the mean's which at present will rtf-** suit from our union, which we can mutually exert in** one another's behalf; and strongly to represent to** your own reflexions, thar, even without the concur-"rence of allies, a road to your reduction will at any** time be open to these Syracusans through their own** superior numbers; but an opportunity exceedingly** seldom afforded you to make head against thettl** with so large an auxiliary body. And if, from** groundless suspicions, you suffer now fo large a body** to depart either unsuccessful or defeated, yet a timewill come when you will ardently wish to see them** return, though in a much less proportion of strength,** and they have it no longer in their power to cross the<* lea for your lupport. Take care, theresore, Cama-
*' rjneans,







OCR Output








B.V1IL THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. 321


"the king might be made their friend, and supply them"with money, were Alcibiades recalled, and the de-"mocracy suspended." The effect of these declarationson the many was this, that, though for the present theywere chagrined at the scheme in agitation, yet, soothedby the flattering hope of the royal subsidies, they re­frained from all manner of tumult.
But the set which was caballing in favour of an oli­garchy, after such open declarations to the multitude, re­considered the promises of Alcibiades amongst them­selves, and with a larger number of their associates.The scheme was judged by all the rest to be feasibleand sure; but Phrynichus, who was yet in the com­mand, declared a total dislike of it. It appeared tohim (which was really the case) that " Alcibiades"cared as little for an oligarchical as a democratical'* government; and that no other thought lay seri-"oufly at his heart than to throw the present govern-"ment into some state of confusion, which his friends*' might so far improve as to carry his recallrrlent. Of"consequence, the first point themselves should guard"against was, not to be thrown into seditions for the** benefit of the king. It was not probable, (he plainly"told them,) when the Peloponnesians had gained a"power by sea equal to their own, and were masters of"cities not the most inconsiderable amidst the king's do-"minions, that the latter should turn the balance in"favour of the Athenians, in whom he hath no confi-"dence at all, whilst he might firmly depend upon the"friendship of Peloponnesians, who had never done"him any harm. As for confederate States, to whom"they were to give a certain pledge of future oligar-** chy By setting up that government amongst them-"selves, he told them he was well assured thac on that"account neither such as had revolted would the sooner*' return, nor such as were at present their own would** the longer continue in their duty; since the point on** which their wishes turned was, not to be enslaved by
Vol. II. Y an







OCR Output








INDEX.


Odrysians, I. 209.
Oianthians, I. 299.
Qeniadæ, I. 196, 310. invadedby the Athenians, 2 21. receivedinto their alliance, 376.
Ottteant, I. 293. II. 284..
Olynthians, II. 36.
Onafimus, I. 410.
Onomacles, II. 306,
Ofhionians, I. 295.
Opicians, II. 93.
Or#?«, I. 85.
Orefiians, I. 194.
Oroedus, I. 194.
Or of tans, I. 14^.
Packet, sent by the Athenians toreduce Mitylene, I. 230. takesit, 237. and Netium, 242. andPyrrha and Eresfus, ibid.
Padaritus, or Pedaritus, II. 305,307, 311. killed, 327.
Pœonians, I. 2lO.
Pagendas, bis haraugue to theBœotians, I. 386. wins the bit-tie of Delium, 391* .
Paiirenfians, I. 149.
Pammilus, II. 95*
Panaans, I. 214.
Pandion, I. 148.
Paralians, I. 293.
Paravafans, I. 194.
Parians, I. 398.
Pau/anias, captain-general ofGreece, I, 73. subdues Cyprus,ibid, besieges Byzantium, ibid,grows a tyrant, ibid, recalledand tried at Sparta, 74. returnsto Hellespont, 101. his letter toXerxes, ibid, driven from jSy-zantium, 103. betrayed, 105.starved to death, 106.
Pau/anias,Con of Pleijlionax, 1.2 3 6.
Pelops, I. 7.
Peloponnefians, their colonies, I.11. their character, 11 c. ori­ginally Dorians, II. 168. theirwar with the Athenians, fee yf-Voi.II. G


thenians and Lacedæmonians.
Peræbians, I. 377.
Perdiccas, king of Macedonia, hispolitical turns, I. 44, 47, 148,209. invaded by Siialces, 209.in conjunction with Brafidasinvades Arribeeus, 380, 420.quarrels with Brafidas, 421.makes peace with tneAthentans,422.is again theirenemy.II.76.
Pericles, commands the Athenians.I. 85. conquers Euhoea, 88.and Samos, 90. his speech forwar, 113. makes the funeral-oration, 152. his speech in de­sence of himself, 171. hisdeath and character, 179.
Perieres, II. 95.
Persians, at Thermopylæ, I. 344.their noble custom, 211.
Phaacians, I. 20.
Pharax, II, 4.
Phædimus, II. 39.
Pbaeinis, priestess of'Juno, I. 421.
Phanomacbus, I. 184.
Pbarnabazus, II. 286, 312.
Pbarnaces, I. 181.
PharJ'alians, I. 144.
Pbereeans, I. 145.
Philippus, the Lacedæmonian, II.305, 368.
Pbilocharidas, 1.409. II. 19, 22,4.1.
Philocrates, II. 91.
Pbilocletes, I. 9.
Phliafians, I. 22.
Fhocians, built Marseilles, I. 12.beat iheCarthaginiansat sea, ib.
Phocians, at war with the 2)o-W<;b/, I. 82. recover the tem­ple of 86.
Phœnicians, exercised piracy, I. 6.inhabited the isles, ibid, hadsettlements in S/'a'/p, II. 94.
Phormio, an Athenian commander,I. 48, 91. commands their fleetat NaupaSus, 183. beats thePeloponnefians at sea, 198. pre­pares for a second engagement,
C 2.0.







OCR Output








;o8 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. B.VI.


"who claim equality with them; and, in the next"place, to those amongst whom they are conversant:"And yet, to succeeding generations, they leave an"ambition of claiming affinity to them, though quite"groundless and chimerical; and to their country,"whatever it be, the haughty boast, that they were*' not aliens, were not offenders, but citizens of its own*' growth, and patriots of true renown and worth. Of** such reversionary honours I own myself ambitious;*' and, in order to succeed in the pursuit, have ever"rendered my name illustrious in private life; and, as"to my public behaviour, reflect, Athenians, whether"I am inferior to any person whatever, in performing"good services to my country. For I am the person,'* who, without throwing you into hazard or expence,*' have brought the strongest powers of Peloponnesus"to act in your concurrence; who reduced the Laces."dæmonians to stake their ell upon the fortune of one"day at Mantinea. It is,true, they came off" victori-"ous from the contest; but have not even yet so far"resumed their spirits as to dare to act offensively.
"Such are the exploits which my greener years, nay*' even that unnatural giddiness imputed to me hath at-*' chieved; which, by insinuating language, hath made"the Peloponnesian strength to ply before it, and, gt-*' ving energy to my frantic humour, hath now persua-"ded the world that it is no longer to be dreaded."Whilst, therefore, I flourish in this manner, whilst** Nicias yet continues to be esteemed jortunatey"lay hold of that service we are each of us able to per-*' form; and by no means repeal the decree of our ex-"pedition to Sicily, as if intended against a people we"are not able to encounter.
"For in Sicily the cities swarm with crowds of pro-"miscuous disunited inhabitants, inhabitants for ever»* used to sudden revolutions and to perpetual fluctua-"tions. And hence, not one of thoje crowds is equip-"ped with such arms as are requisite to defend a native


"soil,







OCR Output








B.VIII. THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. 285


Amidst these employments of both parties, which.were nothing less than most earnest preparations on allsides, as if war was just in its commencement, the Eu-bœans took the lead, and sent embassadors this winterto treat with Agis about a revolt from the Athenians.Agis accepted what terms they proposed; and sendsfor Alcamenes, the son of Sthenelai'das, and Melanthus,frorrr Lacedæmon, to pass over as commanders intoEubcea. Accordingly they arrived, with a body of *ci­tizens newly infranchised, to the number of about threehundred; and Agis was preparing for their transporta­tion. But in this interval the Lesbians arrived, withdeclarations of their readiness to revolt; and, as theywere seconded by the recommendations of the Bœotians,Agis is persuaded to put off for a time the affair of Eu­bcea, and began to expedite the revolt of the Lesbians,having assigned them Alcamenes for their governor, whowas to have passed over to Eubœa. The Bœotianspromised to send them ten ships, and Agis ten. Thesepoints were transacted without the privity of the Lace­dæmonian State: For Agis, so long as he continued atDecelea, having under his command the army of theState, was invested with a power of sending detachmentswhithersoever he thought proper, and to levy men andmoney at his own discretion; and it may withtruth be affirmed, that the confederates, duringthis period, paid a much greater deference to himthan to the State of Lacedæmon; for, having a power­ful force under his own orders, he was formidable in hisevery motion. And thus he arbitrarily settled the ne­gotiation of the Lesbians.
But then the Chians and the Erythræans, who werealso desirous to revolt, addressed themselves, not to A-gis, but at Lacedæmon. In their company also wentthither an embassador from Tissaphernes, who was lieu­tenant for Darius, the son of Anaxerxes, in the mari-
* Neodamodes.
time







OCR Output








B.VI. THE PELOPONNESIAN WAft. 167


'** assailant be invigorated by success, what can such ab-lt sensing of yourselves avail, but to help forwards the"ruin of the one, and afford free scope to the pernicious"schemes of the other? And how glorious would the"reverse of this conduct be, would you exert your ef-forts to redress the injured, who also by the ties"of consanguinity have a right to expect it from you j** to guard the common welfare of Sicily; and not suf-** fer your friends, your good friends, the Athenians,** to run out into a course of outrage!
** In a word, we Syracusans have now only this to'* add: That arguments are superfluous, either for the"instruction of you or of others, in points whose ten-** dency you know as clearly as ourselves. But we ear-** nestly conjure you, and, if prayers will not avail, we** boldly protest against you, that, as the worst designs** are formed against us by our eternal foes, the Io-"nians, you would act as you ought •,—-if not, that by** you we are basely betrayed, Dorians by Dorians."If such must be our fate, if by the Athenians we** must be destroyed, they will be indebted for their*c success to your determinations, but the glory ,of it** will be totally assumed by themselves. Nay, theu chief reward they will reap from the victory will be** this, to inflave the persons who enabled them to gaia** it. But then, should the victory rest with us, you are** the men from whom we shall exact revenge for all the*"dangers to which we have been exposed. Examine** things, therefore, and declare your resolution, either** at once, without embarking into dangers, to put on•** the Athenian chains; or, with us, to face the storm** and earn your preservation; not basely bending to"the yoke of foreign tyrants, and preventing an enmi-** ty with us which will not quickly be appeased."
In these words Hermocrates harangued the Camarkpeans: And, when he had ended, Euphemqs, embas­sador of the Athenians, replied as follows:
M 4 "OUH







OCR Output








86 THE PELOPONNESIAN WARi B.V.


*' tion, that, according to the best lights we have
"been able to collect, they repute as honourable the"things which please them, and as just the things"which promote their interest. Such maxims are noe** in the least conducive to your preservation,: It is all« chimera.'!'.
Mel i ans;
« NO. We ground our hopes of relief from them** upon their own clear conviction of whit their interest;
injoineth them. This.never can suffer them to enter**' tain a thought of abandoning the Melians, who are»* a colony of their own; of being faithleis to the States*' of Greece, who wish them well; or of promoting the'
schemes of the common foe."
Athenians.
"OF consequence you imagine,-»«that their interest'»* is connected with your security; that the duties of juf-« tice should in honour be observed, though attended'*' with dangers. But these are maxims which the La­s' cedæmonians, least of all men, have resolution enoughV to observe in fact."
Melians,
"WE have the strongest grounds to imagine* that*' in our defence they will hazard any dangers, from a-*' sense that their own preservation dependeth more-on"us than any other people, as we are finely situated for'*' doing them service in Peloponnesus, and in affection-** are more faithfully attached to them through the*» bands of consanguinity."
&THE,NIANS,







OCR Output








$o THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. B.V.


And, this said, the Athenian deputation returned totheir camp. ...-,• (;
But the Athenian commanders, upon this refusalof submission from the Melians, applied themselves in­stantly to the acts of war; and, dividing the work nfshares to the several parties in their army, completes^shut up the Melians in a line of circumvallation. And»•when this Was perfected, and a sufficient number, bothof the Athenians and their dependents, were appointedto flay behind and continue the blockade both by landand sea, they departed with the bulk of their forces.Those farther, who were left for this service, staid be-hind and continued the blockade.
About the same time, the Argives, making an irrup­tion into Phliafia, and caught in an ambuscade, laid-for them by the Phliasians and their own exiles, wereslaughtered to the number of eighty.
1 he Athenians, by their excursions from Pylusycommitted' many depredations on the Lacedæmonians.But these had not influence enough upon the Lacedæ­monians to cause a renunciation of the peace, or a re*newal of the war. They only proclaimed, that " their"people had free leave to. make reprisals on the Athc-« nians."
The Corinthians also had a war with the Athenians,on accourit of some private differences between them }but the rest of Peloponnesus interfered hot in the quar­rel.
The Melians, farther, assaulting it by nighr, carried'that part of the Athenian circumvallation which lay closeto their market. They flew the guards who were postedthere; and, having gained a conveyance into the town'for provisions, and all necessary stores they could pro-'cure by money, they aftewards withdrew, and disconti­nued all efforts of resistance: But the Athenians took
care







OCR Output








122 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. F.VI.


abroad, but also for the numerous force with which itwas provided to attack the foe; for the remoteness ofthe ..voyage, great as ever they had undertaken fromtheir, native clime, and that prodigious expectationwhich was raised of the event; in order to which theState had now exerted itself quite beyond its strength.
When the whole force was got on-board the fleet,when the stowage of all necessary stores and all baggagewhatever was completely adjusted, silence then wasproclaimed by sound of trumpet: But the solemn,prayers for a successful expedition were not offered fromevery vessel apart, but in behalf of all united, by thevoice of a herald. The goblets mingled with wine ranthe circle of the whole armament, and every crew aswell as the commanders poured out the libations, anddrank success and happiness out of gold and silver cups.The whole crowd that stood upon the beach, both ofcitizens and such strangers as were there and wishedthem prosperity, joined with them in the public prayer.And now, the pæan being sung and the libation finished,they put out to sea. * After moving off at first in a line•.c .: a-head,
* Many incidents arc related by Plutarch, in the life of Niciai, in regard to the de­nunciations of the priests against this expedition, the coining and wresting of oraclesboth for and against it, and omens which portended nothing but misfortune. Merehuman foresight, and a consciousness, that the means were not equal to the end pro­posed, gave the wisest and steadiest part of the Athenian community a sad apprehen­sion of the event, Socrates constantly declared against it; and assured his friends, itwould draw after it the destruction of the Start: This his pre-sentiment soon becamethe public talk, Meton, the Astronomer, who was named to a post of high rank inthe expedition, feigned himself mad and set his house on fire. Others deny that cir­cumstance of his counterfeiting madness j and fay, he set his house on fire by night,and appeared next morning on the forum in an abject manner, and begged of his fel­low-citizens, in order to comfort him under so great a misfortune, to excuse hit son,who was to have commanded a trireme, from going the voyage. An incident,farther, at the very time of the departure of the grand fleet, gave many persons vast;concern. The women were then celebrating the rites of Adonis, in which manyrepresentations of deaths and funerals were exhibited all over Athens 5 and the wo.men,' 'qccoi™?g Wtiistom, were making'heavy moan and lamentation. This struckfad foreboding, unpeople,; Who laid:Msj on such incidents, that this expensive and
mijbty
/void*







OCR Output








B. VI. THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. 185


dred of the choicest men amongst the heavy-armed, tobe commanded by Diomilus, an exile from Andrus.These were appointed for the guard of Epipolæ, and tobe ready for service, as they were always to keep in abody, on any sudden emergence. But the Athenians,who had mustered their forces on the preceding day,had stood away from Catana, and were come in thenight undiscovered to the spot called Leon, which isdistant * six or seven stadia from Epipolæ, where theydisbarked their land-forces, and then serit their ships tolie in the station of Thapsus. Thapsus is a peninsula,joined to the main-land by a narrow isthmus, and jut­ting out into the sea, at no great distance from the cityof Syracuse either by land or water. The naval forceof the Athenians, having secured their station by a pa-lisado across the isthmus, Jay quiet in their posts: Butthe land-army, without loss of time, made a runningmarch towards Epipolæ; and mounted by the palsof Euryalus, before the Syracusans, who were yet inthe meadow busied in their review, discovered or wereable to advance to prevent them. And now their wholeforce was in motion to distodge them; each man wichall possible alacrity, and more particularly the sevenhundred commanded by Diomilus: But, from the mea­dow to the nearest spot where they could come up withthe enemy, was a march of no less than -j- twenty-fivestadia. To this it was owing that the Syracusans cameto the charge in a disorderly manner; and, being plain­ly repulsed in battle at Epipolæ, were forced to retirewithin the city. Diomilus also and about three hun­dred more lose their lives in this engagement.
In pursuance of this, the Athenians, having erected atrophy, and given up the bodies of the stain tinder truceto the Syracusans, marched down the next day in orderof battle to the very gates of the city: But, as the Sy-
* Above half a mile.<j- Two miles and a bi\s,
raculans


1







OCR Output








INDEX.


Vote, The Letters reser to the Volumes and tlie Figures to the Pages.


yfBronychus, I. 71.
j£j Acanthus, II. ig.*^T JL Acarnanians, excellentflingers, I. 195.
conquer the Ambraciots, 305.
snake peace with them, 310.
enter into an alliance with the
Athenians, 183.Acbarnians, I. I42, 144.Admetus, king of the MoloJJians,
I. 108.
Æantidas, tyrant of Lamp/acus,
II. 147.
Æginette, formerly of greatpower at sea, I. 13. stir upthe war against the Athenians,50. conquered by the Athe­nians at sea, 81. how andwhy expelled Ægina by theAthenians, 147. are settled bythe Lacedæmonians at Thyrea,ibid, how used by the Athe­nians when they reduced Thy­rea, 358.
Ægyptians, which pf them mostwarlike, 1. 84.
Æneas, I. 410.
Ænefias, I. 123.
Ænians, II. 247.
Æoltans, tributary to Athens,Is. 247.
Æstmides, I. 37.
Æjon, II. 37.
Æthtans, I. 78.
Ætdians, I. 5. invaded by theAthenians, 296. defeat them,298.
Agamemnon, I. 7.
Agatharchidas, I. 197.
jtgatharcus, II. 214,
Agr/ander, I. 113.
Agesippidas, II. 53.
king of Sparta, I. 290,314. he commands against theArgi<ves, II. $5, lets them gowithout a battle, 57. is accu­sed fer it at Sparta, 59. mar­shes a second time againstthorn, 60. gains the victory


at Mantinea, 68. fortifies De-celta in Attica, 209. makes anunsuccessful attempt on A-thens, 339.Agnon, I. 209. the son of IB.cias, collegue to Pericles, 91.befiegeth Potidœa, 170. thefounder of Ampbipolis, 396,
ii. 11,
Agræans, I. 308.Agrianians, I. 210.Agrigentines, neutral in the Si'ci-
lidn war, II. 248.Akteus, archon at Athens, II.
23-
Alcamenes, 28;, 289.
Alcibiades, son of Clinias, H.39. his expedition into Pf/»-ponne/us, 51. and to ^rgw,76. named for one of thecommanders in Sicily, 99. hisspeech on that occasion, 106.is accused about the Mercuries,and for profaning the myste­ries, 118, 141. insists on atrial, 118. sets out far Sicily.119. his opinion ata councilof war, 138. is recalled totake his trial, 141. flies, andis outlawed, 150. takes refugeax Sparta, 176. his speech atSparta, ibid, adviseth the La-cedæmonians about prosecutingthe war, 286, 291. sent to Chi-eswithChakideus,zc)2. his trans.actions at Miletus, 294. goes toTijsaphernes, and becomes afavourite, 317. contrives hisown recalment to Athens, 319.his quarrel with Pbrynicbus,3/1. is recalled, 348, 367.his management at Santos,
349' '-SI' Soes to Aspendus,356.
A'cidas, the Lacedæmonian admi­ral, sent to Lejbos, I. 249,2j6. he flies, 240. returns toPeloponnesus, 276. fails to Cor-cyra, 2so. one of the threeleaden







OCR Output








368 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. B.VIH.


payments; and nothing could be seen either of Tissapher-nes or the Phœnician fleet; and Philippus, who accompa­nied him, sent advice to Mindarus, the admiral in chief;and Hippocrates, farther, a citizen of Sparta, who wasthen at Phaselis, advised him also, that '. this fleet"would never join him, and in all respects they were"shamefully abused by Tissaphernes ;"— as Pharnaba-zus had made them an invitation, and declared him­self ready, if aided by the consederate fleet, to engageas strongly as Tiflaphernes for the revolt of what citiesyet remained in subjection to the Athenians ; — Minda­rus, hoping to find more punctuality in the latter, withnotable conduct, and by a sudden signal to the fleer,that his motions might not be discovered at Samos,weighs from Miletus with seventy-three sail, and benthis course to the Hellespont. But, earlier this sum­mer, sixteen ships had steered their course thither, andravaged part of the Chersonesus. Mindarus met withtempestuous weather in his passage, which forced himto put into Icarus; and, after staying there five or sixdays for want of weather to keep the sea, he arrives atChios.
Thrasyllus, so soon as informed of the departure fromMiletus, stood after him wich five and fifty sail, ma­king the best of his way lest the other should enter theHellespont before he reached him. But, gaining intel­ligence that he was put into Chios, and concluding hedesigned to remain there, he sixed his scouts at Lesbosand the opposite continent; that, if the Peloponnesianfleet put out, their motions might be delcried. Hehimself, repairing to Methymne, ordered quantitiesof meal and other necessaries to be prepared, that, incase he should be forced to stay in these parts, he mightmake frequent cruises from Lesbos against Chios.
But, as Eressus in Lesbos had revolted, his designwas farther to attempt its reduction, in cafe it were fea­sible. For some of the Methynean exiles, and thosenot the most inconsiderable of the number, having
brought







OCR Output








364 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. B. VIII.


were aground; and others posted themselves upon thewalls and at the mouth of rhe harbour.
But the Peloponnesian fleet, having sailed by anddoubled the cape of Sunium, comes to anchor betweenThoricus and Prasiæ, and proceeds afterwards to Oro-pus. Hereupon the Athenians, in all imaginable hurry,manning out their ships with what hands could be goton this sudden emergency, as in a city distracted withsedition, and yet eager to stave off the greatest dangerthat had ever threatened it, (for, as Attica was occu­pied by the enemy, Eubœa was now their all,) causeThymocharis, a commander, to stand away with theirfleet to Eretria. On their arrival there, and their junc­tion with such as were already in Eubcea, they amountedto six and thirty sail, and were immediately forced toengage: For Hegesandridas, after the hour of repast,came out in line of battle from Oropus.
The distance of Oropus from the city of the Eretrians,across the sea, is about * sixty stadia: And therefore,upon his approach, the Athenians ordered their menon-board, imagining the soldiers to be ready at hand toobey their orders; whereas they happened not yet to bereturned from the market, whither they had gone tobuy provisions. For, through the management of theEretrians, nothing could be got by way of sale, exceptin such houses as lay in the most remote quarters of thecity i with an intent that the enemy might attack theAthenians before they were all embarked, and obligethem in a hurrying and disorderly manner to begin thefight. Nay, a signal had even been held out to theenemy from Eretria towards Oropus, at what time theyought to come forward to the attack.
Upon so short a notice, the Athenians, havingformed their line as well as they were able, and enga­ging the enemy before the harbour of Eretria, madehowever a gallant resistance for a time. At length, be-
* About fix English mile:,


ing







OCR Output








2S8 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. B.Vlh


When the Syracusan generals, seconded by Gylippus,had finished this their exhortation to their own soldiers,they also, in their turn, repaired immediately on-boardtheir fleet, as they found was already done by the Athe­nians. • •. t
But Nicjas, whose mind was surcharged with presentcares, sensible how extreme the danger, and how nearlyapproaching! since this very moment they were onlynot in motion; and once more reflecting, that, as ge­nerally happens in affairs of such prodigious moment,some points might yet be left imperfect, something ofenergy, and weight, and influence, be yet left unlaid jhe called out again upon every single captain in the fleet,addressing himself separately to them, with the honour­able mention of their fathers, themselves, and their tribe;and conjuring each, by his own distinguishing splendor,whatever it was, "not now to betray it, nor tarnish** those hereditary virtues on which their ancestors had"sounded their gloryreminding them earnestly
of the uninterrupted freedom of their country, and"the privilege they had ever enjoyed of living in it"quite free and uncontrouled •" asserting other argu­ments, soch as, with men who had their all so much atstake, might have influence and weight; no matternow how trite or hackneyed by frequent repetitions,pr how equally applicable to every case, as fetched fromthe endearments of their wives, and their offspring, andtheir paternal gods; such as from every topic, in aplunge of horror and distress, are rung in the earsof men, as likely to animate and persuade. And thusat last, though fearful that not even yet he had said c-nough, but all that the time would permit, he partedfrom them; and, placing himself at the head of theland-army, marched down to the beach; where hedrew them up in as large a line as they could possiblyform, that their appearance might have the greater ef­fect in emboldening those on-board the fleet.







OCR Output








B.VII. THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. 325


thenians erected a trophy. The spot they chose, whereonto place this token of their victory, was distant about•twenty stadia from Erineus, the station in which theCorinthians rode. Such was the event of this naval en­gagement. •'
Demosthenes and Eurymedon, so soon as the Thu-rians had got in readiness seven hundred heavy-armed,with three hundred darters to attend them in the expe­dition, ordered the fleet to coast along the shore to­wards the Crotoniatis; whilst themselves, after havingtaken a review of all their land-army upon the banksot the Sybaris, marched them over land through theThuriatis. But, when they were advanced to the riverHylias, they were met by a message from the Crotonia-tæ, intimating to them, that their consent should ne-** ver be given for the passage of this army through** their dominionsupon which they wheeled off down­wards towards the sea and the mouth of the Hylias,where they halted a night, and were joined by the wholebody of the fleet.
The next morning they re-embarked and proceededalong the coast, touching at every city except Locri,till they arrived at Petra in the district of Rhegium.
But, during this interval, the Syracusans, who hadreceived advice of the approach of the reinforcement,determined to make another attempt with their fleet andthe whole augmented body of their land-army, whichthey had assembled together for this very design of at­tacking the Athenians again before the reinsorcementarrived. But, like men who in "the former action hadclearly perceived what would give them advantages overthe enemy, they had made some alteration in the struc­ture of their vessels: Having shortened the headsof their ships, they made them more firm and compact,and fastened very substantial stays to each fide of thebeak; they strengthened these again by rafters of sixcubits in length, which were laid along the ribs both
* About two miles.
Vol. II. Q within







OCR Output








B.VI1I. THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. 301


from Erythræ, they consulted how to prevent the exe­cution of the plot by the mildest and most gentle me­thods, either by taking hostages for the sidelity of thesuspected, or some other such cautionary expedients.In this posture stood affairs at Chios.
But, from Athens, in the close of the same summer,one thousand five hundred heavy-armed Athenians anda thousand Argives, (for, five hundred Argives, whowere but light-armed, the Athenians had equipped inthe manner more complete,) with the addition of a thou­sand confederates, in eight and forty fail of ships, in­cluding the transports of the heavy-armed, and putunder the command of Phrynichus and Onomacles andSkironidas, sailed away to Samos, and, thence stretch­ing over to Miletus, encamped themselves before it.The Milesians marched out into the field, to the a-mount of eight hundred heavy-armed, assisted by thePeloponnesians who came over with Chalcideus and abody of foreign mercenaries furnished by Tissaphernes.Tissaphernes also assisted them in person with an aid ofcavalry: And thus battle was joined against the Athe­nians and consederates. The Argives, of whom awhole wing was composed, advanced before the rest ofthe line; and, contemning their enemy too much, asIonians and unable to stand their shock, they chargedin a disorderly manner, are routed by the Milesians, andno less a number than three hundred of their body aredestroyed. But the Athenians beat first the Pelopon­nesians, and then cleared the field of the Barbarians andall the rabble of the enemy, yet came not at all to anengagement with the Milesians: For the latter, return­ing towards the city from the chace of the Argives, nosooner perceived that their own side was vanquished thanthey quitted the field of battle. The Athenians, there­fore, as victors, posted themselves under the very wallsof Miletus. It is observable, that, in this battle, theIonians had on both sides the better of the Dorians: Forthe Athenians beat those Peloponnesians who were
ranged







OCR Output








B.VII. THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. 267


began the voyage, were now dislodging with omens thatportended nothing but misery: Those, farther, whocame hither as lords of the ocean, were now stealingaway by land, from henceforth to be saved, not bynaval skill, but the perseverance of a land-army. How*ever, ail these reflexions put their patience nothing onthe stretch, in comparison of that weight of miserywhich this very instant was hovering over their heads.
Nicias, perceiving the whole army to be overwhelmedin despair and sunk in this plunge of distress, addressedhimself severally to the troops, exhorted, and com­forted, by every topic which occurred, each singleparty, whom he visited by turns, elevating his voicefar beyond the ordinary pitch, to suit the earnestness ofhis heart, in hope that, the louder he spoke, the moreextensive effect it might have upon the hearers.
"EVEN yet, and in the present low ebb of our** fortune, my dear countrymen and consederates, we** ought to encourage hope. Instances may be given"of armies who have been rescued from a deeper** plunge of dangers than that which is now our por-** tion. Nor ought you to torture yourselves with too** painful regret at what you suffer, or at the unme-** rited miseries which this moment environ you abour.
Even I myself, who have much less room to boast"of a constitution superior to hardships than the meanest"soldier in your ranks, (for your own eyes can witness** to how low a state my bodily infirmities have redu-"ced me,) who, however, in the continued happi-*.* ness of my former course of lise, or in any other re-** gard, am inserior to none amongst you, — yet am** bufseted now, by the storms and outrages of fortune,** as cruelly as ever were the vilest and most abject of** my sellow-creatures. It is true, I have ever habitu-"ally worshipped the gods, with a conscientious de-"ference to established laws; and have made justice** and beneficence to man the constant practice of myV- ' ~ "life.







OCR Output








262 THE PELOPONNESTAN WAR. B.VII.


noises was heard together ;—Jkrieking—shouting—victory!—undone I —undone! — and all other sounds, of variousimport, which, in such extremity of danger, a nume­rous body of men may be forced to utter.
Those, farther, on-board, were equally sensible of allthe quick alternatives of passion; till at last, after thebattle had for a long time been obstinately maintained,the Syracusans and allies put the Athenians to openflight; and, plying briskly in the chace, with obstrepe­rous clamour and loud exultations drove them upon thebeach. And here, the land-soldiers which had servedon-board, excepting such as had been taken in the deep­er water, leaping in all parts, as they severally could,on the shore, run in great confusion for shelter to the


diversified, but with one and the same uniform vehe­mence, having expressed their resentment of the horribleconclusion by a loud skriek and a hearty groan, somehurried along the beach to succour the shipping; otherstodesend what yet remained of their intrenchments; whilsta third party, and the bulk of the army, confined theirwhole care to themselves, and were solely intent ontheir own personal preservation. The horrid consterna­tion, in which this moment they were universally plun­ged, was greater than Athenians had ever felt before.They suffered now what on a former occasion they hadmade others sufser at Pylus. There the Lacedæmonians,having first lost their fleet, had the farther mortificationto see all their gallant Spartans in the island undone. Andnow the desperate condition of the Athenians offered noglimmering of sasety on the land, unless some miracu­lous contingency should take place in their favour.
After an engagement so hardy and well disputed, as*ter the sinking of a large number of ships,and the deathof numbers on both sides, the Syracusans and their al­lies, who were masters of the day, took up the shattersand the dead. This being done, they sailed in triumphto the city, and erected a trophy.


 


But







OCR Output








B.VI. THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. i7r


"as you know, that over our dependents in Greece"we either hold tight or slacken the rein, as squares best** with the public service. We permit to the Chians** and Methymneans the free use of their liberties and** laws for a quota of shipping; we do the same** to many for an annual tribute, exacted perhaps** with somewhat of rigour. Others amongst them,"who fight under our orders, are absolutely free,** though seated upon islands and easy to be totally re-** duced, because they are commodiously situated to an-"noy the Peloponnesian coast. And hence it may be* * depended upon, that we shall make such dispositions*'• allo here as are most expedient for our own interest,"and may best lessen the dread, which, as was said be-** fore, we entertain of the Syracusans.
"The point at which they aim is an extent of their** rule over you; and when, by alarming your suspicions** of us, they have wrought you to their own purpose,"either by open force or taking advantage of your de-** solate condition, when we are repulsed and obliged1* to abandon your desence, they intend to subdue all** Sicily to their yoke. Such the event will unavoidably** prove, if at present you adhere to them: For, never"again will it be easy for us to assemble together so** large an armament to give a check to their ambition j** nor, when we are no longer at hand for your support,** will their strength against you be insufficient. It is•* vain in any man to indulge an opinion that this may*s not be the cafe, since the very train of things evin-** ceth its truth. For, when first you invited us hither,** it was not upon the suggestion of any other fear than** this, that, should we suffer you to be subjected by the*f Syracusans, the danger then would extend itself to** us. And highly unjust it would be now, if the argu-** ment you luccessfully inforced with us should lose all its** influence upon you, or should you ground suspicions"on our present appearance against them with a force.** superior to theirs, when you ought much more to en-
2 certain







OCR Output








40 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. . B. V.


des, the son of Cliniasa person, in respect of age, e-ven then but a youth; at least he would have passed forsuch in the other States, though, for the dignity of hisbirth, he was much honoured and caressed. It seemedto him the most expedient step to form a good under­standing with the Argives. Not but that his oppositionto other measures was the result of his ambition and astudy of contention, because the Lacedæmonians hademployed their interest in Nicias and Laches to perfectthe treaty, flighting his assistance upon account of hisyouth, nor paying him the deference he expected fromthe ancient hospitality between that State and the familyfrom which he was descended. This, indeed, his grands-father had renounced; but he himself, in the view of re­newing it, had shewn extraordinary civilities to the Spar­tans who were made prisoners at Sphacteria. Thinkinghimself, therefore, in all respects fligtited, at this crisishe began openly to oppose them: He affirmed, that,*•* the Lacedæmonians were a people who could not be"trusted; that they had treacherously entered into the
* Alcibiades is here beginning his political intrigues, to open the field for his ownsearing and enterprising genius to dilate itself more at large. Pericles was his near rela­tion and guardian} Socrates was his friend and guide so long as virtue was his c,are*Warmer passions soon gained the ascenHant over him; and he plunged into all thebusy scenes of life, with that intense application and flexible address, to all personsand all occasions, which surprised the world; " more changeable than a camelion,"(as Plutaich txpresseth it,) since that creature cannot put on a fair or whit* ap-"pearance." His character is thus drawn in miniature by the neat and masterlypen of Cornelius Nepos; " Nature (fays he) seems to have exerted her utmost powet;"in Alcibiades, It is agreed, by all writers who have made him the subject of theiril pens, that a more extraordinary man never lived, either for virtues or vices. Born"in a most noble republic, of a moll honourable family, by far the handsomest person"of his age, fit for every thing, and full cf address; he was a commander that'' made the greatest figure both by land and sea; an orator whom none could sur-"pass; nay, his manner and matter, when he spoke, were quite irresistible. Ex-"actly as occasions requited, he was laborious, persevering, indefatigable, gene­s' rous; splendid in all his outward appearance, and at his table; full of affability,"profuse of civility, and of the utmost dexterity in adapting himsUf to the exigence**' of time; and yet, in the seasons of relaxation, and when business no longer requi-*' red him to keep his faculties on the stretch, he was luxurious, dissolute, lewd, and"intemperate. The whole world was astonished that so vast an unlikeness, and so
different a nature, should be united in the same person."
*'. peace







OCR Output








23o THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. B.VIL


wards and gliding along the sides of their veflels, andfrom these close positions aiming their darts at the ma­riners. In fine, the Syraeusans, persevering in thismanner to gall their foes, were masters of the day,whilst the Athenians, being put to flight, were obligedto retire, through the intervals of the line of transports,into their own station. The Syracusan ships pursued asfar as to this line of transports; but were obliged tostop there, for fear of the * machines which hung uponthe yards of the transports to bar all approach. Twoships, indeed, of the Syraeusans, elevated with success,approached too near, and were funk j and another,with all her crew, was taken by the enemy. And nowthe Syraeusans, who in the action had funk seven shipsof the enemy, had damaged many, had taken manyprisoners, and made great slaughter, judged it properto retire. They then erected trophies as victorious intwo engagements, and plumed themselves in the assu­rance, that, by sea, they had the superiority over theenemy $ presuming, at the same time, that they mustsoon be victorious also by land: upon which they gotevery thing in readiness to attack them once more oaboth elements.
But, at this crisis, Demosthenes and Eurymedort ar­rive, at the head of the reinforcement from Athens;which consisted, of seventy-three sail of ships, inclu­ding foreigners of about five thousand heavy-armedof their own and their confederate troops; beside aconsiderable number of darters, as well Barbarian mprecian, and stingers, and archers, and a Completesupply of all military stores. The first appearance ofthis grand reinforcement struck the Syraeusans arid theirallies with no small consternation. It looked as if thewar must be endless, and themselves exposed to dan­gers that knew no bounds. They saw that, in spite of
W Called dolphins, from their form. They were massy, made of lead, and bongupon the sail-yards by cords and pulleys; and, when thrown into the entity's IhipSieither burst or funk them.
the







OCR Output








B.VIL THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. 233


by Eurymedon and Menander, marched towards Epi-pola;. But Nicias was left behind in the intrench-ments. '. .
When now they were advanced to the pass of Eury-alus, by which the first army gained formerly the as­cent, they are yet undiscovered by the Syracusan guards;and, mounting the heights, surprise the fort which wasthere manned by the Syracusans, and slaughter someof the desendants. But the majority flying amain to­wards the camps, of whicli there were three among theadvanced intrenchments of Epipolæ, (one of Syracu­sans, a second of other Sicilians, and a third of the con­federates,) they spread the alarm, and also notified theenemy's approach to the six hundred Syracusans, whoat first were selected for the guard of this quarter of E-pipolæ. These sallied out instantly to stop their pro­gress; and Demosthenes, with his Athenians, fallingin with them, put them to flight, after they had madea gallant stand. Upon this success, they immediatelypushed forwards, that they might improve the presentardour of the soldiers to the immediate completion ofthose points for which they had made this bold attempt.Another party, which had been advancing all alongwithout a check, surprised the counterwork of the Sy­racusans; of which, since abandoned by its desendants,they were throwing down the battlements.
But now the Syracusans, and their consederates, andGylippus with the body under his command, marchedout of their intrenchments: yet, having been attackedin so daring a manner amidst the darkness of the night,they had not recovered their surprise when they sell inwith the Athenians j and thus, not able to stand thefirst shock, they were obliged to give way for a time.But, as the Athenians pushed forwards with great irre­gularity, as if the victory was quite their own; eager,farther, to make themselves masters of all the tract notyet cleared of the enemy, for sear lest, should theyslacken in their ardour, the enemy might have time to







OCR Output








igo THE PELOPONNESTAN WAR. B.VI,


or six of thole by whom he was accompanied. The Sy-racusans caught up their bodies with al] possible expe.dition, and bore them off to a place of security on theother side of the river. They were in great measureobliged to make a precipitate retreat, since the rest ofthe Athenian army was now coming up to attack them.
But now, such of the Syracusans as had fled at firsttowards the city, having gained leisure to observe suchturns in their favour, caught fresh courage from thefight; and, forming again into order, stood theirground against that body of Athenians which faced them.They also send a detachment to attempt the circle onEpipolæ, concluding it to be unmanned for the present,and might at once be taken. This detachment in factmade itself master of the out-work, and demolishad itfor about ten pktbres in length; but the circle itselfwas defended by Nicias from all their attempts. Ni-cias, being much out of order, had been left to reposehimself within the circle. He therefore issued orders tobis servants to set fire to all the machines arid the tim­ber which were lying before the wall; for he was con­vinced that thus alone, in such a toral wane of handsfor their defence, any safety could be earned. Theevent answered his expectation; for,, when the flamesbegan to mount, the Syracusans durst not any longercome near, but thought proper tc desist and march a-way.
For now the Athenians, who by this time had chacedthe enemy from off the plain, were remounting theascent to defend their circle; and, at the same instantof time, their fleet, conformable to the orders they hadreceived, was standing into the great harbour. TheSyraculans upon the high-ground beheld the sight}which occasioned them and the whole Syracufan armyto retire precipitately into the city ; concluding them­selves no longer able, without an augmentation of theirpresent strength, to hinder the completion ot the Artie*nian works quite down to the sea.







OCR Output








282 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. B.VIII.


to the will of heaven, had elevated their hopes with thecertain conquest of Sicily. On all sides now all mannerof disasters environed them about; and never had A*thens been thrown into so great a consternation and de­jection as at the present juncture: For now, besidewhat each private family suffered, as the public at thefame time had lost the bulk of its heavy-armed andhorsemen, and that flower of its youth which they saw itimpossible to replace, they were sorely dejected. Con­scious, farther, that they had not shipping sufficient intheir docks for a fresti equipment, nor money in thepublic treasury, nor even hands to man what vesselsthey had left, they gave up all hope of deliverance inthe present plunge. Their enemies from Sicily, they i-magined, would soon enter the Piræus with a powerfulnavy, especially as they were flushed with such a careerof success; and their enemies nearer home wouldnow, for a certainty, redouble their preparations, andwith the utmost resolution fall upon them at once bothby sea and land, and be farther strengthened by the re­volt of their own temporising confederates. At last,however, they agreed it was their duty to do what mightyet be done; not basely to abandon their own preier-vation, but to fit out a navy, by collecting from allpossible resources both timber and money ;—and timelyto secure their own dependent States, above all Eubœa;— and to reduce the expences of the civil administrationwith all possible ceconomy; — and to lodge the sove­reignty in the hands of a select body of old experiencedstatesmen, whose maturer counsels might, if possible, yetextricate the State from its present misfortunes. Suchan effect had the general consternation now upon them*an effect not unusual with a peepk, that they becameheartily disposed to order their government aright.And, as to such resolutions they came, they proceeded,farther, to put them in execution: And the summerended.


In







OCR Output








i3& T&E PEtOPONNESsAN WAR; B.VL


"before them the mighty power of the Athenian State,*' and, having given such conspicuous proofs of their*• alacrity to support their friends and afiies, might re-*' turn to Athens; provided, that iid sodden andunex-M pected turn Of affairs might give' then¥ opportunity*' to do service to the Leontines, or bring' Over some*' other cities to their interest; ever intent not to bring*' their ovtn State into danger by a needless profusion oftk blood and treasure."
Altibiades declared," That it could never be justi-"fiedi if, after putting to sea with so great an armaments*' they* should return withr disgrace; artid no effectual"service done to their country; that, on the contrary,"theyought, by hera!ds: dispatched expressly, to notify*' their arrival in these parts td all- ihV cities except"Selinus and Syracuse; that, farther, they should try*' what could be done with the Steals,'tirt order to per-"soade some' of them to revolt from- the Syracusans,"and to strike up treaties of alliance and friendship"with others, that so they might provide a resource*' of provisions and reinforcements; that, the first trial*' of %hfs -kind should be made upon the Messenians,*' (who lay in the finest situation for favouring their"passage and descent into Sicily,) which must open to*' them the most convenient harbour asrtd- station for their"armament: Thus, gaining the concurrence of the1*' cities, arid certain from whom they might depend*' upon assistance, the way would then be open for them"to make attempts upon Syracuse and Selinus, in cafe"the former refused to make up the quarrel with the"Egesteans, and the latter to suffer the replantation- of"the Leontines." \
The opinion of Lamachus was diametrically opposite,since he ad vised it" to be the most judicious measure"to stand at once against'Syracuse, and to try their"fortune before that city with the utmost expedition,"whilst they were yet not competently provided for resis-"taoce and their consternation was still in its height:
** Because







OCR Output








B.VIII. THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. 36$


brought over from Cyme about fifty heavy-armed whowere' most firmly attached to their cause, and hired o-thers from the continent, which increased their numberto about three hundred,— AnaxarchuSj the Theban, irtrespect of consanguinity, being chosen their leader* —assaulted first Methymne j and, being repulsed in theattempt by the Athenian garrison which came up fromMitylene, and then driven quite off by a battle foughtin the field, they retired across the mountain, and makeEressus revolt. Thrasyllus, therefore, steering withhis fleet against Eressus, projected an assault. ButThrasybulus, with five ships from Samos, arrived therebefore him, upon information received of the re-passageof the exiles; yet, coming too late before Eressus toprevent a revolt, he lay at anchor before it. Two otherships, also, bound homewards from the Hellespont,came in, and the Methymnean. All the ships in thefleet amounted now to sixty-seven, from which theydraughted an army for the operations of land, as fullybent, if possible, to take Eressus by a bold assault, with,engines and all the arts of attack.
In the mean time, Mindarus and the Peloponnesiarlfleet at Chios, after two whole days employment in ta­king in provisions, and receiving from the Chians everyman on-board three Chian *teJseracofts, on the the thirdday with urgent dispatch launch out from Chios intothe wide sea, that they might not be deserted by thefleet before Eressus and, leaving Lesbos on the left,stood over to the continent. There, putting into theharbour of Crateræi on the coast of Phocea, and takingtheir noon repast, they proceeded along the coastof Cyme, and supped at Arginusæ of the continent,over-against Mitylene. From thence, at dead of night,they went forwards along the shore > and, being arrived
* This, according to Spanheim, was a month's pay, fince be explains it by forty-three Chian draebmat. But the words will not bear such a construction: A ttjserdcojlwas, it is most probable, a coin peculiar to the Chians ; but of what Talue is notknown, nor is it of any great importance.
Vol. II. B b at







OCR Output








B.VII. THE PELOPONNESTAN WAR. 249


several nations of Greek descent settled in Sicily, beingall Doric, and independent, acted together in concert.Of the barbarous people they had those Siculi alonewho did not openly revolt to the Athenians; but, outof Sicily, the Lacedæmonians sent them a citizen of Spar­ta to command, and a body of Neodamodes and Helots.By a Neodamas is meant a citizen newly enfranchised.The Corinthians alone aided them both with shippingand a-land-force, in conjunction with the Leucadiansand Ambiaciots, by blood allied to Syracuse. FromArcadia also came a body of mercenaries, sent by theCorinthians and the Sicyonians, who acted on com­pulsion; and of those who dwell without the Pelopon­nesus were the Bœotians. But, beside these foreignaids, the Sicilians, as possessed of great and powerfulcities, furnished out in all respects a much greater andwell-appointed force: For by them a numerous bodyof heavy-armed, of ships, and horses, and other kindsof military force, in an amazing abundance, were rai­sed and brought to Syracuse. And yet it must be said,that the domestic force of the Syracusans was more tobe considered than all the rest, from the greatness of theirState and the immediate urgency of those perils withwhich they were environed.
These were the aids, the numerous aids, assembledtogether by the contending parties; and at this junctureall these were present on each side of the contest; andfrom this crisis neither party received any accession.
The Syracusans therefore and their consederatesthought, since the signal victory they had gained uponthe water, it would be a brave exploit, and highly fortheir glory, to make the whole extensive camp of theAthenians their prize, and cut off their retreat onboth elements, both by land and lea. With this pro­ject, they immediately barred up the great harbour,the mouth of which is about * eight stadia over, with a


P Near a mile.


line







OCR Output








B.V. THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. 27


No sooner had the M antineans revolted, than the restof Peloponnesus began to mutter that "they ought also"to take the same step," imagining that revolt to havebeen founded upon some stronger reasons than yet ap­peared; exasperated also against the Lacedæmonians forsundry reasons, and, above all, for this article in thepeace with Athens,—that, "in case the two States of"Lacedæmon and Athens think proper to make any"additions or alterations, the same to be lawful." Forthis was the clause which gave the greatest alarm to Pe­loponnesus, and inspired a jealousy that the Lacedæmo­nians might strike up a bargain with the Athenians toinflave the other States; since, in justice, no alterationought to be made without the concurrence of the wholeconfederacy. Alarmed, therefore, at these proceedings,many of them made instant application to the Argives,exerting their several endeavours to obtain their alliance.
But the Lacedæmonians, perceiving what a com­bustion was arisen in Peloponnesus, principally ow­ing to the insinuations of the Corinthians, who were al­so going to enter into this league with Argos, they dis­patch embassadors to Corinth from a desire to preventwhat might ensue. Here they represented to them, —"how criminal their conduct had been, in having thus"originally fomented the present tumult; and that,"in cafe they abandoned the Lacedæmonians and went"over to the Argive league," they assured them, that,!* by such a step, they must break the most sacred"oaths; injustice they had already committed in refu-"sing to accede to the Athenian peace, since, pursuant"to old stipulations between them, whatever a ma-"jority of the confederates resolved was to be binding"on all, unless some god or hero injoined a dissent" Bucthe Corinthians, in the presence of all those of the con­federacy who had not accepted the peace, and whose at­tendance they had previously invited, replied to the La­cedæmonians without entering into a particular detailof the injuries they had done them, in not covenanting







OCR Output








BtV1II. THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. 303


fleet, even though his collegues declared openly forkeeping their ground and hazarding an engagement bysea, protested boldly, that " such a step, for his own"part, he could not take 5 *and, were he able to hin-** der it, that neither they nor any one should force** him to it: For, since it would be afterwards in their** power, when they had got better intelligence of the"numbers of the enemy, and made what possible ac-** cessions they could to their own, and when they had"prepared for action in an ample and leisurely man-** ner, since it would be still in their power to fight,"the dread of a shameful or reproachful imputation"should not bend him to risk an engagement against"his judgement. It could be no matter of reproach** to the Athenians to retire with their fleet when the"exigences of time required it; but, in every respect,"it would be highly reproachful to them should they"fight and be vanquished. He would not, therefore,** involve the State, not only in reproach, but in the** greatest of dangers;—the State which, but just now** respiring from the terrible blows it had received,* * scarce thought it prudential with most ample prepa-** ration to choose voluntary hazards, or even, when"the last necessity demanded, to strike first at the ene-"my, — why now, when no necessity compelled, must** it be thrown into wilful spontaneous dangers?" Heexhorted them, therefore, " without loss of time to** carry the wounded on-board, to re embark their** troops, and, securing what baggage they had brought** along with them, to leave behind what booty they"had got from the enemy, that their ships might notv** be too deeply laden, and make the best of their way** to Samos; and from thence, after collecting together** what additional force they could, to watch for and** seize the seasons of advantage to attack their foes."The advice of Phrynicus, thus given, was prevailing,and accordingly was put in execution. He was regar­ded, not only on the present but on future occasions,» 1 not







OCR Output








B.VII. THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. 215


whilst others in long boats were fastening cables roundthe piles, and, by the help of a machine convenient forthe purpose, craning them up; and such as they brokea set of divers sawed off close at the bottom. The Sy-racusans in the mean time were pouring their missiveweapons upon them from the docks, which were plenti­fully returned by those posted on the raft. In short,the Athenians plucked up most of the piles; but onepart of the staccade was exceeding difficult to be demo­lished, as it lay out of fight; for they had driven down.some of the piles in such a manner, that their heads e-merged not above the surface of the water. This ren­dered all access exceeding dangerous; since, ignorantwhere they lay, a pilot would be apt to bulge his vesselas it were upon a shelve. But even these the divers, fora pecuniary reward, searched out and sawed away. Andyet, as fast as this was done, the Syracusans drove downa fresh set of piles. The contrivances both of annoy­ance and prevention were strenuously exerted on bothfides, as might justly be expected from two hostile bo­dies posted so near one another; the skirmishings wereoften renewed, and every artifice of war was successivelypractised.
The Syracusans, farther, had dispatched embassies,composed of Corinthians, and Lacedæmonians, andAmbraciots, to the cities of Sicily, " to notify the sur-** prisal of Plemmyrium, and to give a just representa-** tion of the naval engagement in which they had been"defeated, not so much by the strength of the enemy"as by their own confusion; in other respects to assure*' them, that their hopes of success were high, and that"they firmly depended on receiving soon an aid from"them, composed both of a land and naval force; since"the Athenians were also in expectation of a reinforce-** ment from Athens, the approach of which would their*' friends anticipate, the Athenians at present there must"** be totally destroyed, and the war brought at once to
P 4 "af»







OCR Output








A,V. THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. 69


greatest part of the picked band of Argives completedtheir escape.
The flight however was not precipitate, nor the dis­tance to a place of safety great. For the Lacedæmoni­ans, till the enemy flieth, maintain their combats withlong and steady toil; but, after a rout, pursue themneither long nor far.
And thus, or very nearly thus, was the procedureof the whole battle, the greatest that for many ages hadbeen fought amongst Grecians, and where the competi­tion lay between most renowned and flourishing Stales.The Lacedæmonians, amassing together the arms oftheir enemies who had been stain, immediately erected atrophy, and rifled the bodies of the dead. They alsotook up their own dead, and carried, them to Tegea,where they received the rights of sepulture; and also de­livered, upon truce, the slain of their enemy. Therefell, of the Argives, and Orneatæ, and Cleoneans, se­ven hundred; and two hundred of the Mantineans;two hundred also of the Athenians, including the Ægi-netæ and their several commanders. On the Lacedæ- (monian fide,—as the consederates were never hard pres­sed, what loss they suffered is scarcely deserving of no­tice; and the exact number of their own dead it is diffi­cult to discover, but it was reported to have been aboutthree hundred.
When a battle was certainly to be fought, Pleistio-nax, the other king, marched out to their support, withthe whole body of citizens, both old men and youths.But, when he was advanced as far as Tegea, he recei­ved the news of a victory, and returned to Sparta.The Lacedæmonians also sent messengers to countermandtheir aljies from Corinth, and from without the isthmus.And, being themselves returned to Sparta, after givingdismission to their allies, as the Carneian solemnitieswere at hand, they celebrate the sestival. The imputa­tion also of cowardice, at that time laid to their chargeby the rest of Greece, because of their misfortune at
F 3 Sphacteria,







OCR Output








i78 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. B.VI.


"that the judicious part of our community are sensible"what fort of a government a democracy is, — and I** myself no less than others, who have such abundant*' occasion to reproach and curse it: — but, for mad-"ness open and avowed, new terms of abhorrence can-*' not be invented; though totally to subvert it we*' could in no wise deem a measure of security, whilst*' you had declared yourselves our foes, and were in the*' field against us. And all those proceedings of mine,"which have proved most offensive to you, are to be"charged entirely to such principles as these.
** And now, in relation to these points, on which'* you are here assembled to deliberate, (and I also with"you,) and about which, if I am able to give you a"greater light, I am bound to do it, — attend to what'* I am going to declare. Our principal view in the** expedition to Sicily was, if possible, to reduce the"Sicilians to our yoke. After them, we intended to"do the same by the Italians. We should next have"attempted the dominions of the Carthaginians; nay,*' Carthage itself. Had these our views been succes-"ful, eithes in the whole or the greater part, we*' should soon have given the attack to Peloponnesus;"assembling for that purpose the whole Grecian force,*' which the countries thus subdued must have added to*' our own; taking also into our pay large bodies of** Barbarians and Iberians, and other soldiers of those*' nations which by general consent are famed for the"most warlike of all Barbarians. We should have"built also great numbers of triremes for the enlarge-"ment of our navy, as Italy would plentifully have*' supplied us with timber; with which blocking up*' Peloponnesus on all sides, and with our land-forces*' at the same time invading it by land, (after carrying"your cities, some by storm, and some by the regular*' siege,) we hoped without obstruction to have warred"you down, and in pursuance of that to have seized*' the empire of universal Greece. With money and all
"needful







OCR Output








kft THE TELOPONWESIAN WAR. B.VIH.


importance was taTccn in hand, as the point in agitationwas no less than the recovery of Chios.
In the mean time, Strombichides, with the eight failof ships, arrived at Samos j and, taking with him tuneSamian vessel, stood onwards to Teos, and required ofthem " to have no participation in the present commo-** lions." From Chios, also, Chakideus was now co-filing over to Teos, with a fleet of three and twentyfail; and the land-force of the Clazomenians, and alsoof the Erythræans, attending his motions, was march­ing thither by land: But Strombichides, having timelynotice of their approach, pot out again before thefrr ar*rival. Standing out aloos into open sea, he had a viewof this numerous fleet in their course from Chios; uponWhich he fled amain to Samos. But the enemy fol­lowed in pursuit.
The Teians, who at first refused admittance to theland-forces, when now the Athenians plainly fled,thought proper to open their gates. Here the busk ofthem were inactive for a time, attending the return ofChalcideus from the pursuit. But, when time wore onwithout his appearing, they demolished of their'ownaccord the wall'Which the Athenians had built on the•fide of Teos facing the continent. In this they werealso assisted by a small party of Barbarians, who in 'this'interval had joined them, and were commanded byTages, the deputy of TissaphernCs.
But Chalcideus and Alcibiades, when they had chasedStrombichides into Samos, having furnished the mari­ners of the Peloponnesian vessels with proper arms,leave them as a garrison in Chios. Having mannedtheir vessels afresh at Chios, with an additioivof twentyothers, they stood away for Miletus, as meditating itsrevolt. This was owing to Alcibiades; who, having:an interest in persons of the first rank among the Mile­sians, made it a point to effectuate their accession beforethe fleet should come up from Peloponnesus, and to'fe*cure the whole honour to the Chians and himself, and
Chalcideus







OCR Output








332 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. B.VIII.


Instantly upon this, Dercylidas having completed hismarch from Miletus, Abydus in Hellespont revolts toDercylidas and Pharnabazus; and two days afterLampsacus did the fame.
But intelligence of this having reached Strombichidesat Chios, and he, with four and twenty fail of Athe­nians, including the transports which carried the heavy-armed, stretching thither with all possible expedition,the Lampsacenes sallied out to repulse him. He de­feated them in battle; and, having at a shout madehimself master of Lampsacus, which was quite unfor­tified, he gave up all the efsects and slaves for pillage tohis men; and, after re-establishing such as were free intheir old habitations, proceeded against Abydus. But,finding them deaf to all schemes of accommodation,and himself unable to reduce them by force, crossingover to the spot opposite to Abydus, he garrisons Sestus,a city in the Chersonese, which had formerly belongedto the Medes, and put it in a condition to guard theHellespont. r;
During this interval of time, the Chians had verymuch enlarged their room at sea; and those stationed atMiletus, and even Astyochus, upon receiving the par­ticulars of the late engagement, and advice that Strom­bichides was drawn off with so many ships, began to behigh in spirits. Astyochus, accordingly, arriving atChios with only two ships, carrieth off along with himwhat shipping was there, and with the whole force isnow at sea, in order to make an attempt upon Samos.But when the enemy there, because mutually embroiledin jealousies, came not out against him, he returnedagain to the station of Miletus: For, about this time,or rather before, the democracy was overturned at A-thens.
The deputation, at the head of which was Pifander,were no sooner returned to Samos from Tissaphernes,than they found their schemes had gained a strongerfooting in the army, and that the Samians had been
encouraging







OCR Output








140 THE PELOPONNE^IAN WAR. B.VI.


could persuade, when on the contrary they returnedthis answer, that" into their city they would not re*** ceive them, though they were ready to accommodate** them with a market without the walls," he repassedto Rhegium. And immediately the generals, havingmanned out sixty ships with the choicest hands of thewhole fleet and taken in .a requisite stock of subsistence*steered away for Naxus, leaving the rest of the arma­ment at Rhegium under the care of one of those in thecommission.
After a reception granted them into their city by theNaxians, they stood away from thence to Catana.And, when the Cataneans refused to receive them, (forin that city was a party strongly attached to the Syracu-fasis,) they put into the river Terias. After a night'scontinuance there, the next day they sailed for Syracusejkeeping the rest of the fleet ready ranged in a line ofbattle a-head. But they had detached ten beforehand,who were ordered to enter the great harbour of Syracuse,and to examine what naval force lay there ready launchedfor service, and to proclaim from their decks as theypassed along the shore — That, ** the Athenians are** come into those parts to replace the Leontines in"their own territory, as they were bound in point both** of alliance and consanguinity, that whatever Leon-** tines therefore were now residing at Syracuse should** without fear come over to the Athenians, as friendsU and benefactors."
When the proclamation had been made, and theyhad taken a view of the city and its harbours, and ofthe adjacent ground, what spots were most convenientfor a descent and the commencement of the war, theysoiled back again to Catana. A council os war hadbeen held in that city, and the Cataneans were come toa resolution," not to receive the armament;" but, how­ever, they granted an audience to the generals. Acwhich, whilst Alcibiades harangued, and the inhabitantsof Catana were all in the public assembly, the Athenian. . soldiers,







OCR Output








B.VUI. THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. 291


should dispatch a horseman to them. Aad immediate­ly the© they had determined to dispatch away the com­mander Chalcideus, accompanied by Alcibiades, withthe five ships of their own equipment; but, at the in­stant they were ready to move off", the news arrived,—that " the squadron had been drove into Piræus." De­jected by this unexpected event, because they had stum­bled in the very first entrance on an Ionian war, they nolonger persisted in the design of sending away their owaIhips, but even thought of recalling some of thosewhich were already at sea. But, as this was discoveredhy Alcibiades, he again persuades Endius, and the o-ther Effort, by no means intirely to give up the expedi­tion i alluring them, that " by a timely dispatch they** yet might make that island, before any information"of the disaster which had befallen the squadron** could reach the Chians; and of himself, were he** once in Ionia, he could easily effectuate the revolt"of the cities, by opening their eyes in respect to the"weakness of the Athenians and the hearty and vigo-** rous interposition of the Lacedæmonians, since on** these topics he should he heard with greater deference** than any other person whatever." He also privatelyencouraged Endius with the prospect of ** great glory to** himself, if through him Ionia could be brought toi* revolt, and the king be made consederate to Lacedæ-"mon, whilst Agis had no hand in these masterly"strokes of policy ," for he happened now to be ac* variance with Agis. By such insinuations Alcibiades
U 2 prevailed
* Na reason! are here assigned for the variance between Alcibiades and Agis.Numbers of probable poes might occur from the different tempers and manners of(he persons; but we learn, from Plutarch, that Alcibiades had been intriguing withTimsea, the wife of Agis, and had had a son by her, who was called Leotychides,disowned afterwards by A£>s and incapacitated from succeeding to the throne. Alci­biades w?s always, dissolute; and yet this (it seems) was merely to gratify his pride,since he declared his intention in this intrigue to have been that his dependents mightreign at Sparta. This fine gentleman from Athens was exceeding agreeable in theeyes of her Spartan majesty j even though his deportment at Sparta VMS such at if he







OCR Output








B.VIII. THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. 375


having procured from Abydus a party of heavy-armed.who marched across mount Ida, received them intotheir city, provoked to this step by the injurious con­duct of Arsaces, a Persian, lieutenant to Tisiaphernes.This man, pretending he had enemies to cope withwhom yet he never named, prevailed with the Delianssettled in Adramittium, because they had been obligedby the Athenians to quit Delos in the affair of the ex­piation, to attend him in this secret expedition with theflower of their strength; and, leading them forwardswith ail the shew of friendship and alliance, watchedthe opportunity when they were busy at their meal,surrounded them with a body of his own soldiers, andshot them to death with darts. Fearing him, therefore,because os this instance of a cruel temper, lest somesuch act of violence he might execute also upon them,as in other respects he had imposed some burdens uponthem which they could not bear, the Antandrians ejecthis garrison out of their citadel. But Tissaphernes,perceiving how deeply the Peloponnesians were con­cerned in this affair, and esteeming himself sadly in­jured also at Miletus and Cnidus (since in those placestoo his garrisons had been ejected); and fearing theywould proceed to other commissions of the same nature;chagrined moreover that perhaps Pharnabazus, in lesstime and with less expence, having obtained their con­currence, should make a greater progress against theAthenians; — he determined in person to repair to Hel­lespont, in order to expostulate with them about theirlate proceedings at Antander, and to wipe off, as hand­somely as he could, the aspersions thrown upon his ownconduct in regard to the Phœnician fleet and other points.Arriving therefore first at Epheius, he offered sacrificeto Diana * * * * -f-
When the winter following this summer shall be ended,the twenty-first year of the war will be also completed.
•f Here breaks off abruptly the History of the Peloponnesian war by Thucydides.The adjustment of time annexed seems plainly of another hand,
B b 4 INDEX.







OCR Output








THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. B-VII.


From this time the Syracusans rushed upon them fromthence, and awed all their motions. The convoys couldno more get in without fighting their way. Besides that,in all other respects, it struck a great consternation,and even a dejection of mind, amongst the troops.
The next step taken by the Syracusans was to sendout to sea a squadron of twelve ships, under the com­mand of Agatharcus, a Syracusan. One of these shipswas to proceed to Peloponnesus, and land an embassythere, which had instructions, ** to notify a present"hopeful posture of affairs, and to press the prosecu,tM tion of the war in Greece with all possible vigour."The other eleven stood over to the Italian coast, havingreceived intelligence, that a number of small vessels,laden with stores for the Athenians, were coming up..They intercepted and intirely destroyed most of these iand the timber on-board them, which was readywrought for the Athenians to frame together into ships,they burnt to ashes on the shore of Caulonia. Thisdone, they stood away for Locri; and, whilst they layin that road, one of the transports from Peloponnesus,having on-board the heavy- armed from Thespiæ, camein. The Syracusans removed those heavy-armed intotheir own ships, and returned with them to Syracuse.. The Athenians with twenty fail were stationed atMegara, in order to intercept their return; where oneship alone, with all the crew, fell into their hands,They were not able to come up with the rest; since, e-luding all pursuit, they recover with security their ownharbours.
There happened also a skirmish, in the harbour of Sy­racuse, about the piles which the Syraculans had drovedown in the sea before their old docks, that their vesselsmight ride in sasety behind them, the Athenians be un­able to stand in amongst them and do any damage tofheir shipping. Close up to those piles the Athenianshad towed a raft of prodigious size, on which turretsand parapets to cover the defendants were erected,.. .' whilst







OCR Output








s5* THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. B. VII.


with a spirit worthy of that numerous strength ofwhich by ocular demonstration you see yourselvesthis moment possssed'. Those points, of which weperceive we may avail ourselves against the narrow­ness of the harbour's mouth, against such a multi­tude of vessels as will be crouded together, andagainst that particular disposition of soldiers on theirdecks, from which on the former occasion we suf­fered so much, — all these, I must tell you, are aswell adjusted as our present condition will permit,by the united care of us your generals and your ownmasters: for many archers and darters shall now lineyour decks, and that croud of soldiers, which, whenwe engage in the open sea, we never can use, be­cause the vessels would be too heavily laden to allowthe proper exertion of our skill; that croud, I say,in this pent-up contracted space, shall give to ournaval battle the strength and stability of a land-engagement. We have also devised the propermeans to compensate the inferior structure of ourships; and, in return for the consolidated beaks ofour enemy, have provided the ships with grappling-irons, which will hold fast a vessel that hath run a-gainst you from getting clear, provided those on­board will perform their duty: because, as necessityinforceth us now to fight a mere land-battle fromour decks, it highly concerns us neither to be beatoff ourselves, nor to suffer them to get clear fromour grapple; especially when all the ambient shore,excepting the small tract now occupied by our ownarmy, is hostile in regard to us. Mindful of thesethings, it behoves you to fight it out so long asstrength and vigour shall enable you, and never suf­fer yourselves to be driven on such a shore; but,when once your ship hath grappled with a foe, neveronce to think of losing your hold, till you havecleared the enemy's decks of all the defendants.But these points I give in charge to the heavy-armed,
.*' not







OCR Output








B. VI. THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. 165


'c


'* If others, again, entertain any envy or jealousy"of Syracuse, for, to each of these, great States are ge-"nerally obnoxious, and would take delight in seeing'* us depressed, in order to teach us moderation, though*' not totally destroyed, from a regard to his own pre-*' scrvation, — these are such sanguine wishes, as, in the*' course of human affairs, can never be accomplished:*( Because it is quite impossible, that the same person*£ shall build up airy schemes to soothe his own passions"and then insure their success. And thus, should"some sinister event take place, quite sunk under the** weight of his own calamity, he would perhaps be*c soon wishing again, that I was so replaced as to ex-"cite his envy. Impossible, this, for one who aban-"doned my defence, who refused before-hand toparti-*' cipate my dangers, — dangers, though not in name,"yet in reality, his own! For, if names alone be re­garded, he acts in the support of my power; but,if realities, of his own preservation.*' Long since, ye men of Camarina, it was incum­bent on you, who are borderers upon us, and mustbe our seconds in ruin, to have foreseen these things,and not to have abetted our defence with so much re-missness as you have hitherto done it. You ought tohave repaired to our support with free and voluntary** aid; with such as, in case the Athenians'had begunfirst with Camarina, you would have come with ear­nest prayers to implore from us: So cordial and so a-lert you should have appeared in our behalf, to avert«' us from too precipitate submissions. But these things*' never were; not even you, nor any other people,** have shewed such affection or alacrity for us.
*' From timorousnels of heart you will study perhaps** a manage both wirh us and the invaders, and alledge,that there are treaties subsisting between yourlelves and"the Athenians. Yet theie treaties you never made to** hurt your friends, but to repel the efforts of yourf foes, should they dare to attack you. By them you
M 3 V. W


*t







OCR Output








B. Vftl. THE PELOPOfrNESIAN WAR. 367


much altered for the better. But, taking with him tenfail of Peloponnesiansand ten oFChians, he putteth rbsea; ahd, having made an attempt upon Pceleu'm,though without success, he crossed over to Clazomenæ.He there summoned such of the inhabitants as were at­tached to the Athenians to remove with their effects upto Daphhu's, and leave him in possession of the place;Tamus, farther, the sub-governor of Ionia, joined withhim in the summons. But, when the inhabitants re­jected this offer, he made an assault upon the city,which had no fortifications; yet, miscarrying in the at­tempt, he put off again to sea in a hard gale of wind,and reached, With those ships that kept up with him, toPhocea and Cyme; but the rest of the squadron wasby stress of weather forced over to the isles which lienear to Clazomenæ,—— Marathusa, and Pele, and Dri-mussa and, whatever effects belonging to the Clazo-menians had by way of security been deposited there,during eight days continuance, which the stormy wea­ther obliged them to stay, they partly plundered andpartly destroyed; and, having secured their booty on­board, got away to Phocea and Cyme, and joined As-tyochus. But,' whilst he was yet in this station, embas­sadors reach him from the Lesbians, imparting to himtheir desires to revolt. Him, indeed, they persuade;tuit, when the Corinthians and the rest of the consede­rates declared their repugnance, because -of the formermiscarriage, he weighed from thence and made sail forGhifos. And now, a storm dispersing his squadron, aclast they all come in, though from different quarters towhich they had been driven, and rejoin him at Chios.
The next step to this was the junction of Pædaritus;who, being now at Erythræ, after marching by landfrom Miletus, passed over in person with the troops un­der his command to Chios. He had also with him a-botit site hundred soldiers, taken out of the five shipsunder Chalcideus, who had been left behind with theirarms.
X Z But







OCR Output








226 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. B.VII.


within and without, in the softie manner as the Corinthi­ans had strengthened the wholeprow of their ships for thelast naval engagement against the squadron atNaupactus.By thele means the Syracusans coricluded they shouldgain an advantage over the ships of the Athenians,which were of a different 'structure, as in the prow theywere but weak, because of their usual practice, in anengagement, not to charge a-head, biit by tacking a-bout (o strike upon the sides : — that, sarther, shouldthe battle be fought in the great harbour, where sea-room would be small and the ships be crouded, this mustbe also an advantage in their favour since, dariingthemselves a-head, they must needs shatter the prowsof the enemy, when with compact and solid beaks rJheystruck against such as were hollow and weak : — thatagain, for want of sea-room, the Athenians would betoo ftiuch straitened to make their tacks, or to runthrough their lines, which were points of art on whichthey chiefly relied j they were determined to the utmostof their power to check all attempts of the latter sort,and the narrow space in which they must engage wouldof itself prevent the former; and now they intendedwith dexterity to tufn to their own advantage the me­thod of striking a-head, which on the former occasionappeared to be an error in the masters; that hence in­fallibly the day must be their own j for the Athenians,if once repulsed, would not have room to go round andreturn to the charge, since thus they must directly beforced on the shore, which lay but a small distance fromtheir camp and would sadly cramp them up; that theythemielves must be masters of the rest of the harbour,whilst'the enemy, crouded together, in case they shouldbe forced to give'way, must be driven into narrowcompass, and even, falling soul on one another, a totalcons usion and disorder must certainly follow; for, whathurt the Athenians most, in all their naval engagements,was their inability to make use of the whole harbour fortacking about or returning to the charge, in the same
, . manner







OCR Output








B.VI. THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. Ml


*' ought peace to be so much the object of regard to"you as it is to other people, unless you new-model,c your government, and render it conformable to that** of your neighbours.
"Weigh therefore these arguments; and be convin-** ced, that thus only our interest is capable of any con-** siderable advancement,—if we proceed against Sicily,"and execute the expedition in order to deject the** haughty Peloponnesian spirit, by so plain art instance"how much we despise them, how little fond we are at"present of this inactive interval, and how eager to"begin again with a Sicilian voyage. And, by acting"thus, there is probability on our side, that, in cafe"we subdue the people there, we may gain the sove-"reignty over all Greece; or, at worst, we shall de-"press the Syracusan power: The latter point alone
will be an important service to ourselves. and our at-"lies. But, in case any measure of success attends us,** our ships will enable us to secure our acquisitions, or** at worst our departure: For, though the whole body"of the Sicilians combine together against us, we shall"be absolute masters of our own retreat.
"Let not therefore the words of Nicias, calculated*• merely for the service of sloth, and to raise dissentions** between the young and the old, disconcert your plan."But let the usual decorum take place, observant- ** of which our forefathers, at whose consultations both"the seniors and the youths assisted, exalted this State** to its present height; and do you now, adhering to** the established practice, endeavour its farther exasta-"tion. Remember also, that youth and age, ifdebar-** red one another's reciprocal assistance, lose all their** influence and weight; that, on the other hand, fromct the wildness of youth, and the moderation of the"middle-aged, and the consummate prudence of the"old, when tempered harmoniously together, the most** persect strength must infallibly result that a State,"which supinely gives way to sloth, like other things
** for







OCR Output








34 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. B.V.


"rous to have the friendship of Argos, consistently"with their honour; knowing it would facilitate the"success of their war without Peloponnesus." — Theyalso requested the Bœotians " to deliver up Panactum to"the Lacedæmonians, that, exchanging it if possiblelt for Pylus, they might get clear of the main obstacle"to a fresh rupture with the Athenians."
The Bœotians and Corinthians, instructed by Xena-res and Cleobulus, and the party in their interest at La­cedæmon, departed, botht to report this scheme to theirprincipals. But two persons, of the greatest authorityin the State of Argos, were attending upon the roadfor their return. They met, and conferred with them"about the means of gaining the concurrence of the*' Bœotians in this league, upon the same footing with"the Corinthians, and Eleans, and Mantineans: For"they were confident, were this point once completed,"they might easily become the arbiters of war or peace,"either in relation to the Lacedæmonians, (if they so*' determined, and would act together with firm una-"nimity,) or to any other State whatever."
The Bœotian embassadors were highly delighted withthis discourse. The solicitations of these Argives hap­pened to coincide with the instructions recommended tothem by their friends at Lacedæmon. And the Argives,finding them satisfied with their motion, assured themthey would send embassadors to the Bœotians, and sothey parted.
But the Bœotians, at their return, reported to theRulers of Bœotia the proposals from Lacedæmon, andthose from the Argives upon the road. The Bœotian-rulers were delighted, and grew now more zealous thanever; became, on both sides, from their Lacedæmo­nian friends and also from the Argives, the solicitationswere concurrenr. And, very soon after, the Argiveembassadors arrived to forward the dispatch of the trea­ty. The Bœotian-rulers, however, at present, gaveonly a veibal approbation of the scheme, and then dif-
. i ..i missed







OCR Output








B.VIIl, THE PELOFONNESIAN WAR. £99


the fame plates. He hoped the MechymneaoB, uponthe \sight t>f ©his succour, would -refumae their spirks andabide by thbir revolt. But, whenevery thing in Lesbosseemed to act <in concert against his scheme, be took hisJandmen again on-board, arid -made the best of his wayback -again to Chios. The f©r«es» farther* that hadaftflUNkd the motions of his squadron, and which*rere to have proceeded with him to Hellespont*-w&re'difmfffwdto-rheir respective cities. After this, theywere joined at Chios 'by six flails, which were sent thi­ther by the confederate fleet of Pesopon restarts afiembledctt Cenchreae.
The Athenians in the mean time were employed in-resettling the state of affairs in Lesbos. Standing acrose•frdm thenoe, and demolishing Polichne, -on the conti­nent, lately fortified by the Cktaomenians, they memo-ved all the latter back Again to-their city in -the isle, ex­cepting rfiioh as were authors -of the revolt 4 for these'had retired co Daphnus. And thus Clazomenæ once>teore -became subject to the Athenians.
The fame summer, the Athenians, who with twenty'ships had ftatidned themselves at Lade to awe Miletus,having made a descent at Banormus in the Milesian-ter-'rieory, kill Chalcideus the 'Lacedæmonian, who with a4iandful of men endeavoured to repulse them. Thethird day after this action, they re-embarked; but first'erected a trophy; which the Milesians thought proper'loidemohsh, as not fixed on a spot which was the pro­sperity of the victors.
Leon also and Diomedon, at the head of the Athe­nian-fleet on the station of Lesbos, assembling togetherwhat force they-could from the Oinussæ-isknds, which;lie before Chios, and from Sidufa and Pteleum, for­tresses of their Own in Erythræa, stood away from Lesbos'in a body, and carried on the war by sea against theX^hians. The land-soldiers on-board them were some«if the heavy-armed of the public roll of Athens, nowpressed into this service. At Cardamyle they landed;
and







OCR Output








1SS THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR; B.VI,


The business being now come to blows, they for along time maintained the ground on both sides. Ithappened, farther, that some claps of thunder wereheard, attended with lightning and a heavy rain. Thiscaused a sudden consternation in the Syracusans, whonow for the first time engaged the Athenians, and hadgained very little experience in the asfairs of war. But,by the more experienced enemy, these accidents wereinterpreted as the ordinary effects of the season; andtheir concern was rather employed upon the enemy,whom they found no easy conquest. But the Argives,having first of all defeated the left wing of the Syracu­sans, and the Athenians being afterwards successful intheir quarter of the battle, the whole Syracusan armywas soon thrown into disorder, and began the flight.The Athenians however did not continue the pursuit toany great distance: for, the Syracusan cavalry, as theywere numerous and unbroken* put a stop to the chacaby assaulting those parties of heavy-armed, whom theysaw detached for the pursuit, and driving them backinto their own line. Having pursued only so far asthey could in an orderly and secure manner, they againretreated and erected a trophy. ;..„
But the Syracusans, who had rallied again in the roadto Helorum, and were drawn up as well as the presentposture of affairs would permit, send a strong detach­ment from their body for the guard of Olympiæum;apprehensive, that the Athenians might otherwise seizethe treasures that were reposiced there. And, this beingdone, with the remainder of their force they retiredwithin the walls of Syracuse.
The Athenians in the mean time made no advancesagainst Olympiæum; but, after gathering together thebodies of their slain, and laying them upon the funeraljjyre, they passed the night on the field of battle.
The next day they delivered up their dead undertruce to the Syracusans, of whom and their allies therehad perished about two hundred and sixty men; and
then







OCR Output








B.VII. THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. 227


manner as the Syracusans: —- that, finally, the Athe­nians could not possibly get out into wider sea, as theentrance of the harbour and the space behind the linesof battle were in their own command; nay, other ob­stacles would co-operate, such as Plemmyrium, whichwould now oppose any attempt of this kind, and the.very nature of the harbour's mouth, which was exceed­ing narrow.
By such a project the Syracusans had given an increaseto their former skill and strength; and, animated morethan ever by the thought of having improved fromtheir errors in the former engagement, they sallied outto encounter the enemy both with their land and navalforce. Gylippus (hewed himself, a small portion oftime before the rest, at the head of the infantry; whom,Jallying out of the city, he drew up near the AthenianEntrenchment, in that quarter where it faced the city.Then the garrison of Olympiæum, to a man, as wellheavy-armed as horsemen, with all the light-armedparties of the Syracusans, came and drew up on theother quarters; and, immediately after, the ships ofrthe Syracusans and their allies came sailing forwards.
The Athenians at first imagined that at present theywere threatened only with an assault by land; butwhen, on a sudden, they saw the fleet bearing down a-gainst them, they were struck with confusion. Somet>f them were taking post upon and without the intrench-ments, to make head against the assailants; otherswere sallied forth to encounter the troops srom Olym­piæum, and those from remoter parts coming on withfull speed, & numerous body of horsemen and darters.The rest were hurrying on-board to man the ships, orto give what assistance they could upon the beach: andno sooner were the proper complements on-board thanieventy-five ships stood out to meet the enemy; butthen the number of the enemy's vessels was abouceighty.
Q 2 Great







OCR Output








42 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. B. V.


spoke before the senate,* notifying at the same time that"they were come with full power to put an end to all"disputes;" by which they gave fome alarm to Alci-biades, lest, should they make the same declaration be­fore the assembly of the people, it might have an influ-
* The Lacedæmonian embassy have, on this occasion, their first audience from I beserali. The business of this history hath been hitherto transacted in the assembly osthe people t For, as the generals of the State were the chief ministers in time of war,and had a power of convening the people at their own discretion, all points that re­quired a speedy determination were brought before the people in the first instance;and the influence of the senate, which operated on ordinary occasions, was checkedand suspended in time of war, which starts many extraordinary occasions, or left it inthe will of the generals of the Stale to call and treat as extraordinary whatever theypleased. By these means the people had ingtoffed the power, the balance which Solondesigned always to preserve was in a great measure loll, and the aristocratical influencewas quite suspended.
As, therefore, the popular assembly had its note at first setting out, the form andconstitution of the senate now requires an explanation.—-At this time it consisted offive hundred persons, and for that reason is often stiled the council of five hundred,and sometimes, by Thucycides, the council of the bean, from the manner of their e-lection. Every year, on an appointed day, each tribe returned the names of theirmembers who were qualified and stood candidates for this honour. The names wereengraved on pieces of brass, and cast into a vessel; the fame number of beans werecast into another vessel, fifty of which were w hite and the rest black. They thenproceeded to draw out a name and a bean, and the persons to whom the white beanswere drawn became the senators of the year. Each senator had a drachma, that is,seven pence three farlbings, a day for his salary.
In the next place, the names of the tribes were thrown into a vessel, and into ano­ther nine black beans and one white one ; the tribe, to whose name the white beanwas drawn, took the first course of presidency for a tenth part of the year, and the or­der of the succeeding courses was determined in the fame manner by the bean. Howthe fifty in course were again subdivided into tent, and from these tern a chairman cho­sen for a day, hath been already explained, in the note on the popular assembly,Book T.
ThesenateUt every day in the prytaneum, ar slate-bouse, where the prtfidtntl had al­so their diet. They were the grand council of state, took into consideration all theaffairs os the commonwealth, debated, and voted by beans; and whatever determina­tions werethus made in the senate were afterwards carried down to the assembly os thepeople, to be ratified and passed into laws. • By Solon's original constitution, nothingwas to be proposed to the people before it had been canvassed and approved in the se­nate: But this seems to have been eluded by the generals of the state, who had allthe military business in their department, and a power to convene the people at theirpleasure, and lay matters before them in the first instance. To restore the aristocrati­cal power, and reduce that of the people, occasioned an usurpation and fad consusion in/ithenE, as will bescen in the eighth book of this history,
ence







OCR Output








3S4 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. B.VIH.


** in order that those who served in the armies of the** State might be better subsisted, he praised them alto-** gether. He then recommended to them a steady re-*( sistance, and by no means in any shape to give way** to the enemy: For, could the State once be secured** from its public fops, a reconciliation amongst its"members might easily be hoped for; but, should** either party be once destroyed, either this at Samos,"or theirs at Athens, none would soon be left to be** reconciled at all."
There were present at this audience embassadors fromthe Argives, who brought assurances of aid to the peo­ple of Athens at Samos. Alcibiadcs commended themfor their zeal j and then, exhorting them to hold them­selves in readiness to come upon a summons sent, hecivilly dismissed them. These Argives came to Samosin company with the Paralians, who had been latelyturned over by the four-hundred into a vessel of war, tocruize round Eubcea, and to carry to Lacedæmon theembassadors, Læspodias, Aristophon, and Melesius,sent thither from the four-kundred. But, when ad­vanced to the height of Argos, they put the embassa­dors under arrest, as chief agents in pulling down thedemocracy, and delivered them up to the Argives. Theyhad no business now at Athens, and so came from Argosto Samos, convoying the Argive embassadors in thetrireme which they had seized.
The fame summer, Tissaphernes, — about that junc­ture of time in which the Peloponnesians were most fu­rious against him, for the other reasons, and the recall-ment of Alcibiades, as having now pulled off the maskand declared for the Athenians, —- desirous, as in truthit appeared, to efface the bad impressions they had en­tertained of him, got ready to go to Aspendus to thePhœnician fleet, and prevailed with Lichas to bear himcompany. In regard to the Peloponnesians, he decla­red that he substituted his own lieutenant, Tamas^ topay them their subsistence, whilst he himself should be
absent.







OCR Output








iib THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. B.VL


that his advice was just and proper; and, if obeyed, theexpedition must be attended with all imaginable securi­ty. AH ranks of men were now equally seized with afondness for the voyage: For, such as were advanced inyears were confident that a career of success must attendthe enterprise, and that so formidable an armamentcould not possibly miscarry; the younger sort were ani­mated with the desire of seeing so remote a clime, andgratifying at large the curiosity of their tempers, assu­red that safety would attend their course the bulkof the populace and the soldiery in general were pleasedwith their present assignment of pay, and the hope of en­larging dominion, which would afford them perpetualemploy and subsistence.. The passions of the generalitywere for these causes so vehemently elated with the pro­ject, that such as could by nq means approve were a-fraid to oppose it by a vote, lest they might be censu­red as men who malevolently opposed the public glory.And by this all opposition was effectually quashed.
At length, a certain Athenian, standing forth fromamongst the crowd, and calling aloud upon Nicias, toldhim, • "He must no longer cast about for evasions,"nor meditate delays; but declare expressly, now, in"the presence of them all, the particulars of the prepa-** rations which the Athenians fliould vote him."
Nicias, though sorry at his heart, was obliged to re­ply, — That, *' in order to be exact, he ought to con-** suit more leisurely with his colleagues. But, so far*' as he could judge in this sudden manner, they ought"to set out with a fleet consisting of at least one hun-*' dred triremes; that the Athenians themselves ought*' to furnish as many transports for heavy-armed sol-"diers as was possible, and to send for an additional num-*' ber from their dependents; that the number of hea-"vy-armed, both of Athenians and dependents, should*' at least be five thousand, and, if possible, more 5"that to these the rest of their preparations should be"proportioned, such as archers to be levied at home,
. . ** and







OCR Output








*34 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. B. VII.


rally into a body, — the Bœotians first put a flop totheir career; and, rustling boldly upon them, routedand put them to flight. By this turn the Athenianswere thrown into so much disorder and confusion, thatthe particulars which followed cannot easily be gathered,neither from themselves nor their antagonists: for, evenin day light, when objects are clearest to the sight, menpresent in a battle are not able to fee all that paffeth;each single combatant can barely relate what happenedabout his own person. When, therefore, armies en­gage amidst the darkness of the night, (though this isthe only instance of it between powerful armies in thepresent war,) how is it possible to come at the know­ledge of the several incidents? The moon indeed{hone at this time ; but then they only saw one anotheras objects appear by moon-light, so as to discern theappearance of human bodies, but not to distinguish be­tween friends and enemies. The heavy-armed, far­ther, numerous on both sides, were too much croudedfor want of room. One party of the Athenians was al­ready clearly defeated; another, unbroken by the firstattack upon them, was pushing forwards. Of the re­mainder of their army, a great part had already mountedthe ascent; yet some were still busied in mounting up;but none of these, when they were got upon the emi­nence, knew which way to advance: for, before them,(as the rout was begun,) there was one grand medleyof confusion, and the tumult was so loud that no soundscould be distinctly heard. The Syraculans and theirconfederates were animating one another with loud ex­ultations (for the season of the night made all signalsuseless) to complete the blow, and were clearing beforethem all that came in their way: but the Athenianswere prying about for one another, and regarded everything they met, even though they fell in with their ownfriends, as the flight was now begun, for an assuredenemy. Obliged, farther, by frequent iterations to de­mand the word, as the only method to distinguish one
another*







OCR Output








292 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. B.VIII,


prevailed upon the Ephoriand Endius, and sailed awaywich the five ships, in company with Chalcideus, theLacedæmonian ; and the voyage they performed withall possible expedition.
About the fame time, the sixteen ships, which hadbeen at the war of Sicily under the orders of Gylippus,regained in sasety the Peloponnesian ports. They hadbeen intercepted near Leucadia, and terribly harrasscdby twenty-seven sail of Athenians, commanded by Hip-pocles, the son of Menippus, who was stationed thereto watch the return of the fleet from Sicily. Yet onlya single ship was lost. The rest, escaping the Athe->nian chace, arrived sase in the harbour of Corinth.
But Chalcideus and Alcibiades, who were now upontheir voyage, stopped and detained whatever they met,that their course might not be divulged: And, touch­ing first at Corycus on the' main, and there setting atliberty such as they had detained, and gaining a conse­rence wich some of the Chians who were privy to theirdesigns, by whom being advised to make directly forthe harbour of Chios, without any formal notification,they arrive there, entirely unexpected by the Chians.By this, the many were thrown at once into astonish­ment and terror; but the few had so conducted mat­ters, that the council was that moment sitting; in whichChalcideus and Alcibiades being admitted to speech it —that ** many other ships are coming up," — but, sup­pressing all mention of the squadron blocked up at Pi­ræus, the Chians declare a revolt from the Athenians;and the Erythræans soon follow their example.
So far successful, they passed on with three ships toClazomenæ, and cause that city also to revolt. In­stantly upon this, the Clazomenians crossed over intothe continent, and fortified Polichne, to be a place of
had been trained from his birth in the severe discipline of Lycurgus. He was a tbermgkSpartan,—(laved close, plunged into cold water,could make a roeal'on dry bread, andfeast on black broth. One would think, says Plutarch, he had never kept a cook fahis life, never seen a perfumer, nor ever worn a Milesian robe, Life oiAltibiada.
fase







OCR Output








B.VII. THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. 221


road of Phia of the Eleans, on-board of whicsra num­ber of heavy-armed Corinthians were to pass over intoSicily, finks that vessel. But the mariners, havingsaved themselves by flight, found afterwards anothervessel, and proceeded in the voyage.
From hence Demosthenes came up to Zacynthus and,Cephallene; where he took their heavy-armed on­board, and sent for those of the Messenians from Nau-pactus. He also crossed over to the opposite continentof Acarnania, to Alyzia and Anactorium, both be­longing to the Athenians. Thus employed as he wasin augmenting his force, Eurymedon, returning fromSicily, whither he had been sent in the winter to carrya supply of money for the army, meets him; and, a-mongst other intelligence, relates, that " he had heard,*' since he was upon his return, that Plemmyrium had** been taken by the Syracusans." Conon also, whocommanded at Naupactus, came to them, with advice,that " the five and twenty fail of Corinthians which"lay over-against their squadron had not quitted that"station, and even threatened them with an engage-"ment." He exhorted, therefore, these commandersto detach some vessels thither, since their squadron atNaupactus, consisting only of eighteen ships, was not amatch for the enemy, whose squadron amounted totwenty-five. Upon this, Demosthenes and Euryme­don detach ten of the prime sailors, amongst those un­der their own command, to follow Conon for the re­inforcement of the squadron at Naupactus.
The two former continued to assemble forces for thegrand expedition. Eurymedon, for this purpose,sailed to Corcyra, commanded them to man out fifteenships, and selected himself the heavy-armed for the ser­vice; for, as he was returned from carrying the stores,he joined himself with Demosthenes in the command,in pursuance of the prior nomination. Demostheneswas collecting a body of slingers and darters from thetowns of Acarnania.
The







OCR Output








JB.VIi THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR.


;, YEAR XVII.J
IN the succeeding summer, very early in the spring, theAthenian embassadors returned from Sicily, accompa­nied by the Egesteans. They brought sixty talentsof uncoined silver, being a month's pay for sixty failof ships, the equipment of which for succour they wereinstructed to solicit from the Athenians. Upon this,an assembly of the people was called, and the reportsef the Egistean and their own embassadors were recei­ved, consisting of many points, specious indeed, butfalse in fact; and, so far as related to their treasure,that ** sums ample enough are already reposited in their** temples and their public treasury." In consequenceof this, a decree was made, that " a fleet of sixty ships"should sail for Sicily; the commanders, Alcibiades,"the son of Clinias, Nicias, the son ot Niceratus, andi^amachus, the son of Xenophanes, to be invested*: with full powers to act at their own discretion. The
J Before Christ 415.
* Lamachus, the third in this commission, seems to have been picked out for thecommand for the peculiar constitution of his own character, which was a properifieari bet*veen the cautious and phlegmatic disposition of Nicias and the siery impetu­ous ardour of Alcibiades. He was now (according to Plutarch] a brave old experien­ced officer. In his youth he had been rtm.rkable for heat and fire; a length of ser­vice and years had mellowed him into the right temper, to deliberate beforehand, andthen gallantly to carry the point into execution. But then, he wanted the meansof properly supporting the authority and dignity of His post. He was now rankedwith two of the most wealthy and noble Athenians; whereas his own condition waslow; nay, he was (according to Plutarch) so exceedingly poor, that, berore he wentto any foreign command, he was used to petition the Slate for a little money to fur-nifli him out, and even to buy him some (hoes. Mr. Wofli, in his notes on Thucy-dides, refers' in for his character to a comedy of Aristophanes (The Acbarniam) jthat is, to enquire after the character of a plain blunt officer from a professed droll,or to seek ttuih from him who ridiculed all mankind. Aristophanes hath represent­ed Lamachus as a vain-glorious roaring bully, a mere thing of arms, a creature of ver­bal p^mp and parade; contrary to all the truth of history. Writers, who live byturnirtg great ard good men into ridicule, should never be reckoned good evidence asto the truth and reality of characters, when history dissents.
H 2 "whole







OCR Output








B.V. THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. 3t


rinthians and Athenians, without any solemn ratifi­cation.
This same summer, the Lacedæmonians took thefield with their whole united force, under the commandof Pleistionax, the son of Pausaoias, king of the Lace­dæmonians, and marched to the Parrhasians of Arcadia.These were subject to the Mantineans, and, in conse­quence of a sedition, had invited this expedition. Butit was also designed, if possible, to demolish the fortressof Cypscla, which the Mantineans had erected; and, asit was situated in Parrhasia, towards the Skiritis of La-conia, had placed a garrison imit. The Lacedæmo­nians, therefore, ravaged the terricory of the Parrhasi­ans. But the Mantineans, leaving their own city to theguard of the Argives, marched themselves to the sup­port of their dependents. But, finding it impossible topreserve the fortress of Cypscla and the cities of the Par­rhasians, they retired. The Lacedæmonians also, whenthey had set the Parrhasians ac liberty, and demolishedthe fortress, withdrew their forces. . .
The same summer also, upon the return from- Thraceof those soldiers who had served under Brasidas, andwho came home after the peace under the conduct ot"Clearidas, the Lacedæmonians decreed "those Helots,"who had served under Brasidas, to be free, and to*' have permission to reside wherever they pleased.'*And, no long time after, they placed them, togetherwith such persons as were newly enfranchised, at Lepre-um: It is situated between Laconia and Elea; and- theywere now at variance with the Eleans. As for thoieSpartans who had been made prisoners in Sphacteria, andhad delivered up their arms, conceiving some fears aboutthem, left, should they lay their late disgrace too muchto heart, as they were persons of the greatest rank, theymight introduce some innovations in the State, they de­clared them infamous, even though some of the numberwere, at this time, possessed of posts in the government.But this infamy extended no farther than to disqualify
them







OCR Output








B.V. THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. 57


** fair and equitable arbitration, in case the Lacedæmo-*' nians had any charge against them; and for the fu-"ture would live at peace, if a present accommoda-"tion could be effected."
In this manner these Argives presumed to talk, mere­ly of themselves, and without the public authority. A-gis also, by his own private determination, acceptedthe proposals; and, without reporting them to thecouncil of war, without canvassing things maturely him­self, or at least communicating only with one person ofthe number which had authority in the army, grantsthem a four months truce, "in which space they were*' to make good what engagements they had now made;"and then instantly drew off the army, without impart­ing the reasons of his conduct to the other consederates.The Lacedæmonians, indeed, and confederates, follow*ed when he led them off, because their laws exactedsuch obedience; yet, amongst themselves, were lavish,of their censure against Agis, that, when so fine an op­portunity of engaging was in their power, when theirenemies were hemmed in on all sides, both by theirhorse and their foot, they were drawn off, without per­forming any thing worthy of such mighty preparations;for, to this very day, a finer army of Grecians had neverappeared in the field. A most gallant figure in truth itmade, whilst they were all together at Nemea. TheLacedæmonians were there to be seen with the wholecollected force of their State, accompanied by the Arca­dians, and Bœotians, and Corinthians, and Sicyonians,and Pellenians, and Phliasians, and Megareans. Thetroops which compoled their several quotas were all pick­ed men, and were judged a match in the field of battle,not only for the whole Argive alliance, but the addi­tion of double strength. This great army, however,laying all the time most heavy imputations on the con­duct of Agis, drew off, and were disbanded to their se­veral habitations.
On







OCR Output








286 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. B.VIII.


time provinces of Asia. Even Tissaphernes concernedhimself now to inflame the Peloponnesian ardour, andpromised them larpe supplies. For lately he had beensummoned by the king to make returns of the revenueof his government; which not being able to exact fromthe Grecian cities, because of the Athenians, he was runinto a large arrear. He concluded, therefore, that,could he demolish the Athenians, he then with greatease might levy the tributes; what is more, might makethe Lacedæmonians confederates to the king; and mightat length convey to him, either aiive or dead, Amor-ges, the bastard-son of Pissuthnes, who had revolted inCaria, as the king had expressly commanded. TheChians, therefore, and Tissaphernes, were now nego­tiating this point in concert.
Calligitus, the son of Laophon, a Megarean, and Ti-magoras, the son of Athenagoras, a Cyzicene, both ex­iles from their native places, and refuged with Phar-nabazus, the son of Pharnabacus, arrive at Lacedæmonabout the same point of time, commissioned by Pharna-bazus to procure an aid of (hipping for the Hellespont,by which he might be enabled (the very same thing asTissaphernes desired) to work the revolt of the citieswithin his district from the Athenian obedience, be­cause of the tributes, and expeditioufly to gain for him­self the credit of having procured for his master the al­liance of the Lacedæmonians. As the agents of Phar-nabazus and those also of Tissaphernes were negotiatingthe same point; though apart from each other, a great de­bate arose among the statesmen at Lacedæmon; oneparty insisting, with vehemence, that an aid of shipping, and a land force should be sent toTonia and Chios; an­other party, that they should be sent first to Hellespont.The Lacedæmonians, however, complied by far the soon­est with the demands of the Chians and Tissaphernes. Al-cibiades, indeed, espoused the cause of the latter, froman extraordinary zeal to mark hereditary friendship toEn-dius,whoat thisjuncturepresided in thecollege oiEfbori.







OCR Output








184 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. B.VI.


In the fame spring, the Lacedæmonians also took thefield against Argos, and advanced as far as Cleonae;but, the mock of an earthquake being felt there, theyagain retired. And, after this, the Argives, makingan irruption into the Thyreatis, which borders uponthemselves, took a vast booty from the Lacedæmonians,which fold for no less than * twenty-five talents.
And not long after, in the fame spring, the popularparty at Thespiæ assaulted those in power, but withoutsuccess. And, though the Athenians marched away totheir succour, some of them were apprehended, and o-thers were obliged to take refuge at Athens.
In the fame summer, the Syracusans had no sooner re­ceived intelligence of the arrival of a body of horsemenamongst the Athenians, and the design of advancingimmediately to assault them, than it occurred to theirreflexions, that, " in case the Athenians could not pos-*• sess themselves of Epipolæ, (a spot of ground which** is only one continued crag, and lies directly above"the city of Syracuse,) it would be disficult to inclose"them completely round wiih works of circumvalla-"tion, even though they should be defeated in open"battle." They applied themselves therefore to theguard of all the approaches to Epipolæ, that the ene­my might not on a sudden gain the eminence; for byother methods it was impossible for them to carry thatpost. Excepting, those approaches, the rest of the tractis an impracticable steep, inclining gradually quitedown to the city, and commanding the view of everything within it. Hence, therefore, because it risethwith a continual ascent, it was called by the SyracusansEpipolæ.
As Hermocrates and his colleagues had now formallytaken upon them the command, the whole force of Sy­racuse marched out, by break of day, into a meadow,on the banks of the Anapus, to pass under reviewswhere the first thing they did was to select seven hun­







OCR Output








B.VJIL THE PELOPONNESUS WAft. $jt


informed of the enemy's motions, than, instantly quit­ting Eressqs, they advanced with the utmost expedi­tion to secure the Hellespont. They also pick up ttyoships of the Peloponnesians; which, running out tooboldly to sea in the lafe pursuit, fell in amongst them iAnd, coming up only c-ne day aster them, they anchorat Elieus, and r.e-afieflible from Imbrus the ships whichhad fled thither. Five whole days they spend here ingetting every thing in readiness for a general engage­ment: And after this respite they came to an action inthe following manner.
The Athenians, ranged In linp of battle a-headjstood along shore towards Sestus. The PeloponnesianSjaware of their design, stood out to sea from Abydus,to be ready to receive them. And, as both sides werpdetermined to engage, they unfolded their lines to agreater length; the Athenians, along the ChersonefiiSjreaching from Idacus to Arrhianse, in all sixty-eightIail; and the Peloponnesians, over-against them, fromAbydust to Dardanus, being eighty-six. The line ofthe Peloponnesians was thus formed: The Syracusanshad the right; and on the left was ranged Mindaru$jand the ships most remarkable for beipg good sailors.Amongst the Athenians, Thrasyllps had the left, andThrasybulus the right,: The rest of the commanderswere regularly posted according to their rank. ThePeloponnesians, shewing most eagerness to begin theengagement, endeavoured with their left to over-reachthe right of the Athenians, in order to exclude them,if possible, from stretching out into the main sea, and,by keeping them cramped up, to force their center a-gainst the shore, which was not far distant. The Athe*mans, aware ot the enemy's design to shut them up,plying up a-head, forced themselves an opening, andin velocity beat them all to nothing.
By these motions, the left of their line became ex*tended beyond the cape called Cynos-sema. The con­sequence of which was exposing their center, composed
B b 2 only







OCR Output








B.V. THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. g


"already engaged.—And shew yourself now, Cleari-"das, that gallant man, which in honour, as a Spartan,"you ought to be.
"You in general, ye confederates, I exhort to follow"with manly resolution, and to remember that good"soldiers are bound, in duty, to be full of spirit, to be"sensible of shame, and to obey commanders; that,*' this very day, if you behave with valour, you are"henceforth free, and will gain the honourable title of"Lacedæmonian allies; otherwise, must continue to be"the slaves of the Athenians; where the best that can*' befal you, if neither sold for slaves nor put to death"as rebels, will be a heavier yoke of tyranny than you"ever yet have felt, whilst the liberty of the rest of"Greece must by you for ever be obstructed. But so"dastardly behaviour I conjure you to scorn, as you"know for what valuable prizes you are to enter the"lists. I myself shall convince you, that I am not*' more ready to put others in mind of their duty, than"personally to discharge my own through the wholef* scene of action."
Brasidas, having ended his harangue, prepared tosally out himself, and placed the main body under theorders of Clearidas, at the gates which are called theThracian, to be ready to rush out at the appointed time.
To Cleon now,—for Brasidas had been plainly seen. coming down from Cerdylium; and, as the prospect ofthe city lay open to those without, had been seen alsowhen lacrificing before the temple of Minerva and form­ing the proper dispositions:—To Cleon, I fay, who wasnow in a remote quarter to view the posts, advice isbrought, that "the whole force of the enemy was vi-"sibly drawn up within the city, and that, under the"gates, many feet of horses and men might be discern-'* ed, as ready for a sally." Upon hearing this, hewent to the place, and was convinced by his own sight.He determined, however, not to hazard a battle before
his







OCR Output








6 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR, B. V.


and, from a contempt of his opponents, would certainlyadvance thither, without waiting for reinforcements.
He had, at the same time provided himself with fif­teen hundred mercenary Thracians, and had assembledall the Edonian targeteers and horsemen. Of theMyr-cinians and Chalcideans he had a thousand targeteers,besides those in Amphipolis. But his whole force ofheavy-armed of all forts amounted to about two thou­sand; and he had three hundred Grecian horsemen,"With^a detachment, consisting of fifteen hundred ofthese, Brasidas had posted himself at Cerdylium; therest were left in Amphipolis, under the orders of Cle-aridas.
Cleon remained without stirring for the present, butwas soon forced to such a step as Brasidas expected.The soldiers were chagrined at their inactivity, andwere disparaging his conduct by invidious parallels,"against how much siVill and courage, with how much'* unskilfulness and cowardice, he was- matched;" andthat, " with the highest regret they had attended him"from Athens on this expedition." Sensible of theirdiscontent, and unwilling to disgust them more, by toolong a continuance in the same post, he urew them up andled them on. He acted now, upon the vain conceit withwhich his success at Pylus had puffed him up, as a man ofgreat importance. It could not enter his heart, that theenemy would presume to march out against and offerhim battle. He gave out, that " he was only advan-"cing in order to view the place; he waited indeed the"arrival of additional forces, not as if they were need-** fill to his security, should the enemy attack him, but** to enable him completely to invest the city, and to"take it by storm." Being advanced, he posted histroops upon a strong eminence before Amphipolis, andwent in person to view the marshes of the Strymon, andthe situation of the city on the side of Thrace, how itreally was. He judged he could retreat at pleasure,without a battle. Not so much as one person appeared


vpon







OCR Output








B.V1T. THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. 241


deavoured that it should not be determined in publiccouncil, they issued out orders, with the utmost secrecy,that the whole armament should hold themselves in rea­diness to put to sea upon a signal given. But, all thingsnow ready, the very moment they are going to embarkthe moon is eclipsed, for it was now the time of the full.The bulk of the army, struck with the awful appear­ance, called out upon the generals to halt; and Nicias,always addicted too much to superstition and such vul­gar scruples, positively declared, that " it should no"more be debated whether they should remove or not,"till the three times nine days were past which the*' soothsayers prescribe on such occasions." So* forthis reason, a longer stay was forced upon the Athe­nians, who had been too dilatory already.*
Vol. II. R The
* That the bulk of an army or a fleet should be frightened at such appearances, isno wonder at all: They are ever ignoiant; and the most daring of them in otherrespects have been much addicted to superstition. But one cannot help being surpri­sed at the ignorance and superstition of Nicias j one cannot help pitying and deplo­ring the foible of a man who had so good a heart. Plutarch expatiates hugely on this)occasion. "Even the vulgar, fays he, at this time were well apprised that an ec-"lipse of the sun was often occasioned, about the time of the change, by an inter-"position of the moon: but, as to the moon, by the interposition of what body, and*' bow on a sudden, at the full, its light fades away or emits variety of colour, waa"not easy for them to conceive. They thought it a strange occurrence, and sent"from God as a prognostic of great calamities. The first person, who wrote a clear"and bold solution of the enlightening and obscuration of the moon, was Anaxa-f< goras, who now bad not been long dead; nor was his account in every body'*"hands, but concealed, imparted only to a few, and that with caution and aiTu-"ranees of secrecy. The world could not bear that Naturalists and Meteor-mnn-"gers, as they were then stiled, should seem to restrain the divine power by quaint** argumentations, invisible operations, and necessary consequences. For such at-"tempts Protagoras was banished; and Pericles, with much ado, procured the re-*' lease of Anaxagoras when thrown into prison. Nay, Socrates, who never med-"died with any of these points, was however put to death upon the charge of pbi**' hsopbix'mg. It was not till late that the glory of Plato shone abroad j who, by"his irreproachable life, and subjecting natural necessities to a divine and sovereign*' power, cleared away all bad imputations from studies of this kind, and by a ma-** thematical beginning opened a field to other sciences. And thus his friend D on,** at what time he was setting fall from Zacynthus against Dionyfius, was not at all*' disheartened by an eclipse of the moon, but landed safe at Syracuse, and ejrcted"the tyrant, It was the misfortune of Nicias, at this juncture, not to have even







OCR Output








I N D E X.


Jrijteth, son of Timocratis, I. 304.
jtrribæus, king of the Lynceftians,I. 378. warred against by Bra-sidatind Perdiccas, 380, 413.
Arlabazus, I. 10 2.
Artaphtrnes, I. 354.
Art as, II. 223.
Artaxerxes Longimanus, I. 80. be­gins to reign, 109. dies, 354.
Ajopins, son of Pbormio, his ex­ploits and death, I. 221.
AJlymacbus, I* 261.
Astyochus, the Lacedæmonian ad­miral, 11.296,306. goes toCA/m, 298. in great danger,308. resuseth to succour theChi ans, 308, 311. betraysPhrynichus, 323. is mutiniedagainst by his own seamen, andreturns to Sparta, 351.
Athenians, gave lhelter at first toall who would settle amongstthem, I. 2. had war with theÆginettt, jo. how they be­came a naval power, 1;. a-bandoned-Atbeis and sought atSalamis, 57. rebuilt their walls,69. made war against the kingof Persia under Pausanias, 73.Gain a victory at Eurymedon,77. reduce the isle of Thajos,ibid, receive the Helots, andsettle them at Naupadus, 79.their war in Egypt, ibid. 83.with the Corinthians and Epi-dauriani, ibid, and Æginetæ,80. with the Lacedæmonians,82. Bœotians, 86. Sicyonians,85. Cyprians, 86. recover Chæ-ronea, 87. defeated at Coronea,ibid, reduce Eubaea, ibid, makewar upon Sanies, 89. make al­liance with the Corcyreans, 36.assist them against the Corin­thians, ib. their measures withthe Potidæans, 44. make warupon Perdiccas, 45. fight thePotidæans and Corinthians, 48..besiegePoiidæa, 49. deliberateabout the Pelopanntsian war.


113. prepare for defence, 128.
send their fleet to cruise uponPeloponnesus, 145. attack JM>-146. invade Locris, 14?*eject theÆj/nrtÆ from the isleof Ægina, ibid, make an alli­ance with Sitalcti, 148. takeSoliumtnA Aftacut, 149. invadethe Megaris, ibid, fortify ^/a-/sl»/f, 150. celebrate the pub­lic suneral, 151. are afflictedwith the plague, 161. sendtheir fleets to cruise On Pelo­ponnesus, 169. are angry withPericles, 171. take Poiidæa, 184.war upon the Cbahideans, 192.fight the Peloponntsians at sea,196. send a fleet to Lest os, 218.besiege Mitylene, 220. reduceit, 237. seize the island of Mi-noa, 259. send a fleet to Sicily,288. their war in Acarnanta,294. are defeated by the Æ-tolians, 298. their proceedingsin Sicily, 313. they seize andfortify Pylus, 314. fight be­tween them and the Lacedæmo­nians, 320. fight theSyracufans,331. invade the Corinthians,347. take Anaclorium, 353.conquer Cytbera, 35;. takeThyrea, 359. surprise Nisæa,368. invade Boeotia, and aredefeated at Delium, 385, 391.lose Amphipolis, 397. make atruce wilh the Lacedæmonians,406. take Mende, 418. besiegeScione, 420. eject the Deiians,Is. I. are conquered by Brass*das at Amphipolis, 10. make apeace, 16. take Scione, 29. wantto break the peace, 39. makean alliance with the Argines,45. invade and reduce iWf&x,77. determine on the Sicilianexpedition, 92. their prepara­tions, 117. they fail for Sicily,119. land at Syracuse, 154.sight, 156, solicit the allianceof Camarina, l6z. take Epipa.-







OCR Output








B.VIII. THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. 363


blc, plied them with persuasions to proceed in a gentlemanner, and to restrain the fury of their associates;giving them assurances, that " the five-thousand would
be declared ; and from them, by regular succession,M at the pleasure of the five-thousand, the sour-hundred"should be appointed conjuring them, in the meantime, " not to forward, through impatience, the de-** struction of the State, nor give it up for a prey to"the public enemy." The whole multitude of theheavy-armed, attentive to these arguments, on whichmany expatiated at large and pressed home upon num­bers, became more tractable than they were at first,and were most terribly alarmed at the mention of the to­tal destruction of their polity. It was at last concluded,that, on a set day, an assembly should be held in thetemple of Bacchus, to devise an accommodation.
But, when this assembly, to be held in the temple ofBacchus, came on, and all parties were only not com­pletely met, comes in the news that " the two and** forty fail and Hegesandridas are coasting along from"Megara towards Salamis." Not one of the heavy-armed this moment but pronounced it true, what be-.fore was given out by Theramenes and his friends, that"to the new fortifications these ships are now bound"and it was judged that in the nick of time they had beenlevelled with the ground. But Hegesandridas, as per­haps had before hand been concerted, only hovered a-bout at Epidaurus or the adjacent coast. It is howeverprobable, thai, on account of the present sedition a-mongst the Athenians, he lay for a time in this station,in hope to-seize some fair opportunity to strike a blow.
Be this as it will, the Athenians no sooner heard thenews, than, to a man, they flocked down amain to thePiræus j less alarmed at their own domestic war, than aean invasion from a public enemy, no longer remote, butat their very ports. Some of them threw themselves on*board what shipping was ready; others launched such as
were







OCR Output








B.V. THE PELOPGNNESIAN WAR. 7


upon the works, or issued out at the gates; for theywere all shut fast. He now concluded himself guilty ofa mistake, in coming so near the place without the ma­chines, *' as the town must infallibly have been taken,"because abandoned."
Brasidas, however, had no sooner perceived that theAthenians were in motion, than, descending from Cer-dylium, he marcheth into Amphipolis. He there wa­ved all manner of sally and all stiow of opposition againstthe Athenians. He was afraid of trusting too much t<»hh own forces, as he judged them inferior to the ene­my, not truly in numbers, for so far they were nearlybalanced, but in real worth: for the Athenian force,appointed for this service, was composed of the veryflower of Athens, and the choicest troops of the Lem-nians and Imbrians. For this reason, he prepared toassail them with art; because, in case he gave the ene­my a view of his numbers, and of the sorry manner inwhich they were armed, he judged he should be less like­ly to gain a victory, than by concealing them till themoment of action, and avoiding that contempt whichtheir real state would have inspired. Picking out,therefore, a party of one hundred and fifty heavy-armedfor himself, and appointing Clearidas to command therest, he deligned to fall suddenly upon the Athenians intheir retreat; concluding, he should never again findthem in this forlorn manner, when the reinforcementsthey expected were come up. Calling, therefore, allhis soldiers around him, as he was desirous ot animatingthem, and letting them into his scheme, he haranguedthem thus:
•" YE men of Peloponnesos, let it suffice that I brief-*' ly put you in mind, that we are natives of that coun-"try which hath ever by valour preservech-klelf free,*' and that you of the Doric are now going to attack*' your opponents of the Ionic descent, whom you are"inured to defeat. My words are chiefly designed to
B 4 "inform







OCR Output








284 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. B.VHL


Instantly, therefore, Agis their king, though in thedepth of winter,sallying forth with a body of troops fromDecelea, marched round the confederacy, levying sumsof money for the service of the marine. Turning his routeto the Melian gulf, he took a large booty from the CE-tæans, against whom their enmity had been of long dura­tion, which he converted into money. He also compel­led those Achæanswho were seated in the Pthiotis, andother States in this quarter dependent on Theslaly, spiteof all the complaints and murmurs of the Thessalians, togive him some hostages for their good behaviour, and tofurnish him with money. He disposed of these hostagesinto safe custody at Corinth, and spared no pains to getthem over into the alliance.
The Lacedæmonians, farther, circulated an orderamong the States, for the building of one hundred failof ships. They taxed themselves and the Bœotians tofurnish, respectively, twenty-five •, the Phocians andLocrians fifteen; the Corinthians fifteen; the Arca­dians, and Pellenians, and Sicyonians, ten; the Me-gareans, and Trcezenians, and Epidaurians, and Her-mionians, ten. They went to work with all otherneedful preparations, that they might prosecute the warbriskly upon the first approach of spring.
The Athenians, on the other hand, were not remissin preparing for their own defence; since, in pursuanceof the plan they had formed, they were busy during allthe winter in building of ships, having collected properquantities of timber; and in fortifying Sunium, thatthe navigation of their victuallers round that cape mightbe preserved from molestation. They also evacuatedthe fortress in Laconia which they had raised in thevoyage to Sicily; and in all respects, where they jud­ged themselves involved in any less needful expence,they contracted their disbursements with the utmost fru­gality. But their principal care was keeping a close eyeupon their dependents, that they might not revolt.


Amidst







OCR Output








2'90 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. B.VIlI.


amongst their number the seven ships of the Chians,they thought it not safe to trust them. But, having af­terwards manned out others, to the amount of thirty-seven, they drive the enemy along the coast into Pira*.us of the Corinthians: This is a desart harbour, andthe last upon the confines of Epidauria. One (hip, In­deed, which the enemy came up with at sea, the Pelo-ponnesians lost; but all the rest they draw together to astation Within the harbour. Here the Athenians at­tacked them, on the water with their ships, and byland with a party sent purposely on-shore. The attackwas attended with great confusion, and carried on in adisorderly manner. The party of the Athenians, whichattacked from the land, disable the bulk of the squa­dron, and kill the commander, Alcamenes; some alsoof their own people perished in the action. But, whenthe dispute was ended, they posted a sufficient numberof their ships to lie facing those of the enemy; andwith the remainder anchor near a little ifle, on which,as it lay at a small distance, they form ah incampment,and send away to Athens for a reinforcement.
In favour of the Pelopohnesians came up, on the dayfollowing, not only the Corinthians, but soon after a num­ber also of others, from the adjacent country, in aidof the squadron; who, perceiving that the preservationof it would be a work of laborious toil on so desart acoast, were sadly perplexed. Some argued vehement­ly for setting the ships on fire; but at length it wasconcluded to draw them ashore, and, incamping withtheir land-forces round them, to guard them from theenemy till some convenient opportunity should offerof getting them away. Agis, also, when informedof their situation, sent to them Thermo, a citizenof Sparta.
To the Lacedæmonians the first advice that had beensent was this,—that " the squadron had set sail from the** isthmus for orders had been given Alcamenes bythe -Epbori, that, when this point was executed, he
should







OCR Output








B.VII. THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. 209


which Thucydides hath compiled the history, camealso to an. end.


YEAR XIX.J
THE following spring no sooner approached, than,at an earlier date than on any former occasion, the La­cedæmonians and allies invaded Attica; and Agis, theson of Archidamus, king of the Lacedæmonians, hadthe command of the army. At first they ravaged thecountry, particularly the plains; and this being done,having allotted out the work in portions to the severalStates, they set out about fortifying Decelea. Now,Decelea is distant at most but *one hundred and twentystadia from the city of Athens, and lies at the fame dis­tance, or very little more, from Bœotia: but in theplain, and on the finest spot of ground, from whenceeffectually to annoy them, was their fortress raised; andmight be seen from the very walls of Athens.
In this manner the Peloponnesians and allies erecteda fortress within Attica itself; whilst, in the same por­tion of time, their friends in Peloponnesus embarkeda body of heavy-armed on-board their transports, andsent them off for Sicily. For this service the Lacedæ­monians picked out from the very best of the Helotsand of those citizens of Sparta who were newly enfran­chised, from both together, six hundred heavy-armed;and appointed Heccritus, a Spartan, to command them.And the Bœotians sent three hundred heavy-armed,commanded by Xeno and Nicon of Thebes, and He-gesander of Thespiæ. These were first embarked atXænarus in Laconia, and thence put out to sea.
Soon after these, the Corinthians sent away five hun­dred heavy-armed; some from Corinth itlelf, othershired from the Arcadians; and appointed Alexarchus,
J Before Chiist 413.* About twelve milei.
Vol. II. P a Corinthian,







OCR Output








B. VI. THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. 101


"the preeminence of honour awarded tome bias me to"speak in contradiction to my judgement; nor shall it** bias me at present; but what I think tends most to"the public good, that only (ball I utter.
"I am also sensible, that what I can urge may have** but little influence on Athenian tempers, when I at-"tempt persuading you to secure what you already"possess, and not to hazard the present for things invi-"sible and future; but that your eagerness is quite un-"seasonable; and that the ends, which you too san-"guinely propose, are not easy to be accomplished ; —"these things I shall clearly demonstrate.
"To this purpose I aver, that, if the intended expe-** dition proceeds, you are going to leave many ene-** mies behind you here, and to take the most certain"method of setching hither more numerous opponents."You imagine, perhaps, that the late peace will be** firm'yand constantly observed; though it is merely a"nominal peace, and that only so long as you remain** inactive. Nay, such it hath been made by the con-"duct of some even of our own community. And,** Ihould any considerable force of ours have the** unhappiness to sink under hostile efforts, our old** enemies will be suddenly upon us j since merely by"calamities they were reduced to an accommodation,** and, in a manner more disgraceful to chemselves than"to us, were necessitated to treat. In the next place,** we have found, that in the treaty itself many arti-** cles are still controverted. There are, farther, di-** vers States, and those by no means the weakest,*t who have not accepted the accommodation; but, on** the contrary, are still in arms against us; whilst o-** thers are inhibited merely by ten-day truces, and that"only because the Lacedæmonian measures are hither-"to pacific. But suddenly perhaps, when once they** find our strength divided, the very measure into** which we are now precipitating ourselves, they may** fall upon us in a general combination, augmented by
H 3 "the







OCR Output








io8 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. B. VII.


But the motives, which at this present juncture anima­ted the Lacedæmonians most, were, that the Atheni­ans, if engaged in a double war both against themselvesand against the Sicilians, must become a much moreexpeditious conquest; and, farther, the Athenians werethe first aggressors in violating treaties. In the formerwar they were well convinced the first offence waschargeable on their own heads, because the Thebanshad surprised Platæa whilst treaties were in fact subsist­ing. Nay, contrary to an express stipulation in a pre­ceding treaty, that " arms should never be taken up*' against the party which was willing to abide by a ju-** dicial determination," they themselves had refused tosubmit to a trial, though claimed by the Athenians.To a conduct so ungenerous they concluded that theirill success in the war ought fairly to be imputed; andreflected, with self-accusations, not only on the cala­mity they had suffered at Pylus, but On all their otherlosses in every quarter of the war. But now, since theAthenians, with an equipment of thirty fail, had com­mitted devastations at Epidaurus, at Prasiæ, and atother places, and continued to infest their dominionsby robberies from Pylus; nay, as often as disputes hadintervened about the intent of articles in the last treaty,in which the Lacedæmonians appealed to a judicial de­termination, the others had haughtily refused it j — con­cluding hence, that the Athenians were become asguilty aggressors now as themselves had been on theformer occasion; with cheerful presages of success, theydetermined for war. In order to it, they demandedthis winter, from their allies, their contingents of iron,and got all the needful materials in readiness to executetheir plan of fortification. Resolved at the same timeto transport an aid to Sicily in vessels of burden, theybegan to levy it at home, and exacted the quotas ofaugmentation from their consederates. And thus thewinter ended; and the eighteenth year of this war, of


which







OCR Output








B.VI. THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. 189


an entrenchment along the palisade, entirely to pre­vent the Athenians from continuing their works quitedown to the sea. The latter, when they h id perfectedtheir work along the crag, are bent on demolishing thenew palisade and intrenchment of the Syracusans. Forthis purpose, they had ordered their shipping to comeabout from Thapsus into the great harbour or Syracuse.They themselves, at the morning's dawn, marcheddown from Epipolse into the plain; and then, crossingthe marsh, where the mud was hardest and best able tobear, by the help of boards and planks which they laidupon the surface, they carry almost the whole lengthof the palisade and intrenchment early in the morning,and were soon after masters of the whole. This was noteffected without a battle, in which the Athenians wereagain victorious. The routed Syracusans fled differentways; those, who had composed their right, towardsthe city; and those, who had composed their left, to­wards the river. But, with a view of intercepting thepassage of the latter, the three hundred chosen Atheni­ans marched wich all speed to seize the bridge. TheSyracusans, alarmed at this step, as this body consistedof the bulk of their horse, face about on the three hun­dred, and put them to flight, and then break in uponthe right wing of the Athenians. By so unexpected ashock the first band in thac wing was thrown into dis­order. Lamachus, observing it, advanced to their sup­port from the left, with a small party of archers thathappened to be near him, and the whole body of theArgrves. Having crossed a ditch that lay between, se­conded only by a few, whilst the bulk of his parrymade a full stop, he is instantly flain j * as were also five
* Plutarch, in the life of Nicias, circumstantiates the manner in which this oldgeneral lost his life in character, Calibrates, a good soldier, but of great impe­tuosity, rode at the head of the Syracusan horse. Being challenged out by Calibra­tes, Lamachus alone engaged personally with him. Lamachus received the firstwound j he then returned the blow, and dropped. His antagonist fell at the fametime, and they both expired together.


Or







OCR Output








60 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. B.V.


** mas be imposed upon Agis." He earnestly pleadedagainst the execution of the sentence, that, '* in another"expedition, he would purge tne charge by some no-"table service to the State; if not, they might then"proceed to punish him at pleasure." Upon this, theysuspended the fine and demolition, but passed a law uponthe present occasion, such as never before had beenmade amongst them; for they elected a committee often Spartans to attend him as a council, Without whoseconcurrence he was not permitted to lead out their armyinto the field.
In the mean time, a message is brought them fromtheir friends at Tegea, that, " unless they come thither"with the utmost expedition, Tegea will revolt from*' them to the Argives and their confederates, and is on-"Jy not revolted already."
To prevent this, the whole Lacedæmonian strength,both of citizens and Helots, is levied with more sharp­ness than had ever been known before; and, taking thefield, they marched to Oresteum, ofMenalia. An or­der was sent before-hand to their Arcadian allies, to as­semble and follow them directly towards Tegea.
But, when the whole Lacedæmonian strength wasthus marched to Oresteum, the sixth part of the num­ber, consisting of the more aged and younger classes,was from thence again dismissed to Sparta, to take up­on them the guard of that place, whilst the rest of theirmilitary force marcheth to Tegea; and, not long after,their Arcadian confederates join them.
They sent also to Corinth, to the Bœotians, Phocians,and Locrians, a summons of speedy aid into the Manti-nean. But, for some of these, the summons was tooshorthand, for the rest, it was by no means an easytask to take the field in separate bodies, and waiting tortheir mutual junction, to force their passage through anenemy's country; for such lay between to obstruct theiradvance: However, they were earnestly bent to attemptit. The Lacedæmonians, in the mean time, inlarged


with







OCR Output








ioo THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. B.V1.


"whole armament to act as an aid to the Egisteans a-"gainst the Selinuntians; to replace also the Leontines"in their former habitations, if the state of the war
gave them leisure to execute that service; and to** manage all other points in Sicily as they should judge"most beneficial for the Athenian interest."
But, the fifth day after this, another assembly of thepeople was held upon the ways and means to expeditethe equipment of the fleet, and by proper decrees tosupply the commanders with what might be requisite toaccelerate their departure. Nicias, who against his willhad been named for a commander, was persuaded thatthe public determinations were rash and premature,since, on short examination, and motives merely spe­cious, they were bent on the total reduction of Sicily,—an arduous undertaking! Now theresore he stood up;and, having a mind to stop proceedings, he advised theAthenians as follows:
"I AM aware that the present assembly is held to"concert the means of expediting our preparations,"and to get all in readiness for the expedition to Sicily."But, in my sentiments, we ought once more to re-"fume the consideration of the previous point, "Whe-"ther upon the whole it be adviseable to equip out"such a fleetand nor, by rash and premature re-* * solves on points of such vast importance, through"too easy compliance with foreign solicitations, to em-"broil ourselves in an unnecessary war. For my own"part, truly, I am invested with honour by the present** measures, and no man upon earth is so little anxious"about his own personal safety. But at the same time** I pronounce that person to be a valuable member"of the public, who makes use of all his prudence to"preserve his own lise and property: For such an one,"purely for his own private benesit, must be desirous"that the public welsare flourish and abound. Bur,'** however, neither in the preceding assemblies could
* * the







OCR Output













OCR Output








B.VI1I. THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. 325


at stake, continued with much zeal and assiduity to in­gratiate himself with Tissaphernes. .
The Athenian deputies, with Pisander at their head,who were sent from Samos, had no sooner reached A-thens than they obtained an audience from the people;where, after touching in a summary manner upon manyother advantages, they expatiated chiefly on this, that,*' by recalling Alcibiades, and making an alteration in*' the democratical form of government, they might*' gain the friendship of the king and a superiority over*' the Peloponnesians." Large was the number ofthose who would not hear the proposal against the demo­cracy. The enemies, farther, of Alcibiades were loudin their clamours, that " shameful it would be if so*' enormous a transgressor of the laws were recalled;*' one, to whose crimes, in point of the mysteries, the*' * Eumolpidæ and Ceryces had borne solemn attesta-"tion, the consequence of which was his exile; nay,*' had, farther, denounced a curse upon those who*' should restore him." Pisander, interposing to put astop to this violent opposition and these tragical out­cries, addressed himself apart to each of these oppo­nents, and asked them singly, "Whether any hope"they had left of saving their country, now that the*' Peloponnefians had as many ships upon the sea as'* they had themselves, but a larger number of confe-"derate States, besides supplies of money from the"king and Tissaphernes, whilst themselves were quite"exhausted, unless somebody could persuade the king*' to declare in their favour?" And when those, towhom the demand was put, replied in the negative, he
* These were sacerdotal families at Athens, descended from Eumolpus and Ce-ryx. The former of them instituted the Eleusinian mysteries; and it was the grandprivilege of his descendents to preside at and regulate those sacred rites. Who Ce-ryx was, and what the particular privileges of his descendents, any farther than that(according to Suidas) they weie holy and venerable," is not agreed. AU of themwere commanded to pronounce the fqjemn curse on Alcibiades when he was out­lawed. Vet one priestess, (as Plutarch relates,) Theano, the daughter of Menon,refused to obey j alledging, that " it was her duty to Mess, and not to curse."
Y 3 proceeded







OCR Output








356 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. B.VIII.


ter, and with less expence had accomplished his service.To Aspendus, however, whatever was his view, Tissa-phernes repairs, and joins the Phœnicians; nay, far­ther, at his own desire, the Peloponnesians sent Philip-pus, a noble Lacedæmonian, with two triremes, totake charge of this fleet.
Alcibiades had no sooner received intelligence thatTissaphernes was at Aspendus, than, taking with himthirteen sail, he hastened thither after him, promisingto those at Samos an assured and important piece of ser­vice: For, " he would either bring the Phœnician"fleet to the Athenians, or at least prevent their junc-"tion with the Peloponnesians." It is probable that,from a long acquaintance, he was privy to the wholeintention of Tissaphernes never to bring up this fleet;and his project was now, to render Tissaphernes stillmore odious to the Peloponnesians for the regard heshewed to himself and the Athenians, that so he mightat last be necessitated to strike in with the latter. Hestood away therefore directly by Phaselis and Caunus,and held oh his course upwards.
The deputation, sent from the/car hundred, being re­turned from Samos to Athens, reported the answer
of Alcibiades; how " he encouraged them to hold
*' out, and give way in no shape to the enemy; and"that his confidence was great, he should be able tho-"roughly to reconcile them with the army, and give"them victory over the Peloponnesians." By this re­port they very much revived the spirits of many of thosewho had a share in the oligarchy, and yet would gladlyextricate themselves from the business upon assurancesof indemnity. They had already begun to hold sepa­rate cabals, and shew open discontent at the train of af­fairs. They were headed by some of principal authori­ty even in the present oligarchy, and who filled the greatoffices of state, namely, Theramenes, * the son of Ag-
non,
* Theramenes was very expert at turning about and shifting his party. He gotby it the nick-name of Cothurnus, or the Bujkin; because the tragedians' bulkin was
made







OCR Output








196 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. B. VII.


of the town, with the whole of their strength, in orderto meet Gylippus for by this time they had receivedintelligence that he was actually approaching.
Gylippus, upon his route, had made himself masterof Iegas, a fortress belonging to the Siculi; and now,at the head of his army, drawn up in order of battle, hecomes up to Epipolse. Having mounted by the passof Euryalus, as the Athenians had done on their first:approach, he marched, in Conjunction with the Syra­cusans, toward the Athenian circumvallation. Hehappened to arrive in that critical juncture, when theAthenians had completely finished * seven or eight stadiaof the double wall extending to the great harbour jwhen, in consequence, but a very small part remainedincomplete; and on which they were labouring withtheir highest application. On the other side of their cir­cle, towards Trogilus, the stones for completing theirwork had been laid ready in heaps almost down to thebeach, and some parts of their work on that side stoodbut half completed, though others had received the fi-, nishing hand. To such extremity of danger were theSyracusans now reduced.
Gylippus and the Syracusans coming thus suddenlyupon them, the Athenians at first were struck with con­sternation; but formed, however, in order of battle, togive them a reception. But Gylippus, having orderedhis forces to halt, dispatcheth a herald to the Athe­nians, proclaiming that, " in case they would evacu-** ate Sicily within the space of five days, with their"arms and baggage, he would readily grant them a"truce." Such offers they received in a contemptuousmanner jf and, disdaining to return an answer4 ordered
* About J of a mile.
Nicias (fays Plalareb) disdained to return an answer. But seme of hit soldierslaughed outright, and asked "If, at the arrival of a mantle and stasf from Sparta,"the Syracusans were become so full of spirits as to despise the Athenians; who*• had lately given up to the Lacedæmonians three hundred of their countrymen"who had been their prisoners, all of them better soldiers, and who combed"their hair, too, much hetter, than Gylippus."







OCR Output








f54 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. B.VI.


they had thus taken the field, decamping instantly withthe whole of their force, and with ail the Sicilian andother auxiliaries who had joined them, and embarkingthemselves on-board their (hips and transports, steeredaway by night for Syracuse. Aud, early the next dawn,they landed on the intended spot near Olympiæum, in­tent on forming and securing their incampment. Thecavalry ef the Syracusans, in the mean time, came upfirst to Catana; and discovering, that the whole Athe­nian army had put to sea by night, they return withthis intelligence to their foot. Upon this, the wholearmy, soon wheeling about, returned with all speed tothe defence of Syracuse.
In the mean time, the Athenians, as the enemy hada long way to march, formed an incampment on anadvantageous spot without the least obstruction. Onit, they were possessed of the advantage of fighting onlyat their own discretion, and the Syracusan horse couldgive them the least annoyance, either during or beforean engagement. On one side, they were flanked bywalls, and houses, and trees, and a marsh; and' onthe other by precipices. They also felled some treesthat grew sear; and, carrying them down to the more,they piled them into a barricade for the defence oftheir ships, and to cover them on the side of Dalcon.They also expeditioufly threw up a rampart, on thepart which leemed most accessible to the enemy, ofstones picked out for the purpose, and timber, andbroke down the bridge of the Anapus.
Thus busied as they were on fortifying their camp,not so much as one person ventured out of the city toobstruct their proceedings. The first, who appeared tomake any resistance, were the Syracusan cavalry, and,.when once they had shewn themselves, the whole bodyof thtir infantry was soon in sight. They advancedfirst of all quite up to the Athenian works; but, whenthey perceived that they would not sally out to fig he. . - them,







OCR Output








Ij4 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. B.VI.


The Athenians, with the reinforcements of their al­lies, were by this time all arrived at Corcyra. And thefirst thing done by the commanders was, to take a re­view of the whole equipment, and to settle the orderin which they were to anchor and form their naval sta-,tion. They also divided it into three squadrons, andcast lots for the command of each; to the end that, inthe course of the voyage, they might be well suppliedwith water, and harbours, and the proper necessaries,wherever they might chance to put in; that, in otherrespects, a better discipline might be kept up, and themen be more inured to a ready obedience, as being under theinspection of an able commander in each several division.These points being settled, they dispatched three vesselsto Italy and Sicily, to pick up informations, what citieson those coasts would give them a reception. And theirorders were, to come back in time and meet them uponthe voyage, that they might be advertised into whatports they might safely enter.
These previous points being adjusted, the Athenians,with an equipment already swelled to so great a bulk,weighing anchor from Corcyra, stood across for Sicily.The total of their triremes was a hundred and thirty-four, to which were added two Rhodian vessels of fiftyoars. One hundred of these were Athenian, and, of thisnumber, sixty were tight ships fit for service; the restwere transports for the soldiery. The remainder of thefleet consisted of Chians and the other allies. The totalof the heavy-armed on-board was five thousand onehundred men. Of these, fifteen hundred were citizensof Athens inrolled; seven hundred were Athenians ofthe lowest class, (called Tbetes,) who served by way ofmarines. The rest of the force consisted of the quotasof their alliance; some, of their own dependents; fivehundred belonged to the Argives; the number of Man-tineans and mercenaries was two hundred and fifty; thearchers in the whole amounted to four hundred and
eighty;







OCR Output








25.6 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. B. VlL


"that we are really the best, since we have beat the"best, seamen in the world, our hopes of success are"in every light redoubled; and then human experience** teacheth us, that, in every competition, the warmest"hope is ever accompanied with the greatest resolu-"tion.
"But farther, those late alterations which they have"introduced among their shipping, in order to equalise** and balance ours, have been a long time familiar to"our own practice; and each of their new preparations"we shall dexterously improve to our own advantage:"For when, contrary to the long and inveterate disci-** pline of their fleet, there are crouded together upon"their decks a numerous body of heavy-armed, as well** as another numerous body of mere terra firma dart-"ers, as they may properly bestiled, — when thus A-
carnanians and other landmen are forced on-board,** who even sitting would be unable to poise and direct** their weapons,—how can they avoid indangering their** vessels? or, jumbled confusedly together, and tot-"tering under motions to which they are not inured,"how can they escape a total disorder?
"What still makes more against them, the multi-** tude of their shipping will only serve the more to"embarrass them,; and let this dispel the fears of those"who may be afraid of engaging against their superior** numbers; for a multitude ot ships in a contracted"space will be more stow in executing orders, and are** at the fame time most easily exposed to the annoy-** ance which our preparations are contrived to give"them. And now attend to the true and real situation** of the foe, as from good intelligence we are enabled"clearly to declare it to you.
"Environed on all sides with misfortunes, and dif-"tressed in a present want of the necessaries of life, they"are become quite desperate: And hence, though"they have resigned all considence in their real"strength, yet in the fury of despair they are throwing
"themselves







OCR Output








3io THE PELOPONNESUN WAR. B.VIIJ,


did less damage than on the preceding day. Afterscouring and laying waste the terjispJiy of Cnidus, theyfailed baek to Samos.
About the same time, Astyochus having rejoined thefleet at Miletus, the Peloponnesians were still abound­ing in all the needful expedients of war. Good paywas regularly advanced them, and the soldiers hadstore of rnoney yet remaining of the rich booty theymade at Iafus. The Milesians, farther, sustained. withalacrity the burden of the war. It was, however, theopinion of the Peloponnesians, that the first treaty madewith Tissaphernes by Chalcideus was in some articlesdefective and less advantageous to themselves. Uponthis they drew up and ratified a. second in the presenceof Theramenes. The articles of it are these:


*'. STIPULATED, by the Lacedæmonians and"conftderates, with king Darius and the sons of the"king and Tissaphernes, that peace and amity subsist*c on the following conditions:
"Whatever province or city soever belongeth to"king Darius, or did belong to his father or ancestors,*' against them in a hostile manner not to march, and*? no injury to do, are bound both Lacedæmonians and,*' confederates of the Lacedæmonians. Not to; exact-."tribute from any, soch places, are bound both Lace-."dæmonians and confederates of the Lacedæmonians.** Neither shall king Darius, nor any. subject of the-"king, march in a hostile manner against, nor dp any.** injury to the Lacedæmonians and confederates.
"But, in cafe the Lacedæmonians or confederates.*' need any assistance whatever from the king; or the;*' king from the Lacedæmonians and confederates;*f whatever either party can convince the other to be-** right, let that be done.
"Be the war against the Athenians and confederates.*' carried on by both parties in strict conjunction. Aod»


*' in







OCR Output








104 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. B. VL


s


*' voc made amongst us by pestilence and war, and*' to repair the prodigious waste of our fortunes and"our lives. These, according to all the rules of equi-"ty, should be reserved for our own domestic exigen-"cies, and not be lavished away on a set of fugitives,"who implore our protection, and are bound in inte-"rest to tell specious falsehoods; though, whilst plun-"g'ng tneir neighbours into hazards, they have no-"thing but words to contribure; and, (hould we re-"dress them, know not how to be grateful; but, in*' cafe we miscarry in the attempt, must involve their*' friends in their own destruction.
"If there be, farther, a person, who, elevated withM his own designation to the command, incites you*' earnestly to sail; heedful of nothing but his own pri-"vate views, nor qualified by his years for so important"a trust; if his passion be merely to excite admiration"for his fine breed of horses, or, by the gains of his*' commission, to repair the havoc ot his fortune caused*' by prodigality; I conjure you to afford no such per-"son an opportunity to maite a splendid figure at the"expence of your country: But rest convinced, that*' men of such a turn will be corrupt in public office,"as they are bad ceconomists in private life; that the"enterprize in hand is a very arduous trust, far be-*f yond such measures or luch exploits as a stripling can"devise or execute.
"I own myself intimidated by that crowd of youths*' who fit by this per/on and abet his schemes. I am*' hence obliged to implore the men of years and expe-"rience, who happen to sit near them, by no means to"dread that appearance of pusillanimity, which, in"cafe this decree of war be revoked, might be objec-"ted to them; by no means to indulge the same raw"passions by which boys are actuated, so as to dote"upon remote contingencies. You, gentlemen, by"experience are convinced, that success exceedingly"seldom Jesuits from hot and sanguine presumption,
w but







OCR Output








B.VII. THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. 243


But, on the day following, they stand out with their* fleet, to the number of seventy-six ships; and, at thefame time, the land-army marched up to the intrench-ments. The Athenians launched out, with fourscoreand six, to give them a reception; and thus, chargingone another, an engagement ensued. Eurymedoncommanded the right wing of the Athenian fleet, andendeavoured to over-reach and surround the ships ofthe enemy. For this purpose, he opened his line, andstood along too close to the land; which gave the Sy­racusans and their allies, who had now defeated thecenter of the Athenians, an opportunity to intercepthim in the bottom and recess of the harbour, wherethey slay Eurymedon himself, and destroy the shipswhich had separated in his company: and, this done,they gave chace to the whole Athenian fleet, and drovethem ashore.
Gylippus, now, perceiving that the ships of the ene­my were defeated and drove aground quite wide of thepiles and their camp, formed instantly a design to makeslaughter of the men as they were leaping on shore, andof giving the Syracusans an opportunity easily to drawoff all the ships from land of which they were entiremasters. At the head, therefore, of one division ofthe land-force, he marched down to the pier to secondthe fleet. The Tyrrhenes happened to have been postednearest by the Athenians; who, seeing a body of theenemy running down thither in a dilbrderly manner,advanced eagerly to meet them; and, charging brisklyon the van, put them to flight and drive them into thelake of Lysimclia. But, soon after, a reinforcement ofSyracusans and their allies coming up, the Athenians
* Plutarch adds, that, " on this occasion, the very lads came out in fishing-** boats and fleiffs, taunting and insulting the Athenians. One of these lads, Hera-"elides, of a noble family, who had advanced too near, was in great danger of be-** ing intercepted by an Athenian vessel. But Pollichus, the uncle of the hi', a-«* Jarmed for his safety, charged instantly with the ten triremes he had under his«* command. The rest of the Syracusan fleet, now alarmed for Pollichus, ran in** mi once, and brought on a general engagement," Life of Nitiet,
R 2 also







OCR Output








B. VII. THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. 251


had youth and vigour enough to be of service there.The whole number of ships they were by this means e-nabled to man amounted to a hundred and ten. Theyalso placed on-board the fleet a large number of archers,the darters of the Acarnanians, and other foreign auxi­liaries; and provided in all other respects for action, aswell as their condition would permit or the nature of theproject required.
When things were thus in great forwardness, Nicias,taking notice that the soldiery was much dejected by thegreat defeats, which, contrary to their wonted custom,they had received by sea, and yet desirous to hazard an­other engagement as soon as possible, because pinchedfor want os necessary subsistence, he gathered them allround about himself, and endeavoured to raise theirdrooping spirits by the following exhortation, the firstof the kind he had ever made.
"MY sellow-foldiers, whether of the Athenian or'* the consederate troops! the bold attempt we are now"going to make is of equal concern to each individual"amongst us; since, not more for victory over our** foes than for the preservation of ourselves and our*( country, we are now to fight; and, if our naval ef-"forts be crowned with victory, each of us may again** be blessed with the fight of his own native city, A-** way, therefore, with these faces of despair, this pain-** ful dejection, fit only for a raw unexperienced multi-'* tude, who, unsuccessful in their first attempts, for
ever after bid adieu to hope, and by unmanly sears** anticipate misfortunes!
"As for you, Athenians, who form so considerable** a part ot this assembly, experienced as you are in** such variety of warfare ! — and you also, our allies,** who have ever fought under our banners! — recal** to your reflexion the unexpected turns of war ; en-w courage the hope that fortune may at length declaref* for us, and determine once more to engage the foe


"with







OCR Output








'&+ THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. B.V,


in magnifying their own strength, hath been still difbe-*lieved. However, from the following computation, aninquirer may discover the number of the Lacedæmoni­ans, who on this occasion were drawn up in the field.
Besides the Skiritæ, who were in humber six hundred,seven battalions were in this engagement. 'Now in eve­ry battalion there were four companies; and, in everycompany, four platoons; in the first rank of every platoon.were four fighting soldiers. In regard to depth theywere not equally formed, as every colonel determinedthe depth at his own private discretion; but generallythey were drawn up eight deep. The front-line of theirwhole force, excepting the Skiritæ, consisted of fourhundred and forty-eight men.-f
When both sides were ready, the small respite beforethe engagement was employed by the several comman­ders in animating the soldiers under their respective or­ders.
To the Mantineans it was urged, That " the
"points, for which they were going to fight, were"their country and their future fate, either rule or fla-"very; that of rule, whose sweets they had known,"they might not be divested, and that they might ne-"ver feel again what slavery is."
To the Argives, It was "for their ancient so-
"vereignty, and the equal fliare of dignity they had*' once enjoyed in Peloponnesus, now timely to prevent"an eternal submission to such losses, and earn revenge
•f The Lacedæmonian mura, or brigade, consisted of four hch'i, or battalions, =2048 men: For a locbos, or battalion, consisted of four fetiueoKa, or companies,ac 512 men; a fer.tecojiy, or company, of four enamalia, or platoons, =128 men iand each tnomatia, or platoon, consisted of 32. This is the account of Thucydides,who computes the platoon by 4 in front and 8 in depth. The platoon consisted there­fore of 32 f which, X by 4, = 128, the number of a company; which, also Xby 4, ~ 512, the number of a battalion. The number of battalions was seven,which shews the number of Lacedæmonians to have been 3584; and then, with the-addition of 600 Siirittr, who were posted on the left, to have amounted, in the whore,to 4184 men. Or again, the whole front line, = 448, X 8, the number in depth,is equal to 3584, +600 Skiritæ, = 4184.
for







OCR Output








132 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. B.VI.


** but an oligarchy means only a party; in the next place,*' that men of opulence are the most suitable guardians*' of the public treasure; that men of understanding*' and experience are best qualified to advise; but the*' many, after hearing, are the best judges of measures.*' And thus, by a democracy, equality of right and of** privilege is most fairly preserved, as well to the*' separate members as to the whole community. An"oligarchy indeed bestows an ample portion of dangersft on the many, but in benesicial points it not only as-*' fumes the larger ihare to itself, but by an unboun-"ded rapacity monopoliscth the public harvest. These*' are the ends, which the men of power and the raw"unexperienced youths amongst you ambitiousty pur-"sue; ends, incompatible with the welfare of a great*' and flourishing State. The accomplishment of these,«* I say, you have this very mordent in agitation; though"the world cannot furnish such a set of fools, if you?* perceive not the pernicious tendency of your schemes."Nor can any set of Grecians, within my knowledge,"equal either your brutality or your villany, if with*' open eyes you dare proceed. Lay hold then at once*' of sound information, or repent if already informed,ff and unite in the infallible advancement of the general"w.elfare of the whole community. And let the men** of probity amongst you rest perfectly satisfied, that"thus they shall obtain a proper share, nay more than"a share, in those emoluments, which will equally rc-** dound to all their country. But, in cafe you give"into different schemes, the hazard is great; the wholef* of your plan will be baffled and confounded.
"Trouble us therefore no farther with your infor-f* matipns, as we are privy to and shall certainly discon-"cert the views of their authors. For the Syracuse** State, even though the Athenians actually invade us,will repel their efforts with a magnanimity worthy ofherself: And we have already a set of brave com.*' manders, who will effectually manage the point.
** But,







OCR Output








37* THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. B. VltJ


sidue of the march was no longer pointed towards Ca-tana, but to the other coast of Sicily, towards Cama-rina, and Gela, and the cities in that quarter, both Gre­cian and Barbarian. In pursuance of this, a large num­ber of fires being kindled, they dislodged in the dead ofnight.
This part of their retreat (as is the general fate of ar­mies, but especially of the greatest, ever subject to fearsand panics, particularly when moving in the night andon hostile ground, and conscious, farther, that theenemy is close at their heels) was made in a fad anddisorderly manner. The column, indeed, under Ni-cias, which composed the van, kept firm together in abody, and quite out-matched the rest of the army: butthat under Demosthenes, being one half at least, if notthe major part, of the whole force, was separated fromthe van, and came on in great confusion and disorder.However, by the dawn of day, they reach the coast;and, gaining the great road which is called the Helorine>took their route along it, that, after they had reachedthe river Cacyparis, they might pierce upwards alongthe course of that river into the heart of the country;for thus they hoped to meet with the Siculi, whom theyhad summoned to be ready on their route. But, whenthey had gained the fight of that river, they found itsbanks already occupied by a Syracusan guard, busy inthrowing up a rampart and palisado to defend its pas­sage. This party they soon dispersed, and passed theriver, and from thence advanced towards another river,the Erineus; for thus their guides had planned theirroute.
In the mean time the Syracusans and allies, when theday was clearly broke, and they knew the Athenianswere stole off, began in general to throw heavy impu­tations on Gylippus, as if the Athenians had made theirescape through his connivance. Yet, beginning thepursuit with all possible expedition, (and it was easilydiscoverable what route they had taken,) they come up


with







OCR Output








 







OCR Output








a THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. B.V.


soon as the suspension of arms expired, having under hiscommand twelve hundred neavy-armed Athenians, threehundred horsemen, and larger numbers of their alliedforces. His whole armament consisted of thirty sail.Touching first at Scione, yet blocked up, he drew fromthence the heavy-armed, stationed there as guards; and,standing away, entered the haven of the Colophonians,lying at no great distance from Torone. Being hereinformed, by the deserters, that Brasidas was not inTorone, nor the inhabitants able to make head againsthim, he marched his forces by land towards that city,and sent ten of his ships about, to stand into the harbour.His first approach was to the new rampart, which Bra­sidas had thrown up quite round the city, in order toinclose the suburbs within its cincture, and thus, by thedemolition of the old wall, had rendered it one intire ci­ty. When the Athenians came to the assault, Pasiteli-
rhe Knights of Aristophanes. Arid, to set it in the most ludicrous view, the poet openshis play with Nieias and Demosthenes, whom he paints in a very injurious manner;and, no doubt, it must have been very grating to them, to fee themselves representedin fo low buffoonery upon the stage at Athens. *' Demosthenes begins with a shower"of curses on that execrable Paphlagonian, Cleon; Nicias seconds him j and, then,<* both of them howl together in a most lamentable duetto. They next lay their"heads together about some means of redress. Demosthenes proposeth getting out"of their master Cleon's reach. Lei us go then, fays Nicias. Ay; let us go, cries*' Demosthenes. Say mere, fays Nicias, lit us go ever to the enemy. Ay, ever to tie"enemy, adds the other. But first, ftys Nicias, let us go and f rostrate ourselves before** the Images of the Gods. What images? fays Demajthenes; dost thou think then there"are any Cods? I do. Upon ivhat grounds? Because I am undeservedly tbetbjetl of*' their hatred. Such are the daring misrepresentations Aristophanes makes of*' characters that by no means deserved it t Demosthenes afterwards describes the*' arrogance of Cleon thus; He hath one foot fixed in Py/ut, and the other in the astern-** hly of the feofle. When he moves, he struts and stretches at such a rate, that bis turn*"is in Thrace, hit bands in Ætolia, and bis attention amongst the tribes at home, •"Nicias then proposeth poisoning themselves by drinking bull's blood, like ThemiC** tocles;—Or rather, fays Demosthenes, a dose of good-wine. This is agreed upon,* in order to cheer up their spirits, and enable them to confront Cleon, and play off"against him the seller of black-puddings. Nicias accordingly goes and steals the
"wine." Yet, in spite of the most outrageous ridicule, and the opposition of alL
wife and honest men at Athens, we fee Cleon now at the head of an army, to stop therapid conquests of Brasidas,
das,







OCR Output








B.VIII. THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. 357


non, and Aristocrates, the son of Sicelius; and otherswho were most deeply concerned in late transac­tions; and from a dread, as they gave our, of the armyat Samos, and Alcibiades, had concurred in sending anembassy to Lacedæmon, lest by unseasonable dissentsfrom the majority they might have done mischief to thepublic. Not that they hasted themselves even now toput an utter end to the oligarchical government, but toinforce the necessity of making use of the five thousandnot merely in name but in act, and to render the politymore equal. This was, it must be owned, the politi­cal scheme which they all pretended; but, through pri­vate ambition, the majority had given into that course,by which an oligarchy, founded upon the ruins of a de~mocracy, is ripe for subversion: For it was the dailyclaim of each single person concerned, not to be equalwith the rest, but to be pre-eminently the first; where­as, when out of a democracy a preference is awarded,the distinction is the more easily brooked, as if it werethe real consequence os superior worth. But what of acertainty elevated them most, was the great influenceof Alcibiades at Samos, and their own conscioulnelsthat this business of an oligarchy carried with it no pros­pect of firm or lasting continuance. A contention,therefore, ensued among them, which of them shouldshew the greatest zeal for the people.
But such of the four hundred as made the greatest op­position to this new scheme, and were leaders of theirparty ; — namely, Phrynichus, who formerly, during
made large enough for any foot to go into it. He was however a man of great abili­ties, and generally regarded as a lover of his country. His turns were dextrous, well-timed, and made with a view of public good. Caesar, when making Cicero acompliment, likened him to Theramenes. He was deeply concerned in all the subse­quent revo'utions at Athens. He put the finishing hand to the peace with the Lace­dæmonians after the talcing of Athens by Lyfander, when they demolished theirlong walls, opened their harbours, and gave up their shipping. He was afterwards,nominally, one of the thirty tyrants: For he soon began to oppose them; first withmoderation, then with vehemence j which exasperated them so, that they put himto death,
A a 3 his







OCR Output








B.V. TFTE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. 87


Athenians.
"BUT the certainty of obtaining succour in the in-"tervals of need seerhcth not to depend so much on theV merit of those who implore it, as on the consciousness'* of superior strength in those who are implored to"give it;, A maxim, this, to which no State adheres*' so strictly as the Lacedæmonian. Hence, ever* through a diffidence of their own domestic force, they*' never dare even to invade their neighbours without"the concurrence of numerous allies. There cannor,*' therefore, be the least room to expect, that they*' will transport an aid into an island whilst we are mas-** ters of the sea."


Melians.
"NOT perhaps of their own forces; but they have*'* confederates enow to employ in this service. Then sea of Crete is wide and spacious; a passage through** it even the lords of the sea will find it more difficult'* to obstruct than those who are intent on stealing it to'* effect with safety. Or, grant they miscarry in the at-*' tempt, at worst they can make a diversion upon your"territory,' dr against the remainder of your depen-"dents who escaped the efforts of Brasidas. And then** your attention and your arms must be drawn from a"quarter where you have no right to six them, for the'* necessary defence of your own home and your own** appendage,"
Athenians.
"THOUGH such turns may intervene, your own*» experience should teach you to distrust them: For** you are not, cannot, be ignorant, that the Athenians** never yet would condescend to raise a siege through
G 4 "hostile







OCR Output








B. VIII. THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. 329


or, necessitated to engage with the Athenians, shouldsusfer a defeat, or should the mariners quit their vessels,the, Athenians then would carry their point withoutthanks to him j but his greatest fear was this, lest forthe fake of subsistence they should ravage the continent.Upon all these considerations, and the prudential mo­tives arising from each, co-operating with his principalmaxim of balancing the Grecians against one another,he sent for the Peloponnesians, pays them their arrears ofsubsistence, and makes the following treaty, the thirdof the kind, with them:
"IN the thirteenth year of the reign of Darius, A-"lexippidas presiding in the college of Ephori at Lace-*^ dæmon, articles are signed, in the plain of Mæan-"der, between the Lacedæmonians and consederates"on one side; and Tissaphernes, Hieramenes, and the"sons of Pharnacus, on the other; concerning the af-** fairs of the king and those of the Lacedæmonians and** confederates.
"The whole of the king's dominions situate in Asia"belongeth to the king; and all his own dominions let** the king govern as to him seemeth meet. -
** The Lacedæmonians and confederates are not to** enter the dominions of the king to commit any act"of hostility whatever: Nor he those of the contract-** ing parties for any act of hostility whatever.
"And, in case any of the Lacedæmonians or confe-M derates enter in a hostile manner the dominions of the** king, the Lacedæmonians and consederates are bound
to restrain them: And, in case any subjects of the'* king act in a hostile manner against the Lacedæmo-** nians and confederates, be the king also bound to re-** strain them.
"Tissaphernes shall pay subsistence to the ships now** upon the station, according to the rates agreed on,** till the king's fleet come up.
» But







OCR Output








«50 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. B.VII.


line of triremes placed fide by side, and other vesselsand boats moored fast together by anchors; and got e-very thing besides in readiness, in cafe the Athenians shouldventure on another engagement. Their every view wasnow become large and aspiring.
When the Athenians saw the harbour thus barred up,and perceived, farther, the whole of the enemy's de­signs, it was judged high time to go to consultation.The commanders of the different bodies were called tocouncil, with the generalsin which,— upon represen­tations made " of the great distress to which they were"reduced, and that they had not a stock of provisions"ample enough for their immediate subsistence, (for,"bent on sailing away, they had sent already to Catana"to countermand any fresh convoys,) and, unless they*4 could recover their mastery at sea, it would be im-"practicable for the future to obtain a supply,".— theycame to a final resolution, " To quit their intrench-** ments on the higher ground, and before the station"of their shipping to raise a circular work, of as little** compass as possible, but sufficient to serve for a ma-M gazine and hospital, and to this only to assign a"guard; as for the rest of the land-army, they were to"oblige every soldier to goon-board, that all the ships,** which yet were undamaged, or had been <aid up for** want of hands, might be completely manned; and** thus they must fight their passage out of the har-*4 bour; and, if it succeeded, make directly for Cata-
na; but, if repulsed, they would burn their (hip-** ping, and, moving off in one body by land, would"endeavour, by the most expeditious marches, to"reach the ntrarest place that would receive them, whe*-"ther barbarian or Grecian."
Such was the plan resolved on, and which they beganimmediately to execute; for now, abandoning theirupper intrenchments, they drew down to the beach,and manned the whole of their shipping, on boardof which they forced, without exception, all such as







OCR Output








B.VII. THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. 255


Gylippus, animated their men to engage with resolu­tion, by the following harangue.
"THAT your past achievements have been glorious"indeed, and for the acquisition of greater honour"and glory that you are now on the brink of engaging,"the generality of you, ye Syracusans and confede-"rates, are well convinced, and need not at present to"be informed; for otherwise you could never have"persisted so far in this warm career of bravery and fuc-** cess: But, if there be a man amongst you whose sense** of things drops short of their real position, we shall** now throw upon it the needful illustration.
"This land, our property, the Athenians have inva-** ded; aiming, in the first place, at insiaving Sicily;** and, had this design succeeded, at inflicting an equal** fate on Peloponnesus and the rest of Greece. And** yet these very Athenians, who enjoy already the lar-
gest tract of empire that any ancient or modern State"of Greece hath at any time enjoyed, you are the first** who have bravely resisted; and of that navy, on** which they erected their incroaching pile of power, are** plainly the victors in several engagements; as again,hi** that which now approacheth, you will assuredly beat** them. For men, who have received such severe** checks in a point for which they so highly plumed** themselves, wiH for the future have a much worse o-** pinion of their own merit than if they had never con-** ceived so high a value of it; and, when all their tow-** ering pretensions are so unexpectedly blasted, their
subsequent efforts must of course drop short of their** real strength: And this, you may rest assured, is the** present state of yonder Athenians. And by parity, in** regard to ourselves^ that proportion of strength we** enjoyed at first, with which, though far inserior in** skill, we boldly and successfully presumed to with-** stand them, must now be suitably enlarged; and,f with the farther accession of this inward assurance,


"thai







OCR Output








B.V. THE PELO'PONNESIAN WAti. tj|


It so fell out indeed, immediately after the battle ofAmphipolis and the return of Ramphias from Thessaiy,that neither of the parties meddled any longer with thioperations of war, but were more inclined to a peace.The motives on the Athenian side were these;—Theyhad received a terrible blow at Delium, and a secondlately at Amphipolis: Hence they no longer entertain­ed that assured considence of their own strength, whichhad formerly occasioned them to reject all accOmmoda-1tions, as they imagined, in their then career of success,they should soon give law to their enemies. Now alsothey were under apprehensions of their dependents, lest,buoyed up by the late misfortunes of Athens, theymight the sooner be induced to revolt. And theyheartily repented now, that they had neglected the fineopportunity, which their success at Pylus gave them, ofbringing the dispute to a happy determination.
On the other hand, the Lacedæmonians acted onthese motives: — They found themselves strangely mis­taken in the events of war. , At its commencement-,they imagined, that, in the space of a few years, theyshould intirely have demolished the power of the Athe­nians, by laying their territory waste; but they had suf­fered a terrible calamity in the affair of Sphacteria, suchas never before had been the lot of Sparta. Devasta­tions now were extended over all their country, fromPylus and Cythera. Their Helots had also in numbersdeserted to the foe; and they lived in constant expec­tation that those, who yet persevered in their allegiance,gained by the solicitations of those who were fled,might, in the present low ebb of Sparta, attempt tosubvert their constitution, as had formerly been thecase. It happened farther, that the thirty years trucewith the Argives was on the point of expiring; and theArgiv.es were unwilling to renew it, unless the Cynuriawas previously restored. They judged it therefore aplain impossibility, to make head, at the fame time, a-gainst both Argives and Athenians. They had alia a
suspicion







OCR Output








200 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. B.VII.


It was the opinion of Nicias, and in general of allthe Athenians, that, " though.it was not their own in-** terest to bring on an engagement, yet it highly con-"cerned them to put a stop to the counterwork which"the enemy was raising to hinder their progress:" For,by this time, the wall of the Syracusans had only notover-reached the extreme point to which the Athenianshad brought their circumvallation: " And, should it** be extended farther, it would give the enemy this dou-** blc advantage;—a certainty of conquest whenever they** thought proper to fight, and a discretionary power"not to fight at all." Determined by these considera-tions, they drew out in order to give the Syracusansbattle.
Gylippus soon began the engagement. He had nowdrawn up his heavy-armed without the works, and at agreater distance from them than before. He had post­ed the cavalry and the darters on a wide and open spot,yet unoccupied by the works on either side, and postedthem so that they flanked the Athenians. In the ardourof the engagement, the cavalry broke in upon the leftwing of the Athenians, which was ranged against them,and intirely routed them. In consequence of which, theremainder of the army was soon deseated by the Syra­cusans, and in the greatest disorder retired for shelterbehind their works. And night no sooner came on,than the Syracusans, without loss of time, began to car­ry forwards their cwn works, which they soon extendedbeyond the Athenian circumvallation; by which theygained this great point, that they could no longer beinvested on all sides by the Athenians; and the latter,though masters in the field, were henceforwaids effectu­ally stopped srom perfecting their circumvallation.
After this, twelve (hips of the Corinthians, and Am-bracicts, and Leucadians, the remainder of the squa­dron designed for this service, having given the Athe­nian guaru-ships the slip, came into the harbour of Sy­racuse: They were commanded by Herasinides, a Co­rinthian,







OCR Output








B.VII. THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. 275


** reimbursed, on condition the forces under his com-"mand might have free departure; bur, till the mo-"ney could be paid, he would leave with them a num-*' ber of Athenians as hostages for performance, a maa*' for a talent."
Gylippus and the Syracusans refused the offer; and,resuming offensive measures, ranged their parties quiteround the eminence, and poured in their missive wea­pons upon them till the evening. This body of troopswas also sadly distressed for wane of bread and necessarysubsistence. Watching, however, for the dead and si­lent hours of the night, they were then determined tocontinue their march. They accordingly take up theirarms; the Syracusans perceive it, and sing the pæan ofalarm. The Athenians were thus convinced that theycould not dislodge without being discovered, and sogrounded their arms again, all but one party of threehundred men; for these, having forced themselves apassage through the guards, made off in the night asfast as it was possible.
So soon as the day appeared, Nicias, at the head ofhis troops, led them forwards. But the Syracusans andallies pressed upon him on all sides in the usual manner,pouring in vollies of darts and javelins. The Atheni­ans made the best of their way to reach the river Assina-rus; not only because, annoyed on all sides by the ir­ruption of the numerous cavalry and skirmishing par­ties, they concluded they should be eated of these couldthey once pass that river, but also through bodily fa­tigue and a vehement desire to extinguish their thirst."When, therefore, they are upon the bank, they rushinto the river; no longer observant of order, but eachsingle soldier intent on passing the first of the army.And the enemy, who now prefled hard upon them, hadrendered the passage already a business of toil:For, obli­ged as they were to go down in confused'heaps, they felland trampled upon one another; some, embarrassed bytheir spears and luggage, met with instant destruction
T 2 others,







OCR Output








188- THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. B. VI.


one band of heavy-armed for the guard of their counter-wall.
In the next place, the Athenians cut off the pipes,which by subterraneous ducts conveyed the drinking-water into the city: and, having farther observed thatthe Syracusans kept within their tents during the heatof the day, but that some had straggled into the town,whilst those posted at the palisades kept but a negli­gent ouard; they picked out three hundred of theirheavy-armed, and, strengthening them with a choiceparty os their light-armed soldiers, ordered them tomarch with all possible speed and attack the counter­work. The rest of their force was to march anotherway, since, headed by one of the generals, it advancedtowards the city, to employ the Syracusans in case theysallied; whilst the other detachment, headed by theother general, attacked the palisade, which coveredthe sally-port. Accordingly, the three hundred assaultand carry the palisade, which those who were postedfor its guard abandoned, and fled sor shelter behindthe works which inclosed Temenites. The pursuershowever entered with them ; but were no sooner got inthan they were again forcibly driven out by the Syra­cusans. And here some of the Argives and a smallnumber of Athenians were flain.
But now the whole army, wheeling about, demo­lished the counter-work, and pulled up the palisade.The piles, of which it was composed, they carried offin triumph, and erected a trophy.
The next morning the Athenians resumed their workof circumvallation, and continued it across the cragwhich is above the marsh and lies on the quarter osEpipolæ that looks towards the great harbour. Thiswas the shortest cut for their circumvallation down­wards, across the plain and the marsh, till it reachedthe harbour. Upon this, the Syracusans, issuing again,raised another palisade, beginning from the city, andstretching quite across the marsh. They also threw up







OCR Output








no THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR; B.VL


parting decorums where their several attachments claim­ed it; some to their friends, some to their relations,some to their own sons. The whole company movedalong with a medley of hope and lamentation; with hope,that success would attend their course; with lamentation,lest they might never meet again. The lad recollecti­on occurred — to how great a distance from their nativesoil they were going to be sent! And now that the hourof departure was come, and when this moment they weregoing to be dismissed into scenes of danger, the impressi­ons of terror were felt with much keener fense than whenthe expedition was only decreed. However, at the sight.of their present strength, of the numerous expedients ofa prosperous enterprise which their eyes beheld, theirspirits were again elated. . ><
As for the strangers and bulk of the crowd, they at­tended merely for the pleasure of gazing at the meansintended to accomplish a great and stupendous design.For never did any one State of Greece, before this time,equip by its own strength such a powerful armament.It was the finest and most glorious fleer, that to this daythe world had seen. It is true, in number of ships andheavy-armed on-board, that which sailed against Epi-daurus under command of Pericles, and that also againstPottdæa under Agnon, where by no means inferior.For those carried four thousand heavy-armed soldiers, allnative Athenians, with three hundred horsemen: Thenumber of their triremes was a hundred; fifty more werefurnished by the Lesbians and Chians, besides a largenumber, of confederates who attended those expeditions.But then they were fitted for a voyage in comparisontrifling, and in a flight and penurious manner.
On the contrary, the present equipment was calcula­ted for a length of time, and completely fitted out forboth services, as occasion might demand, either of thesea or of the land. The shipping, at the great expenceof the captains of the several triremes and of the State,was quite elaborate. The pay assigned by the public to


every







OCR Output








RVIH. THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. 353


turned the popular government. At length, with greatdifficulty, being quieted, they gave them a hearing.
The deputies remonstrated, that " not for the ruin"of Athens was this new change introduced, but"purely for its preservation — in no wise to betray it"into the hands of the enemy ; because that might*' have been done effectually upon the late approach of"its enemy to her walls, since they were in power."Every single person amongst the five-thousand was"intended to have a regular share in the administra-"tion. Their friends and relations are not treated in"an insolent manner, as Chæreas had maliciously sug-*' gested to them; nay, were not in the least molested,"but every where remained in the undisturbed posses-"fion of their property."
Though on these topics they amply enlarged, yetthey were heard with no manner of complacence, butwith manifest indignation. Different methods of pro­ceeding were recommended by different persons; butthe majority declared for sailing away at once for thePiræus. On this occasion Alcibiades first shewed him­self a true patriot; nay, as much a patriot as ever A-thenian had been: For, when the Athenians at Samoswere hurried furioufly along to invade their own selves,the plain consequence of which was giving up at onceIonia and Hellespont to their public foes, he mollifiedtheir fury; and, at a crisis when no other man livingcould have been able to restrain the multitude, he per­suaded them to desist from this strange invasion; and,by reprimanding those whose private resentments burstout most violently against the deputies, prevented mis­chief. At length, he himself dismissed them, with thefollowing answer. — That " the administration in the"hands of five-thousand he had no intention to oppose:** But he ordered them to give an immediate discharge"to the four-hundreds and to restore the council of"five-hundred to their prior state. If, farther, from a** principle of frugality, they had made retrenchments,Vol. II. A a "in


'







OCR Output








48 THE PEtOPONNESIAN WAR. B.V.


"By the Argives, in the forum, in the temple of*' Apollo:
"By the Mantineans, in the temple of Jupiter, in*' the forum: And
"All jointly to erect, by way of memorial, a bra-"sen pillar at Olympia, at the Olympics now ap-"proaching.
** If it be judged expedient, by any of the contract*** ing States, to make any additions to these articles al*"ready agreed, whatever, in pursuance of this, be*c deemed proper, by the joint determination of all"parties, the lame to be valid."
A peace and alliance, offensive and defensive, wasin this manner concluded: And those subsisting betweenthe Lacedæmonians and Athenians were not, upon thisaccount, renounced by either side.
.The Corinthians, however, who were confederates ofthe Argives, refused to accede; but, what is more,they had never sworn to the alliance, made previous tothis, between the Eleans, and Argives, and Mantine*ans,-—" to have the lame foes and the same friends."They pretended that the defensive league, already made",was quite sufficient, —" to succour one another, but"not to concur in an offensive war." In this mannerthe Corinthians were drawing off from the league, andagain warped in their inclinations towards the Lacedæ*monians.
The Olympics were solemnized this summer, rnwhich Androflhenes, the Arcadian, was for the firsttime victor in the pancrace, and the Lacedæmonianswere excluded the temple by the Eleans, so that theycould neither sacrifice nor enter the lists. They hadnot discharged the sine set upon them by the Eleans, byvirtue of the Olympic laws, who had charged them witha conveyance of arms into the fort of Phyrcon, andwith throwing some of their heavy-armed into Lepreum,* during the Olympic cessation. The fine imposed was
two







OCR Output








B.VI. THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. 97


war with the latter, about some connubial points, and acertain tract of land to which both laid claim. TheSelinuntians, farther4 assisted by their Syracuf'an allies,pressed hard upon them both by land and sea. Andhence, the Egesteans were now suggesting at Athens,that *' they ought not to forget their alliance with the*' Leonttnes, made by Laches in the former warre*questing farther, that a naval force might be sent thitherfor their succour. To this purpose many other argu­ments were alledged by them, but the principal was this:"If the Syracusans, who have overthrown the Leon-*' tines, be left in the unmolested enjoyment of their"conquest, and proceed still farther to destroy the re-"maining parties of that alliance, they will get into*' their hands the whole power of Sicily. Such an e-"vent would be attended with the utmost danger; lest*' in consequence of it, as they were Doric by descent,"they might think, themselves bound by the ties"of blood to assist with a powerful armament their kin-*' dred Dorians, and, in quality of colonies, might suc-"cour those Peloponnesians by whom they were origi-** nally planted, and thus form a combination to de-"molish the Athenian empire. In policy, therefore,"the Athenians were obliged to support the allies who"yet remained, in order to make head against the Sy-"racusans; and this the more readily, as they them-"selves would undertake to furnissi them with sums"of money equal to the exigencies of the war." Withsuch discourle the Athenians were frequently entertainedin their popular assemblies, as the Egestean embassa­dors, still urging their point, had gained many advo­cates to second their arguments. And at length it wasdecreed, that "embassadors should be previously dis-*' patched to Egesta to inspect the state of their wealth,"whether they had such sums as they talked of in the"public treasury and the temples; and also to draw** up a report of the present posture of their war againstVol. II. H "the


 







OCR Output








B.V. THE PELOFONNE^IAtf WAR. 47


"If, farther, it be agreed by the contracting Slates"to act offensively with their united forces, the com-"mand then to be equally divided among all the"States.
"That the Athenians swear to observe these arti-"cles in their own names and those of their depend-"ents; but the Argives, and Mantineans, and Eleans,*' and the dependents of these, are to swear separately,"each State for itself.
"Each party to take the oath in the most solemn fa-"shion of their own country, in the most sacred man-"ner, with the choicest victims. The terms of the
*' oath to be thus conceived: 1 will stand by the alli-
"ance, according to covenant, justly, honestly, and sin-"cerely; and I will not trangress its obligation by any"fraud or evasion whatsoever.
** To be sworn
"At Athens, by the senate and the city-magistrates:** The Presidents in course to administer the oath.
"At Argos, by the senate, and the eighty, and the*' Artynæ: The eighty to administer the oath.'"At Mantinea, by the Demiurgi, and the senate,*< and the other magistrates: The Theori and Pole-"marchs to administer the oath.
*' At Elis, by the Demiurgi, and the officers of state,"and the six hundred: The Demiurgi and the keepers"of the sacred records to administer the oath.
** These oaths to be renewed. —For which purpose,"the Athenians to repair to Elis, and to Mantinea, and"to Argos, thirty days before the Olympic games."But the Argives, and Eleans, and Mantineans, are*' to repair to Athens, ten days before the great Pana-*' thenæa.
"The articles relating to this peace, and these oaths,'* and this alliance, to be inscribed on a column of** stone,
** By the Athenians, in the citadel:







OCR Output








224 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. B.VII.


together composed the center of their arrangement, andPolyanthes, the Corinthian, commanded the fleet.
The Athenians, with three and thirty sail, under thecommand of Diphilus, weighed from Naupactus, andstood in against them. At first, the Corinthians laystill without motion; but, so soon as it was judged ne­cessary for them to act, and the signal-flag was accord­ingly hoisted, they advanced to charge the Athenians,and an engagement ensued. The contention was main­tained a long time on both fides. Three of the Co­rinthian vessels are destroyed, whilst not a single ship onthe Athenian side was funk, though seven were disabledfor service by blows they had received from the ene­mies beaks, by which their forecastles had been shat­tered by the Corinthian ships, made firm and compactfor this very purpose by stays on each side of the beak.The event of the engagement remaining doubtful,from whence both sides took occasion to claim the vic­tory, the Athenians however being masters of all theshatters of the enemy's fleet, which the wind droveright into the sea, and which the Corinthians made noefforts to recover, they dropped away from each other.Yet no kind of pursuit was attempted, and no prisonerswere taken by either: for the Corinthians and Pelo-ponnesians, who fought close under the shore, were bythat enabled to make an easy escape; but, on the Athe­nian side, not even a single ship was funk. And yet,when the Athenians were sailed back to Naupactus, theCorinthians immediately set up a trophy, as if the vic­tory was their own, because they had disabled a largernumber of the enemy. They farther looked uponthemselves as not defeated, because their enemies werenot clearly victorious: for it is the way with the Corin­thians to pronounce themselves victors if they are notladly beaten; whereas the Athenians esteem themselvesdefeated if they have not made a signal conquest. But,farther, when the Peloponnesians were retired fromtheir station, and the land-army was dismissed, the A-
thenians







OCR Output








io6 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. B.VI.


In this manner Nicias delivered his sentiments. Butthe far greater part of the Athenians who were presentdeclared for the expedition, and against the repeal ofwhat had been already decreed. Some however therewere, who made a fruitless opposition.
The person who shewed molt ardour, and pressed themmost earnestly to proceed, was Alcibiades, the son ofClinias; partly from a resolution to oppose Nicias, withwhom, in other political points, he generally clashed,and because he had calumniously glanced at him in hisspeech; but, principally, because he was ambitious ofbeing at the head of this expedition. He presumed,that not Sicily only, but Carthage also, might be re­duced by himself; and, when he should be the authorof so great a success, that he must needs abound inwealth and glory. His credit was great, at present, a-mongst the citizens; but the warmth of his passionsthrew him into larger expences than his fortune couldsupport, being sumptuous in every article of life, andespecially in horses. And it was chiefly by him that thefinal overthrow of Athens was at length occasioned.For the bulk of the city, alarmed at the great irregularrity of his private life, the excessive luxury of his dressand diet, as also at that greatness of spirit which heshewed in every single branch of his conduct, turnedout enemies to him as a man who affected the tyranny.And though, when in public commands, he conductedthe war with the utmost bravery, yet, at home, eachsingle citizen was chagrined at his manners, and displa­ced him to make room for others, which soon drew af­ter it the subversion of the State. Upon this occasion,therefore, Alcibiades stood up, and advised the Athe­nians as follows: i .
"YES; to me, ye citizens of Athens, in preserence'" toothers, this command is due;—for with this I** must needs begin, since on this point Nicias hath at-
"tacked







OCR Output








B.VI. THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. 145


Hipparchus got the title, and passed in the opinion ofsucceeding ages for one of the tyrants.
On Harmodius therefore, who was deaf to his solicita­tions, he executed his resentment in the manner pre­determined. For, a summons having been delivered toa sister of his, a young virgin, to attend and carry thebasket in some public procession, they afterwards reject­ed her; alledging, she never had nor could have beensummoned, because flie was unworthy of the honour.This affront highly provoked Harmodius; but Aristo-giton, out of zeal for him, was far more exasperated atit. The points needful to their intended revenge wereconcerted with the party who concurred in the design.But they waited for the great Panathenæa to strike theblow; on which festival alone, without incurring suspi­cion, such of the citizens as assisted in the processionmight be armed and gathered together in numbers. Itwas settled, that they themselves should begin; andthen, the body of their accomplices were to undertaketheir protection against the guards of the tyrant's family.
The persons made privy to this design were but few,from a view to a more secure execution of it. For theypresumed that even such as were not in the secret,•when the attempt was once in whatever manner begun,finding themselves armed, would seize the opportunity,and readily concur to assert their own freedom. Whentherefore the festival was come, Hippias, repairingwithout the walls to the place called Ceramicus, andthere attended by his guards, was prescribing and ad­justing the order of the procession. Harmodius andAristogiton, each armed with a dagger, advanced toexecute their parts. But, when they saw one of theiraccomplices in familiar conversation with Hippias, (forHippias was affable and courteous to all men,; theywere struck with fear; they imagined the whole oftheir plot had been betrayed, and that already they wereonly nor apprehended. Now therefore, by a sudden turnof resolution, they determined, if possible, to snatch aVol. II. L * timely


1







OCR Output








j66 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. B.VI.


** are bound to give defensive aid to the Athenians** when attacked by others, and not when they (as is** the present case) injuriously fall upon your neigh-** bours. Remember that the Rhegians, though even** of Chalcidic descent, have refused to concur with
them in replanting the Leontines, who are also Chal-** cideans. Hard, indeed, is your fate, if they, fus-** pecting some bad design to lie lurking under a fair** justification, have recourse to the wary moderate be-** haviour which appearances will not warrant; whilst** you, on the pretended ground of a rational conduct:,*t are eager to serve a people who are by nature your"foes; and join with most; implacable enemies to de-** stroy your own kindred, to whom nature hath Ib** closely attached you 1
"In such a conduct; there is no justice: The justice"lies in abetting our cause, and not dastardly shrinking"before the terror of their arms. These arms are not"terrible, would we only all combine in our mutual"defencei they are only so, if, on the contrary, we con-"tinue disunited, the point which the Athenians la-"bour with so much assiduity. For, even when sin-** g'y against Us they entered the lists, and were victo-** rious, yet they were not able to effectuate their de*** signs, but were obliged precipitacely to re-embark.** If united, therefore, what farther can we have to** fear? What hinders us from associating together** with instant alacrity and zeal? especially as we** soon shall receive an aid from Peloponnesus, who in** all the business of war are far superior to Athenians.** Reject, I fay, the vain presumption, that either it** will be equitable in regard to us, or prudential in re-** gard to yourselves, to take part with neither fide* on** pretence that you have treaties subsisting with both:** There is a fallacy in it, which, though veiled under** plausible words, the event will soon detect. For if,"through your determination to abandon his support,J* the party already attacked be vanquished, and the
** assailant







OCR Output








B.V* THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. 3


das, the Lacedæmonian, (who was commandant,) andthe garrison under his command, exerted themselves inits defence. But, when they could no longer maintainit, and at the same time the ships, sent round on pur­pose, had entered the harbour, Pasnelidas, fearing leftthe ships might take the town now left defenceless, and,when the rampart was carried by the enemy, he himselfmight be intercepted, abandons it immediately, and re­tired with all speed into the town: But the Athenianswere already disembarked and masters of the place.The land-force also broke in instantly at his heels, byrustling along through the aperture in the old wall; andsome, as well Peloponnesians as Toroneans, they flewin the moment of irruption. Some also they took alive,amongst whom was Pasnelidas, the commandant. Bra-sidas was indeed coming up to its relief, but, receivingintelligence on his march that it was taken, he retired;since he was *forty stadia off, too great a distance toprevent the enemy,.
ButCleon and the Athenians now erected two tro­phies; one upon the harbour, the other at the rampart.They farther doomed to slavery the wives and childrenof the Toroneans. The male-inhabitants, together withthe Peloponnesians and every Chalcidean that was foundamongst them, amounting in all to seven hundred, theysent away captives to Athens. The Peloponnesians in­deed Were afterwards released, by virtue of the subse­quent treaty; the rest were fetched away by the Oiyn-thians, who made exchanges for them, body for body.
About the fame time, the Bœotians, by treachery,got possession of Panactum, a fort upon the frontier,belonging to the Athenians.
As for Cleon, having established a garrison at To-rone, he departed thence, and sailed round Athos, asbound against Amphipolis.
But two vessels about this time, bound for Italy andSicily, sailed out of the harbour of Athens, having on-
* A bout 4 miles.
B 2 board







OCR Output








B.VIII. THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. 319


*' two to share the dominion with him; because they"were less desirous of power on the continent, and by** their peculiar turn of politics and military conduct"were better adapted for this purpose. They would"be glad, at the same time, to subdue the maritime"parts to their own yoke, and to that of the king all"Grecians whatever who live upon the continent. The"Lacedæmonians, on the contrary, came thither with"the sole passion to sec them free; nor in common*' prudence could it be judged likely, that men, who*' were this moment employed to deliver Grecians from"the yoke of Grecians, would in that case be stopped by"any thing but a superior force from delivering them al-so from the yoke of barbarians." He advised him,therefore, *' in the first place to wear out the strength*' of both; and, after clipping as much as possible the"wings of the Athenians, then instantly to drive the"Peloponnesians from off his coasts."
The larger part of this advice Tissaphernes deter­mined to follow, so far at least as may be gatheredfrom his actions: For, satisfied by this means with Al-cibiades, as a person who on these points gave himfound advice, and resigning himself up to his gui­dance, he paid but sorrily their subsistence to the Pelo­ponnesians, and would not suffer them to engage at sea.By the constant pretext that the Phœnician fleet wascoming up, and then with so great a superiority ofstrength the war might be brought to a clear decision,he ruined all operations of war; he suffered the vigourof their fleet, which in fact was strong and mighty, in­sensibly to moulder away, and disconcerted them soopenly, in other respects, that his motives in doing itwere no longer to be concealed.
Such was the advice which Alcibiades gave to Tissa­phernes and the king when he had opportunities, andwhich he really thought to be the best in policy : Butat the same time he had deep in his heart and in hisstudy bis own return to his country ; assured, within
himself,







OCR Output








S20 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. B.VIIL


himself, that, if he preserved it from a total destruc­tion, he might find a time to compass his own restora-tion: And nothing, he judged, could expedite his pur­pose more, than if it appeared to the world that Tissa-phernes was his friend i which also was verified by fact.
For, when the Athenian troops at Samos perceivedthat he had so strong an interest with Tissaphernes, andAlcibiades had already paved the way by sending inti­mations beforehand to the men of influence and au­thority amongst them, how desirous he was ** they"should patronize his return with the consent of the** persons of the greatest honour and worth in their** company; since only under an oligarchy, but not un-* * der an iniquitous cabal or that democracy which had"formerly banished him, could he even desire it J —"and, thus recalled, he would come and join his cares
with theirs for the public welfare, and procure them** farther the friendship of Tissaphernes— when,more than this, the officers of those Athenians at Sa­mos, and the men of highest authority amongst them,were voluntarily inclined to put an end to the demo­cracy ; — the method of bringing it about began to beagitated first in the army, and from thence soon made astir in Athens itself.
Some persons passed over from Samos, to concertmatters with Alcibiades; who gave them room to hopethat " he could render first Tissaphernes, and in the** next place the king, their friend, if they would dis-"solve the democracy; since, on this sole condition,"could the king be assured of their sincerity." Thiscontributed to enhance their sanguine expectations, thaton this their affairs might take a new turn, in whichmen of first rank in the community, who in the pre­sent management were most depressed, might recoverthe administration, and gain the ascendant over theirenemies. Returning, therefore, to Samos, they tookin the most proper persons there to be assistants to thescheme; and to the many made public declarations, that
"the







OCR Output








THE


PELOPONNESIAN WAR.


BOOK V.


Year X.J


In the following summer* the truce, made for a year*expired, of course, at the time of the Pythian Games.And, during this relaxation from war, the Athenianscaused the Delians to evacuate the isle of Delos; ima­gining that, upon the taint of some crimes long sincecommitted, they were not sufficiently pure to performdue service to the God, and that this yet was wantingto render that work of purgation complete, in which,as I have already related, they thought themselves justi­fied in demolishing the sepulchres of the dead. TheDelians settled again, so fart as they could remove them­selves thither, at Atramyttium, bestowed upon themfor this purpose by Pharnaces.
Cleon, * having obtained the commission from theAthenians, went by sea into the Thracian dominions, so
Vol. II. B soon
J Before Christ 422. ,
* Ckon is now grown perfectly convinced that he is a very hero, and hath provailed upon a majority of the people of Athens to be of the fame mind, since, serious­ly and deliberately, they intrust him with a most important and delicate commission.He now imagines he can carry all before him, and pluck all the laurels of Brasidasfrom the head of that accomplished Spartan, even without having Demosthenes forbis second. We itiay guess to what an height of insolence he was now grown from
the







OCR Output








B.V1I. THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. 271


fame time, that some claps of thunder were heard, ac­companied with rain, esfects not unusual in this season,as the year was now in autumn; and yet these accidentscontributed still more to dispirit the Athenians, who con­cluded that every thing now acted in combination fortheir destruction. During this interval of inaction, Gvtlippus and the Syracusans send off" a detachment of theirforces, to throw up a work in their rear, where theenemy had already pasted. But the Athenians sent alsoa detachment of their own body, which prevented itsexecution; and, after this, wheeling off with theirwhole body more into the plains, they halted there forthe night.
The next morning they began to move forwards a-gain. And now the Syracusans, besetting them quiteround in a circle, poured vollies os darts and arrowsamongst .them, and wounded numbers. If, indeed,the Athenians sallied out against them, they retreated;but, when the Athenians drew back, they then pressedupon their retreat i and, falling in chiefly amongst theirrear, if at any time they put small parties to flight, theystruck a consternation into the whole army. But fora long time, in such a train of skirmishings, the Athe­nians made good their ground; and, advancing after­wards the kogth of *five or six stadia, they halted in aplain. Here also the Syracusans no longer molestedthem, but withdrew to their own camp.
This night it was determined by Nicias and Demos­thenes, that, — since the army was reduced to so low acondition, and began already to be pressed with a totalfailure of provisions; since, farther, large numbers hadbeen wounded in the many incidental assaults of theenemy ; — they stiould first kindle a great number offires, and then march the whole army off, no longer bythe route which they had first projected, but by anothertowards the sea, quite contrary to that which the Syra­cusans had already preoccupied and guarded. The re-
* About I a milt. .


sidue







OCR Output








iS6 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. B.VI.


** Argives, and Mantineans, and Athenians, and the** flower of the isles, we are here assembled together,—-"how is it possible, when such brave and numerous** allies are to fight in company, that we should not* * entertain a stedfast, nay the warmest, hope, that the"victory will be our own? Nay more, as we have to** do with a promiscuous crowd, the mob of a city,"not selected for service, as we have had the honour*I to be; and who, it must be added, are but Sicilians;"who, though affecting to despise us, will never sus-"tain our charge, because their skill is far beneath their"courage.
"Let every soldier farther recal to his remembrance,"that he is now at a vast distance from his native foil,** and near no friendly land but what you shall render"such by the efforts of your valour. Such things I"am bound to suggest to your remembrance, the re-"verse, I am well convinced, of what our enemies utter"for their mutual encouragement. They undoubtedly"are roaring aloud — It is for your country you are"now to fight. But 1 tell you, that from your coun-"try you are now remote; and, as such, must either"conquer, or not without disficulty ever see it again,"since the numerous cavalry of the enemy will press"hard upon our retreat. Call therefore to mind your"own dignity and worth; advance with alacrity to"assault your foes; convinced, that your present ne-"cessities and wants are far more terrible than the"enemy you are to engage."
When Nicias had finished this exhortation, he led onhis army towards the encounter. But the Syracusanswere not yet prepared, as by no means expecting to becharged lo loon; and some of the soldiers, as the citylay so near, were straggled thither. These howevercame running with all eagerness and speed to gain theirposts; too late upon the whole; but, as each of themmet with any number intent on action,, he ranged
himself
>







OCR Output








B. VII. THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. 263


But the Athenians, quite funk with the weightof their present misfortunes, never so much as once en­tertained the- thought of recovering their mattered ves­sels Or their dead, but were contriving how to decampby favour of the approaching night. Demosthenes,upon this, repairing to Nicias, declared it as his ownOpinion, that, " manning at once the whole number** of their vessels, they mould exert their utmost effortsM to force their passage out of the harbour early the"next dawn;" affirming that "they had still a larger"number of shipping fit for service than the enemy:"For the Athenians had yet about sixty left, whereasthose of the enemy were under fifty. Nicias came intothe proposal; but, when both joined in issuing pro­per orders for the execution, the seamen flatly resused togo on-board. Dispirited as they were by the last greatblow, they had resigned all hope of ever beating theseenemies again. No measure now remained but a retreatby land, on which the universal attention was hence­forth employed.
Hermocrates, the Syracusan, had conceived a suspi­cion that such a step would be taken by them; and,foreseeing what difficulties might arise if so large an ar­my should march across the country, and, postingthemselves afresh onSicilian ground,should again resumetheir spirits and renew the war against Syracuse, he wai­ted upon those in authority, and suggested to' them, that"they odght not, by any rales of policy, to let the e-"nemy steal off by night; (inserting here his own senri-** ments of the affair;) but that all the Syraeusans and** their allies, sallying out in a body, should pre-occupy** and secure the roads, and in good time beset and put'* strong guards in all the passes." The magistrateswere sensible, as much as he who gave this advice, howreasonable it was, and declared themselves forks execu­tion: But then, " the men, who now, indulging their"joy for the late victory, were intent on recreations,"and as besides it was a festival-time, (for this very
S 4 * * day







OCR Output








*78 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. B. VII.


not least of all, the Corinthians, lest as he was rich hemight purchase the connivance of his keepers to get hisliberty, and then again might have influence enough tofoment fresh stirs to their prejudice; obtained the con­currence of their allies, and put him to death. Forthese, or reasons most nearly neighbouring to these,was Nicias doomed to destruction •, though the man, ofall the Grecians in the present age, who least deservedso wretched a catastrophe, since his whole life was oneuniform series of piety towards the Deity.*
As for those who were doomed to the quarries, theSyracusans treated them at first with outrageous seve­rity. As great numbers were crouded together in thishollow dungeon, the beams of the fun, in the first place,and then the suffocating air, annoyed them in a moreterrible manner, because the aperture was left unco­vered; and each succeeding night, the reverse of thepreceding day, autumnal and nipping, through suchvicissitudes threw them into strange disorders. Thusstraitened as they were for room, they did whateverthey had to do on one and the same spot; and the car­cases of those who died lay heaped up promiscuously to­gether, as some expired of their wounds, and othersperished through the viciflitudes of air they suffered, orsome other such deadly cause. At length the stench be­came intolerably noisome; and they were farther op­pressed with hunger and thirst i For, during the spaceof eight months, the allowance to each was only a \ co-tyl of water and two J cotyls of bread a day. Nay,whatever species of misery numbers cooped up in ibclose a confinement might be liable to suffer, not one ofthese but pressed cruelly upon them. They were allthus thronged and dieted together for seventy days:But, after this term, all but the Athenians, and such
* Mr. Hobbes, in his translation, has omitted this last comma,.f Little more than half a pint,\ About 32 solid inches,
of







OCR Output








I


!







OCR Output








THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR; B.VI.I.


Whilst Persia trembled at th'Atnenian name,Now droop'd at once I — A chaos soon succeeds,Of anarchy, destruction, and distress iLow ebb'd the State, as high it erst had flow'd.


•


 


THE







OCR Output








B.VII. THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. 261


"shore would prove more friendly to them than the"open sea, which by long prescription they had claimed"as their own province? — But, on the Syrac'usan —"Would they, who were perfectly assured that the*' Athenians wanted nothing so much as to escape —"would they fly fit ft from those who were flying?"The land-army, farther, of each party upon the beach,whilst yet the battle was alternately fluctuating on thewater, felt the utmost anxiety and the most painful Con­flict of mind; earnestly bent, as the one domestic partywas, " on gaining accumulated honours;" but fearful,as the other invading party was become, that " their"condition might loon become worse than it was al-"ready:" For, the whole hope of the Athenians cen­tering at present in that fleet, their anguish for the e-vent was more acute than ever they had felt, and wasaggravated by their own position on the beach, whichgave them a clear uninterrupted prospect of all thatpassed in the battle upon the water. The scene wasbut at a trifling distance from their eyes; and, as thelooks of all of them were not at the fame instant fastenedupon the same spectacle, if any saw their own partyprevailing, they grew at once exalted, and immedi­ately began an invocation to the gods, that the effortsof their friends might be crowned wich success; whilstanother party, beholding those who were vanquished,uttered a loud shriek which ended in a groan ; and,by the sight of such affecting turns, were more subduedin spirit than those who were actually engaged in thismedley of horror. Others, farther, who were intentupon a quarter of the engagement, where the event wasyet in suspense, and no judgement amidst such confu­sion could be formed, adjusted the contortions of theirbodies to their own inward fears, and passed that inter­val in extremity of anguilh ; for, each single moment,they were within a little ot escaping or being sunk.And thus, in one and the same army of Athenians, solong as the event was under decision, a whole medley of-l * S 3 noises







OCR Output








IB. VI. THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. 135


 


eighty; and, of these, eighty were Cretans. There wereseven hundred Rhodian flingers, and a hundred andtwenty light-armed Megarean exiles. And one horse-transport attended, which carried thirty horsemen.
So great an equipment sailed out at first to begin thewar. And, in the train of this equipment, went thirtystorefhips laden with corn, and carrying on-board thebakers, and masons, and carpenters, and all things re­quisite in the works of fortification; and also a hundredsail of small vessels, which necessity demanded to attendthe (hips that carried the stores. A large number alsoof small craft and trading vessels sailed voluntarily incompany with the fleet, for the sake of traffic. Allwhich now, in one collected body, stood away fromCorcyra across the Ionian gulf.
The whole armament being got over to cape Japygia,or to Tarentum, as they severally could make the passage,sailed along the coast of Italy, — where not one citywould receive them, would grant them a marker, or suf­fer them to land, barely permitting them to anchor andto water,—though at Tarentum and Locri even that wasdenied them, — till they arrived at Rhegium, a promon­tory of Italy. At Rhegium the whole fleet was nowassembled; and without the city (for an admission intoic•was refused them) they formed an incampment withinthe verge of Diana's temple, where also they were ac­commodated by the Rhtgians with a market.
Here, having drawn their vessels on-shore, they laysome time for refreshment; and had a conference withthe Rhegians, in which they pressed them, as they wereof Chalcidic descent, to succour the Leontines who werealso Chakideans. Their answer was, that " they should*' side with neither party, but, whatever measures were** judged expedient by the other Italians, they should"conform to those." The Athenians counsels were nowsolely bent on the affairs of Sicily, in what manner theymight most successfully make their approaches. Theyallo waited for the return of the three vessels from
K-4 Hgeita,







OCR Output








B.VIII. THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. 309


In the mean time, the armament of the Athenians,having sailed round from Corycus to Arginum, fallsin with three long vessels of the Chians, and no soonerhad descried than they, gave them chace. And now aviolent storm ariseth, and the vessels of the Chians withgreat difficulty escape into harbour: But, of the Athe­nian squadron, three, which had molt briskly followedthe chace, are disabled and drive ashore at the city ofthe Chians: The crews of them were partly made pri­soners, and partly put to the sword. The rest of thefleet got into a safe harbour, which is known by thename of Phcenicus, under the Mimas. From hencethey afterwards took their course to Ltsbos, and got allin readiness to raise fortifications.
From Peloponnesus, the same winter, Hippocratesthe Lacedæmonian, putting out to sea, with ten sail ofThurians commanded by Doricus, the son of Diagoras,and two collegues, with one ship of Laconia and one ofSyracuse, arriveth at Cnidus. This place was now inrevolt from Tissaphernes. Those at Miletus were nosooner advised of the arrival of this squadron, than thaysent them orders, with one moiety of their ships to keepguard upon Cnidus, and with the other to post them­selves at the Triopium, in order to take under theirconvoy the trading-vessels which were in their coursefrom Egypt. The Triopium is a point in the territoryof Cnidus, jutting out into the sea, and a temple ofApollo. But the Athenians, informed of their designs,and standing away from Samos, take six of the shipswhich were stationed at the Triopium: The crews, in­deed, quit their ships, and reach the shore. This be­ing done, the victors sailed directly to Cnidus; and,making an assault upon that city which was quite un­fortified, had very nearly taken it, On the next daythey renewed the assault. Yet, as the inhabitants hadtaken care to make it more secure by favour of thenight, and the men escaped from the vessels taken atTriopium had thrown themselves into the place, they
X 3 did







OCR Output








 







OCR Output













OCR Output








B.VL THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. 103


** Peloponnesians to overturn our empire, those very** Peloponnesians may probably, from the fame princi-"pie, concur wiih us to demolish the Sicilian. As"for us, the Grecians there may have reason to dread** us most if we go not at all amongst them; and,** what is next to that, if we only give them a sight** of our. power for a short time, and then withdraw."But if, acting osfensively, we incur miscarriage, they*** will instantly despise us, and join our neighbouring** foes to annoy us here. For things that are placed** most remotely from us, as likewise those which yieldno opportunity of adjusting our opinion of them by** experience, such, it is universally known, are most"apt to excite admiration. Reflect, ye citizens of A-"thens, that your present elevation of spirits is owing"to your success against the Lacedæmonians and allies.** You crouched for fear under their first attacks; till,"having gained the superiority over them, to their utter"disappointment, you instantly despised them. And"now, nothing less than Sicily can content you. We"by no means ought to be too much buoyed up by the** dilasters os our soes, but only to be so far consident as** we are able to awe their intriguing tempers. We ought"to ascribe no other view to the Lacedæmonians, than"a vigilant care to seize the first opportunity of wiping** off their disgrace by giving us a blow, and thus reco-"vering their former reputation; and that they are** most earnest on accomplishing this, since, from time** immemorial, the glory of military valour hath been"their warmest, most prevailing, passion. Our welfare"theresore, is we knew in what our welfare consists,"by no means summons us to enter the lists in be-"half of the Egesteans of Sicily, who to us are mere** barbarians; but to exert our utmost vigilance to"guard our own constitution srom oligarchical in-"croachments.
"My duty obligeth me also to remind you, that we"have had but a short respite to breathe from the ha­ll 4 ;* voc







OCR Output








INDEX.


raising the siege, 2 3 6. decamps,265. surrenders with the troopsunder his command, 274. isput to death, 278.
Demoteles, I. 333.
Dereylidas, II. 331.
Derdas, I. 45.
Dersteans, 1.214.
Dians, I. 2IO. II. 329.
DiMdeans, take Tbyssus, II. 32.dwell on mount Atbos, 74.. re­volt from the Athenians, ibid.
Diemporus, I. 123.
Diitripbes, II. 219.
Diodotus, his speech, I. 250.
Diemedon, besieges the Chians, If.299.favours the democracy,342,
Diomilus, II. 185.
Diotimus, I. 37.
Diotresbes, II. 333.
Dipbilus, II. 224.
Do/opes, I, 76.
Dorcis, I. 74.
Dcrians, in Peloponntfus, I. II.
foundersof Lacedæmon, 82,293.
bordering on the Cartons, 131.
warred upon by the Photians,
82. perpetual enemies to /c-
nians, II. 167.Dorieus, the Rbodian, I. 22;.Dorieus, the Thurian, II. 309.Dr Bans, of Thrace, I. 214.E.
Edonians, I. 77, 212, 402.
Egefteans, at war with thenuntians, II. 96. solicit aid atAthens, 97. their trick, 136.
Eleans, defeated by the Athenians,I. 147. in alliance with theCorinthians and Argi-ves, II. 28.with the Athenians, 45.
Eleu/inians, warred against .Era­ses «j, I. 137.
Elymi, It. 93.
Lmpedias, II. 19,22.
Endius, the Spartan, II. 286. em­bassador to Athens, 41. his en­mity with /f/V, 291.
Entimtis, the Cre:an, foundero( Gela, II, 9j.


Eordians, I. 212.
Epiiamnians, harrassed with sedi­tions, I. 19. beg aid at Corcy-ra, ibid, at Corinth, 20. be­sieged by the Corcyreans, 2r.reduced, 23.
Epitadas, 1. 318, 345.
Epitelidas, 1.421.
Ereclheus, I. 137.
Eretrians, at war with the Cia/-cideans, I. 13. subject and tri­butary to Athens, II. 246.
Erythraans, II. 292.
E/eonicus, II. 298.
Eualas, II. 297.
j£Wr<v&«.',tyrant of AstatusX- '49*another of the name, II. 94.
Eubulus, II. 298.
Eucles, the Athenian, I. 398.
Eucles, the Syracujan, II. 191.
Euclides, fonnderofHimera, II. 96.
Euclemon, II. 306.
Eve/peril ar, II. 240.
Euetion, II. 315.
Eumachus, I. 150.
Eumolpida, II. 325.
Eumolpus, I. 137.
Euphamidas, I. i;o, 410.
Ephtmus, his speech at Camarina,II. 168.
Eurylockus, the Spartan, I. 299,
3°3, 3°5-
Eurymachus, I. 124, 128.
Eurymedon, sent toCorcyra, I. 282.V) Sicily, 314. is fined for re­turning, 366. sent thither a-gain, II. 206. arrives at ty/-*-ca/j, 230. killed, 243.
Euryjihins, king of Micenx, I. 7.
Eurytanians, I. 259.
Euftrophus, II. 37.
Euthydemus, II. 19, 23. a com­mander at Syracuse, 206. un­successful in the last batile, 259.G.
Gf/otf, king of Syracuse, II. 95,96.Geloans, build Agrigentum, II. 95.
aid the Syracujant, 248.Gc/^, I. 209.Giauco, I. 41.
Gcaxis,







OCR Output








W j


'







OCR Output








38 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. B.V.


Lacedæmonians to agree to these proposals; that, "for"the present, a peace mould be concluded for the termK of fifty years; provided, notwithstanding, that liber-"ty remain to either party to send a challenge, when"neither was embarrassed by plague or war, and the** right of this district be then decided by arms between*f Lacedæmon and Argos, as had formerly been done *"when the victory was equally claimed on both sides;*f and that, in this case, it be not lawful to carry the*f pursuit beyond the boundaries of either Argos or La-cedæmon." These proposals, it is true, appeared atfirst to the Lacedæmonians to be foolish; but, aclength, as their necessary interest made them vastly desi­rous of the Argive friendship, they complied with thedemand, and the terms agreed on were digested intowriting. But the Lacedæmonians, before they put thelast hand to the treaty, insisted on their previous returnto Argos, and reporting it to the people; and, in cafethe ratification was given, to repair again to Lacedæ­mon, at the Hyacinthian festival, and swear obser­vance. And upon this they returned to Argos.
* Herodotus relates this remarkable piece of history in Clio. "They had a con-f* ference, (fays he,) and came to an agreement, that three hundred men on each"fide should decide the point by combat, and the land contested should remain the'* property of the victors; that both armies in the mean time should retire within"their respective dominions, nor be present at the combat, lest, by being spectators"of it, either of them, seeing their countrymen defeated, might run to their assist-*' ance. When articles were settled both armies drew off: those selected on each"fide for the combat staid behind aud engaged. They fought it out with equal reso-U lution and fortune: Of fix hundred men only three were left alive; two of them'* Argives, Alcinor and Chromius j and one Lacedæmonian, Othryadcs: These*! weie all the survivors when night came on. The Argives, as victors, ran in"haste to Argos; but Othryades, for the Lacedæmonians, having stripped the deadf bodies of the Argives, and carried off their arms lo the place where his own fide"had encamped^ continued upon the field of battle. Next morning both parties"came to learn the eyent; and then, truly, each party also claimed the victory j"one averring, that a majority survived on their fide; the other maintaining, that"even those had fled, whilst their own combatant had kept his ground and spoiledf* the dead. In short, from wrangling they came again to blows and a general engage-"ment; in which, after great slaughter on bojh fides, the Lacedæmonians obtainedf the victory."


Whilst







OCR Output








b:v. the peloponnesian war. 85


"strength will be amplified by the addition of Lace-"dæmonian aid; since it is incumbent upon them to** support us, if from no other motive, yet from the"ties of blood and a sense of honour. And thus it is** not intirely without good grounds that we can form** the resolution to withstand your esforts."
Athenians.
." NOR have we any reason to apprehend, on our** own account, that the divine benevolence will not e-
"qually exert itself for us; because neither our opini-
** ons nor our acts are worse than those of the rest
'* of mankind, either in regard to the worship of the
"gods or an acknowledgement of their providence.
** For of the divine nature we think like the rest of the
** world; and of men, that beyond a scruple they are
"impelled, by the necessary bent of their nature, to
"seize dominion wherever they have power. As for
"ourselves, we were not the authors of this constitu-
** tion, nor were we the first who digested it into prac-
** tice. We found it already in force; we have accor-
** dingly applied it, and shall leave it behind us for the
** practice of every future age; conscious that you
** yourselves, and every other State, invested with e-
** qual power, would make the fame exertion of it.
"And truly, so far as relateth to the gods, we have no
** more reason to distrust their protection than our
"neighbours. But your sentiments of the Lacedæ-
** monians are such, that you are confident of support
** from them because it will be base in them to refuse
** it. Here we bless your simplicity, but envy not
"your folly. The Lacedæmonians, we allow, amongst
** one another, and in paying all due regard to the laws
** of their country, give ample proofs of honour and
** virtue: But their behaviour towards the rest of
"mankind, though it would open a large field
*' of censure were it to be minutely examined, yet
"at present shall be shewn by one concise declara-
G 3 ** tion,







OCR Output








3o6 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. B.VIIL


and, for the rest, as many as exceeded that number,pay was to be furnished at the race of only three oboli aday.
The fame winter, the Athenians now lying at Samoshad been reinforced by the arrival of five and thirty failfrom Athens, under the command of Charminus, andStrombichides, and Euctemon j and they had fartherassembled all their ships from Chios, and others. Aresolution was therefore taken, after assigning each hispeculiar command by lot, to make up against it with atnaval force, and awe Miletus j but to send against Chiosboth a naval and a land force; and this accordinglythey put in execution. For, in fact, Strombichides,and Onomacles, and Euctemon, with a squadronof thirty sail and a body of transports, which had on­board a detachment from the thousand heavy-armedwhich came against Miletus, stood away for Chios, asthis service had fallen to them by lot; but the rest of thecommanders who now remained at Samos, having un­der them seventy-four ships, were quite lords of the sea,and sailed boldly up to awe Miletus.
Astyochus, who happened at this juncture to be inChios, selecting hostages as a prevention against treache­ry, thought proper for the present to desist, when heheard of the arrival of the squadron under Theramenes,and that their engagements with ThTaphernes were
above three Mi a day. And hence it seems pretty clear, that the complement rfa Fcloponnesian skip of war was two hundred men.
; I hare another proof ac hand, which will confirm what bath already .been said,and seive at the same time to ascertain the number of men on-board a ship of war.In the sixth book Thucydidet fays, the Egesleans brought to Athens sixty talents, asa month's pay for sixty (hips. He fays also, that in the Sicilian expedition the daily pay-ps the Athenian seamen was raised to a drachma a man. Now a talent a month,reckoning thirty days to the month, is two mime a day; and two mirnt are just two-hundred drachmas. Hence, it is plain, the complement of an Athenian thip was twohundred men; and, according to the former computation, that of a Peloponnefiastihip was, as might reasonably be expected, exactly the fame. This is a farther con­firmation that there is a mistake in the printed copies of the original, as was (aidabort; where, instead of three talents, which amount but to 581/. 51.sttrssttg, daouldhave been read thirty talents, amounting in Englisli money to 5812/, 101.
much







OCR Output








B.V. THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. 53


far as the frontiers of Epidauria, and then refused toact. And, during the space of time that the Argiveswere in Epidauria, embassies from the several Statesheld a congress at Mantinea, ac the request of the A-thenians; and, proceeding to a conserence, Epharru-das, the Corinthian, remonstrated, that "their words** were by no means consistent with their actions; for,** whilst they were here sitting together upon the terms"of peace, the Epidaurians and allies and the Argives** were opposing one another in arms: That, consc-** quently, the first thing to be done was to send depu-** tations on both sides to disband those armies, and"then orderly to proceed to treat of peace." Yield­ing, therefore, to the justice of such a remonstance,they fetched the Argives out of Epidauria; and, retur­ning to the congress, they were not able even then taagree together: Upon which the Argives once more en­tered Epidauria, and resumed the ravage.
The Lacedæmonians now had taken the field, andwere advanced to Caryæ •> but, as now again the vic­tims sacrificed portended no success to a campaign, theyonce more withdrew.
The Argives also, after ruining about a third of theterritory of Epidauria, were returned home. In thisincursion they were assisted by one thousand heavy-armedAthenians, with Alcibiades at their head; who, havingheard that the Lacedæmonians had now left the field,as their service was now no longer needful, marched a-way. And in this manner the summer passed.
In the beginning of the next winter, the Lacedæmo­nians, unknown to the Athenians, threw a body of mento the number of three hundred, with Agesippidas ascommandant, into Epidaurus by sea. Upon this, theArgives repaired instantly to Athens, with remonstran­ces, that, " though it was explicitly mentioned in the** treaty that no enemy should be suffered to pass"through their respective dominions, yet they had** permuted the Lacedæmonians to make this passage
E 3 "by







OCR Output








B.VIIT. THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. 289


Expeditious sailing was earnestly solicited; but the Co­rinthians declared a reluctancy to go the voyage tillthey had celebrated the Isthmian games, which were athand. To remove this obstacle, Agis declared him­self ready to have the whole procedure charged to hisown account, that they might be cleared from a breachof the Isthmian cessation. The Corinthians not com*plying with this proposal, and delay necessarily result­ing from it, the Athenians gained by this an earlier dis*covery of the negotiation of the Chians; and, dispatch­ing Aristocrates, one of their generals, charged themopenly with the guilt of such a procedure. The Chi­ans as strenuously denying the charge, they commandedthem to send away their shipping forthwith to Athensby way of pledge for their safety.
The Chians accordingly sent seven. But the detach­ment of these was intirely owing to the popular partyof that island, who had been kept in utter ignoranceof the late negotiation. The few, who were privy to it,had no mind to incur the popular resentment beforethey were enabled to stem its fury; especially as nowthey had resigned all hope of the arrival of the Pelopon-nesians, whose motions were exceeding dilatory.
In the mean time the Isthmian games were solem­nized j and at these the Athenians, who had the regu­lar invitation sent them, assisted in form. The practicesof the Chians became here more apparent to them thanever. No sooner, therefore, were they returned to A-thens, than they put all the needful expedients in rea­diness, to prevent the squadron, which was to fail fromCenchreæ, from passing undiscovered.
When the festival was over, the latter, with one andtwenty fail, under the command of Alcamenes, stoodout to sea in order for Chios. And the Athenians, ad­vancing against them, at first with an equal numberos ships, stood off again into open sea j but, when thePcloponnesians would not follow them far, but stoodin to the land, the Athenians disappeared; for, having
Vol. II. U amongst







OCR Output








B.VIII. THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. 373


deed in their present situation: For hitherto, afraid ofthe naval strength of the Peloponnesians, because of therebusfs they had lately received from it, and the cala­mitous event of the Sicilian expedition, from this mo­ment they stopped all fruitless self-accusations or ground­less exaggerations of the enemy's ability by sea. Someships of the enemy in fact they take; for instance, eightChian, five Corinthian, two Ambraciot, two Bœotian;but, of Leucadian, and Lacedæmonian, and Syracu-san, and Pellenean, a single one of each: But then theysufsered the loss of fifteen ships of their own.
After erecting a trophy upon the cape of Cynos-sema,and picking up the shatters of the fight, and giving up,under truce, their dead to the enemy, they dispatcheda trireme to Athens, to notify the victory. On the ar­rival of this vessel, those at home, after hearing thenews of this unhoped-for success, greatly resumed theirspirits, which had been dejected by the recent misfor­tunes at Eubœa and the fad efsects of their sedition,and hoped the State might again resume its power ifthey cheerfully exerted their efforts in its behalf.
On the fourth day after the battle, the Athenians,having diligently resitted their fleet at Sestus, sailed a-gainst Cyzicus, which had revolted: And, descryingeight ships from Byzantium riding at anchor underHarpagium and Priapus, they crouded fail towardsthem j and, having in battle upon the shore deseatedtheir crews, made prizes of them all. Repairing thenceagainst Cyzicus, which was quite unfortified, they re­duced it once more, and exacted large contributionsfrom it.
But, during this interval, the Peloponnesians madea trip from Abydus to Eleus, and brought off as manyof their own ships which had been taken as were able to, fail j the residue the Eleusians burnt. They also dis­patched Hippocrates and Epicles to Eubcea, to setchup their fleet from thence.
B b 3 About







OCR Output








164 THE PELOPONNESIANWAR. B.VI.


no inclination to unite together in our common de-** fence, in order to give them most signal proofs,** thatinSiiily are neither Ionians, nor Hellespontins,** noriflanders, who will be slaves, though ever chan-"g'ng their master, one while to the Mede, and soon"after to whoever will please to govern — but, on the"contrary, that we are Dorians, who from Pelopon-"nesus, that seat of liberty and independence, came to** dwell in Sicily. Shall we, therefore, protract our u-"nion, till, city after city, we are compelled to a fub-** mission? we—? who are convinced that thus only"we can be conquered, and when we even behold that"thus our foes have dressrd up their plan; amongst** some of our people scattering dissentions, setting o-** thers to war down each other for the mighty recom-** pence of their alliance, cajoling the rest as may best** soothe the pride or caprice of each, and avail themselves** of these methods to work our ruin? We even in-* * dulge the wild imagination, that, though a remote** inhabitant of Sicily be destroyed, the danger can ne-** ver come home to ourselves; and that he who pre-** cedes us in ruin is unhappy only in and for himself.
"Is there now a man amongst you who imagines,"that merely a Syracusan, and not himself, is the ob-** ject of Athenian enmity, and pronounceth it hard** that he must be exposed to dangers in which I only** am concerned? Let such an one with more solidity"reflect; that, not merely for what is mine, but equally** also for what is his own, he should associate with me,"though within my precincts; and that this may be** done with greater security now, since as yet I am not"quite destroyed, since in me he is sure of a stedfast** ally, and before he is bereaved of all support may** hazard the contention. And let him farther rest as-** lured, that it is not the fole view of the Athenian to** bridle enmity in a Syracusan j but, under the colour"of that pretext, to render himself the more secure,"by gaining for a time the friendship of another.


* * If







OCR Output








B.VI. THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. i8x


"That these or any of these points be executed with"dispatch and vigour, dependeth, ye Lacedæmo-"nians, on yourselves alone. I can confidently aver*' that all are feasible, and I think I shall not prove mis-M taken in my sentiments. I ought not to suffer in the*' opinion of any Lacedæmonian, though, once ac-*' counted the warmest of her patriots, I now strenu-*' oufly join the most inveterate foes of my cuuntry;"nor ought my sincerity to be suspected by any as if I** suited my words to the sharp resentments of an exile,** I am driven from my country, through the malice"of men who have prevailed against me; but not*' from your service, if you hearken to my counsels."Your enmity is sooner to be forgiven, who have hurt*' your enemies alone, than their's, who by cruel treat-"ment compel friends to be foes. My patriotism is''* far from thriving under the injustice I have suffered;"it was merely an effect of gratitude for that protection". I once enjoyed from my country. Nor have 1 reason"at present to imagine, that against my country I am"now going to march, so much as to recover some** country to myself, when at present I have none at all."And 1 judge the person to be a true lover of his
"country, not him who, exiled from it, abandons
** himself without a struggle to his own iniquitous fate,
"but who, from a fondness for it, leaves no pro-
"ject unattempted to recover it again.
"As these are my sentiments, I may fairly, ye La-*' cedæmonians, insist upon your acceptance of my ser-** vice without diffidence or fear, whatever dangers or"whatever miseries may hereafter result. You well*' know the maxim, which universal consent will evince
"to be good, that if, when an enemy, I hurt you
*' much, when I am now become your friend, I can*' help you more. Nay, for the latter I am better qua-lifted on this very account, that I am perfectly ac-"quainted with the state of Athens; whereas 1 was on-** ly able to conjecture at your's. And, as you are
N 3 "now







OCR Output








B. VL THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. 117


** and procured also from Crete, not forgetting slingers;** and, in fine, that whatever should be judged in any
degree expedient should be provided in good time,"and carried along with them in the fleet."
This the Athenians had no sooner heard, than theyinstantly voted, '».." That the generals were invested** with absolute authority, to determine the numbers"of the expedition, and the whole procedure of the"voyage, at their own discretion, as might best pro-"mote the public welfare."
In pursuance of this, the preparations were immedi­ately in hand. Summonses for the quotas adjustedwere sent to their dependents, and the levies at homewent briskly forwards. Athens was now finely recover­ed from the pestilence and a long-continued destructivewar; both in a multitude of young men now arrived atthe vigour of their age, and an increase of the publicrevenues by favour of the peace. By this means all theneedful supplies were more easily provided; and thuswere the Athenians busied for the present in fitting outtheir armament.
But, at this very juncture, almost all the statuesof Mercury, wherever found within the precincts of A-thens, and according to the established custom theywere very numerous, both in the porches of privatehouses and the public temples, f * * * * * had theirfaces disfigured in the space of one night. The authorsof this outrage were not known but large rewardswere osfered by the State in order to discover them, anda decree was also passed, that, "if any person knew of the
'}- I have omitted two words in the original, because I cannot translate them withany precision or clearness. They are n ftToesymoc, toyouria, of us tuadratum, faysone Latin translator; opus ex Upide fuadrato, fays another. Mr. Hoiies hath it.Mercuries of square stone: How such a description can be applicable to a statue willbe hard to conceive. Whether they allude to the inclosure in which the statues wereerected, or to the form of the pedestals, or whether a Mercury was carved on any orall the sides of a souare stone, I am not able to decide. The Mercuries were verynumerous j and many of them, it is certain, were strange, uncouth, and very bung­ling performances.
I 3 * * commission







OCR Output








B.V. THE PELdPONNESlAN WAR. 35


misled them, promising to send an embassy of their* ownto Argos, to perfect the alliance.
But, in the mean time, it was judged to be previous­ly expedient, that the Bœotian-rulers, and the Corin­thians, and the Megareans, and the embassadors fromthe allies of Thrace, should mutually interchange theiroaths, " to act in support of one another, if, upon an/M occasion, such support might be requisite, and roen-"ter neither into war nor peace without joint-consent;"and then the Bœotians and Megareans (for these actedin union) to form a league with the Argives. But, be­fore such exchange of oaths, the Bœotian-rulers com­municated the whole of the plan to the four Bœotiancouncils, in whom the sovereignty is lodged; recom­mending it, as worthy their confirmation, that " what-"ever cities were willing might mutually interchange"such oaths for their reciprocal advantage." Yet theBœotians who composed the councils refused a confir­mation; apprehensive it might tend to embroil themwith the Lacedæmonians, should they pledge such anoath to the Corinthians, who were now abandoning theLacedæmonian interest: For the rulers had not madethem privy to the scheme from Lacedæmon, how"Xenares and Cleobulus, of the college of Ephori,*' and their friends, advise them, to enter first into"league with the Argives and Corinthians, and then"to extend it to the Lacedæmonians." They had pre­sumed that the supreme council, though they secretedthese lights, would not resolve against a plan whichthemselves had pre-digested and recommended to them.But now, as this affair took so wrong a turn, the Corin­thians and embassadors from Thrace went home with­out effect; and the Bœotian-rulers, who had .all alongintended, in case their scheme had passed, to persect analliance with the Argives, made no farther report to the•councils in relation to the Afgives» sent no embassy toArgos in consequence of thejnpromise^Jiiu, suffered the
D 2 _ whole
r - r







OCR Output








296 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. B.VIII.


** And, if any revolt from the Lacedæmonians and** consederates, be they declared enemies, in the fame** manner, to the king"
This alliance was now formally concluded.
Immediately after this, the Chians, who had mannedout ten additional Ihips, stood away to Anæa, beingdesirous to pick up some information of what was doingat Miletus, and at the fame time to cause the revolt osthe cities. Here, being reached by an order from Chal-cideus to return back to Chios, with an intimation thatAmorges with a land-army would soon be upon them,they sailed away to the temple of Jupiter. From hencethey descry sixteen ships, which Diomedon was bring­ing up from Athens, from whence he had sailed some­what later than Thrasycles. Upon this discovery theyfled amain with a single ship to Ephcsus, but with therest of their fleet to Teos. Four indeed of the num­ber, which their crews had abandoned, the Athenianstake; yet all the hands escaped on shore; but the re­mainder reach in safety the city of the Telans. Afterthis, the Athenians stood away into Samos, But theChians, putting again to sea with the residue of theirships, arid attended by a land-force, caused Lebedostorevolt, and also Eræ. And, these points carried, boththe land-force and the squadron returned respectively totheir own homes.
About the fame time, the twenty fail of Feloponne-sians, which had been chased into Piræus, and layblocked up there by an equal number of Athenians,having made an unexpected sally upon the enemy, andgot the better in a naval engagement, take four of theAthenian ships; and, sailing away for Cenchreæ, wereagain fitting put for the voyage to Chios and Ionia.Astyochus also came down thither from Lacedæmonas admiral, in whose hands the whole command at seawas now lodged.







OCR Output








266 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. B. VII.


or an old comrade, moving off; throwing their armsabout their necks, and fo dragged along whilst theycould keep their hold; but, when strength and bodilyvigour tailed and left them destitute or resource, theygave them the last adieu, not without a shower of cur­ses and a hideous howl. By such cutting incidents thewhole army was silled with tears and a wild irresolution;fo that they could not depart without the highest regret,though from a spot so hostile, where they had sufferedmore than tears could alleviate; and the dread,of more,which yet might be impending, was inexpressible. De­jection of the head and self-accusation were generalthrough all the troops; and they resembled nothing lessthan a large subjugated city, whose numerous inhabi-tants were escaping from the fury of a sack; for the a-mountof those, who were now marching off together,was not less than forty thousand men.
Of these, the generality carried off merely what ne­cessary subsistence they had scraped together; but theheavy-armed and horsemen, contrary to custom, werenow obliged to carry their own sustenance themselvesbeneath their armour; some, because they had none;others, because they durst not trust their servants. Thedesertions had for a long time been large, but of late ingreater numbers than ever. Neither were they thusprovided with susficient stores for there was no longerany corn to be found in the camp. Nay, truly, thegeneral calamity and equability of misfortunes, whichin many cafes alleviate the pain as numbers are in­volved, were unable to render the present evils in anydegree supportable; especially when the thought oc­curred, srom what a height of splendor and precedingglory, to what a plunge and miserable state they werenow reduced! For, a most cruel turn of fortune thisreally proved to a Grecian army; who, coming hitherto inflave others, were departing now with the fad al­ternative of fearing to be made slaves themselves; and,instead of the prayers and pæans with which they first
began







OCR Output








14. THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. B,V,


suspicion that some cities of Peloponnesus would revoltfrom them to the Argives, which proved afterwardstrue.
Both parties, then, being respectively influenced bysuch considerations, an accommodation was judged to beexpedient. The anxiety of the Lacedæmonians aboutit was not the least, as they were eagerly bent on reco­vering their prisoners that had been taken at Sphacteria;for they were all citizens of Sparta, of the first rank,and allied to the most honourable families. They hadbegun to solicit their liberty so soon as ever they weretaken; but the Athenians, flushed with conquest, atthat time disdained to treat. Yet, after the blow recei­ved at Delium, the Lacedæmonians, knowing then theywere become more tractable, laid hold of the favourablejuncture, and obtained a cessation of arms for a year,in which space they were, by article, to hold mutualconferences, in order to settle an accommodation for alonger time. And since the Athenians had now againmore lately been totally defeated at Amphipolis, and aswell Cleon as Brafidas was dead, both of whom had moststrenuously opposed an accommodation; the latter, be­cause he was successful and reaped glories in war; theformer, because, in a season of tranquillity, his villa-nies must needs be detected, and his bold calumniationslose all credit; the persons, who at present were chief inthe management of either state, were more strongly dis­posed than ever to adjust disputes. These were, Pleisti-onax, the son of Pausanias, king of the Lacedæmonians,and Nicias, the son of Niceratus, by far the most suc­cessful general of that age. Nicias desired it, as hither­to he had never been deseated, and was bent on securinghis own prosperity on a lasting foundation, on obtaininga relaxation of toils for himself, and of their present bur­dens for his fellow-citizens, and on leaving his name il-Justrious to posterity, as one who had never involvedhis country in cala'mity. These views, he judged,could only be accomplished by vacuity from danger, by
exposing







OCR Output








B.VIII. THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. 333


encouraging the men of power amongst the Atheniansto join their efforts with them for the erection of anoligarchy, though a party was very busy in opposingthem, with a view to quash the projected alteration.The Athenians, farther, at Samos had in private con­ferences come to a resolution — " to think no longer." of Alcibiades, since he shewed himself so averse to* ' join them, and in fact was by no means a proper"person to have a share in an oligarchical administra-"tion: — Bur, merely from a principle of self-preser-"vation, as now they were environed with dangers,*' they should take all possible care that the project:*' should not drop in the execution. — That, farther,"they should prosecute the war with vigour, and con-"tribute largely towards it from their own private"purses, and answer every other exigence of service,*' since, no longer for others, but their own sakes, they*' must continue the struggle." Determined, there­fore, to proceed in this manner, they dispatch Pisanderand half the former deputation once more to Athens, tomanage the execution of the project there: To whom,farther, instructions were given, at whatever places intheir dependency they should touch upon the voyage,to set up the oligarchy. The other half they sent se­verally about to other of the dependent States. Dio-trephes also, who was now at Chios, but appointed totake upon him the command of the Thracian pro­vinces, they ordered away immediately to his post.
Diotrephes, upon his arrival at Thasus, dissolved thepopular government. And, in the second month atmost aster this, the Thasians fortified their city, as menwho no longer cared for an aristocracy under Athenianinfluence, but were in daily expectation of receivingliberty from the Lacedæmonians: For a number oftheir countrymen, driven out by the Athenians, werenow refuged among the Peloponnesians. These werelabouring the point with their correspondents in Tha­sus, to bring off their shipping, and declare a revolt.
'The







OCR Output








B.VI. THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. 115


*' were indebted to a parallel coincidence of events*' for the vast enlargement of their strength and empire,** when the Mede, who gave out that he aimed the blow*' at Athens, was, contrary to all human expectation,"disconcerted by a series of errors that were purely his"own. And some such fortunate coincidence, in our"own behalf, we have at present all imaginable rea-"son to expect.
"Let us therefore with active resolution put our do-"mestic affairs into a posture of defence, and dispatch"our embassadors to the SicuJi, to keep firm in our*' friendship such as are already our friends, and to** endeavour to procure the friendship and concurrence*' of the rest. Nay, let our embassies regularly com-*f. plete the whole circuit of Sicily, where they may re-'* present the common danger which equally threatens*f them all. Let them, farther, cross over to Italy to"procure for us their defensive alliance, or at least to*' negotiate a denial of reception to the Athenians. I"also judge it adviseable to fend to Carthage: For even** the Carthaginians are not exempted from the present"dangers, but have been ever under apprehensions of*' receiving from them a visit at Carthage. It mayf perhaps effectually occur to their thoughts, that,"should they now abandon us, the storm must soon** extend itself to them; by which they may be deter-*' mined either secretly or openly, by some expedient»* or other, to vindicate our cause. And, were their*' inclination equal to their power, no people on the*' globe could so easily redress us. For they are pof-"sesied of an immensity of wealth, which gives an easy"and prompt completion to the schemes of war and to"every human enterprize. Let us send, farther, to La-*' cedæmon and Corinth, requesting the dispatch of*' immediate succours hither, and the renewal of the war'* against the Athenians.
"There is one point more, which in my opinion is"more critical and important than all the rest: and. I which,


 







OCR Output








254 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. B/VII.


** there will no longer be able to repulse the united as-"faults of their domestic foes and such foreign inva-"ders. Nay, the infallible result must be, that you at** once put on the chains of Syracusans, against whom** you are conscious with what intentions you at first** came here, whilst your country must be forced ro"submit to a Lacedæmonian bondage. Now, there-** fore, summon all your courage, to earn the day in** which your own liberty and that of Athens is to be"the victor's prize: and let each individual amongst** you invigorate himself with the thought; nay, let it** throw spirit and life into the whole army, — that** these who are now to engage on-board this present"fleet are the whole of the land and naval force of** your country; arc the surviving supports of the** State, and the great Name of Athens. In so mo-** mentous a conflict, whoever amongst you excels in** military skill or inward bravery, that person had ne-"ver so fine an opportunity to give demonstration of** his superior worth, or to perform a great service for** himself or for the welfare of his country."
Nicias, after he had finished this earnest exhortation,ordered them to repair directly to their posts on-boardthe fleet.
As all this hurry of preparation lay within their view,Gylippus and the Syracusans could not escape the con-victon that the Athenians were bent on another engage­ment. They had, moreover, received intelligence ofthe new project of the grappling-irons. As, therefore,they had provided against every thing besides, they alsomade provision to counterwork that project. For thispurpose, they had covered the prows and almost thewhole gunnel of their ships with hides; that, when thegrappling-iron was thrown, it might slip off and catchno hold. And no fooner were all their preparationscompleted, than the Syracusan generals, in concert with
Gylippus,
i







OCR Output








B.VII. THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. 207


•twenty talents of silver; impowered, farther, to as­sure them, that "a large reinforcement will soon come"up, as the State had seriously interested itself in their"welsare." Demosthenes stayed behind to forwardthe equipment, and was intended to set out on the firstapproach of spring. He was busied in assembling to­gether their contingents from the dependent States, andin levying amongst them both money, and shipping,and soldiers.
The Athenians farther send out twenty fail, to cruizeon the coasts os Peloponnesus, and to take care that noone passed over from Corinth and Peloponnesus into Si­cily. For the Corinthians, upon the arrival of the em­bassadors, and the advice they brought, that "the face"of affairs was much altered for the better," (pridingthemselves in the reflexion that their former equipmenthad arrived in time to contribute to this turn,) becamenow more alert than ever, and got transports in readi­ness to carry over a body of their own heavy-armed intoSicily, whilst the Lacedæmonians were intent on doingthe fame from other parts of Peloponnesus. The Co­rinthians, sarther, manned out five and twenty fail; de­signing to hazard an engagement with the guard-shipsstationed at Naupactus, or to disable the Athenians wholay there from giving their transports the least molesta­tion, by keeping their own triremes ready ranged in or­der of battle in the very face of that squadron.
. The Lacedæmonians also were preparing for an inva­sion of Attica, in pursuance of a former resolution, andin compliance farther with the pressing instances of bothSyraculans and Corinthians. They had no sooner heardot the reinforcement intended to be sent by the Athe­nians to Sicily, than, by making a diversion, they de­signed to stop its execution. Alcibiades also continuedwarmly importuning them to execute his plan of forti­fying Decelea, and to proceed briskly with the war.
* 3875/. Stirling,
But







OCR Output








366 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. B.VlIf.


to come over from Ionia, though averse to the oligar­chy, in order to prevent the ruin of their own relationsand the total destruction of their country: And, in themean time, Hellespont, Ionia, the isles even up to Eu-bœa, in a word, the whole empire of Athens, musthave been their own. Yet, not in this instance only,but many others, the Lacedæmonians shewed them­selves most commodious enemies for the Athenians toencounter: For, as nothing differed more than theirrespective tempers; the one being active, the other stow;enterprising these, but timorous those, especially in na­val competitions; they gave them many advantages.The truth of this the Syracusans most plainly (hewed,who very nearly resembled the Athenians in disposition,and so warred against them with the highest spirit andsuccess.
Terrified, however, at these tidings, the Atheniansmade a shift to man out twenty vessels, and convenedan assembly of the people, on the first report of theirloss, in the place which is called the Pnyx, and wheregenerally that assembly was held. In this they put anend to the administration of the sour-hundred, and de­creed " the supreme power to be vested in the Jive-"thousand, which number to confist of all such citi-
zens as were enrolled for the heavy armour; and*' that no one should receive a salary for any public ma-** gistracy; whoever offended in this point they de-"dared a traitor." Other frequent assemblies wereafterwards held, in which they appointed Nomatheta*and filled up the other posts in the government. Andnow at least, though for the first time in my opinion,the Athenians seem to have modelled their government
* The general course of appointing Nomatbtta was by lot. Their number in thewhole was a thousand and one. Their business was not, as the nane seems to im­ply, to make new laws, since that belonged to the lupreme power lodged in the peo­ple; but to. inspect such as were already made, to re-considcr such as were thoughtto be, or were complained of as, grievous, aud tegularly report fab as ought to becontinued or ought to be repealed.
aright.







OCR Output








to THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR; B.V.


his succours were arrived; and though he knew his mo­tions could not be concealed, he went off, and orderedthe signal to be given fora retreat; commanding fartherthat the lest wing should file off first, which indeed wasthe only method of drawing off securely to E'ion. Butas they seemed to him to be long about it, he wheeledoff himself at the head of the right \ and thus, exposinghis men to the missive weapons of the enemy, was draw­ing off his army.
At this instant Brasidas, perceiving it was time to at­tack, since the army of the Athenians was already inmotion, says to those about him, and to all that werenear, —" These gentlemen wait not for us; that plainly"appeareth by the shaking of their spears and heads;"for those who make such motions are not used to stay"for the enemy's approach. But let somebody throw me"open the appointed gates, and letus boldly and with all"speed sally out against them." In effect, Brasidas,issuing at the gates of the intrenchment, and the first ofwhat was then the long-wall, advanced with all speed di­rectly along the road, where now standeth the trophy,to be seen by those who pass along by the strongest partof the town, and, falling upon the Athenians, dismayednot only at their own irregular situation, but also terri­fied at his bold attack in the very center of their army,he putteth them to the rout. And now Clearidas, sal­lying out according to order at the Thracian gates, wasadvancing to second him. The consequence was, that,by such an unexpected and sudden assault on both sides,the Athenians were thrown into the highest confusion.Their left wing, which inclined the most towards Eton,as having filed-off first, was instantly broken, and fled.These were no sooner dispersed in flight, than Brasidas,advancing to the attack of the right, is wounded: — Hedropped;—but the Athenians are not sensible of it.Thole who were near him took him up, and carried himoff. This accident, however, enabled the right wingof the Athenians to maintain their ground the longer;
though







OCR Output








228 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. B.VII.


Great parr of this day was spent in advancing to­wards, and retiring from, one another, and in recipro­cal endeavours to seize advantages; but neither sidewas able to execute any remarkable piece of service,excepting that the Syracusans lunk one or two of theAthenian ships; upon which they parted, and at thefame time the land-army drew off from the intrench-ments.
The day following the Syracusans lay quiet, asford­ing the entmy no room to guess at their future designs.
But Nicias, conscious to himself that hitherto no ad­vantages had been gained by sea, and fully expectingthat the enemy would repeat their attempt, obliged thecaptains of the triremes to repair their ships if any wifedamaged, and stationed ihe transports before the piles,which they had driven down in the sea, to secure theships, and lock up as it were that space in which theylay. The transports he ranged in a line, at the distanceof the breadth of two * plethra from one another; that,in case a ship was repulsed, it might run in hither as a.place of scqurity, and might again stand out withoutany molestation. In persecting these dispositions the
'Athenians were all this day employed from morning tonighf.
The next day, the Syracusans, earlier in the morn­ing than before, and with the fame parade of their landand naval force, came out to attack the Athenians.Now again, facing each other in the lines of engage­ment, they spent great part of the day in the same en-
, deavours as before to over-reach and surprise one ano­ther; till, at length, Aristo, the son of Pyrricus, aCorinthian, and the most expert seaman in the fleet ofSyracuse, persuades the commanders of that fleet todispatch their orders to the magistrates within the city,—"with all expedition to bring the provisions which"were for sale down to the beach of the sea, and hold"the market there; nay, farther, to compel all those
* A plttbnti is said by seme to contain 1444, by others, 1000 square feet.
** who







OCR Output








B.VI. THE PEtOPONNESIAN WAR; 159


then gathered up the bones of theif own. Of theAthenians and their allies about fifty in all were" (lain.And now, with all the pillage they had made of theenemvj they sailed back to Catana.
This was owing to the season of the year, now ad­vanced to winter. It was no longer judged possible forthem to be able to continue the war in their presentpost before they had procured a supply of horse fromAthens, and had assembled others from their confede­rates in Sicily, that they might not be entirely exposedto the horse of the enemy. They were also intent oncollecting pecuniary aids in those parts, and some wereexpected from Athens. —" They might also obtain** the Concurrence of some other cities, which they"hoped would porve more tractable, since they had"gained a battle: They wanted, farther, to furnish'*f themselves with provisions and all necessary stores,"which might enable them early in the spring to make"new attempts on Syracuse." Determined by theseconsiderations, they sailed back to Naxus and Catana,in order to winter there.
The Syracusans, after they had performed the obse­quies of their slain, called a general assembly of thepeople. And on this occasion Hermocrates, the son ofHermon, (a man who was inferior to none in all otherbranches of human prudence, who for military skillwas in high reputation, and renowned for bravery,)standing forth among them, endeavoured to encourage"them, and prevent there being too much dispirited b/their late defeat.
He told them, " that in courage they had not been"worsted, but their want of discipline had done them** harm: and yet the harm suffered by that was not** near so great as they might justly have expected; efpe-** cially when, no better than a rabble of mechanics,** they had been obliged to enter the lifts against theI* most experienced soldiery of Greece: That what hurt** them most was too large a number of generals, and1 ;- " "the







OCR Output








B.V. THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. 4r


** peace in order to divert the Argives from their alii-"ance, that again they might attack the Athenians"when left alone." Nay farther; upon the first dissa­tisfaction between them, he secretly dispatchech his e-missaries to Argos, exhorting them, " at his invita-"tion, to come to Athens, in company with the Man-*' tineans and Eleans, and solicit an alliance, since op-"portunity favoured, and his whole interest should be"exerted in their support."
The Argives, having heard these suggestions, andbeing now convinced that the Bœotian separate alliancehad been made without the privity of the Athenians,who, on the contrary, were highly discontented at theLacedæmonian proceedings, took no farther noticeof their embassy at Lacedæmon, though sent expresslythere to negotiate an accommodation, but recalled alttheir attention from thence to the Athenians. They re­flected, that Athens, a State which from long antiquityhad been their friend, which was governed by a demo­cracy in the same manner as their own, and which waspossessed of a great power at sea, could most effectuallysupport them in ease a war should break out againstthem. In short, they lost no time in dispatching theirembassadors to the Athenians to propose an alliance,who were accompanied by embassies from the Eleansand Mantineans.
A Lacedæmonian embassy also arrived in great haste,composed of Philocharidas, and Leon, and Endius,persons who were judged most acceptable at Athens.They were afraid lest the Athenians, in the heat of theirresentments, should clap up an alliance with the Ar­gives. They sent also by them a demand of the resti­tution of Pylus in lieu of Panacturn, and excuses fcrthe separate alliance they had made with the Bœotians,*' which had been concluded without any design of pre­judicing the Athenians." Upon these points they
spoke







OCR Output








36 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. B.V.


whole plan to fink away in careless and dilatory uncon­cern.
In this fame winter, the Olynthians, after a suddenassault, took Mecyberne, which was garrisoned by A-thenians..,
After the former proceedings,—for conferences werestill continued between the Athenians and Lacedæmo­nians about those places they held from one another, —the Lacedæmonians, conceiving some hope that, if theAthenians could recover Panactum from the Bœotians,they also might regain Pyius, addressed themselves insolemn embassy to the Bœotians, and importuned themto deliver up Panactum and the Athenian prisoners,that they in return might get Pylus from them. Butthe Bœotians persisted in a resusal, unless they would makea separate alliance with them, as they had done with theAthenians. Upon this the Lacedæmonians, thoughconvinced that such a step would be injustice to the A-thenians,— since it had been stipulated that, " without"joint consent, they should neither make peace nor** war," — yet, bent on the recovery of Panactum, thatthey might exchange it for Pylus, the party at the fametime amongst them, who were meditating a fresh rupture,inclining to the Bœotian interest, made the requisite alli­ance in the very close of this winter on the approach ofspring. The consequence was, that Panactum was im­mediately levelled with the ground; and the eleventhyear of the war was brought to a conclusion.
_ . YE AR XII. %
EARLY in the spring of that summer which wasnow approaching, the Argives, —— when the expectedembassy frorn Bceotia was not arrived in pursuancebf promise, when they found that Panactum was demo­lished i afid a separate alliance struck up between theBœotians and Lacedæmonians, began to fear they
'• % Before Christ 420. - :--t
lhould







OCR Output








3ii THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. B.VIII.


"• an oligarchy rather than a democracy, but to recover** their liberty, indisferent equally to either form. As** for those of their fellow-citizens to whom was given"the appellation of worthy and good, even they would** perplex the train of government as much as the people,** when, by cajoling that people, and authoritatively"leading them into a series of bad measures, they would"principally regard their own private emoluments:** And, should they be subjected to the caprice of such,"to die by violence and without a trial must be the ge-"neral fate; whereas the people was a sure resource in"seasons of extremity, and ever tempered the fury of** the great. He was well convinced, the States, en-"lightened by a long tract of experience, judge of** their government in the fame light. Upon the whole,"theresore, the negotiations of Alcibiades, and all at"present upon the carpet, could in no wise be approved, * * by him."
The party, however, associated together in this de­sign, abiding by their former determinations, resolvedto proceed to their execution, and were preparing tosend Pisander and others by way of deputation to A-thens, to set on foot the negotiations concerning thereturn of Alcibiades, the dissolution of the popular go­vernment there, and the gaining over Tissaphernes tothe Athenian friendship.
Phrynichus,—now convinced that the return of Alci­biades would be brought upon the carpet, and the A-thenians assuredly grant it; apprehensive, farther, that,from the opposition he had given it at their consulta­tions, he should then be exposed to his resentments, asone who had endeavoured to stop it, — hath recourse tothe following project: He sends to Astyochus, admiralin chief of the Lacedæmonians, who yet continued inthe station of Miletus, a secret hint, by letter, that"Alcibiades is ruining their affairs, by endeavouring** to gain over Tissaphernes to the Atheniansand,after giving him a clear explanation of other matters,
he







OCR Output








i46 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. B.Vl


timely revenge upon him, by whom they were aggrieved,and on whole account they had en.barked into so dan­gerous an affair. In this hurry of thought they rushedback into the city, and met with Hipparchus at theplace called Leocorium; where, without any regard to.their own safety, they made an instant assault upon him.And thus, in all the fury of passion, one actuated byjealousy, and the other by resentment, they woundedand they kill him. As the people immediately ran to­gether, Aristogiton by favour of the concourse escapesfor the present, but, being afterwards seized, was un­mercifully treated: But Harmodius is instantly stain onthe spot.
The news of this assassination being carried to Hippi-as at the Ceramicus, he moved off immediately; not tothe scene of action, but towards the armed accomplicesin the procession, before they couid be informed of thefact, as they were stationed at a distance. He artfullysuppressed on his countenance all fense of the calamity;and, pointing to a certain spot, commanded them aloudto throw down their arms and file off thither. Thiscommand they obeyed, expecting he had some­thing to communicate to them. But Hippias, ad­dressing himself to his guards, orders them to takeaway those arms. He then picked out man by man,from amongst them, such as he designed "to put to thequestion, and all upon whom a dagger was found: For,by ancient custom, they were to make the processionwith a spear and a shield.
In this manner truly, from the anguish *6f irritatedlove, this conspiracy took its rise, and this desperate
attempt
l •
* And ;et so violently were tyrants detested at Athens, that the memory of Har­modius and Aristogiton was ever after honoured there, as martyrs for liberty andfirst authors of the ruin of tyrants. Their praises were publicly fung at the greatPanatbcnaa. No slave was ever called by their names. Praxiteles was employedto cast their statuei, which were afterwards set up in the forum: Xeries indeedCarried themaway into Persia, but Alexander afterwards scot them back to Athens.
flktmrtt







OCR Output








44. THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. B.V.


* for your credit, but for their disgrace, that a war*' should be averted: For, as your affairs are in a hap-*' py posture, it is above all things eligible for you to** preserve your prosperity unimpaired; but they, in*' their present low situation, should put all to hazard,
V in the hopes of redress." He carried it, in short,that embassadors should be dispatched, he himself to beone in the commission, " earnestly to require of the"Lacedæmonians, that, if their intentions were ho-** nest, they should surrender Panactum standing, and*' Amphipolis; and should, farther, renounce the at-*.V.Hance with the Bœotians, in cafe they still refused to"accede to the peace ; — this in pursuance of the arti-"cle, that Neither Jhculd make peace without joint con-
sent" They ordered it to be added farther, thatthey themselves, could they have deigned to act un-"justly, had concluded before this an alliance with the"Argives, as they were already attending and soliciting*,? such a measure." And, having subjoined their instruc­tions in relation to all other pointsin which they thoughtthemselves aggrieved, they sent away the embassadorsin commission along with Nicias. These being arrived,and having reported their instructions, added, in con­clusion, that, " unless they would renounce their al-"liance with the Bœotians, if still refusing their acces-*' sion to the peace, they would admit the Argives and
V their associates into league." The Lacedæmoniansreplied, " They would never renounce their alliance"with the Bœotians:" For the party of Xenares, theEpborus, and all those who acted in the same combina­tion, had still the majority: However, at the requestof Nicias, they renewed the oaths. Nicias was afraidof being forced to depart without settling anycne point of his commission, and of falling under pub­lic censure, (which really came to pass,) as undoubtedauthor of the peace with the Lacedæmonians. Andwhen, upon his return, the Athenians had heard thatno one point was adjusted at Lacedæmon, they imme­diately







OCR Output








8 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. B.V.


"inform you in what manner I have planned the methodof attack, lest hazarding the event with so small a par-** ty, and not with our intire force, may seem unequal"to the work, and may too much dispirit you. The** enemy, I conjecture, from an utter contempt of us,** and a strong presumption that we durst not come out"into the field against them, have shewn themselves"before this city; and this very moment, disorderly"scattered as they are to view the situation, they hear-"tily despise us. The leader, therefore, who hath the** most acuteness in detecting such blunders in a foe,"and then scizeth the proper moment to fall upon"them, as best enabled by his own strength; not so"much in the open and regular manner of a methodi-"cal fight, as with a surprise, most advantageous in the** present juncture; —such a leader may, for the most"part, be assured of success. Such stealths as these"draw after them the highest glory: By these, the"man, who over-reacheth his enemy the most, per-** formeth the most substantial service for his friends."Whilst, therefore, haughtily presuming on their own"worth, they remain thus disordered, and, by what"appeareth to me, are bent more on drawing osf than"remaining here,— during this their intermission of** purpose, and before their resolutions can be regular-"ly adjusted, I myself, at the head of my chosen par-"ty, will be amongst them, if possible, and will rush** with vigour into the center of their army. And then,** Clearidas, when once you perceive that I am engaged,"and, as in probability it must be, have thrown them"into disorder; then, at the head of yours, accompa-r"nied by the Amphipolitans and the rest of the conse-,f derates, throw open the gates on a sudden for your** sally, and advance with your utmost speed to the"charge. And thus, it may considently be hoped, thef< enemy must be thrown into the utmost consternation;"because a second body, thus running to the charge,w is more terrible to the foes than the; present which is-
already







OCR Output








3i4 TFTE PELOFOJTNESIAN" WAR. B.VlII.


ving landed in his psflage at Cos Meropidis, the inha­bitants of which had refuged themselves in the moun­tains, he rifled the city, which was quite unfortified,and had lately been tumbled into ruins by an earth­quake, the greatest that had been felt there in the me­mory of us now living. By excursions, also, throughall the country, he made prize of all he found, except­ing seamen for such he dismissed unhurr.
From Cos advancing by night ro Cnidus, he is diC-suaded by the Cnidians from landing his men; but, onthe contrary, without loss of time to get out to sea, andmake head against twenty sail of Athenians, whichCharminus, one of the commanders from Samos, hadunder his orders, and with them was watching the ap­proach of the twenty-seven sail coming up from Pelo­ponnesus, which Astyochus was now going to join.For they at Samos had received from Miletus adviceof their coming, and Charminus was appointed tocruise for them about Cyme, and Chalce, and Rhodes,and the coast of Lycia; and by this time he knew, fora certainty, that they were lying at Caunus.
Astyochus, therefore, without loss of time, stood a-way for Cyme, with a view to surprise the ships of the e-nemy at sea before they could get any advice of his ap­proach. A heavy rain and thick cloudy weather occa­sioned the dispersion of his vessels in the dark, and sadlydisordered him.
When morning broke, the fleet being widely separa­ted and the left wing driven already within the viewof the Athenians, the remainder yet driving in confu­sion about the island, Charminus and the Athenianslaunch out against them with all possible expedition,though with fewer than twenty sail, imagining this tobe the squadron from Caunus whose approach they wereto observe; and, proceeding instantly to action, theyfunk three and dilabled others. They had by far thebetter jn the action, till the numerous remainder of hos­tile ships appeared, to their great consternation, and in-compassed







OCR Output








THE.


PELO P O N N E S I A N WAR.


BOOK VI.


In the fame winter, the Athenians came to a resolu­tion, to make a second expedition against Sicily, with alarger force than had been sent thither heretofore, underLaches and Eurymedon, and to attempt its total reduc­tion. The bulk of the people was, in truth, ignorantof the largeness of the island, and of the multitude ofthe Grecians and Barbarians by whom it was inhabited;ignorant, farther, that they were going to embark in awar, not much less considerable than the Peloponnesian,The compass of Sicily is little under eight days sail fora trading vessel; and, though it be so large, it is severedfrom the main-land, so as not to be part of the conti­nent, by a gut, in breadth but * twenty stadia. Themanner in which it was inhabited in the earliest ageswas this; and the several nations which possessed itthese.
The Cyclops and Lestrigons are said to be the mostancient inhabitants of some part of this country; but,from what stock they were derived, or from whencethey came hither, or what is become of them since, Ihave nothing to relate. Poetical amusements must here
* Abcut 2 miles.
suffice, •







OCR Output








7o THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. B.W


Sphacteria, and some other instances of impolitic and di­latory conduct, by this one action they completely pur­ged away. Now it was determined that their depressionhad been merely the result of fortune, but that in in­ward bravery they were still themselves.
The day before this battle was fought, it happenedthat the Epidaurians, with the whole of their strength,had made an incursion into Argia, as left defenceless,and had done great execution on the guards, left behindat the general march of the Argives.
Three thousand heavy-armed Eleans, as auxiliaries tothe Mantineans, came up after the battle; as did also athousand Athenians to join the former body; uponwhich the whole alliance marched immediately againstEpidaurus, whilst the Lacedæmonians were solemnizingthe Carneian festival. Afcer an equal distribution ofthe work, they began to raise a circumvaliation aroundthat city. The rest, indeed, soon desisted; but the A-thenians, conformably to their orders, completed theirsround the eminence on which stood the temple of Juno.To guard this, work, the whole alliance left behind asufficient number draughted from their several bodies,and then departed to their respective homes. And thesummer was now at an end.
In the first commencement of the succeeding winter,and after the celebration of the Carneian festival, theLacedæmonians immediately took the field; and,advancing as far as Tegea, sent from thence to Argosproposals for an accommodation. There was alreadyin that city a party in their intelligence, who were alsobent on overturning the popular government at Argos;and, since the event of the late fatal battle, they wereenabled to use more cogent arguments to persuade themany into the accommodation. Their scheme was, firstto enter into truce with the Lacedæmonians, as prepara­tory to an alliance offensive and defensive, which wasnext in agitation; and, this point carried, then imme­diately to execute thtir plot against the people.
Lichas,







OCR Output








*20 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. B.VII.


was exemplified in act: They even sell upon the publicschool, which was a very large one, when the youthof the town were but just got in, and hacked all thechildren to pieces. And thus this whole city was invol­ved in a calamity, a greater than which no city had everfelt nay, a calamity unexpected and dreadful indeed!
The Thebans had no fooner intelligence of it, than theymarched to their assistance; but came not up with theThracians till they were retired to some distance fromthe town, where they recovered from them their booty,and, having put them to flight, continue the chacedown to the Euripus and the sea, where the vesselswhich had brought them lay at anchor. Here theymake a staughter of most of those who endeavoured toget on-board, but could not swim; since the persons leftin the vessels, when they law what passed on the shore,put them off beyond their reach. But, in the otherpartsof the retreat, the Thracians behaved with some gal­lantry against the Theban horse, which attacked themfirst since, sallying frequently out on the pursuers, andrallying again after the discipline of their country, theymade good their retreat; and thus few of this body weredestroyed. A number, farther, who staid behind in thecity to plunder, were found there and put to thesword. The whole number of the slain, amongst thisbody of thirteen hundred Thracians, amounted to twohundred and fifty men; though, in return, they killed,of Thebans, and others who accompanied by way of aid,of horse and heavy-armed together, about twenty, andSkirphondas of Thebes, one of the rulers of Bœotia;the lives of some more Mycalessians were also lost intheir company. Such was the calamity which fell tothe unhappy lot of Mycalesius; and which, for excessof horror, is more to be deplored than any other of thetragical events of this war.
Demosthenes, who, after marking out the fortifica­tion, had stood away from Laconia to Corcyra, sur­prising a transport-vessel which rode at anchor in the
.. . road







OCR Output








B. VII. THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. 217


been fortified this spring by thejoint-labours of the wholeunited army, continued to be garrisoned by detachmentsfrom the several States, which at certain intervals of timerelieved one another in a regular succession, it gave ter­rible annoyance to the Athenians, and caused amongstthem such havoc of their effects, and such a destructionof their men, as threw them into great distress. Allpreceding incursions of the enemy, having been onlytransient, had left them in the peaceable enjoymentof their lands for the rest of the year; but now, as theyawed the country by one continued blockade, and as byintervals they received considerable augmentations to e-nable them to give greater annoyance, as even the regu­lar garrison was periodically obliged to scour the countryand plunder for their own subsistence, and as Agis, kingof the Lacedæmonians, who with the utmost diligenceprosecuted the war, in person directed all the operations,—the Athenians were sorely pressed: For they were de­barred the whole produce of their own lands; more thantwenty thousand of their slaves had deserted to the ene­my, and a large part of these were mechanics of the city;their whole stock of ssieep and labouring cattle was lostbeyond retrieve; their horses, — as the horsemen wereobliged every day to mount, either to ride towards De-celea, to awe the excursions of that garrison, or to guardsome important posts in the country,— their horses wereeither lamed by running incessantly over hard or ruggedground, or by wounds were disabled for service; theconstant supplies of provisions for the city, which usedto be fetched from Eubœa to Oropus, and to be broughtin from thence through Decelea as the shortest passage,were now forced to go round the cape of Sunium bylea, which considerably enchanced their price. Forwant also of all foreign commodities the city was equal­ly distressed; and Athens was now reduced to be merelya place ofarms. To keep guard on the battlements byday, the citizens were obliged successively to relieveone another; but the whole body of the city, except







OCR Output








72 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. B.V.


"as those of the Lacedæmonians and those of the Ar-."gives enjoy, each remaining in free possession of. their"territories.
"These articles to be communicated to the confede-*' rate?, and ratification to be made, if they approve."If different methods seem adviscable to the confede-"rates, all parties to desist and return directly home."
These proposals, by way of preliminary, the Argivesaccepted; and the army of the Lacedæmonians wasdrawn off from Tegea to their own home. And after­wards, in the course of mutual negotiation, the sameparty at Argos prevailed upon their countrymen to re­nounce their alliance with the Mantineans and Eleans,and even with the Athenians, and to strike up a peace,and an alliance offensive and defensive, with the Lacedæ­monians. The tenor of it was this:
"RESOLVED thus, by the Lacedæmonians and the*' Argives, on a peace, and an alliance offensive and*' desensive, for the term of fifty years.
"They shall do justice to each other reciprocally,"with impartiality and equity, according to their seve-** ral forms of law.
"The other States in Peloponnesus, comprehended"in this peace and alliance, shall continue in the enjoy-'' ment of their own laws, their own independence,"holding the same territories, doing justice with im-"partiality and with equity, according to their several"forms of law.
"All confederates of the Lacedæmonians whatever,"without Peloponnesus, shall enjoy the same privile-"ges with the Lacedæmonians themselves; and the"Argive confederates shall enjoy the same with the"Argives themselves; each holding their respective'c territories.
"If a joint-expedition be at any time requisite,, a"conlultation to be held, by the Lacedæmonians and
"the







OCR Output








a4* THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. B.VII.


also advanced with speed to succour their friends, and,trembling for their ships, soon came to an engagement.with them, and, after routing, pursued them amain."They slaughtered now a great number of the heavy-armed; and, what was more, preserved the far greaterpart of their fleet, and towed again to their formermoorings all their ships, except eighteen, which theSyracusans and their allies made prizes, and put all themen on board them to the sword. With a view, far­ther, to destroy the rest by setting them on fire, theyfilled an old transport-ship with fascines and combusti­ble matter, and, as the wind blew right upon the Athe­nians, set her on sire, and let her drive in amongst them.The Athenians, trembling for the ships, put all theirengines instantly at worK to extinguish the flames;which having at length effectuated, and kept this fire-ship clear of their own vessels, they were delivered fromthis irrmir.ent danger.
After this the Syracusans erected a trophy for theirvictorious engagement on the water, and for the inter­ception of the party of the heavy-armed before the in-trenchments, where they had taken so many horses.The Athenians also did the same, for the repulse givenby the Tyrrhenes to the land-forces of the enemy, andtheir being chated into the lake, and the larger successthey afterwards obtained with the rest of their army.
But now, when, beyond the reach of doubt, the Sy­racusans, though at first aiaimed at the large reinforce­ment of Hupping brought against them by Demosthenes,had gained a signal victory by sea, the Athenians wereplunged into a total dejection of spirit; they were thun­derstruck by the reverie of misfortunes so little expect­ed; and began to repent, with much more bitternessof thought, that they had ever engaged in so fatal anexpedition. They had invaded States, whose politywas already of a piece with their own, whose formof government was popular, like that of Athens, andwhich flourished in shipping, in horses, and each arti­







OCR Output








8o THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. B. V,


"sides be judged persuasive: Since of this you are as"strongly convinced as we ourselves are sensible of it,—** that, in all human competitions, equal wants alone pro-"duce equitable determination; and, in what terms so-"ever the powerful injoin obedience, to those the weakV are obliged to submit."
Melians.
"IF this be so, we boldly aver,— for, as you have"discarded justice from the question, and substi-"tuted interest in its place, we must follow the
"precedent, that you also it concerneth, we
"should not be deprived of the common privilege** of men; but that to human creatures, ever liable tolt so dangerous a loss, the pleas of reason and equity,"even though urged beyond their exact limitations,"should be indulged and allowed their weight. And"more to you than to others is this proper to be fug-** gested, lest, after satiating revenge in all its fury,"should you ever be overthrown, you may teach your"enemies how you ought to be treated."
Athenians.
"THAT afsecteth us not: For, though to our"fliare an overthrow of empire fall, the event would<* render us neither abject nor desponding; because"men, inured to inlarged command, as the Lacedæ-** monians for instance, are never terrible to the van-"quifhed. But our contest, at present, is not against** the Lacedæmonians. That revenge alone is terrible,"when subjects tumultuousty rebel, and gain the asoen-
dant over such as were once their masters: And truly,*f to avert iuch dangerous extremities, be the care en-** trusted to us. But, on the present occasion, that we"are here for the inlargement of our own power, and"that what we have to urge concerneth the preserva-
"tion of the State of Melos, these are the points we
** are







OCR Output








fc.V. THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. i$


<


expofing himself, as little as possible, to the uncertain­ties of fortune; and vacuity from danger was compatiblesolely with peace. Pleistionax had been calumniated byhis enemies on the account of his restoration; and theyinvidiously suggested to his prejudice, upon every losswhatever which the Lacedæmonians sustained, that suchwas the consequence of transgressing the laws in the repealof his banishment. For they laid to his charge, that,in concert with his brother Aristocles, he had subornedthe priestess of Delphi to give one general answer to allthe deputations sent by the Lacedæmonians to consultthe oracle, that " they should bring back the seed of*' the demi-god son of Jove from a foreign land into"their own country; if not, they should plough with a"silver plough-share;" and thus, at length, so seducedthe Lacedæmonians in the favour of an exile, residing atLycæum, upon account of his precipitate retreat ouc ofAttica, as though purchased by bribes from the enemy,and from a dread of his countrymen dwelling in a house,one half of which was part of the temple of Jupiter,that, nineteen years after, they conducted him homewith the same solemn processions and sacrifices as those,who were the original founders of Lacedæmon, had ap­pointed for the inauguration of their kings. Repining,therefore, at these calumniations, and judging that, aspeace giveth no room for miscarriage, and that, sar­ther, if the Lacedæmonians could recover the prisoners,his enemies would be debarred of a handle for detrac­tion; whereas, whilst the chances of war subsist, thepersons at the helm of government must be liable to re­proaches for every disaster; he was earnestly desirous tobring about an accommodation.
This winrer, therefore, they proceeded to a confe­rence; and, at the approach of spring, great prepara­tions were openly in hand on the Lacedæmonian fide,and a scheme for fortifying in Attica was circulatedthrough all the States, in order to render the Atheniansmore compliant. Many meetings were held, and many
demands,







OCR Output








20 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. B. V,


cannot be exactly known in what determinate part, whe­ther in the beginning or middle, or any other portion,of a magistracy, any important event occurred. But, ifthe computation proceed by summers and winters, whichmethod I have observed, such an inquirer will find,that these two halves being equivalent to a whole year,ten complete summers, and the same number of winters,elapsed in the course of this first part of the war.
The Lacedæmonians, for to them it fell by lot tomake the first restitutions, released immediately whatprisoners they had in their hands; and, having dispatch­ed Ischagoras, and Menas, and Philocharidas, in thequality of their embassadors to the cities of Thrace, or­dered Clearidas to deliver up Amphipolis to the Athe­nians, and all the consederates there to submit to theterms of the treaty, according to the stipulation givenfor them. But this they positively refused, as theyjudged the treaty prejudicial. Clearidas also, to ingra­tiate himself with the Chalcideans, would not deliver upAmphipolis, alledging, that, without their concurrence,he could not possibly do ir. He himself returned inperson soon after with the embassadors, in order to makehis defence at Lacedæmon, mould Ischagoras accusehim there of disobeying orders. His view was, farther,to try if the accommodation could by any means be eva­ded. But, when he found it fast confirmed, he postedback with all speed to his government, having expresiorders from the Lacedæmonians to deliver up Amphi­polis; or, if that was beyond his power, to cause all thePeloponnesians within that garrison instantly to evacuatethe place.
The confederates happened, at this juncture, to beat Lacedæmon, where such of them, as had hithertorefused to accept the treaty, were ordered by the Lace­dæmonians to accede to it. But this they positively re­fused, alledging the same reason as before; and plainlyaffirming, that " they would not come in, till better"terms than the present were obtained for them."


Their







OCR Output








i98 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. B. VII.


ans to raise those pans of their wall to a greater height,and to take the guard of it upon themselvts, as amongstthe body of their confederates they had divided theguard of the rest of their works, allotting a propercharge to each.
Nicias also judged it expedient to fortify the spot cal­led Plemmyrium. Plemmyrium is a point of landover-against Syracuse, which, jutting out before thegreat harbour, renders the mouth of it very narrow."If this were fortified," he thought " the importa-*' tion of necessaries for the army would be better se-*' cured; because then, from a smaller distance, they*' could at any time command the harbour where the"Syracusan shipping lay; and, should it be their ill—"fortune to be straitened by sea, might easier fetch in"supplies than in the present station of their fleet atM the bottom of the great harbour." Now also he be­gan, with greater attention than before, to study howto distress them by sea; convinced, since the arrival ofGylippus, how little room he had to hope for successby land. To this spot therefore he ordered his fleet,and drew his land-forces down, and immediately erectedthree forts. In these the greatest part of the baggagewas laid up; and the transports and tight ships wereimmediately stationed there. To this project, however,the havock that afterwards ensued amongst the seamenis principally to be ascribed: for, as they suffered inthis station under scarcity of water, and the marinerswere frequently obliged to fetch both water and woodfrom a distance, since near at hand they were not to behad, the Syraculan horse, who were masters of thecountry, slaughtered them in abundance. The Syra-cusans had posted a third part of their cavalry at theirfcrtreis of Olyrrpiæum, to bridle the marauding ex­cursions of the enemy at Plemmyrium.
Now also Nicias received intelligence that the otherCorinthian ships were in their passage. To watch theirapproach, he therefore detached twenty sail, who were
appointed







OCR Output








B.VTIt. THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. 305


This being done, they again repaired to Miletus; andfrom hence they detach Pædaritus, the son of Leon,whom the'Lacedæmonians had sent expressly to be go­vernor of Chios, to march over land to Erythræ, ha­ving under his command the auxiliaries who had servedunder Amorges; and appoint Philippus to command atMiietus. And the summer ended.
The winter now succeeding, after Tissaphernes hadgarrisoned and provided for the security of Iasus, he re­paired to Miletus, and distributed a month's subsistence,in pursuance of his engagements at Lacedæmon, to allthe ships, at the rate of an * Attic drachma to each ma­riner by the day; but for the remainder of time he de­clared he would only pay at the rate of Jdiree oboli, tillhe had consulted the king's pleasure; and, in cs"; hismaster's orders were for it, he said, he would make itup a complete drachma. But, as Hermocrates, the Sy-racusan commander, remonstrated sharply against thisusage, (for Theramenes, not regarding himlelf as ad­miral, since he was now at the head of the fleet merelyto carry it up to Astyochus, was very indolent about thearticle of pay,) it was at length compromised, that ex­cepting the five supernumerary ships, the crews of thereft should receive more than three oboli a man: For tothe five and fifty ships he paid -f thiee talents a month;
Vol. II. X and,
* 7<l- !.
J Half a drachma.
•f- Thrre is manifestly a fault here; for Tfia, three, in the original, should be read.j-gtaxorV, thirty, talents a month. Mr. Hobbes hath taken the pains to compute,and finds that the Peloponnesian ships carried eighteen men apitce. What i only soimall a crew as eighteen men for a ship of war with three banks of oars ? or, where(he complement was perhaps two hundred, did Tissaphernes only pay a tenth part ofthat number? Xenophon, in the first book of his Greek history, enables us to set all tolight;, Lyfander is negotiating with Cyrus for an increase of pay. Cyrus insists uponChe former agreement, made by Tissaphernes, that every ship should receive but*h:rty m'wa a month. The daily pay of each was of course one mha, or one hun­dred drachmas: Whence it appears, that, at chree oboli, or half a drachma, a man, thepay of sixty ships, each carrving two hundred men, would be just thirty talents.Thirty talents, therefore, paid to silty-five shifS for a month, wat two talents and a half


thirst







OCR Output








68 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. B.V,


the horse-guards, stiled The three hundreds falling uponthoie troops which were composed of the elder Argives,and them which are called the Pentelochi, and upon theGleoneans, and Orneatæ, and those Athenians whoranked along with them, they broke them in an instant,so that many of them durst not stand to exchange a blow,but, so soon as they felt the Lacedæmonian shock,turned about at once, and others were trampled underfoot in the great hurry they were in to secure their es­cape.
But, when the main body'of the Argives and their al­lies was in this quarter routed, their foot, on both theflanks, were instantly discomfited. Now, also, theright of the Lacedæmonians and Tegeatæ, by the ad­vantage of superior numbers, had overreached, and in-compassed the Athenians. These now, on all hands,were beset with danger; in this quarter they were sur­rounded by their enemies, in another they v/ere alreadyvanquished; and they must have suffered the most ofany part of the army, had it not been for the excellentsupport their own cavalry gave them. It happened alsothat Agis, when he perceived that the Mantineans andthe thousand Argives had got the better on the lefr,commanded the whole army to wheel off to the supportof the vanquished. And, whilst this was executing,the Athenians laid hold of the interval, which this mo­tion of the enemy, and their drawing off from aroundthem, occasioned, to secure their own escape without a-ny opposition, accompanied by the Argives, who werealso vanquished with them.
But the Mantineans, and those who fought in com­pany with them, and the picked band of Argives, werenow no longer intent on pressing upon their adversaries;but, perceiving their own side to be completely van­quished, and the Lacedæmonians approaching to theirattack, they turned about and fled. Yet numbers ofthem perished, and those chiefly Mantineans; for the
greatest







OCR Output








B.VII. THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. 213


cusans were plainly vanquished, which gave them whoabandoned the last an opportunity to sail away withoutobstruction. For that Syracusan squadron, that wasengaged before the harbour's mouth, having forcedtheir way through the Athenian fleet, by sailing for­wards in a disorderly manner and continually runningfoul one upon another, gave the Athenians an opportu­nity to regain the day. For this squadron they soonrouted, and afterwards that, within the harbour, bywhich they had been vanquished. They also sunk ele­ven ships of the enemy, and made a slaughter of all theircrews, those of three ships excepted, to whom theygranted quarter; and all this with the lose only of threeships on their own side. Having afterwards drawn a-shore the shatters of the Syracusan fleet, and piled theminto a trophy on the little isle before Plemmyrium, theyretired to their main incampment.
Thus unsuccessful were the Syracusans in their navalengagement. They had carried, however, the forts atPlemmyrium; and, to signalize each of their acquisi­tions, they erected three several trophies. One, also,of the two forts that were taken last they levelled withthe ground, but the other two they repaired and garri­soned.
In this furprisal of the forts, many were slain and ma­ny were made prisoners, and a great stock of wealthreposited there became the prize of the enemy. For,as the Athenians had made use of these forts by wayof magazine, much wealth belonging to merchants,and corn in abundance, were found within; much alsoof the stores belonging to the captains of the shipsof war,. inasmuch as forty masts for triremes, and othermaterials of resitment, had been laid up there; andthree triremes were hauled ashore to be careened. Nay,this furprisal of Plemmyrium wasoneof thechief if not thegreatest source of all the distress which the Athenian armysuffered in the sequel; for no longer was the sea open tothem for the secure importation of necessary supplies.
P 3 From







OCR Output








B.V. THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. 37


should be totally abandoned, and that their whole con­federacy would go over to the Lacedæmonians. Theyconcluded that, through the prevalence of the Lacedæ­monian arguments, the Bœotians had been persuaded tolevel Panactum and accede to the treaty made with A-thens, and that the Athenians were privy to all thesesteps; and so, of consequence, they themselves werenow utterly excluded from an alliance with the Athe­nians, and their former hopes entirely blasted, that, incase disputes should arise, and their treaty with the La­cedæmonians not be renewed, they might, at worst,depend on gaining the Athenian alliance. The Ar-gives, therefore, amidst these perplexities, and the dreadof being attacked at once by the Lacedæmonians andTegeatæ, by the Bœotians and Athenians, as theyhad formerly refused an accommodation with the Lace­dæmonians, and had grasped in. thought at the sove­reignty of Peloponnesus ;—the Argives, I say, had nolonger one moment to lose, but dispatched instantlyEustrophus and Æson, whom they judged to be per­sons most agreeable there, in embassy to Lacedæmon.They now judged it their interest to procure the bestpeace which the present posture of affairs would allowfrom the Lacedæmonians, and then quietly to attendthe event of things. In this view, the embassadors ontheir arrival had a conserence with the Lacedæmoniansabout the terms of a peace; and at first the Argives in­sisted, that " to some State or private person should be"referred, for equitable arbitration, the controversy be-»* tween them about the district of Cynuria ." concern­ing which, as it is frontier to both, they are eternally atvariance; in this district stand the cities of Thyrea andAnthena, and the possession of it is in the hands of theLacedæmonians. But, at length, when the Lacedæ­monians would not suffer any mention to be made of this,declaring only, that, " were they willing to renew thef* former"truce, they should find them complying,"the Argive embassadors, however, prevailed upon the
D 3 Lacedæmonians







OCR Output








248 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. B. VII.


than the rancour they bore the Lacedæmonians, andthe gratification of private spleen, though Doric, yetfollowed the Ionic Athenians against their Doric kin­dred. But the Mantineans and the reft of the Arca­dians, who are mercenaries, and eternally habituated toact against any foe pointed out to them, were now so farinfluenced by gain as to regard those Arcadians as theirenemies who came over on this occasion in company withthe Corinthians. The Cretans also and Ætolians werethere, allured by an advantageous pay; and thus ithappened that the Cretans, who, in concert with theRhodians, had founded Gela, readily took part, forthe fake of gain, not with but against a colony whichthemselves had planted. There was also a body of A-carnanian auxiliaries, partly induced to join by the paythey received, but principally by their personal regardfor Demosthenes and their attachment to the Athenians.And thus have we run them over to the utmost bounda­ry of the Ionian gulf. Of the Italic nations, the Thu-rians, and those Metapontians whom intestine feudshad reduced to the necessity of fighting for subsist­ence, joined their arms; and, of the Sicilian, the Nax- 1ians and Cataneans of barbarian, the Egesteans, whowere the first movers of this grand contention, and themajor part of the Siculi* and, out of Sicily, some of theTyrrhenes, from enmity to the Syracusans, and themercenary Iapygians. So many nations were assembledtogether at present under command of the Athenians.
The auxiliaries, on the side of the Syracusans, werethe Camarineans, who border close upon them, and theGeloans, who are situated next the Camarineans. Toproceed regularly: As the Agrigentines were neutral,the Selinuntians next occur, who are seated beyond theAgrigentines, since they inhabit that tract of the islandwhich faceth Afric. Then the Himereans, the onlyGrecian people who inhabit that part of the iflandwhich lies off the Tyrrhene sea, and were the only bodywhich came from thence to the aid of Syracuse. The
several







OCR Output








;io THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. B. VI.


*' have never had less hopes of being a match for us than"at this very juncture, even though their strength be in"all its maturity of vigour. It is true, they have it"ever in their option to make inroads into our domini-*' ons, even though we wave this expedition; but, at"sea, they never can be able to hurt us: The fleet we"shall leave behind will be amply sufficient to make"head against them.
"By what plausible arguments, therefore, can we ex-*' cuse our behaviour, should we now pufillanimoufly"desist? what evasion can we find to deny our confcde-"rates the succour they demanded? We are bound in'* honour, by the oaths we have sworn, to undertake*' their redress. Unavailing is the pretext, that they"have never done such good offices for us. Our alii-** ance with them was not made on the condition of their"sailing hither to bring us succour, but of giving such"full employ to our enemies there, as might effectu-"ally deter them from coming hither. The ready"road to empire, as not Athenians only, but every"people who have risen to a summit of power, by ex-"perience know, is ever to succour those who implore*' our protection, whether they be Greeks or barba-*' rians. For, had it been the constant method to che-"rifh indolent inactive measures, or minutely to liti-"gate who in justice ought to be protected, the en-"largement of our empire had been but trifling, or ra-"ther we had been liable to the loss of our original"portion. For a Stale invested with superior power"is not only openly opposed in the field, but recourse** is had to every precaution to prevent their appear-*' ance in it. Neither is it in our power to prescribe ex*"act or arbitrary limitations to our own empire; but"we are by necessity compelled to cabal against some,"and with a high hand to keep others in subjection"because, should we relax our command over others,."we endanger our own authority, and those we will"not awe may become our mailers, Nor, farther,
"ought







OCR Output








B.VII. THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. 229


"who had any meat to sell to offer it instantly on the"beach, that the mariners might come ashore and dine"under the sides of their vest" Is; so that, after a short*' repast, they might this same day unexpectedly fall"upon the Athenians." This counsel being approved,the necessary orders were dispatched away, and themarket was furnished out. Then suddenly the Syracu-san fleet fell back, and stood away towards the city;where, disembarking with all possible haste, they tooktheir repast.
But the Athenians, who ascribed this dropping-off ofthe enemy to a consciousness of their own inferiority,quitting their own ships as if there was nothing fartherto be done, diverted their attention to their own affairs,and especially to prepare a refreshing meal for them­selves, consident there would be no engagement on thisday. But, on a sudden, the Syracusans, repairing on­board, stood out a second time to give them battle.Then the Athenians, in much hurry and confusion,and most of them still fasting, re-embarking withoutany regularity or order, with great difficulty, after aconsiderable interval, stood out to receive them. Fora certain space, each side stood upon their guard, anddeclined the charge. At length it occurred to the Athe­nians, that it was imprudent to dally so long, and ex­haust their spirits by the mere labour of the oar, whichought rather to be exerted on an expeditious attack.Upon which, animating one another with a shout, theydarted upon the enemy, and the engagement began.
The Syraculans received the shock without givingway, and, keeping the heads of ti.eir vessels right a-gainst the enemy, executed their project, and with theirstrengthened beaks shattered the forecastles of the Athe­nian Ihips; whilst their darters, who were ranged alongthe dei.ks, galled the Athenians sorely with their mis­sive weapons; though not near so much as did thecrews of some light Syratusan boats, which scoured a-bout the enemy's fleet; sometimes getting under their. . Q^3 wards







OCR Output








236, THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. B. VII.


On the day following, the Syracusans erected twotrophies on Epipolæ; one on the summit of the pass,and the other where the Bœotians first stopped the ene­my's progress. The Athenians also obtained a truce,to setch osf their dead the number or which was large,*both in their own troops and thole of their aHies; andyet more arms were taken by the enemy than bore pro­portion to the slain: for, of the number of light-armedwho were pushed to the brink of the precipices, and,throwing away their shields, were obliged to leap down,though some perished by the fall, yet others escapedwith life.
But, after this, the Syracusans, highly animated a-gain with this fresh unexpected turn in their favour,sent out Sicanus, at the head os fifteen fail, to Agri-gentum, now embroiled in a sedition, with orders toexert the utmost of his power to reduce it to their obe­dience. Gylippus also made once more the tour of Si­cily, to levy another army; consident that, with sucha reinforcement, he could carry the very intrenchmentsof the enemy by storm, since affairs had taken such afavourable turn on Epipolæ.
In the mean time, the Athenian generals were em­ployed in the needful consultations since the last misfor­tune and the present universal dejection of their troops.They law that all their attempts were blasted by ill suc­cess, and that the soldiers were chagrined at the con­tinuance of so fruitless a service: tor a sickness spreadamongst their people from a double cause ; from theprelent season of the year, in which the human body ismost subject to disorders, and the marshy unwholesomeground on which they were encamped; besides that, inevery respect, their situation appeared desperate andquite beyond the power of redress.
The opinion of Demosthenes was therefore totally re­pugnant to a longer continuance before Syracule. He
* Plutarch puts it at two thousand j but Diodwus Siculm says it was two thousandfive hundred.
urged







OCR Output








B.VI. THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. 177


I cheerfully persevered in these my favourable incli-"nations towards you, till you yourselves, bent onm accommodating your differences with the Athenians,"employed my adversaries to negotiate your affairs;"and, as thereby you invested them with authority,"you of course reflected disgrace on me. With rea-"son therefore, after such provocations, you were af-"terwards thwarted by me, when I supported the in-** terest of the Mantineans and the Argives, and in-"troduced new measures into the State, in opposition"to you. Let therefore such of your number as,"chagrined at what they suffered then, continue un-*' justly their resentments against me, weigh now the"force of those reasons on which I acted, and return'* to better temper. If again I suffer in the opinion of"any man, because I have ever manifested an attach-** ment to the interest of the people, let him also learn*' that his enmity to me on that account is not to be"defended. We have borne, from time immemorial,"a stedfast unrelenting aversion to tyrants: now, the*' whole of opposition to the despotic power of one is** expressed by this word, the people; and on this prin-"ciple alone our firm and constant adherence to the"multitude hath been hitherto carried on and supported."Besides, as the State of which I was a member was*' purely democratical, I lay under a necessity, in many"respects, of conforming my conduct to the established** model; and yet I endeavoured to give the public"measures a greater share of moderation than the"frantic humour of the Athenians was judged capable*-* of brooking. But incendiaries started up; such as,'* not only in earlier times, but even in our own, have"driven the people to more furious measures, and have"'"-at length effected— the exile of Alcibiades. But.*' so long as the State was in my own management, I** thought myself justified, could I preserve it in that** height of grandeur and freedom, and on the lame** model of government in which I found it. Not butVol. II. N "that







OCR Output








348 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. B.VIII.


ment with the enemy. But, as nothing stirred outagainst them, they also returned to Samos.
In the same summer, immediately after the formermovements, the Peloponnesians — who had wavedcoming out to an engagement, since with the whole oftheir strength they thought themselves by no means amatch for their enemy, and were now reduced to greatperplexities about the methods of procuring subsistencefor so numerous a fleet, especially as Tissaphernes wasso remiss in his payments — fend away to Pharnabazus(pursuant to the prior instructions from Peloponnesus)Clearchus the son of Ramphias, with a detachment offorty sail: For Pharnabazus had demanded such aforce, and was ready to support the expences of it; andit had been farther notified to them in form that By­zantium was ripe for a revolt. And thus this detach­ment of Peloponnesians, having run out far to sea toget clear of the Athenians during the course, met withvery tempestuous weather. The bulk of them, it istrue, with Clearchus, rode it out to Delos, and fromthence return again to Miletus. But Clearchus, settingout again, travelled over land to Hellespont, and tookupon him the command. Ten ships, however, of rhedetachmenr, under Elixus the Megarean, who wasjoined in the command, reached the Hellespont withoutdamage, and effectuate the revolt of Byzantium. TheAthenians at Samos, informed of these incidents, fendaway a detachment to the Hellespont, to support andguard the adjacent cities: And a small engagementhappens before Byzantium, between eight ships on afide.
Those who were in the management at Samos, andabove all Thrasybulus, adhering still to the sentimentsthey had entertained ever since the last turn of affairsthere, that Alcibiades must needs be recalled; the lat­ter at last obtained, in full assembly, the concurrenceof the soldiery. Accordingly, when they had voteda return and an indemnity to Alcibiades, Thrasybulus
repaired







OCR Output








30 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. B. V,


They also again brought back the Delians to Delos,induced to it by the many defeats they had suffered inbattle, and the express oracle of the god at Delphi.
The Phocians also and Locrians began about thistime to make war upon one another.
And now the Corinthians and Argives, united iflleague, go together to Tegea, to persuade its revoltfrom, the Lacedæmonians. They saw it was a largedistrict; and, in case they compassed its accession, theyimagined the whole of Peloponnesus would be ac theirbeck. But, when the Tegeatæ declared, that " they"would in no shape oppoie the Lacedæmonians," theCorinthians^; who till now had acted with great alacrity,slackened in their zeal for contention, and began to fearthat no more of the States would come in. They pro­ceeded, however, to the Bœotians, and solicited them"to accede to the league between themselves and*' Argives, and to co-operate with them for the com-"mon welfare." And, as there were truces for ten-days between the Athenians and Bœotians, which were1agreed upon soon after the peace for fifty years wasmade, the Corinthians now pressed the Bœotians " to*"accompany them to Athens, and solicic for truces"of the same nature for them; but, in cafe the Athe-"nians refused to grant them, to renounce the suspen-"sion of arms, and for the future never to treat With-*' out their concurrence." The Bœotians, thus solici-cited by the Corinthians, desired a longer time to consi­der about their accession to the Argive league. To A-thens, indeed, they bore them company, but could notobtain the ten-days truces: For the Athenians answer­ed, — " The Corinthians have a peace already, if they"are confederates of the Lacedæmonians." And, up­on the whole, the Bœotians absolutely refused to re­nounce their own truces, though the Corinthians insistedupon ir, and urged, with some warm expostulations,that it had been so covenanted between them. Sothere was only a mere cessation of arms between the Co­rinthians,


 







OCR Output








I N D E X.


200. his harangue, ibid, beatsthem again, 206.Photius, I. 194.
Pbtynichus, II. 302. his intrigueaga.in&.Alcihiades,$2\ .deprivedof the command, 326. is of theoligarchical faction, 337, 357.is assassinated, 360.
Pierians, I. 2 12.
Pi/ander, overturns the democra­cy at Athens, II. 325, 332,358. flies toDccelea, 367.
Pijijlratus, the tyrant, I. 301. II.142. purifies Delos, L 301.died an old man, II. 142.
Pijijlratus, the son of Hippias, II.144. dedicated altars, ibid.
Piffuthnes, I. 89, 241.
Piltactu, I. 400.
Platauus, confederate with A-thens, I. 125. besieged, 185.a body of them make their es­cape, 233. surrender, 260. theirspeech to the Lacedæmonians,261. are put to death, 275.
Pleifticnax, king os Sparta, I.Jjj, 88. banished, 143. resto.red, II. 14, 22, 31.
Plei fto/as, II. 19, 22.
Plijiarchus, I. 104.
Polis, I. 181.
Folles, II. 5.
Polyanthes, II. 224.
Polycrates, tyrant of Santos, pow­ersul at sea, I. 12. consecratesRbenea to the Delian Apollo,ibid. 301.
Polydamidas, 1.413,419.
Poly nudes, I. 145.
Potidœans, originally from Co­rinth, I. 43. defeated by theAthenians, 47. besieged, 48,170. surrender, 184.
Pratodemus, I. 180.
Prodis, I. 292. II. 19, 23.
Procne, I. 148.
Proteas, I. 37, 145.
Proxenus, I. 301.
Ptoecdtrus, I. 375.


Pyjlillus, II.95.Pylhangelus, I. 125.Pythen, II. 192, 194.Pythias, I. 277.
Pytbodorus, the archon at Athens,I. 123. the son ofI/oloebus, inthe command, 311. II. 19, 23,193. banished, I. 366.R.
Ramphias, I. 113. II. 12.Rhegians, I. 288. attacked by the
Locrians, 313, 332. neutral in
the Sicilian war, 135.Rhodians, Doric by descent, II.
247, 316.
S.
Sahylinthus, I. 194.Sacon, II. 96.
Sadccas, son of Sitalces, I. 181.
made a citizen of Athens, 149.Salretbus, sent to Mitylene, I. 237.
taken prisoner and put to
death by the Athenians, 242.Salynthius, king of the Agreeans,
I. 310.
Samians, conquered by the Atbe*nians, I. 90. their insurrec­tion, II. 297.
Sargeus, II. 210.
Scioneans, of the Pellene, origi­nally from Peloponnesus, I. 410.revolt, 412. crown Brajidas,ib. reduced and severely treat­ed by the Athenians, II. 29.
Sdrondas, II. 326.
Scythians, I. 211.
Selinuntians, II. 248. at warwith the Egefteans, 96.
Sermylians, II. 18.
Scutbes, I. 210, 396. succeeds S/'-talces in the kingdom of Odiy-jk, 210. marries the filterof Perdiccas, 215.
Sicanians, II. 93.
Sicilians, I. 359, 365.
II. 93, 174, 191.
Sicyonians, I. 84, 85, 396.
Simonides, I. 316.
II, 96. Singeqns,







OCR Output








B.VIII. THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. 283


In the beginning of the ensuing winter, animated bythe terrible blow the Athenians had received in Sicily,the whole body of Greece was alert against them. li­ven such as had hitherto observed a strict neutrality,without so much as waiting for a formal invitation toaccede, thought it incumbent upon themselves no longerto be absent from the war, but voluntarily to enter thelists against the Athenians. Not a State but reasonedthus,—that " themselves also these Athenians, had they"succeeded in Sicily, would undoubtedly have attack-"ed and then concluded, — that, " as the war for*' certainty was very nearly finished, it would be glo-*' rious for them to have a hand in its completion.'*But the old confederates of the Lacedæmonians, astheir desires were greater, so they exerted themselves nowwith higher alacrity than ever to procure a speedy relax­ation of their heavy burdens. Yet, in a most remarka­ble manner, such States as were dependent upon Athensmanifested their readiness to revolt, even beyond thebounds of caution; since now they formed their judge­ments in all the warmth of indignation, and could dis­cern no probable method by which the Athenians couldretard their ruin for another summer.
All these circumstances coinciding, the Lacedæmo7nian state became prodigiously alert; and, above all,with the expectation, that their confederates of Sicily,with a powerful reinforcement, as their navies must nowof necessity act in concert, would be with them, in allprobability, very early in the spring. In every viewtheir hopes were gallant and elate. They determinedto go on with the war without any delay; concludingthat, if once brought well to a conclusion, they shouldever for the future be released from such dangers as hadlately threatened from Athens, in case Sicily had beenreduced; and, should they now demolish their competi­tors, must remain for the future supreme leadersof Greece, without fear of a reverse.
Instantly,







OCR Output








I N D E it-


185. besiege Syracuse t 186.sight with Gylippus, 199. send2 reinforcement toSyracufe,zi o.fight the Corinthians at Erineus,223. defeated in the attackofÆ-fip*lee,z^. are raising the siege,240. are stopped by an eclipseof the moon, 24.1. sight thebattle in the harbour, 259.march away, 265. forced tosurrender, 274, 276. their con­sternation at Athens, 281. theirmeasures, 284. take Mitylene,
298. subdue the Clazomenians,
299. besiege the Chiani, ibid,defeat the Milesians, 301 • quitMiletus for fear of the Pelopon-nesians, 303. fight and are de­feated, 314. solicit the friend­ship of Tifapbernes, 327. fightwith the GAi'oW, 331. lose theirdemocracy, 332. lose Eubœar365. defeat the Peloponmfeansin the battle of Cynos-fema, 371.
Athenæus, (• 409.Atbenagoras, his speech at Syra­cuse, II. 128.Atreus, I. 7.Autocles, I. 355, 410.
B.
Battus, I. 348.
Bœotians, ejected out of iw, I.It. conquered by the Atheniansat Oenophyta, 83. become free,87. win the battle of Delium,391. besiege Delium, 394. takePanafium, II. .3. send aid tothe Syracusans, 209.
2?aM//a»-Rulers, eleven in num­ber, I.386.11.35. *°or coun­cils, 3<j.
Bomhnsians, I. 297.
Bottiaans, I. 44, 192, 212.
Brasidas, saves Methone, and re­ceives the public commenda­tion at Sparta, 1.146. is of thecouncil to Alcidas, 280. hisgallant behavioural Pylus, 321.saves Megara, 373. marches to9 brace, 376. hischaracter,,379.


marches against the Lyncestians,
380. harangues the Acantbians,
381. gets possession of Amphi-folis,jgg. is repulsed at400; marches into Ade, 402.takes Tortrne, 403. and /Ugr-
406. crowned by the Set-cneans, 411. marches a secondtimeagainsttheivOTi^/Vw^ij.his brave retreatj 4.1 j. makesan unsuccesssul attempt on Po-tidaa, 422. opposeth Clean atAmpbipolis, II. 5. resolves toattack, 7. harangues, ibid,sallies, 10. conquers and dies,11. his suneral, ibid.Braures, I. 400.
Byzantines, revolt from the Athe­nians, I. 90.
C.
Calli as, son of Calliades, I. 46.killed, 48.
Callicrates, I. 23.
Calliensians, I. 295.
Camarineans, twice ejected, II.96. their conduct in theft/ja war, 141, 174.
Camtyfis, I. 12.
Care in us, I. 145.
Carians, I. 4, 6.
Carthaginians, I. 1 2.II. I2y, 178.
Caryjlians, 1. 76. If. 246.
Cataneans, dwell under mountÆtna, I. 312. reduced by theAthenians, II. 140, 248.
Cecrops, king of Athens, I. 137.
Ceryces, II. 325.
Cbeereas. II. 343, 353.
Chalcidtus, the Lacedæmonian ad­miral, II.291. his exploits,292, 294. killed by the Athe­nians, 299.
Chalcideans of Eulœa, make warwith the Eretrians, I. 13. sub­ject to the Athenians, II. 246.
ChalcdeansoiThrace, revolt fromthe Athenians, 1. 4;. defeatthem, 192. enter into leaguewith the Argi,vet, II. 29.
Chaonianf, I. 193.
Cbaricles,







OCR Output








B.VII. THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. 273


with them about the hour of repast: And, as they settin first with the column under the orders of Demosthe­nes, which composed the rear, and had moved in amore flow and disorderly manner than the van, becausethe darkness of the night had so highly incommodedand confounded their march, they immediately chargedthem and fought. The Syracusan cavalry beset themquite round, (the more easily, indeed, as they were se­parated from the van,) and drove them into one croudedheap. But the column under Nicias was now * fiftystadia before them; for Nicias led them forwards withgreat celerity, concluding that their sasety consisted, notin lingering voluntarily at so critical a period, or expo­sing themselves to an engagement, but in pushing for­wards with their utmost speed, and fightingonly when byabsolute necessity they were compelled to fight. Butthen Demosthenes was involved in a much more labo­rious and continued toil; because, as he filed off last,the enemies were left upon his rear; and, soon con­vinced that they had begun the pursuit, he was obli­ged, not so much to move forward, as to draw up histroops in the order of battle, till by such necessitatedlingering he is environed by them, and himself and thebody of Athenians under him are thrown into high tu­mult and confusion. For now, hemmed in as theywere on a certain spot, surrounded quite round by walls,and whence the issues both on one side and the otherwere full of olive-trees, they were terribly galled ontheir flanks by the darts of the enemy. This kind ofannoyance the Syracuians wisely chose to give them, andto decline all close engagement; because, to hazard thelatter against enemies now become quite desperate, theyjudged would make more for the advantage of the A-thenians than of themselves: Though, at the same time,a kind of frugality, inspired by the great career of suc­cess they had already obtained, taught them not to ex­haust their strength on superfluous encounters, and per-
* Above five miles.
Vol. IL T fuaded







OCR Output








74 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. B. V.


mosthenes to draw them off. He, upon his arrival,pretending to solemnise some martial game without thefortress, when the reft of the garrison was gone out tothe spectacle, barred fast the gates. And afterwards,the Athenians, having renewed the peace with them,surrendered the fortifications they had raised into thehands of the Epidaurians.
When the Argives had in this manner gone off fromthe alliance, the Mantineans also, who at first stood out,finding at length that without the Argives they coulddo nothing os themselves, thought proper to accommo­date their disputes with the Lacedæmonians, and resign­ed their command over the cities of Arcadia. The La­cedæmonians also and Argives, to the number of athousand each, marched in company to Sicyon; where,principally by the presence of the Lacedæmonians, thegovernment was shifted into the hands of a smaller num­ber. And, after transacting such points in concert,they soon procured the demolition of the popular govern­ment at Argos; and an oligarchy, suited to the Lace­dæmonian model, was erected in its stead.
As the winter was now in its close, these transactionsran out nearly into the spring j and the fourteenth yearof the war expired.


YEAR XV. J
I N the following summer, the Dictideans of Athosrevolted from the Athenians to the Chalcidc'ans; andthe Lacedæmonians resettled the state of Achaia, whichfora time had been under a management not agreeableto them.
The people of Argos also, combining gradually toge­ther and resuming their spirits, made an assault uponthe few. They waited for a favourable opportunity,till the festival of the naked games was celebrating at La-
X Before Christ 417.
cedæmon.







OCR Output








246 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. B.V1I.


with the Lacedæmonians and Corinthians, they had ob­jected their own State to the fury of a storm whichthreatened them all, and, by their own personal valourin naval engagements, had contributed most to such aheight of success.
The various people, now got together at this one cityof Syracuse, were so very numerous, as to be exceededonly by the comprehensive roll of those who, in the se­ries of the present war, sided either with the States of A-thens or Sparta. The catalogue is subjoined of those,who mustered in the offensive and defensive armies atSyracuse; who fought against or in behalf of Sicily,who joined for the reduction or preservation of thisifland, not so much from just and lawful motives, oraconcurrence resulting from the ties of blood, as frompolicy, or interest, or direct compulsion.
The Athenians, truly, in quality of Ionians, had vo­luntarily come hither against the Syracusans, who wereDorians; attended by those who spoke the same dialectand used the same institutions with themselves, the Lem-mans, and Imbrians, and those Æginerse who were thepresent possessors of Ægina. The Hestiæans, farther,now inhabiting Hestiæa in Eubœa, as an Athenian co­lony, had joined in the expedition. Ot the remainingpumbers, some came along with them because theywere dependents; some, though independent, becausethey were confederates; and some there were who at­tended merely for their pay. The dependents And tri­butaries were the Eretrians, and Chalcideans, and Sty-rensians, and Carystians, from Eubœa; from theislands, the Ceans, and Andrians, and Tei'ans; fromIonia, the Milesians, and Samians, and Chians; of thesethe Chians, being not subjected to a tribute, but onlyto furnish a quota of shipping, though independent athome, yet followed their arms. And all these hithertorecited were Ioi.ians and Athenian colonies, exceptingthe Carystians, for these last areDryopes; but, as sub­jected to Athens, not so much from choice as Ionians,
as







OCR Output








B-V. THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. 6,t


with such Arcadian parties as were already come up,marched on and broke into the Mantinean; and, havingformed their camp near the temple of Hercules, theyravaged the country.
The Argives and their allies, when their enemy wasthus in sight, having posted themselves on a spot ofground by nature strong and difficult of approach, drewup in order, as ready to engage. The Lacedæmoni­ans also immediately advanced towards them, and evenapproached so near as within the cast of a stone or a dart.But qne of the old experienced Spartans, perceiving thatthey were to attack so difficult a post, roared out aloudto Agis,* that " he was going to repair one evil by an-** other j" as if, by his present ill-judged eagerness, hewas bent on making reparation for his censured retreatfrom Argos. Upon this, either struck with such anexclamation, or whether upon a sudden his own thoughtssuggested to him a different conduct, he drew off hisarmy again, with all possible expedition, before the bat­tle could be joined. And, wheeling from thence intothe Tegeatis, he turned a stream of water into the Man­tinean, about which, as apt to. do great damage to thelands on which side foever it flowed, the Mantineans andTegeatæ are eternally at blows. It was his scheme todraw down the Argives and their allies from their strongpost, on the eminence, in order to prevent the turningof this stream, so soon as they knew it was in agitation,and thus to gain an opportunity of fighting in the plain.In pursuance of this, he halted the whole day upon thestream, and accomplished its diversion. But the Ar­gives and their allies, surprised at this sudden and preci­pitate retreat, had been, at first, unable to conjecturewhat it meant. At length, when the enemy was totally
* Plutarch fays it was an apophthegm of this Agis, that Lacedæmonians never askconcerning their enemies, " How many are they?" but " Where are they?" Andthat, when he was hindered from righting at Mantinea, he said, "They, who"would rule over many, must fight against many:" And, being asked what was thenumber of the Lacedæmonians, he replied, " Enow to b:at cowards."
withdrawn^.







OCR Output








46 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. B. V*


* * vade the territory of the Eleans, or that of the Man-"tineans, or that of the Argives, in strict conformity to** a summons received from any of those States, in the"most vigorous manner they may be able, to the ful-** ness of their abilities.
"But if the enemy, after ravaging, be again with-"drawn, the State under which they acted to be decla-** red an enemy to the Athenians, and Argives, and"Mantineans, and Eleans, and to be pursued with the"ofsensive arms of all these confederate States.
"And farther, that it be not lawful to lay down* * their- arms against the Stale which hath so ofsended,** without the joint consent of all these contracting** States.
"That no armed force be admitted to pass in order** for war through any of their respective dominions, or"those of their respective dependents, nor along their"sea, unless such a passage be granted unanimously by** all the contracting parties, by the Athenians, and Ar-"gives, and Mantineans, and Eleans.
** Agreed farther, that, when the auxiliaries attend4"the State which summoned them supply them with"thirty days provision so soon as they shall have enter-"ed the territory of the State which summoned their"attendance, and the same at their departure. .
"And, it there be occasion for the attendance of such"an auxiliary force for a larger space, that the State** which sent for it maintain that force, by paying to e-** very soldier, heavy-armed and lighc-armed, and e-** very archer, three oboli of Ægina f a day, and a"drachma of Ægina to every hoiieman.
'** But the State which sent for auxiliaries to have the** supreme command, lo long as the war continueth"within its district.: :•,
•s- The value of three oboli of Ægina is about six-pence, and the drachma of Æ-gina nearly one sliilling, EngliJIi': For, according to Dr. Arbuthnot, the talentof JEgina consisted of a hundred. Attic, win*, and therefore was larger than the Attictalent in the proportion of one hundred to sixty.







OCR Output








M THE FELOPONNESIAtf WAR: B.V.


But, during the approach, Agis, the king, bethoughthimself of making a new disposition.—It is the constantcafe with all armies, that, upon the right, their wings,whilst they approach one another, extend themselvestoo far, so that constantly, on both sides, the left wingis overreached and flanked by the enemy's right. Thisproceedeth from the dread every soldier lieth under ofbeing exposed on his unarmed side, which maketh himeager to get it covered by the shield of the next personon his right, and positive that a firm closing together,in this manner, will render them impenetrable to theshock of the enemy. This turn of the body is first be­gun by the right-hand man of the whole front, and isthe result of his constant care to shift his defenceless sidefrom the aim of the foe; and the dread of being in thesame manner exposed obligeth all the rest to follow hismotion. And thus, in the present approach, the Man-tineans in their wing had far overreached the Skiritæ;but the Lacedæmonians and Tegeatæ had done so, morein regard to the Athenians, in proportion as they exceed­ed them in numbers. «*- Agis, therefore, fearing lest theleft wing of the Lacedæmonians might be quite sur­rounded, and judging that the Mantineans quite too
Arming to battle; and, instead of rage,Deliberate valour breath'd, firm, and unmov'dl With dread of death to flight dr foul retreat:
Nor wanting pow'r to mitigate and swage,With solemn touches, troubled thoughts, and chafeAnguish, and doubt, and fear, and sorrow, and puin(From mortal or immortal minds. Thus they,Breathing united force, with fixed thought,Mov'd on in silence to soft pipes, that charm'dTheir painful steps o'er the burnt foils And nowaAdvanc'd in view, they stand, a horrid frontOf dreadful length and dazzling arms, in guiseOf warriors old with order'd spear and sliield,Awaiting what command their mighty chiefHad to impose.- He through the armed files iDarts his rxperiene'd eye j and soon, traverseThe Whole battalion, views their order due,
far







OCR Output








52 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. B.V,


the Argives were now the chief managers of the tem­ple. But, this pretended grievance let apart, it hadbeen judged expedient, by Alcibiades and the Argives,to get possession, if possible, of Epidaurus, in order toprevent molestation on the side of Corinth, and to ren­der the passage of Athenian succours more expeditiousfrom Ægina than by setching a compass about Scyllæ-um. The Argives, therefore, were intent on their pre­parations, as resolved to take the field and act againstEpidaurus, in order to exact the victim by forceof arms.
Bur, about the fame time, the Lacedæmonians alsomarched out, with their whole force, as sar as to Leuc-tra, upon their own frontier, towards Lyceum, underthe command of Agis, the son of Archidamus, theirking. Not a man was privy to the design of their thustaking the field, not even the States from which thequotas were furnished out. But, when the victimsthey sacrificed for a successful campaign proved inauspi­cious, they again marched home, and circulated freshorders to their consederates to be ready to take the fieldagain after the next month, which was the month Car-ndus,-f- the grand festival of the Dorians. But, whenthey were thus withdrawn, the Argives, taking thefield on the twenty-seventh day of the month precedingCarneius, and though celebrating their own festival thacvery day, continued all this intermediate time to makeincursions and ravages upon Epidauria. The Epidau-rians sent about to solicit the succours of their allies jfome of whom excused themselves as bound to observethe approaching sestivals, though others advanced as
•f This festival was observed by most cities in Greece; but with the greatestpomp and solemnity at Sparta, where it began the thirteenth of the month Carneius-,according to the Lacedæmonian stile, and lasted nine days. A camp was formed forits celebration, in wlich they continued during the whole solemnity, and observedfliict military discipline. By these means, as we find a little lower, the Argives,i n this instance no slaves to superstition, attended to the festival and warfare at the sametime, and anrojcd the Epidaurians, whilst religions awe restrained the friends of th*latter siotii acting in their deser.ee. See PnV.tr 's ArtbanUgia, vol, i, p. 408.







OCR Output








362 THE PELOPONNESIAtt WAR. fc.VIII.


done. Nay, they demanded aloud from Therarrieries,— " If, in his judgement, these new Works were raised*' with a good design, or would not better be derilo-"lifhed?" His reply was this — That, " if they'* thought it expedient to demolish them, his opinion"should concur with theirs." Hereupon, at a signalgiven, the heavy-armed and many others who belongedto the Piræus rushed on in a moment, and pulled downall the new fortification.
The watch-word now published to the multitude wasthis — " Whosoever would have the administration"lodged in the five-thousand instead of the four hundred"let him join in the work." For even still they judgedit politic to veil their design under the name of thefive-thousand, and not to say downright— " Whosoever"would have the democracy restored," — lest possiblythe former might have been actually in force, and aperson speaking to any one of them might spoil all bysome inadvertent expressions. And, on the same ac­count, the four-hundred would neither have the five-thousand declared, nor yet have it known that they hadnever been appointed. To admit so large a numberinto a share of the government, they judged was in sacta mere democracy; but that leaving the matter in sus­pense would strike a dread of his neighbour into everyAthenian.
The next morning, the four-hundred, though highlydisordered in their politics, assembled however in coun­cil. But those in the Piræus, after enlarging Alexietes,wnom they had put under confinement, and comple­ting the demolition of the new works, marched to thetheatre of Bacchus in Munichia, and there, all armedas they were, held a formal assembly; and then, inpursuance of what had been resolved, marched directlyinto the upper-city, and posted themselves in the Ana-ceum. Here they were accosted by a select committeesent from the four-hundred, who man to man reasonedcalmly with them; and, perceiving any to be tracta­







OCR Output








B.VL THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. 187


called Trogilus, near to the line marked out for the cir-cumvallation, which was to reach, by the shortest com­pass, from the great harbour on one side to the sea onthe other. But the Syracusans, who were principallyguided by the advice of Hermocrates, gave up allthoughts of sallying out for the future, with the wholestrength of the city, to give battle to the Athenians.It was judged more adviseable to run along a wall inlength, which should cut the line in which the Athenianworks were designed to pass, and which (could they ef­fect it in time) mull entirely exclude the enemy frompersecting their circumvallation. "Nay, farther, in cafethe enemy should come up in a body to interrupt the'work, they might give them full employ with one divi­sion of their force, whilst another party might raise pa-lilades to secure the approaches; at least, as the wholeof the Athenian force must be drawn out to opposethem, they would be obliged to discontinue their ownworks. To raise, therefore, the projected work, theyissued out ot the city; and, beginning at the foot of thecity-wall from below the Athenian circle, they carriedon srom thence a transverse wall, cutting down the o-live-trees in the sacred grove, of which they buiit wood­en turrets to cover their work. The Athenian shippingwas not yet come round from Thapsus into the greatharbour, but the Syracusans continued masters of allthe posts upon the sea, and consequently the Athenians'were obliged to fetch up all necessary stores from Thap­sus across the land,
When it appeared to the Syracusans that all theirpalisades and the transverse-wall were sufficiently com­pleted, in which the Athenians had given them nomanner of interruption, as they were under apprehen­sions that, should they divide their force, they mightbe exposed to a defeat, and at the same time were ar­dently intent on perfecting their own circumvallation;—the Syracusans drew off again into the city, leaving only
one







OCR Output








i5o THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. B.VI.


Salaminian to Sicily, to order him and such others as theyhad informations against to repair to Athens. But ithad been given them in charge to notify to him, that"he should follow them home in order to make his de-"fence," and by no means to put him under arrest.This management was owing to a desire of preventingall stirs in the army or in the enemy; and, not least ofall, to their willingness that the Mantineans and Argivesshould continue in the service, whose attendance in theexpedition they wholly ascribed to the interest Alcibiadeshad with them.
In pursuance of this, Alcibiades on-board his ownship, and accompanied by all those who were involvedin the same accusation, sailed away from Sicily with theSalaminian for Athens. And, when they were got to theheight os Thuria, they no longer followed; but quittingtheir ship were no longer to be seen. Censured as theywere, they durst not in fact undergo a trial. The crewof the Salaminian exerted themselves immediately in thesearch after Alcibiades and his companions: But, whenthey found the search was ineffectual, they gave ic up,and steered away for Athens. And Alcibiades, now be­come a fugitive, passed over in a vessel soon after fromThuria * to Peloponnesus. But the Athenians, uponhis thus abandoning his defence, pronounced the sen­tence of death against him and his asfociates.
After these transactions, the Athenian generals whoremained in Sicily, having divided their whole arma­ment into two squadrons and taken the command ofeach by lot, set sail with all their united force for Seiinus> and Egesta. They were desirous to know, whether theEgesteans would pay down the money: to discover also
the
* Somebody at Thuria, who knew AIciMades, aiked him, why he would notstand a trial, and trust hit country?" In other points I would; but, when roy life"is concerned, 1 would not trust my own mother, lest flie should make a mistake,"and put in a black bean instead of a white one." And, when he was afterwardstold, that his countrymen had passed the sentence of death against him, he b'ilklyreplied—" But I'll make them know that 1 am alive." Plutarch in Akibiada,







OCR Output








B.VlI. THE PELOPONNESlAN WAR; 277


War: And in the preceding skirmishes, which had hap*pened very frequently during the march, not a fewhad been slain. Yet, notwithstanding all this, manymade their escape; some from the scenes of action, andothers from their prisons, from whence they afterwardsgained an opportunity to run away. These repaired toCatana, as a safe resort.
And now the Syracusans and allies in one grand col­lective body, having amassed together as large a num*ber of prisoners as they possibly could> and all the spoils*returned in triumph to Syracuse. The bulk of pri­soners, whether of the Athenians or their confederates*whom they had taken, they thrust down into the quar­ries, concluding that from such a confinement theycould not possibly make escapes; but Nicias and De*mosthenes, in spite of all the remonstrances of Gylip-pus, they butchered: For Gylippus imagined, that thefinishing of this war would invest himself with pre­eminent degrees of glory, if, besides the rest of his at-chievements, he could carry home to the Lacedæmo­nians the generals of the enemy. It had, farther, lahappened, that one of these, that is, Demosthenes*was regarded as their most inveterate enemy, becauseof his exploits against them in the island Sphacteria andPylus; and the other (Nicias) as their most sincerewell-wisher, from his behaviour on those very inci­dents. For Nicias had strenuously exerted himself inbehalf of those Lacedæmonians who were made pri­soners in the island. It was he who prevailed with theAthenians to sign the treaty, in pursuance of which theywere released. For such services done them, the Lace­dæmonians had a kindness for him; and it had beenchiefly owing to his assurance of this that he surren­dered himself prisoner to Gylippus. But a party of theSyracusans, as was generally reported, fearful, becausethey had kept up a correspondence with him, lest, ifput to the torture, he might now, amidst the generalprosperity, involve them in trouble j others also, and*
T 3 hot







OCR Output








374 THE PELOPONNESlAK WAR. B.VHI.


About the same space of time, Alcibiades also* at thehead of his squadron of thirteeri sail, returned fromCaunus and Phasclis into the harbour of SamoS; report­ing that " by his management he had diverted the"junction of the Phœnician fleet with the Peloponne-"sians, and made Tissaphernes a faster friend than*' ever to the Athenians." After enlarging his squa­dron by the addition of nine more just manned, he le­vied large contributions upon the Halicarnasseans,-ahdfortified Cos. After these exploits, and putting thegovernment of Cos into proper hands, he returned a-gain, about autumn, to Samos.*
From Aspendus also Tissaphernes rode back post­haste into Ionia, so soon as advised of the departure ofthe Peloponnesian fleet from Miletus for the Helles­pont.
Buti as the Peloponnesians were now in the Helles­pont, the Antandrians, (who are of Æolic descent,)
* As the English reader is here to take his leave of Alcibiades-, he may have the
curiosity to know what became of him after. — Every thing succeeded so well, underhim and his active collegues, that the Lacedæmonians, having received several de­feats ooth by land and sea, and lost two hundred ships, were again necessitated to suefor peace. After such great services, Alcibiad-s returned triumphant to Athens,The whole city flocked down to the Piræus to meet hirfc. All strove to get a fightof Alcibiades; they caressed him, crowned him, cursed the authors of his exile, andhurried him away to an assembly of the people. There he harangued them fora tinttjthen flopped and ihed teats in abundance; then harangued them again. In fliott,they undid all they had ever done against him ; and Alcibiades for a time was all inall at Athens. Yet, in subsf auent commands, he happened not to be successful j 1crime which his countrymen very seldom forgave. He became a second time an ailefrom Athens. His great abilities made him a continual terror, both to foreign anddomestic enemies.' Yet now he persevered to serve his country, by caballing in theirfavour, and advising them on critical occasions. Yec all in vain j Lysander was soonmaster of the Piræus and of Athens. Alcibiades retired into Phrygia, and was hand­somely supported by the bounty of his friend Pharnabazus; who however waswrought upon at last, by the joint solicitations of his em mies and the plea of itsnecessity for the service of the king, to undertake hit destruction. The agents ofPharnabazus durst not attempt him in an open manner, but set fire to his house bynight. By-throwing in clothes to damp the flames he got out safe. The Barbarianssoon spied him, ihot him to death with arrows and darts, then cut off his bead, andcarried it to Pharnabazus. I shall only add, that he was birt forty years old when hewas thus destroyed,


haying







OCR Output








B.V. THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. 5


He met also in his course with those Locrians, whowere going to another settlement, after expulsion fromMessene. They had been driven to this necessity by se­ditious factions at Messene, one of which had invitedthem thither since the joint-accommodation among the Si­cilians; and now they were forced to shift again, thoughMessene had for a time been entirely in their power.Phæax therefore, meeting with these in their removal,gave them no annoyance; for the Locrians had been ata conference with him, to concert the measures of an a-greement with the Athenians. These, however, werethe only party of all the consederates, who, when theSicilians had amicably ended their disputes, refused totreat with the Athenians, and were brought to suchsubmission since merely by a war, in which they wereembroiled against the Itonians and Meleans, who bor­dered upon them, and were colonies of their own. And,some time after this, Phæax truly returned to Athens.
But Cleon, who from Torone was gone about by seaagainst Amphipolis, marching away fron Ei'on, makeihan assault upon Stagirus, a colony of Andrians, butwithout success; yet Galepfus, a colony of the Thasians,he taketh by storm. He sent farther embassadors to'Perdiccas, to summon his attendance in the expedition,according to the tenor of the new alliance. He sent o-thers into Thrace to Polles, king of the Odomantians,that he would hire as large a body of Thracians as couldbegot, and bring them up under his own orders. And,during this interval, he himself lay quiet at Eton.
But Brasidas, informed of these proceedings, placedhimself in an opposite post at Cerdilium. This place be-longeth to the Argilians, and is seated on an eminenceon the other side of the river, and at no great distancefrom Amphipolis. From hence he had a perfect viewof all Clton's motions; so that now it was impossible forthe latter to make any approach with his army, fromthence to Amphipolis, without being discovered. Bra­sidas, however, suspected that Cleon would approach,
B 3 and,







OCR Output








B.VI. THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. 113


 


"might readily embrace, in order to render their con-"dition more supportable. Nor is it, farther, to be"presumed, that they will readily exchange their ownM liberty for subjection to us, as they are numerous, ac"least for one island, and many of them inhabited by"Grecians. For, without reckoning Naxus and Ca-M tana, which I hope, upon account of their affinity to** the Leontines, will side with us, there are no less than*' seven provided in all respects with as good martial ha-"biliments and stores as our own armies \ and more"particularly those against which we chiefly bend our"course, Selinus and Syracuse. These cities abound with*' soldiers heavy-armed, with archers, and with darters.*' They have a great number of triremes, and plenty"of hands toman them. They possess a large quanti-"ty of wealth, not only in private purses, but in their"public treasuries. So rich are even the Selinuntians.*' And to the Syracusans, farther, a tribute is paid by*' several barbarians. But the points, in which they'* most of all excel us, are, that numerous cavalry"of which they are possessed, and corn of their own*' growth sufficient to answer all demands without fo-*' reign importations. An armament, therefore, sini-"ply naval, will by no means be sufficient to cope with"such a strength. A large land force must accompa-"ny the naval, if we are desirous of performing such"atchievements as may be worthy the greatnelsof our"plan, and would not be debarred an opportunity** of landing by their numerous cavalry. And this will*' be yet more needful, should the cities, alarmed at** our approach, combine together against us, and no'* other friends but the Egesteans join us, or supply us"with a body of cavalry sufficient to countenance our"landing. It would be a terrible disgrace, should we"be compelled by force to give over our design, or to*' send for a larger supply, as if our councils at first fet-"ting-out were rash and ill-concerted. We must steer'* ar once against them with preparations in all respectsVol. II. I *' well­







OCR Output








B.VII. THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. aoj


*' on-board arc skilled at steering the vessel or mana-"ging the oar.' But what gives me most acute vexa-
tion is this,——that, though commander in chief, I"am utterly unable to put a stop to these disorders;*' since your tempers, Athenians, are hard to be mana-*' ged; and am quite at a loss from whence to repair*' the waste that hath been made of our seamen. The"enemy have abundant resources every where at hand,"whereas necessity points out only one to us,———that*' place, from whence we had who now remain, and■' who are for ever lost: For Naxus and Catana, the"cities which still persevere in our alliance, are unable"to recruit us. And, should the enemy get one cir-
"cumltance more in their favour, that the towns
"of Italy, which at present supply us with food, de-"terred by the discovery of our low condition and the"non-appearance of a reinforcement from Athens, go
"over to the Syracusans, the war will be finished
*' to their hands without costing them a blow, and we"shall be left to the mercy of the enemy.
1 could have sent you much more pleasing accounts*' of things, but none so proper to give you a clear idea"of the posture of your affairs here, and such as you.
ought to have before you proceed to deliberate upon"them; and at the same time,— as I am by no means a*' stranger to Athenian tempers, since I know you to"be fond of hearing what will give you pleasure, but** are afterwards inflamed with anger if any article in e-*' vent drops short of your expectation, — I thought it*' highly concerned my own safety to tell you nothing*' but the truth. And let me here conjure you, to cn-
tertain no resentment either against private soldiers or** commanders; since, in labouring thole points which"are the principal ends of the expedition, they have"fully done their duty.
*' But, since all Sicily is in arms against us, and since** our enemies expect a reintorcemeut from Peloponne-*' sus, resolve, without loss of time, that, as your forces
"arc







OCR Output








B.VII. THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. 439


*' of such as -were only discretionary aids." He con­cluded with * the necessity they lay under, from the*•' ties of duty, to continue the siege with vigour, and'* by no means expose a superior strength to ruin,"through a false presumption that they were inferior"in point'of supplies."
Nicias expressed himself on this occasion with an airof neat confidence, as a person perfectly weli -acquaint­ed with the stare of Syracuse and the failure'of moneythere, and because there was a party within the citywhich acted in favour of the Athenians, and had advi­sed him, iby their agents, " by no means to raise the"siege." 'And, what is more, he placed a strongerdependence now upon the fleet than ever 'he had donebefore the late unsuccessful engagement.
As to the proposal of continuing the siege, Demos­thenes would not yield the least degree of attention toit: " if ithe army must not evacuate Sicily without a*.* peremptory order from Athens, but must persist in"this destructive service, he judged it would be better"to draw them off to Thapsus or to Catana, whereM they might find opportunity enough to make incur-** sions with the land-army upon the territories of the"enemy, and, by committing devastations, migbc"highly distress them. Their fleet might then en-*' gage 'n tne open sea; not in a space confined and"straitened, which was the greatest advantage to the"enemy, but in sufficient sea-room, where all their'su-*1 perior skill might fairly be exerted, where they"would be able to make their tacks, and bear down a-*' gain upon the foe with greater agility, and more vio-"lent (hocks, than could be done in the limitary space** of a close pent-up harbour. Upon the whole, he af-** firmed, that his consent should never be given to a"longer continuance in their present posts, but he was"for moving off with all possible expedition, and they*' had not a moment to lavish upon delay."( Eurymedon







OCR Output








3co THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. B.VIII.


and at Bolissus, having routed in battle a body of Chi-ans that made head against them, and done great exe­cution upon them, they reduced all the places in thatquarter of the island. At Phanæ also they fought a se­cond time with great success; and, a third time, at Leu-conium. But as, after these repeated defeats, the Chi-ans no longer stiewed themselves in the field to opposethem, the victors made cruel ravage on that rich andfertile country; and which, from the invasion of theMedes to the present period of time, had been totallyexempted from the miseries of war. For, next to theLacedæmonians, the Chians are the only people who(as far as I have been able to observe) have enjoyed aseries of public prosperity with a steady and uniform mo­deration, and, in proportion as their State increased inwealth and power, made suitable accessions to its do­mestic splendor and security. Nay, even their late re­volt, if this should chance to be ascribed to a want ofjudicious and cautionary measures, they never venturedto declare, till they had fortified the hazardous step withnumerous and gallant confederates, and saw plainly thatthe Athenians, (as even the Athenians themselves couldnot possibly deny,) after the blow received in Sicily,were plunged into the lowest depth of impotence anddistress. If, therefore, they proved mistaken, it wasone of those cases inseparable from the constant muta­bility of human affairs, where numbers were involvedin the fame mistake with themselves, who yet in theirjudgement were perfectly convinced that the entire ruinof Athens was fast approaching.
Now, therefore, blocked up as they were by sea,whilst their lands all around were ravaged by the ene­my, a party amongst them were concerting the methodof delivering up the city into the hands of the Athe­nians. But those in the administration, getting wind oftheir design, refrained indeed from making a bustle a-bout it in public; but, fetching over Astyochus, theLacedæmonian admiral in chief, with his four ships,
from







OCR Output








3i8 THE PELOPONNESIAN WATt. & Vllt.


making answer himself, instead of Tiffaphernes, that,for instance, " the Chians were void of all shame;"who, though the most wealthy of the Grecians, and** hitherto preserved by the auxiliary efforts of others,"yet are ever requiring strangers to expose their lives** and fortunes to keep them free." As for otherStates, he maintained "they acted basely, if, when"subjected to vast expences before they revolted froth"the Athenians, they refused to lay out as much, nay,"a great deal more, in their own defence." He wasalso dextrous at proving, that " Tiffaphernes, since"now he supported the war at his own private ex-** pence, was in the right to be frugal; but assuredly,"when returns were made him from the king, he** would makeup the present abatement of pay, and do** strict justice to every single State." He farther sug­gested to Tiffaphernes, that "he should not be too** much in a hurry to bring the war to a conclusion ; or** entertain the wish, either by bringing up the Phoe-** nician fleet which he had provided, or by taking in-** to pay a larger number of Grecians, to turn the supe-"riority at land and sea in favour of the Lacedæmo-"nians. He ought rather to leave both parties pretty"nearly balanced in strength; and fo enable the king,** when one of them became troublesome, to let the o-** ther party loose against them: Whereas, should the** dominion in both elements be given exclusively to ei-"ther, he would then be distressed for want of susfi-** cient power to pull down the triumphant State; un-"less, at a prodigious expence, and through infinity** of danger to himself, he should choose to enter the* * lists in person and war them down. The risks incur-** red by the other method were far more eligible, be-** cause attended with a smaller proportion of expence* * and his master might lie by with persect security,** whilst he was wearing out the Grecians by their own** reciprocal embroilments." He moreover hinted tohim, that " the Athenians were the best suited of the
** two







OCR Output








B. VII. THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. 259


And now Demosthenes, and Menander, and Euthy-demus, (for these went on-board to command the fleet,)getting clear from their moorings, stood away directlytowards the barricade of the harbour, and that intervalof its mouth not yet completely barred, in order toclear the passage. The Syracusans also and their allieshad now launched forth against them with their usualnumber of ships. A detachment of these were so sta­tioned as to guard the passage; the rest were spread cir­cularly quite round the harbour, that on all sides at oncethey might attack the Athenians, and their land-army onthe beach might second them on approaches to the shore.The Syraculan fleet was commanded by Sicanus and A-gatharcus, who were respectively stationed in each of thewings, whilst Py then and the Corinthians composed thecenter.
When the Athenians were come up to the barricade,they run boldly at it; and by the violence of the firstshock they beat off the vessels ranged about it, andwere intent on clearing away the whole barricade. Buthere, the Syracusans and allies falling in amongst themfrom every quarter, a general engagement ensued, notonly at the barricade, but in every part of the harbour.Obstinate it really proved, and such a battle as theyhad never fought before. Great, in truth, was the ar­dour of the seamen on both sides, in running upon theenemy, whenever the word was given; and great wasthe art exerted by the officers, in attack, and defence,and reciprocal contention. The soldiers on-board ex­erted all their efforts, that, when ship came to closewith ship, no stretch of military skill mould be omittedon the hatches. Every individual, abiding firmly inhrs post, strained all his diligence to signalize his ownbehaviour. But, as numerous ships were falling in to­gether amongst one another in little sea-room, and solarge a number never fought before in so small a space,(since she amount of both fleets fell little short of twohundred,) the direct incursions with the beak were few,
S 2 because


 







OCR Output








B. VIII. THE PELOPONNESTAN WAR. 315


compassed them round on all sides. Then, taking toopen flight, they lost six of their ships; but with theremainder reach in safety the iste of Teuglussa, andfrom thence proceed to Halicarnassus.
This being done, the Peloponnesians, putting backto Cnidus,, and the twenty-seven fail from Caunus com­pleting here their junction with them, they put out a-gajn to sea in one body; and, after erecting a trophyas Cyme, returned again to their anchorings at Cni­dus.
The Athenians, on the other hand, had no soonerbeen informed of the engagements of the squadrons,thao with the whole of their fleet they put out from Sa-mos, and made the best of their way to Cyme. Andyet,against the fleet at Cnidus they made no sallies, asneither did the enemy against them; but, after takingup the tackling of the vessels left at Cyme, and makingan assault upon Lori ma on the continent, they returnedtoSamos,.
The whole united fleet of the Peloponnesians, nowlying at Cnidus,, was busy in resitting completely forservice; and the Lacedæmonian council of eleven had aconference with Tiffaphernes, who was now come tothem, in which they notified to him their dislike of somethings in past transactions; and, in regard to the futureoperations of war, debated in what manner they mightbe carried on for their joint benesit and convenience.But;Lichas was the person who scrutinized most closelyinto the past, and expressed a dissatisfaction with bothtreaties; affirming* that " even the last settled by The-"ramenes was far from being good; but that terrible"it would be, should the king now claim, upon that
pretext* the possession of that tract ofcountry of which,**• either he or his ancestors had formerly, been masters:"For thus he might be enabled once more to inflave** all.the islands, and Thessaly, and Locri, quite-a$;far'**" as Bœotia; whilst the Lacedæmonians, instead"of freeing, would be obliged to impose the Median
"subjection 1







OCR Output








i8' THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. B.V.


with the Athenians for the restitution of Solium, or A-nactorium, or any other point in which they thoughtthemselves aggrieved; but speciously pretending, that*' they could never abandon their allies in Thrace,*' whom by solemn oaths they were bound to support;*' oaths which they had severally sworn when they first*' revolted in concert with the Potidæans, and had on*' other occasions since renewed:" arguing from hence,that "they could not have violated the common oath"of the confederates in refusing their accession to the"Athenian peace, since, as they had sworn upon the** faith of the gods to the former, they could not be-'' tray them without the guilt of perjury. The stipu-"lation, indeed, ran thus: unless some god or hero injoin-*' ed a dissent:»-— their present dissent, therefore, ap-*' peared to them to be a divine injunction." So farthey argued from their former oaths; and, in regardto the alliance offensive and defensive with Argos, ——*' they would hold consultations with their friends, and*' take such steps as were expedient and just." Andwith this answer the Lacedæmonian embassadors depart­ed home. An Argive embassy happened also at thesame time to be at Corinth, who pressed the Corinthiansto enter into their league without any farther hesitation.They desired them to attend, at the next public meetingthey held, for a final answer.
There arrived soon after an embassy from the Eleans,who made, in the first place,, an alliance offensive anddefensive with the Corinthians i and then, from Corinthrepairing to Argos, became allies of the Argives, ac­cording to the icheme pre-established for this purpose;for a misunderstanding had arisen between them and theLacedæmonians about Lepreum. In a former warof the Lepreatæ against a province of Arcadia, the Ele­ans had been prevailed upon tojoin the Lepreatæ for a moi­ety of the land that should be conquered; and, at theconclusion of the war, the Eleans left all the land in themanagement of the Lepreatæ, subject to the annual tri­bute







OCR Output








338 THE FELOPONNESIAN WAR. B.VllI.


wards introduced the four hundred into the senate, inthe following manner.
The whole body of the citizehs were daily underarms, either upon the Walls or in the field, to bridle theexcursions of the enemv from Decelea. Therefore^ onthe day appointed, they susfered such as were not ih thesecret to repair to their posts as usual: But, to those inthe plot, it had been privately notified, "by rtd"means to repair to their posts, but to lag behind at *** distance; and* in cafe any one should strive to oppose"what was now to be agitated, they should take up"arms and quell all opposition." Those, to whotrithese orders were previously imparted, were the An*drians and Teiians, three hundred of the Carysthians,and other persons now established in Ægina, whom theAthenians had sent thither by way of colony* but Werehow invited to repair to Athens with their arms to sup­port the scheme. When these dispositions Were formed,the four hundred (each carrying a concealed dagger, andguarded by one hundred and twenty youths of Greece,whose hands they had employed when assassination wasihe point) broke in upon the * counsellors of the ieatl,who were this moment sitting in the senate-house* andcalled out to them " to quit the place and take: thik** f salaries." Accordingly they had ready fo* themthe full arrears due to them, which they paid to each ashe went out of the house. In this manner the Senate,without giving the least opposition, removed themselvestamely from their office and the rest of the citizenstrade no effort to check such proceedings, and re­frained from any the least tumult.
The four hundred, having thus gained poflessjOh »fthe senate-house, proceeded immediatefy tfd ballot Fdra £ set of presidents from amongst their own body ; ahd
* The senate cfJive hundred,
's- The stated salary for a senator of Athens was a drachma, or seven pence threeWritings, a day.
made'







OCR Output








B>V, THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. 8j


Athenians..
*' THAT never can be: Since from States seated on** the continent we have nothing to apprehend they** are under no immediate necessity of guarding their li-"berty against attacks from us. Those alone we dread■* who are seated in islands; and who, like you, refuse** our government; or who, having felt the pains** of subjection, are irritated against us. Such are most** likely to have recourse to violent measures, and to** plunge themselves aqd us into imminent dangers."
MELI ANS.
** IF this be so k,---and if you, ye Athenians, can rea-** dily embark into so many perils to prevent die diffo-*' lution of your own empire; if States, by you insla-** ved, can do as much to throw off your yoke ; —*f* must it not be Wretchedly base and cowardly in us,** who yet are free, to leave any method, even to the** last extremity, untried, of averting stavtery?"
.., ',. Athenians.
w I F you judge, of things as wise men ought, we.** answer——Not. For the point, in which you are at** present concerned, is not a trial of valour upon equalterms, in order to escape the reproach of cowardice;but your deliberations proceed at present about themeans of self-preservation, that you may not be obli-*' ged to encounter those who must by far overpower** you." •:
Mel I ans.
"BUT we, on the contrary, know, that the entef-** prizes of war have sometimes very different events
G 2 "to


«*«c«*







OCR Output








£,V. THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. 19


If any point be in any manner or degree for the<l present, through forgetfulness on either side, omit-"ted; or, if any thing, upon a serious consultation"holden, be judged more proper; the Lacedæmonians"and Athenians are impowered, with all due regard"to their oaths, to make additions and alterations, at"their joint difcretion..
"Pleistola*, presiding in the college of Ephori, put-teth this treaty in force at Sparta, on the twenty-*' seventh day of the month Artemisias:. At Athens,"Alcaeus, the Archon, on the twenty-fifth day of the"month Elaphebolion. '..
*' Those who took the oath and sacrificed were,
"On the Lacedæ- ? Pleistolas, Damagetus, Chionis,monianside, — j Metagenes, Acanthus, Daichus,'. •. , . Ischagoras, Philocharidas, Zeux-
Idas, Anthippus, Telles, Alci-, nidas, Empedias, Menas, Lam-. . . -»i philus.
*' On the Athenian,—Lampo, Isthmionicus, Nicias,
Laches, Euthydemus, Procles,Pythodorus, Agnon, Myrtilus,. . Thrafycles, Theagenes, Aristo-
ccetes, Iolcius, Timocrates, Leo,Lamachus, Demosthenes."
This treaty was perfected upon the close of the winter,in the first commencement of the spring, immediatelyafter the Bacchanalian festivals at Athens. Ten com­plete years, and some few days over, were elapsed, sincethe first irruption into Attica, and an open commence­ment of the war. And let him, that would be assuredof the truth, compute only by the seasons of the year,and not by those who, in the contending States, were ei­ther Archons, or, by the offices they bore, had eventsdistinguished by an enumeration of their names. For it
C 2 cannot







OCR Output








128 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. B.VI.


*' by a decent fear, judge it needful to prepare with all"caution and alacrity, as if the danger was instant at"our doors. But these our enemies are actually'* coming; they are already (I know it well) upon the*' voyage; they are this moment only not in sight."
In this manner Hermocrates spoke his sentiments.But the popular assembly of the Syracusans was embroil­ed with much variance and contention. One party criedout, that "it was all a joke, the Athenians durst not*' think of invading them." Another, "Hermocrates"had truth and reason on his side." A third," let them"come, what damage can they do us which we are
not able heartily to repay them?" Others betrayedan open contempt at the whole account, and laughed atit as downright ridiculous. The party was but smallwhich gave credit to Hermocrates and trembled forthe future. At length, Athenagoras stood up, who,'being the first magistrate of the people, and whose cre­dit at this time was highest with them, delivered himselfas followeth:
"THE man, who wishes the Athenians may not"be so mad as to come hither and run themselves head-*' long into our subjection, is either a coward or a trai-** tor to his country. But for those, who vent such*' news and endeavour to frighten you by the terrible"recital, at their audaciousness, truly, I am not in the*' least surprised; but I am greatly so at their folly, if"they imagine their views can escape detection! Poor*' abject souls, quite dispirited within through their"own pusillanimity, are glad to spread consternation** throughout a whole community; that, under the"general panic, their own may lie veiled and undistin-"guished. And such is the effect, which the present"informations may be ready to produce; not from any"grounds of truth and certainty, but the fictions and"falsehoods of an iniquitous cabal, who are ever dab-"bling in the practices of faction.
*' But







OCR Output








B.V. THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. 39


Whilst: the Argives were employed in this negotia­tion, the Lacedæmonian embassadors, Andromenes, andPhædimus, and Antimenidas, who were commissionedto receive Panactum and the prisoners of war from theBœotians, and deliver them over into the hands of theAthenians, found, upon their arrival, that Panactumwas already demolished by the Bœotians, upon prettxcthat, " in former times, upon occasion of some disputeabout it, an oath had been taken, by the Athenians"and Bœotians, that neither should inhabit that place,"excluding the other, but should jointly possess itbut what Athenian prisoners of war were in the handsof the Bœotians were delivered up to Andromenes andhis collegues, who carried and released them to the A-thenians. They also reported the demolition of Panac­tum, declaring this to be equivalent to a restitution, asno enemy to Athens could occupy that post for the fu­ture.
These words were no sooner heard than the Athe­nians conceived the deepest resentments. They thoughtthemselves injured by the Lacedæmonians, not only inthe demolition of Panactum, which ought to have beenrestored standing, but also in the separate alliance madelately with the Bœotians, of which they now had no­tice, in open contradiction to their own declaration,** of joining them to compel by force such as would noc"accede to the treaty." They reflected also upon o-ther points in which the engagements of the treaty hadbeen in no wife fulfilled, and concluded themselves o-verreached. For these reasons, they gave a rough an­swer to the embassadors, and an instant dismission.
Upon so much umbrage, taken by the Athenians a-gainst the Lacedæmonians, such persons at Athens, aswere willing to dissolve the peace, set themselves in­stantly at work to accomplish their views. Others werelabouring the fame point, but none more than Alcibu-
D 4 des,







OCR Output








174 THE PELOPONNES^AN WAR. B.VI.


"ready for those who want it, you are conjured by no** means to reject; but relying, like other communi-*' ties, on that quantity of support we are able to af-"ford you, put the change for once on the Syracusans;** and, instead of being ever on the watch against them,"force them at length to be watchful and alarmed for** themselves."
Such was the reply of Euphemus. In the mean timethe real disposition of the Camarineans was this: A.tbottom they were well-affected to the Athenians, saveonly for the ambition they shewed of inflaving Sicily \but had ever been embroiled with the Syracusans,through that jealousy ever to be found in a neighbour­ing State. But, as the dread of victory on the fideof the Syracusans, who were close upon their borders,if earned without their concurrence, had influencedtheir measures, they sent a small party of horse to suc­cour them on the former occasion; and looked uponthemselves as obliged in policy to serve them underhandin future exigences, but with all possible frugality andreserve and, at the present juncture, that they mightnot betray any the least partiality against the Athenians,as they were come offvictorious from a battle, to returnthe fame impartial reply to both. Determined, there­fore, by these considerations, they answered,—— that,*' since a war had broke out between two States, each*? of which was in alliance with themselves, they judged*' the only method of acting consistently with their*' oaths would be to observe a strict neutrality." Uponthis the embassadors of both parties took their leavesand departed. And the Syracusans, within themselves,exerted their utmost applications to get all things inreadiness for war.
The Athenians, who were now incamped at Naxus,opened negotiations with the Siculi, to draw over asmany of them as was possible into their adherence*Many of these, who inhabited the plains, and were
most







OCR Output








B.VIII. THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. 317


having laid their ships aground, continued with themeighty days without subjecting them to any farther im­position.
During this interval of time, nay, extended fartherback, before they undertook this enterprise againstRhodes, the following transaction happened:
Alcibiades, after the death of Chalcideus and the bat­tle of Miletus, falling under the suspicion of the Pelo-ponnesians, and through them a letter having been sentfrom Lacedæmon to Astyochus to put him to death, —for he was an enemy to Agis, and his treachery in otherrespects was become notorious, — Alcibiades, s say,fearful of his life, withdraws himself first to Tissapher-nes, and, in the next place, did all in his power to un­dermine what interest the Peloponnesians had in him.Grown at length his dictator in every affair, he abridgedtheir pay; that, instead of an Attic * drachma, three 0-boli only should be given them, and that too with nopunctuality. He advised Tissaphernes to remonstratewith them, that " the Athenians, who through a long"tract of time had gained experience in naval affairs,"paid only three oboli to their seamen, — not so muchtf through a principle of frugality, as to prevent their** seamen from growing insolent through too much'* plenty; some of them would otherwise render their'* bodies less fit for fatigue, by having wherewithal to*c purchase those pleasures by which weakness is occa-"stoned; and others would desert, and leave their ar-*' rears to balance their desertion." He instructed him,farther, how, by seasonable gratuities to the comman­ders of ships and generals of the States, he might per­suade them all to acquiesce in his proceedings, except­ing the Syracusans; for, amongst these, Hermocratesalone made loud remonstrances in behalf of the wholealliance. Nay, Alcibiades himself took upon him togive the denial to such States as petitioned lor money;


* Six oboli, or 7'/. \ Sterling.


making







OCR Output








B.VIII. THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. 345


mocracy at Athens, and those at Athens to force an olugarcbical form upon the army. The soldiers, farther,immediately summoned a general assembly, in whichthey deposed their former commanders, and all suchcaptains of triremes as fell under their suspicions, andthen chose others to fill up the vacancies, both captainsof triremes and land-commanders, amongst whom wereThrasybulus and Thrasyllus. The last rose up in theassembly, and encouraged them by every topic of per­suasion; particularly, —— that " they had not the least"reason to be dispirited, though Athens itscif had re-"volted from them; for this was merely the secession** of a minority from men whose numbers were greater,*' and who were better furnished for every exigence;** because the whole navy of Athens was their own, by*' which they could compel dependent states to pay in"their former contingents of tribute as fully as if they*' sailed on such an errand from Athens itself. Even"yet they were masters of a city at Samos, a city despi-*' cable in no respect, but which once in a former war*' had well nigh wrested the empire of the sea from"the Athenians. The feat of war, in regard to their*' public enemies, would continue the fame as it was*' before, nay, by being masters of the fleet, they** were better enabled to procure all the needful sup-"plies than their opponents who were now at Athens.*' It was purely owing to their own peculiar situation at"Samos that the others had hitherto been masters of the*' entrance into the Piræus; and they soon should be*4 highly distressed if they refused to restore them their*' ancient polity, since these at Samos could more easily*' bar them the use of the sea than be barred up by*' them. What assistances Athens had hitherto given*' them against the enemy were but trifling, and of no** real importance. Nothing could be lost from that*' quarter; which was no longer able to supply them** with money, since with that they had been supplied** by the army; nor to send them any valuable instruc-
*' tions,







OCR Output








E.VUI. THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. 367


aright. A moderation, finely tempered between thefew and the many, was now inforced. And, from thelow situation into which their affairs were now plunged,this enabled Athens co re-erect her head.
They decreed, sarther, the recallroent of Alcibiadesand his adherents; and, dispatching a deputation to himand the army at Samos, exhorted them to exert theirutmost efforts for the public service.
In the first moments of this new revolution, Pisanderand Alexicles, with their partisans, and in general allthe great sticklers for the oligarchy, withdraw privatelyto Decelea. But Aristarchus, who was one of the ge­nerals of the State, took a different route from all therest; and, carrying off a party of archers, though rankBarbarians, went off towards Oenoe: Oenoe was a for­tress of the Athenians on the frontiers of Bœotia. Butthe Corinthians, on a provocation peculiar to them­selves, having procured the concurrence of the Bœo­tians, held it now blocked up, because a party of theircountrymen, drawing off from Decelea, had been putto the sword by a sally of the garrison from Oenoe. A-ristarchus, therefore, having in a conference settled mat­ters with the besiegers, deceives the garrison in Oenoe,by afluring them, that, " as their, countrymen in A-*' thens had made up all their quarrels with the Lace-"dasmonians, they also were bound to deliver up this*' place to the Bœotians; and that this was an exprese"provision in the treaty." Qiying credit therefore tohtm as in public command, and ignorant of all the latetransactions because closely blocked up, they agree withthe enemy and evacuate the fortress. In this mannerthe Bœotians regained possession of abandoned Oenoe:And thus the oligarchy and sedition were suppressed atAthens.
But, about the same space of time in the current sum­mer, in regard to the Peloponnesians at Miletus: .•■
When none of those, who were substituted by Tissa-phernes during his absence at Aspcndus, made regular
payments;







OCR Output








304 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR; B. VHf,


not only for this, but all the subsequent instances of hisconduct, as a man of an excellent understanding.
In pursuance of this, the Athenians, so soon as thdevening was closed, made the best of their way to Mile­tus, and left the victory imperfect. And the Argives,without making the least stay, chagrined as they wereat their late defeat, departed immediately from Samoato return to Argos.
The Peloponnesians, early the next dawn, weighingfrom Teichiusla* stand into Miletus. After one day'sstay in that harbour, on the next, having augmentedtheir squadron with the Chian ships which had formerlybeen chaced in company with Chalcideus, they determi­ned to go back again to Teichiussa to fetch off whatstores they had landed there. Accordingly, when the/were thus returned, Tiflaphernes, being come up withhis land-army, persuades them to stand directly againstIasus» in which his enemy Amorges at that instant lay.Thus, falling on Iafus by surprise, the inhabitantsof which expected none but an Athenian squadron,they become masters of it. In this action the Syracu-sans were the persons who gained the greatest honour,Amorges, farther, the bastard-son of Pifluthnes, whowas a revolter from the king, was taken prisoner by thePeloponnesians. They delivered him up to Tiflapher­nes, that if he pleased he might send him to the king,in obedience to his orders. Iafus* farther, they put tothe sack; and the army made on this occasion a verylarge booty, for this city had ever been remarkable forits wealth. They gave quarter to the auxiliaries in theservice of Amorges; and, without committing the leastinsult upon them, took them into their own troops, asthe bulk of them were Peloponnesians. They deliver­ed up the town into the hands of Tisiaphernes, as like­wise all the prisoners, whether Oaves or freemen, uponcovenant to receive from him a * Daric stater for each.


: This







OCR Output








&V. THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. sr


YEAR XIII. J
THE succeeding summer was no sooner begun, thanthe Bœotians, viewing the low estate to which it hadbeen reduced by the late battle, took into their ownhands the city of Heraclea, and discharged Hegesippi-das, the Lacedæmonian commandant, as guilty of mal­administration. They took this city into their ownhands, from the apprehension that, during the em­broilments of the Lacedæmonians in Peloponnesus, theAthenians might seize it. The Lacedæmonians, howe­ver, were chagrined at this step of the Bœotians.
This fame summer also, Alcibiades, the son of Cli-nias, being general of the Athenians, with the concur­rence of the Argives and their allies, entered Pelopon­nesus with a small party of heavy-armed Athenians andarchers, and enlarged his forces upon his route by theaids of the confederates in those quarters j where he notonly made such a disposition of asfairs as might best an­swer the views of the alliarrce, but also, traversing Pe­loponnesus with his force, he both persuaded the Pa-treans to continue their works quite down to the seaand intended also to execute a plan of his own for erec­ting a fort upon the Rhium of Achaia. -f But the Co­rinthians, and Sicyonians, and all such as were alarmedat the annoyance this fort might give them, rushed outto prevent him, and obliged him to desist.
The same summer a war broke out between the Epi-daurians and the Argives. The pretext was groundedon a victim due from the Epidaurians to the'PythianApollo, as an acknowledgement for their pastures; for
J Before Christ 419.
•f This was a graed project indeed! It aimed at no less than the total ruin of Co­rinth, and putting an end to all the navigation of that trading and opulent citythrough the hay of Crisla, The Athenians were already intire masters of the sea onthe other side of the isthmus.
E 2 the







OCR Output








U4 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. B. VI.


"well-proportioned to the design, since we know that we"are bound to a land far remote from our own, and"are under many disadvantages to grapple with our"foes. It will not be now your employment to march** to the relief of your dependents seated near to A-"thens against a hostile invasion, where all the needsulsupplies would be brought to your camp out of the** territories of friends; but you are to roam to a dif-** tant climate, where you cannot call one inch of ground** your own, and from whence, in the four winter months,** vou will scarcely be able to send a messenger to A-"thens.
"In my opinion, therefore, it is incumbent upon us** to carry thither large parties of heavy-armed, to be"raised out of our own citizens, our allies, and our"dependents, and an additional strength of Pelopon-** nesians, if we are able to procure it by persuasion or** by pay. Our archers and stingers must be also nu-"merous, that we may be able to make good our de-"scent in spite of the Sicilian horse. "We must alfo be"attended by supernumerary vessels, that we may be"enabled with greater ease to fetch in necessaries for** our army. We must also carry with us from A-
thens, in our tenders, a great quantity of corn, such"as wheat and barley, parched j with bakers, fome** of whom, for certain wages, must be obliged to"grind, that, if our armament lie any where weather-** bound, we may not stand in need of the necessaries"of life: For, so numerous as we must be, it will not"be possible for every city to receive us. All other** provisions must be laid in by ourselves to the utmost** of our power, and we must trust for nothing to the** care of others.
"But what concerns us most is, to carry from hence** a fund of money as ample as we can raise. As for"that, which the Egesteans pretend is already laid up"for our use, conclude it to be so only so far as words** are current. For, unless we set out from Athens,
"not







OCR Output













OCR Output








a38 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. B.VII.


against drawing off the army. He told them, " he** was perfectly well affined that the Athenians would"never forgive him, should he carry their troops from"Sicily without peremptory orders: That the affair** would not then lie under the cognizance of such as'** here advised it, and with their own eyes were con-** vineed of Che necessity of such .a step; but of men* * who would form their judgements upon the spiteful** calumniations of others, and the influence some ma-"Hcious demagogues would have over their under-"standings, by which their fate would be determined."-He farther represented, that ** many, nay, the greater** part of the soldiers, who now farmed the troops, andmake such tragical outcries ,about ahe perils that en-** viron them at present, would change their notes so'** foon as they were landed again at Athens, and as-** cribe their return to the treachery and corruption of** their commanders." For such reafons, he declared,"as he was well acquainted with Athenian tempers,** he would choose, rather than be undone at Athens'* by base criminations and an unjust sentence, to ha-** zard the last extremity, and perish, if so it must be,'* under the violence, of the enemy." He maintained,however, that " the state of the Synacu sans was worse** than their own. The demand upon them ffor the** pay of foreigners was large; their expences in secu-"ring the outworks of Syracuse were nigh: they had** now supported a large navy for thespace of an en-* * tire year; want theresore must soon come upon them,"and they must shortly be tocally distressed; because** the sum of * two thousand .talents they had already** expended of their .own stook, and had even con-"tracted a large debt beside. And, in case they a-** bate of their present.punctuality or making good the** appointments of the forces they have on foot, their** strength must moulder away; since it consisted, not** like the Athenians, of troops which must serve, but
* 337500/. Stirling.
"of







OCR Output








B.VIII. THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. 337


was Antipho, a man who in personal merit was secondto no Athenian then alive, and the greatest genius of histime to devise with sagacity, and ingeniousty to expresswhat he had once devised. At the assemblies of thepeople, or any public debate, he never assisted, if he couldpossibly decline it, since the »»«////«^wasjealous of the greatreputation he had gained: Yet, in the courts of judicatureor appeals to the people, he was the only person who wasable effectually to serve those clients who could get himfor their patron. And this same Antipho, when in pro­cess of time the government of the four hundred was quitedemolished, and severely prosecuted by ihepeople, is judgedto have defended their conduct, and plt-aded in a causewhere his own life was at stake, the best of any personthat down to this time was ever heard to speak.
Phrynichus also was another who singularly distin­guished himself in his zeal for the oligarchy. He dreadedAlcibiades, as conscious that he was privy to the wholeof the correspondence he had carried on with Astyo-chus. He proceeded thus, on the supposition that Al­cibiades would never be restored by an oligarchical go­vernment. And then he was a man in whose capacityand zeal, if once engaged, the greatest considence mightreasonably be placed. ,Theramencs, farther, the son of Agnon, a man whoboth in speaking and acting made no ordinary figure,had a principal share in the dissolution of the populargovernment: No wonder, therefore, as the businesswas managed by so many and so able agents, that,spite of every obstacle, it was brought to effect. Grie­vous, indeed, it was to the Athenian people to submicto the loss of their liberty a century after the expulsionof their tyrants, during which period they had not onlybeen independent, but accustomed, for above half thatspace, to give law to others.
To return. When, in the assembly of the people,not a soul was heard to oppose the motion, it passed intoa law, and the assembly was adjourned. They aster-Vol. II. Z wards







OCR Output








8.VII. THE PELGPONNESIAN WAR. 211


he had been able to collect from the several States,with whom his persuasions had been effectual; and, ha­ving convened the Syracusans, he told them that —"they ought to man out as large a number of ship-"ping as they possibly could, and try their fortune in*' a naval engagement: such a step, he had reason to*' hope, might be attended with consequences which"would amply compensate the danger, and invigorate"the war."
These instances of Gylippus were well seconded byHermocrates, who took uncommon pains to encouragehis countrymen to attack the Athenians by sea. —•** The latter, he told them, were far from enjoying"their naval skill as an hereditary right, or a privi-
lege from time immemorial exclusively their own."In fact, they were by nature land men much more
than the Syracusans; and necessity alone, in the Me-"dish invasion, had forced them to try their fortune"at sea: By enterprising men, as the Athenians were,*' such as were most daring in opposing them must*» needs be regarded as the most formidable enemies.** True — they had been used to intimidate their neigh--*' bours, not by a real superiority of strength, but by** their daring enterprising genius; and now, by the"fame methods, themselves might become formidable"even to Athenians." He assured them, " for his"own parr, he was perfectly convinced that the Syra-"cusans, if by an effort of bold resolution they would'* on a sudden attack the Athenian fleet, might reap•** more benesit from the terror which such a step wouldM strike upon the foe, than could accrue to the Athe-"nians from their superior skill when compared with"Syracusan inexperience." He pressed them there­fore ** to try their fortune by sea, and to bid adieu to"fear."
Thus animated by Gylippuy, and by Hermocrates,and by others, the Syracusans were eagerly bent on ac­tion by ica, and manned out their fleet. And, when
P 2 the







OCR Output








B. VII. THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. 265


Bur, in this interval, the Syracusans and Gyljppus,by sallying out with the land-forces, had gained a marchbefore them, had blocked up the roads along the coun­try by which it was judged the Athenians would march,and had posted strong guards upon all the fords of brooksand rivers; nay, their detachments stood ready drawnup in battalia to beat off the enemy from the most con­venient passes. Standing out farther into the harbourwith their fleet, they dragged from the shore the Athe­nian shipping. Some few of these they burnt, as theAthenians themselves had designed to do; but the resi­due at their leisure, from the (pot where each lay stran­ded, they took in tow and carried away to the city.And, this being done, when Nicias and Demosthenesjudged that they had completed such preparations fortheir march as were absolutely needful, the dislodge-nient of the whole army was put in execution on thethird day from the naval engagement.
Terrible indeed it was, not only when viewed in oneparticular light, as that they retreated because they hadlost the whoie of their fleer, and all their mighty hopeshad terminated in such personal dangers to themselves,and such as even boded the ruin of Athens; but the ve­ry abandoning of the camp presented to their fight themost cutting spectacles, and struck each foul amongstthem with heart-piercing anguish: For, as the dead layuninterred upon the surface of the earth, when the re­mains of m old acquaintance, thus miserably laid out,arrested the eyes of a soldier, he was instantly seizedwith regret and horror. But the living, who on accountof wounds and sickness were left behind, were causesof much greater affliction to the found than were eventhe dead, and in truth were much more to be deploredthan those who had no longer a being: For, burstingout into prayers and lamentations, they occasioned awild irresolution of thought; earnestly intreating thatthey might not be left behind, and screaming out aloudon each by name, as they saw a friend, or an acquaintance,







OCR Output








94 THE PELOPONNESUN WAR. 8.


to this very day, in posieffion.of the midland and north"erly parts of the island.
The Phœnicians also had settlements quite round thecoast of Sicily. They secured the capes on the sea andthe small circumjacent isles, for the fake of traffickingwith the Sicilians. But, when the Grecians, in consi­derable numbers, began to cross over and six their resi­dence here, the Phœnicians abandoned their other set­tlements, and, uniting together, seated themselves atMotya, and Soloeis, and iPanormus, near to the Ely mi)secure of their own continuance in these quarters fromtheir friendship with the Elymi, and because, from thispart of Sicily, the passage to Carthage is exceedingshort. — So many were the barbarians seated in Sicily jand such the order of their setdements.
The first Grecians who came hither were the Chalci-deans of Eubœa. Thucles led the colony, which set­tled at Naxus, and erected the altar of Apollo theGuide, which is still to be seen without the city; and onwhich the Reputations, sent from hence to the oracles, roffer sacrifice before they begin their voyage.
In the year following, Archias, a Corinthian, of therace of Hercules, founded Syracuse, having previouslyexpelled the Sicilians out of that island on which theinner-city is seated, though now no longer washed roundabout by the sea. And, in process of time, the upper-city also, being taken in by a wall, became exceedingpopulous.
In die fifth year after the foundation of Syracuse,Thucles and his Chalcideans sallied forth out of Naxus)and having, by force of arms, drove away the Sicilians,they build Leontium, and afterwards Catana. But theCataneans themselves declared Evarchus their founder.
About the same point of time, Lamis also, leading acolony from Megara, arrived in Sicily, and planted themon a spot called Trotilus, upon the river Pantacias. But,removing afterwards from thence to 1 eontium, he aslo-ciated himself a short time with the Cataneans for the
protection







OCR Output








B.V. THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. 25


thoughts, to gain an exact insight into all its occurren­ces. It was farther my lot to susfer a twenty years ex­ile from my country, after my employment in the bu­siness of A mphipolis, and to be present at the transac­tions of both parties, and not the least at those of thePeloponnesians, in consequence of my banishment; bywhich means I had leisure to gather more ample infor­mations about them. I shall relate therefore the quar­rel and breach of the treaty, subsequent to the first tenyears, and the incidents of the war which afterwardsensued.
UPON the conclusion of the treaty of peace for fif­ty years and the subsequent alliance, the embassies fromthe different States of Peloponnesus, who had been sum­moned thither to give their concurrence, withdrewfrom Lacedæmon. The rest of them indeed went di­rectly home; but the Corinthians, stopping in their re­turn at Argos, began first, at a conference with some ofthe magistracy there, to insinuate, "that, since the** Lacedæmonians, not in order to serve but to inslave** Peloponnesus, had entered into a treaty and an alii-** ance, offensive and desensive, with their once most'* inveterate soes, the Athenians, it highly behoved the** Argives now to watch over the preservation of Pelo-** ponnesus, and to form a public resolution,—That
any Grecian State, which is free and uncontrolled,** which enjoyeth and supporteth an equal share of"rights and privileges, might enter into an alliance, of-** fensive and desensive, with the Argives, for the guard
of their mutual properties against their common foes:*f t- This to be communicated only to the few who were*f absolute masters of the decisions of each State, and e-*? very where to shun all conference with the bulk of"the people, lest the scheme might be detected, in caseM the multitude should refuse their concurrence." Theyassured them, that the majority of the States were so ex­asperated against the Lacedæmonians, that they would
infallibly







OCR Output








360 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. B.VIII.


Hitherto, indeed, this charge against them had onlybeen whispered with an air of secrecy amongst a few.But, when Phrynichus, upon his return from the em-bassy to Lacedæmon, was treacherously stabbed, by oneof the patrole in the forum, at the hour of public resort,bjing got but a few steps from the house where thecouncil was sitting, and dropped down dead upon the
spot; when, farther, the assassin made his escape;
and a stranger from Argos, who assisted at the fact,being apprehended and tortured by the four hundred,discovered not the name of any one person who set thempn, nor made any farther confession than that" he knew"large numbers met at the house of the officer who"commanded the patrole, and at other places ;"—*then,at length, as nothing could be made of this affair,Theramenes and Aristocrates, and as many either of thescur hundred or of others as were combined with them,proceeded to act in a more open and resolute manner.For by this time the fleet was come round from Laco-nia; and, riding before Epidaurus, had made ravagesupon Ægina. Theramenes therefore averred it impro­bable, that, " were they intended for Euboea, they"would ever have put into Ægina, and then go again"and lie at Epidaurus, unless they had been sent out atf* the express invitation of those whom he had always*' accused of traiterous designs; and it was impossible"to be passive any longer under such practices." Infine, after many speeches made to excite a tumult, andmany suspicions disseminated abroad, they fell to workjn earnest. For the heavy-armed, posted in the Piræusto carry on the new works of Eetione'ia, amongst whomAristocrates himself was employed at the head of hisown band, lay under an arrest Alexicles, who com­manded there for the oligarchy, and was a most vehe­ment adversary to the opposite party; and, carryinghim into a houie, put him under confinement. To thisaction they were also emboldened by the concurrenceof others, as well as by Hermon, who commanded the
patrole







OCR Output








*76 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. B.VII.


others, entangled in the croud, were carried away by thecurrent. The hither bank of the river was now rilledwith Syracusans; and, it being naturally steep, theypoured down their darts upon the Athenians, numbersof whom were drinking greedily of the stream, confu­sedly hampered together in the hollow of the channel.The Peloponnesians, plunging in after them, made agreat slaughter of those who were in the river. Thewater was immediately discoloured with blood: But thestream, polluted with mud and gore, deterred them notfrom drinking it greedily, nor many of them from fight­ing desperately for a draught of it. But, in short, whenthe carcases of the dead began to lie heaped one uponanother in the river, and the whole army was become acontinued carnage;* of some in the river; of those whowere making off from the banks, by the horsemen ofthe foe; Nicias surrenders himself prisoner to Gylip-pus, into whose power he chose to fall sooner than intothat of the Syracusans. He told him, that " he him-** self and the Lacedæmonians might decide his fate as** best pleased themselves; but intreated that a stop** might be put to the slaughter of his soldiers." Uponthis, Gylippus issued out orders to give quarter; andthus they carried off the remnants of this body as pri­soners of war, such excepted as were secreted by theircaptors, the number of which was large. Having, far­ther, detached a party in pursuit of the three hundred,who in the night had broke through the guard, theyalso made them prisoners. The whole number nowcollected together as the public prize was not large>but very numerous were they who were clandestinelysecreted. Not a town in Sicily but was crouded withthem, fince these had not surrendered upon terms likethole under Demosthenes. A considerable number hadalso perished: For this was a terrible slaughter; nay,there was no one greater in the course of the Sicilian
* According to DUderut Siculus, the number of the slain amounted to eightttnthousand men.
war:







OCR Output








B.VI1I. THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. 347


•


"strength of theirs, by not supplying them constantly"and fully with their pay. The time, therefore, they*' insisted, ought no longer to be thus idly wasted, but"an engagement hazarded at once." Yet in such cla­mours thole deepest concerned were the Syracusans.
The confederates and Astyochus himself being af­fected with these clamours, and having declaimed in acouncil of war for engaging the enemy forthwith, asthey had received undoubted intelligence of the confu­sions at Samos; putting out to sea with the whole oftheir fleet, amounting to a hundred and twelve sail,and having ordered the Milesians to march thither over­land, they stood away for Mycale. At GJaucæ of My­cale the Athenians were now lying, with eighty-twoships of the Samian department: For in this quarter ofMycale Samos lies, but a small distance from the con­tinent: But, when they saw the fleet of the Peiopon-»esians approaching, they retired to Samos, judgingtheir own strength insufficient for an engagement withthe foe which might prove decisive. Besides, as theyhad discovered the intention of those at Miletus to ven­ture An engagement, they expected Strombichides fromthe Hellespont, who was to bring to their assistance theships on the station of Chios which had gone up toAbydus; and a message had already been dispatched,to hasten him up. For these reasons they plied away toSamos. The Peloponnesians, arriving at Mycale, en­camped upon the shore along with the land-forces ofthe Milesians and those sent in 'by the bordering people.On the next day, when they were fully bent on stand­ing directly against Samos, advice is brought them that"Strombichides is come up -with the ships from the** Hellespontupon which they made the best of theirway back again to Miletus. And now the Athenians,having gained so large an accession of strength, shewthemselves immediately before Miletus, with a hun--dred and eight fail, desirous of coming to an engage-*. • . • ...... «' .'i-rhent







OCR Output








3.V. THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. . 9i


care for the future to place a stronger guard upon theirworks. And here the summer ended.
In the winter which followed, the Lacedæmoniansdrew out their forces in order to begin an expedition in.to Argia j but, when the victims, offered on the fron­tiers, boded no success to the expedition, they againwithdrew. Yet the Argives, as such an invasion hadbeen intended against them, suspected it was owing tothe intrigues of a- faction within their city; someof whom they immediately secured, but the rest escapedby flight.
About the same time also, the Melians carried ano­ther part of the Athenian circumvallation, as the partyby which it was guarded was not numerous. But, up­on such disturbances, a strong reinforcement was sentfrom Athens, under the command of Philocrates, theson of Demeas. The Melians were now closely investedon all fides; and, some schemes to betray the town be­ing in agitation amongst them, they thought proper tomake a voluntary surrender. This they did " at the dis-** cretion of the Athenians who put to death all theyfound within the place able to bear arms, and made thewomen and children staves. The town they afterwardsrepeopjed by fending thither a colony of five hundred.


THE







OCR Output








£.V. THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. 21


Their remonstrances had no effect upon the Lacedæmo­nians, who sent them away without redress, and struckup forthwith an alliance, offensive and defensive, withthe Athenians. They had reason to conclude that*' the Argives would come to no agreement with"them," fince they had lately declared a negative totheir embassadors, Ampelidas and Lichas; "and yet'* these Argives," theyjudged, " could be no dreadfulM foe without the Athenians; and that the rest of Pelo-"ponnems would not now presume to interfere, who,"without this method of prevention, would certainly*' have gone over to the Athenians." An Athenianembassy, therefore, being at this crisis resident amongstthem, a conference was holden, and the terms complete­ly adjusted. The ratification was made by solemn oath,and the articles of this alliance, offensive and defensive,were these:
"THE Lacedæmonians enter into this alliance for"the term of fifty years.—Provided that,
"If any enemy enter the territories of the Lacedæ-"monians, and commit any manner of hostilities to*' their prejudice, the Athenians march forthwith to"their succour, with all the possible means of redress,** and with their whole united force.
"And, in case fucji invaders shall have withdrawn** themselves, that the State under which they acted be*' declared an enemy both to the Lacedæmonians and** the Athenians, both which are to join in acting of-*' fensively against that State, nor to lay down their*» arms without the mutual consent of both the con-*' trailing States.
** These terms to be observed with honour, with ala-*' crity, and without any fraud whatever.
** Provided, farther,— That, if any enemy enterM the territories of the Athenians, and commit hostili-*' ties to the prejudice of the Athenians, the Lacedæ-M monians march forthwith to their succour, with all
C 3 "the







OCR Output








i6 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. B.V.


demands, with large justifications, were urged on bothsides, till, at length, it was agreed, that " a peace"should be concluded, each party restoring what they** had conquered in the war, but Nisæa to remain in"the hands of the Athenians." Platæa was re-demand­ed by the latter, but the Thebans urged that it had nocfallen into their hands by force or by treachery, butthey possessed it in pursuance of a free and voluntarysurrender. And, upon the same plea, the Athenianskept Nisæa.
Things being so far adjusted, the Lacedæmonianscalled together their consederates; and all their voices,excepting those of the Bœotians, and Corinthians, andEleans, and Megareans, who were not at all satisfiedwith these proceedings, concurring for a peace, they ra­tify the accommodation, and solemnly pledged the ob­servance of it to the Athenians, who, in exchange,swore the same to the Lacedæmonians, in effect as fol-loweth:
"THE Athenians and Lacedæmonians, and their"allies, have made peace on these terms, and every"State hath sworn to their observance.
"In regard to the common temples: — Permission is"granted, to all who desire it, to sacrifice, to visit, to"consult the oracles, to send public deputations, in"the prescribed forms of every people, both by land"and sea, without any molestation.,
"That the sacred soil and the temple of Apollo at"Delphi, and Delphi itself, be ruled after its own mo-** del, be taxed at its own discretion, and be adminis-"tered by its own magistrates, whose determinations to"be final both in regard to life and property, accord-** ing to the primitive laws of the place.
"That this peace continue for the space of fifty"years, between the Athenians and the confederates"of the Athenians, on the one side, and the Lacedæ-** monians and the consederates of the Lacedæmonians,
« on







OCR Output








58 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. B.V,


On the other part also, the Argives were still much,more exasperated against those, who had made this sus­pension without public authority. They imagined theLacedæmonians had escaped them, when they had thefinest opportunity of striking a blow, inasmuch as thecontest must have been decided under the very walls ofArgos, and in company with a numerous and gallantalliance. And hence, upon their return, at the Chara*drum, the place where the crimes committed in an ex­pedition are adjudged, before they enter the city, theywere beginning to stone Thrasyllus, who, flying to analtar, escapeth with life: His effects, however, thtyconfiscated to public use.
But, after this, came up the Athenian succour, con­sisting of a thousand heavy-armed and three hundredhorsemen, commanded by Laches and Nicostratus,The Argives, who, after all, were afraid to break theagreement with the Lacedæmonians, ordered them to*' be gone forthwith;" and, though they requested aconference, refused to introduce them into the assemblyof the people, till the Mantineans and Eleans, who werenot yet departed, by great importunity obtained a com­pliance. Here the *Athenians, in the presence of Al-cibiades their embassador, assembled with the Argivesand their allies, averred, that " the suspension was not** valid, since agreed to without the consent of the bo-"dy of the confederates; now, therefore, as themselves"were come up opportunely to their assistance, they"were obliged in honour to prosecute the war." Theconfederates allowed the force of this argument; andthe whole alliance, except the Argives, marched instant­ly away against Orchomenus, of Arcadia. But eventhe Argives, though they stayed behind at first, werepersuaded by such reasoning, and soon after went alsoto take part in the expedition. Thus united, they satdown before and besieged Orchomenus. They madeseveral assaults upon it, desirous for other reasons to get
* Laches and Nicostratus.


it







OCR Output








96 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. B.Vf,


]y. And, after a short interval, Anaxilas, tyrant of theRhegians, ejected the Samians, repeopled the city witha number of mixed inhabitants, and changed its nameto Meslene, in honour of the country from whence hewas originally descended. Himera also was foundedfrom Zancle by Euclides, and Simus, and Sacon. In­to this colony came also a very numerous body of Chal-cideans. Some exiles farther from Syracuse, who hadbeen worsted in a sedition, and were distinguished by thetitle of Miletidæ, took up their residence amongst them.Hence their dialect became a mixture of the Chalcidicand the Doric; but the Chalcidic model obtained illtheir civil institutions.
Acræ and Casmenæ were founded by the Syracusans;Acre seventy years after Syracuse, and Casmenæ neartwenty after Acræ. Camarina also was first founded bythe Syracusans, very nearly one hundred thirty-fiveyears after the building of Syracuse: Its founders wereDascon and Menecolus. But the Camarineans being af­terwards driven out by the arms of the Syracusans, be­cause of a revolt, in process of time, Hippocrates, ty­rant of Gela, received the lands of the Camarineans asa ransom for some Syracusan prisoners of war, and ta*king upon himself to be their founder, replanted Ca­marina. Yet once more again it was demolished byGelon; and replanted a third time by the same Gelon.So many nations of Greeks and Barbarians inhabited Si­cily.
An island so large and so populous the Athenianswere passionately bent on invading. Their truest andfinal view was to compass its total reduction; but thepretext, alledged for a colour, was their readiness tosuccour such as by blood were related, or by prior alli­ances had been attached to them. An Egestean embas­sy, now residing at Athens, laboured the point with allpossible industry, and with extraordinary earnestnesspressed them to engage in ir. For the Egesteans, whobordered upon the Selinuntians, had been embroiled in 4
war







OCR Output








fc.'V-i; TWE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. 115


I


"riot barely provided as well as those we are to encoun-
"ter,- but, equality in strength for battle alone ex-
** cepted, in all other respects far surpassing them in e-** very needful appointment, —• we shall hardly be able"to reduce who are to be reduced, or even to protect** who are' to' be protected. We should regard"ourselves in the character of people who are going to"seek a new settlement among aliens and enemies;"andj as such* are necessitated to render themselves"victors of the spot the very day they land; or to* * rest assured, if they then miscarry, that the whole"of that region will be in arms against them. Of this"I own myself afraid; against this I am convinced that** by repeated consultations we ought timely to pro-** vide; and, after all, must, trust still farther to the** goodness of our fortune, hazardous, as we are but** men. Yet hence, I should be glad to set out in this** enterprize with as little occasion as possible to rely on"uncertain fortune, and to be amply provided with e-*t very expedient for a successful expedition: For these,"to my apprehension, are the readiest means to secure** the public welfare, and the safety of us who are desti-** ned for the voyage. But, if any .man thinks my"reasons chimerical, I am ready to resign my com-** marid to his superior abilities." .•
In this manner Nicias delivered himself, with a view,if possible, to discourage the Athenians from proceeding,by so vast a demand of articles requisite to the design;or at least, that, in case he must be obliged to under­take the service, he might set out with such ample expe­dients of security.
Yet all this bulky and embarrassing demand of ap­pointments could not raise in the Athenians the least a-version to the expedition, but rather fastened their ea­gerness upon it more intensely than ever; and Niciasprevailed on that side of the question where he hoped tohave been deseated. It was now universally agreed,
I % that







OCR Output








B.VIJI. THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. 295


Chalcideus And Endius who had sent him, in pursuanceof his engagements to work the revolt of the cities withthe sole power of the Chians and with Chalcideus. Ha-ving therefore performed the greatest part of their voy­age thither without being discovered, arid prevented bya small portion of time Strombichides, 8nd also Thra-fycle?, who was lately come up from Athens with twelve&ips, and in junction with she former followed afterthem, they cawse Miletus to revolt. The Athenians,indeed, with nineteen sail, arrived upon their heels;but, as the Milesians denied them a reception, theytook their station at Lade, an adjacent isle.
The first alliance between the king and the Lacedæ­monians was made immediately after the revolt of Mi­letus, by Tissaphernes and Chalcideus, as followeth.
ON these terms the Lacedemonians and confeder"rates make an alliance with the king and Tissapher-"nes. . m,
** Whatever region or cities the king possesseth. and"ithe ancestors »f the ku^g possessed, be thai? (the-«* Mvg's.
"Afld, out of thpse cities, whatever sums of money"ipr any other supply went to the Athenians, let the"king and (Jie Laoedasroonians and confederates jointly"stopa that the Athenians may no longer receive those"sums of money, nor any other such supply.
K* Afld the war against the Athenians let the king"and the Lacedæmonians and confederate* jointly*' (Carry on.
'* And be it unlawful to put an end to the war a-'* gainst the Athenians without the consent of both the"contracting parties; of the king on one side, of the"Lacedæmonians and confederates on the other.
*' If, farther, any revolt from the king, be they de-** ejared enemies to the Lacedæmonians and confede-*' rates.
'U 4 "And,







OCR Output








I'ga THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. B. VL


truth, that " Syracuse was completely invested on all** sides." Gylippus upon this gave up all hopes of sa­ving Sicily; but, having the preservation of Italy stillat heart, he and Pythen, the Corinthian, with the smallsquadron at hand, consisting only of two Laconic andtwo Corinthian vessels, crossed over the Ionian gulf withall possible dispatch to Tarentum. The Corinthians,besides their own ten now fitting out, were to man twobelonging to the Leucadians, and three more belong­ing to the Ambraciots, and follow them as soon as pos­sible.
The first step of Gylippus, now arrived at Tarentum,was to go in quality of embassador to Thuria, claimingprivilege for it, as his father had been a denison of thatState; but, finding himself unable to gain their concur­rence, he weighed from thence and stood along thecoast of Italy. But in the Terinean gulf he met with ahard gale of wind, which in this gulf, when in a nor­therly point, blows generally with great and lasting vi­olence, and now drove him from his course, and blewhim out into the open sea, where he stood again therebuff of another violent storm, but at length reachedTarentum. He there laid his vessels on-ground whichhad been damaged in the foul weather, and resittedthem for service.
When Nicias found that he was in his passage, he be­trayed an open contempt of so trifling a squadron, asthe Thurians had already done before him. It appear­ed to him, that so petty a squadron could only be fittedout for piratical cruizes, and therefore he sent out nodetachments to hinder his approach.
About the fame time of this summer, the Lacedæmo­nians, with their own domestic forces augmented by thejunction of their allies, made an irruption into Argos, andravaged great part of that territory. The Atheniansput out to lea with thirty fail to succour the Argives,which procedure was, beyond all denial, the clearestViolation of the treaties between them and the Lacedæ­monians.







OCR Output








b;v, the peloponnesian war. 73


"'the Argives, about the determinate and most expe-*' dient methods of issuing orders to the rest of the al-*' liance.
*' But, if any controversy arise between the States,"either those within or those without Peloponnesus;*' either concerning their boundaries or any oiher point,it shall be determined by judges.".And, if any confederate State have a dispute with*' another State, they shall go, with a reference, to that*' State which to the contending States shall be thought"most impartial. Private persons, however, to be- *' judged bv the laws of that State to which they arc"subject."
This peace, and such an alliance, was now perfected;and the reciprocal damages of war and all other of­fences were now buried in oblivion. And, having al­ready settled all points to general satissaction, they con­curred in a suffrage, " to receive no herald nor embassy*' from the Athenians, till they were withdrawn out*' of Peloponnesus, and had given up their fortifications". at Epidaurus ;'* and farther, " for the future to*' make neither peace nor war but with joint concurs"rence." Their attention was also extended to objectsmore remote; and in conjunction they dispatched em­bassadors to the cities in Thrace and to Perdiccas, andseduced Perdiccas to swear adherence to their league:Not that he instantly declared his revolt from the Athe­nians, but he was bent on accomplishing it ever since hesaw the Argives had done it; for he was originally de­scended from Argos. They renewed also their ancientoaths to the Chalcideans, and strengthened them by theaddition of new.
The Argives also dispatched an embassy to the Athe­nians, requiring them to quit the works they had raisedat Epidaurus. The latter, sensible that their soldiers there•were but a handful of men, when compared with those.who were associated with them in that service, sent De­mosthenes







OCR Output








3o8 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. B.VIII.


But now, the Lesbians notifying again their readi­ness to revolt, Astyochus, in a conference with Pæda-ritus and the Chians, "maintains the necessity of go-"ing thither with a squadron to support the revolt of"Lesbos since, in consequence ot it, they must ei-"ther enlarge the number of their confederates, or,"even though miscarrying in the design, must hurt"the Athenians-" But they were deaf to this remon­strance; and Pædaritus positively declared that heshould not be attended by the ships of Chios. Uponthis, taking with him five fail of Corinthians, a sixthship belonging to Megara, and one more of Hermione,and all the Laconjan which he himself brought thither,he stood away from thence to his station at Miletus,uttering grievous threats against the Chians, that,"how low soever they might be reduced, they should*' never receive any succour from him." Accordingly,touching fiist at Corycus of Erythræ, he moored therefor the night. The Athenians, who, from Samos,with a considerable strength, were now bound againstChios, were lying at the fame instant of time on theother side of the cape, but so stationed that neitherparty knew of the nearness of the other. At this junc­ture, a letter being delivered from Pædaritus, that ;t a"party of Erythræans, who had been prisoners at Sa-"mos and released from thence, are coming to Ery-"thræ to betray that place," Astyochus puts out a-gain immediately for Erythræ; and thus narrowly, onthis occasion, d\d he escape falling into the hands ofthe Athenians. Pædaritus, farther, had made the pas­sage upon this affair; and both having joined in ma­king all necessary enquiries about those who were accu­sed of this piece of treachery, when they found thewhole to have been a plot of the prisoners at Samosmerely to recover their liberty, they pronounced theminnocent, and so departed; the latter to Chios; but theother, in pursuance of his first designation, made thebest of his way to Miletus.







OCR Output








54 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR, B.V,


** by sea without molestation, f Unless, therefore,* * they would replace the Mefienians and Helots in Py-** lus, to annoy the Lacedæmonians, they should deem** themselves aggrieved." Upon this, the Athenians,at the instigation of Alcibiades, underwrote this chargeupon the Laconic column, that "the Lacedæmonians** were guilty of perjury and removed the Helotsfrom Crania into Pylus, to resume their depredations,but refrained from any other act of hostility.
In the course of this winter, though the Argives andEpidaurians were at war, yet no regular battle wasfought between them. The hostilities consisted of am­buscades and skirmishes, in which, according to thechance of action, some persons perished on both sides.
But in the close of winter, when the spring was nowapproaching, the Argives, provided with ladders forscale, came under Epidaurus, hoping to take it by sur­prise, as insufficiently manned by reason of the war jbut, failing of success, they soon withdrew. And thenthe winter ended, and with it ended also the thirteenthyear of the war.
YEAR XIV.J
ABOUT the middle of the ensuing summer, whentheir consederates, the Epidaurians, were sadly distres-sed, when some of the Peloponnesians had already re­volted, and others shewed plainly a spirit of discontent,the Lacedæmonians were clearly convinced that, unlessexpeditiousty prevented, the mischief would spread a.-broad. Upon this they took the field against Argoswith their whole force, both themselves and their He­lots; and Agis, the son of Archidamas, king of the La­cedæmonians, commanded in chief. They were atten-
f The Argives, in this remonstrance, acknowledge the dominion of the sea, evenon the coast of Peloponnesus, to belong to Athens,
t Before Chijst4i$;







OCR Output








i86 -THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. B.VI.


racusans refrained from sallying out against them, theyagain drew off, and raised a fort at Labdalum, on thevery steepest edge of Epipolæ, looking towards Mega-ra, which they intended as a repository for their bag­gage and money, whilst themselves might be called off,cither to fight or to carry on the works of a siege.
Soon after this they were joined by a body of threehundred Egestean horse, and one hundred more consist­ing of Siculi and Naxians, and some others in their al­liance. The Athenian cavalry was in all two hundredand fifty: They had procured some horses from the E-gesteans and Cataneans, and had purchased the rest; sothat now they had got together a body of horse amount­ing in all to six hundred and fifty.
A garrison was no sooner settled in the fort of Labda­lum, than the Athenians approached to Tyche; wheretaking post they built a wall in circle with great expe­dition, and by the rapidity of their work struck conster­nation into the Syracusans. Upon this they sallied outwith the sixed design of hazarding an engagement, asthey saw the danger of dallying any longer. The ar­mies on both sides were now beginning to face each o-ther; but the Syracusan generals, observing that theirown army was in disarray and could not easily be for­med into proper order, made them all wheel off againinto the city, except a party of their horse: These,keeping the field, prevented the Athenians from carry­ing stones and straggling to any distance from theirposts. But, at length, one Athenian band of heavy-armed, supported by the whole body of their cavalry,attacked and put to flight these Syracusan horsemen.They made some slaughter amongst them, and erected atrophy for this piece of success against the enemy's ca­valry.
On the day following, some of the Athenians beganto raise a wall along the northern side of their drtU\whilst others were employed in carrying stones and tim­ber, which they laid down in heaps all along the place
called







OCR Output








CONTENTS. _


Gylippus; he arrives at Tarentum. The Athenians, by openlyjoining the Argives against the Lacedæmonians, violate th*.treaty of peace in Greece. — — P. i8i
CONTENTS of Book Vis.
The siege of Syracuse is carried oh so vigorously by Nicias, that the
Syracusans think of a surrender. At this crisis arrive the Pelo-
ponnesian succours and Gylippus the Spartan, which giveth a.
new turn to the siege. A counterwork is raised, to stop the A-
thenian circumvallation; engagements ensue. Nicias is now in
a bad situation. He sendeth home a succinct detail of affairs by
letter. A reinforcement is ordered him from Athens, under the
command of Demosthenes. The Lacedæmonians resolve to re­
new the war at home. — — — P. 194.
Year XIX. Attica invaded, and Decelea fortified.— A naval en­
gagement in the harbour of Syracuse, in which the Athenians
are superior. In the mean time Athens is sadly distressed by the
enemy.—A massacre at Mycalessus. — A sea fight on the coast of
Achaia.—A second engagement in the harbour of Syracuse, to.
the advantage of the Syracusans. The reinforcement arriveth
from Athens. Demosthenes attempts Epipolæ without success.
Debates about raising the siege, which at length is resolved. The
instant they are embarking the moon is eclipsed; upon which su­
perstition detaineth them. The Syracusans attack them both by
land and water. The Athenians are worsted in every engage­
ment; at length lose all their shipping. They retreat by land,
are pursued, sadly distressed, and totally subdued. Nicias and
Demosthenes are taken prisoners and put to death. P. 209
CONTENTS of Book VIII.
The news of the overthrow in Sicily causeth a great consternation
at Athens. All Greece is in combination against them; and
their dependents are meditating revolts. P. 281
Year XX. Revolt of the Chians. An alliance between Darius No-
thus and the Lacedæmonians. The war transferred to Ionia.
Battle of Miletus. A second alliance between Darius and the
Lacedæmonians. Proceedings at Chios. Revolt of Rhodes.
The politic conduct of Alcibiades: His intrigues. A sedition
among the Athenians at Samos in favour of an oligarchy. Phry­
nichus counterplots Alcibiades. A third alliance between Da­
rius and the Lacedæmonians. — — P. 287
Year XXI. Proceedings at Chios. The democracy overturned in
several places of the Athenian jurisdiction; and at Athens, by
the influence of Antipho, Phrynichus, and Theramencs. A
council of four hundred take upon them the government. The
army at Samos declares for the democracy, recals Alcibiades,
and elects him General. Athens full of factions. Phrynichus
stabbed. A tumult; in the midst of which the fleet of the enemy
appears in sight. Battle of Eretria; and revolt of Eubœa. The
four-hundred are deposed: And a new form of government settled
at Athens. The banishment of Alcibiades repealed. Battle of
Cynos-Sema. — — — P. 331







OCR Output








B.VIII. THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. 35$


adjoined to the new work erected in the Piræus, andkept it intirely in their own custody. Here they obligedall the citizens to lodge what corn they already had,and all that should hereafter be imported, and here on­ly to expose it to sale and to vend it.
These proceedings had for a long time drawn sharp1insinuations from Theramehes; arid, when the embassyreturned from Lacedæmon without bringing to anymariner of issue a general accommodation for the wholeiof the Std(et he averred, that ** by this new work the** safety of the city toas visibly endangered." Forfrom Peloponnesus, at this instant of time, at the rex.quest of the Eubœans, no less than forty-two fail of (hipswere on the coast of Laconia; some of which were Ita­lian, from Tarentum and from Locri, and some Sici­lian; and all were now bound sor Eubœa. At thehead of this equipment was Hegesandridas, a Spartan,the son of Hegesander. Theramenes maintained, that"it was set out less for Eubœa! thdri for those who"were now fortifying at Eetiorieia j ants, unless we"stand upon our guard, they will surprise and corh-"plete the rilin of Athens." There was really some­thing in the conduct of the" rrien he accused to counte­nance this charge, nor was it merely thev Outcry of slan­der. Those who now composed the oligarchy wereprincipally desirous to preserve in their hands the whole.appenage of the republic j if this were impracticable,to secure the shipping and walls, and subsist with inde­pendence; but, should they be unable to compass this,rather than fall the first victims to the democracy re-esta­blished, to let in the enemy; and, resigning their ship­ping and fortifications, to make any terms whatever fortheState, provided they could obtain security for theirown persons. They accelerated, therefore, this nev^work; which was lo contrived as to have posterns, andsally-ports, and passages enow to let in the enemy; andthey proceed with all imaginable dispatch, in order tooutstrip prevention.
A a 4 Hitherto,







OCR Output








B.VII. THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. 195


Selinuntians also, by a messenger dispatched on pur­pose, they had summoned to meet them, with all theirunited strength, at a determined place upon their route.The Geloans also, and some of the Siculi, promised toattend with a party, though by no means considerable.The latter of these were disposed better than ever to theservice, since Archonides was lately dead, (who, reign­ing over some of the Siculi seated in these parts, and *having a great influence over them, had declared forthe Athenians,) and since Gylippus appeared to themto be sent from Lacedæmon with a full purpose to dothem service.
And now Gylippus, *— having assembled an army,which consisted ot about seven,hundred of those whonavigated or came on-board his vessels, and for whomhe had provided arms; of heavy-armed and light-armedHimereans, amounting together to a thousand men andone hundred horsemen; of some light-armed Selinun­tians i a small party of Geloan horse; and a body ofSiculi, in all a thousand; — began his march for Syra­cuse.
The Corinthians in the mean time were sending outthe other ships, as fast as they could equip them for theservice, to follow with all possible expedition from Leu-cas: and Gongyplus, one of the Corinthian command­ers, who with a single ship set out last from Leucas, isthe first who arrives at Syracuse; and that but a smallspace of time before the approach of Gylippus. Find­ing therefore, upon his arrival, that the Syracusanswere going forthwith to hold a public assembly, inwhich the terms of putting an end to the war were de­signed to be adjusted, he dissuaded them from so pre­cipitate a step, and animated their drooping resolutionsby strong assurances, that " other ships would instantly** arrive•" and that " Gylippus, the son of Cleandridas,"was sent thither by the Lacedæmonians to take upon
him the command." The Syracusans accordinglyresumed their lpirits, and immediately marched out


O 2 of







OCR Output








56 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. E.V.


gives should march into the plain to make head againstthe Lacedæmonians, the last wuh their cavalry mightpress upon their rear.
After these dispositions, and such a descent into theplain, Agis ravaged Saminthusand other places; uponintelligence of which, the Argives, so soon as it wasday, dislodged from Nemea to stop the depredations,and on their march met with the body of Phiiasians andCorinthians; and, encountering, flew some few of thePhiiasians, whilst not a much greater number of theirown men were destroyed by the Corinthians. The Bœ­otians also, and Megareans, and Sicyonians, took theroute of Nemea conformably to orders, and found theArgives already dislodged; but the latter, upon enter­ing the plain, and a view of the ravage made upontheir lands, drew up in order of battle. The Lacedæ­monians stood regularly drawn up on the other side.And now the Argives were shut up in the middle of theirenemies: For, on the side of the plain, the Lacedæ­monians, and those in their body, intercepted their re­turn to the city; on the high ground above them werethe Corinthians, and Phiiasians, and Pellenians; on theother part, towards Nemea, were the Bœotians, andSicyonians, and Megareans. Cavalry they had none:For the Athenians were the only part of their confede­racy who were not yet come up. •
The bulk, indeed, of the Argives and confederatesapprehended not the danger, which at present environ­ed them, to be so great; but rather concluded theymight engage with advantage, and that they had caughtthe Lacedæmonians fast within their territory, and near
to Argos itself. Two Argives, however, Thrasyl-
lus, one of the five in command, and Alciphron, the
public host of the Lacedæmonians, the very instant
the armies were moving to the charge, had addresiedthemselves to Agis, and proposed expedients to pre­vent a battle; giving their word, that "the Argivestf were ready to do and tQ submit to justice, upon a


"fair







OCR Output








 


B.VI. THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. 123


a-head, each vessel made afterwards the best of her wayto Ægina. And this armament made all possible hasteto reach Corcyra, where the force of their allies bywhich they were to be joined was already assembled.
Though the intelligence of such an intended invasionhad been brought to Syracuse from several quarters, yetfor a long course of time they would yield no credit to itstruth. Nay more, when an assembly was convened,such speeches as follow were made by different persons;some believing the accounts received in relation to thisarmament of the Athenians; others pronouncing themabsolutely false. On this occasion Hermocrates, the sonof Hermon, standing forth in the assembly, and as oneconvinced in his own mind that all such accounts weretrue, addressed and advised his countrymen thus:
"I T will probably be my own fate, as it hath been'* the fate of others, to be disbelieved, when I speak of"this intended invasion as a matter of truth and cer-** tainty. And I also know, by experience, that both** those who vent and those who retail such accounts of*' things as seem incredible are so far from effectually"persuading, that they generally incur the imputation"of madness. Yet no such apprehensions shall intimi-'* date or strike me dumb, when such a weight of dan-"ger hovers over my country; when in my own hearcf* I am convinced, that I am more clearly enlightened¥f on the point than any other person whatever.
*' For I assert that to be a master of the highest cer-"tainty, which you hear only with a sit of stupid*' surprise, that the Athenians have already set sail"against us with a numerous farce both for the service"of the sea and the land. The pretext alledged by
them is, execution of treaties with the Egesteans, and** the restoration of the Leontines; but the true motive"is their ambition to inslave Sicily, and above all this
. " '. •- V. •:. . . - . ... , ;. .:."
mighty armament, though now so vigorpHl pff4 magnificent, would soon moulder







OCR Output








240 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR/ B.VII.


%
Eurymedon then declared that his sense of things co­incided with that of Demosthenes; and, Nicias persist­ing in the contrary opinion, a sit of languor and sus-pence ensued, attended with the secret imagination thatthe pofitiveness of Nicias resulted from some strongerhopes of success he had conceived above his colleagues.And in this manner the Athenians fell into dilatory mea­sures, and continued in their camp before Syracuse.
But in this interval Gylippus and Sicanos returnedto Syracuse: Sicanus, truly, disappointed of Agrigen-tum, for he was advanced no farther than Gela whenthe sedition in favour of the Syracusans was brought toan amicable period; but then Gylippus was returned atthe head of a numerous body, consisting of levies madein Sicily, and the heavy-armed troops from Peloponne­sus, who in the spring had put to sea on-board thetransport, but came over last from Africa to Selinus;for into Africa they had been driven by contrary winds jand, having there been furnished by the Cyreneans withtwo triremes and a set of pilots, as they coasted alongthe African shore, they relieved the Evesperitæ, thenblocked up by the Libyans. The latter they deseated ina set battle; and, proceeding from thence along theshore, they reached Neapolis, a Carthaginian mart,from whence lies the shortest cut to Sicily, being only apassage of two days and a night. Hence therefore theystood across, and landed at Selinus. . . ,
With this accession of strength the Syracusans instant­ly prepared to attack the Athenians again both by landand sea. But the Athenian generals,—finding they hadreceived so large an augmentation, and that the postureof their own affairs was so far from being changed forthe better that day after day it grew worse in every re­spect, and, what was worst of all, that their troops werequite exhausted with fatigue and sickness, — they repent­ed now in earnest that they had not drawn off in time;and, as Nicias now no longer opposed that step with thesame vehemence as he had done before, but merely en­deavoured







OCR Output








B.VIII. THE PELOP.GNNESIAN WAR. 343


jured "not to look' calmly on till their destruction
should be completed, and Samos rent away from the** Athenians, by which alone till now their empire had** been preserved and supported." Listening, there­fore, to these representations, they privately exhortedevery single soldier not to suffer such proceedings; andmore earnestly than others the Paralian, .since ail thatsailed in that vessel were citizens of Athens, a)l free,find enemies determined, from time immemorial, to anoligarchy, even when it had no existence. Leon alsoand Diomedon never went out to sea without leavingthem some ships for their guard; insomuch that, whenthe three hundred made their attempt, as all these united.in their obstruction, but most heartily of all the Para-Mans, the popular party at Samos was rescued from de­struction. Thirty of those three hundred they evenslaughtered, and three .of .the most factious amongst theiurviyars they doomed to banishment. Then, havingspublished an indemnity for the rest, they continued to.support she democracy at Samos.
But the Samians and soldiery dispatch the Paralus•with ail expedition to Athens, having on-board herChæreas, the ion,of Achestratus, an Athenian, who hadborne a canGderable share in the last .turn of affaii s*-charged with a .notification of these last transactions;for yet it .was not known at Samos that .the four hun­dred ihad seized .the administration. No sooner, there­fore, were they come <to -their moorings, than the fourhundred .caused twp.or three .of the crew of the P<2ra/w to.be dragged .away to prison; the residue they turned over-from that vessel into another ship of war, and ordered.che^n away as a guard-ship for the station of Eubœa.But .Ctiæreas, sensible .in what train affairs were going,ijiad ^he good fortune to make his escape; and, return­ing again to Saraos^ related to the soldiery all that hadbeen done in Athens, exaggerating every point with a-fottndantisoveritiy.r-—That "every citizen was now kept.4* in a,vsie•wi.ch whips .and scourges, and that even their
Z 4 *• own







OCR Output








B.VIII. THE PELOP0NNES1AN WAR. a87


On this account it was, that the family of Alcibiades, incompliment to this friendship, had taken a Lacedæmo­nian name; for this Endius was the son of an Alcibiades.Yet, previously, the Lacedæmonians dispatched Phry-nis, a person born and educated in those parts, to Chi­os, to inspect the state of afsairs there, and report, whe­ther they had so large a number of stripping as theypretended, and their situation in other respects equali­zed the fine account they had given of it. Accordingly,when Phrynis had reported, " that all the accounts"they had heard were true," the Chians and Erythræ-ans were instantly admitted allies. They voted, far­ther, to fend them forty sail of shipping, as there werealready assembled at Chios not fewer than sixty fromplaces which the Chians named. Ten of these they de­signed to dispatch, as soon as possible, under the com­mand of Melanchridas, who was appointed admiral.But afterwards, the shock of an earthquake being felt,instead of Melanchridas they sent Chalcideus; and, in­stead of ten, equipped in Laconia only five, ships forthis service.
Here the winter ended; and the nineteenth yearof this war came also to an end, of which Thucydideshath compiled the history.


YEAR XX. J
SUMMER now coming on, as the Chians weremost earnestly soliciting the dispatch of the ships, andalso afraid lest the Athenians should get notice of theirtransactions,— for the whole of the negotiation had beencarried on without the knowledge of the latter, — theLacedæmonians fend to Corinth three citizens of Spar-ra, to prevail with that State for the transportation of theirships with all possible expedition across the isthmus,
% Before Cbiist 412.
from







OCR Output








r44 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. S.VI.


j i
Of Pythian Phœbus, radiant God of day,Chose thus the temple to adorn,'And thus record his own superior sway.
But, farther, that Hippias succeeded in the govern­ment as the eldest son, 1 myself can positively aver; asI know it to be so, and have examined all the accountsof tradition with much greater accuracy than others.But any one may be convinced of the fact by what Iam going to subjoin. — Now, we have abundant light toprove, that he was the only one of the legitimate bro-chcrs who had any sons. So much the altar attests,and the column erected for a perpetnal brand of the in­justice of the tyrants in the citadel of Athens. In thelatter, the inscription makes no mention of any son, ofeither Thessalus or Hipparchus; but nameth five sonsof Hippias, who were brought him by Myrrhine, thedaughter of Callias, the fon of Hyperochidas. Itis certainly most probable that the eldest son was marri­ed first; nay he is named the first after his father onthe upper part of the column. And there were goodreasons for this preserence; because his seniority gavehim this rank; and because he succeeded to the tyranny.Nor can it in any light seem probable to me, that Hip­pias, on a sudden and with ease, could have seized thetyranny, had Hipparchus died when invested with ic,and he had only one day's time to effect his own esta­blishment. The reverse is the truth j that, having fora length of time been familiarized to the expectation,having rendered himself awful to the citizens, and beingsupported by vigilant and trusty guards, he receivedand enjoyed his power with abundant security. Henever had cause, as a younger brother must have had,to work his way through perplexities and dangers, asin that casehe could not by practice have been made anadept in the affair of government. But it was acciden­tal, and owing, intirely to subsequent misfortunes, that
Hipparchus


 


-







OCR Output








fe.V. THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. 6y


far overreached them, sent orders to the Skiritæ aridBrasideans to wheel away from the spot where they werefirst posted, and fill up the extremity of the line, so asto render it equal to the Mantineans; and, to supplythe void thus made, he ordered, from the right wing,two battalions, commanded by general-officers, Hippo-no'idas and Aristocles, to repair thither, and, salling in*to close up the ranks; judging, that their own rightwould still be more than sufficient to execute their parts*and the wing opposed to the Mantineans might, by thisdisposition, be properly strengthened. But, as he issu­ed these orders in the very onset and close of battle,it happened that Aristocles and Hipponoi'das absolutelyrefused to change their post (though for such disobedi­ence, as apparently the result of cowardice, they wereafterwards banished from Sparta); and, before the newdisposition could be completed, the enemy had begunto charge. Upon the refusal of these two battalions tochange their post, Agis countermanded those marchingto strengthen the Skiritæ to their former places, whonow were unable to fall into the ranks, or close togetherwith those whom they had quitted: But, on this occa­sion, more remarkably than ever, the Lacedæmonians,though irr all respects outdone in the military art, gavesignal proofs of their superiority in true manly valour.
For, to come to particulars, when once they were atblows with the enemy, the right wing of the Mantineansrouts their Skiritæ and Brasideans. Then the sameMantineans, supported by their confederates and thethousand picked Argives, falling in at the void in theLacedæmonian line, which was not yet filled up, didgreat execution upon them; for, taking them in flank,they intirely broke them, drove them for shelter amongtheir carriages* and made a slaughter of the old menwho were appointed for their guard. And in this quar­ter the Lacedæmonians were clearly vanquished.
But in the other quarters, and especially in the cen­ter, where Agis, the king, was posted, and round him
Fa the







OCR Output








136 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR, B, VI.


Egesta, which had previously been dispatched thither;longing earnestly for a report about the state of theirtreasure, whether ic was really such as their envoys atAthens had represented.
To the Syracusans, in the mean time, undoubted ad­vice is brought from several quarters, and by their ownspies, that" the fleet of the enemy lies at Rhegium."The truth of this being uncontested, they prepared fortheir defence with the utmost attention, and were nolonger duped by incredulity. They also sent about tothe Siculi; to some places, their agents, who were tokeep a watchful eye upon ther conduct \ and, to others,embassadors. And into those towns upon the coast,which were exposed to a descent, they threw a garrison.In Syracuse, they examined if the city was providedwith the proper means of a defence, by a careful inspec­tion of the arms and the horses; and all other pointswere properly adjusted, as against a war coming swiftlyupon them, and only not already present.
The three vessels, detached beforehand to Egesta,rejoin the Athenians, yet lying at Rhegium, with a re­port that" the great sums which had been promised*' them were quite annihilated, since they saw only*' * thirty talents in specie." Upon this the commanderswere instantly seized with a dejection of spirit, becausetheir first hope was thus terribly blasted; and the Rhe-gians had refused to concur with their attempts, upon;whom they had made their first efiay of persuasion, andwith whom they had the greatest probability of success,as they were by blood allied to the Leontines, and hadever fliewn themselves well-disposed to the AthenianState. The Egestean affair had indeed taken no otherturn than what Nicias fully expected, but the other twocommanders were quite amazed and confounded at it.
The trick, made use of by the Egesteans, at the timethat the first embassy went thither from Athens to take asurvey of their treasures, was this: —Having conducted
* 5812/, lot. Stirling.
them







OCR Output








B.VII. THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. 237


urged ** the immediate execution of the scheme he had*' formed before he made the late dangerous attempt"upon Epipolse; which since it had miscarried, they"should no longer protract their departure, whilst yet*' the season of the year was proper for their voyage*' homewards, and they had strength enough in the*' last reinforcement to force their pafskge in spite of** the enemy." He affirmed, " it would be more con-*' ducive to the public welsare to turn their arms against*' those who were erecting fortifications within Attica*.* itself, than against the Syracusans, whose reduction*' now was almost impracticable; and that it was mad-*' ness to persist any longer in a siege which dissipated"the wealth of the State in fruitless vain expences."In this manner Demosthenes declared his sentiments.
As for Nicias, though convinced within himself thattheir affairs were in a bad situation, yet he was unwil­ling with his own mouth to confess their low condition,or that a departure should be sixed by the general votesof a public council, where all that passed must be re-'ported to the enemy; because, should the determina­tion be formed in this manner, the execution could notgo forwards without the enemy's privity. Besides, ashe knew the state of the enemy somewhat more per­fectly than others, he imagined there were grounds tohope that the state of the latter would soon becomeworse than their own, would they only continue to pressthe siege. A want of supplies must soon reduce themto great straits -, and this the sooner, as, by the acces­sion of the last squadron, themselves were now againmasters of the sea. And, what is more, in Syracuseitself there was a party which wished to see the city fallinto their hands. These had dispatched their agents toNicias, and insisted he should not quit the siege. Yet,thus enlightened as he was, in reality he knew not howto act, as his mind was balanced between two mea­sures, which equally required mature deliberation. But,for the present, he openly declared himself in council
against







OCR Output








B.V. THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. 55


ded in the field by the.Tegeatæ, and all the other Ar­cadians whatever confederated with the Lacedæmonians.But the allies of the other parts of Peloponnesus, andthose without the isthmus, were assembled at Phlius;-—the Bœotians, consisting of five thousand heavy-armed,and the same number of light-armed ; five hundredhorsemen, each attended by a soldier on foot:—the Co­rinthians of two-thousand heavy-armed ;—the other con­federates with their several quotas ; — but the Phliasianswith the whole of their force, because the army was as­sembled in their district.
The Argives, who had sometime before intelligenceof the Lacedæmonian preparations, and that since theywere filing towards Phlius in order to join the forces as­sembled there, now took the field themselves. Theywere joined by a succour of the Mantineans, strength­ened by the addition of their dependents, and threethousand heavy-armed Eleans. Upon their march, theyfell in with the Lacedæmonians at Methydrium of Ar­cadia. Each party posts itself upon a rising ground.The Argives got every thing in readiness to attack theLacedæmonians whilst yet they were alone; but Agis,dislodging by night and stealing a march, completedhis junction with the body of confederates at Phlius.When this was perceived by the Argives, they drewoff early the next dawn, first cf all to Argos, and thento the pass on the route of Nemea, by which they ex­pected the Lacedæmonians, with their confederates,would faU into their country. Yet Agis took not thatroute which they expected; but, having communicatedhis design to the Lacedæmonians, and Arcadians, andEpidaurians, be took a different route, though muchless practicable, and descended into the plains of Argos.The Corinthians, and Pellenians, and Phliasians, fol­lowed by another more direct route; and orders hadbeen given to the Bœotians, and Megareans, and Sicyo-riians, to take the route which leadeth to Nemea, onwhich the Argives were posted, that, in case the Ar-
E 4 glves







OCR Output








26 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. B.V.


I


infallibly come in. And, after suggesting such a course,the Corinthians also returned home.
The persons at Argos, who had listened to these insi­nuations, reported the scheme, in the next place, to thewhole magistracy and people of Argos. The Argivesresolved accordingly, and elected a committee of twelve,with whom such Grecians, as desired it, might agree uponan alliance, the Athenians and Lacedæmonians excepted.Neither of these States were permitted to treat with theArgives, without the public consent of the whole peo­ple.
The Argives were, the more readily persuaded to sucha measure, as they plainly saw a war was unavoidablebetween themselves and the Lacedæmonians; for thetruce between them was on the point of expiring. Theywere also animated by the hope of gaining into theirhands the sovereignty of Peloponnesus. For, atthis juncture of time, Lacedæmon lay under the great­est discredit, and was fallen into utter contempt upon ac­count of their late disasters; whereas the Argives werein the high vigour of their strength in all respects, asthey had never intersered in the Attic war; and, havingobserved an exact neutrality with both, had been thri­ving in peace and plenty. The Argives, therefore, inthis manner invited those Grecians who were willing toenter into their alliance. . -
The Mantineans and allies were the first who, out ofa dread of the Lacedæmonians, accepted the proposal.For these Mantineans, in the heat of the war against theAthenians, had seized and appropriated to themselvesa certain district of Arcadia subject to Lacedæmon, andnow concluded that the Lacedæmonians would neverleave them in the quiet possession of it, when they wereat liberty to act for its recovery. This readily inducedthem to have recourse to the league of Argos, regardedby them as a powerful State, which had ever been at va­riance with Lacedæmon, and, like their own, was de-mocratical. - ...







OCR Output








88 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. B,V.


** hostile dread. But we cannot avoid observing, that,** in the whole course of this debate, though de-** clared by you to be held as the means of your preser-
vation, you have not so much as started one. single** point upon which wise men can presume to fisten the"least considence of redress. Your firmest security is"placed in the faint hope of some distant contingen-** ciesj but your present strength is merely trifling a-<* gainst the extensive scope of your anragonists. Nay,** victimsyou must fall to your own absurd prelumptions,** unless, when we are once withdrawn to give you time** to consult, you determine to try some oth r expe-** dient. You will then no longer be controuled by
that sense of fliame, which, when dishonour glareth"besore and danger prefleth on, precipitateth men in-** to ruin. For though they see, with their eyes quite"open, into what an abyss they are going to plunge,*1 yet, to avoid the imputation of what the world sti-♦* leth dishonour, — so prevalent is the force of one be-"witching found! though vanquished by it, they** icorn to yield to reason, wilfully embarrafiing then>"selves with incurable calamities, and contracting a"more shameful weight of dishonour, through their"own mad obstinacy, than fortune could award them.** Such consequences you are now concerned by mature** deliberations to avoid. You are next to reflect, that"no shame can attend your plying under the force of a** most formidable Stale; a State, which designeth to"make the moderate demands alone, — that you would"accept her alliance, and securely enjoy your territory"upon the condition only to pay her tribute; and,** when war or safety are left to your own option, thatw you wpujd not peevishly prefer the worst. For those** are the men, to maintain themselves in credit andft prosperity, who never suffer their equals to insultV them, who pay proper regard to their superiors, and,"towards their infeiiors behave with moderation.m Reflect on these points whilst we withdraw; and reT
** member,







OCR Output








82 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. B.V.


"who are under no manner of tie, and who were never** indebted for their settlement to you, and those, who*** revolting from you, have been again reduced?"
Athenians.
"WHY should they not? They know such a sense"of things may be well grounded in regard to both;** inasmuch as those, who are exempted from our yoke,** owe such exemption to their own superior strength,** and, if we attack them not, it is the pure result or"fear. And hence, the reduction of you, besides iri-
larging our empire, will invest it with more ample se-** curity; especially, when seated on an island, you are** bound to submit to the masters of the sea, and to re-"main henceforth too weak for resistance, unless you** are victorious at the present crisis."
M E L I A N S.
"DO you then conclude that what we have proposed** is incompatible with your own security ?^—For since,"excluding us from the plea of justice, you endeavour"merely to persuade us in;o subserviency to your inte-"rest, we also are again necessitated to insist once more* ** on the -profitable to ourselves, and, by shewing that"with our welfare your own also coincideth, endea-** vour to prevail. — What think you of all those States?* which now stand neutral, in your disputes? How will** you avoid their implacable hatred, when, terrified at"such your usage of us, they mult live in constant expec-V tation of your hostilities? And whither can such con-"duct tend, but to enlarge the number of your decla-_** red enemies, and to constrain others, who never de-signed to be your foes, to take up arms against you,** though to their own regfet ?•" *
rod; Athenians,







OCR Output








B.VI. THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. 169


** been glad to invelope us. Thus solid are the** grounds on which we found our title to that extensive** rule we now enjoy. We honestly deserve it: Since,"in the cause of Greece, we equipped the largest fleet,*' and exerted the greatest ardour, without the least e-** quivocation; and since those others, acting with im-** plicit obedience to the Mede, did all they could to4* distress us. To which let it be added, that we were** at the fame time desirous to obtain a strength suffi-** cient to give a check to the ambition of Peloponne-** sians. Submissive, therefore, to their dictates, we are** not, will not be because, either in return for the** repulse of the barbarian by our single efforts, or in** requital of the dangers we bravely encountered in de-
** fence of the liberty of those Ionians, greater than
** all the rest of Greece, or even they themselves, durst** hazard for their own, . we have an undoubted** right to empire.
** But, farther, to guard its own liberties and rights** is a privilege, which, without either murmur or en-** vy, will be allowed to every State: And now, for** the security of these important points to ourselves,** have we ventured hither to beg your concurrence;** conscious, at the fame time, ye inen of Camarina,** that your welfare too coincides with our own. This** we can clearly demonstrate, even from those crimina-** tions which our adversaries here have lavished upon** us, and from those so terrible suspicions which you** yourselves are inclined to entertain of our proceed-4* ings. We are not now to learn, that men, who** with some high degrees of horror suspect latent mis-** chief, may for the present be soothed by an insinua-** ting flow of words; but, when summoned to action,** will so exert themselves as is expedient for their wel-** fare: And, consonant to this, we have already hint*** ed that through fear alone we seized that power** which we now possess in Greece; that through the« fame motive we have ventured hither, to establish our
"own



