


OCR Output








408 WARS OF THE JEW3. Book II.


" Greeks, more numerous than all men upon the habitable" earth ? What confidence is it that elevates you to oppose the" Romans? Perhaps it will be said, it is hard to endure slave." ry. Yes, but how much harder is this to the Greeks, who" were esteemed the noblest of all people under the sun. These," though they inhabit in a large country, are in subjection to" six bundles of Roman rods. It is the same case with the Ma-" cedonians, who have juster reason to claim their liberty than" you have. What is the case of five hundred cities of Asia ?" do they not submit to a single governor, and to the consular" bundle of rods? What need I speak of the Heniochi, and" Cholchi, and the nation of Tauri, those that inhabit the Bos-" phori's, and the nations about Pontus, and Meotis, who for-" merly knew not so much as a lord of their own, but are now?' subject to three thousand armed men, and where forty long" ships keep the sea in peace, which before was not navigable," and very tempestuous? How strong a plea may Bithynia," and Cappadocia, and the people of Pamphylia, the Lycians," and Cilicians, put in for liberty? But they are made tribu-" tary without an army. What are the circumstances of the" Thracians? whose country extends in breadth five days jour-'' ney, aad in length seven, and is of a much more harsh consti." tution, and much more defensible than yours, and by the ri-" gour of its cold sufficient to keep off armies from attacking" them; do not they submit to two thousand men of the Ro-" man garrisons? Are not the Illyrians, who inhabit the coun-" try adjoining, as far as Dalmatia and the Danube, governed" by barely two legions! by which also they put a stop to the" incursions of the Dacians. And for the Dalmatians, who" have made such frequent insurrections in order to regain their'' liberty, and who could never before be so thoroughly sub-" dued, but that they always gathered their forces together a-gain, and revolted, yet are they now very quiet under one Ro-mon legion. Moreover, if great advantages might provokeany people to revolt, the Gauls might do it best of all,as being' so thoroughly walled round by nature. On the east side by the' Alps, on the north by the riverRhine, on the south by the Py-' renean mountains,and on the westby theocean. Nowalthough' theseGauls have such obstacles before them to prevent any at-" "tack upon them, and have no fewer than three hundred and'.' five nations among them, nay have, as one may say, the foun-" tains of domestic happiness within themselves, and send out" plentiful streams of happiness over almost the whole world," these bear to be tributary to the Romans, and derive their" prosperous condition from them; and they undergo this, not
" became







OCR Output








THE LIFE OF -FLAVJDS JOSEFHUS. 197


persons before named gave their advice, that the city should thencontinue in their allegiance to the Romans, and to the king. ButPistus, who was guided by his son Justus, did not acquiesce inthat resolution ; otherwise he was himself naturally of a goodand virtuous character. But the second faction was composedof the most ignoble persons, and was determined for war. Butas for Justus, the son of Pistus, who was the head of the thirdfaction, although he pretended to be doubtful about going to war,yet was he really desirous of innovation, as supposing that heshould gain power to himself by the change of affairs. He there­fore came into the midst of them, and endeavoured to inform themultitude, That " the city Tiberias had ever been a city of" Galilee, and that in the days of Herod the tetrarch, who had" built it, it had obtained the principal place, and that he had or-" dered that the city Sepphoris should be subordinate to the city" Tiberias ; that they had not lost this pre-eminence even under." Agrippa the father, but had retained it until Felix was procu-" rator of Judea. But he told them, that now they had been so" unfortunate as to be made a present by Nero to Agrippa jn-f nior ; and that, upon Sepphoris's submission of itself to the" Romans, that was become the capital city of Galilee, and that" the royal treasury and the archives were now removed from" them." When he had spoken these things, and a great manymore against Agrippa, in order to provoke the people to a revolt,lie added, That " this was the time for them to take arms, and" join with the Galileans as their confederates (whom they might" command, and who would now willingly assist them out of the'.' hatred they bare to the people of Sepphoris, because they pre-" served their fidelity to the Romans), and to gather a great ntun-',' ber of forces in order to punish them." And, as he said this, heexhorted the multitude [,to go to war] ; for his abilities lay inmaking harangues to the people, and in being too hard in hisspeeches for such as opposed him, though they advised what wasmore to their advantage, and this by his craftiness and his falla­cies, for he was not unskilful in the learning of the Greeks,and in dependence on that skill it was, that he undertook tewrite an history of these affairs, as aiming by this way of ha­ranguing to disguise the truth. But as to this man, rmd how illwere his character and conduct of life, and he and his brotherwere, in great measure, the authors of our destruction, I shallgive the reader an account in the progress of my narration. Sowhen Justus had, by his persuasions, prevailed with the citizensof Tiberias to take arms, nay, and had foreed a great many so todo against their will, he went out, and set the villages that be­longed







OCR Output








Ghap. VI. ANTIQJJIT1ES OF THE JEWS. 9J


tween them, as they once were in a chariot together, concerningTiberius ; Agrippa praying [to God], (for they two sat by.themselves ,, that " Tiberius might soon go off the stage, and" leave the government to Caius, who was in every respect more" worthy of it." ' Now, Eutychus, who was Agrippa's freed-man, and drove his chariot, heard these words, and at that timesaid nothing of them ; but when Agrippa accused him of steal,ing some garments of his, (which was certainly true), he ranaway from him ; but, when he was caught, and brought beforePiso, who was governor of the city, and the man was asked,why he ran away ? he replied, that he had somewhat to say toCjesar, that tended to his security and preservation : so Pisobound him, and sent him to Caprepe. But Tiberius, accordingto his usual custom, kept him still in bonds, being a delayer ofaffairs, if ever there was any other king or tyrant that was so ;for he did not admit ambassadors quickly, and no successors weredispatched away to governors or procurators of the provinces,that had been formerly sent, unless they were dead ; whence itwas, that he was so negligent in hearing the causes of prisoners;insomuch, that when he was asked by his friends, what was thereason of his delay in such cases ? he said, That " he delayed to" hear ambassadors, lest, upon their quick dismission, other" ambassadors should be appointed, and return upon him ; and" so he should bring trouble upon himself in their public recep-" tion and dismission : that he permitted those governors, who" had been sent once to their government [to stay there a great" while], out of regard to the subjects that were under them ;" for that all governors are naturally disposed to get as much" as they can, and that those who are not to fix there, but to" stay n short time, and that at an uncertainty, when they shall" be turned out, do the more severely hurry themselves on to': fleece the people ; but that, if their government be long con-" tinued to them, they are at last satiated with the spoils, as" having gotten a vast deal, and so become at leYigth less sharp" in their pillaging; but that, if successors are sent quickly, the" poor subjects, who are exposed to them as a prey, will not be" able to bear the new ones, while they shall not have the same" time allowed them, wherein their predecessors had filled them-" selves, and so grew more unconcerned about getting more ;" and this because they are removed before they have had time" [for their oppressions]. He gave them an example to shew" his meaning: NA great number cf flies came about the sore" places of a man that had been wounded ; upon which one off the standers-by pitied the man's misfortune, and, thinking he" was not able to drive those flies away himself, was going to
" drive







OCR Output








XIV. WAHS OF THE JEWS. • 395


Albums ; and every one of those wicked wretches was encom­passed with his own band of robbers, while he himself, like an.arch-robber, or a tyrant, made a figure among his company, and,abused his authority over those about him, in order to plunderthose that lived quietly. The effect of which was this, thatthose who lost their goods were forced to hold their peace, whenthey had reason to shew great indignation at what they had suf­fered ; but those who had escaped, were forced to flatter himthat deserved to be punished, out of the fear they were in ofsuffering equally with the others. Upon the whole, no bodydurst speak their minds, but tyranny was generally tolerated ;and at this time were those seeds sown which brought the cityto destruction.
2. And though such was the character of Albinus, yet didGessius * Florus, who succeeded him, demonstrate him to have1»een a most excellent person, upon the comparison ; for the for-mer did the greatest part of his rogueries in private, and witha sort of dissimulation ; but Gessius did his unjust actions tothe harm of the nation after a pompous manner : and as thoughhe had been sent as an executioner to punish condemned male­factors, he emitted no sort of rapine, or of vexation ; where thecase was really pitiable, he was most barbarous, and in things-of the greatest turpitude he was most impudent. Nor couldany one outdo him in disguising the truth, nor could any one con­trive more subtle ways of deceit than he did. He indeed thoughtit but a petty offence to get money out of single persons ; so hespoiled whole cities, and ruined entire bodies of men at once,snd did almost publicly proclaim it all the country over, thatthey had liberty giv«n them to turn robbers, upon this condi­tion, that he might go shares with them in the spoils they got.Accordingly, this his greediness of gain was the occasion that,entire toparchies were brought to desolation, and a great manyof the people left their own country, and fled into foreign pro­vinces.
3. And truly, while Cestius Oallus was president of the pro­vince of Syria, nobody durst do so much as send an embassage tohim against Florus ; but when he was come to Jerusalem, up­on the approach of the feast of unleavened bread, the people
came


* Net long after this beginning of Floras, the wickedest of all the Roman pro­curators of Judea, and the immediate occasion of the Jewish war, at the nth yearof Nero, and the i?th of Agrippa, or A. D. 66. the history in the XX books ofJosephus* Antiquities ends ; although Josephus did not finish the^e books tiil the1.1th of Domitian,or A. D' 93, twenty-seven years afterward; as he did not finishtheir Appendix, containing an account of his own life, till Agrippa was dead,which happened in the 3d year of Trajan, or A. D. 100, as 1 have several time»otserved before.


3 D2







OCR Output








wars or the jews. Book II.


condemed. They also take great pains in studying the writingsof the ancients, and choose out of them what is most for theadvantage of their soul and body, and they enquire after suchroots and medicinal stones as may cure their distempers.
7. But now, if any one hath a mind to come over to theirsect, he is not immediately admitted, but he is prescribed thesame method of living which they use, for a year, while he con­tinues excluded, and they give him also a small hatchet, and theforementioned girdle, and the white garment. And when hehath given evidence, during that time, that he can observe theircontinence, he approaches nearer to their way of living, and ismade a partaker of the waters of purification; yet is he not evennow admitted to live with them; for after this demonstration ofhis fortitude, his temper is tried two more years, and if he ap­pear to be worthy, they then admit him into their society. Andbefore he is allowed to touch their common food, he is obligedto take tremendous oaths, that, in the first place, he will exercisepiety towards God, and then that he will observe justice towardsmen, and that he will do no harm to any one, either of his ownaccord, or by the command of others; that he will always hatethe wicked, and be assistant to tbe righteous; that he will evei.-shew fidelity to all men, and especially to those in authority ;because no one obtainsthe government without God's assistance;and that ifhebein authority, he will at no time whatever abusehis authority, nor endeavour to outshine his subjects, either inhis garments, or any other finery; that he will be perpetuallya lover of truth, and propose to himself to reprove those thattell lies; that he will keep his hands clear from theft, and hissoul from unlawful gains; and that he will neither conceal anything from those of his own sect, nor discover any of their doc­trines to others, no, not though any one should compel him so*to do at the hazard of his life. Moreover he swears to com­municate their doctrines to no one any otherwise than as he re­ceived them himself; that he will abstain from robbery, andwill equally preserve the books belonging to their sect, and thenames of the * angels [or messengers]. These are the oaths bywhich they secure their proselytes to themselves.
8. But
» This mention of the nanus vf angds, so particularly preserved hir the Essens,(If it means more than those messengers which were employed' to bring them thepeculiar books of their sect), looks iilce a prelude to that -warsbiffing of angelsblamed by St Paul, as superstitious and unlawful, in some such, sort of people asthese Essetw were.Coloss. ii. 8. as is the prayer to, or towards the sun for hisrising every morning, mentioned before, § 5. very like those not much later obser­vances made mention of in the preaching of Peter, Authent. Rcc. Pt II. page 669.and regarding a kindfof worship of angels, of the month, and of the moon, and not.celebrating the new moons, or other festivals, unless the moon appeared. Which in-^deed seems to me the earliest mention of any regard to the moon's phasis-in fixingthe Jewish calendar, of which the Talmud and later Rabbins talk so much,andupon so very little ancient foundation.







OCR Output








ISO ANTIOJJ1TIES OF THE JEWS. Book XX.


who first of all built the entire temple. But king Agrippa, whohad the care of the temple committed to him by Claudius Caesar,considering that it is easy to demolish any building, but hard tobuild it up again, and that it was particularly hard to do it tothese cloisters, which would require a considerable time, andgreat sums of money, he denied the petitioners their requestabout that matter ; but he did not obstruct them when they de­sired the city might be paved with white stone. He also depri­ved Jesus, the son of Gamaliel, of the high-priesthood, and gaveit to Matthias, the son of Theophilus, under whom the Jewswar with the Romans took its beginning,
CHAP. X.
jtn enumeration of tie Higl-prifsts.
$ 1. A ND now I think it proper, and agreeable to this his-"^^ tory, to give an account of our high-priests ; how theybegan, who those are which are capable of that dignity, andhow many of them there had been at the end of the war. Inthe first place, therefore, history informs us, that Aaron, thebrother of Moses, officiated to God as an high-priest, and that,after his death, his sons succeeded him immediately ; and thatihis dignity hath been continued down from them all to theirposterity. Whence it is a custom of our country, that no oneshould take the high.priesthood of God, but he who is of theblood of Aaron, while every one that is of another stock, thoughhe were a king, can never obtain that high-priesthood. Ac­cordingly, the number of all the high-priests from Aaron, ofwhom we have spoken already, as of the first of them, until Pha-nas, who was made high-priest during the war by the seditious,was eighty-three ; of whom thirteen officiated as high-priests inthe wilderness, from the days of Moses, while the tabernaclewas standing, until the people came into Judea, when king So­lomon erected the temple to God : for at the first they held thehigh-priesthood till the end of their life, although afterwardthey had successors while they were alive. Now these thirteen,who were the descendants of two of the sons of Aaron, receivedthis dignity by succession, one after another; for their form ofgovernment was an aristocracy, and after that a monarchy, andin the third place the government was regal. Now, the numberof years during the rule of these thirteen, from the day whenour fathers departed out of Egypt, under Moses their leader,until the building of that temple which king Solomon erected
at


* Of these cloisters of Solomon, see the description of the temple, ch. xiii.—They KCID, by josephus's words, to Imvc beenli.ih from the bottom of the valley.







OCR Output








ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book XX.


they would not hearken to them, but took their weapons, andentreated the assistance of Eleazer, the son of Dineas, a robber,/ who had many years made his abode in the mountains, withwhich assistance they plundered many villages of the Samaritans.When Cumanus heard of this action of theirs, he took the bandof Sebaste, with four regiments of footmen, and armed the Sa­maritans, and marched out against the Jews, and caught them,and slew many of them, and took a great number of themalive ; whereupon those that were the most eminent persons at»' Jerusalem, and that both in regard to the respect that was paidV them, and the families they were of, as soon as they saw to what^ an height things were gone, put on sackcloth, and heaped ashes%yon their heads, and by all possible means besought the sedi­tious,' and persuaded them that they would set before their eyesthe utter subversion * of their country, the conflagration of theirtemple, and the slavery of themselves, their wixes and children,which would be the consequences of what they were doing, an'dwould alter their minds, would cast away their weapons, and forthe future be quiet, and return to their own homes. Thesepersuasions of theirs prevailed upon them. So the people dis­persed themselves, and the robbers went away again to tbejrplaces of strength ; and after this time all Judea was over-runwith robberies.
2. But the principal of the Samaritans went to UmmidiusQuadratus, the president of Syria, who at that time was atTyre, and accused the Jews of setting their villages on fire, andplundering them ; and said withal, That " they were not so" much displeased at what they had suffered, as they were at the'' contempt thereby shewed the Romans ; while, if they had re-" ceived any injury, they ought to have made them the judges" of what had been done, and not presently to make such de-" vastation, as if they had not the Romans for their governors ;" on which account they came to him, in order to obtain that«' vengeance they wanted.'' This was the accusation which theSamaritans brought against the Jews. But the Jews affirmed,that the Samaritans were the authors of this tumult and fighting,and that, in the first place,'Cumanus had been corrupted by theirgifts, and passed over the murder of those that were slain in si­lence. Which allegations when £)uadi atus heard, he put oft" thehearing of the cause, and promised that he would give sentencewhen he should come into Judea, and should have a more exact
knowledge


* Our Saviour had fcretr'ld, that tlie Jews' rejection of his gnspcl xvculd bringupon them, among other miseries, these three, which, they themselves here shew,they exptcted would be the consequences of their present tumults ancl seditions;the utter subversion of" their country, the conflagration of their temple, and theSlavery of then selves, their wives, and children. See Luke, xxi. 6.—24.







OCR Output








Chap. -VI. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 83


The man also grew eld in that honourable post, and thereindied. But all this happened a 'good while later. ,
7. Now Agrippa stood in his bonds before the royal palace,and leaned on a certain tree for grief, with many others, whowere in bonds alio ; and as a certain bird sat upon the tree onwhich Agrippa leaned, (the Romans call this bird bulo), [an owl],one of those :that were bound, a German by nation, saw him,and asked a soldier what that man in purple was ? and when hewas informed that his name was Agrippa, and that he was bynation a Jew, and one of the principal men of that nation, heasked leave of the soldier to whom he was bound *, to let himcome nearer to him, to speak with him'; for that he had a mindto inquire of him about some things relating to his country ;which liberty when he had obtained, and as he stood near him,he said thus to him by an interpreter, That" this sudden change" of thy condition, O young man ! is grievous to thee, as bring*«' ing on thee a manifold and very great adversity ; nor wilt" thou believe me, when I foretell how thou wilt get clear of" this misery which thou art now under, and how divine Pro-f vide nee will provide for thee. Know therefore (and I ap-" peal to my own country-gods, as well as to the gods of this" place, who have awarded these bonds to us), that all I am" Somg to say about thy concerns, shall neither be said for fa-" vour nor bribery, nor out of an endeavour to make thee chear-" ful without cause ; for such predictions, when they come to" fail, make the grief at last, and in earnest, more bitter than" if the party had never heard of any such thing. However," though 1 run the hazard of my own self, I think it fit to de-" dare to thee the prediction of the gods. It cannot be that" thou shouldst long continue in these bonds ; but thou wilt" soon be delivered from them, and wilt be promoted to the" highest dignity and power, and thou wilt be envied by all" those who now pity thy hard fortune ; and thou wilt be hap-" py till thy 'death, and wilt leave thine happiness to the" children whom thou shalt have. But, do thou remember," when thou seest this bird again, that thou wilt then live but" five days longer. This event will be brought to pass by that" God who hath sent this bird hither to be a sign unto thee." And I cannot but think it unjust to conceal from thee what I" foreknow concerning thee, that, by thy knowing beforehand" what happiness is coming upon thee, thou mayest not regard" thy present misfortunes. But, when this happiness shall ac-
L 2 " tually


* Dr Hudson here takes notice, out of Sebeca, Epistle V. that this was the,sustom of Tiberius, to couple the prisoner and the soldier that guarded him to.Jtther in the same chain.







OCR Output








38* WARS OF THE JEWS. Book 1L


the multitude of the supplicants, and "by their supplications,and left his army ai:d the statues at Ptolemais, and then wentforward into Galilee, and called together the multitude, and allthe men of note to Tiberias, and shewed them the power of theRomans, and the threatenings of Caesar; and, besides this,proved that their petition was unreasonable, because while allthe nations in subjection to them had placed the images of Cae­sar in their several cities, among the rest of their gods, forthem alone to oppose it, was almost like the behaviour of re-volters, and was injurious to Ccesar.
4. And when they insisted on their law, and the custom oftheir country, and how it was not only not permitted them tomake either an image of God, or indeed of a man, and to putit in any despicable part of their country, much less in thetemple itself; Petronius replied, " And am not I also, said he," bound to keep the law of my own lord? For if I transgress" it, and spare you, it is but just that 1 perish; while he that" sent me, and not I, will commence a war against you; for I" am under command as well as you." Hereupon the .wholemultitude cried out, That " they are ready to suffer for their" law." Petronius then quieted them, and said to them," Will you then make war against Caesar?" The Jews said," We offer sacrifices twice every day for Caesar, and for the Ro-" man people; but that if he would place the images among" them, he must first sacrifice the whole Jewish nation; and" that they were ready to expose themselves, together with" their children arid wives, to be slain." At this Petroniuswas astonished, and pitied them on account of the inexpressiblesense of religion the men were under, and that courage of theirswhich made them ready to die for it; so they- were dismissedwithout success.
5. But on the following flays, he got together the men ofpower privately, and the multitude publicly, and sometimes heused persuasions to them, and sometimes he tave them his ad­vice; but he chiefly made use ot threatening^ to them, and insistedupon the power of the Romans, and the anger of Caius; and be­sides, upon the necessity he was himself unler [to do as he wasenjoined]. But as they could be no way prevailed upon, andhe saw that the country was iu danger of lying without tillage;for it was about seed time that the multitude continued for fiftydays together idle; so he at last got them together, and toldthem, That " it was best for him to run some hazard himself;" for either, by the divine assistance, I shall prevail with Caesar," and shall myself escape the danger as well as you, which will'•' be matter of joy to us both; or, in case Caesar continue in hi*







OCR Output








.WARS OF THE JEWS. . ' ' Book L


nay, on the contrary, they pretended to quarrel one with anotherwhen the king was within hearing. The like dissimulationdid Antipater make use of, and when matters were public, heopposed Pheroras; but still they had private cabals, andmsrrymeetings in the night-time ; nor did the observation of othersdo any more than confirm their mutual agreement. However,Salome knew every thing they did, and told every thing toHerod.
2. But he was inflamed with anger at them, and chiefly atPheroras's wife; for Salome had principally accused her. Sohe got an assembly of his friends and kindred together, and thereaccused this woman of many things, and particularly of the af­fronts she had offered his daughters; and that she had suppliedthe Pharisees with money, by way of rewards for what they haddone against him, and had procured his brother to become hisenemy, by giving him love potions. At length he turned hisspeech to Pheroras, and told him, That " he would give him". his choice of these two things, whether he would keep in with"his brother, or with his wife?" And when Pheroras said,that he would * die rather than forsake his wife, Herod notknowing what to do farther in that matter, turned his speechto Antipater, and charged him to have no intercourse either witkPheroras's wife, or with Pheroras himself, or with any one be­longing to her. Now, though Antipater did not transgress thathis injunction publicly, yet did he in secret come to their night-meeting j and because he was afraid that Salome observed whathe did, he procured, by the means of his Italian friends, that hemight go and live at Rome: for when they wrote that it wasproper for Antipater to be sent to Caesar for some time, Herodmade no delay,but sent him, and that with a splendid attendance,and a great deal of money, and gave him his testament to carrywith him, wherein Antipater had the kingdom bequeathed tohim, and wherein Herod was named for Antipater's successor,that Herod, I mean, who was the son of Mariamne, the high-priest's daughter.
3. Sylleus also, the Arabian, sailed to Rome, without anyregard to Caesar's injunctions, and this in order to oppose Anti­pater


11 This strange obstinacy of Pheroras in retaining his wife, who was one of alow family, and refusing to marry one nearly related to Herod, though he so ear­nestly desired it, as also that wife's admission to the counsels of the other greatcotrt hdies, together with Herod's own importunity as to Pheroras's divorce andother marriage, all so remarkable here, or in the Antiquities, B. XVII. ch. ii. sect.4. Vol. III. and ch. iii. sect. 3. cannot be well accounted for, but on the supposalthat Pheroras believed, and Herod suspected, that the Pharisees prediction, as ifthe crown of Judea should be translated from Herod to Pheroras's posterity, andthat most probably to Pheroras's posterity by this his wife, also would prove true.See Anticj. B. XVII. ch. ii. secc, 4. and ch' iii. sect. I. Vol. III.







OCR Output








Ghap. V-III. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Q-f


* therefore desirous to make thee amends for every thing in•' which I have been formerly deficient, for all that I have be-«' stowed on thee, that may be called my gifts, is but little." Every thing that may contribute to thy happiness shall be at" thy service, and thM chearfully, and so far as my ability will" reach." And this was what Caius said to Agrippa, thinking hewould ask for some large country, or the revenues of certain ci­ties. But, although he had prepared before-hand what he wouldask', yet had he not discovered his intentions, but made this an­swer to Caius immediately: That '' it was not out of any ex-" pectation of gain that he formerly paid his respects to him," contrary to the commands of Tiberius, nor did he now do any" thing relating to him out of regard to his own advantage, and" in order to receive any thing from him : that the gifts he had" already bestowed'upon him were great, and beyond the hopes" of even a craving man ; for, although they may be beneath thy" power, [who art the donor], yet are they greater than my in-" clination and dignity, who am the receiver." And, as Cainswas astonished at Agrippa's inclinations, and still the more pres­sed him to make his request for somewhat which he might gra­tify him with, Agrippa replied, " Since thou, O my Lord ! de-" clarest such is thy readiness to grant, that I am worthy of thy" gifts, I will ask nothing relating to my own felicity ; for what" thou hast already bestowed on me has made me excel therein;" but I desire somewhat which may rriaki thee glorious for piety," and render the Divinity assistant to thy designs, and may be for" an honour to me among those that inquire about it, as shewing" that I never once fail of obtaining what I desire of thee ; for" my petition is this. That thou wilt no longer think of the de-" <!ication of that statue which thou hast ordered to be fet up in" the Jewish temple by Petronius."
8. And thus did Agrippa venture to cast the die upon this oc­casion, so great was the affair in his opinion, and in reality, thoughhe knew how dangerous a thing it was so to speak ; for, had notCaius approved of it, it had tended to no less than the loss of hL;life. So Caius, who was mightily taken with Agrippa's oblig­ing behaviour, and on other accounts thinking it a dishonourablething to be guilty of falsehood before so many witnesses, in pointswherein he had with such alacrity forced Agrippa to become a.petitioner, and that.it would look as if he had already repented'of what he had faid, and because he greatly admired Agrippa'svirtue, in not desiring him at all to augment his own dominion?,either with larger revenues, or other authority, but took care of'he public tranquillity, of the laws, and of the Divinity itself, lit;granted him what he had requested. He also wrote thus to Pc-. VOL. III. N tronius,







OCR Output








Chap. IV. WA?S OF THE JEW?. SS5


fire, by killing themselves with their own swords ; but so manyof them as crept out from the walls, and came upon the Romans,were easily mastered by them, by reason of the astonishmentthey were under ; until at last some of the Jews being destroyed,and others dispersed by the terror they were ii., the soldiers fellupon the treasure of God, which was now deserted, and plun­dered about four hundred talents, of which sum Sabinus gottogether all that was not carried away by the soldiers.
4. However, this destructionof the works [about the temple],and of the men, occasioned a much greater number, and thoseof a more warlike sort, to get together, to oppose the Romans.These encompassed the palace round, and threatened to destroyall that were in it, unless they went their ways quickly; forthey promised that Sabinus should come to no harm, if he wouldgo out with his legion. There were also a great many of theking's party who deserted to the Romans, and assisted the Jews;yet did the most warlike body of them all, who were three thou­sand of the men of Sebaste, go over to the Romans. Rufus also,and Gratus, their captains, did the same, (Gratus having thefoot of the king's party under him, and Rufus the horse), eachof whom, even without the forces under them, were of greatweight, on account of their strength and wisdom, which turn thescales in war. Now the Jews persevered in the siege, and triedto break down the walls of the fortress, and cried out to Sabinusand his party, That they should go their ways, and not prove anhinderance to them, now they hoped, after a long time, to reco­ver that ancient liberty which their forefathers had enjoyed. Sa­binus indeed was well contented to get out of the danger he wasin, but he distrusted the assurances the Jews gave him, and sus­pected such gentle treatment was but a bait laid as a snare forthem: this consideration, together with the hopes he had ofsuccour from Varus, made him bear the siege still longer.
CHAP. IV.
Herod's "veteran soldiers become tumultuous. The robberies ofJtidas. Simon and Atbrongeus take the name of king upontlem.
§ 1. A T this time there were great disturbances in the coun-J-JL try, and that in many places ; and the opportunitythat now offered itself induced a great many to set up for kings.And indeed in Idumea two thousand of Herod's veteran soldiersgot together, and armed themselves, and fought against those ofthe king's party; against whom Achiabus, the king's first com-sin; fought,and that out of some of the places that we; e the most
strongly







OCR Output








Chap. XI. ANTIOJUTlES OF THE JEWS. 49


lents, while Batanea, with Trachonitis, as well as Auranitis,with a certain * part of what was called the house of Zenodorus,paid the tribute of one hundred talents to Philip ; but Idumea,and Judea, and the country of Samaria, paid tribute to Arche-laus, but had now a fourth part of that tribute taken off by theorder of Caesar, who decreed them that mitigation, because theydid not join in this revolt with the rest of the multitude. Therewere also certain of the cities which paid tribute to Archelaus,Strato's tower, and Sebaste, with Joppa and Jerusalem ; for asto Gaza and Gadara, and Hippos, they were Grecian cities,which Caesar separated from his government, and added themto the province of Syria. Now the tribute money that came toArchelaus every year from his own dominions, amounted to sixhundred talents.
5. And so much came to Herod's sons from their father's in­heritance. But Salome, besides what her brother left her byhis testament, which were Jamnia and Ashdod, and Phasaelis,and five hundred thousand [drachmae] of coined silver, Caesarmade her a present of a royal habitation at Askelon 5 in all, herrevenues amounted to sixty talents by the year, and her dwell­ing-house was within Archelaus's government. The rest, also,of the king's relations received what his testament allotted them.Moreover, Caesar made a present to each of Herod's two virgin-daughters, besides what their father left them, of two hundredand fifty thousand [drachmae ^ of silver, and married them toPheroras's sons ; he also granted all that was bequeathed to him­self to the king's sons, which was one thousand five' hundred ta­lents, excepting a few of the vessels, which he reserved forhim-
VOL. III. « • G self;


ral methods put together, all which yet seem very much too small for his exprn-ces being drawn from no larger a nation than that of the Jews, which was verypopulous, but without the advantage of trade, to bring them riches; so that I can­not but strongly suspect that no small part of this his wealth arose from anothersource, I mean from some vast sums he took out of David's sepulchre, but con­cealed from the people. See tlie note on Antiq. B. Vli. ch. xv. sect. 3.
* Take here a very useful note of Grotius, on Luke, B. 111. ch. i. here quotedby Dr Hudson : " When Josephuss ays that some part of the house (or possession)" of Zenodorus (i' e. Abilene), was allotted to Philip, he thereby declares that" the larger part of it belonged to another; this 01 her was Lysanias, who:ii" Luke mentions, of the posterity of that Lysanias who was possessed of the" same country called dbiievc, from the city Abila, and by others Chalcidene," from the city Chalcis, when the government of the cast was under Antonius," and this after Ptolemy, the son of Mennius; trom which Lysanias. this coun-" try came to be commonly cilltd the Country of Lyianiat; and as, after the" death of the former Lysanias, it was called the tetrarcby of Zencilorus, it*" after the death of Zenodorus, or wttih the time for which h& hired it was" ended, when another Lysanias, of the same name with the former, wai posv" sessed of the same country, it begun to be called the trtiurchy of iysanini."-However, since Josephuselsewhere, Antiq. B. XX. ch. vii. $ i. clearly distinguiJh-e» Abilene from Chaicidine, Grotius must be here so far misukcn.







OCR Output








Chap. I. WARS «F THE JEWS. 359


2. Upon this the multitude were pleased, and presently made9. trial of what he intended, by asking great things of him; forsome made a clamour that he would ease them in their taxes,others, that he would take off the duties upon commodities, andsome, that he would loose those that were in prison; in all whichcases he answered readily to their satisfaction, in order to getthe good-will of the multitude; after which he offered [the pro­per] sacrifices, and feasted with his friends. And here it wasthat a great many of those that' desired innovations came incrowds towards the evening, and began then to mourn on theirown account, when the public mourning for the king was over.These lamented those that were put to death by Herod, becausethey had cut down the golden eagle that had been over the gateof the temple. Nor was this mourning of a private nature, butthe lamentations were very great, the mourning solemn, andthe weeping such as was loudly heard all over the city, as beingfor those men who had perished for the laws of their country,and for the temple. They cried out, that a punishment oughtto be inflicted for these men upon those that were honoured byHerod, and that, in the first place, the man whom he had madehigh-priest should be deprived, and that it was fit to choose aperson of greater piety and purity than he was.
3. At these clamours Archelaus was provoked, but restrainedhimself from taking vengeance on the authors, on account of thehaste he was in of going to Rome, as fearing lest, upon his mak­ing war on the multitude, such an action might detain him athome. Accordingly, he made trial to quiet the innovators bypersuasion, rather than by force, and sent his general in a pri.vate way to them, and by him exhorted them to be quiet. Butthe seditious threw stones at him, and drove him away, as hecame into the temple, and before he could say any thing to them.The like treatment they shewed to others, who came to themafter him, many of which were sent by Archelaus, in order toreduce them to sobriety, andthese answered still on all occasionsafter a passionate manner; and it openly appeared that theywould not be quiet, if their numbers were but considerable.And indeed, at the feast of unleavened bread, which was nowat hand, and is by the Jews called the Passover, and used to becelebrated with a great number of sacrifices, an innumerablemultitude of the people came out of the country to worship:some of these stood in the temple bewailing the Rabbins [thathad been put to death J, and procured their sustenance by beg­ging, in order to support their sedition. At this Archelaus wasaffrighted, and privately sent a tribune, with his cohort of sol­diers upon them, before the disease should spread over the
whole







OCR Output








THE I.IFE OF FLAVIUS JOSEFHUS. £07


for when I was satisfied of the advantage that his horse wouMhave if we came down into the plain, while we were all foot­men, I resolved to join battle with the enemy where I was.Now Ebutius and his party made a courageous opposition forsome time ; but when he saw that his horse were useless to himin that place, he retired back to the city Gibea, having lost threeof his men in the fight. So I followed him directly with twathousand armed men ; and when I was at the city Besara, thatlay in the confines of Ptolemais, but twenty furlongs from Gi-bea, where Ebutius abode, I placed my armed men on the out­side of the village, and gave orders that they should guard thepasses with great care, that the enemy should not disturb us, un-till we should have carried off the corn, a great quantity of whichlay there : it belonged to Bernice the queen, and had been ga­thered together out of the neighbouring villages into Besara : so Iloaded my camels and asses, a great number of which I hadbrought along with me, and sent the corn into Galilee. WhenI had done this, I offered Ebutius battle ; but when he wouldnot accept of the offer, for he was terrified at our readiness andcourage, I altered my route, and marched towards Neopolitanus,because I had heard that the country about Tiberias was laid,waste by him. This Neopolitanus was captain of a troop ofhorse, and had the custody of Scythopolis intrusted to his careby the enemy ; and when I had hindered him from doing anyfarther mischief to Tiberias, I set myself to make provision forthe affairs of Galilee.
27. But when John, the son of Levi, who, as we before toldyou, abode at Gischala, was informed how all things had suc­ceeded to my mind, and that I was much in favour with thosethat were under me, as also that the enemy were greatly afraidof me, he was not pleaesd with it, as thinking my prosperity-tended to his ruin. So he took up a bitter envy and enmityagainst me ; and hoping, that if he could inflame those thatwere under me to hate me, he should put an end to the prosperi­ty I was in, he tried to persuade the inhabitants of Tiberias, andof Sepphoris (and for those of Gabara he supposed they wouldbe also of the same mind with the others), which were the great­est cities of Galilee, to revolt from their subjection to me, and tobe of his party ; and told them, that he would command thembetter than I did. As for the people of Sepphoris, who belongedto neither of us, because they had chosen to be in subjection tothe Romans, they did not comply with his proposal; and forthose of Tiberias, they did not indeed so far comply as to make arevolt from under me, but they agreed to be his friends, whilethe inhabitants of Gabara did go over to John; and it was Si-
maa







OCR Output








;. s WARS or T»E JEWS. Book I.


" came with what haste I could from Cappadocia, I expected" to find him put to death for, his crimes long ago-, but still in" order to make an examination with thee about my daughter," whom, out of regard to thee, and thy dignity, I had espoused" to him in marriage; but now we must take counsel about" them both; and if thy paternal affection be so great, that thou" canst not punish thy son, who hath plotted against thee, let'« us change our right hands, and let us succeed one to the other" in expressing our rage upon this occasion."
2. When he had made this pompous declaration, he got He­rod to remit of his anger, though he were in disorder, who there­upon gave him the books which Alexander had composed to beread by him, and as he came to every head, he considered of it,together with Herod. So Archelaus took hence the occasion forthat stratagem which he made use of, and by degrees he had theblame on those men whose names were in these books, and es­pecially upon Pheroras; and when he saw that the king believedhim [to be in earnest], he said, " We must consider whether" the joung man be not himself plotted against by such a num-" ber of wicked wretches, and not thou plotted against by the" young man; for I cannot see any occasion for his falling into" so horrid a crime, since he enjoys the advantages of royalty" already, and has the expectation of being one of thy succes-" sors; I mean this unless there were some persons that per," suade him to it, and such persons as make an ill use of the fa-*' cility they know there is to persuade young men; for by such" persons, not only young men are sometimes imposed upon," but old men also, and by them sometimes are the most illus-" trious families and kingdoms overturued."
3. Herod assented to what he had said, and, by degrees, abatedof his anger against Alexander; but was more angry at Phero­ras; for the principal subject of the four books was Pheroras,who perceiving that the king's inclinations changed on a sudden,and that Archelaus's friendship could do every thing with him,and that he had no honourable method of preserving himself, heprocured his safety by his impudence. So he left Alexander,and had recourse to Archelaus, who told him, That " he did not" see how he could get him excused, now he was directly caught" in so many crimes, whereby it was evidently demonstrated" that he had plotted against the king, and had been the cause of" those misfortunes which the young man was now under, un-" less he would moreover leave off his cunning knavery, and" his denials of what he was charged withal, and confess the" charge, and implore pardon of'his brother, who still had a
" kindness







OCR Output








374 WARS OF THE JEWS. Book II,


3. These men are despisers of riches, and so very communi­cative as,raises our admiration. Nor is there any one to befound among them who hath more than another; for it is a lawamong them, that those who come to them must let what theyhave be common to the whole order, insomuch that among themall there is no appearance of poverty, or excess of riches, butevery one's possessions are intermingled with every other's pos­sessions, and'so there is, as it were, one patrimony among all thebrethren. They think that oil is a defilement; and if any oneof them be anointed, without his own approbation, it is wipedoff his body; for they think to be sweaty is a good thing, asthey do also to be clothed in white garments. They also havestewards appointed to take care of their common affairs, whoevery one of them have no separate business for any, but whatis for the uses of them all.
4. They have no one certain city, but many of them dwell inevery city; and if any of their sect come from other places,what they have lies open for them, just as if it were their own,and they go into such as they never knew before, as if they hadbeen ever so long acquainted with them. For which reason theycarry nothing at all with them when theytravel into remoteparts, though still they take their weapons with them, for fearof thieves. Accordingly, there is, in every city where they live,one appointed particularly to take care of strangers, and to pro­vide garments and other necessaries for them. But the habitand management of their bodies is such as children use who arein fear of their masters. Nor do they allow of the change ofgarments, or of shoes, till they be first entirely torn to pieces,or worn out by time. Nor do they either buy or sell any thingto one another, but every one of them gives what he hath tohim that wanteth it, and receives from him again in lieu of itwhat may be convenient for himself; and although there be noicquittal made, they are fully allowed to take what they want ofwhomsoever they please.
' 5. And as for their piety towards God, it is very extraordi­nary: for before sun-rising they speak not a word about profanematters, but put up certain 'prayers, which they have receivedfrom their forefathers, as if they made a supplication for its ri­sing. After this every one of them are sent away by their cura­tors to exercise some of thoce arts wherein they are skilled, inwhich they labour with great diligence till the fifth hour. , Af­ter which they assemble themselves together again into one place,and when they have clothed themselves in whits veils, they thenbathe their bodies in cold water. And aitcv this purification is'ever, they every one meet together in an apartment of their own,
into







OCR Output








I5fll AKTIQJJITIES OF THE JEWS. Book XIX.


an equal number of soldiers out of the Roman legions, that werein Syria, to supply their place. Yet were not those that hadsuch orders actually removed ; for by sending ambassadors toClaudius, they mollified him, and got leave to abide in Judeastill; and these were the very men that became the source ofvery great calamities to the Jews in after times, and sowed theseeds of that war which began under Florus; whence it was,that when Vespasian had subdued the country, he removed^them out of his province, as we shall relate hereafter *.
* This history is now wanting.







OCR Output








152 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEW3. Book XIX.


CHAP. VIII.
What other acts were done by Agrippa until his death ; and afterwhat, manner he died.
$ l-WHEN Agrippa had finished what I have above related* * at Berytus, he removed to Tiberias, a city of Gali­lee. Now he was in great esteem among other kings. Accor­dingly there came to him Antiochus, king of Commagena, Samp-sigeramuSiking of Emesa, andCotys, who was king of the lesserArmenia, and Polemo, who was king of Pontus, as also Herod hisbrother, who was king of Chalcis. All these he treated withagreeable entertainments, and after an obliging manner, and soto exhibit the greatness of his mind, and so as to appear worthyof those respects which the kings paid to him, by coming thus,to see him. However, while these kings staid with him, Mar­cus, the president of Syria, came thither. So the king, in orderto preserve that respect that was due to the Romans, went out ofthe city to meet him, as far as seven furlongs. But this provedto be the beginning of a difference between him and Marcus ;for he took with him in his chariot those other kings as his as­sessors. But Marcus had a suspicion what the meaning could beof so great a friendship of these kings one with another, and didnot think so close an agreement of so many potentates to be forthe interest of the Romans. He therefore sent some of his do­mestics to every one of them, and enjoined them to go theirways home without farther delay. This was very ill taken byAgrippa, who after that became his enemy. And now he tookthe- high-priesthood away from Matthias, and made Elioneus,the son of Cantheras, high-priest in his stead.
2. Now, when Agrippa had reigned three years all over Ju-dea, he came to the city Cesarea, which was formerly called,Strato's Tower ; and there he exhibited shows in honour of Cae­sar, upon his being informed that there was a certain festival ce­lebrated to make vows for his safety. At which festival, a greatmultitude was gotten together of the principal persons, and suchas were of dignity through his province. On the second day ofwhich shows he put on a garment made wholly of silver, and ofa contexture truly wonderful, and came into the theatre early inthe morning; at which time the silver of his garment being il­luminated by the fresh reflection of the sun's rays upon it, shoneout after a surprising manner, and was so resplendent as to spreadan horror over those that looked intently upon him ; and pre.sently -his flatterers cried out, one from one place, and anotherfrom another, (though not for his good), that " he was a god ;"
and







OCR Output








THE LIFE OF FLAVIUS JOSEPHUS. 195


vehement exhortation, because I foresaw that the end of such awar would be most unfortunate to us. But I could not persuadethem ; for the madness of desperate men was quite too hard forme.
5. I was then afraid, lest, by inculcating these things so often,I should incur their hatred and their suspicions, as if I were ofour enemies party, and should run into the danger of being sei­zed by them, and slain ; -since they were already possessed ofAntonia, which was the citadel ; so I retired into the inner courtof the temple. Yet did I go out of the temple again, after Ma-nahem and the principal of the band of robbers were put to death,when I abode among the high-priests and the chief of the Pha­risees. But no small fear seized upon us when we ?aw the peo­ple in arms, while we ourselves knew not what we should do.,and were not able to restrain their seditions. However, as thedanger was directly upon us, we pretended that we were of thesame opinion with them, but only advised them to be quiet forthe present, and to let the enemy go away, still hoping, that-Gessius [Floras]'would not be long ere he came, and th^t withgreat forces, and so put an end to these seditious proceedings.
6. But, upon his coming and fighting, hewasbeaten, and a greatmany of those that were with him fell. And this disgrace [which,Gessius with Casfius] received, became the calamity of our wholenation ; for those that were fond of the war were so far elevatedwith this success, that they had hopes of finally conquering theRomans. Of which war another occasion was ministered ;•which was this, Those that dwelt in the neighbouring cities ofSyria seized upon such Jews as dwelt among them, with theirwives and children, and slew them, when they' had not the leastoccasion of complaint against them ; for they did neither attemptany innovation or revolt from the Romans, nor had they givenany marks of hatred or treacherous designs towards the Syrians.But what was done by the inhabitants of Scythopolis was themost impious and most highly criminal of all * ; for, when theJews their enemies came upon them from without, they forcedthe Jews that were among them to bear arms against their owncountrymen, which it is unlawful for us to do-f-; and when, bytheir assistance, they had joined battle with those that attackedthem, and had beaten them, after that victory they forgot the
B b 2 assurances
« See Of the War, B. II. ch. xviii. sect 3.
+ The Jews might collect this unlawfulness of fighting against their brethreniram that law of Moses, Levit. xix. 16. " Thou i'halt not s.arul against the blood•• of thy neighbour ;" and that, ver. 17. " Thou shalt nor avenge, nor btar any" grudge against the children of thy people; but ihou shalt love ihy neighbour as." thvselt;'' as well as from many other places in the IV'Mtciich and Prophets.See Aatig. B. VHI.xh.viii. sect. 3.







OCR Output








Chap. XVI. WARS OF THE JEWS.


" war, nor, if they should follow such ill advice, will the Par-" thians permit them so to do; for it is their concern to main-" tain the truce that is between them and the Romans, and-" they will be supposed to break the covenants between-" them, if any under their government march against the Ro-" mans. What remains, therefore, is this, that you have re-" course to divine assistance; but this is already on the side of'1 the Romans; for it is impossible that so vast an empire should" be settled without God's providence. Reflect upon it how" impossible it is for your zealous observations of your religi-'' ous customs to be here preserved, which are hard to be ob-" served even when you fight with those whom you are able to' conquer; and how can you then most of all hope for God's'' assistance, when, by being forced to transgress his law, you,' will make him turn his face from you? and if you do ob-' serve the custom of the Sabbath days, and will not be prevailed'' on to do any thing thereon, you will easily be taken, as were'' your forefathers by Pompey, who was the busiest in his siege" on those days on which the besieged rested. But if in time" of war you transgress the law of your country, I cannot tell" on whose account you will afterward go to war; for your con-" cern is but one, that you do nothing against any of your fore-" fathers-, and how will you call upon God to assist you, when" you are voluntarily transgressing against his religion ? Nowall men that go to war do it either as depending on divine, or" on human assistance; but since your going to war will cut off" both those assistances, those that are for going to war choose" evident destruction. What hinders you from slaying your" children and wives with your own hands, and burning this" most excellent native city of yours? for by this mad prank" you will, however, escape the reproach of being beaten. But" it were best, O my friends, it were best, while the vessel is" still in the haven, to foresee the impending storm, and not to"set sail out of the port into the middle of the hurricanes; for" we justly pity those who fall into great misfortunes without" foreseeing them ; but for him. who rushes into manifest ruin," he gains reproaches [instead of commiseration]. But cer-" tainly no one can imagine that you can enter into a war as by" agreement, or that when the Romans have got you under their" power, they will use,you with moderation, or will not ratherj" for an example to other nations, burn your holy city, andjut-" terly destroy your whole nation; for those of you who shall" survive the war, will not be able to find a place whither to',' flee, since all men have the Romans for their lords already, or" are afraid they shall have hereafter. Nay indeed, the danger
3 F 2 " concerns







OCR Output








272 WARS OF THE JEWS. Book I.


them, and shut up a great number of them in the citadel. NowMarcus Antonius, their leader, signalised himself in this battle,who, as he always shewed great courage, so did he never shew itso much as now ; but Gabinius, leaving forces to take the cita­del, went away himself, and settled the cities that had not beendemolished, and rebuilt those that had been destroyed. Accord­ingly, upon his injunctions, the following cities were restored.Scythopolis, and Samaria, and Anthedon, and Appolinia, and Ja-minia, and Raphia, and Marissa, and Adoreus, and Gamala,and Ashdod, and many others; while a great number of menreadily ran to each of them, and became their inhabitants.
5. When Gabinius had taken care of these cities, he returnedto Alexandrium, and pressed on the siege. So when Alexanderdespaired of ever obtaining the government, he sent ambassadorsto him, and prayed him to forgive what he had offended him in,and gave up to him the remaining fortresses, Hyrcaniutn, andMacheras, as he put Alexandrium into his hands afterwards : allwhich Gabinius demolished, atthe persuasion of Alexander's mo.ther, that they might not be receptacles of men in a second war.She was now there in order to mollify Gabinius, out of her con­cern for her relations that were captives at Rome, which wereher husband and her other children. After this Gabinius broughtHyrcanus to Jerusalem, and committed the care of the temple tohim ; but ordained the other political government to be by anaristocracy. He also parted the whole nation into five conven­tions, assigning one portion to Jerusalem, another to Gadara, thatanother should belong to Amathus, a fourth to Jericho, and tothe fifth division was allotted Sepphoris, a city of Galilee. Sothe people were glad to be thus freed from monarchical govern­ment, and were governed for the future by an aristocracy.
6. Yet did Aristobulus afford another foundation for newdisturbances. He fled away from Rome, and got together againmany of the Jews that were desirous of a change, such as hadborne an affection to him of old ; and when he had taken Alex­andrium in the first place, he attempted to build a wall about it;but as soon as Gabinius had sent an army against him under Si-senna, and Antonius, and Servilius, he was aware of it, and re­treated to Macherus. And as' for the unprofitable multitude, hedismissed them, and only marched on. with those that were arm­ed, being to the number of eight thousand, among whom was Pi-tholaus, who had been the lieutenant at Jerusalem, but desertedto Aristobulus with a thousand of his men : so the Romans fol-Jowed him, and when it came to a battle, Aristobulus's party fora long time fought courageously;' but at length they were over­borne by the Romans, and of them five thousand fell down dead,
and







OCR Output








422 WARS OF THE JEWS. Book It.


tioch, but had left one of his companions, whose name wasNoarus, to take care of the public affairs; which Noarus wasof kin to king Sohemus *. Now there came certain men, se­venty in number, out of Batanea, who were the most considera­ble for their families and prudence of the rest of the people ;these desired to have an army put into their hands, that if anytumult should happen, they might have about them a guardsufficient to restrain such as might rise up against them. ThisNoarus sent out some of the king's armed men by night, andslew all those [seventy] men; which bold action he ventured up­on without the consent of Agrippa, and was such a lover of mo­ney, that he chose to be so wicked to his own countrymen, tho'he brought ruin on the kingdom thereby: and thus cruelly didhe treat that nation, and this contrary to the laws also, untilAgrippa was informed of it, who did not indeed dare to puthim to death, out of regard to Sohemus, but still he put an endto his procuratorship immediately. But as to the seditious,they took the citadel which was called Cypros, and was aboveJericho, and cut the throats of the garrison, and utterly demo­lished the fortifications; this was about the same time that themultitude 'of the jews that were at Macherus persuaded theRomans who were in garrison to leave the place, and deliver itup to them. These Romans being in great fear, lest the placeshould be taken by force, made an agreement with them to de­part upon certain conditions; and when they had obtained thesecurity they desired, they delivered up the citadel, into whichthe people of Macherus put a garrison fer their own security,and held it in their own power.
7. But for Alexandria, the sedition of the people of the placeagainst the Jews was perpetual, and this from that very timewhen Alexander [the Great], upon unding the readiness of theJews in assisting him against the Egyptians, and as a reward forsuch their assistance, gave them equal privileges in this citywith the Grecians themselves. Which honourary reward con­tinued among them under his successors, who also set apart forthem a particular place, that they might live without beingpolluted [by the Gentiles], and were thereby not so much in­termixed with foreigners as before: they also gave them thisfarther privilege, that they should be called Macedonians. Nay,when the Romans got possession of Egypt, neither the first Cae­sar, nor any one that came after him, thought of diminishing the
honours


* Of this Eohemus we have mention made by Tacitus. We also learn from Dio,that his father was king of the Arabians of Iturea, [which Iturea is mentioned bySt Luke, iii. i.], both whose testimonies are quoted here by Dr Hudson. SecNoldius, No. 371.







OCR Output








. III. WARS OF THE JEWS.


He also put his mother in bonds, for her contesting the govern­ment with him; for John had left her to be the governess ofpublic affairs. He also proceeded to that degree of barbarity as,to cause her to be pined to death in prison.
2. But vengeance circumvented him in the affiiir of his bro­ther Antigonus, whom he loved, and whom he made his part­ner in the kingdom; for he slew him by the means of the qalum'--nies which ill men about the palace contrived against him. Atfirst, indeed, Aristobulus would not believe their reports, partlyout of the affection he had for his brother, and partly becausehe thought that a great part of these tales were owing to the en- -vy of their relaters: however, as Antigonus came once in asplendid manner from the army to that festival, wherein ourancient custom is to make tabernacles for God, it happened, illthose days, that Aristobulus was sick, and that, at the conclu­sion of the feast, Antigonus came up to it, with his armed menabout him; and this, when he was adorned in the finest mannerpossible, and that, in a great measure, to pray to God on thebehalf of his brother. Now, at this very time it was that theseill men came to the king, and told him in what a pompous man­ner the armed men came, and with what insolence Antigonusmarched, and that such his insolence was too great for a privateperson, and that accordingly he was come with a great band ofmen to kill him ; for that he could not endure this bare enjoy­ment of royal honour, when it was in his power to take thekingdom himself.
3. Now Aristobulus, by degrees, and unwillingly, gave creditto these accusations ; and accordingly he took care not to disco­ver his suspicion openly, though he provided to be secure againstany accidents : so he placed the guards of his body in a certaindark subterranean passage ; for he lay sick in a place called for­merly the Citadel, though afterwards its name was changed toAntonia; and he ga"ve orders, that if Antigonus came unarmed,they should let him alone ; but if he came to him in his armour,they should kill him. He also sent some to let him know before­hand, that he should come unarmed. But, upon this occasion,the queen very cunningly contrived the matter with those thatplotted his ruin, for she persuaded those that were sent to con­ceal the king's message ; but to tell Antigonus how his brotherhad heard he had got a very fine suit of armour, made with finemartial ornaments, in Galilee ; and because his present sicknesshindered him from coming and seeing all that finery, he verymuch desired to see him now in his armour; because, said he, in3. little time thou art going away from me.
4. As soon as Antigonus heard this, the good temper of hisVOL. III. K k " brother







OCR Output








302 WARS OF THE JEWS. Book f.


the engines of the enemy, nor had they so much success anyway as in the mines under ground.
2. Now, as for the robberies which were committed, the kingcontrived that ambushes should be so laid, that they might re­strain their excursions; and as for the want of provisions, heprovided that they should be brought to them from great dis­tances. He was also too hard for the Jews, by the Romans skillin the art of war; although they were bold to the utmost degree,now they durst not come to a plain battle with the Romans,which was certain death, but through their mines under groundthey would appear in the midst of them on the sudden, and be­fore they could batter down one wall, they built them another inits stead; and to sum up all at once, they did not shew any wanteither of pains taking, or of contrivances, as having resolved tohold out to the very last. Indeed though they had so great an ar­my lying round about them, they bore a siege of five months, tillsome of Herod's chosen men ventured to get upon the wall, andfell into the city, as did Sosius's centurions after them; and nowthey first of all seized upon what was about the temple, and up­on the pouring in of the army, there was slaughter of vast mul­titudes every where, by reason of the rage the Romans were inat the length of this siege, and by reason that the Jews who wereabout Herod earnestly endeavoured that none of their adversa­ries might remain; so they were cut to pieces by great multitudes,as they were crowded together in narrow streets, and in houses,or were running away to the temple; nor was there any mercyshewed either to infants, or to the aged, or to the weaker sex;insomuch, that although the king sent about and desired themto spare the people, nobodycouldbe persuaded to withhold theirright hand from slaughter, but they slew people of all ages likemadmen. Then it was that Antigonus, without any regard tohis former or to his present fortune, came down from the cita­del and fell down at Sosius's feet, who, without pitying him atall, upon the change of his condition, laughed at him beyondmeasure, and called him dntigona *. Yet did he not treat himlike a woman, or let him go free, but put him into bonds, andkept him in custody.
3. But Herod's concern at present, now he had gotten his ene­mies under his power, was to restrain the ieal of his foreign aux­iliaries; for the multitude of the strange people were very eagerto see the temple, and what was sacred in the holy house itself;but the king endeavoured to restrain them, partly by hisexhorta-tions, partly by his threntemngs, nav, partly by force, as think­ing the victory worse than a defeat to him, if any thing thatought not to be seen were seen by them. He also forbade, at the
same, * That is, A woman, not a man.







OCR Output








. X. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.' 187


at Jerusalem, were six hundred and twelve. After those thir­teen high-priests, eighteen took the high-priesthood at Jerusa­lem, one in succession to another, from the days of king Solo­mon, until Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon, made an expedi­tion against that city, and burnt the temple, and removed ournation into Babylon, and then took Josadek, the high-priest, cap­tive ; the times of these high-priests were four hundred sixty-six years, six months, and ten days, while the Jews were still un­der the regal government. But after the term of seventy yearscaptivity under the Babylonians, Cyrus, king of Persia, sent theJews from Babylon to their own land again, and gave them leaveto rebuild their temple ; at which time, Jesus, the son of Josadek,took the high-priesthood over the captives when they were re­turned home. Now he and his posterity, who were in all fif­teen, until king Antiochus Eupator, were under a democraticalgovernment for fourteen years ; and then the forementioned An­tiochus, and Lysia the general of his army, deprived Onias, whowas also called Menelaus, of the high-priesthood, and slew himat Berea, and driving away the son [of Onias the third], put Ja-cimus into the place of the high-priest, one that was indeed of thestock of Aaron, but not of that family of Onias. On which ac­count, Onias, who was the nephew of Onias that was dead, andbore the same name with his father, came into Egypt, and gotinto the friendship of Ptolemy Philometor, and Cleopatra hiswife, and persuaded them to make him the high-priest of th;.ttemple which he built to God in the prefecture of Heliopolis,and this in imitation of that at Jerusalem ; but as for that tem­ple which was built in Egypt, we have spoken of it frequentlyalready. Now, when Jacimus had retained the priesthood threeyears, he died, and there was no one that succeeded him, thatthe city continued seven years without an high-priest •, but thenthe posterity of the sons of Asamoneus, who had the governmentof the nation conferred upon them, when they had beaten theMacedonians in war, appointed Jonathan to be their high-priest,who ruled over them seven years. And when he had been slainby the treacherous contrivance of Trypho, as we have related'somewhere, Simon his brother took the high-priesthood ; andwhen he was destroyed at a feast by the treachery of his son-in-law, his own son, whose name xvasllyrcanus, succeeded him, af­ter he had held the high-priesihood one year longer than his bro­ther. This Hyrcanus enjoyed that dignity thirty years, and diedan old man, leaving the succession to Judas, who was also calledAristobukis, whose brother Alexander was his heir ; which Ju­das died of a sore distemper, after he had kept the priesthood, to­gether with the royal authority ; for this Judas was the first that
A a 2 put







OCR Output








so Book XVIIT. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


" drive them away for him ; but he prayed him to let them a-" lone : the other, by way of reply, asked him the reason of such" a preposterous proceeding, in preventing relief from his pre-" sent misery ; to which he answered, If thou drivest these flies" away, thou wilt hurt me worse ; for, as these are already full" of my blood, they do not crowd about me, nor pain me so" much as before, but are sometimes more remiss, while the" fresh ones that come almost famished, and find me quite tired" down already, will be my destruction. For this cause, there." fore, it is, that I am myself careful not to send such new go-" vernors perpetually to those my subjects, who are already" sufficiently harrassed by many oppressions, as may, like these" flies, farther distress them ; and so, besides their natural desire" of gain, may have this additional incitement to it, that they*' expect to be suddenly deprived of that pleasure which they" take in it." And, as a farther attestation to what I say of diedilatory nature of Tiberius, I appeal to this his practice itself;for, although he were emperor twenty-two years, he sent in allbut two procurators to govern the nation of the Jews, Gratus,and his successor in the government, Pilate. Nor was he in oneway of acting with respect to the Jews, and in another with re­spect to the rest of his subjects. He farther informed them, thateven in the hearing of the causes of prisoners, he made such de­lays, " because immediate death to those that must be condemned*' to die, would be an alleviation of their present miseries, while,£ those wicked wretches have not' deserved any such favour ;*' but I do it, that, by being harassed with the present calamity," they may undergo greater misery."
0. On this account it was, that Eutychus could not obtain anhearing, but was kept still in prison. However, some time af­terward, Tiberius came from Capreae to Tusculanum, whichis about aa hundred furlongs from Rome. Agrippa then de­sired of Antonia, that she would procure an hearing for Euty­chus, let the matter whereof he accused him prove what it would.Now, Antonia was greatly esteemed by Tiberius on all accounts,from the dignity of her relation to him, who had been his bro­ther Drusus's wife, and from her eminent chastity* ; for though
, she
* This high commendation of Antonia for marrying but once, given here, andsupposed elsewhere, Anttq. B. XVII. ch. xiii. sect. 4. and this, notwithstandingthe strongest temptations, shews how honourable single marriages were bothamong the Jews and Romans, in the days of Josephus and of the apostles, andtakes away much of that surprise which the modern Protestants have at thoseJaws of the apostles, where no widows, but those who had been the wives ofone husband only, are taken into the church-list, and no bishops, priests, or dea­cons, are allowed to marry more than once, without leaving oif to officiate asclergyman any longer. See Luke ii. 36. 1 Tim. v. II. u. iii- 3. 13. Tit. i. 10.Constitut*







OCR Output








220 THE LIFE OF FLAVIUS JOSEPHUS.


coming they were in fear for themselves, and came to me, an$when they had saluted me, they said, that I was an happyman in having behaved myself so well in the government of Ga­lilee ; and they congratulated me upon the honours that werepaid me : for they said that my glory was a credit to them,since they had been my teachers and fellow-citizens; and theysaid farther, that it was but just that they should prefer myfriendship to them rather than John's, and that they would haveimmediately gone home, but that they staid that they might de­liver up John into my power ; and when they said this theyrook their oaths of it, and those such as are most tremendousamongst u's, and such as I did not think fit to disbelieve. How­ever, they desired me to lodge some where else ; because thenext day was the Sabbath, and that it was not fit the city of Ti­berias should be disturbed [on that day].
54. So I suspected nothing, and went away to Taricheae ; yetdid 1 withal leave some to make inquiry in the city how matters'went, and whether any thing was said about me: I also set manypersons all the way that led from Taricheae to Tiberias, thatthey might communicate from one to another, if they learnedany news from those that were left in the city. On the nextday, therefore, they all came into the Proseucha * ; it was alarge edifice, and capable of receiving a great number of people ;thither Jonathan went in, and though he durst not openly speakof a revolt, yet did he say that their city stood in heed of a bettergovernor than it then had. But Jesus, who was the ruler, madeno scruple to speak out, and said openly, " O fellow citizens ! it is'• better for you to be in subjection to four than to one ; and" those such as are of high birth, and not without reputation for" their wisdom ;" and pointed to Jonathan and'his colleagues.Upon his saying this, Justus came in and condemned him forwhat he had said, and persuaded some of the people to be of hismind also. But the multitude were not pleased with what wassaid, and had certainly gone into a tumult, unless the sixth hour,which was now come, had dissolved the assembly, at which hourour laws require us to go to dinner on Sabbath-days ; so Jona­than and his colleagues put off their council till the next day, andwent off without success. When I was informed of these af­fairs, I determined to go to the city of Tiberias in the morning.Accordingly, on the next day, about the'first hour of the day, 1







OCR Output








Chap. VIII. WARS OF THE JEWS. 273


and about two thousand fled to a certain little hill, but the thou­sand that remained with Aristobulus brake' through the Romanarmy, and marched together to Macherus; and, when the kinghad lodged the first night upon its ruins, he was in hopes of rai­sing another army, if the war would but cease a while ; accor­dingly, he fortified that strong hold, though it were ilone after apoor manner. But, the Romans falling upon him. he resisted,even beyond his abilities, for two days, and then was taken, andbrought a prisoner to Gabinius, with Antigonus his son, who hadfled away together with him from Rome, and from Gabinus hewas carried to Rome again. Wherefore the senate put him.under confinement, but returned his children back to Judea, be­cause Gabinius informed them by letters, that he had promised'Aristobulus's mother to do so, for her delivering the fortressesup to him.
1. But now as Gabinius was marching to the war against theFarthians, he was hindered by Ptolemy, whom, upon his returnfrom Euphrates, he brought back into Egypt, making use ofHyrcanus and Antipatcr, to provide every thing that was neces­sary for this expedition ; for Antipater furnished him with mo­ney, and weapons, and corn, and auxiliaries ; he also prevailedwith the Jews that were there, and guarded the avenues at Pe-lusium, to let them pass. But now, upon Gabinius's absence, theother part of Syria was in motion, and Alexander, the son ofAristobulus, brought the Jews to revolt again. Accordingly, hegot together a very great army, and set about killing all the Ro­mans that were in the country ; hereupon Gabinius was afraid,(for he was come back already out of Egypt, and obliged tocome back quickly by these tumults), and sent Antipater, whoprevailed with some of the revoltersto be quiet. However, thir­ty thousand still continued with Alexander, who was himselfeager to fight also ; accordingly, Gabinius went out to fight, whenthe Jews met him, and, as the battle was fought near Mount Ta­bor, ten thousand of them were slain, and the rest of the multi­tude dispersed themselves, and fled away. So Gabinius came toJerusalem, and settled the government as Antipater would haveit ; thence he marched, and fought and beat the Nabateans ; asfor Mithridates and Orsanes, who fled out of Parthia, he sentthem away privately, but gave it out among the soldiers thatthey had run away.
8. In the mean time, Crassus came as successor to Gabinius inSyria. He took away all the rest of the gold belonging to thetemple of Jerusalem, in order to furnish himself for his expedi­tion against the Parthians. He also took away the two thousandtalents which Pompey had not touched ; but when he had passed
VOL. III. M m over







OCR Output








434 WARS or THE JEWS. Book II.


against external violence; and as he knew the Romans wouldfall upon Galilee, he built walls in proper places about Jatapataand Barsabee, and Selamis; and besides these about Capharec-cho, and Japha, and Sigo, and what they call Mount Tabor, andTariqheae, and Tiberias. Moreover, he built walls about thecaves near the lake of Gennesar, which places lay in the LowerGalilee; the same he did to the places of Upper Galilee, as wellas to the rock called the Rock of the Achabari, and to S-ph, andJamneh, and Meroth; and in Gaulanitis he fortified Selucia, andSogane, and Gamala; but as to those of Sepphoris, they werethe only people to whom he gave leave to build their own walls,and this because he perceived they were rich and wealthy, andready to go to war, without standing in need of any injunctionsfor that purpose. The case was the same with Gischala, whichhad a wall built about it by John the son of Levi himself, butwith the consent of Josephus: but for the building of the restof the fortresses, he laboured together with all the other build­ers, and was present to give all the necessary orders for thatpurpose. He also got together an army out of Galilee, of morethan an hundred thousand young men, all of which he armedwith the old weapons, which he had collected together, and pre­pared for them.
7. And when he had considered that the Roman power becameinvincible, chiefly by their readiness in obejing orders, and theconstant exercise of their arms, he despaired of teaching thesehis men the use of their arms, which was to be obtained by ex­perience; but observing that their readiness in obeying orders,was owing to the multitude of their officers, he made his parti­tions in his army more after the Roman manner, and appointeda great many subalterns. He also distributed the soldiers intovarious classes, whom he put under captains of tens, and captains,of hundreds, and then under captains of thousands; and besidesthese he had commanders of largerbodies of men. Healsotaughtthem to give the signals one to another, and to call and recal thesoldiers by the trumpets, how to expand the wings of an army,and make them wheel about, and when one wing hath had suc­cess, to turn again andassist those that were hard set, and to joinin the defence of what had most suffered. He also continuallyinstructed them in what concerned the courage of the soul, andthe hardiness of the body; and above all he exercised them forwar, by declaring to them distinctly the good order of the Ro­mans, and that they were to fight with men who, both by thestrength of their bodies, and courage of their souls, had con­quered in a manner the whole habitable earth. He told themthat he should make trial of the good order they would observe in


war,i







OCR Output








Chap. XVIII. WARS or THE JEWS. 423


honours which Alexander had bestowed on the Jews. But stillconflicts perpetually arose with the Grecians; and although thegovernors did every day punish many of them, yet did the sedi­tion grow worse ; but at this time especially, when there weretumults in other places also, the disorders among them were putinto a greater flame; for when the Alexandrians had once a pub­lic assembly, to deliberate about an ambassage they were send­ing to Nero, a great number of Jews came flocking to thetheatre ; but',when their adversaries saw them, they immediate­ly cried out, and called them their enemies, and said they cameas spies upon them ; upon which they rushed out, and laid vio­lent hands upon them ; and as for the rest, they were slain asthey ran away ; but there were three men whom they caught,and hauled them along, in order to have them burnt alive; butall the Jews came in a body to defend them, who at first threwstones at the Grecians, but after that they took lamps, andrushed with violence into the theatre, and threatened that theywould burn the people to a man: and this they had soon done,unless Tiberius Alexander, the governor' of the city, had re­strained their passions. However, this man did not begin toteach them wisdom by arms, but sent among them privatelysome of the principal men, and thereby entreated them to be >quiet, and not provoke the Rdman army against them; but theseditious made a jest of the entreaties of Tiberius, and reproach­ed him for so doing.
8. Now when he perceived that those who were for innova­tions would not be pacified till some great calamity should over­take them, he sent out upon them those two Romans legions thatwere in the city, and together with them five thousand othersoldiers, who, by chance, were come together out of Libia, tothe ruin of the Jews. They were also permitted not only tokill them, but to plunder them of what they had, and to set fireto their houses. These soldiers rushed violently into that partof the city that was called Delta, where the Jewish people livedtogether, and did as they were bidden, though not withoutbloodshed on their own side also; for the Jews got together, andset those that were the best armed among them in the forefront,and made resistance for a great while, but when once they gaveback, they were destroyed unmercifully, and this their destruc­tion was complete, some being caught in the open field, andothers forced into their houses, which houses were first plunderedof what was in them, and then set on fire by the Romans ;wherein no mercy was shown to the infants, and no regard hadto the aged; but they went on in the slaughter of persons ofwery age, till all the place was overflowed with blood, and fifty•• , ', •' • , thousand







OCR Output








Chap. XVI. WARS OF THE JEWS. 297


th'ately, and destroyed a great number of the seditious,and raisedthe sieges of all those fortresses they had besieged: he also exact­ed the tribute of an hund'-ed talents of his enemies, as a penalty,or the mutations they had made in the country.
6. By this time the Parthians being already driven out ofthe country, and Pacorus slain, Ventidius, by Antony's command,sent a thousand horsemen, and two legions, as auxiliaries to He.rod, against Antigonus. Now Antigonus besought Macheras,who was their general, by letter, tocome tohisassistance.andmadea great many mournful complaints about Herod's violence, andabout the injuries he did to the kingdom; and promised to givehim money for such his assistance: but he complied not with hisinvitation to betray his trust, for he did not contemn him thatsent him, especially while Herod gave him more money [thanthe other offered}- So he pretended friendship to Antigonus, butcame as a spy to discover his affairs: although he did not here­in comply with He-rod, who dissuaded him from so doing. ButAntigonus perceived what his intentions were before-hand,and excluded him out tjf the city, and defended himself againsthim, as against an enemy from the walls ; till Macheras wasashamed of what he had done, and retired to Emmaus to Herod;and, as he was in a rage at his disappointment, he slew all theJews whom he met with, without sparing those that were forHero'd, but using them all as if they were for Antigonus.
1. Hereupon Herod was very angry at him, and was going tofight against Macheras as his enemy; but he restrained his indig­nation, and marched to Antony to accuse Macheras of maj-administration. But Macheras was made sensible of his offences,andfollowed after the king immediately, andearnestly begged andobtained that he would be reconciled to him. However, Heroddid not desist from his resolution of going to Antony; but wheuhe heard that he was besieging * Samosata with a great army,.which is a strong city near to Euphrates, he made the greaterhaste; as observing that this was aproper opportunity for shew­ing at once his courage, and for doing what would greatly obligeAntony. Indeed, when he came, he soon made an end of thatsiege, and slew a great number of the barbarians, and took fromthem a large prey ; insomuch that Antony, who admired hiscourage formerly, did now admire it still more. Accordingly heheaped many more honours upon him, and gave him more as­sured hopes that he should gain his kingdom: and now kingAntiochus was forced to deliver up Samosata.
CHAP.
« -This Samosata, the metropolis of Commagena, is well known from its coins,,as Spanheim here as'ures us. Dean Aldrich also confirms what Josephus here notes,that Herod was a great meaiis of taking the city by Antony, and that from Pk«Orch and D10.
VOL. III. P p







OCR Output








Chap. IT. , ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 131


" and are only accountable to one another, (which form of go-" vernment affords us the hest assurance of our present concord," and promises us the best security from evil designs, and will" be most for our own glory in settling the city in good order)," you ought, every one of you in particular, to make provision'' for his own, and in general for the public utility ; or, on the" contrary, they may declare their dissent to such things as" have been proposed, and this without any hazard of danger to" come upon them ; because they "have now no lord set over" them, who, without fear of punishment, could do mischief to" the city, and had an uncontroulable porwer to ta'Tte off those" that freely declared their opinions. Nor has any thing so" much contributed to this increase of -tyranny of late as sloth," and a timorous forbearance of contradicting the emperor's" will; while men had -an over-great inclination to the sweet-" ness of peace, and had learned to live like 'slaves, and as many" of us as either heard of intolerable calamities that happened'•' at a distance from us, or saw the miseries that were -near us," out of the dread of dying virtuously, endured a death joined" with the utmost infamy. V/e ought, t'hen, in the first place," to decree the greatest honours we are able to those that have" taken off the tyrant, especially to Cherea Cassius ; for this'' one man, with the assistance of the gods, hath, by his counsel,11 and by his actions, been the procurer of our liberty. Nor'• ought we to forget him now we have recovered our liberty," who, under the foregoing tyranny, took counsel before-hand," and before-hand hazarded himself for our liberties ; but ought" to decree him proper honours, and thereby freely declare, that" he from the beginning acted with our approbation. And cer-" tainly it is a very excellent thing, and what becomes freemen," to requite their benefactors, as this man hath been a benefac-'' tor to us a1!, though not at all like Cassius and Brutus, who" slew Caius Julius [Caesar] ; for those men laid the foundations«' of sedition and civil wars in -our city, but this man, together" with his slaughter of the tyrant, hath set our city free from all" those sad miseries which arose from the tyranny *."
3. And this was the purport of Sentius's oration, whfch wasreceived with pleasure by the senators, and by as many of theequestrian order as were present. And now one TrebelliusMaximus rose up hastily, and took off Sentius's finger a ring,
R 2 which


*'ln this oration of Sentius Satiirninns, we may see the greit value virtuous'men put upon public liberty, and the sad misery they underwent, while theywere tyrannized over by such emperors as Caius. See Josephus's own short butpithy reflection at the end of the chapter: " So difficult," fays he, " it is for thoseU:to obtain the virtue that is necessary to a wise man; who have the absoluteffovrer 10 do what they please without controtU.'J







OCR Output








Chap. Vllf. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 153'


and they added, " Be thou merciful to us; for although we have" hitherto reverenced thee only as a man, yet shall we henceforth" own thee as superior to mortal nature." Upon this the kingdid neither rebuke them, nor reject their impious flattery. Buta:s he presently afterward looked up, he saw an owl * sitting ona certain rope over his head, and immediately understood that thisbird was the messenger of ill tidings, as it had once been the mes­senger of good tidings to him ; and fell into the deepest sorrow.A severe pain also arose in his belly, and began in a most vio­lent manner. He therefore looked upon his friends, and said,^ l:, whom you call a god, am commanded presently to depart" this life ; - while Providence thus reproves the lying words you" just now said to me ; and I, who was by you called immortal," am immediately to be hurried away by death. But I am" bound to accept of what Providence allots, as it pleases God ;" for we have by no means lived ill, but in a splendid and hap-" py manner." When he said this, his pain was become vio­lent. Accordingly he was carried into the palace ; and the ru­mour went abroad every where, that he Would certainly die ina little time. But the multitude presently sat in sackcloth, withtheir wives and children, after the law of their country, andbesought God for the king's recovery. All places were also fullof moUrning and lamentation. Now the king rested in a highVol. III. U chamber,
* \Ve have a mighty cry made here by some critics, as if (he great Eusebiushad on purpose falsified this account of Josephus, so as to make it agree with theparallel accouiuin the Acts ot the Apostles; because the present copies of his ci­tation of it, Hist. Eccles. B. II. ch x. omit the words jSvCam—in ex°"' «»», i. e.an onvl—on a certain rope, which Josephus's present copies retain, and only havethe explicatory word iyiXor or angel; as if he meant that angel of the Lordwhich St Luke mentions as smiting Herod, Acts, xii. 23. and not that owl whichJosephus called an any.ei or messenger formerly of good, but now of bad neixs, toAgrippa. This accusation is a somewhat strange one in the case of the greatE.isebius, who is known to have so accurately and faithfully produced a vastri'imber of other ancient records, and particularly not a few out of our Josephusalso, without any suspicion of prevarication. Now, not to alledge how uncertain,we are, whether Jo&cphus's and Eusebius's copies of the fourth century were justlike the present in tins clause, which we have indistinct evidence of, the follow,ing words, prf served still in Eusebius, .will not admit of any such exposition." This [bird] (says Eusebius) Agrippa presently perceived to be the cause of ill" fortune, as it was once of good fortune to him;'' which can only belong to tnatbird, the anil, which, as it had formerly foreboded his happy deliverance fromimprisonment, Antiq. B. XV! 11. ch. vi. sect. 7. so was it then foretold to proveiUterward ihe unhappy tore runner of his death in five days time. If the im­proper words signifying cause, be changed for Josephus's proper word ayiXn, an-g'l or messenger, and the foregoing words, #y*(iva— irt e^amivmi be inser eJ,Euseoins's text will truly represent that in Josephus. Had tnis imperfection beenin some heathen author that wns in good esteem with our modern critics, theywould have readily correced these as barely errors in the copies; but being 111an ancient Christian writer, not so well relished by many of those critics, no.thing will serve but the ill-grounded supnosal of 'jtillfui corruption andprc-uatUa. tioti.







OCR Output








Chap. XIII,' ANTIQUHfES Of THE JEWS. 'fj8


could make, both banished him, and appointed Vienrra, a city ofGaul, to be the place of his habitation, and took his money a-way from him.
3. Now, before Archelaus was gone up to Rome upon thismessage, he related this dream to his friends, that " he saw cars" of corn, in number ten, full of wheat, perfectly ripe, which" ears, as it seemed to him, were devoured by oxen." Andwhen he was awake and gotten up, because' the vision appearedto be of great importance to him, he sent for the diviners, whosestudy was employed about dreams. And while some were ofone opinion, aud some of another, (for all their interpretationsdid not agree), Simon, a man of the sect of the Essens, desiredleave to speak his mind freely, and said, that " the vision deno-" ted a change in the affairs of Archelaus, and that not for the" better ; that oxen, because that animal takes uneasy pains in" his labours denoted afflictions, and indeed denoted, farther, a" change of affairs ; because that land which is ploughed by ox-" en cannot remain in its former state ; and that the ears of corn" being ten, determined the like number of years, because an" ear of corn grows in one year ; and that the time of Arche-" laus's government was over." And thus did this man ex­pound the dream. Now, on the fifth day after this dream camefirst to Archelaus, the other Archelaus, that was sent to Judeaby Caesar to call him away, came hither also.
4. The like accident befel Glaphyra his wife, who was thedaughter of king Archelaus, who, as I said before, was married,while she was a virgin, to Alexander, the son of Herod, and bro­ther of Archelaus; but since it fell out so that Alexander was slainby his father, she was married to Juba, the king of Lydia, andwhen he was dead, and she lived in widowhood in Cappadociawith her father, Archelaus divorced his former wife Mariamne,and married her, so great was his affection for this Glaphyra ;who, during her marriage to him, saw the following dream. Shethought " she saw Alexander standing by her, at which she re-" joiced, and embraced him with great affection ; but that he" complained of her, and said, O Glaphyra ! thou provest that" saying to be true, which assures us, that women are not to be" trusted. Didst not thou pledge thy faith to me ? and wast not" thou married to me when thou wast a virgin ? and had we not" children between us ? Yet hast thou forgotten the affection" I bare to thee, out oi the desire of a second husband. Nor hast" thou been satisfied with that injury thou didst me, but thou" hast been so bold as to procure thee a third husband to lie by",thee, and in au indecent and imprudent manner hast entered in-
«tQ







OCR Output








Chap. Vt. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 81


she were still a young woman, she continued in her widowhood,and refused all other matches, although Augustus had enjoin,ed her to be married to some body else ; yet did she allalong preserve her reputation free from reproach. She hadalso been the greatest benefactress to Tiberius, when therewas a very dangerous plot laid against him by Sejanus, a martwho had been her husband's friend, and who had the great­est authority, because he was general of the army, and whenmany members of the senate, and many of the freed-menjoined with him, and the soldiery was corrupted, and the plotwas come to a great height. Now Sejanus had certainly gain­ed his point, had not Antonia's boldness been more wiselyconducted than Sejanus's malice ; for» when she had discover­ed his designs against Tiberius, she wrote him an exact accountof the whole, and gave the letter to Pallas, the most faithful ofher servants, and sent him to Capreas to Tiberius, who, whenhe understood it, slew Sejanus and his confederates; so that Ti­berius, who had her in great esteem before, now looked uponher with still greater respect, and depended upon her in all things.So, when Tiberius was desired by this Antonia to examine Euty-chus, he answered, " If indeed Eutychus hath falsely accused" Agrippa in what he hath said of him^ he hath had sufficient" punishment by what I have done to him already ; but if, upon" examination, the accusation appears to be true, let Agrippa" have a care, lest, out of desire of punishing his freed-man, he" do not rather bring a punishment upon himself." Now, whenAntonia told Agrippa of this, he was still much more pressingthat the matter might be examined into ; so Antonia, uponAgrippa*s lying hard at her continually to beg his favour, tookthe following opportunity : As Tiberius lay once at his ease uponhis sedan, and was carried about, and Caius, her grandson, andAgrippa, were before him after dinner, she walked by the sedan,and desired him to call Eutychus, and have him examined ; towhich he replied, " O Antonia! the gods are my witnesses, that" I am induced to do what I am going to do, not by my own" inclination, but because I am forced to it by thy prayers."When he had said this, he ordered Marco, who succeeded Seja­nus, to bring Eutychus to him ; accordingly, without any de-Vot. III. L * lay,
Conitit. Apost. B. II. sect. i. 2. B. VI. sect. 17. Can. B. XVII. Grot' in Luc. ii. 36".and Respons. ad Consult Cassand' p. 44. a>nd Cotelet. in Constit' B. Vi. sect. 17.And note, That Tertullian owns this law, against second marriages of the cler­gy, had been once at least executed in his time ; and heavily complains el5< where,that the breach thereof had not been always punished by the Cathol'c.j' as itought to have been. Jerome, speaking of the ill reputation of marrying twice,says, That no such p-rson could be chosen into the clergy in his days ; whichAugustine testifies also; and for Epiphanius, rather earlier, he is clear and fullto the same purpose, and says, that law obtained over the whole Catholic Churchin his days; as the places in the fore-cited authors inform us.







OCR Output








32P WARS or THE jews. Book I.


man in making speeches. And upon his saying at last, that ifbis father objected this crime to them, it was in his power to put 'them to death, he made all the audience weep; and he broughtCaesar to that pass, as to reject the accusations, and to reconciletheir father to them immediately. But the conditions of theirreconciliation were these, that they should in all things be obe­dient to their father, and that he should have power to leavethe kingdom to which of them he pleased.
4. After this the king came back from Rome, and seemed tohave forgiven his sons upon these accusations; but still so, thathe was not without his suspicions of them. They were follow­ed by Antipater, who was the fountain-head of those accusa­tions ; yet did not he openly discover his hatred to them, as re­vering him that had reconciled them. But as Herod sailed byCilicia, he touched at * Eleusa, where Archelaus treated themin-the mostobligingmanner,'andgave him thanks for thedeliver-ance of his son-in-law, and was much pleased at their reconcilia­tion ; and this the more because he had formerly written to hisfriends at Rome, that they should be assisting to Alexander at histrial. So he conducted Herod as far as Zephyrium, and madehim presents to the value of thirty talents.
5. Now when Herod was come to Jerusalem, he gathered thepeople together, and presented to them his three sons, and gavethem an apologetic account of his absence, and " thanked God" greatly, and thanked Caesar greatly also, for settling his house" when it was under disturbances, and had procured concord" among his sons,whichwas of greater consequence than the king*" dom itself, and which I will render still more firm; for Caesar" hath put into my power to dispose of the government, and to" appoint my successor. Accordingly, in way of requittal for" his kindness, and in order to provide for mine own advantage,*' I do declare, that these three sons of mine shall be kings. And," in the first place, I pray for the approbation of God to what** I am about; and, in the next place, ! desire your approbation" also. The age of one of them, and the nobility of the other" two, shall procure them the succession. Nay, indeed, my king*** dom is so large, that it may be sufficient for more kings." Now do you keep those in their places whom Caesar hath*' joined, and their father hath appointed; and do not you pay" undue or unequal respects to them, but to every one accord-
" ing
* That this island Eleuoa, afterward called Sebaste, near Cilicia, bad io it tfca
royal palace of this Archelaus, king of Cappadocia, Strabo testifies, B. XV. page671. Stephanus of Byzantium also calls it " an island of Cilicia, which is now* Sebaste ;* both whose testimonies are pertinently cited here by Dr Hudson. $ee<he same history, Antiq.B. XVI. ch. x. sect. 7. Vol. II.







OCR Output








Chap. IV. WARS OF THE JEWS. 261


the mountains, came over to him. Yet could not Demetriusbear this turn of affairs, but supposing that Alexander was al­ready become a match for him again, and that all the nationwould [at length] run to him, he left the country, and went hisway.
6. However, the rest of the [Jewish] multitude did not layaside their quarrels with him, when the [foreign] auxiliaries weregone ; but they had a perpetual war with Alexander, until hehad slain the greatest part of them, and driven the rest into thecity Bemeselis; and when he had demolished that city, he carriedthe captives to Jerusalem. Nay, his rage was grown so extra­vagant, that his barbarity proceeded to the degree of impiety ;for, when he had ordered eight hundred to be hung upon crossesin the midst of the city, he had the throats of their wives andchildren cut before their eyes ; and these executions he saw as hewas drinking and lying down with his concubines. Upon whichso deep a surprise seized on the people, that eight thousand of hisopposers fled away the very next night, out of all Judea, whoseflight was only terminated by Alexander's death; so at last,though not till late, and with great difficulty, he, by such actions,procured quiet to his kingdom, and left off fighting any more.
7. Yet did that Antiochus, who was also called Dionysus, be­come an forigin of troubles again. This man was the brotherof Demetrius, and the* last of the race of the Seleucidae. Alex­ander was afraid of him, when he was marching against the Ara­bians ; so he cut a deep trench between Antipatris, which wasnear the mountains, and the shores of Joppa ; he also erected anhigh wall before the trench, and built wooden towers, in orderto hinder any sudden approaches. But still he %vas not able toexclude Antiochus, for he burnt the towers, and filled up thetrenches, and marched on with his army. And as he looked upon,taking his revenge on Alexander, for endeavouring to stop him,as a thing of less consequence, he marched directly against the A-rabians, whose king retired into such parts of the country as werefittest for engaging the enemy, and then on the sudden made hishorse turn back, which were in number ten thousand, and fellupon Antiochus's army, while they were in disorder, and a ter­rible battle ensued. Antiochus's troops, so long as he was alive,fought it out, although a mighty slaughter was made among themby the Arabians; but when he fell, for he was in the fore-front,in the utmost danger in rallying his troops, they all gave ground,
and
« Joseplius here calls this Antiochus the last of the Seleutidae, although thera,remained still a shadow of another king of that family, Antiochus Asiaticus, orCommagenus, who reigned, or rather lay hid, till Pompejr <juite turned him out,as Dean Aldrich here notes, from Apphn and Jihtin.







OCR Output








26 Book XVII. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


5. But now Herod's distemper greatly Increased upon himafter a severe manner, and this by God's judgement upon himfor his sins; for a fire glowed in him slowly, which did not so muchappear to the touch outwardly, as it augmented his pains in­wardly ; for it brought upon him a vehement appetite to eating,which he could not avoid to supply with one sort of food orother. His entrails were also exulcerated, and the chief vio­lence of his pain lay on his colon ; an aqueous and transparentliquor also had settled itself about his feet, and a like matter af­flicted him at the bottom of his belly. Nay, farther, his privy-member was putriiied, and produced worms ; and when he satupright, he had a difficulty of breathing, which was very loath­some, on account of the stench of his breath, and the quicknessof its returns; he had also convulsions in all parts of his body,which increased his strength to an unsufierable degree. It wassaid by those who pretended to divine, and who were enduedwith wisdom to foretel such things, that God inflicted this pu-nishment on the king on account of his great impiety ; yet washe still in hopes of recovering, though his afflictions seemedgreater than any one could bear. He also sent for physicians,and did not refuse to follow what they prescribed for his assist­ance, and went beyond the river Jordan, and bathed himself inthe warm baths that were at Callirrhoe, which, besides theirother general virtues, were also fit to drink ; which water runsinto the lake called Asphaltitis. And when the physicians oncethought fit to have him bathed in a vessel full of oil, it was sup­posed that he was just dying ; but, upon the lamentable cries ofhis domestics, he revived ; and having no longer the least hopesof recovering, he gave order that every soldier should be paidfifty drachmae ; and he also gave a great deal to their command­ers, and to his friends, and came again to Jericho, where he grewso choleric, that it brought him to do all things like a madman ;and though he were near his death, he contrived the followingwicked designs. He commanded that all the principal men ofthe entire Jewish nation, wheresoever they lived, should be call­ed to him. Accordingly, they were a great number that came,because the whole nation was called, and all men heard of thiscall, and death was the penalty of such as should despise theepistles that were sent to call them. And now the king was ina wild rage against them all, the innocent as well as those thathad afforded ground for accusations; and when they were come,
he
year of the Julian period 4710, and the 4th year before the Christian aera. Seeits calculation by the rules of astronomy, at the end of the Astronological Lec.rares, edit. Lat. p. 451. 451.







OCR Output








392 WARS OF THE JEWS. Book II.


spread itself to others that were most nearly related to him j andhow, at last, he was so distracted that he became an actor in thescenes, and upon the theatre, I omit to say any more about them,because there are writers enough upon those subjects everywhere; but I shall turn myself to those actions of his time inwhich the Jews were concerned.
2. Nero therefore bestowed the kingdom of the lesser Ar­menia upon Aristobulus, * Herod's son, and he added lo Agrip-pa's kingdom four cities, with the toparchies to them belong­ing: I mean Abila, and that Julias which is in Perea, Taricheaalso, and Tiberias of Galilee; but over the rest of Judea hemade Felix procurator. This Felix took Eleazar the arch-rob­ber, and many that were with him, alive, when thev had rava­ged the country for twenty years together, and sent them toRome; but as to the number of the robbers he caused to becrucified, and of those who were caught among them, and whomhe brought to punishment, they were a multitude not to beenumerated.
3. When the country was purged of these, there sprang upanother sort of robbers in Jerufalem, which were called Sicarii,who slew men in the day time, and in the midst of the city;this they did chiefly at the festivals, when they mingled them­selves among the multitude, and concealed daggers under theirgarments, with which they stabbed those that were their ene­mies ; and when any fell down dead, the murderers became apart of those that had indignation against them, by which meansthey appeared persons of such reputation that they could by nomeans be discovered. The first man who was slain by them wasJonathan the high-priest, after whose death many were slain e-very day, while the fear men were in of being so served wasmore afflicting than the calamity itself, and while c-.very bodyexpected death every hour, as men do in war, so men were o-bliged to look before them, and to take notice of their enemiesat a great distance; nor, if their friends were coming to them,durst they trust them any longer; but, in the midst of theirsuspicions and guarding of themselves, they were slain. Suchwas the celerity of the plotters against them, and so cunningwas their contrivance.
9. There was also another body of wicked men gotten toge­ther, not so impure in their actions, but more wicked in theirintentions, which laid waste the happy state of the city no lessthan did these murderers. These were such men ss deceived anddeluded the people under pretence of divine inspiration, but werefor procuring innovations and changes of the government; and
these,* i. e. Herod king ef Chalet:.







OCR Output








. VIII. ANTIQJJITIES OF THE JEWS, 93


*' mands of our law ; and as we depend upon the excellency of" our laws, and, by the labours of our ancestors, have continued" hitherto without suffering them to be transgressed, we dare" not by any means suffer ourselves to be so timorous as toV transgress those laws out of the fear of death, which God" hath determined are for our advantage ; and, if we fall into1' misfortunes, we will' bear them in order to preserve our" laws, as knowing, that those who expose themselves to dan-? gers, have good hope of escaping thern ; because God will'' stand on our side, when, out of regard to him, we undergo af-" ftictior.s, and sustain the uncertain, turns of fortune. But, if" we should submit to thee, we should be greatly reproached for<' our cowardice, as thereby shewing ourselves ready to trans-" gress our law ; and we should incur the great anger of God'' also, who, even thyself being judge, is superior to Caius."
3. When Petvonius ?aw by their words that their determina­tion was hard to be removed, and that, without a war, he shouldnot be able to be subservient to Caius in the dedication of hisstatue, and that there must be a great deal of bloodshed, he tookhis friends, and the servants that were about him, and hasted toTiberias, as wanting to know in what posture the affairs of theJews were ; and many ten thousands of the Jews met Petroniusagain, when he was come to Tiberias. These thought theymust run a mighty hazard if they should have a war with theRomans, but judged that the transgression of the law was ofmuch greater consequence, and made supplication to him, that hewould by no means reduce them to such distresses, nor defile theircity with the dedication of the statue. Then Petronius said tothem, " Will you then make war with Caesar, without consider-'• ing his great preparations for war, and your own weakness ?"They replied, " We will not by any means make war with him,'' but still we will die before we see our laws transgressed." Sothey threw themselves down upon their faces, and stretched outtheir throats, and said they were ready to be slain ; and this theydid for forty days together, and in the mean time' left otf the tillingof their ground, and that while the season * of the vear requiredthem to sow it. Thus they continued firm in their resolution,and proposed to themselves to die willingly, rather than to seethe dedication of the statue.
4. When


* What Josephus here, and sect. 6. relates as done by the Jews Iff are feed-tine, is in Philo, not far off the time <wben the corn ifaj life, who, as Le Clercnotes' differ here one from the other. This is another indication that Josephus,when he wrote this account, had not seen Fhilo'i L«gat. ad Caiiun, otherwise h*would hardly have herein differed from him.







OCR Output








932 W'ARS OF THE JEWS. Book T,


" kingdom of their ancestors to that pestilent fellow AntirSater:" that he would now appease the ghosts of Hyrcanus and Ma." riamne, by taking vengeance on him; for that it was not fit" for him to take the succession to the government from such a" fatherwithout bloodshed: thatmany tilings happen every day to" provoke him so todo, insomuch that hecan say nothingat all, but" it affords occasion tor calumny against him; for that,ifanymen-" tiou be made of nobility of birth, even in other cases, he is a-" bused unjustly, while his father would say, that nobody, to be" sure, is of noble birth but Alexander, and that his father was" inglorious fpr want of such nobility. If they be at any time" hunting, and he says nothing, he gives offence; and if he com-'' mends any body, they take it in way of jest: that they always" find.their father unmercifully severe, and have no natural af-" fection for any of them but for Antipater; on which accounts,•' if his plot does not take, he is very willing to die; but that in" case he kill his'father, he hath sufficient opportunities forsa-" ving himself. In the first place, he hath Archelaus his father-" in-law to whom be can easily fly; and in the next place he'' hath Caesar, who hath never known Herod's character to this" day; for that he shall not appear then before him with that'' dread he used to do, when his father was there to terrify him;"' and that he will not then produce the accusations that con-'' cerned himself alone, but would, in the first place, openly in-«' sist on the calamities of their nation, and how they are taxed,«' to death, and in what ways of luxury and wicked practices'« that wealth is spent which was gotten by blood-shed; what" sort of persons they are that get our riches, and to whom those" cities belong, upon whom he bestows his favours ; that he«: would have inquiry made what became of his grand-father" [Hyrcanus], and his mother [Mariamne], and would openly" proclaim the gross wickedness that was in the kingdom; on" which accounts he should not be deemed a parracide."
3. When Eurycles had made this portentous speech, he great­ly Commended Antipater, as the only child that had an affectionfor his father, and on that account was an impediment to the o-thers plot against him. Hereupon the king, who had hardly re­pressed his anger upon the former accusations, was exasperatedto an incurable degree. At which time Antipater took anotheroccasion to send in other persons to his father to accuse his breth­ren, and to tell him, that they had privately discoursed with Ju-cundus audTyrannus, who had once been masters of the horse tothe king, but for some offences had been put out of that honour­able employment. Herod was in a very great rage at these in­formations, and presently ordered those men to be tortured: yet
did







OCR Output








113 Book XIX. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


means their mutual hatred against Cains, and on that accountwere not averse to a mutual kindness one towards another.
'9. When Minucianus and Cherea had met together, and sa­luted one another ("as they had been used in former conversa­tions to give the upper hand to Minucianus, both on account ofhis eminent dignity, for he was the noblest of all the citizens,and highly commended by all men, especially when he madespeeches to them,) Minucianus began first, and asked Cherea,What was the watch-word he had received that day fromCaius ? for the affront, which was offered Cherea in giving thewatch-words, was famous over the city. But Cherea madeno delay, so long as to reply to that question, out of the joyhe had that Minucianus would have such confidence in him asto discourse, with him. " But do thou," faid he, " give me the" watch-word of liberty. And I return thee my thanks, that" thou hast so greatly encouraged me to exert myr If after an" extraordinary manner ; nor do I stand in need of many words" to encourage me, since both thou and I are of the same mind," and partakers of the same resolutions, and this before weM have conferred together. I have indeed but one sword girt*' on, but this one will serve us both. Come on, therefore, let
us set about the work'. Do thou go first, if thou hast a mind,** and bid me follow thee ; 'or else I will go first, and thou shalt" assist me, and we'will assist one another, and trust one another." Nor' is there a necessity for even one sword to such as have" a mind disposed to such works, by which mind the sword uses*' to be successful. I am zealous about this action, nor am I" solicitous what I may myself undergo ; for I am not at leisure" to consider the dangers that may come upon myself, so deep-" ly am I troubled at the slavery our once free country is now" under, and at the contempt cast upon our excellent laws, and" at the destruction which hangs over all men, by the means of*' Caius. I wish that I may be judged by thee, and that thou" mayst esteem me worthy of credit in these matters, seeing we" are both of the same opinion, and there is herein no difference" between us."
10. When Minucianus saw the vehemency with which Che­rea delivered himself, he gladly embraced him, and encouraged'him in his bold attempt, commending him, and embracing him ;so he let him go with his good wishes ; and some affirm, that he'thereby confirmed Minuaianus in the prosecution of what hadbeen agreed among them ; for, as Cherea entered into the court,the report runs, that a voice came from among the multitude toencourage him, which bid him finish what he was about, and takethe opportunity that providence afforded; and that Cherea at
first







OCR Output








278 WARS OF THE JEW9. Book I.


5. Now Herod was an active man, and soon found propermaterials for his active spirit to work upon. As therefore hefound that Hezekias, the head of the robbers, ran over the neigh­bouring parts of Syria with a great band of men, he caught himand slew him, and many more of the robbers with him ; whichexploit was chiefly grateful to the Syrians, insomuch that hymnswere sung in Herod's commendation, both in the villages and inthe cities, as having procured their quietness, and having pre­served what they possessed to them ; on which occasion he be­came acquainted with Sextus Caesar, a kinsman of the great Cae­sar, and president of Syria. A just emulation of his gloriousactions excited Phasaelus also to imitate him. Accordingly, heprocured the good-will of the inhabitants of Jerusalem, by hisown management of thecity-aiFairs, and did not abuse his powerin any disagreeable manner ; whence it came to pass, that thenation paid Antipater the respects that were due only to a king,and the honours they all yielded him were equal to the honoursdue to an absolute lord; yet did he not abate any part of thatgood-will or fidelity which he owed to Hyrcanus.
6. However, he found it impossible to escape envy in suchhis prosperity ; for the glory of these young men affected evenHyrcanus himself already privately, though he said nothing of itto any body ; but what he principally was grieved at, was thegreat actions of Herod, and that so many messengers came one be­fore another, and informed him of the great reputation he got inall his undertakings. There were also many people in the royalpalace itself, who inflamed his envy at him ; those, I mean, whowere obstructed in their designs by the prudence either of theyoung men, or of Antipater. These men said, that by com­mitting the public affairs to the management of Antipater and ofhis sons, he sat down with nothing but the bare name of a king,without any of its authority; and they asked him, how long hewould so far mistake himself, as to breed up kings against hisown interest ? for that they did not now conceal their governmentof affairs any longer, but were plainly lords of the nation, and hadthrust him out of his authority ; that this was the case when He­rod slew so many men without his giving him any command todo it, either by word of mouth, or by his letter, and this in con­tradiction to the law of the Jews ; who therefore, in case he benot a king, but a private man, still ought to come to his trial, andanswer it to him, and to the laws of his country, which do notpermit any one to be killed, till he hath been condemned in judge­ment.
7. Now
XIV. ch. ix. sect. i. and Of the W*r, B. II. eh. xi. sect. 6. and Polyb. B. XVII,P- 72-J- -







OCR Output








1(56 Book XX, ANTIQJJITIES OF THE JEWS.


intentions, and how he had-determined to make war with theRomans, slew him, and gave his kingdom to his brother Gotar-zes. He also, in no long time, perished by a plot made againsthim, and Vologases, his brother, succeeded him, who committedtwo of his provinces to two of his brothers, by the same father ithat of thg Medes to the elder, Pacorus, and Armenia to theyounger, Tiridates. ...
CHAP IV.
How Izates was betrayed by his own subjects, and fought againstby the Arabians : and bow Izates, by the providence of God,was deiivered out of their hands.
§ i. 'VTOW when the king's brother, Monobazus, and his other-1- kindred, saw how Izates, by his piety to God, wasbecome greatly esteemed by all men, they also had a desire toleave the religion of their country, and to embrace the customsof the Jews; but that act of theirs was discovered by Izates'psubjects. Whereupon the grandees were much displeased, andcould not contain their anger at them ; but had an intention,when they should find a proper opportunity, to inflict a punish-inent upon them. Accordingly, they wrote to A.bia, king of theArabians, and promised him great sums of money, if he wouldmake an expedition against their king ; and .they farther promi­sed him, that, on the first onset, they would desert their king,because they were desirous to punish him, by reason of the ha­tred he had to their religious worship,: then they obliged them­selves, by oaths, to be faithful to each other, and desired that hewould make haste in this design. The king of Arabia compliedwith their desires, and brought a great army into the field,and marched against Izates ; and, in the. beginning of the firstonset, and before they came to a close fight, those grandees, as ifthey had a panic terror upon them, all deserted Izates, as theyhad agreed to do, and, turning their backs upon their enemies,ran away. Yet was not Izates dismayed at this ; but when heunderstood that the grandees had betrayed him, he also retiredinto his camp, and made inquiry into the matter ; and as soon ashe knew who they were that had made this conspiracy with theking of Arabia, he cut oft0 those that were found guilty ; andrenewing the fight on the next day, he slew the greatest part ofhis enemies, and forced all the rest to betake themselves toflight. He also pursued their king, and drove him into a for­tress called Arsamus, and, following on the siege vigorously, he.took that fortress, i And, when he had plundered it of all the.prey that was in it, which was not small, , he returned to Adia-
'i- . bene;


I







OCR Output








Chap. IX. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. S3


violent manner, and thought all to be lawful and right whichtended to please them, and being unskilful in foreseeing whatdangers they incurred ; and when they had suspicion of such athing, yet did the present pleasure they took in the punilhmentof those they deemed their enemies, overweigh all such consi­derations ; and although Archelaus sent many to speak to them,yet they treated them not as meflengers sent by him, but aspersons that came of their own accord to mitigate their anger,and would not let one of them speak. The sedition, also, wasmade by such as were in a great passion ; and it was evidentthat they were proceeding farther in seditious practices, by themultitude's running so fast upon them.
3. Now, upon the approach of that feast of unleavened bread,which the law of their fathers had appointed for the Jews at thistime, which feast is called the Passover *, and is a memorial of'their deliverance out of Egypt, (when they offer sacrifices withgreat alacrity ; and when they are required to slay more sacrifi­ces in number than at any other festival; and when an innu­merable multitude came thither out of the country, nay, frombeyond its limits also, in order to worfliip God) ; the seditiouslamented Judas and Matthias, those teachers of the laws, andkept together in the temple, and had plenty of food, becausethese seditious persons were not ashamed to beg it. And asArchelaus was afraid lest some terrible thing should spring upby means of these men's madness, he sent a regiment of armedmen, and with them a captain of a thousand, to suppress the vio­lent efforts of the seditious, before the whole multitude shouldbe infected with the like madness ; and gave them this charge,that if they found any much more openly seditious than others,and more busy in tumultuous practices, they should bring themto him. But those that were seditious on account of thoseteachers of the law, irritated the people by the noise and cla­mours they used to encourage the people in their designs^ sothey made an assault upon the soldiers, and came up 'to them,and stoned the greatest part of them, although some of them ranaway wounded, and their captain among them'; :and when theyhad thus done, they returned to the sacrifices which were alreadyin their hands. Now Archelaus thought there was no way topreserve the entire government, but by cutting off those whomade this attempt upon it; so he sent out the whole army upon•them, and sent the horsemen to prevent those that had theirtents without the temple, from assisting those that were within
VOL. III.*..- : • E' /, the
. '), ' * i • . • ,


* This pissover, when the sedition here mentioned was moved against Ar.<helaus, was not one, but thirteen months after the eclipse of the moon alreadymentioned. '







OCR Output








348 Book I. WARS OF THE JEWS.


" this Varus, who is very seasonably here, to be thy judge; and* get thou thy defence ready against to-morrow; for I give" thee so much time to prepare suitable excuses for thyself."And as Antipater was so confounded, that he was able to makeno answer to this charge, he went away; but his mother andwife came to him, and told him of all the evidence they hadgotten against him. Hereupon he recollected himself, and con­sidered what defence he should make against the accusations.
CHAP. XXXII.
Antipater is accused before Varus, and is convicted of laying aplot [against his father] by the strongest evidence. Herodputs off his punishment till he should be recovered, and, in themean time, alters his testament.'
j 1. "VTQW the day following the king assembled a court ofJ_N hiskinsmenandfriends.andcalledinAntipater'sfriendsalso: Herod himself, with Varus, were the presidents; and He­rod called for all the witnesses, and ordered them to be broughtin; among whom some of the domestic servants of Antipater's,mother were brought in also, who had but a little while beforebeen caught, as they were carrying the following letter from herto her son: "Since all those things have been already discovered" to thy father, do not thou come to him, unless thou canst pro--" cure some assistance from Caesar." When this and the otherwitnesses were introduced, Antipater came in, and failing onhis face before his father's feet, he said, " Father, I beseech" thee do not condemn me before hand, but let thy ears be un-" biassed, and attend to my defence; for if thou wilt give me" leave, 1 will demonstrate that I am innocent."
2. Hereupon Herod cried out to him to hold his peace, andspake thus to Varus, " I cannot but think that thou, Varus," and every other upright judge, will determine that Antipater" is a vile wretch. I am also afraid that-thou wilt abhor my ill" fortune, and judge me also myself worthy of all sorts of cala-" mity, for begetting such children; while yet' I ought rather, to be' pitied, who have been so affectionate a father to such'* wretched sons: for when I had settled the kingdom on my*' former sons, even when they were young, and when, be-** sides the charges of their education at Rome, I had made them'* the friends of Caesar, and made them envied by other kings, I'* found them plotting against me, these have been put to death,'* and that, in great measure, for the sake of Antipater ; for asf* he was then young, and appointed to be my successors, I took*' care chiefly to secure him from danger: but this profligate







OCR Output








PREFACE. 24!)


ter, dissolved their government, and brought Sosius upon them ;as also how our people made a sedition upon Herod's death,while Augustus was the Roman emperor, and Quintilius Varuswas in that country ; and how the war broke out in the twelfthyear of Nero, with what happened to Cestius ; and what placesthe Jews assaulted in an hostile manner in the first sallies of thewar.
8. As also, p shall relate] how they built walls about theneighbouring cities ; and how Nero, upon Cestius's defeat, wasin fear of the entire event of the war, and thereupon made Ves­pasian general in this war ; and how this Vespasian, with the *elder of his sons, made an expedition into the country of Judea ;what was the number of the Roman army that he made use of ;and how many of his auxiliaries were cut off in all Galilee ; andhow he took some of its cities entirely, and by force, and othersof them by treaty, and on terms. Now, when I come so far,I shall describe the good order of the Romans in war; and thediscipline of their legions ; the amplitude cf both the Galilees,with its nature, and the limits of Judea. And, besides this, Ishall particularly go over what is peculiar to the country, thelakes and fountains that are in them, and what miseries happenedto every city as they were taken ; and all this with accuracy asI saw the things done, or suffered in them. For 1 shall notconceal any of the calamities I myself endured, since I shallrelate them to such as know the truth of them.
9. After this, [I shall relate] how, when the Jews affairswere become very bad, Nero died, and Vespasian, when he wasgoing to attack Jerusalem, was called back to take the govern­ment upon him ; what signs happened to him relating to hisgaining that government, and what mutations of government thenhappened at Rome, and how he was unwillingly made emperorby his soldiers, and how,' upon his departure to ligypt, to takeupon him the government of the empire, the affairs of the Jewsbecame very tumultuous ; as also how the tyrants rose up againstthem, and fell into dissensions amongst themselves.
10. Moreover, [I shall relate] how Titus marched out ofEgypt into Judea the second time ; as also how, and where, andhow many forces he got together ; apd in what state the city was,by the means of the seditious, at his coming; what attacks he maie,and how many ramparts he c-j'st up ; of the three walls that en­compassed the city, and of their measures ; of the strength of thecity, and the structure of the temple, and holy house ; and be­sides, the measures of those edifices, and of the altar, and all ac­curately determined. A description also of certain of their
III* I i festivals;
* Titus.







OCR Output








THE LITE OF FLAVIUI JOSEPHU3. 223


ceived what snares they had laid for me. No<v, as soon as I wasgot off my journey, I took up my lodgings over against them,and pretended to be asleep ; so Jonathan and his party thinkingthat I was really asleep, and at rest, made haste to go down intothe plain, to persuade the people that I was an ill governor. Butthe matter proved otherwise ; for upon their appearance therewas a cry made by the Galileans immediately, declaring theirgood opinion of me as their governor ; and they made a clamouragainst Jonathan and his partners, for coming to them when theyhad suffered no harm, and as though they would overturn theirhappy settlement; and desired them by all means to go back a-gain, for that they would never be persuaded to have any otherto rule over them but myself. When I heard of this, I did riotfear to go down into the midst of them ; I went, therefore, my­self down presently to hear what Jonathan and his companionssaid. As soon as I appeared, there was immediately an accla­mation made to me by the whole multitude, and a cry in mycommendation by them, who confessed their thanks was owingto me for my good government of them..
49. When Jonathan and his companions heard this, they werein fear of their own lives, and in danger lest they should be as­saulted by the Galileans on my account ; so they contrived howthey might run away. But as they were not able to get off, forI desired them to stay, they looked down with concern at mywords to them. I ordered, therefore, the multitude to restrain en­tirely their acclamations, and placed the most faithful of my arm­ed men upon the avenues, to be a guard to us, lest John shouldunexpectedly fall upon us ; and I encouraged the Galileans totake their weapons, lest they should be disturbed at their ene­mies, if any sudden insult should be made upon them. Andthen, in the first place, I put Jonathan and his partners in mindof their [former] letter, and after what manner they had writtento me, and declared they were sent by the common consent ofthe people of Jerusalem, to make up the differences I had withJohn, and how they had desired me to come to them ; and as Ispake thus, I publicly shewed that letter they had written,till they could not at all deny what they had done, the letter itselfconvicting them. I then said, " O Jonathan ! and you that are" sent with him as his colleagues, if I were to be judged as to" my behaviour, compared with that of John's, and had brought" no more than two * or three witnesses, good men and true, it
" is
* We here learn the practice of the Jews, in the days of Josenhus, to inquireinto the characters of witneses, before they were admitted, and that their num­ber ought to be three, or two at the least, also exactly as in the law of Moses, andin the Apostolical Constitutions, B. II. ch. 37. See Horeb Covenant Revived,paje 9-j. 98.







OCR Output








Chap. III. ANTIQJJIT1E3 OF THE JEWS. S3


• ..' '. CH A P. III.
A sedition of the Jews 'against Pontius Pilate. Concerning Christ,and what ieftl Paulina and the Jews at Rome.
J 1. T>UT now Pilate, the procurator of Judea, removed the-^ army from Cesarea to Jerusalem, to take their winter-quarters there, in order to abolish the Jewish laws. So he in­troduced Caesar's effigies, which were upon the ensigns, andbrought them into the city ; whereas our law forbids us the verymaking of images; on which account the former procuratorswere wont to make their entry into the city with such ensignsas had not those ornaments. Pilate was the first who broughtthose images to Jerusalem, and set them up there ; which wasdone without the knowledge of the people, because it was donein the night-time ; but as soon as they knew it, they came inmultitudes to Cesarea, and interceded with Pilate many days,that he would remove the images ; and when he would not granttheir requests, because it would tend to the injury of Caesar,while yet they persevered in their request, on the sixth day heordered his soldiers to have their weapons privately, while hecame and sat upon his judgement-seat; which seat was so prepa.red in the open place of the city, that it concealed the army thatlay ready to oppress them ; and when the Jews petitioned him.again, he gave a signal to the soldiers to encompass them round,and threatened that their punishment should be no less than im­mediate death, unless they would leave off disturbing him, andgo their ways home. But they threw themselves upon theground, and laid their necks bare, and said they would taketheir death very willingly, rather than the wisdom of their lawsshould be transgressed ; upon which Pilate was deeply affectedwith their firm resolution to keep their laws inviolable, and pre­sently commanded the images to be carried back from Jerusa­lem to Cesarea.
2. But Pilate undertook to bring a current of water to Jeru-s lem, and did it with the sacred money, and derived the originof the stream from the distance of two hundred furlongs. How­ever, the Jews * were not pleased with what had been done a-
bout


* These Jews, as they are here called, whose blood Pilate shed on this occasion,may very well be those very Galilean Jews whose blood Pilate had mingled tuitbtheir sacrifices, Luke, xiii. i i.; these tumults being usually excited at some of theJews great festivals, when they slew abundance ot sacrifices, and the Galileansbeing commonly much more busy in such tumults than tho-e of Judea and Jerusa­lem, as we learn from the history of Archelaus, Antiq' B' XVII. ch. ix. sect. 3.and ch. x. sect. 2. 9. ; though, indeed, Josephus's present copies say not one won!«f tboir eightecn upon •whom the tower in Siham fell, anit situ' them, which the4"> verse of the same isth chapter of St Luke informs us of. B'^t since our go­







OCR Output








Chap. VI. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS, 147


men, that king Agrippa had been once bound in a chain for asmall cause, but recovered his former dignity again ; and a littlewhile afterward got out of his bonds, and was advanced to be amore illustrious king than he was before. Whence men may un­derstand, that all that partake of human nature, how great soeverthey are, may fall; and that those that fall may gain their for­mer illustrious dignity again.
2. And when Agrippa had entirely finished all the duties ofthe divine worship, he removed Theophilus, the son of Ananus,from the high«priesthood, and bestowed that honour of his on Si­mon, the son of Boethus, whose name was also Cantheras, whosedaughter king Herod had married, as I have related above. Si­mon, therefore, had the [high] priesthood with his brethren, andwith his father, in like manner as the sons of Simon, the son ofOnias, who were three, had it formerly under the government ofthe Macedonians, as we have related in a former book.
3. When the king had settled the high-priesthood after thismanner, he returned the kindness which the inhabitants of Jeru­salem had shewed him ; for he released them from the tax uponhouses, every one of which paid it before, thinking it a goodthing to requite the tender affection of those that loved him. Healso made Silus the general of his forces, as a man who had par­taken with him in many of his troubles. But after a very littlewhile the young men of Doris, preferring a rash attempt be­fore piety, and being naturally bold and insolent, carried a statueof Ca'sar into a synagogue of the Jews, and erected it there. Thisprocedure of theirs greatly provoked Agrippa 5 for it plainlytended to the dissolution of the laws of his country. So he camewithout delay to Publius Petronius, who was then president ofSyria, and accused the people of Doris. Nor did he less resentwhat was done than did Agrippa ; for he judged it a piece ofimpiety to transgress the laws that regulate the actions of men.So he wrote the following letter to the people of Doris in an an­gry strain : " Publius Petronius, the president under Tiberius'' Claudius Caesar Augustus, Germanicus, to the magistrates of" Doris, ordains as follows .• Since some of you have had the" boldness, or madness rather, after the edict of Claudius Csesar" Augustus Germanicus was published, for permitting the Jews" to observe the laws of their country, not to obey the same," have acted in entire opposition thereto, as forbidchng the Jews" to assemble together in the synagogue, by removing Caesar's" statue, and setting it up therein, and thereby have offended" not only the Jews, but the emperor himself, whose statue is" more commodiously placed in his own temple, than in a fo-" reign one, where is the place of assembling together; while
T2 ' " "it







OCR Output








#56 WARS OF THE JEWS'. Book 1,


As soon as ever Autipater heard that, he took courage, and withjoy in his looks, besought his keepers, for a sum of money, toloose him and let him go; but the principal keeper of the prisondid not only obstruct him in that his intention, but ran and toldthe king what his design was; hereupon the king cried outlouder than his distemper would well bear, and immediatelysent some of his guards and slew Antipater; he also gave orderto have him buried at Hyrcanium, and altered his testamentagain, and therein made Archelaus his eldest son, and the bro­ther of Antipas, his successor, and made Antipas tetrarch.
8. So Herod having survived the slaughter of his sou five days,died, having reigned thirty-four years, since he had caused An-tigonus to be slain, and obtained his kingdom; but thirty-seven;years since he had been made king by the Romans. Now as forhis fortune, it was prosperous in all other respects, if ever anyother man could be so, since, from aprivate man, he obtained thekingdom, and kept it so long, and left it to his own sons ; butstill in his domestic affairs, he was a most unfortunate man.Now before the soldiers knew of his death, Salome and her hus­band came out and dismissed those that were in bonds, whom theking had commanded tobe slain, and told them that he had alter­ed his mind, and would have every one of them sent to their ownhomes. When these men were gone, Salome told the soldiers-[the king was dead}, and got them and the rest of the multitudetogether to an assembly, in the ar -phitheatre at Jericho, wherePtolemy, who was intrusted by the king with his signet-ring,came before them, and spake of the happiness the king had at­tained, and comforted the multitude, and read the epistle whichhad been left for the soldiers, wherein he earnestly exhorted themto bear good-will to his successor; and after he had read the e-pistle, he opened and read his testament, wherein Philip was toinherit Trachonitis, and the neighbouring countries, and Antipaswas to be tetrarch, as we said before, and Archelaus was madeking. He had^also been commanded to carry Herod's ring toCaesar, andthe settlements he had made.sealed up,because Caesarwas to be lord of all the settlements he had made, and was to con­firm his testament; and he ordered that the dispositions he hadmade were to be kept as they were in his former testament.
9. So there was an acclamation made to Archelaus, to congra­tulate him upon his advancement, and the soldiers, with the mul­titude, went round about in troops, and promised him their goodwill, and besides, prayed God to bless his government. Afterthis, they betook shemselves to prepare for the king's funeral;and Archelaus omitted :.othing of magnificence therein, butbrought out all the royal ornaments to augment the pomp of the
deceased.







OCR Output








Chap VIII. ANTIQJJITIES OF THE JEWS.


nished them. Moreover, there came out of Egypt * about thistime to Jerusalem, one that said he was a prophet, and advised themultitude of the common people to go along with him to theMount of Olives, as it was called, which lay over against the city,and at the distance of five furlongs. He said farthei, that hewould shew them from hence, how, at his command, the wallsof Jerusalem would fall down ; and he promised them, that hewould procure them an entrance into the city through thosewalls, when they were fallen down. Now, when Felix was in­formed of these things, he ordered his soldiers to take their wearpons, and came against them with a great number of horsemenand footmen, from Jerusalem, and attacked the Egyptian and thepeople that were with him. He also slew four hundred of them,and took two hundred alive. But the Egyptian himself escapedout of the fight, but did not appear any more. And again therobbers stirred up the people to make war with the Romans, andsaid, they ought not to obey them at all ; and when any personwould not comply with them, they -set fire io their villages, andplundered them.
7. And now it was that a great sedition arose between theJews that inhabited Cesarea, and the Syrians who dwelt therealso, concerning their equal right to the privileges belonging tocitizens, for the Jews claimed the pre-eminence, because Herodtheir king was the builder of Cesarea, and because he was bvbirth a Jew. Now, the Syrians did not deny what was alledgedabout Herod; but they said, that Cesarea was formerly calledStrato's tower, and that then there was not one Jewish inhabitant.When the presidents of that country heard of these disorder.,they caught the authors of them on both sides, and tormentedthem with stripes, and by that means put a stop to the distur­bance for a time. But, the Jewish citizens, depending on theirwealth, and on that account despising the Syrians, reproachedthem again, and hoped to provoke them by such reproaches.However, the Syrians, though they were inferior in wealth, yetvaluing themselves highly on this account, that the greatest partof Roman soldiers that were there, were either of Cesarea orSebaste, they also for some time used reproachful language tothe Jews also ; and thus it was, till at length they came to throw­ing stones at one another, and several were wounded, and fell onboth sides, though still the Jews were the conquerors. But whenFelix saw that this quarrel was become a kind of war, he cameupon them on the sudden, and desired the Jews to desist; andwhen they refused so to do, he armed his soldiers, and sent them
Z 2 out
« Of this Egyptian impostor, and the number of his followers, in Josephus, ses^cts, xxi. 38.







OCR Output








THE
WORKS


OF


FX.AVIUS JOSEPHUS,
THE LEARNED AND AUTHENTIC JEWISH HISTORIAN
AND CELEBRATED WARRIOR,


IN FOUR VOLUMES.
TO WHICH ARE ADDED,
THREE DISSERTATIONS
CoNCERNING
JESUS CHRIST, JOHN THE BAPTIST, JAMES THB JUST,
GOD'S COMMAND TO ABRAHAM, bV.
WITH
AN INDEX TO THE WHOLE, AND COPPERPLATES.


TRANSLATED BY WILLIAM WHISTON, A.M.PROFESSOR OF MATHEMATICS IN THE UNIVERSITY OF CAMBRIDGE.


VOL. III.


LONDON:
,Printed for Lackington} Allen & Co.; Longman, Hurst, Rees &. Orme; Vcrnor,
Hood & Sharpc; Cuthell & Martin ; James Nunn, and Samuel Bagster.


1806.







OCR Output








Chap. XXX. WARS OF THE JEWS. , 343


** riamne and her children, he would spare nobody; and that" for this reason it was best to get as far off the wild beast as" they were able." And that Antipater oftentimes lamentedhis own case before his mother, and said to her, That" he had" already grey hairs upon his head, and that his father grew" younger again every day, and that perhaps death Would over-" take him before he should begin to be a king in earnest; andf that in case Herod should die, which yet nobody knew whenP it would be, the enjoyment of the succession could certainly." be but for a little time; for that these heads .of Hydra, theff sons of Alexander and Aristobulus, were growing up: that'* he was deprived by his father of the hopes of being succeed**' ed by his children, for that his successor after his death^wasH not to be anyone of his own sons,but Herod the son ofMari-f* amne: that in this point Herod was plainly distracted, to think" that his testament should therein take place; for he would" take care that not one of his posterity should remain, because
he was of all fathers the greatest hater of his children. Yet" does he hate his brother still worse, whence it was that he au while ago gave himself an hundred talents, that he should not" have any intercourse with Pheroras. And when PherorasH said, Wherein have we done him any harm? Antipater repli-H ed, I wish he would but deprive us of all we have, and leave" us naked and alive only; but it is indeed impossible to escape" this wild beast, who is thus given to murder, who will not
permit us to love any person openly, although we be togeth-" er privately, yet may we be so openly too, if we have but" the courage and the hands of men."
4. These things were said by the women upon the torture;as also that Phertfras resolved to fly with them to Perea. NoWHerod gave credit to all they said on account of the affair ofthe hundred talents; for he had had no discourse with any bodyabout them, but only with Antipater. So he vented his angerfirst of all against Antipater's mother, and took away from herall the ornaments which he had given her, which cost a greatmany talents, and cast her out of the palace a second time. Healso took care of Pheroras's women after their tortures, as be­ing now reconciled to them; but he was in great consternationhimself, and inflamed upon every suspicion, and had many in­nocent persons led to the torture out of his fear, lest he shouldleave any guilty person untortured.
5. And now it was that he betook himself to examine Anti­pater of Samaria, who was the steward of [his son] Antipater;and upon torturing him, he learned, that Antipater had sent forJ potion of deadly poison for him opt of Egypt, by Antiphilus,
a com.







OCR Output








354 Book I . WARS OF THE JEWS.


whose command they had done it, they replied, at the commandof the law of their country; and when he farther asked them,how they could be so joyful when they were to be put todeath,they replied,* Because they should enjoy greater happiness afterthey were dead.
4. At this the king was in such an extravagant passion, thathe overcame his disease [for the time], and went out, and spaketo the people; wherein he made a terrible accusation againstthose men, as being guilty of sacrilege, and as making greaterattempts under pretence of their law, and he thought they de­served to be punished as impious persons. Whereupon the peo­ple were afraid lest a great number should be found guilty, anddesired that when he had first punished those that put them uponthis work, and then those that were caught in it, he would leaveoff his anger as to the rest. With this the king con -plied, thoughriot without difficulty, and ordered those that had let themselvesdown, together with their Rabbins, to be burnt alive, but deli­vered the rest that were caught to the proper officers to be putto death by them/
5. After this, the distemper seized upon his whole body, andgreatly disordered all its parts with various symptoms; for therewas a gentle fever upon him, and an intolerable itching over allthe surface of his body, and continual pains in his colon, anddropsical tumours about his feet, and an inflammation of the ab­domen, and a putrefaction of his privy member, that producedworms. Besides which, he had a difficulty of breathing uponhim, and could not breathe but when he sat upright, and had a
convulsion
* Since in these two sections we hare an evident account of the Jewish opinion*in the days of Josephui, about a future happy state, and the resurrection of thedead, as in the New Testament, John xi. 24.1 shall-here refer to to the other placetin Josephus, before he became a Catholic Christian, which concern the same mat­ters. Of the War, B. II. ch viii sect 10, 11. B. III. ch viii. sect. 4. Voi. III.B. VII. ch. vi. sect. 7. Contr. Apion, B. II. sect 30. Vol. III. where we mayobserve, that none of these passages are in his Books of Antiquities, written pecu­liarly for the a'e of the Gentiles, to whom he thought it not proper to insist ont opics so much out of their way as these were. Nor is this observation to be omit­ted here, especially on account of the sensible difference we have now before us iaJosephus's representation of the arguments used by-the Rabbins to persuade theirscholars to hazard their lives for the vindication of God's law, against images, byMoses, as well as of the answers those scholars made to Herod, when they Werecaught, and ready to die for the same ; I mean as)compared with the parallel ar­gument- and answers represented in the Antiquities, B. XVII. ch. vi. sect, a, 3.Vol. III. A like difference between Jewish and Gentile notions, the reader willfind in my notes on Antiquities, B III. ch. vii. sect. J. Vol. I. B. XV. ch. be.*ect. t. Vol II. See the like also in the case of the three Jewish sects in the Anti­quities, B XIII. ch. v. sect 9. and ch. x. sect. 4, and 5. Vol. II. book XVIII. ch. i.sect. .t. Vol. III. and compared with this in his Wars of. the Jews B II. ch. viii.sect, x—14. Vol. III. Nor does St Paul himself reason to Gentiles at Athens',Acts xvii. 16, 34. as he does to Jews in his epistles.







OCR Output








4 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book XVII.


ever his brothers had been ; while Archelaus, a king, wouldsupport his daughter's sons, and Pheroras, a tetrarch, wouldaccept of on? of the daughters as a wife to his son. Whatprovoked him also was this, that all the multitude would socommiserate these fatherless children, and so hate him, [formaking them fatherless], that all would come out, since theyWere no strangers to his vile disposition towards his brethren.He contrived, therefore, to overturn his father's settlements,as thinking it a terrible thing that they should be so related tohim, and be so powerful withal. So Herod yielded to him,and changed his resolution at his intreaty ; and the determina­tion now was, that Antipater himself should marry Aristobu-lus's daughter, and \ntipater's son should marry Pheroras'sdaughter. So the espousals for the marriages were changedafter this manner, even without the king's real approbation.
Now Herod* the king had at this time nine wives; one ofthem Antipater's mother, and another the high-priest's daugh­ter, by whom he had a son of his own name. He had alsoone who was his brother's daughter, and another his sister'sdaughter ; which two had no children. One-of his wives alsowas of the Samaritan nation, whose sons were Antipas andArchelaus, and whose daughter was Olympias ; which daugh­ter was afterward married to Joseph, the king's brother's son;but Archelaus and Antipas were brought up with 'a certainprivate man at Rome. Herod had also to wife Cleopatra ofJerusalem, and by her he had his sons Herod and Philip ;which last was also brought up at Rome: Pallas also was oneof his wives, which bare him his son Phasaelus. And besidesthese, he had for his wives Phedra and Elpis, by whom hehad his daughters Roxana and Salome. As for his elderdaughters by the same mother with Alexander and Aristobu-lus, and whom Pheroras neglected to marry, he gave the onein marriage to Antipater, the king's sister's son, and the etherto Phasaelus, his brother's son. And this was the posterity ofHerod.
CHAP.
* Those who have a mind to know all the family and descendants of An­tipater the Idumean, and of Herod the Great, his son, and have a memoryto preserve them all distinctly, may consult Josephus, Antiq. B. XVIII. ch. v.§ 4. vol. 11. and Of the War, B. I. ch. xxviii. § 4. vol. III. and Noldius in Ha-vercamp's edition, p. 336. and Spanheim, ib. p 402.—405. and Reland, Pales-tin. Part I. p. 175. 276. , • ;,







OCR Output








Chap. XXI. WARS OF THE JEWS. 441


routed those four commanders by stratagems, and had taken themost potent of their warriors, he sent them to Jerusalem ; andthe people [of Galilee] had great indignation at them, and werein a zealous disposition to slay, not only these forces, but thosethat sent them also, had not these forces prevented it by running 'away.
8. Now John was detained afterward within the walls ofGischala, by the fear he was in of Josephus; but within a fewdays Tiberias revolted again, the people within it inviting KingAgrippa [to return to the exercise of his authority there]. Andwhen he did not come at the time appointed; and when a fewRoman horsemen appeared that day, they expelled Josephus outof the city. Now this revolt of theirs was presently known atTaricheae; and as Josephus had sent out all the soldiers thatwere with him to gather corn, he knew not how either to marchout alone against the revolters, or to stay where he was, becausehe was afraid the king's soldiers might prevent him if he tar­ried, and might get into the city ; for he did not intend, to doany thing on the next day, because it was the Sabbath day, andwould hinder his proceeding. So he contrived to circumventthe revohers by a stratagem; and in the first place he orderedthe gates of Taricheae to be shut, that nobody might go out andinform [those of Tiberias], for whom it was intended, whatstratagem he was about: he then got together all the ships thatwere upon the lake, which were found to be two hundred andthirty, and in each of them he put no more than four mariners.So he sailed to Tiberias with haste, and kept at such a distancefrom the city, that it was not easy for the people to see the ves­sels, and ordered that the empty vessels should float up and downthere, while himself, who had but seven of his guards with him,and those unarmed also, went so near as to be seen ; but whenhis adversaries, who were still reproaching him, saw him fromthe walls, they were so astonished that they supposed all theships were full of armed men, and threw down their arms,and by signals of intercession they besought him to spare the city.
9. Upon this Josephus threatened them terribly, and reproach­ed them, that when they were the first that took up arms againstthe Romans, they should spend their force before-hand in civildissensions, and do what their enemies desired above all things;and that besides they should endeavour so hastily to seize uponhim, who took care of their safety, and had not been ashamed toshut the gates of their city against him that built their walls ;that, however, he would admit of any intercessors from themthat might make some excuse for them, and with whomhe would make such agreements as might be for the city's se­curity. Hereupon ten of the most potent men of Tiberias came
VOL. 111. 3 K down







OCR Output








230 THE LIFE OF FLAV1US IOSEPHUS.


observed the truth of the facts ; and as I expected to have theirattestation to them, so I was not deceived in such expectation.Moreover, I immediately presented my history to many otherpersons, some of which were concerned in the war, as was kingAgrippa and some of his kindred. Now the emperor Titus wasso desirous that the knowledge of these affairs should be takenfrom these books alone, that he subscribed his own hand to them,and ordered that they should be published ; and -for Agrippa, hewrote me sixty-two letters, and attested to the truth of what Ihad therein delivered ; two of which letters I have here subjoin­ed, and thou mayest thereby know their contents. " King A-" gr'PPa t0 Josephus, his dear friend, sendeth greeting. I havef' read over thy book with great pleasure, and it appears to me," that thou hast done it much more accurately, and with great-" er care, than have the other writers. Send me the rest of" these books. Farewell, my dear friand." " King Agrippa" to Josephus* his dear friend, sendeth greeting. It seems byf what thou hast written, that thou standest in need of no in-i " struction, in order, to our information from the beginning." However, when thou comest to me, I will inform thee of a great" many things which thou dost not know." So when this histo­ry was perfected, Agrippa, neither by way of flattery, which wasnot agreeable to him, nor by way of irony, as thou wilt say, (forhe was entirely a stranger to such an evil disposition of mind),but he wrote this by way of attestation to what was true, as allthat read histories may do. And so much shall be said concern­ing Justus*, which I am obliged to add by way of digression.
o'6. Now,
* The character of this history qf Justus of Tiberias, the rival of our Josephus.which is now losr, with irs only remaining fragment, are given us by a very ablecritic, Photius, who read that history. It is in the 33d code of his Bibliotheca,and runs thus: " 1 have read (say s Phctius) the chronology of Justus of Tiberias," whose title is this, [The chronolongy of ] the Kings of Judith, which succeeded" one another. This [Justus] canie out of the city Tiberias in Galilee. He be-" gins his history from Moses, and ends it not till the death of Agrippa the sc." venth [ruler] of the family of Herod, and the last king of the Jews ; who took" the government under Claudius, had it augmented under-Nero, and still more" augmented by Vespasian. He died in the third year of Trajan, where also his" history ends. He is very concise in his language, and slightly passes ever those" alFairs that were most necessary to be insisted on; and being under the Jewish"prejudices, as indeed he was himself also a Jew by birth, he makes not the" least mention of the appearance of Christ, or of what things happened to him," or of the wonderful works that he did. He was the son of a certain Jew," whose name was Pittus. He was a man, as he is described by Josephus, of a" must profligate character; a slave both to money and to pleasures. In public" affairs he was opposite to Josephus; and it is related, that he laid many plots" against him, but that Jo;eplius, though he had this his enemy frequently under" his power, did only reproach him in words, and so let him go without farther*' punishment. He says ako, that the history which this man wrote is. for the" main, fabulous, and chiefly as to those parts where he describes the Roman" war with the Jevs, and the taking of Jerusalem."


1







OCR Output








'Chap. |. WA*S OF THE JEWS. 251


BOOK I.
Containing the interval of one hundred fixty-feven years.
\From the taking of Jerusalem By Antiochus Epiphanes, tothe death of Herod the Great.J
CHAP. L
How the city Jerusalem was taken, and the temple pillaged \ly An­tiochus Epiphanes.] As also concerning the actions of the Mac­cabees, Matthias, and Judas and concerning the death of Ju­das.
i i. AT the same time that Antiochus, who is called Epipha-res, had a quarrel with the sixth Ptolemy about hisright to the whole country of Syria, a great-sedition fell amongthe men of power in Judea, and they had a contention about ob­taining the government,; while each of those that were of digni­ty could not endure to be subject to their equals. However, O-nias, one of the high-priests, got the better, and ca-st the sons ofTobias out of the city; who fled to Antiochus, and besought himto make use of them for his leaders, and to make an expeditioninto Judea. The king being thereto disposed beforehand, com­plied with them, and came upon the Jews with a great army, andtook their city by force, and slew a great multitude of those thatfavoured Ptolemy, and sent out his soldiers to plunder them with­out mercy. He also spoiled the temple, and put a stop to theconstant practice of offering a daily sacrifice of expiation for threeyears and six months. ButOni&s, the high-priest, fled to Ptole­my, and received a place from him in the Nomus of Heliopolis,where he built a city resembling Jerusalem, and a temple thatwas like * its temple ; concerning which we shall speak morein its proper place hereafter.
2. Now Antiochus was not satisfied either with his unexpect­ed taking the city, or with its pillage, or with the great slaugh­ter he had made there ; but being overcome with his violentpassions, and remembering what he had suffered during the siege,he compelled the Jews to dissolve the laws of their country, and
I i 2 to
* I see little difference in the several accounts in Josephus about the Egyptiant«mple Onion, of which large complaints are made by his commentators. Onias,it seems, hoped to have made it very like that at Jerusalem, and of the same di­mensions; and so he appears to have really done, as tar as he was able, andthought proper. Of this temple, see Antiq.B. XUI. chap. iii. sect, i, i. 3. and Ofthe War, B. VII. ch. x. sect. 3.







OCR Output








210 THE LIFE OF FLAVIUs JOSEPHUS.


den, and fell dovra flat on the earth, and bedewed the groundwith my tears: then I seemed to them all an object of compas­sion. And when I perceived the change that was made in the mul­titude, Itried todivide their opinions, before the armed men shouldreturn from my house; so I granted them, that I had been as wick-sed as they supposed me to be ; but still I entreated them to let mefirst inform them for what use I had kept that money which arosefrom the plunder, and that they might then kill me if they plea­sed : and, upon the multitude's ordering me to speak, the armedmen came upon me, and when they saw me, they rah to kill me;but, when the multitude bid them hold their hands, they com­plied, and expected that as soon as I should own to them that Ikept the money for the king, it would be looked on as a confes­sion of my treason, and they should then be allowed to kill me.
29. When, therefore, silence was made by the whole multi^tude, I spake thus to them : M O my countrymen ! I refuse not" to die, if justice so require. However, I am desirous to tell*' you the truth of this matter before I die ; for as I know that" this city of yours [Taricheae] was a city of great hospitality," and filled with abundance of such men as have left their own'' countries, and are come hither to be partakers of your for-*< tune whatever it be, I had a mind to build walls about it, out*' of this money, for which you are so angry with me, while** yet it was to be expended in building your own walls." Upon mysaying this, the people of Taricheae and the strangers cried out,That " they gave me thanks, and desired me to be of good cou-" rage." Although the Galileans and the people of Tiberiascontinued in their wrath against me, insomuch that there arosea tumult among them, while some threatened to kill me, andsome bid me not to regard them.; but when I promised themthat I would build them walls at Tiberias, and at other citiesthat wanted them, they gave credit to what I promised, and re­turned every one to his own home. So I escaped the foremention-ed danger, beyond all my hopes, and returned to my own house,accompanied with my friends, and twenty armed men also.
30. However, these robbers and other authors of this tumult,who were afraid on their own account, lest I should punish themfor what they had done, took six hundred armed men, and cameto the house where I abode, in order to set it on fire. Whenthis their insult was told me, I thought it indecent for me to runaway, and I resolved to expose myself to danger, and to act withsome boldness; so I gave orders to shut the doors, and went upinto an upper room, anddesired that they would sendsome of theirmen in to receive the money [from the spoils] ; for I told them{hey would then have no occasion to be angry with me; and when







OCR Output








Chap. IX. ANTTQtJITlES OF THE JEWS." 183


the law, he delivered them to be stoned : but as for those whoseemed the most equitable of the citizens, and such as were themost uneasy at the breach of the laws, they disliked what wasdone ; they also sent to the king, [Agrippa], desiring him to sendto Ananus that he should act so no more, for that what he hadalready done was not to be justified : nay *, some of them wentalso to meet Albinus, as he was upon his journey,from Alex­andria, and informed him, that it was not lawful for Ananusto assemble a sanhedrim without his consent. Whereupon Al­binus complied with what they said, and wrote in anger toAnanus, and threatened that he would bring him to punishmentfor what he had done ; on which king Agrippa took the high-priesthood from him, when he had ruled but three months, andmade Jesus, the son of Damneus, high-priest.
2. Now, as soon as Albinus was come to the city of Jerusalem,he used all his endeavours and care that the country might bekept in peace, and this by destroying many of the Sicarii. Butas for the high-priest Ananias f, he increased in glory every day,and this to a great degree, and had obtained the favour andesteem of the citi?.ens in a signal manner ; for he was a greathoarder up of money : he therefore cultivated the friendship ofAlbinus, and of the high-priest [Jesus], by making them pre­sents ; he also had servants who were very wicked, who joinedthemselves to the boldest sort of the' people, and went to thethreshing-floors, and took away the tithes that belonged to thepriests by violence, and did not refrain from beating such as wouldnot give these tithes to them. So the other high-priests acted inthe like manner, as did those his servants, without any one's beingable to prohibit them; so that [some of the] priests, that of old
were
* Of this condemnation of James the Just, and its causes, as also that he didnot die till long afterwards, see Prim. Christ. Revived, Vol. III. ch. 43.—46.The sanhedrim condemned our Saviour, but could not put him to deaih withoutthe approbation of the Roman procurator; nor could therefore Ananias andhis sanhedrim do more here, since they never had Albinus's approbation for theputting this James to death.
t This Ananias was not the son of Nebedeus, as I take it, but he who wascalled Annas or Ananus the elder, the 9th in the catalogue, and who had beenesteemed high.priest for a long time; and besides, Caiaphas his son-in-law hadfive of his own sons high-priests after him, which were those of numbers 11, 14.15,. 17, 14, in the foregoing catalogue. Nor ought we to pass slightly over whatJosephus here says of Annas or Ananias, that he was high-priest a long time be­fore his children were so ; he was the son of Seth, and is set down first for high.priest in the foregoing catalogue, under number 9. He was made by Quirinus,and continued till Ismael, the loth in number, for about 23 years, which longduration of his high-priesthood, joined to the successions of his son-in-law, andfive children of his own, made him a sort of perpetual high-priest, and was pen.haps the occasion that former high-priests kept their titles ever afterwards i fa*! believe it is hardly met with before him.







OCR Output








338 Hook. I. WARS OF THE JEW*.


port them. He also considered how be was himself hated bythe nation, and how they pitied these orphans; how great affec­tion the Jews bare to those brethren of his when they werealive, and how gladly they remembered them now they hadperished by his means. So he resolved by all the ways possi­ble to get these espousals dissolved.
4. Now he was afraid of going subtilly about this matterwith his father, who was hard to be pleased, and was presentlymoved upon the least suspicion: so he ventured to go to him di­rectly, and to beg of him before his face, not to deprive him ofthat dignity which he had been pleased to bestow upon him, andthat he might not have the bare name of a king, while the powerwas in other persons; for that he should never be able to keepthe government, if Alexander's son was to have both his grand­father Archelaus, and Fheroras for his curators; and he be­sought him earnestly, since there were so many of the royal fa­mily alive, that he would change those [intended] marriages,Now the king had * nine wives, and children by seven of them;Antipater was himself born of Doris, and Herod [Philip] ofMariamne, the high-priest's daughter, Antipas also and Archerlaus were by Malthace, the Samaritan, as his daughterOly mpias,which his brother Joseph's f son had married; by Cleopatra ofJerusalem he had Herod and Philip, and by Pallas, Phasaelus,he had also two daughters, Roxana and Salome, the one byPhedra, and the other by Elpis; he had also two wives that hadno children, the one his first cousin, and the other his niece; and
, besides these he had two daughters, the sisters of Alexander andAristobulus, by Mariamne. Since, therefore, the royal familywas so numerous, Antipater prayed him to change these [in­tended] marriages.
5. When the king perceived what disposition he was in to­wards these orphans, he was angry at it, and a suspicion cameinto his mind, as to these sons whom he had put to death,whether that had not been brought about by the false tales ofAntipater; so at that time he made Antipater a long and apeevish answer, and bid him be gone. Yet was he afterwards
prevailed
* Dean Aldrich take; nctice here, that these nine wives of Herod were alive atthe same time, and that if the celebrated Mariamne, who was now dead, he reck­oned, those wives were in all ten. Vet it is remarkable that he had no more thanfifteen children by them all.
f To prevent confusien, it may not be amiss, with Dean Aldrich, to distinguish
' between four Josephs in the history of Herod. I. Joseph, Herod's uncle, and the[second] husband of his sister Salome, slain by Herod, on account of Mariamne.»[Joseph, Herod's quaestor, or treasurer, (lain on the same account 3- Joseph,Herod's brother, slain in battle against Antigonus. 4. Joseph, Herod'* nephew,
' the husband of Olympias, mentioned in this place.







OCR Output








Chap. XIV. WARS OF THE JEWS. 307


5. Now on the next day, which was the seventh day of theweek, when the Jews were crowding apace to their synagogue,a certain man of Cesarea, of a seditious temper, got an earthenvessel, and set it with the bottom upward at the entrance of thatsynagogue, and sacrificed birds *. This thing provoked theJews to an incurable degree, because their laws were affronted,and the place was polluted. Whereupon the sober and moder­ate part of the Jews thought it proper to have recourse to theirgovernors again, while the seditious part, and such as were inthe fervour of their youth, were vehemently inflamed to fight.The seditious also among the [Gentiles of] Cesarea stood readyfor the same purpose; for they had, by agreement, sent theman to sacrifice beforehand, [as ready to support him;] so thatit soon came to blows. Hereupon Jucundus, the master of thehorse, who was ordered to prevent the fight, came'thither, andtook away the earthen vessel, and endeavoured to put a stop tothe sedition; but when he was overcome by the violence of thepeople of Cesarea, the Jews 'caught up their books of the law,and retired to Narbata, which was a place to them belonging,distant from Cesarea sixty furlongs. But John, and twelve ofthe principal men with him, went toFIorus, to Sebaste, and madea lamentable complaint of their case, and besought him to helpthem; and with all possible decency, put him in mind of theeight talents they had given him; but he had the men seizedupon, and put in prison, and accused them for carrying thebooks of the law out of Cesarea.
6. Moreover, as to the citizens of Jerusalem, although they tookthis matter very ill, yet did theyrestraintheirpassionj but Florusacted herein as it he had been lured, and blew up the war into aflame, and sent sometotake seventeen talentsoutof the sacred trea­sure, and pretended that Caesar wanted them. A t this the peeplewere in confusion immediately, and ran together to the temple,with prodigious clamours, and called upon Caesar by name, andbesought him to free them from the tyranny of Florus. Somealso of the seditious cried.out upon F.lorus, and cast the great­est reproaches upon him, and carried a basket about, and beggedsome spills of money for him, as for'one that was destitute ofpossessions, and in a miserable condition. Yet was not he madeashamed hereby of his love of money, but was more enraged,and provoked to get still more; and instead of coming to Ce­sarea,


* Take hen Dr Hudson's very pertinent note. " By this action, sayi he, the!' killing of a bird over an earthen vessel, the Jews were exposed as a leprous peor" pie; for that was to be done by the law in the cleansing of a leper, (Levit. ch." xiv.) It is a'•o known that the Gentiles reproached the Jews as nibject to the" leprosy, and belfeted that they were driven out of Egypt on that account. Thi»" that eminent person Mt Reland suggested to me."







OCR Output








liJ2 ANTIQJJITIES OF THE JEWS. Book XIX.


dius had gone out before, Cains turned aside into a private narrowpassage, in order to go to the place for bathing, as also in orderto take a view of the boys that came out of Asia, who were sentthence, partly to sing hymns in these mysteries which were nowcelebrated, and partly to dance in the pyrric way of dancingupon the theatres. So Cherea met him, and asked him for thewatch-word ; upon Caius's giving him one of his ridiculouswords, he immediately reproached him, and drew his sword, andgave him a terrible stroke with it, yet was not this stroke mor­tal. And although there be those that say, it was so contrivedon purpose by Cherea, that Caius should not be killed at oneblow, but should be punished more severely by a multitude ofwounds, yet does this story appear to me incredible ; becausethe fear men are under in such actions does not allow them touse their reason. And if Cherea was of that mind, I esteem himthe greatest of all fools, in pleasing himself in his spite againstCaius, rather than immediately procuring safety to himself andto his confederates from the dangers they were in -, because theremight many things still happen for helping Caius's escape, if hehad not already given up the ghost; for certainly Cherea wouldhave regard, not so much to the punishment of Caius, as to theaffliction himself and his friends were in, while it was in hispower, after such success, to keep silent, and to escape the wrathof Caius's defenders, and not leave it to uncertainty whether heshould gain the end he aimed at or not, and after an unreasonablemanner to act as if he had a mind to ruin himself, and lose theopportunity that lay before him ; but every body may guess ashe pleases about this matter. However, Caius was staggered'with the pain that blow gave him ; for the stroke of the swordfalling in the middle, between the shoulder and the neck, washin-tlered by the first bone of the breabt from proceeding any farther.Nor did he either cry out, in such astonishment was he, nor did hecall out for any of his friends ; whether it were that he had noconfidence in them, or that his mind was otherwise disordered, buthe groaned under the pain he endured, and presently went for­ward and fled ; when Cornelius Sabinu«, who was alreadyprepared in mind so to do, thrust him down upon his knee,where many of them stood'round about him, and struck him withtheir swords, and they cried out, and encouraged one another allat once to strike him Ejgain; but all agree that Aquila gave himthe finishing stroke, which directly killed him. But one mayjustly ascribe this act to Cherea ; for although many concurred inthe act itself, yet was he the first contriver .of it, and began longbefore all the rest to prepare for it, and was the first man thatboldly spake of it to the rest; and upon their admission of what
• he







OCR Output








106 ANTIQJJITIES OF THE JEWS. Book XVIII.


" though they had injured Mtthridates, yet if they preserved" his life, this benefit would be remembered by him to the ad-" vantage of those that gave it him ; but that if he were once" put to death, the king would not be at rest till he had made a«' great slaughter of the Jews that dwelt at Babylon ; to whose" safety we ought to have a regard, both on account of our re-" lation to them, and because, if any misfortune befal us, we have" no other place to retire to, since he hath gotten the flower of" their youth under him." By this thought, and this speech ofhis made in council, he persuaded them to act accordingly ; sdMithridates was let go. But, when he was got away, his wifereproached him, that although he was son-in-law to the king, he"neglected to avenge himself on those that had injured him, whilehe took no care about it, but was contented to have been made acaptive by the Jews, and to have escaped them ; and she bid him" either to go back like a man of courage, or else she sware by" the gods of their royal family, that she would certainly dissolve«' her marriage with him." Upon which, partly because hecould not bear the daily trouble of her taunts, and partly becausehe was afraid of her insolence, lest she should in earnest dissolveher marriage, he unwillingly, and against his inclinations, gottogether again as great an army as he could, and marched alongwith them, as himself thinking it a thing not to be borne anylonger, that he, a Parthian, should owe his preservation to theJews, when they had been too hard for him in the war.
7. But as soon as Anileus understood that Mithridates wasmarching with a great army against him, he thought it too igno­minious a thing to tarry about the lakes, and not to take thefirst opportunity of meeting his enemies, and he hoped to havethe same success, and to beat their enemies as they did before )as also he ventured boldly upon the like attempts. Accordinglyhe led out his army, and a great many more joined themselvesto that army, in order to betake themselves to plunder thepeople, and in order to terrify the enemy again by their numbers.But when they had marched ninety furlongs, while the road hadbeen through dry [and sandy] places, and about the midst of theday, they were become very thirsty ; and Mithridates appeared,and fell upon them, as they were in distress for want of water,-on which account, and on account of the time ot the day, they werenot able to bear their weapons. So Anileus and Lis men were putto an ignominious rout, while men in despair were to attack thosethat were fresh, and in good pKght; so great slaughter was made,and many ten thousand men fell. Now Anileus, and all thatstood iirm about him, ran away, as fast as they were able, into awood, and afforded Mithridates the pleasure of having gained a
great







OCR Output








16\ ' avtiqtiities of THE iews. Book XX.


own dominions. So he came to Jzates, and brought a thousandof his kindred and secants with him, and met him upon theroad, while he well knew lzates, but lzates did not knowhim. When Artabaiuis stood near him, and,' in the first place,worshipped him, according to the custom, he then said to himi" O king ! do not thou overlook me thy servant, nor do thou" proudly reject the suit I make thee ; for, as I am reduced to*' a low estate, by the change of fortune, and of a king am be-" come a private man, I stand in need of thy assistance. Have** regard, therefore, unto the mcertainty of fortune, and esteenl" the care thou shalt take of me to be taken of thyself also ; for*f if I be neglected, and my subjects go off unpunished, litany" other subjects will become the more insolent towards other*' kings also." And this speech A'tabanus made with tears inhis eyes, and with a dejected countenance. Now, as soon as lza­tes heard Artabanus's names, and saw him stand as a supplicantbefore him, he leaped down from his horse immediately, and saidto him, " Take courage, O king ! nor be disturbed at thy pre-" sent calamity, as if it were'incurable ; for the Change of thy" sad condition shall be sudden ; for thou shalt find me to be" more thy friend and thy assistant than thy hopes can promise" thee ; for I will either re-establish thee in the kingdom of*' Parthia, or lose my own."
2. When he had said this, he set Artabanus upon his horse,and followed him on foot, in honour of a king whom he ownedas greater than himself; which, when Artabanus' saw, he wasvery uneasy at it, and sware, by his present fortune and honour,that he would get down from his horse, unless lzates would getupon his horse again, and go before him. So he complied withhis desire, and leaped upon his horse ; and, when he had broughthim to his royal palace, he shewed him all soyts of respect, whenthey sat together, and he gave him the upper place at festivalsalso, as regarding not his present fortune, but his former dig-ftity, and that upon this consideration also, that the changes offortune are common to all men. He also wrote to the Parthi-ans, to persuade them to receive Artabanus again ; and gavethem his right hand and his faith, that he should forget what waspast and done, and that he would undertake for this as a media­tor between them. Now the Parthians did not themselves re­fuse
" these procurators there happened a great famine in Judea." Whence it isplain that this famine continued for many years, on account of its durationunder those two procurators. Now Fadus was not sent into Judea till after thedeath of king Agrippa, i. e. towards the latter end of the 4th year of Claudius;so that this famine foretold by Agabus, happened upon the 5th. 6th, and 7thyears of Claudius, as says Valesius on Euseb. II. 12. Of this famine also, andqueen Helena's supplies, and her monument, see Moses Chorenensis, p. 144. 145-where it is observed in the notes, that Pausanias mentions that her monumentalso.







OCR Output








. XX. WARS OF THE JEWS. 433


they neglect the care of other parts of the country, but Josephthe son of Simon, was sent as a general to Jericho, as was Ma-nasseh to Perea, and John, the Essene, to the toparchyof Thama-na; Lydda was also added to his portion, and Joppa, and Em-maus. But John, the son of Matthias, was made governor ofthe toparchies of Gophnitica, and Acrabattene, as was Josephus,the son of Matthia-s of both the Galilees. Gamala also, whichwas the strongest city in those parts, was put under his com-mand.
5. So every one of the other commanders administered the af­fairs of his portion with that alacrity and prudence they weremasters of; but as to Josephus, when he came into'Galilee, hisfirst care was to gain the good-will of the people of that country,as sensible that he should thereby have in general good success,although he should fail in other points. And being concious tohimself that if he communicated part of his power to the greatmen, he should make them his fast friends; and that he shouldgain the same favour from the multitude, if he executed hiscommands by persons of their own country, and with whomthey were well acquainted; he chose out * seventy of the mostprudent men, and those elders in age, and appointed them to berulers of all Galilee, as he chose seven judges in every city tohear the lesser quarrels; for as to the greater causes, and thosewherein life and death were concerned, he enjoined they shouldbe brought to him, and the seventy elders.
6. Josephus also, when he had settled these rulesfor determin­ing causes by the law, with regard to the people's dealings onewith another, betook himself to make provisions for their safety
against
* We §ee here, and in Josephus's account of his own life, § 14. Vol' HI. how ex­actly he imitated his legislator Moses, or perhaps only obeyed wh»t he took to beTiis perpetual law, in appointing seven lesser judges, for smaller causes, in particu­lar cities, and peihapsfor the first hearing of greater causes, with the liberty of anappeal to seventy-one supreme judges, especially in those causes where life anddeath were concerned; as Antiq. B. IV. ch. viii. § 14. Vol. 1. and of his life, §14. See also Of the War, B. IV. ch. v. § 4. Vol. IV. Moreover we find, § 7.that he imitated Moses, as well as the Romans, in the number and distribution ofthe subaltern officers of his army, as Exod. xviii. 25. Deut. i. 15. and in his chargeagainst the offences common among soldiers, as Deut. xxiii' 6. in all which heshewed his great wisdom, and piety, and skilful conduct in martial affairs. Yetmay we discern in his very high character of Ananus the high-priest, B. IV. ch. v.§ a. who seems to have been the same who conducted St James, Bishop of Jerusa>-Jem, to be stoned, under Albinus the procurator, ttiat when he wrote these book*of the War, he was not so much as an Ebionite Christian; otherwise he wouldnot have failed, according to his usual cnstom, to have reckoned this his barbarousmurder, as a just punishment upon him for that his cruelty to the chief, or rather,only Christian bishop of the circumcision. Nor, had he been then a Christian,could he immediately have spoken so movirgly of the causes of the destruction ofJerusalem, without one word of either jhe condemnation of James, or c.of Ohrist, as he did when he was become a Christian afterward.
VOL, III. 3 I







OCR Output








Chap. VII. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 151


any donation that was worth mentioning. But Agrippa's tem­per was mild, and equally liberal to all men. He was humaneto foreigners, and made them sensible of his liberality. He wasin like manner rather of a gentle and compassionate temper.Accordingly, he loved to live continually at Jerusalem, and wasexactly careful in the observance of the laws of his country.—He therefore kept himself entirely pure ; nor did any day passover his head without its appointed sacrifice.
4. However, there was a certain man of the Jewish nation atJerusalem, who appeared to be very accurate in the knowledgeof the law. His name was Simon. This man got together anassembly, while the king was absent at Cesarea, and had the inso­lence to accuse him as not living holily, and that he might justlybe excluded out of the temple, since it belonged only to nativeJews. But the general of Agrippa's army informed him, thatSimon had made such a speech to the people. So the king sentfor him ; and, as he was sitting in the theatre, he bid him sitdown by him, and said to him with a low and gentle voice,'' What is there done in this place that is contrary to the law ?"But he had nothing to say for himself, but begged his pardon.So the king was more easily reconciled to him than one couldha-ve imagined, as esteeming mildness a better quality in a kingthan anger, and knowing that moderation is more becoming in'great men than passion. So he made Simon a small present, anddismissed him.
5. Now, as Agrippa was a great builder in many places, hepaid a peculiar regard to the people of Berytus; for he erecteda theatre for them, superior to many other of that sort, both insumptuousness and elegance, as also an amphitheatre, built atvast expences ; and besides these, he built them baths and porti­coes, and spared for no costs in any of his edifices, to render themboth handsome and large. He also spent a great deal upon theirdedication, and exhibited shows upon them, and brought thithermusicians of all sorts, and such as made the most delightfulmusic of the greatest variety. He also shewed his magnificenceupon the theatre, in his great number of gladiators ; and there itwas that he exhibited the several antagonists, in order to pleasethe spectators ; no fewer indeed than seven hundred men to fightwith seven hundred other men * ; and allotted all the malefactorshe had for this exercise, that both the malefactors might receivetheir punishment, and that this operation of war might be a re­creation in peace. And thus were these criminals all destroyedat once.
CHAP.
« A strange number of condemned criminals to be under the sentence of deathit once; no fewer, it seems, than 1400 !







OCR Output








274 WARS OF THE JEWS. Book I.


over Euphrates, he perished himself, and his army with him ;concerning which affairs this is not a proper time to speak [morelargely].
y. But now Cassius, after Crassus, put a stop to the Parthians,who were marching in order to enter Syria. Cassius had fled in­to that province, and when he had taken possession of the same,he made an hasty march into Judea ; and, upon his taking Ta-richeae, he carried thirty thousand Jews into slavery. He alsoslew Pitholaus, who had supported the seditious followers of A-ristobulus, and it was Antipater who advised him 50 to do. Nowthis Antipater married a wife of an eminent family among theArabians, whose name was Cypros, and had four sons born tohim by her, Phasaelus and Herod, who was afterwards king, and,besides these, Joseph and Pheroras ; and he had a daughter whosename was Salome. Now, as he made himself friends among themen of power every where, by the kind offices he did them, andthe hospitable manner that he treated them ; so did he contractthe greatest friendship with the king of Arabia, by marrying hisrelation ; insomuch, that when he made war with Aristobulus,he sent and intrusted his children with him. So, when Cassiushad forced Alexander to come to terms and to be quiet, he return­ed to Euphrates, in order to prevent the Parthians from repass-ing it; concerning which matter * we shall speak elsewhere.
CHAP. IX.
Aristobulus is taken off" by Pompey1* friends, as is Ms son Alexan-dert 1y Scipio. Antipater cultivates a friendship with Cxsar,after Pompey''s death ; 'he also performs great actions in thatwar, wherein he assisted Mithridates.
§ 1. "VT'OW, upon the flight of Pompey, and of the senate, be-•^ yorid the Ionian Sea, Caesar got Rome and the empireunder his power, and released Aristobulus from his bonds. Healso committed two legions to him, and sent him in haste intoSyria, as hoping that by his means he should easily conquer thatcountry, and the parts adjoining to Judea. But envy preventedany effect of Aristobulus's alacrity, and the hopes of Caesar ; forhe was taken off by poison given him by those of Pompey's par­ty, and, for a long while, he had not so much as a burial vouch­safed him in his' own country ; but his dead body lay [aboxeground], preserved in honey, until it was sent to the Jews byAntony, in order to be buried in the royal sepulchres.
2. His son Alexander also was beheaded by Scipio at Antioch.and that by the command of Pompey, and upon an accusation
laid« This citation is now wanting.







OCR Output








Chap. XXI. WARS OF THE JEWS. 435


war, even before it came to any battle, in case they would ab­stain from the crimes they used to indulge themselves in, suchas theft, and robbery, and rapine, and from defrauding theirown countrymen, and never to esteem the harm done to thosethat were so near of kin to them, to be any advantage to them­selves ; for that wars are then managed the best when the war­riors preserve a good conscience ; but that such as are ill menin private life, will not only have those for enemies which at­tack them, but God himself also for their antagonist.
8. And thus did he continue to admonish them. Now he chosefor the war such an army as was sufficient, i. e. sixty thousandfootmen, and* two hundred and fifty horsemen: and besidesthese, on which he put the greatest trust, theie were about fourthousand five hundred mercenaries; he had also six hundred menas guards of his body. Now the cities easily maintained the restof his army, excepting the mercenaries, for every one of the ci­ties enumerated above sent out half their men to the army, andretained the other half at home, in order to get provisions for .them; insomuch that the one part went to the war, and theother part to their work, and so those that sent out their cornwere paid for it by those that were in arms, by that securitywhich they enjoyed from them.


CHAP. XXI.


Concerning 'John ofGiscbala. Jotepbus uses stratagems againstthe plots John laid against him ; and recovers certain cities,which bad revolted from him.
§ 1. "V'TO Was Josephus was thusengagedin the administration "
.LNI of the affairs of Galilee, there arose a treacherousperson, a man of Gischala, the son of Levi, whose name wasJohn. His character was that of a very cunning, and veryknavish person, beyond the ordinary rate of the other men ofeminence there, and for wicked practices he had not his fellowany where. Poor he was at first, and for a long time his wantswere an hinderance to him in his wicked designs. He was a readyliar, and yet very sharp in gaining credit to his fictions; hethought it a point of virtue to delude people, and would deludeeven such as were the dearest to him. He was an hypocriticalpretender to humanity, but where he had hopes of gain, hespared not the shedding of blood: his desires were ever carried to
great


* I should think that an army of 60,000 footmen should require many morethan 2'co hortemen ; and we find Josephus had more horsemen under his command'than 250 in his f-n'ire history. 1 suppose [he number of the thousands is droptin our present copies.


3 I 2







OCR Output








•4. *







OCR Output








Chap. VI. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 85


affected in the same manner by the report of the others that hadbeen with him : and, upon his death, there was a lamentation*made by all men; not such an one as was to be made in way offlattery to their rulers, while they did but counterfeit sorrow,but such as was real; while every body grieved at his deathras if they had lost one that was near to diem. And truly suchhad been his easy conversation with men, that it turned greatlyto the advantage of his son among all; and| among others, thesoldiery were so peculiarly affected to him, that they reckonedit an eligible thing, if need were, to die themselves, if he mightbut attain to the government.
9. But whe:i Tiberius had given order to Euodus to bringthe children to him the next day in the morning, he prayed tohis country-gods to shew him a manifest signal, which of thosechildren should come to the government; being very desirous toleave it to his son's son, but still depending upon what Godshould foreshew concerning them, more thanupon his own opi­nion and inclination ; so he made this to be the omen, that thegovernment should be left to him who should come to him firstthe next day. When he had thus resolved within himself, hesent to his grandson's tutor, and ordered him to bring the childto him early in the morning, as supposing that God would per­mit him to be made emperor. But God proved opposite to hisdesignation ; for, while Tiberius was thus contriving matters,and as soon as it was at all day, he bid Euodus to call in that childwhich should be there ready. So he went out, and found Cai-us before the door, for Tiberius was not yet come, but staidwaiting for his breakfast; for Euodus knew nothing of what hislord intended ; so he said to Caius, " Thy father calls thee," andthen brought him in. As soon as Tiberius saw Caius, and notbefore, he reflected on the power of God, and how the ability ofbestowing the government oa whom he would, was entirely takenfrom him; and thence he was not able to establish what he hadintended. So he greatly lamented that his power of establishingwhat he had before contrived was taken from him, and that hisgrandson Tiberius was not only to lose the Roman empire byhis fatality, but his own safety also, because his preservatioawould now depend upon such as would be more potent than him­self, who would think it a thing not to be borne, that a kinsmanshould live with them, and so his relation would not be able toprotect him : but he would be feared and hated by him who hadthe supreme authority, partly on account of his being next to theempire, and partly on account of his perpetually contriving toget the governmenti both in order to preserve himself, and to beat the head of affairs also. Now Tiberius had been very much


given







OCR Output








134 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book XIX.


of wickedness ; a slave to his pleasures, and a lover of calumny;greatly affected by every terrible accident, and on that accountwf a very murderous disposition, where he durst shew it. Heenjoyed his exorbitant power to this only purpose, to injure thosewho least deserved it, with unreasonable insolence, and got hiswealth by murder and injustice. He laboured to appear aboveregarding either what was divine or agreeable to the laws, butwas a slave to the commendations of the populace ; and whatso­ever the laws determined to be shameful, and punished, that heesteemed more honourable than what was virtuous. He wasunmindful of his friends, how intimate soever, and though theywere persons of the highest character; and, if he was once angryat any of them, he would inflict punishment upon them on thesmallest occasions, and esteemed every man that endeavoured tolead a virtuous life his enemy. And whatsoever he command­ed, he would not admit of any contradiction to his inclinations ;whence it was that he had criminal conversation with his ownsister * ; from which occasion chiefly it was also, that a bitter ha­tred first sprang up against him among the citizens, that sort ofincest not having been known of a long time ; and so this provo­ked men to distrust him, and to hate him that was guilty of it.And for any great or royal work that he ever did, which mightbe for the present and for future ages, nobody can name anysuch, but only the haven that he made about Rhegium and Si­cily, for the reception of the ships that brought corn from E-gypt; which was indeed a work without dispute very great initself, and of very great advantage to the navigation. Yet wasnot this work brought to perfection by him, but was the onehalf of it left imperfect, by reason of his want of applicationto it; the cause of which was this, that he employed his stu­dies about useless matters, and that by spending his moneyupon such pleasures as concerned no one's benefit but hisown, he could not exert his liberality in things that wereundeniably of great consequence. Otherwise he was an ex­cellent orator, and thoroughly acquainted with the Greektongue, as well as with his own country or Roman language.He was also able, off-hand and readily, to give answers tocompositions made by others, of considerable length and ac­curacy. He was also more skilful in persuading others to verygreat things than any one else, and this from a natural affa­bility
» Spanheim here notes from Suetonius, that the name of Caius's sister, withwhom he was guilty of incest, was Tirusilla ; and that Suetonius adds, he wasguilty of the same crime with all his sisters also. He notes farther, that Suete.nius omits the mention of the haven for ships, which our author esteems the en.ly public work for the good of the present and future ages which Caius left be-Vuid him, though in an imperfect condition.







OCR Output








tlhap. IV. ANTIQUITIES OF 1HE JEWS.


bene : yet did not he take Abii alive ; because, 'when he foiitdhimself encompassed on 'every side, he slew himself.
2. But although the grandees of Adiabene had failed in theirfirst attempt, as being delivered .UpJ by Gfod into their kind'shands, yet would they not even thence 'quiet,' but wrote againto Vologases, who was then king of'Panliia, and desired thathe would kill Izates, and set over fherri some other potentate,who should be of a Parthian family ;'for they said, That " theyM hated their own king for abrogating the laws of their fore­fathers, and embracing foreign custonfts1.j" When the king ofParthia heard this,' he boldly made war upon Izates ; and he hadjust pretence for this'war; he sent to .hint, and demanded backthose honourable privileges whfch had'btefr bestowed on him byhis father, and threatened, on his refrfsftlj, to mnke war uponhim. Upon hearing of this, liat^s was'under no small troubleof mind, as thinking it would be a reproach upon him to ap­pear to resign those privileges that had been bestowed upon him,out of cowardice ; yet, because he knew, that though the king ofParthia should receive back those honours, yet would he not bequiet, he resblvcd to commit himself to God, his protector, inthe present danger he was in of his life ; and as he esteemedhim to be his principal assistant, he entrusted his children andhis wives'to a very strong fortress, and laid up his corn in hiscitadels, and' set the hay and the grass on fire. And when hehad thus put things in order, as well as he could, he awaitedthe coming of the enemy. And when the king of Parthia wascome, with a great army of footmen and horsemen, which hedid sooner than was expected (for'he'iniarehed in great haste),and had cast up a bank at the river that-parted Adiabene fromMedia; Izates also pitched his camp-not'' far off, having withhim six thousand horsemen. But there came a messenger toIzates, sent by the king of Parthia} who told him, « How large" his dominions were, as reaching from the river Euphrates to" Bactria, and enumerated that king's subjects : he also threaten*- '" ed him, that he should be punished, as a person ungrateful to" his lords ; and said, that the God whom he worshipped could" not deliver him of the king's hands."- -When the messengerhad delivered this his message, Izates replied, That " he knew" the king of Parthia's power was much greater than his own ;" but that he knew also that God was- 'much more powerful" than all men." And when he had returned him this answer,he betook himself to make supplication* to God, and threw,.-" • ', himself


* This mourning, and fasting, and praying, used by Izates, with prostration nfhis body, and ashes upon liis head, are plain signs that he was become either a.Jew, or an Ebionite Christian, who indeed differed not much from proper Jews'bee chap. vi. sect. i. However, his supplications were heard, .and he was pro.videmialJy delivered from that imminent dapger he was in.







OCR Output








Chap. I. Ill ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


accusations and miseries, and had occasioned the greatest insultof slaves against their masters, who indeed in a great measureruled them, there were many secret plots now laid against him ;some in anger, and in order for men to revenge themselves, onaccount of the miseries they had already undergone from him ;and others made attempts upon him, in order to take him off be­fore they should fall into such great miseries, while his deathcame -very fortunately for the preservation of the laws of all men,and had a great influence upon the public welfare ; and this hap­pened most happily for our nation in particular, which had al­most utterly perished if he had not been suddenly slain. And Iconfess I have a mind to give a full account of this matter, par­ticularly because it will afford great assurance of the power ofGod, and great comfort to those that are under afflictions, andwise caution to those who think their happiness will never end,nor bring them at length to the most lasting miseries, if they donot conduct their lives by the principles of virtue.
3. Now there were three several conspiracies made in orderto take off Caius, and each of these three were conducted by ex­cellent persons. Emilius Regulus, born at Corduba in Spain,got some men together, and was desirous to take Caius off, eitherby them, or by himself. Another conspiracy there was laid bythem, under the conduct of Cherea Cassius, the tribune [of thePretorian band] ; Minucianus Annius was also one of great con­sequence among those that were prepared to oppose his tyranny.Now the several occasions of these men's several hatred and con­spiracy against Caius were these : Regulus had indignation andhatred against all injustice, for he had a mind naturally angry,and bold, and free, which made him not conceal his counsels ; sohe communicated them to many of his friends, and to others, whoseemed, to him persons of activity and vigour : Minucianus en­tered into this conspiracy, because of the injustice done to Lepi-dus his particular friend, and one of the best character of all thecitizens, whom Caius had slain, as also because he was afraid ofhimself, since Caius's wrath tended to the slaughter of all alike :and for Cherea, he came in, because he thought it a deed worthyof a free ingenious man to kill Caius, and was ashamed of the re­proaches he lay under from Caius, as though he were a coward ;as also because he was himself in danger every day from hisfriendship with him, and the observance he paid him. Thesemen proposed this attempt to all the rest that were concerned,who saw the injuries that were offered them, and were desirousthat Caius's slaughter might succeed by their mutual assistanceof one another, and they might themselves escape being killedby the taking off Caius ; that perhaps they should gain theirpoint, and that it would be an happy thing if they should gain







OCR Output








Chap. XV. WARS or THE JEWS.


ket Place, and to slay such as they met with. So the soldiers*taking this exhortation of their commander in a sense agreeableto their desire of gain, did not only plunder the place they weresent to, but forcing themselves into every house, they slew itsinhabitants; so the citizens Red along the narrow lanes, and thesoldiers slew those that they caught, and no method of plunderwas omitted; they also caught many of the quiet people, andbrought them beforeFlorus, whom he first chastised with stripes,and then crucified. Accordingly, the whole number of thosethat were destroyed that day, with their wives and children(for they did not spare even the infants themselves), was aboutthree thousand and six hundred. And what made this calami­ty the heavier, was this new method of Roman barbarity: forFlorus ventured then to do what no one had done before, thatis, to have men of the * equestrian order whipped, and nailed tothe cross before his tribunal; who although they were by birthJews, yet were they of Roman dignity notwithstanding.
CHAP. XV.
Concerning Bernice'j petition to Florus, to spare the Jews, lutin vain ; as also how, after the seditious flame was quenched,it was kindled again by Florus.
J !• A BOUT this very time king Agrippa was going to Alex.J^\. andria, to congratulate Alexander upon his havingobtained the government of Egypt from Nero; but as his sisterBernice was come to Jerusalem, and saw the wicked practicesof the soldiers, she was sorely affected at it, and frequently sentthe masters of her horse, and her guards, to Florus, and beggedof him to leave off these slaughters; but he would not complywith her request, nor have any regard either to the multitudeof those already slain, or to the nobility of her that interceded,but only to the advantage he should make by this plundering;nay, this violence of the soldiers brake out to such a degree ofmadness, that it spent itself on the queen herself; for they didnot only torment and destroy those whom they had caught un­der her very eyes, but indeed had killed herself also, unless shehad prevented them by flying to the palace, and had stayed thereall night with her guards, which she had about her for fear ofan insult from the soldiers. Now she dwelt then at Jerusalem,
in


* Here we have examples of native Jews who were «f the equestrian order a-mong the Romans, and so ought never to have been whipped or crucified, ac­cording to the Roman laws. See almost the like case in St Paul himielf, Actsliii. tf,—i.







OCR Output








Chap. XII. WARS OF THE JEWS. '283


plot that was laid against him ; accordingly they called to mindwhat orders Cassius had given them, and went out of the citywith their swords in their hands upon the sea-shore, where theyencompassed Malichus round about, and killed him wiih manywounds. Upon which Hyrcanus was immediately affrighted, tillhe swooned away, and fell down at the surprise he was in ; and itwas with difficulty that he was recovered, when he asked xvhoit was that had killed Malichus ? and when one of the tribunesreplied that it was done by the command of Cassias, " Then," said he, Cassius hath saved both me and my country, by cutting" off one that was laying plots against them both." Whether h,espake according to his own sentiments, or whether ITS fear wassuch, that he was obliged to commend the action by saying so,is uncertain ; however, by this method Herod inflicted punish­ment upon Malichus.
CHAP. XII.
Pbasaelus is too iard for Felix ; Herod also overcomes Antigomnin battle ; and the Jews accuse both Herod and Phasaelus t butAntonius acquits them, and makes them tetrarcis.
$ 1. "1X/"HEN Cassius was gone out of Syria, another seditionarose at Jerusalem, wherein Felix assaulted Phasaeluswith an army, that he might revenge the death of Malichus up­on Herod, by falling upon his brother. Now Herod happenedthen to be with Fabius, the governor of Damascus, and as he wasgoing to his brother's assistance, he was detained by sickness j mthe mean time, Phasaelus was by himself too hard for Felix, andreproached Hyrcanus on account of his ingratitude, both for whatassistance he had afforded Malichus, and for overlooking Mali-chus's brother, when he possessed himself of the fortresses; forhe had gotten a great many of them already, and among themthe strongest of them all, Masada.
2. However, nothing could be sufficient for him against theforce of Herod, who, as soon as he was recovered, took theother fortresses again, and drove him out of Masada in the pos­ture of a supplicant; he also drove away Marion, the tyrant ofthe Tyrians, out of Galilee, when he had already possessed him­self of three fortified places; but as to those Tyrians whom hehad caught, he preserved them all alive ; nay, some of them hegave presents to, and so sent them away, and thereby procuredgood-will to himself from the city, and hatred to the tyrant. Ma-lion had indeed obtained that tyrannical power of Cassius, who
N n 2 set







OCR Output








Chap. IV. ANTKLUITIES OF THE JEWS. 141


on account of the dignity of their families, and that accruing tothe'tn by their marriages ; for Marcus Minutianus was illustri­ous, both by his own nobility, and by his having married Julia,the sister of Caius, who accordingly was very ready to claimthe government, although the consuls discouraged him, and madeone delay after another in proposing it: that Minucianus also,who was one of Caius's murderers, restrained Valerius of Asiafrom thinking of such things ; and a prodigious slaughter therehad been, if leave had been given to these men to set up forthemselves, and oppose Claudius. There were also a consider­able number of gladiators besides, and of those soldiers whokept watch by night in the city, and rowers of ships, who allran into the camp ; insomuch, that of those who put in for thegovernment, some left off their pretensions in order to spare thecity, and others out of fear for their own persons.
4. But as soon as ever it was day, Cherea, and those thatwere with him, came into the senate, and attempted to makespeeches to the soldiers. However, the multitude of those sol­diers, when they saw that they were making signals for silencewith their hands, and were ready to begin to speak to them, grewtumultuous, and would not let them speak at all, because theywere all zealous to be under a monarchy; and they demanded ofthe senate one for their rulers, as not enduring any longer delays:but the senate hesitated about either their own governing, orhow they should themselves be governed, while the soldierswould not admit them to govern, and the murderers of Caiuswould not permit the soldiers to dictate to them. When theywere in these circumstances, Cherea was not able to contain theanger he had, and promised, that if they desired an emperor,he would give them one, if any one would bring him the watch­word from Eutychus. Now, this Eutychus was charioteer ofthe green-band faction, styled Prasirie, and a great friend ofCaius, who used to harass the soldiery with building stables forthe horses, and spent his time in ignominious labours, which oc­casioned Cherea to reproach them with him, and to abuse themwith much other scurrilous language ; and told them, " he would'' bring them the head of Claudius ; and that it was an amazing" thing, that after their former madness, they should commit" their government to a fool." Yet were not they moved withhis words, but drew their swords, and took up their ensigns, andwent to Claudius, to join in taking the oath of fidelity to him.So the senate were left without any body to defend them, andthe very consuls differed nothing from private persons. Theyalso under consternation aad sorrow, men not knowing what
would







OCR Output








83 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book XVIll.


soner, and this upon the news of the death of Caesar ; so he thrustAgrippa from the couch whereon he lay, and said, " Dost thou" think to cheat me by a lie about the emperor without punish-'' ment ? and shall not thou pay for this thy malicious report" at the price of thine head?" When he had so said, he orderedAgrippa to be bound again, (for he had loosed him before), andkept a severer guard over him than formerly, and in that evilcondition was Agrippa that night ; but the next day the rumourincreased in the city, and confirmed the news that Tiberius wascertainly dead ; insomuch that men durst now openly and freelytalk about it; nay, some offered sacrifices on that account. Se­veral letters also came from Gains, one of them to the senate,which informed them of the death of Tiberius, and of his ownentrance on the government; another to Piso, the governor of thecity, which told him the same thing. He also gave order that A-grippa should be removed out of the camp, and go to that housewhere he lived before he was put in prison ; so that he was now1 out of fear as to his own affairs; for, although he were still incustody, yet it was now with ease to his own affairs. Now, assoon as Caius was come to Rome, and had brought Tiberius'sdead body with him, and had' made a sumptuous funeral for him,according to the laws of his country, he was much disposed toset Agrippa at liberty that very day, but Antonia hindered him ;not out of any ill-will to the prisoner, but out of regard to decencyin Caius, lest that should make men believe that he received thedeath of Tiberius with pleasure, when he loosed one whom heLad bound immediately. However, there did not many dayspass ere he sent for him to his house, and had him shaved, andmade him change his raiment, after which he put his diadem up­on his head, and appointed him to be king of the tetrarchy ofPhilip. He also gave him the tetrarchy of Lysanias *, andchanged his iron chain for a golden one of equal weight. Healso sent Marullus to be procurator of Judea.
11. Now, in the second year of the reign of Caius Caesar, A-grippa desired leave to be given him to sail home, and settle theaffairs of his government, and he promised to return again, whenhe had put the rest in order, as it ought to be put. So, upon theemperor's permission, he came into his own country, and appear­ed to them all unexpectedly as a king, and thereby demonstratedto the men that saw him, the power of fortune, when they com­pared his former poverty with his present happy affluence ; sgsome called him an happy man, and others could not well be­lieve that things were so much changed with him for the better.
C H A P.
* Although Caius now promised to give Agrippa the tetrarchy of Lysanias,yet was it not actually conferred upon him till the reign of Claudius, a* welearn, Antiq. B' XIX. chap. v. sect. i.







OCR Output








. ANTIQUITIES OFTHE'JECT-SW- 457


BOOK XX.
Containing the interval of twenty-two years.[From FADUS the Procurator to FLORTJS.]


CHAP. I.
A Sedition of the PJnladelpiians against the Jews ; and also con­cerning the vestments of the high-priest.
\ 1. TTPON the death of king Agrippa, which we have rela-*-^ ted in the foregoing book, Claudius Caesar sent Cas-sius Longinus, as successor to Marcus, out of regard to the me­mory of king Agrippa, who had often desired of him by letters,while he was alive, that he would not suffer Marcus to be anylonger president of Syria. But Fadus, as soon as be was comeprocurator into Judea, found quarrelsome doings between theJews that dwelt in Perea, and the people of Philadelphia, abouttheir borders, at a village called Mia, that was filled with menof a warlike temper ; for the Jews of Perea had taken up armswithout the consent of their principal men, and had destroyedmany of the Philadelphians. When Fadus was informed dfthis procedure, it provoked him very much that they had notleft the determination of the matter to him, if they thought thatthe Philadelphians had done them any wrong, but had rashlytaken up arms against them. So he seized upon three of theirprincipal men, who were also the causes of this sedition, andordered them to be bound, and afterward had one of themslain, whose name was Hannibal, and he banished the other two,Amram and Eleazar. Tholotny also, the arch robber, was,after some time, brought to him bound, and slain, but not tillhe had done a world of mischief to Idumea and the Arabians.And indeed, from that time, Judea was cleared of robberies bythe care and providence of Fadus. He also at this time senf forthe high-priests and the principal citizens of Jerusalem, andthis at the commands of the emperor, and admonished them,that they' should lay up the long garment, and the sacred vest­ment, which it is customary for nobody but the high.priest towear, in the tower of Antonia, that it might be under the powerof the Romans, as it had been formerly. Now the Jews durstnot contradict what he had said, but desired Fadus, however,and Longinus, (which last was come to Jerusalem, and hadbrought a great army with him, out of a fear that the frigid] in­junctions







OCR Output








Chap. XI. ANTIQUITIES OF TtfE JEWS. 47


" continency, and those things acted after an insolent and in-" human manner; because it was not a smaller pleasure to the* sufferers to have such things concealed, than it would have" been to have suffered them. That Herod had put such ab-" uses upon them as a wild beast would not have put on them," if he had power given him to rule over us ; and that although" their nations had passed through many subversions and altera-" tions of government, their history gave no account of any ca-" lamity they had ever been under, that could be compared with" this which Herod had brought upon their nation ; that it was." for this reason, that they thought they might justly and gladly" salute Archelaus as king, upon this supposition, that whoso.'' ever should be set over their kingdom, he would appear more" mild to them than Herod had been ; and that they had joined" with him in the mourning for his father, in order to gratify" him, and were ready to oblige him in other points also, if they" could meet with any degree of moderation from him ; but" that he seemed to be afraid lest he should not be deemed He-" rod's own son ; and so, without any delay ; and he immediate-" ly let the nation understand his meaning, and this before his" dominion was well established, since the power of disposing of" it belonging to Caesar, who could either give it to him or not," as he pleased. That he had given a specimen of his future" virtue to his subjects, and with what kind of moderation and" good administration he would govern them, by that his first ac-" tion which concerned them, his own citizens, and God himself" also, when he made the slaughter of three thousand of his own" countrymen at the temple. How, then, could they avoid the" just hatred of 'him, who, to the rest of his barbarity, hath add-" ed this as one of our crimes, that we have opposed and con-" tradicted him in the exercise of his authority ?" Now, the mainthing they desired was this, "That they might be delivered from" kingly* and the like forms of government, and might be add-
" ed


* If any ore compare that divine prediction concerning the tyrannical powerwhich Jewifli kings would exercise over them, if they would be so foolifli as toprefer it before their ancient theocracy or aristocracy, i Sara. viii. i—^^. An-tiq. B. 1. ch' iv. $ 4. he will soon find that it was super-abundantly fulfilled inthe days of Herod, and that to such a degree, that the nation now at last seemsorely to repent of such their ancient choice, in opposition to God's better choicefor them, and had much rather be subject to even a Pagan Roman government,and their deputies, than to be any longer under the oppression of the family ofHerod; which request of theirs Augustus did not now grant them, bnt did it forthe one-half of that nation in a few years afterward, upon fresh complaintsmade by the Jews against Archelaus, who, under the more humble name of aiieihnarch, which Augustus only would now allow him, soon took upon him theinsolence and tyranny of his father king Herod, as the remaining part of thi*kouk will inform us, and particularly chap. xiii. sect. 2'







OCR Output








THE LIFE Of FLAVIUS JOSEPHUS. 227


<fatne to Taricheae, and found the multitude ready assembled inProseucha ; but on what account they were gotten together,those that were assembled did not know. But, when Jonathanand his colleagues saw them there unexpectedly, they were in dis­order ; after which they raised a report of their own contrivance',that' Roman horsemen were seen at a place called Union, in theborders of Galilee, thirty furlongs distant from the city. Uponwhich report, Jonathan and his colleagues cunningly exhortedme not to neglect this matter, nor to suffer the land to be spoiledby the enemy. And this they said with a design to remove meout of the city, under the pretence of the want of extraordinaryassistance, while they might dispose the city to my enemy,
55. As for myself, although I knew of their design, yet did Icomply with what they proposed, lest the people of Tiberiasshould have occasion to suppose, that I was not careful of their-Security. I therefore went out; but, when I was at the place, Ifound not the least footsteps of any enemy, so I returned as fastas ever I'could, and found the whole council assembled, and thebody of the people gotten together, and Jonathan and his col­leagues bringing vehement accusations against me, as one that hadno concern to ease them of the burdens of war, and as one thatlived luxuriously. And as they were discoursing thus, they produ­ced four letters as written to them, from some people that livedat the borders of Galilee, imploring that they would come totheir assistance, for that there was an army of Romans, bothfrorse'men and footmen, who would come and lay waste the coun­try on the third day ; they desired them also to make haste, and,not to overlook them. When the people of Tiberias heard this,they thought they spake truth, and made a clamour against me,and said, 1 ought not to sit still, but to go away to the assistanceof their countrymen. ' Hereupon I said, (for I understood themeaning of Jonathan and his colleagues), that I was ready to com­ply with what they proposed, and without delay to march to thewar which they spake of, yet did I advise them, at the same time,that since these letters declared that the Romans would maketheir assault in' four several places, they should part their forcesinto five bodies, and make Jonathan and his colleagues generalsof each body of them, because it was fit for brave men, not onlyto give counsel, but to take the place of leaders, and assist theircountrymen when such a necessity pressed them ; for, said I, it isnot possible for me to lead more' than one party. This advice ofmine greatly pleased the multitude ; so they compelled them togo forth to war. But their designs were put into very muchdisorder, beca-ase they IICK! not done what they designed to do,
F f 2 " on







OCR Output








Chap. XIX- WARS OF THE JEWS. 429


thither did they come, in order to set open the gates, and to ad­mit Cestius as their benefactor, who, had he but continued thesiege a little longer, had certainly taken the city ; but it was, Isuppose, owing to the * aversion God had already at the city,and the sanctuary, that he was hindered from putting an end tothe war that very day.
7. It then happened that Cestius was not conscious either howthe besieged despaired of success, nor how courageous the peo­ple were for him; and so he recalled his soldiers from the place,and by despairing of any expectation of taking it, without havingreceived any disgrace, he retired from the city, without anyreason in the world. But when the robbers perceived this un­expected retreat of his, they resumed their courage, and ran af­ter the hinder parts of his army, and destroyed a considerablenumber of both their horsemen and footmen; and now Cestiuslay all night at the camp which was at Scopus, and as he wentoff farther next'day, he thereby invited the enemy to follow him,who still fell upon the hindmost, and destroyed them; they alsofell upon the flank on each side of the army, and threw darts up­on them obliquely, nor durst those that were hindmost turn backupon those who wounded them behind, as imagining that themultitude of those that pursued them was immense ; nor didthey venture to drive away those that pressed uport them on eachside, because they were heavy with their arms, and were afraidof breaking their ranks to pieces, and because they saw theJews were light, and ready for making incursions upon them.And this was the reason why the Romans suffered greatly, with-»ut being able to revenge themselves upon their enemies ; sothey were galled all the way, and their ranks were put intodisorder, and those that were thus put out of their ranks wereslain ; among whom were Priscus, the commander of the sixthlegion, and Longinus the tribune, and Emilius Secundus, the
commander


* There may another very important, and very providential reason be hereassigned, for this strange and foolish retreat of Cestius; which, if Josephus had beennow a Christian, he might probably have taken notice of also; and that is, the af­fording the Jewish Christians in the city an opportunity of calling to mind the pre­diction and caution given them by Christ about thirty-three years and an half before,that " when they should see the abomination of desolation," [the idolatrous Roman
npassed with armies," they iBy complying wifh which those Jewish Christians fled to the mountains of Perea,and escaped this destruction. See Lit. Accompl. of Proph' page 69, 70. Nor wa«there, perhaps, any one instance of a more unpolitic, but more providential con­duct than this retreat of Cestius visible during this whole siege of Jerusalem;which yet was providentia'^v such a " great tribulation, as had not been from the" beginning of the world to that time; no, nor ever should be." Ibid' page*7«, 71.







OCR Output








THE LIFE OF FLAVIUS JOSEPHUS.' 539


u danger, and then you shall have them all at once under your" power, with all such as you shall yourselves bring in also."Upon my saying this, I pacified the multitude, and they left oft'their anger, and went their ways ; and I gave orders that he whobrought the king's letters should be put into bonds ; but in a few-days I pretended that I was obliged, by a necessary affair of myown, to go out of the kingdom. I then called Crispus privately,and ordered him to make the soldier that kept him drunk, andto run away to the king. So, when Tiberias was in danger ofbeing utterly destroyed a second time, it escaped the danger bymy skilful management, and the care that I had for its preser­vation.
70. About this time it was that Justus, the son of Pistus,without my knowledge, ran away to the king; the occasion ofwhich I will here relate. Upon the beginning of the war be­tween the Jews and the Romans, the people of Tiberias re­solved to submit to the king, and not to revolt from the Ro­mans ; while Justus tried to persuade them to betake themselvesto their arms, as being himself desirous of innovations, andhaving hopes of obtaining the government of Galilee, as well asof his own country [[Tiberias] also. Yet did he not obtain whathe hoped for ; because the Galileans bore ill-will to those ofTiberias, and on this account of their anger at what miseriesthey had suffered from them before the war ; thence it was,that they would not endure that Justus should be their governor.I myself also, who had been intrusted by the community of Jeru­salem with the government of Galilee, did frequently come tothat degree of rage at Justus, that I had almost resolved to killhim, as not able to bear his mischievous disposition. He wastherefore much afraid of me, lest at length my passion shouldcome to extremity ; so he went to the king, as supposing that heshould dwell better and more safely with him.
71. Now, when the people of Sepphoris had, in so surprisinga manner, escaped their first danger, they sent to Cestius Gal-lus, and desired him to come to them immediately, and takepossession of their city, or else to send forces sufficient to repressall their enemies incursions upon them ; and at the last theydid prevail with Gallus to send them a considerable army, bothof horse and foot, which came in the night-time, and whichthey admitted into the city. But when the country round a-bout it was harassed by the Roman army, I took those soldiersthat were about me, and came to Garisme, where I cast up abank, a good way off the city Sepphoris ; and when I was attwenty furlongs distance, I came upon it by night, and madean assault upon its "walls with my forces; and,when I had or­dered







OCR Output








Chap. II. ANTIQJJITES OF THE JEWS. 161


"* * I
" Izates ; but desired that they would however defer the execu. •" tion of this slaughter of Izates's brethren till he should be there" himself, and give his approbation to it." So, since these menhad not prevailed with her, l^hen they advised her to slay them,they exhorted her at least to keep them in bonds till he shouldcome, and that for their own security ; they r-lso gave her coun­sel to set up some one whom she should put the greatest trust in,as a governor of the kingdom in the mean time. So Queen: He­lena complied with this counsel of theirs, and setup Monobazus,the eldest son, to be king, and put the diadem upon his head,and gave him his father's ring, with its signet; as also the orna­ment which they call Sampscr, and exhorted him to administerthe affairs of the kingdom till his brother should come ; whocame suddenly upon hearing that his father was dead, and suc­ceeded his brother Monobazus, who resigned up the governmentto him.
3. Now, during the time Izates abode at Charax-Spasini, acertain Jewish merchant, whose name was Ananias, got amoagthe women that belonged to the king, and taught them to wor­ship God according to the Jewish religion. He, moreover, bytheir means, became known to Izates, and persuaded him, inlike manner, to embrace that religion ; he also, at the earnestentreaty of Izates, accompanied him when he was sent for byhis father to come to Adiabene ; it also happened, that Helenu,about the same time, was instructed by a certain other Jew, andwent over to them. But, when Izates had taken the kingdom,and was come to Adiabene, and there saw his brethren, andother kinsmen in bonds, he was displeased ;it it; and as he thoughtit an instance of" impiety either to slay or imprison them, but
_ still thought it an hazardous thing for to let them have their li­berty, with the remembrance of the injuries that had been offer­ed them, he sent some of them and their children for hostages toRome, to Claudius Ceesar, and sent the others to Artabanus, theking of Parthia, with the like intentions.
4. And when he perceived that his mother was highly plea­sed with the Jewish customs, he made haste to change, and to em­brace them entirely ; and, as he supposed that he could not bethoroughly a Jew unless he were circumcised, he was ready tohave it doae. But, when his mother understood what he wasabout, she endeavoured to hinder him from doing it, and said tohim, that " this thing would bring him into danger, and that, as" he was a king, he would thereby bring himself into greac" odium among his subjects, when they should understand that" he was so fond of rites that were to them strange and foreign ;" and that they would never bear to be ruled over by a Jew."This it was that she said to him, and for the present persuaded
VOL. III. X^ *







OCR Output








220 THE LIFE OF FLAV1US JOSEFHUS.


and drank a great deal of wine, in order to get the more money,and was so drunk, that at last he could not keep the secrets hewas intrusted with, but discovered them, without my puttingquestions to him, viz. that a treacherous design was contrivedagainst me, and that I was doomed to die by those that sent him.When I heard this, I wrote back this answer : " Josephus, to" Jonathan and those that are with him, sendeth greeting. Upon" the information that you are come in health into Galilt e, 1 re-" joice, and tKis especially because I can now resign the care of" public affairs here into your hands, and return into my na-" live country ; which is what I have desired to do a great" while ; and I confess I ought not only to come to you as far." as Xaloth, but farther, and this without your commands." But I desire you to excuse me, because I cannot do it now," since I watch the motions of Placidus, who hath a mind to go" up into Galilee ; and this I do here at Chabolo. Do you«' therefore, on the receipt of this' epistle, come hither to me." Fare you well."
45.' When I had written thus, and given the letter to be car­ried by the soldier,! sent along with them thirty of the Galileansof the best characters, and gave the ji instructions to salute thoseambassadors, but to say nothing else to them. I also gave ordersto as many of those armed men, whom I esteemed most faith­ful to me, to go along with the others, every one with himwhom he was to guard, lest some conversation might pass be­tween those whom I sent and those who were with Jonathan.So those men went [to Jonathan]. But, when Jonathan andhis partners had failed in this their first attempt, they sent meanother letter, the contents whereof were as follows : " Jona-'' than and those with him, to Josephus, send greeting. We re-" quire thee to come to us to the village Gabaroth, on the third" day, without any armed men, that we may hear what thou«' hast to lay to the charge of John [of Gischala]." Whenthey had written this letter, they saluted the Galileans whom Isent, and came to Japha, which was the largest village of allGalilee, and encompassed with very strong walls, and had agreat number of inhabitants in it. There the multitude of men,with their wives and children, met them, and exclaimed loudlyagainst them, and desired them to be gone, and nor. to envythem the advantage 'of an excellent commander. With theseclamours Jonathan and his partners were greatly provoked, al­though they durst not shew their anger openly : so they made himno answer, but went to other villages. But still the same cla­mours met them from all the people, who said, " Nobody should" persuade them to have any other commander besides Jose-*' phus." So Jonathan and his partners went away from them
'







OCR Output








Chap. VI. ANTIQJJITIES OF THE JEWS. 15


king of Emesa * ; they had a daughter who was deaf, whosename also was Jotape ; and these hitherto were the children ofthe male-line. But Herodias, their sister, was married to He­rod [Philip]j the son of Herod the Great, who was born of Ma-riamne, the daughter of Simon the high-priest, who had adaugh-ter, Salome ; after whose birth Herodias took upon her to con­found the laws of our country, and divorced herself from herhusband while he was alive, and was married to Herod [Anti-pas], her husband's brother by the father's side ; he was tetrarchof Galilee ; but her daughter Salome was married to Philip, theson of Herod, and tetrarch of Tranchonitis, and, as he died child­less, Aristobulus, the son of Herod, the brother of Agrippa,married her ; they had three sons, Herod, Agrippa, and Aristo-buluSj and this was the posterity of Phasaelus, and Salampsio.But the daughter of Antipater by Cypros, was Cypros, whomAlexis Selcias, the son of Alexas, married ; they had a daugh­ter, Cypros ; but Herod and Alexander, who, as we told you,were the brothers of Antipater, died childless. As to Alexan­der, the son of Herod the king, who was slain by his father, hehad two sons, Alexander and Tigranes, by the daughter of Ar-chelaus, king of Cappadocia ; Tigranes, who was king of Ar­menia, was accused at Rome, and died childless ; Alexander hada son of the same name with his brother Tigranes, and was sentto take possession of the kingdom of Armenia by Nero : he had'a son, Alexander, who married Jotape f, the daughter of Antio-chus, the king of Commagena ; Vespasian made him king of an.island m Cicilia. But these descendants of Alexander, soon aftertheir birth, deserted the Jewish religion and went over to that ofthe Greeks ; but for the rest of the daughters of Herod the king,it happened that they died childless. And as these descendantsof Herod, whom we have enumerated, were in being at the sametime that Agrippa the Great took the kingdom, and I have now-given an account of them, it now remains that I relate the seve­ral hard fortunes which befel Agrippa, and how he got clear ofthem, and was advanced to the greatest height of dignity andpowert
C H A P. VI.
Of the navigation of king dgrippa to Rome, to Tiberius Casar ;and bow, upon his being accused l>y bis own freed-man, he il>asbound: bow also be was set at liberty by Cams, after Tiler ius'sdeath, and was made king of the tetrarchy of Philip.
$ 1. A LITTLE before the death of Herod the king, Agrip-
-^,*- pa lived at Rome, and was generally brought up and
K 2 conversed


* There are coins still extant of this Emess, as Spnnheim informs us.+ Spanheim also informs us of a coin still extant ol this Jotape, daughter ofthe king of '







OCR Output








306 WARS OF THE JEWS. Book I.


to defend them elves by the following speech which he madeto them.
4. " The present dread you are under, seems to me to hara" seized upon you very unreasonably. It is true, you might" justlybedismayedat that providential chastisement whichhath" befallen you; but to suffer yourselves to be equally terrified" at the invasion of men, is unmanly. As for myself, I am so" far from being affrighted at our enemies after this earthquake,*' that I imagine that God hath thereby laid a bait for the Ara-*' bians, that we may be avenged on them, for their present" invasion proceeds more from our accidental misfortunes, than" that they have any great dependence on their 'weapons, or" their own fitness for action. Now that hope which depend*" not on men's own power, but on others ill success, is a very" ticklish thing; for there is no certainty among men, eithefr" in their bad or good fortunes; but we may easily observe," that fortune is mutable, and goes from one side to another:" and this you may readily learn from examples among our-" selves ; for when you were once victors in the former fight," your enemies overcame you at last; and very likely it will" now happen so, that these who think themselves sure of beat-*' ing you, will themselves be beaten. For, when men are very" confident, they are not upon their guard, while fear teaches" men to act with caution; insomuch, that I venture to prove*' from your very timorousness, that you ought to take cour-** age; for when you were more bold than you ought to have*' been, and than I would have had you, and marched on,'* Athenio's treachery took place; but your present slowness" and seeming dejection of mirftl, is to me a pledge and assurance" of victory. And indeed it is proper before hand to be thus" provident; but when we come to action, we ought to erect*" our minds, and to make our enemies, be they ever so wicked," believe< that neither any human, no, nor any providential" misfortune, can evef depress the courage of Jews while they" are alive ; nor will any of them ever overlook an Arabian," or suffer such an one to become lord of his good things, whom" he has in a manner taken captive, and that many times also." And do not you disturb yourselves at the quaking of inani-" mate creatures, nor do you imagine that this earthquake is" another sign of another calamity; for such affections of the" elements are according to the course af nature, nor does it" import any thing farther to men, than what mischief it does" immediately of itself. Perhaps there may come some short" sign before hand in the case of pestilences, and famines, and" earthquakes ; but these calamities themselves have their
" force







OCR Output








Chap. V. ANTIOJJITIES OF THE JEWS. 15


whom he learned all circumstances which concerned him, andthen prepared himself for his trial.
3. On the next day Varus and the king sat together in judge­ment, and both their friends were also called in, as also theking's relations, with his sister Salome, and as many as coulddiscover any thing, and such as had been tortured ; and besidesthese, some slaves of Antipater's mother, who were taken up a «little before Antipater's coming, and brought with them a writ­ten letter, the sum of which was this, that " he should not come" back, because all was come to his father's knowledge; and" that Caesar was the only refuge he had left to prevent both" his and her delivery into his father's hands." Then did An-tipater fall down at his father's feet, and besought him " not to" prejudge his cause, but that he might be first heard by his fa-" ther, and that his father would keep him still unprejudised."So Herod ordered him to be brought into the midst, and then" lamented himself about his children, from whom he had suf-" fered such great misfortunes ; and because Antipater fell up-" on him in his old age. He also reckoned up what mainte-" nance, and what education he had given them ; and what sea-'" sonable supplies of wealth he had afforded them, according to" their own desires, none of which favours had hindered them." from contriving against him, and from bringing his very life" into danger, in order to gain his kingdom, after an impiousman-" ner, by taking away his life before the-course of nature, their" father's wishes, or justice, required that that kingdom should" come to them ; and that he wondered what hopes could ele-" vate Antipatcr to such a pass as to be hardy enough to at-" tempt such things ; that he had by his testament in writing" declared him his successor in the government; and while he" was alive, he was in no respect inferior to him, either in his" illustrious dignity, or in power and authority, he having no" less than fifty talents for his yearly income, and had received" for his journey to Rome no fewer than thirty talents. He" also objected to him the case of his brethren whom he had ac-" cused; and if they were guilty, he had imitated their exam-" pie ; and if not, he had brought him groundless accusations" against his near relations ; for that he had been acquainted" with all those things by him, and by no body else, and had" done what was done by his approbation, and whom he now" absolved from all that was criminal, by becoming the inheri-" tor of the guilt of such their parricide."
4. When Herod had thus spoken, he fell a-weeping, and wasnot able to say any more; but at his desire Nicolaus of Damas­cus, being the king's friend, and always conversant with him,
and







OCR Output








ISO ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book XX,


out upon them, and slew many of them, and took more of themalive, and permitted his soldiers to plunder some of the housesof the citizens, which were full of riches. Now those Jewsthat were more moderate, and of principal dignity among them,were afraid of themselves, and desired of Felix that he wouldsound a retreat to his soldiers, and spare them for the future, andafford them room for repentance for what they had done ; andFelix was prevailed upon to do so.
8. About this time king Agrippa gave the high-priesthood toIsmael, who was the son of Fabi. And now arose a sedition be­tween the high-priests and the principal men of the multitudeof Jerusalem ; each of which got them a company of the bold­est sort of men, and of those that loved innovations, about them,and became leaders to them ; and when they struggled together,they did it by casting reproachful words against one another,and by throwing stones also. And there was no body to re­prove them; but these disorders were done after a licentiousmanner in the city, as if it had no government over it. And suchwas the impudence * and boldness that had seized on the highpriests, that they had the hardiness to send their servants intothe threshing-floors, to take away those tithes that were due tothe priests ; insomuch that it so fell out that the poorer sort ofthe priests died for want. To this degree did the violence ofthe seditious prevail over all right and justice !
9- Now, when Porcius Festus was sent as successor to Felix byNero, the principal of the Jewish inhabitants of Cesarea wentup to Rome to accuse Felix ; and he had certainly been brought1,1 punishment, unless Nero had yielded to the importunate so­licitations of his brother Pallas, who was at that time had inthe greatest honour by him. Two of the principal Syrians inCesarea persuaded Bunhus, who was Nero's tutor, and secre­tary for his Greek epistles, by giving him a great sum of mo­ney, to disannul that equality of the Jewish privileges of citi­zens which they hitherto enjoyed. So Burrhus, by his solici­tations, obtained leave of the emperor, that an ejpistle shouldbe written to that purpose. This epistle became the occasion ofthe following miseries that befel our nation ; for, when the Jewsof Cesarea were informed of the contents of this epistle to theSyrians, they were more disorderly than before, till a war waskindled. ' '
10. Upon Festus's coming into Judea, it happened that .Tudeawas afflicted by the robbers, while all the villages were set on
fire,
* The wickedness here was very peculiar and extraordinary, that the high-priests should so oppress their brethren the priests, as to starve the poorest ofthem to death. See the like presently, ch. ix. sect. a. Such fatal crimes are co-yetcusness s.nd tyranny in the clergy, as well as in the laity, in all ages,







OCR Output








222 THE LIFE OF FLAVIUS JOSEFHtTS.


men, to the borders of Galilee, in order to watch the roads that ledfrom the country to the city Jerusalem, and gave him charge tolay hold of such as travelled with letters about them, to keep themen in bonds upon the place, but to send me the letters.
47. When I had laid these commands upon them, I gave themorders, and bid them to take their arms and bring three daysprovision with them, and be with me the next day. I also part­ed those that were about me into four parts, and ordained thoseof them that were most faithful to me to be a guard to my bo­dy. I also set over them centurions, and commanded them totake care that not a soldier which they did not know shouldmingle himself among them. Now, on the fifth day following,when I was at Gabaroth, I found the entire plain that was beforethe village full of armed men, who wer'e come out of Galilee toassist me : many others of the multitude, also, out of the village,ran along with me. But as soon as I had taken my place, andbegan to speak to them, they all made an acclamation, and call­ed me the benefactor and saviour of the country. And when Ihad made them my acknowledgements, and thanked them [fortheir affection to me], I also advised them to fight * with nobody, nor to spoil the country ; but to pitch their tents in theplain, and be content with their sustenance they had brought withthem ; for I told them I had a mind to compose these troubleswithout shedding any blood. Nowit came to pass, that on theverysame day those who were sent by John with letters, fell amongthe guards whom I appointed to watch the roads ; so the menwere themselves kept upon the place, as my orders were, but Igot the letters, which were full of reproaches and lies ; and 1 in­tended to fall upon these men, without saying a word of thesematters to any body.
48. Now, as soon as Jonathan and his companions heard ofmy coming, they took all their own friends, and John with them,and retired to the house of Jesus, which indeed was a large castle,and no way unlike a citadel; so they privately laid a bandof armed men therein, and shut all the other doors but one, whichthey kept open, and they expected that I should come out of theroad to them, to salute them. And indeed they had given or­ders to the armed men, that when I came they should let nobody besides rue come in, but should exclude others 5 as sup­posing that, by this means, they should easily get me under theirpower : but they were deceived in their expectation ; for I per­ceived
» Josephus's directions to his soldiers here are much the same that John theBaptist gave, Luke, iii. 14. " Do Violence to no man, neither accuse any falsely," and be content with your wages." Whence Dr Hudson confirms this conjec­ture, that Josephus, in some things, was, even now, a follower of John the Baptist, which is no way improbable. See the note on sect. z.







OCR Output








WARS OF THE JEWS. Book I.


the temple, which was within that valley, was itself encompas­sed with a very strong wall, insomuch that if the city weretaken, the temple would be a second place of refuge for the ene­my to retire to. .. .'
2. Now, as he was long in deliberating about this matter, asedition arose among the people within the city ; Aristobulus'sparty being willing to fight, and to set their king at liberty,while the party of Hyrcanus were for opening the gates to Pom-pey ; and the dread people were in, occasioned these last to bea very numerous party, when they looked upon the excellentorder the Roman soldiers were in. So Aristobulus's party wasworsted, and retired into the temple, and cut off the communi­cation between the temple and the city, by breaking down thebridge that joined them together, and prepared to make an op­position to the utmost; but as the others had received the Ro­mans into the city, and had delivered up the palace to him, Pom-pey sent Piso, one of his great officers, into that palace with anarmy, who distributed a garrison about the city, because he couldnot^ persuade any one of those that had fled to the temple, tocome to terms of accommodation ; he then disposed all thingsthat were round about them so as might favour their attacks, ashaving Hyrcanus's party very ready to afford them both counseland assistance.
3. But Pompey himself filled up the ditch that was on thenorth side of the temple, and the entire valley also, the army it­self being obliged to carry the materials for that purpose. Andindeed it was an hard thing to fill up that valley by reason of itsimmense depth, especially as the Jews used all the means pos­sible to repel them from their superior station : nor had the Ro­mans succeeded in their endeavours, had not Pompey taken no­tice of the seventh days on which the Jews abstain from all sortsof work on a religious account, and raised his bank, but restrain­ed his soldiers from fighting on those days; for the Jews onlyacted defensively on Sabbath days. But as soon as Pompey hadfilled up the valley, he erected high towers upon the bank, andbrought those engines which they had fetched from Tyre, near tothe wall, and tried to batter it down ; and the slingers of stonesbeat ofFthose that stood above them, and drove them away : butthe towers on this side of the city made very great resistance, andwere indeed extraordinary both for largeness and magnificence.
4. Now, here it was that upon the many hardships which theRomans underwent, Pompey could not but admire not only atthe other instances of the Jews fortitude, but especially that theydid not at all intermit their religious services, even when theywere encompassed with darts on all sides ; for, as if the city were







OCR Output








Chap. IX» ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. '^55


life, the inhabitants of Cesarea and of Sebaste forgot the kind­nesses he had bestowed on them, and acted the part of riie bitter­est enemies ; for they cast such reproaches upon the deceased asare not fit to be spoken of; and so many of them as were thensoldiers, which were a great number, went to his house, and has­tily carried off the statues* of this king's daughters, and all atonce carried them into the brothel-houses, and, when they hartset them on the tops of those houses, they abused them to theutmost of their power, and did such -things to them as are too inf-decent to be related. They also laid themselves down in publicplaces, and celebrated general feastings, with garlands on theirheads, and with ointments and libations to Charon, and drinkingto one another for joy that the king was expired. Nay, theywere not only unmindful of Agrippa, who had extended his li­berality to them in abundance, but of his grandfather Herod also,who had himself rebuilt their cities, and had raised them havensand temples at vast expences.
2. Now Agrippa, the son of the deceased, was at Rome, andbrought up with Claudius' Caesar. And when Caesar was in­formed that Agrippa was dead, and that the inhabitants of Se­baste and Cresarea had abused him, he was sorry for the first news,and was displeased with ihe ingratitude 'of those cities. He wastherefore disposed to send Agrippa junior away presently to suc­ceed his father in the kingdom, and was willing .to confirm himin it by his oath. But those freed-men and friends of his, whohad the greatest authority with him, dissuaded him from it, andsaid, that " it was a dangerous experiment to permit so large a*• kingdom to come under the government of so very young a" man, and one hardly yet arrived at years of discretion, who«' would not be able to take sufficient care of its administration ;" while the 'weight of a kingdom is heavy enough to a grown" man." So Caesar thought what they said to be reasonable.Accordingly he sent Cuspios Fadus to be procurator of Judea,and of the entire kingdom, and paid that respect to the deceased,as not to introduce Marcus, who had been at variance with him,into his kingdom. But he determined, in the first place, to sendorders to Fadus, that he should chastise the inhabitants of Cesa­rea and Sebaste for those abuses they had offered to him that wasdeceased, and their madness towards his daughters that were stillalive ; and that he should remove that body of soldiers that wereat Cesarea and Sebaste, with the five regiments, into Pontus, thatthey might do their military duty there, and that he should chdse
U 2 an


* Photius, who made an extract out of this section, says, they were not thestatues or images, but the ladies themselves, who were thus basely abused by thesoldiers. Cod. CCXXXV1U.







OCR Output








Chap. IV. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 69


no innovations against him. The like to what HeroJ did wasdone by his son Archelaus, who was made king after him ; afterwhom the Romans, when they entered on the government, tookpossession of these vestments of the high-priest, and had themreposited in a stone-chamber, under the seal of the priests, andof the keepers of the temple, the captain of the guard lighting alamp there every day ; and * seven days before a festival theywere delivered to them by the captain of the guard, when thehigh-priest having purified them, and made use of them, laidthem up again in the same chamber where they had been laidup before, and this the very next day after the feast was over.This was the practice at the three yearly festivals, and' on thefast-day ; but Vitellius put these garments into our own power,as in the days of our forefathers, and ordered the captain of theguard not to trouble himself to inquire where they were laid,or when they were to be used ; and this he did as an act of kind­ness, to oblige the nation to him. Besides which, he also depri­ved Joseph, who was also called Caiapbas, of the high-priest­hood, and appointed Jonathan, the son of Ananus, the formerhigh-priest, to succeed him. After which, he took his journeyback to Antioch.
4. Moreover, Tiberius sent a letter to Vitellius, and com­manded him to make a league of friendship with Artabanus, theking of Parthia ; for, while he was his enemy, he terrified him,because he had taken Armenia away from him, lest he shouldproceed farther, and told him he should no otherwise trusthim than upon his giving him hostages, and especially hisfon Artabauus. Upon Tiberius's writing thus to Vitellius,by the offer of great presents of money, he persuaded both theking of Iberia, and the king of Albania, to make no delay, but tofight against Artabanus ; and although they would not do it them­selves, yet did they give the Scythians a passage through theircountry, and opened the Caspian gates to them, and brought themupon Artabanus. So Armenia was again taken from the Parthi-ans, and the country of Parthia was filled with war, and the prin­cipal of their men were slain, and all these things were in disorderamong them : the king's son also himself fell in these wars,together with many ten thousands of his army. Vitellius hadalso sent such greac sums of money to Artabanus's father's kins­men and friends, that he had almost procured him to be slain by
the


* This mention of the high priest's sacred garments received seven days be'fore a festival, and purified in those days against a festival, as having been pol­luted by being in the custody- of heathens, in Josephus, agrees well with thetraditions of Talmudists, as Reland here observes. Nor is there any question butthe three feasts here mentioned, were the Passover, Pentecost, and Feast of Ta­bernacles ; and the Fust, so called by way of distinction, as Acts, xxvii. y. watthe great day of expiation.







OCR Output








Chap. VIII. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEV?s; 17T


4. For in the first year of the reign of Nero, upon the deathof Azizus, king of Emesa, Soemus *, his brother, succeeded inhis kingdom, and Aristobulus, the son of Herod, king of Chal-cis, was intrusted by Nero, with the government of Lesser Ar­menia. Caesar also bestowed on Agrippa a certain part of Ga­lilee, Tiberias f, and Taricheae, and ordered them to submit tohis jurisdiction. He gave him also Julias, a city of Perea, withfourteen villages that lay about it.
5. Now, as for the affairs of the Jews, they grew worse andworse continually ; for the country was again filled with rob­bers and impostors, who deluded the multitude. Yet did Felixcatch, and put to death, many of those impostors every day, to­gether with the robbers. He also caught Eleazer, the son ofDmeas, who had gotten together a company of robbers; and-this he did by treachery ; for he gave him assurance, that heshould suffer no harm, and thereby persuaded him to come to him;but when he came he bound him, and sent him to Rome. Felixalso bore an ill-will to Jonathan, the high-priest, because hefrequently gave him admonitions about governing the Jewish af­fairs better than he did, lest he should himself have complaintsmade of him by the multitude, since hs it was who had desiredCaesar to send him as procurator of Judea. So Felix contrived amethod whereby he might get rid of him, now he was becomeso continually troublesome to him ; for such continual admoni­tions are grievous to those who are disposed to act unjustly.Wherefore Felix persuaded one of Jonathan's mostfaithful friends,a citizen of Jerusalem, whose name was Doras, to bring the rob«bers upon Jonathan, in order to kill him ; and this he did bypromising to give him a great deal of money for so doing. Do­ras complied with the proposal, and contrived matters so, that therobbers might murder him after the following manner: Certainof those robbers went up to the city, as if they were going toworship God, while they had daggers under their garments,and, by thus mingling themselves among the multitude, they slewJonathan J, and as this murder was never avenged, the robbers
VOL. III. Z went


« This Soemus is elsewhere mentioned [by Josephns in his own life, sect. II. asalso] by Dio Cassius and Tacitus, as Dr Hudson informs us.
t This agrees with Josephus's frequent accounts elsewhere in his own Life,that Tiberias, and TaricheiE, and Gamala, were under this Agrippa junior, tillJustus, th6 son of Pistus, seized upon them for the Jews upon the breaking out ofthe u-ar.
J This treacherous and barbarous murder of the good high.priest Jonathan, byr/ie contrivance of this wicked procurator Felix, was the immediate occasion ofthe ensuing murders by the Sicarii or ruffians, and one great cause of the follow,ing- horrid cruelties and miseries of the Jewish nation' as Josephus here sup.s; whose excellent reflection on the gross wickedness of that nation, as thect cause of their terrible destruction, is well worthy the attention of every







OCR Output








SLO, 4 0.0


Harvard Oollege Library,
Bequest of
, FKANOm tABKMAli.17 Ja-^i.i


Printed Vy Tliomas Tun-bull,Canongate, Ed.nburgh.







OCR Output








Ghap. V. WARS OF THE JEWS;' 360


was what he had himself built and adorned, at a vast expence);the multitude of the Jews stood with the ambassadors, and onthe other side stood Archelaus, with his friends; but as for thfekindred of Archelaus, they stood on neither side; for tostand on Archelaus'a side, their hatred to him, and envy athim, would not give them leave, while yet they were afraid tobe seen by Caesar with his accusers. Besides these, there werepresent, Archelaus's brother, Philip, being sent thither befoffehand out of kindness by Varus, for two reasons ; the one wasthis, that he might be assisting to Archelaus, and the other wasthis, that in case Caesar should make a distribution of what He­rod possessed among his posterity, he might obtain some shareof it.
2. And now, upon the permission that was given the accusers
to speak, they, in the first place, went over Herod's breaches of
their law, and said, That " he was not a king, but the most
" barbarous of all tyrants, and that they had found him to be
" such by the sufferings they underwent from him: that when a
" very great number had been slain by him, those that were
" left had endured such miseries, that they called those that
" were dead happy men: that he had not only tortured the bodies
" of his subjects, but entire cities, and had done much harm to
" the cities of his own country, while he adorned those that be-
" longed to foreigners, and he shed the blood of Jews, in order
" to do kindness to those people that were out of their bounds:
" that he had filled the nation full of poverty, and of the greatest
" iniquity, instead of that happiness, and those laws which they
" had anciently enjoyed: that, in short, the Jews had borne
" more calamities from Herod, in a few years, than had their
" forefathers during all that interval of time that had passed
" since they had come out of Babylon, and returned home, ih the
" reign of * Xerxes: that, however, the nation was come to so
" low a condition, by being inured to hardships, that they sub-
" mittedto his sncesso'r of their own accord, though he brought
" themintobitterslavery: thata-ccordinglytheyreadilycalledAr-
" chelaus,. though he was the son of so great a tyrant, king, after
«* the decease of his father, and joined with him in mourning fo*
*' the death of Herod, and in wishing him good success in that his
'' succession'; while yet this Archelaus, lest he should be in dan-«
" ger of not being thought the genuine son of Herod, began his
-" reign with the murder of three thousand citizens; as if he had
*« a mind to offer so many bloody sacrifices to God for his go-
" vemment,'and to fill the temple with the like nurftber of dead
" bodies


* H*re we hava a strong confirmation that it was Xerxes, and not Artaxerte^under whom the main part of the Jews returned out of the Babylonian captivity;i. e. in the days of Ezra and Nehemiah. The same thing ii in the Antiquities,B. XI. chap. v. sect. i. Vol. II.
VOL. III. 3 A







OCR Output








THE LIFE OF FLAVIUS JOSEFHUS. 235


to the king and to the Romans, but en account of yourown wickedness, and this while 1 was besieged by the Romansin Jotapata. Nay, indeed, were there not reckoned up twothousand of the people of Tiberias during the siege of Jerusa­lem, some of which were slain, and the rest caught and cacried'captives ? But thou wilt pretend that thou didst not engage 'inthe War, since thou didst ilee to the king. Yes, indeed, thoudidst flee to him ; but I say it was out of fear of me. 'Thousayest, indeed, that it is I who am a wicked man. But then,for what reason was it that king Agrippa, who procured theeihy life when .thou wast condemned to die by Vespasian, and.who bestowed so muck riches upon thee, did twice afterward putthee into bonds, and as often obliged thee to run away from thycountry, and, when he had once ordered thee to be put to death,he granted thee a pardon at the earnest request of Bernice ? andwhen (after so many of thy wicked pranks) he had made theehis secretary, he caught thee falsifying his epistles, and drovethee away from his sight. But I shall not inquire accurately in­to these matters of scandal against thee. Yet cannot I but won-.der at thy impudence, when thou hast the assurance to say, thatthou hast better related these affairs [of the war] than have allhe others that have written about them, whilst thou didst not,know what was done in Galilee ; for thou wast -then at Bcrytuswith the king ; nor didst 'thou know how much the Romans sut-fered at the siege of Jotapata, or what miseries they brought up­on us ; nor couldst thou learn by inquiry what I did during thatsiege myself; for all those that might afford such informationwere quite destroyed in that siege. But perhaps thou wilt ?;ay,thou hast written of what was done against the people of Jerusa­lem exactly. But how should that be ? for neither wast thouconcerned in that war, nor hast thou read the commentaries ofCaesar ; of which we have evident proof, because thou hast con­tradicted those commentaries of Caesar in thy history. But ifthou art so hardy as to affirm, that thou hast written that historybstter than all the rest, why didst thou not publish thy historywhile the emperors Vespasian and Titus, the generals in thatwar, as well as king Agrippa and his family, who were men verywell skilled in the learning of the Greeks, were til alive ? forthou hast had at written these twenty years, and then mightestthou have had the testimony of thy accuracy. But now whenthese men are no longer with us, and thou thinkest thou canstnot be contradicted, thou venturest to publish it. But then I,was not in like manner afraid of my own writing, but I offeredany books to the emperors themselves, when the facts were al-'»ost under men's eyes ; for I was conscious to myself, that I had
G g 2 observed







OCR Output








Chap. II. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 159


" was dated before the fourth of the kalends of July, when Rufus" and Pompeius Sylvanus are consuls."
3. Herod also, the brother of the deceased Agrippa, who wasthen possessed of the royal authority over Chalcis, petitionedClaudius Caesar for the authority over the temple, and themoney of the sacred treasure, and the choice of the high-priests,and obtained all that he petitioned for. So that after that timethis authority continued among * all his descendants till the endof the war. Accordingly Herod removed the last high-priest,called Cantberas, and bestowed that dignity on his successor Jo­seph, the son. of Camus.
CHAP. II.
How Helena, the !j>ueen of Adialene, and her son I-zates, embracedtie Jewish religion ; and how Helena supplied the poor withcorn, ivben there was a great famine at Jerusalem.
$ 1. A BOUT this time it was that Helena, queen of Adiabene,,**- and her son Izates, changed their course of life, andembraced the Jewish customs, and this on the occasion follow­ing : Monobazus, the king of Adiabene, who had also the nameof Bazeus, fell in love with his sister Helena, and took her to behis wife, and begat her with child. But as he was in bed withher one night, he laid his hand upon his wife's belly, and fell a-sleep, and seemed to hear a voice, which bid him take his handoff his wife's belly, and not hurt the infant that was therein,which, by God's providence, would be safely born, and have anhappy end. This voice put him into disorder ; so he awakedimmediately, and told the story to his wife ; and when his sonwas born, he called him I-zatet. He had indeed Monobazus, hiselder brother, by Helena also, as he had other sons by otherwives besides. Yet did he openly place all his affections on thishis only begotten \ son Izates, which was the origin of that envywhich his other brethren, by the same father, bore to him ;while on this account they hated him more and more, and wereall under great affliction that their father should prefer Izates be­fore all them. Now although their father were very sensible of
these


* Here is some error in the copies, 'or mistake in Josephus; for the power ofappointing high-priests, after Herod king of Chalcis was dead, and Agr'.ppa ju.nior was made king of Chalcis in his room, belonged to him, and he exercisedthe same all along till Jerusalem was destroyed, as Josephus elsewkere inform!us. ch. viii. sect. 8. 11. ch. ix. sect. I. 4. 6. 7.
t Josephus here ufes the word /tnvytn, an only begotten son, for no other thanone best beloved, as does both the Old and New Testament, I mean where therewere one or more sons besides, Gen. xxii. 2. Heb. xi. 17. See the note on IS. 1.ch. xiii. sect. i.







OCR Output








Chap. I. "AVTIQJJITIES OF THE JEWS. / 125


to themselves; but for the women, and the youth, they hadbeen inveigled with shews, and the fightings of the gladiators,and certain distributions of flesh-meat among them, which thingsin pretence were designed for the pleasing of the multitude, butin reality to satiate the barbarous cruelty and madness of Caius.The slaves also were sorry, because they were by Caius allow­ed to accuse, and t9 despise their masters, and they could haverecourse to his assistance, when they had unjustly affrontedthem ; for he was very easy in believing them against theirmasters, even when they accused them falsely; and, if theywould discover what money their masters had, they might soonobtain both riches and liberty, as the rewards of their accusa­tions, because the reward of these informers was the eighth *part of the criminal's substance. As to the nobles, althoughthe report appeared credible to some of them, either becausethey knew of the plot before-hand, or because they wished itmight be true ; however, they concealed not only the joy theyhad at the relation of ir, but that they had heard any thing atall about it. These last acted so out of the fear they had, that ifthe report proved false, they should be punished, for having sosoon let men know their minds. But those that knew Caiuswas dead, because they were partners with the conspirators,they concealed all still more cautiously, as not knowing one ano­ther's minds; and fearing lest they should speak of it to someof those to whom the continuance of tyranny was advantageous :and, if Caius should prove to be alive, they might be informedagainst, and punished. And another report went about, that al­though Caius had been wounded indeed, yet was not he dead,but alive still, and under the physician's hands. Nor was anyone looked upon by another as faithful enough to be trusted,and to whom any one would open his mind ; for he was eithera friend to Caius, and therefore suspected to favour his tyranny,or he was one that hated him, who therefore might be suspect­ed to deserve the less credit, because of his ill-will to him.—Nay, it was said by some, (and this indeed it was that depri­ved the nobility of their hopes, and made them sad), that Cai­us was in a condition to despise the dangers he had been in, andtook no care of healing his wounds, but was gotten away intothe market-place, and, bloody as he was, was making an ha­rangue to the people. And these were the conjectural reportsof those that were so unreasonable as to endeavour to raise lu-rnults, which they turned different ways, according to ihe opi*nions of the hearers. Yet did they not leave their seats, for
fear


* The rewards proposed by the Roman laws to informers, was sometimes aneighth part of the criminal's goodi, as here, and sometimes a fourth part, asSpanheim assures us, from Suetonius and Tacitus.







OCR Output








Chap. VI. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. ' Z1


he ordered them to be all shut up in the hippodrome *, and sentfor his sister Salome, and her husband Alexis, and spake thus tothem : " I shall die in a little time, so great are my pains ; which" death ought to be chearfully borne, and to be welcomed by" all men; but what principally troubles me is this, that I shall" die without being lamented, and without such mourning as«' men usually expect at a king's death. For that he was not" unacquainted with the temper of the Jews, that his death" would be a thing very desirable, and exceedingly acceptable" to them ; because during his lifetime they were ready to re-" volt from him, and to abuse the donations he had dedicated to" God : that it therefore was their business to resolve to afford" him some alleviation of his great sorrows on this occasion ;" for that, if they do not refuse him their consent in what he"desires, he shall have a great mourning at his funeral, and" such as never any king had before him ; for then the whole" nation would mourn from their very soul, which otherwise'' would be done in sport and mockery only. He desired there-" fore that as soon as they see he hath given up the ghost, they" shall place soldiers round the hippodrome, while they do not" know that he is dead; and that they shall not declare his" death to the multitude till this is done, but that they shall" give orders to have those that are in custody shot with their"• darts; and that this slaughter of them all will cause that he" shall not miss to rejoice on a double account: that as he" is dying, they will make him secure that his will shall be exe-" cuted in what he charges them to do ; and that he shall have" the honour of a memorable mourning at his funeral. So he" deplored his condition, with tears in his eyes, and obtested" them by the kindness due from them, as of his kindred, and" by the faith they otved to God, and begged of them that they"would not hinder him of this honourable mourning tit his fu-" neral." So they promised him not to transgress his com­mands.
6. Now, any one may easily discover the temper of this man's
mind, which not only took pleasure in doing what he had done
formerly against his relations, out of'the love of life, but by
those commands of his which savoured of no humanity : since he
took care, when he was departing out of this life, that the whole
nation should be put into mourning, and indeed made desolate
of their dearest kindred, when he gave order that one out of
every family should be slain, although they had done nothing
rfiat was unjust, or that was against him, nor were they accused
of any other crimes; while it is usual for those who have any
D 2 regard


* A place for the horse-races.







OCR Output








Chap. V. THE ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. ' 21


also generally supposed, that whatsoever Herod did afterwardabout his son, was done with his approbation. But, when He­rod had bound his son, he sent letters to Rome to Caesar abouthim, and such messengers withal as should, by word of mouth,inform Caesar of Antipater's wickedness. Now, at this verytime there was seized a letter of Antiphilus, written to Anti-pater out of Egypt, (for he lived there) ; and, when it wasppened by the king, it was fsund to contain what follows: " I«' have sent thee Acme's letter, and hazarded my own life ; forf« thou knowest that I am in danger from two families, if I be" discovered. I wish thee good success in thy affair." Thesewere the contents of this letter; but the king made inquiryabout the other letter also, for it did not appear, and Antiplnlusjsslave, who brought that letter which had been read, denied thathe had received the other. But, while the king was in doubtabout it, one of Herod's friends seeing a seam upon the innercoat of the slave, and a doubling of the cloth, (for he had twocoats on), he guessed that the letter might be within that doub­ling ; which accordingly proved to be true. So they took outthe letter, and its contents were these: " Acme to Antipater.'" I have written such a letter to thy father as thou desirest me.'f I have also taken a copy and sent it, as if it came from Sa-" lome to my lady [Livia] ; which, when thou readest, I know" that Herod will punish Salome, as plotting against him." Now,this pretended letter of Salome's to her lady was composed byAntipater, in the name of Salome, as to its real meaning, but inthe words of Acme. The letter was this : " Acme to king He-" rod. I have done my endeavour that nothing that is done" against thee should be concealed from thee. So, upon my find-" ing a letter of Salome written to my lady against thee, I have" written out a copy, and sent it to thee ; with hazard to myself,f but for thy advantage.' The reason why she wrote it was this," that she had a mind to be married to SyIleus, Do thou there-" fore tear this letter in pieces, that I may not come into dan-" ger of my life." Now Acme had written to Antipatsr him­self, and informed him, that, in compliance with his command,she had both herself written to Herod, as if Salome had laid asudden plot entirely against him, and had herself sent a copy ofan epistle, as coming from Salome to her lady. Now, Acmewas a Jew by birth, and a servant to Julia, Caasar's wife ; anddid this out of her friendship for Antipater, as having been cor­rupted by him with a large present of money, to assist in hispernicious designs against his father and his aunt.
8. Hereupon Herod was so amazed at the prodigious wicked­ness of Antipater, that he was ready to have ordered him to be


slain







OCR Output








Chap. IV. AVTIQJJITIES OF THE JEWS. 143


Lupus laid his garment aside and complained of the cold *, hesaid, that cold was never hurtful to Lupus, [i. e. a. wolf]. And,as a great many men went along with them to see the sight, whenCherea came to the place, he asked the soldier who was to betheir executioner, whether this office was what he was used to ?or whether this was the first time of his using his sword in thatmanner, and desired him to bring him that very sword with'which he himself slew Caius. So he was happily killed at onestroke. But Lupus did not meet with such good fortune in goinsjout of the world, since he was timorous, and had many blowslevelled at his neck, because he did not stretch it out boldly, [ashe ought to have done.]
6. Now, a few days after this, as the parental solemnites werejust at hand, the Roman multitude made their usual oblations totheir several ghosts, and put portions into the fire, in honour ofCherea, and besought him to be merciful to them, and not con­tinue his anger against them for their ingratitude. And this wasthe end of the life that Cherea came to. But, for Sabinus, al­though Claudius not only set him at liberty, but gave him leaveto retain his former command in the army, yet did he think itwould be unjust in him to fail of performing his obligations tohis fellow confederates; so he fell upon his sword, and killedhimself, the wound reaching up to the very hilt of the sword f-.
CHAP.


* This piercing cold here complained of by Lupus, agrees well to the time ofthe year when Claudius began his reign ; it being for certain about the monthsof November, December, or January, and most probably a few days after Jan.24th, and a few days before the Roman Pareiifalia.
t It is both here and elsewhere very remarkable, that the murderers of thevilest tyrants who yet highly deserved to die, when those murderers were underoaths, or other the like obligations of fidelity to them, were usually revenged,and the murderers were cut off themselves, and that after a remarkable manner;and this sometimes, as in the present case, by those very persons who were notsorry for such murders, but got kingdoms by them. The examples are very nu­merous, both in sacred and profane histories, and seem generally indications ofdivine vengeance on such murderers. Nor is it unworthy of remark, that suchmurderers of tyrants do it usually on such ill principles, in such a cruel manner,and as ready to involve the innocent with the guilty, which was the case here,chap. i. sect. 14. and chap. ii. sect. 4. as justly deserved the divine vengeanceupon them. Which seems to have been the case of Jehu also, when, besides thehouse of Ahab, for whose slaughter he had a commission from God, without anysuch commission, any justice or commiseration, he killed Ahab's great men, andacquaintance, and priests, and forty-two of the kindred of Ahaziah, 2 Kings x.ii—14. SeeHos. i. 4. I do not mean here to condemn Ehud or Judith, or thelike executioners of God's vengeance on those wicked tyrants, who had unjustlyoppressed God's own people under their theocracy; who, as they appear still to havehad no selfish designs nor intentions to slay the innocent, so had they still a di­vine commission, or a divine impulse, which was their commission for what theydid, Judges, iii. 15, jp, 20. Judith, ix. 2. Test. Levi, sect.,;;' in Authent. Rec. p312. Se.e also page 432.







OCR Output








Chap. XlII. WARS OF THE JEWS. 39*


procurator of Galilee, and Samaria, and Perea, and removed A-grippa from Chalcis unto a greater kingdom; for he gave himthe tetrarchy which had belonged to Philip, which contained Ba-tanea, Trachonitis, and Gaulanitis: he added to it the kingdomof Lysanias, and that province [Abilene] which Varus had go­verned. But Claudius himself, when he had administered thegovernment thirteen years, eight months, and twenty days, died,and left Nero to be his successor in the empire, whom he hadadopted by his wife Agrippina's delusions, in order to be hissuccessor, although he had a son of his own, whose name wasBritannicus, by Messalina his former wife, and a daughter whosename was Octavio, whom he had married to Nero; he had alsoanother daughter by Petina, whose name was Antonio.
CHAP. XIII.
Nero adds four cities to Agrippa's kingdom ; but the other partsofjudea were under Felix:. The disturbances which were rai­sed by the Sicarii, the magiciam, and an Eygptain false pro­phet. The Jews and Syrians have a contest at Cesarea.
§ 1. "^"T'OW as to the many things in whicn Nero acted like a,l,\i madman, out of the extravagant degree of the felici­ty and riches which he enjoyed, and by that means used his goodfortune to the injury of others; and after what maner he slewhis brother, and wife, and mother, from whom his barbarity
spread
Apostles, particularly from \iKtrcmHing when St Paul disconrwd of" righteousness," chastity, and judgment to come," Acts xxiv. 15. and no wonder, when wehave elsewhere seen, that he lived in adultery with Brasilia, another man's wife,Antiq. B. XX. ch. vii. § i. Vol. III.) in the word* of Tacitus, produced here byDean Aldrich; " Felix exercised, says Tacitus, the authority of a king, with the11 disposition of a slave, and relying upon the great power of his brother Pallas at" court, thought he might safely be guilty pf all kinds of wicked practices'" Ob­serve also the time when he was made procurator, A. D. 52, that when St Paulpleaded his cause before him, A. D. 58, he might have been " many years a judge" unto that nation'" as St Paul says he had then been, Acts Jtxiv. 10. But as towhat Tacitus here lays, that before the death of Cumanus, Felix was procuratorover Samaria only, does not well agree with St Paul's words, who would hardlyhave called Samaria a Jeiuitt nation In short, since what Tacitus here says' if a-bout countries very remote from Rome, where he lived; since what he says oftwo Roman procurators, the one over Galilee, the other over Samaria at the same«ime, is without all example else where, and since Josephus, who lived at that verylime in Judea, appears to have known nothing of this procuratorship of Felix, be­fore the death of Cumamis, T much suspect the story itself, as nothing better thana mistake of Tacitus, especially when it seems not only omitted, but contradictedby Josephs; as any one may find that compares their histoiies together. Possi­bly Felix might have been a subordinate judge among the Jews sometime beforeunder Cumanus, but that he was in earnest a procurator of Samaria before, I donot believe. Bi.-hop Pearson, as well as Bishop Lloyd, quote this account, but with'a doubtful clause; itfdit Tacito,lS we may believe Tacitui. Pears Annal. Puulin,J>ajje 8' Marshal's Table$, at A, D. 49.







OCR Output








388 WARS OF THE JEWS. Book II.


CHAP. XII.


Many tumults tinder Cumanus, luUch "were composed by ^ua-dratus. Felix is procurator of Judea. dgrippa is advancedfrom Clalcis to a greater kingdom.
$ 1. 'M'OW after the death of Herod, king of Chalcls, Claudiusset Agrippa, the son of Agrippa, over his uncle's king.dom, while Cumanus took upon him the office of procurator ofthe rest, which was a Roman province, and therein he succeededAlexander, under which Cumanus began the troubles, and theJews ruin came on; fur when the multitude were come togetherto Jerusalem, to the feast of unleavened bread, and a Roman co­hort stood over the cloisters of the temple, (for they always werearmed and kept guard at the festivals, to prevent any innovation,which the multitude thus gathered together might make), oneof the soldiers pulled back his garment, and couring down afteran indecent manner, and turned his breech tothe Jews, and spakesuch -words as you may expect upon such a posture. At thiathe whole multitude had indignation, and made a clamour toCumanus, that he would punish the soldier; while the rasherpart of the youth, and such as were naturally the most tumultu­ous, fell to fighting, and caught up stones, and threw them at thesoldiers. Upon which Cumanus was afraid lest all the peopleshould make an assault upon him, and sent to call for more arm.ed men, who, when they came in great numbers into the clois­ters, the Jews were in a very great consternation, and beingbeaten out of the temple, they ran into the city, and the vio­lence with which they crowded to get out was so great, thatthey trode upon each other, and squeezed one another, till tenthousand of them were killed, insomuch that this feast becamethe cause of mourning to the whole nation, and every familylamented [their own relations}.
2. Now there followed after this another calamity, which a-rose from a tumult made by robbers; for at the public road ofBeth-lioron, one Stephen, a servant of Caesar, carried some furni­ture, which the' robbers fell upon, and seized; upon this Cuma­nus sent men to go round about to the neighbouring villages, andto bringtheir inhabitants to him bound, aslaying it totheirchargethat they had not pursued after the thieves, and caught them.Now here it was that a certain soldier, finding the sacred bookof the law, tore it to pieces, and * threw it into the fire. Here­upon the Jews were in great disorder, as if their whole country
were


* Reland notes here, that the Talmud, in recounting ten sad accidents for whichthe Jews ought to rend their garments, reckons this for or.e, " When they htfcr" that t}ie law of God is bjirn?,"







OCR Output








*\6 THE Lr»E OF FLAVIUS JOSEPHUS.


Pharisees, which are supposed to excel others in the accurateknowledge of the laws of their country. He was a man of greatwisdom and reason, and capable of restoring public affairs by hisprudence, when they were in an ill posture. He was also an oldfriend and companion of John ; but at that time he had a differ­ence with me. When therefore he had received such an exhor­tation, he persuaded the high-priests, Ananus, and Jesus the sonof Gamala, and some others of the same seditious faction, to cutme down, now I was growing so great, and not to overlook mewhile I was aggrandizing myself to the height of glory ; and hesaid, that it would be for the advantage of the Galileans, if Iwere deprived of my government there. Ananus also, and hisfriends, desired them to make no delay about the matter, lest Ishould get the knowledge of what was doing too soon, and shouldcome and make an assault upon the city with a great army. Thiswas the counsel of Simon; but Ananus the high-priest demonstra­ted to them, that this was not an easy thing to be done, becausemany of the high-priests and of the rulers of the people bore wit­ness that I had acted like an excellent general, and that it wasthe work of ill men to accuse one against whom they had nothingto say.
39. When Simon heard Ananus say this, he desired that themessengers would conceal the thing, and not let it come amongmany ; for that he would take care to have Josephus removedout of Galilee very quickly. So he called for John's brother[Simon], and charged him, that they should send presents to A-nanus and his friends ; for, as he said, they might probably bythat means persuade them to change their minds. And indeedSimon did at length thus compass what he aimed at; for Ananus,and those with him, being corrupted by bribes, agreed to expelme out of Galilee, without making the rest of the citizins ac­quainted with what they were doing. Accordingly they resol­ved to send men of distinction as to their families, and of distinc­tion as to their learning also. Two of these were of the popu­lace, Jonathan * and Ananias, by s^-ct of Pharisees ; while thethird, Jozar, was of the stock of the priests, and a Pharisee also ;and Simon, the last of them, was of the youngest of the high-priests. These had it given them in charge, that, when theywere come to the multitude of the Galileans, they should askthem, what was the reason of their love to me ? and if theysaid, that it was because I was born at Jerusalem, that theyshould reply, that they four were all born at the same place ;and if they should say, it was because I was well versed in theirlaw, they should reply, that neither were they unacquainted with
the
« This Jonathan is also taken notice of in the Latin notes, as the same that ismentioned by the rabbins in Porta Mosis,







OCR Output








302 WARS OT THE JEWS. Book If.


" to be now heard on that account; since he had not staid for" his determination about the succession, and since he had sub-" orned certain persons, after Herod's death, to move for put-" ting the diadem upon his head; since he had set himself down" in the throne, and given answers as a king, and altered the«' disposition of the army, and granted to some higher dignities:«' that he had also complied in all things with the people in the" requests they had made to him as to their king, and had also'' dismissed those that had been put into bonds by his father," for most important reasons. Now, after all this, he desires«' the shadow of that royal authority, whose substance he had al-" ready seized to himself, and so- hath made Caesar lord, not of*' things, but of words. He also reproached him farther, that" his mourning for his father was only pretended, while he put" on a sad countenance in the day time, but drank to great ex-«' cess in the night, from which behaviour, he said, the late" disturbance among the multitude came, while they had an in-" dignation thereat. And indeed the purport of his whole dis-" course was to aggravate Archelaus's crime in slaying such a" multitude about the temple, which multitude came to the fes-" tival, but were barbarously slain in the midst of their own sa-" crifices; and he said, there was such a vast number of dead" bodies heaped together in the temple, as even a foreign war,that should come upon them [suddenly], before it vras de­nounced, could not have heaped together. And he added,that it was thefore sight his father had of that his barbarity,which made him never give him any hopes of the kingdom,but when his mind was more infirm than his body, and he" was not able to reason soulidly, and did not well know what" was the character of that son, whom in his second testament«« he made his successor; and this was done by him at a time«« when he had no complaints to make of him whom he had«« named before when he was sound in body, and when his mind«' was free from all passion. That, however, if any one should«« suppose Herod's judgment, when he was sick, was superior" to that at another time, yet had Archelaus forfeited his" kingdom by his own behaviour, and those his actions, which" were contrary to the law, and to its disadvantage. Or what" sort of a kingwill this man be, when he hath obtained the" government from Caesar, who hath slain so many before he" hath obtained it."
6. When Antipater had spoken largely to this purpose, andhad produced a great number of Archelaus's kindred as witnes­ses, to prove every part of the accusation, he endedhis discourse.Then stood up Nicolaus to plead for Arehelaus. He alleged,
V That







OCR Output








WARS OF TH£ JEWS. Book I.


ever a most excellent hunter, where he generally had good suc­cess, by the means of his great skill in riding horses; for in oneday he caught forty wild beasts *; that country breeds alsobears, and the greatest part of it is replenished with stags, andwild asses. He was also such a warrior as could not be with­stood: many men therefore there are who have stood amazed atai& readiness in his exercises, when tbey saw him throw thejavelin directly forward, and to shoot the arrow upon the mark.And then besides these performances of his, depending on hisown strength of mind and body, fortune was also very favour­able to him; for he seldom failed of success in his wars; andwhen he failed, he was not himself the occasion of such failings,but he either was betrayed by some, or the rashness of his ownsoldiers procured his defeat. . -
GHAP. XXII.
The Murder of Ar'ntohuhts, and Hyrcanvt, the high-priest*^ asalso- of Mariamne the queen.
i i. YTCfWEVER, fortune was avenged on Herod in his_Ll eternal great successes, by raising him up domesticaltroubles, and he began to have wild disorders in his family, onaccount of his wife, of whom he was so very fond. For whenhe came to the government, he sent away her whom he had be­fore married, when he was a private person, and who was bornat Jerusalem, whose name was Doris, and married Mariamne,the daughter of Alexander, the son of Aristobulus; on whoseaccount disturbances arose in his family, and that in part verysoon, but chiefly after his return from Rome. For first of all,he expelled Antipater the son of Doris, for the sake of his sonsby Mariamne, out of the city, and permitted him to come thitherat no other times than at the festivals. After this he slew hiswife's grandfather, Hyrcanus, when he was returned out of Par-thia to him, under this pretence, that he suspected him of plot­ting against him. Now this Hyrcanus had been carried captiveto Barzapharnes, when he over-ran Syria; but those of his owncountry beyond Euphrates were desirous he would stay withthem, and this out of the commiseration they had for his condi­tion ; and had he complied with their desires, when they exhort­ed him not to go over the river to Herod, he had not perished:. but themarriage of his grand-daughter [to Herod] was his tempt­ation ;. for as he relied upon him,and was over fond of his own coun-
'. -. ' tT7r
• Here seems to be a small defect in the copies, which describe the wild beasw-which were hunted in a certain country by Hired, without noising any such coun­try at all.
r< 1







OCR Output








Chap. XIX. WARS or THE JEWS. / 437


were the kinsmen of Monobazus king of Adiabene, and theirnames were Monobazus and Kenedius; and next to them wereNiger of Perea, and Silas of Babylon, who had deserted fromKing Agrippa to the Jews; for he had formerly served in hisarmy. When the front of the Jewish army had been cut off,the Jews retired into the city; but still Simon, the son of Gio-ra fell upon the backs of the Romans, as they were ascendingup Bethoron, and put the hindmost of the army inta disorder,and carried off many of the beasts that carried the weapons ofwar, and led them into the city. But as Cestius tarried therethree days, the Jews seized upon the elevated parts of the city,and set watches at the entrances into the city, and appeared o-penly resolved not to rest, when once the Romans should beginto march.
3. And now when Agrippa observed that even the affairs ofthe Rorhans were likely to be in danger, while such an immensemultitude of their enemies had seized upon the mountains roundabout, he determined to try what the Jews would agree to bywords, as thinking that he should either persuade them all to de­sist from fighting, or, however, that he should cause the soberpart of them to separate themselves from the opposite party. Sohe sent Borceus and Phebus, the persons of his party that werethe best known to them, and promised them, that Cestius shouldgive them his right hand, to secure them of the Romans entireforgiveness of what they had done amiss, if they would throwaway their arms, and come over to them; but the seditious,fearing lest the whole multitude, in hopes of security to them­selves, should go over to Agrippa, resolved immediately to fallupon and kill the ambassadors: accordingly they slew Phebusbefore he said a word, but Borceus was only wounded, and soprevented his fate by flying away; and when the people werevery angry at this, they had the seditious beaten with stonesand clubs, and drove them before them into the city.
4. Sftit now Cestius, observing that thedisturbances that werebegun among the Jews afforded him a proper opportunity to at­tack them, took his whole army along with him, and put theJews to flight, and pursued them to Jerusalem. He then pitch­ed his camp upon the elevation called Scopus, [or watch tower],which was distant seven furlongs from the city; yet did not heassault them in three days time, out of expectation that thosewithin might perhaps yield a little; and in the mean time hesent out a great many of his soldiers into neighbouring villages,to seize upon their corn. And on the fourth day, which wasthe thirtieth of the month Hyperbereteus [TisriJ, when he hadput his army in array, he brought it into the city. Now for
3 H 2 the







OCR Output








22 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book XVII.


slain immediately, as a turbulent person in the most importantconcerns, and as one that had laid a plot not only against him­self, but against his sister also, and even corrupted Caesar's owndomestics. Salome also provoked him to it, beating her breast,and bidding him kill her, if he could produce any credible testi­mony that she had acted in that manner. Herod also sent forhis son, and asked him about this matter, and bid him contradictit if he could, and not suppress any thing he had to say for him­self ; and, when he had not one word to say, he asked him, sincehe was every way caught in his villainy, that he would makeno farther delay, but discover his associates in these his wickeddesigns. So he laid all upon Antiphilus; but discovered no­body else. Hereupon Herod was in such great grief, that he wasready to send his son to Rome to Caesar, there to give an ac­count of these his wicked contrivances. But he soon becameafraid, lest he might there, by the assistance of his friends, es­cape the danger he was in : so he kept him bound as before, andsent more ambassadors and letters [to Rome] to accuse his son,and an account of what assistance Acme had given him in hiswicked designs, with copies of the epistles before mentioned.


CHAP. VL
Concerning the disease that Herod fell into, and the sedition'which the Jews raised thereupon ; with the punishment of theseditious.
§ i. TVTOW Herod's ambassadors made haste to Rome ; but,* ' went as instructed beforehand what answers theywere to make to the questions put to them. They also carriedthe epistles with them. But Herod now fell into a distemper,and made his will, and bequeathed his kingdom to [Antipas] hisyoungest son ; and this out of that hatred to Archelaus and Phi­lip, which the calumnies of Antipater had raised against them.He also bequeathed a thousand talents to Caesar, and five hun­dred to Julia, Caesar's wife, to Caesar's children, and friends andfreed men. He also distributed among his sons and their sonshis money, his revenues, and his lands. He also made Salomehis sister very rich, because she had continued faithful to himin all his circumstances, and was never so rash as to do him anyharm : and as he despaired of recovering, for he was 'about theseventieth year of his age, he grew fierce, and indulged the bit­terest anger upon all occasions ; the cause whereof was this, thathe thought himself despised, and that the nation was pleased withhis misfortunes; besides which, he resented a sedition which some
of







OCR Output








28 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book XVII.


regard to virtue, to lay aside their hatred at such a time, evenwith respect to those they justly esteemed their enemies. -
CPIAP. VII.
Herod has thoughts of killing himself with his own hand ; and alittle afterwards he orders Antipater to be slain.
§ 1. A S he was giving these commands to his relations, there,**, came letters from his ambassadors, who had been sentto Rome unto Caesar, which, when they were read, their pur­port was this; That " Acme was slain by Caesar, out of his in-" dignation at what hand she had in Antipater's wicked prac-" tices; and that as to Antipater himself, Coesar left it to He-" rod to act as became a father and a king, and either to banish" him or take away his life, which he pleased." When He­rod heard this, he was somewhat better, out of the pleasure hehad from the contents of the letters, and was elevated at thedeath of Acme, and at the power that was given him over hisson ; but, as his pains were become very great, he was nowready to faint for want of somewhat to eat; so he called for anapple, and a knife ; for it was his custom formerly to pare theapple himself, and soon afterwards to cut it, and eat it. Whenhe had got the knife, he looked about, and had a mind to stabhimself with it; and he had done it, had not his first cousin,Achiabus, prevented him, and held his hand, and cried out loud­ly. 'Whereupon a woful lamentation echoed through the pa­lace, and a great tumult was made, as if the king were dead.Upon which Antipater, who verily believed his father was de­ceased, grew bold in his discourse, as hoping to be immediatelyand entirely released from his bonds, and to take the kingdominto his hands, without any more ado; so he discoursed withthe jailor about letting him go, and in that case promised himgreat things, both now and hereafter, as if that were the onlything now in question. But the jailor did not only refuse to dowhat Antipater would have him, but informed the king of hisintentions, and how many solicitations he had had from him [ofthat nature.]. Hereupon Herod, who had formerly no affectionnor good will towards his son to restrain him, when he heardwhat the jailor said, he cried out, and beat his head, althoughhe was at death's door, and raised himself upon his elbow, andsent for some of his guards, and commanded them to kill Anti­pater without any farther delay, and to do it presently, and tobury him in an ignoble manner at Hyrcania.
CHAP.







OCR Output








THE LIFE OF FLAVIUS JOSEPHUS. 205


'have no suspicion of him to his disadvantage. He also addedoaths and certain horrible curses upon himself, and supposed heshould be thereby believed in the points he wrote about to me.
21. But now another great number of the Galileans came to­gether again with their weapons, as knowing the man how wick­ed and how sadly perjured he was, and desired me to lead themagainst him, and promised me that they would utterly destroyboth him and GIschala. Hereupon I professed, that I was ob­liged to them for their readiness to serve me, and that I wouldmore than requite that their goodawill to me. However, I en­treated them to restrain themselves, and begged of them to giveme leave to do what I intended, which was to put an end to thesetroubles without bloodshed; and when I had prevailed with themultitude of the Galileans to let me do so, I came to Sepphoris.
22. But the inhhitants of this city having determined to con­tinue in their allegiance to the Romans, were afraid of my co­ming to them, and tried, by putting me upon another action, to di­vert me, that they might be freed from the terror they were in.Accordingly they sent to Jesus, the captain of those robbers whowere in the confines of Ptolemais, and promised to give him agreat deal of money, if he would come with those forces he hadwith him, which were in number eight hundred, and fight withus. Accordingly he complied with what they desired, upon thepromises they had made him, and was desirous to fall upon uswhen we were unprepared for him, and knew nothing of his co­ming beforehand. So he sent to me, and desired that I wouldgive him leave to come and salute me. When 1 had given himthat leave, which I did without the least knowledge of his treach­erous intentions beforehand, he took his band of robbers, andmade haste to come to me. Yet did not this his knavery suc­ceed well at last; for, as he was already nearly approaching, oneof those with him deserted him, and came to me, and told mewhat he had undertaken to do. When I was informed of this,I went into the market-place, and pretended to know nothing ofhis treacherous purpose. I took with me many Galileans thatwere armed, as also some of those of Tiberias ; and, when I hadgiven orders that all the roads should be carefully gardeud, Icharged the keepers of the gates to give admittance to none butJesus, when he came with the principal of his men, and to ex­clude the rest; and in case they aimed to force themselves in, touse stripes [in order to repel them]. Accordingly, those thathad received such a charge did as they were bidden, and Jesuscame in with a few others ; and when I had ordered him, to throvydown his arms immediately, and told him, that if he refused soto do, he was a dead man, he seeing armed men standing all
round


 







OCR Output








36 ANTIOJUTIES OF THE JEWS. Book XVII.


" and appealed to his changing the commanders in the army," and his sitting in the royal throne before-hand, and his deter-" minatiou of law-salts ; all done as if he were no other than a" king. He appealed also to his concessions to those that peti-" tioned him on a public account, and indeed doing such tilings," than which he could devise no greater if he had been already" settled in the kingdom by Caesar. He also ascribed to him«' the releasing of the prisoners that were ia the Hippodrome," and many other things, that either had been certainly done" by him, or were believed to be done, and easily might be be-" lieved to have been done, because they were of such a nature,«' as to be usually done by young men, and by such as, out 'of" a desire of ruling, seize upon the government too soon. He" also charged him with his neglect of the funeral-mourning for" his father, and with having merry meetings the very night" in which he died ; and that it was thence the multitude took«' the handle of raising a tumult; and if Archelaus could thus-" requite his dead father, who had btstowed such benefits upon" him, and bequeathed such great things to him, by pretending" to shed tears for him in the day-time, like an actor on the" stage, but every night making mirth for having gotten the" government, he would appear to be the same Archelaus with" regard to Caesar, if he granted him the kingdom, which he" hath been to his father ; since he had then dancing and sing-" ing, as though an enemy of his were fallen, and not as though«* a man were carried to his funeral, that was so nearly related," and had been so great a benefactor to him. But he said that" the greatest crime of all was this, that he came now before" Caesar to obtain the government by his grant, while he had be-«« fore acted in all things as he could have acted if Caesar him-«' self, who ruled all, had fixed him firmly in the government." And what be most aggravated in his pleading, was the slaugh-" ter of those about the temple, and the impiety of it, as done" at the festival; and how they were slain like sacrifices them-"' selves, some of whom were foreigners, and others of their«' o-wn country, till the temple was full of dead bodies : and all" this was done, not by an alien, but by one who pretended to" the lawful title of a king, that he might complete the wicked" tyranny which his nature prompted him to, and which is" hated by all men. On which account his father never so" much as dreamed of making him his successor in the king-*' dom, when he was of a sound mind, because he knew his dis-" position ; and, in his former and more authentic testament, he" appointed his antagonist Antipas to succeed ; but that Arche-•' laus was called by his father to that dignity, when he was in







OCR Output








54 Book XVII. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


" to my house, and hast been married to Archelaus, thy husband,'* and my brother. However, I will not forget thy former kind" affection for me, but will set thee free from every such rer" proachful action, and cause thee to be mine again, as thou, " once wast." When she had related this to her female compa­nions, in a few days time she departed this life.
5. Now, I did not think these histories improper for the pre­sent discourse, both because my discourse now is concerning kings,and otherwise also on account of the advantage hence to be drawn,as well as for the confirmation of the immortality of the soul, asof the providence of God over human affairs, I thought them fitto be set down; but if any one does not believe such relations,let him indeed enjoy his own opinion, but let him not hinderanother, that would thereby encourage himself in virtue. SoArchelaus's country was laid to the province of Syria; andCyrenius, one that had been consul, was sent by Caesar to takeaccount of people's effects in Syria, and to sell the house ofArchelaus*


BOOK







OCR Output








Chap. XVII. WARS OF THE JEWS. 41T


thought it would be a reproach to them, and besides, if theyshould give it them, they durst not depend upon it; so they de­serted their camp, as easily taken, and ran away to the royaltowers, that called Hippicus, that called Phas&lus, and that call­ed Mariamne. But Manahem and his party fell upon the placewhence the soldiers were fled, and slew as many of them as theycould catch, before they got up to the towers, and plunderedwhat they left behind them, and set fire to their camp. Thiswas executed on the sixth day of the month Gorpieus, [Elul].9. But on the next day the high-priest was caught, where hehad concealed himself in an aqueduct; he was slain, togetherwith Hezekiah his brother, by the robbers: hereupon the sedi­tious besieged the towers, and kept them guarded, lest any oneof the soldiers should escape. Now the overthrow of the placesof strength, and the death of the high-priest Ananias, so puffedup Manahem, that he became barbarously cruel, and, as hethought he had no antagonist to dispute the management of af­fairs with him, he was no better than an insupportable tyrant:but Eleazar and his party, when words had passed betweenthem, how " It was not proper when they revolted from the" Romans, out of the desire of liberty, to betray that liberty to" any of their own people, and to bear a lord, who though he" should be guilty of no violence, was yet meaner than thern-" selves; as also, that, in case they were obliged to set some one" over their public affairs, it was fitter they should give that" privilege to any one rather than to him," they made an as­sault upon him in the temple; for he went up thither to worshipin a pompous manner, and adorned with royal garments, and hadhis followers with him in their armour. But Eleazar and hisparty fell violently upon him, as did also the rest of the people,and taking up stones to attack him withal, they threw them atthe sophister, and thought, that if he were once ruined, the en­tire sedition would fall to the ground. Now Manahem and hisparty made resistance for a while, but when they perceived thatthe whole multitude were falling upon them, they fled whichway every one was able, those that were caught were slain, andthose that hid themselves were searched for. A few there wereof them who privately escaped to Masada, among whom wasEleazar, the son of Jairus, who wasof kin to Manahem,andactedthe part of a tyrant at Masada afterward: as for Manahem him­self, he ran away to the place called Ophla, and there lay skulk­ing in private; but they took him alive, and drew him out be­fore them all; they then tortured him with many sorts of tor­ments, and after all slew him, as they did by those that wereVOL. III. 3 G captains







OCR Output








Chap. £ ." ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 109


BOOK XIX.Containing the interval of three years and a half.
[From the departure of the JEWS out of Babylon, to FADUS tbtRoman Procurator.'}


CHAP. I.
How Caius * was slain ty Chereas.
$ 1. "VTOW this Caiusf did not demonstrate his madness in of-fering injuries only to the Jews at Jerusalem, or tothose that dwelt in the neighbourhood, but suffered it to extenditself through all the earth and sea, so far as was in subjection tothe Romans, and filled it with ten thousand mischiefs; so manyindeed in number as no former history relates. But Rome it­self felt the most dismal effects of what he did, while he deemedthat not to be anyway more honourable than the rest of the ci­ties ; but he pulled and hauled its other citizens, but especiallythe senate, and particularly the nobility, and such as had beendignified by illustrious ancestors ; he also had ten thousand de­vices against such of the equestrian order, as it was styled, whowere esteemed by the citizens equal in dignity and wealth withthe senators, because out of themthesenatorswere themselves cho­sen ; these he treated after an ignominious manner, and removedthem out of his way, while they were at once slain, and theirwealth plundered; because he slew men generally in orderto seizeon their riches. He also asserted his own divinity, and insisted ongreater honours to be paid him by his subjects, than are due tomankind. He also frequented that temple of Jupiter which theystyle the Capitol, which is with them the most holy of all theirtemples, and had boldness enough to call himself the brother ofJupiter. And other pranks he did like a madman ; as when helaid a bridge from the city Dicearchia, which belongs to Cam­pania, to Misenum, another city upon the sea-side, from one pro­montory


« In this and the three next chapters, we have, I think, a large and more dis.tinct account of the slaughter of Gains, and the succession of Claudius, than wehave of any such ancient. facts whatsoever elsewhere. Some of the occasions ofwhich probably were, Josephus's bitter hatred against tyranny, and the pleasurehe took in giving the history of the slaughter of such a barbarous tyrant as wasthis Caius Caligula, as also the deliverance his own nation had by that slaugh­ter, of which he speaks sect. 2. together with the great intimacy he had withAgrippa junior, whose father was deeply concerned in the advancement of Clau.dius, upon the death of Caius; from which Agrippa junior, Josephus might befully informed of his history.
t Called Caligula by the Romans'







OCR Output








344 .WARS OF THE JEWS. ." Book Ti


a companion of his ; that Theudio, the uncle of Antipater, hadit from him, and delivered it to Pheroras ; for that Antipaterhad charged him to take his father off while he was at Rome, andso free from the suspicion of doing it himself: that Pheroras al­so commited this potion to his wife. Then did the king sendfor her, and bid her bring to him what she had received imme­diately. So she came out of her house as if she would bring itwith' her;; but threw herself down from the top of the house, inorder to prevent any examination and torture from the king.However, it came to pass, as it seems by the providence of God,when: he intended to bring Antipater to punishment, that she fellriot upon her head, but npon other parts of her body, and escap­ed. The king, when she was brought to him, took care of her(for she was at first quite senseless upon her fall), and asked herwhy she had thrown herself down? and gave her his oath, thatif she would speak the real truth, he would excuse her from pu­nishment ; but that if she concealed any thing, he would haveher body torn to pieces by torments, and leave no part of it tobe buried.
6. Upon this the woman paused a little, and then said, " Why" do I spare to speak of these grand secrets, now Pheroras is*' dead, that would only tend to save Antipater, who is all our" destruction. Hear then, O king, and be thou, and God him-" self, who cannot be deceived, witnesses to the truth of what I" am going to say. When thou didst sit weeping by Pheroras" as he was dying, then it was that he called me to him, and said," My dear wife, J have been greatly mistaken as to the disposi-" tion of my brother towards me, and have hated him that is so" affectionate to me, and have contrived to kill him who is in" such disorder for me before I am dead. As for myself, I re-" ceive the recompence of my impiety; but do thou bring what" poison was left with us by Antipater, and which thou keepest" in order to destroy him, and consume it immediately in the" fire in my sight, that I may not be liable to the avenger in the" invisible world. This 1 brought as he bid me, and emptied" the greatest part of it into the fire, but reserved a little of it" for my own use against uncertain futurity, and out of my fear« of thee."
7. When she had said this, she brought the box, which had asmall quantity of this potion in it: but the king let her alone,and transferred the tortures to Antiphilus's mother and brother;who both confessed that Antiphilus brought the box out of E-gypt, and that they had received the potion from a brother ofhis, who was a physician at Alexandria. Then did the ghostsof Alexander and Aristobulus go round all the palace, and b&-
came







OCR Output








214 THE LIFE OF FLAVIUS JOSEPHUS.'


begged of me to spare him one of his hands, it was with difficultty that I granted it. So, in order to prevent the loss of both hishands, he willingly took his sword, and cut off his own lefthand ; and this put an end to the sedition.
35. Now the men of Tiberias, after I was gone to Taricheae,perceived what stratagem I had used against them, and they ad­mired how I had put an end to their foolish sedition, withoutshedding of blood. . But now, when I had sent for some of thosemultitudes of the people of Tiberias out of prison, among whomwere Justus and his father Pistus, I made them to sup with me ;and during our supper-time I said to them, that I knew thepower of the Romans was superior to all others, but did not sayso [publicly] because of the robbers. So I advised them to doas I did, and to wait for a proper opportunity, and not to beuneasy at my being their commander ; for that they could notexpect to have another who would use the like moderation thatI had done. I also put Justus in mind how the Galileans hadcut off his brother's hands, before ever I came to Jerusalem,upon on accusation laid against him, as if he had been a rogue,and had forged some letters ; as also how the people of Gamala,in a sedition they raised against the Babylonians, after the de­parture of Philip, slew Chares, who was a kinsman of Philip,and withal how they had wisely punished Jesus, his brother Jus­tus's sister's husband, [with death]. When I had said this to themduring supper-time, I in the morning ordered Justus, and all therest that were in prison, to be loosed out of it, and sent away. .
36'. But before this, it happened that Philip, the son of Jaci-mus, went out of the citadel of Gamala upon the following oc­casion : When Philip had been informed that Varus was put outof his government by king Agrippa, and that Modius Equieo-lus, a man that was of old his friend and companion, was cometo succeed him, he wrote to him, and related what turns of for­tune he had had, and desired him to forward the letters he sentto the king and queen. Now, when Modius had received theseletters, he was exceedingly glad, and sent the letters to the kingand queen, who were then about Berytus. But when king A-grippa knew that the story about Philip was false, (for it hadbeen given out, that the Jews had begun a war with the Ro­mans, and that this Philip had been their commander in thatwax), he sent some horsemen to conduct Philip to him, and,when he was come, he saluted him very obligingly, and shewedhim to the Roman commanders, and told them that this was theman of whom the report had gone about as if he had revoltedfrom the Romans. He also bid him to take some horsemen withhim, and to go quickly to the citadel of Gamala, and to bring
out







OCR Output








WARS OF THE JEWS. Book I.


" no one who thirsts after my blood shall escape punishment," although the evidence should extend itself to all my sons."
9. Upon Herod's saying this, he was interrupted by the con­fusion he was in ; but ordered Nicolaus, one of his friends, toproduce the evidence against Antipater. But in the mean timeAntipater lifted up his head (for he lay on the ground beforehis father's feet), and cried out aloud, " Thou, O father, hast" made my apology for me; for how can 1 be a parricide, w!iom" thou thyself confessest to have always had for thy guardian?" Thou callest my filial affection prodigious lies, and hypocrisy;" how then could it be that I, who was so subtile in other" matters, should here be so mad as not to understand that it" was not easy that he who committed so horrid a crime should*' be concealed from men, but impossible that he should be" concealed from the Judge of heaven, who sees all things, and" is present every where? or did not I know what end my" brethren came to, on whom God inflicted so great a punish-" ment for their evil designs against thee? and indeed what'f was there that could possibly provoke me against thee? Could" the hope of being king do it? I was a king already. Could
1 suspect hatred from thee? No. Was not I beloved by thee ?f* And what other fear could I have? Nay, by preserving thee" safe, I was a terror to others. Did 1 want money? No; for*' who was able to expend so much as myself? Indeed, father,*' had I been the most execrable of all mankind, and had I had** the soul of the most cruel wild beast, must 1 not have been*' overcome with the benefits thou hadst bestowed upon me ?
whom, as thou thyself sayest, thou broughtest [into the pa-" lace]; whom thou didst prefer before so m»ny of thy sons ;** whom thou madest a king in thine own lifetime, and by thef* vast magnitude of the other advantages thou bestowedst on" me, thou madest me an object of envy.' O miserable man!tl that thou shouldst undergo this bitter absence, and thereby af-" ford a great opportunity for envy to arise against thee, and a" long space for such as were laying designs against thee ! Yet'* was I absent, father, on thy affairs, that Sylleus might not" treat thee with contempt in thine old age. Rome is a witness*' to my filial affection, and so is Caesar? the ruler of the habi-" table earth, who oftentimes called me * PhUopater. Take*' here the letters he hath sent thee, they are more to be be-" lieyed than the calumnies raised here; these letters are my" only apo'ogy; these 1 use as the demonstration of that natural" affection 1 have to thee. Remember that it Wa3 against my^ own choice that I sailed [to Rome], as knowing the latent
*f hatred
f A lover of his fathtjfc







OCR Output








IPS TCHE LIFE OF FLAVIUS JOSEPHtJS.


longed to Gadara and Hippos on fire ; which villages were si­tuated on the borders of Tiberias, and of the region of Scytho-polis.
10. And this was the state Tiberias was now in. But as forGischala, its affairs were thus : When John, the son of Livi,saw some of the citizens much elevated upon their revolt fromthe Romans, he laboured to restrain them, and entreated them,that they would keep their allegiance to them. But he couldnot gain his purpose, although he did his endeavours to the ut­most ; for the neighbouring people of Gadara, and Gabara, andSogana, with the Tyrians, got together a great army, and fellupon Gischala, and took Gischala by force, and set it on fire jand when they had entirely demolished it, they returned home.Upon which John was so enraged, that he armed all his men,and joined battle with the people forementioned, and rebuiltGischala after a manner better than before, and fortified it withwalls for its future security.
11. But Gamala persevered in its allegiance to the Romans,for the reason following : Philip the son of Jacimus, who wastheir governor under king Agrippa, had been unexpectedly pre­served when the royal palace at Jerusalem had been besieged ;but, as he fled away, had fallen into another danger, and that was,of being killed by Manahem, and the robbers that were with him ;but certain Babylonians, who were of his kindred, and were thenin Jerusalem, hindered the robbers from executing their design.So Philip staid there four days, and fled away on the fifth, ha­ving disguised himself with fictitious hair, that he might not bediscovered ; and when he was come to one of the villages to himbelonging, but one that was situated at the borders of the citadelof Gamala, he sent to some of those that were under him, andcommanded them to come to him. But God himself hinderedthat his intention, and this for his own advantage also ; for hadit not so happened, he had certainly perished. For a fever havingseized upon him immediately, he wrote to Agrippa and Bernice,and gave them to one of his freed-men to carry them to Varus,who at this time was procurator of the kingdom, which the kingand his sister had intrusted them withal, while they were gone toBerytus with an intention of meeting Gessius. When Varus hadreceived these letters of Philip, and had learned that he was pre­served, he was very uneasy at it, as supposing that he should ap­pear useless to the king and his sister, now Philip was come. Hetherefore produced the carrier of the letters before the multitude,and accused him of forging the same ; and said, that he spake,falsely when he related that Philip was at Jerusalem, fighting 2­







OCR Output








330 WARS OF THE JEWS. -Book I.


to discourse with Caesar, because he had already written a fullaccount to him of this whole matter.
6. Thus a period was put to Archelaus's stratagem, wherebyie delivered his son-in-law out of the dangers he was in : butwhen these reconciliations were over, they spent their time infeastings and agreeable entertainments. And when Archelauswas going away, Herod made him a present of seventy talents,with a golden throne set with precious stones, and some eunuchs,and a concubine who was called Pannychis. He also paid duehonours to every one of his friends according to their dignity.In like manne'r did all the king's kindred, by his command, makeglorious presents to Archelaus; and so he was conducted onhis way by Herod and his nobility as far as Antioch.
CHAP. XXVI.
How* Eurycles calumniated the sons of Mariamne : and bt,v>Euaratus of Cos's apology for them bad no effect.
f 1. "^T"O W a little afterward there came into Judea a man thatJ.^1 was much superior to Archelaus's stratagems, who didnot onlyoverturnthatreconciliation that had ber.nsowiselymadewith Alexander, but proved the occasion of his ruin. He was aLacedemonian, and his name was Eurycles. He was so corrupta man, that out of the desire of getting money, he chose to liveunder a king, for Greece could not suffice his luxury. He pre­sented Herod with splendid gifts, as a bait which he laid in orderto compass his ends,and quickly receiving them back again mani­fold; yet did he esteembare gifts asnothing, unless he imbrued thekingdom in blood by his purchases. Accordingly, he imposedupon the king by flattering him, and by talking subtily to him,as also by the lying encomiums which he made upon him ; foras he soon perceived Herod's blind side, so he said and did everything that might please him, and thereby became one of his mostintimate friends ; for both the king and all that were about him,had a great regard for this+ Spartan, on account of his country.2. -Now as soon as this fellow perceived the rotten parts of thefamily, and what quarrels the brothers had one with another,
and


* This vile fellow, Eurycles the Lacedemonian, seems to have been the samewho is mentioned by Plutarch, as is years before a companion to Mark Antony,and as living with Herod ; whence he might easily insinuate himself into the ac­quaintance ef Hertd's sons, Antipater and Alexander, as Usher, Hudson, andSpanheim justly suppose. The reason why his being a Spartan rendered him ac­ceptable to the Jews, as we here see he was, is visible from the public records ofthe Jews and Spartans, owning those Spartans to be of kin to the Jews, and de»rived from their common ancestor Abraham, the first patriarch of' the Jewish na­tion. Anfiq. B. XII. ch. iv. sect. 10. B. XIII. ch. v. sect. 8. Vol. II. and I.B' XII. ch. vil.f See the preceding note.







OCR Output








386 WARS OF THE JEWS. Book II.


" zeal for him, and that if he should do so, his own fortune" would be in uncertainty: for that it was a dangerous case to" have been once called to-the empire. He added farther, that" he would administer the government as a good prince, and?" not like a tyrant ;, for that he would be satisfied with the ho-" nour of being called emperor, but would, in every one of his" actions, permit theni all to give him their advice ; for that" although he had not been by nature for moderation, yet would" the death of Caius afford him a sufficient demonstration how*' soberly he ought to act in that station."
3-. This message was delivered by Agrippa; to which thesenate replied, That " since they had arf army, and the wisest«' consuls on their sitle, they would not endure a voluntary sk-" very." And when Claudius-heard what answer the senate had- made, he sent Agrippa to them again, with the following mes­sage, That " he could not bear the thoughts of betraying them" that had given their oaths to be true to him ; and that" he saw he must fight, though unwillingly, against such as he" had no mind/to fight; that however, [if it must come to that]," it was proper to choose a place without the city for the war ;" because it wai not agreeable to piety to pollute the temples" of their own city with the blood of their own countrymen," and this only on occasion of their imprudent conduct." Andwhen Agrjppa had heard this message, he delivered it to thesenators.
4. In the mean time, One of the soldiers belonging to the se­nate drew his sword, and cried out, " O my fellow-soldiers,*' what is the meaning of this choice of ours, to kill our brethren," and to use violence to our kindred that are with Claudius ?kl while we may have him for our emperor whom no one can'" blame, and who hath so many just reasons [to lay claim to the" government] ; and this with regard to those against whom«' we are going to fight." When he had said this, he marchedthrough the whole senate, and carried all the soldiers along withhim. Upon which all the patricians were immediately at agreat fright nt their being thus deserted. But still, becausethere appeared no other way whither they could turn themselvesfor deliverance, they made haste the same way with the soldiers,and went to Claudius. But those that had the greatest luck inflattering the good fortune of Claudius betimes, met them be­fore the walls with their naked swords, and there was reasontofear that those that came first might have been in danger, beforeClaudius could know what violence the soldiers were going tooffer them, had not Agrippa ran before, and told him what adangerous thing they were going about, and that unless he re­strained







OCR Output








Chap. IX. ANTIQJJITIES OF THE JEWS. 37


" a dying condition, both of body and mind, while Aniipas was" called when he was ripest in his judgment, and of such strength" of body as made him capable of managing his own affairs:" and if his father had the like notion of him formerly that lie«' hath now shewed, yet hath he given a sufficient specimen what" a king he is likely to be, when he hath [in effect] deprived" Caesar of that power of disposing of the kingdom, which he" justly hath, and hath not abstained from making a terrible«' slaughter of his fellow-citizens in the temple, while he was" but a private person." ' '
C. So when Antipater had made this speech, and had confirm-.ed what he had said by producing many witnesses from amongArchelaus's own relations, he made an end of his pleading. Up­on which Nicolaus arose up to plead for Archelaus, and said," That what had been done at the temple was rather to be at-" tributed to the mind of those that had been killed, than to the" authority of Archelaus ; for that those who were the authors" of such things, are not only wicked in the injuries they do of" themselves, but in forcing sober persons to avenge themselves" upon them. Now, it is evident, that what these did in way" of opposition was done under pretence, indeed, against Arche-" laus, but in reality agninst Caesar himself, for they, after an in-" jurious manner, attacked and slew those who were sent by Ar-" chelaus, and who came only to put a stop to their doings." They had no regard, either to God or to the festival, whom" Antipater yet is not ashamed to patronize, whether it be out" of his indulgence of an enmity to Archelaus, or out of his" hatred of virtue and justice. For as to those who begin such" tumults, and first set about such unrighteous actions, they are" the men who force those that punish them to betake them-" selves to arms even against their will. So that Antipater in" effect ascribes the rest of what was done to ail those who were" of counsel to the accusers, for nothing which is here accused" of injustice has been done, but what was derived from them" as its authors ; nor are those things evil in themselves, but so" represented only in order to do harm to Archelaus. Such" is these men's inclinations to do an injury to a man that is of" their kindred, their father's benefactor, and familiarly ac-" quainted with them, and that hath ever lived in friendship" with them ; for that, as to this testament, it was made by the" king when he was of a sound mind, and so ought to be of more" authority than his former testament; and that for this reason," because Caesar is therein left to be the judge and disposer of" all therein contained ; and for Caesar he will not, to be sure,f at all imitate the unjust proceedings of those men, who, du­


" ring







OCR Output








Chap. XXVI. WARS OF THE JEWS. 331


I


and in what disposition the father was towards each of them, heChose to take his lodging at the first in the house of Antipater,but deluded Alexander with a pretence of friendship to him, andfalsely claimed to be an old acquaintance of Archelaus; for whichreason he was presently admitted into Alexander's familiarityas a fathful friend. He also soon recommended himself to hisbrother Aristobulus. And when he had thus made trial of theseseveral persons, he imposed upon one of them by one method,and upon another by another. But he was principally hired byAntipater, and so betrayed Alexander, and this by reproachingAntipater, because, while he was the eldest son, he overlookedthe intrigues of those who stood in the way of his expectations;and by reproaching Alexander, because he who was born of aqueen, and was married to a king's daughter, permitted one thatwas born of a mean woman to lay claim to the succession, andthis when he had Archelaus to support him in the most completemanner. Nor was his advice thought to be other than faithfulby the young man, because of his pretended friendship with Ar­chelaus: on which account it was that Alexander lamented tohim Antipater's behaviour with regard to himself, and this with­out concealing any thing from him; and how it was no wonderif Herod, after he had killed their mother, should deprive themof her kingdom. Upon this Eurycles pretended to commiser­ate his condition, and to grieve with him. He also, by a baitthat he laid for him,procured Aristobulus tosay thesame things.Thus did he inveigle both the brothers to make complaints oftheir father, and then went to Antipater, and carried these grandsecrets to him. He also added a fiction of his own, as if hisbrothers had laid a plot against him, and were almost ready tocome upon him with their drawn swords. For this intelligencehe received a great sum of money, and on that account he com­mended Antipater before his father, and at length undertook thework of bringing Alexander and Aristobulus to their graves,and accused them before their father. So he came to Herod andtold him, That " he would save his life, as a requital for the" favours he had received from him, and would preserve his"light [of life] by wayof retribution for his kind entertainment:a for that a sword had been long whetted,and Alexander's right" hand had been long stretched out against him; but that he had" laid impediments in his way, prevented his speed, and that bv" pretending to assist him in his design: how Alexander said," that Herod was not contented to reign in a kingdom that be-" longed to others, and to make delapidations in their mother's" government, after he had killed her; but besides all this, that" he introduced a spurious successor, and proposed to give the
T t 2 " kingdom







OCR Output








Chap XXXI. , WARS OF THE JEWS. 345


came the inquisitors and discoverers of what could not otherwisehave been found out, and brought such as were the freest fromsuspicion to be examined; whereby it was discovered, that Ma-riamne,the high-priest's daughter, was conscious of this plot,andher very brothers, when they were tortured, declared it so tobe. Whereupon the king avenged this insolent attempt of themother upon her son, and blotted Herod, whom he had by her,out of his testament, who had been before named therein assuccessor to Antipater.
CHAP. XXXI.
Antipater is convicted by Bathyllus : But be still returns fromRome without knowing it. Herod brings him to bis trial.
§ 1. A FTER these things were over, Bathyllus came underJL\. examination, in order to convict Antipater, who pro­ved the concluding attestation to Antipater's designs; for indeedhe was no other than his freed man. This man came, and broughtanother deadly potion, the poison of asps, and the juices of otherserpents, that if the first potion did not do the business, Pherorasand his wife might be armed with this also to destroy the king.He brought also an addition to Antipater's insolent attempt againsthis father, which was the letters which he wrote against hisbrethren, Archelaus and Philip, which were the king's sons, andeducated atRome,beingyet youths,but of generous dispositions.Antipater set himself to get rid of these as soon as he could, thatthey might not be prejudicial to his hopes, and to that end heforged letters against them in the name of his friends at Rome.Some of these he corrupted by bribes to write how they grosslyreproached their father, and did openly bewail Alexander andAristobulus, and were uneasy at their being recalled; for theirfather had already sent for them, which was the very thingthat troubled Antipater.
2. Nay indeed, while Antipater was in Judea, and before hewas upon his journey to Rotne, he gave money to have the likeletters against them sent from Rome, and then came to his father,who as yet had no suspicion of him, and apologized for his breth­ren, and alleged on their behalf, that some of the things contain­ed in those letters were false, andothers of themwere onlyyouth-ful errors. Yet at the same time that he expended a great dealof his money, by making presents to such as wrote against hisbrethren,didheaimtobringhis accounts intoconfusion,bybuyingcos tly garments, andcarpets of various contextures,withsilver andgold cups, and a great many more curious things, that so, amongthe very great expences laid out upon such furniture, he might
VOL. HI. X x conceal







OCR Output








264 WARS OF THE JEWS; Book I.


tra, by agreements and presents, to go away. Accordingly Ti-granes soon arose from the siege, by reason of those domestic tu­mults which happened upon Lucullus's expedition into Armenia.4. In the mean time, Alexandra fell sick, and Aristobulus, heryounger son, took hold of this opportunity, with his domestics,of which he had a great many, who were all of them his friends,on account of the warmth of their youth, and got possession of allthe fortresses. He also used the sums of money he found inthem, to get together a number of mercenary soldiers, and madehimself king ; and, besides this, upon Hyrcanus's complaint tohis mother, she compassionated his case, and put Aristobulus'swife and sons under restraint in Antonia, which was a fortressthat joined to the north part of the temple. It was, as I havealready said, of old called the Citadel; but afterwards got thename of Antonia, when Antony was lord [of the East], just asthe other cities, Sebaste and Agrippias, had their names changed,and these given them, from Sebastus and Agrippa. But Alex­andra died before she could punish Aristobulus, for his disinherit­ing his brother, after she had reigned nine years.
CHAP. VI.
When Hyramus, who was Alexander's heir, receded from his claimof the crown, Aristobulus is made king, and afterward the sameHyrcanus, by the means of Antipater, is brought back by Are-tas. At last Pompey is made the arbitrator of the dispute be­tween the brothers.
j 1. "VTOW Hyrcanus was heir to the kingdom, and to him did*^ his mother commit it before she died : but Aristobuluswas superior to him in power and magnanimity ; and when therewas a battle between them, to decide the dispute about the king­dom, near Jericho, the greatest part deserted Hyrcanus, and wentover to Aristobulus; but Hyrcanus, with those of his party whostaid with him, fled to Antonia, and got into his power the hos­tages that might be for his preservation (which were Aristobu-lus's wife, with her children) ; but they came to an agreement,before things should come to extremities, that Aristobulus shouldbe king, and Hyrcanus should resign that up, but retain all therest of his dignities, as being the king's brother. Hereupon theywere reconciled to each other in the temple, and embraced oneanother in a very kind manner, while the people stood roundabout them: they also changed their houses, while Aristobulus
went


mais, and that he took the city, the Antiquities inform us, yet does he no whereintimate that he now took the queen herself; so that both the narrations of Stra-bo and Josephus may still be true notwithstanding.







OCR Output








9 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book XVIL


were not concealed from Salome, but were told the king ; asalso how ;hey I- id perverted some persons about the palaceitself: so the kmg slew such of the Pharisees as were princi­pally a<- , ised, and Bagoas the eunuch, and one Cams, whoexceede i all trie'1 of that time in comeliness, and one that washis catai'nte. He slew also all those of his own family whohad consente.1 to what the Pharisees foretold; and for Bagoas,he had been puffed up by them, as though he should be na­med the father and the benefactor of him who, by the pre­diction, was foretold to be their appointed king ; for thatthis king would have all things in his power, and would en-ablt Bagoas to marry, and to have children of his own bodybegotten.
CHAP. III.4
Concerning the enmity lctwcei\ Herod and PJjeroras ; bow: Herodsent Antipater to desar ; and of the death of Pheroras.
$ 1. 'VI/'HEN Herod had punished those Pharisees who hadbeen convicted of the foregoing crimes, he gather­ed an assembly together of his friends, and accused Pheroras'swife ; and ascribing the abuses of the virgins to the impu­dence of that woman, brought an accusation against her forthe dishonour she had brought upon them : That " she had" studiously introduced a quarrel between him and his bro." ther, and, by her ill temper, had brought them into a state" of war, both by her words and actions ; that the fines which" he had laid had not been paid, and the offenders had" escaped punishment by her means ; and that nothing which'" had of late been done had been done without her : for which'«« reason Pheroras would do well, if he would, of his own«' accord, and by his own command, and not at my intreaty," or as following my opinion, put this his wife away, as one" that will still be the occasion of war between thee and me." And now, Pheroras, if thou valuest thy relation to me, put" this wife of thine away ; for by this means thou wilt con-" tinue to be a brother to me, and wilt abide in thy love to" me." Then said Pheroras, (although he were pressedhard by the former words), that tl as he would not do so un-" just a thing as to renounce his brotherly relation to him, so«' would he not leave off his affection for his wife ; that he" would rather chuse to die than to live, and be deprived of«' a wife that was so dear unto him." Hereupon Herod put
off







OCR Output








6(3 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book XVIII.


out. Then did -Mundus leap out, ('for he was hidden therein),and did not fail of enjoying her, who was at his service all thenight long, as supposing he was the god ; and when he was goneaway, which was before those priests who knew nothing ofthis stratagem were stirring, Paulina came early to her husband,and told him how the god Anubis had appeared to her. Amongher friends, also, she declared how great a value she put uponthis favour, who partly disbelieved the thing, when they reflect­ed on its nature, and partly were amazed at it, as having nopretence for not believing it, when they considered the modestyand the dignity of the. person. But now, on the third day afterwhat had been done, Mundus met Paulina, and said, *' Nay," Paulina, thou hast saved me two hundred thousand drachmae,f which sum thou mightest have added to thy own family ; yet" hast thou not failed to be at my service in the manner I invi-" ted thee. As for the reproaphes thou hast laid upon Mundus," I value not the business of names ; but I rejoice in the plea-*' sure I reaped by what I did, while I took to myself the" name of Anubis." When he had said this, he went his way.But now she began to come to the sense of the grossness ofwhat she had done, and rent her garments, and told her husbandof the horrid nature of this wicked contrivance, and prayedhim not to neglect to assist her in this case. So he discoveredthe fact to the emperor; whereupon Tiberius inquired into thematter thoroughly, by examining the priests about it, and or­dered them to be crucified, as well as Ide, who was the occasionof their perdition, and who had contrived the whole matter,which was so injurious to the woman. He also demolished thetemple of Isis, and gave order that her statue should be throwninto the river Tiber ; while he only banished Mundus, but didno more to him, because he supposed that what crime he hadcommitted was done out of the passion of love. And thesewere the circumstances which concerned the temple of Isis, andthe injuries occasioned by her priests. I now return to the re­lation of what happened about this time to the Jews at Rome,as I formerly told you I would.
5. There was a man who was a Jew, but had been driven a-way from his own country by an accusation laid against him fortransgressing their laws, and by the fear he was under of punish­ment for the same ; but in all respects a wicked man. He, thenliving at Rome, professed to instruct men in the wisdom of thelaws of Moses. He procured also three other men, entirely ofthe same character with himself to be his partners. These menpersuaded Fulvia, a woman of great dignity, and one that had- - embraced







OCR Output








82 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book XVIII.


lay, he was brought. Then Tiberius asked him, what he had tosay against a man who had given him his liberty ? Upon whichhe said, " O my lord ! this Caius, and Agrippa with him, were" once riding in a chariot, when I sat at their feet, and among" other discourses that passed, Agrippa'said to Cains, O that the" day would once come, when this old fellow will die, and" name thee for the governor of the habitable earth ! for then" this Tiberius, his grand-son, would bs no hindrance, but" would be taken off by thee, and that earth would be happy," and I happy also." Now, Tiberius took these to be trulyAgrippa's words, and bearing a grudge withal at Agrippa, be­cause, when he had commanded him to pay his respects* to Ti--berius, his grandson, and the son of Drusus, Agrippa had notpaid him that respect, but had- disobeyed his commands, andtransferred all their regard to Caius ; he said to Macro, " Bind'' this man." But Macro, not distinctly knowing which of themit Was whom he bid him bind, and not expecting that he wouldhave any such thing done to Agrippa, he forbore, and eame toask more distinctly what it was that he said ? But, when Caesarhad gone round the hippodrome, he found Agrippa standing :«' For certain," said he, " Macro, this is the man I meant to" have bound:" and when he still asked, " Which of these is to" be bound ?" he said, " Agrippa." Upon which Agrippa be­took himself to make supplication for himself, putting him inmind of his son, with whom he was brought up,' and of Tiberius[his grandson] whom he had educated : but all to no purpose';for they led him about bound even in his purple garments.It was also very hot weather, and they had but little wineto their meal, so that he was very thirsty ; he was also in asort of agony, and took this treatment of him heinously, as Iretherefore saw one of Caius's slaves, whose name Was Tkuumat-tus, carrying some water in a vessel, he desired that he wouldlet him drink ; so the servant gave him some water to drink,and he drank heartily, and said, " O thou boy ! this service of"thine to me will be for thy advantage; for, if I once get*' clear of these my bonds, I will soon procure thee thy fre'6-" dom of Caius, who has not been wanting to minister to me" now I am in bonds, in the same manner as when I was in" my former state and dignity." Nor did he deceite him inwhat he promised him, but macje him amends for what he hadnow done ; for, when afterward Agrippa was come to the king*dom, he took particular care of Thaumastus, and got him his li­berty from Caius, and made him the steward over his ownestate ; and when he died, he left him to Agrippa his son, and toBernice his daughter, to minister to them in the same capacity.
The







OCR Output








Chap. III. 165 AWfIQJJITIES OF THE Ir.WS.


fuse to receive him again, but pleaded that it was not now intheir power so to do ; because they had committed the govern­ment to another person, who had accepted of it, and whose namewas Cinnamus, and that they were afraid lest a civil war should^rise on this account. When Cinnamus understood their inten­tions, he wrote to Artabanus himself, for he had been broughtup by him, and was of a nature good and gentle also, and de­sired him to put confidence in him, and to come and take hisown dominions again. Accordingly Artabanus trusted him, andreturned home ; when Cinnamus met him, worshipped him, andsaluted him as a king, and took the diadem off' his own head, andput it on the head of Artabanus.
3. -And thus was Artabanus restored to his kingdom again bythe means of Izates, when he had lost it by the means of thegrandees of the kingdom. Nor was he unmindful of the bene­fits he had conferred upon him, but rewarded him with such ho­nours as were of greatest esteem among them ; for he gave himleave to wear his tiara upright *, and to sleep upon a goldenbed, which are privileges and marks of honour peculiar to thekings of Parthia. He also cut off a large and fruitful countryfrom the king of Armenia, and bestowed it upon him. The nameof the country is Nisibis, wherein the Macedonians had formerlybuilt that city which they called' Antioch of Mygdonia. Andthese were the honours that were paid Izates by the king of theParthians.
4. But in no long time, Artabanus died, and left his kingdom£o his son Bardanes. Now this Bardanes came to Izates, andwould have persuaded him to join him with his army, and to as­sist him in the war he was preparing to make with the Romans ;but he could not prevail with him. For Izates so well knewthe strength and good fortune of the Romans, that he took Bar­danes to attempt what was impossible to be done ; and havingbesides sent his sons, five in number, and they but young also,to learn accurately the language of our nation, together with ourlearning, as well as he had sent his mother to worship at ourtemple, as I have said already, was the more backward to a com­pliance ; and restrained Bardanes, telling him perpetually of thegreat armies and famous actions of the Romans, and thoughtthereby to terrify him, and desired thereby to hinder him fromthat expedition. But the Parthian king was provoked at thishis behaviour, and denounced war immediately against Izates.Yet did he gain no advantage by this war, because God cut offall his hopes therein ; for the Parthians, perceiving Bardanes's
intentions,
* This privilege of -wearing the tiara upright, or with the tip of the coneerect, is known to have been of old peculiar to (great) kings, from Xenophonand others, as Dr. Hudson obsei ve» here.







OCR Output








208 THE LIFE OF FLAVIUS JOSEFHUS.


mon that persuaded them so to do, one who was both the prin­cipal man in the city, and a particular friend and companion ofJohn. It is true, these did not openly own the making a re-Tolt, because they were in great fear of the Galileans, and hadfrequent experience of the good-will they bore to me ; yet didthey privately watch for a proper opportunity to lay snares forme ; and indeed I thereby came into the greatest danger, onthe occasion following.
26. There were some bold young men of the village Da-baritta, who observed that the wife of Ptolemy, the king's pro­curator, was to make a progress over the great plain with amighty attendance, and with some horsemen that followed, as aguard to them, and this out of a country that was subject to theking and queen, into the jurisdiction of the Romans ; and fell'upon them on the sudden, and obliged the wife of Ptolemy to flyaway, and plundered all the carriages. They also came to meto Taricheae, with four mules loading of garments, and otherfurniture ; and the weight of the silver they brought was notsmall, and there were five hundred pieces of gold also. Now Ihad a mind to preserve these spoils for Ptolemy, who was mycountryman ; and it is prohibited * us by our laws even to spoilour enemies ; so I said to those that brought these spoils, thatthey ought to be kept in order to rebuild the walls of Jerusalemwith them, when they came to be sold. But the young men tookit very ill that they did not receive a part of these spoils forthemselves, as they expected to have none ; so they went amongthe villages, in the neighbourhood of Tiberias, and told thepeople, that I was going to betray their country to the Romans,and that I used deceitful language to them, when I said, thatwhat had been thus gotten by rapine should be kept for the re­building of the walls of the city of Jerusalem ; although I hadresolved to restore these spoils again to their former owner.And indeed they were herein not mistaken as to my intentions ;for when I had gotten clear of them, I sent for two of the prin­cipal men, Dassion, and Janneus the son of Levi, persons that
were
* How Joseplius could say here that the Jewish laws for bade them to " spoil«' even their enemies," while yet, a little before his time, our Saviour had mention­ed it as then a current maxim with them," Thou shalt love thy neighbour/and hate" thine enemy," Matt. v. 43. is worth our inquiry. 1 take it that Josephus, hav­ing been now for many years an Ebionite Christian, had learned this interpreta­tion of the law of Moses from Christ, whom he owned for the true Messiah, asit follows in the succeeding verses, which, though he might not read in St Mat­thew's gofpel, yet might he have read much the same exposition in their ownEbionite or Nazarene gospel itself; of which improvements made by Josephuj,after he was become a. Christian, we have already had several examples in tliishis life, sect. 3. M. 15. 19. 21. 23. and shall have many more therein before illconclusion, as well as we have them elsewhere in all his latter writings.







OCR Output








THE


WORKS
or
FLAVIUS JOSEPHUS;
CONTAINING
THE ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


BOOK XVII.
Containing the interval of Fourteen Years.
From ike Death of Alexander and Arhtobulus, to theBanishment of Archelaus.
CHAP. I.
flow ^intipater was hated by alt the nation [of the 5*<?wr] forthe slaughter of his brethren ,- and how, for that reason, hegot into peculiar favour with his friends at Rome, by givingthem many presents ; as he did also with Saturninus, the pre­sident of Syria, and the governors who were under' him y andconcerning Herod's wives and children.
Si. 'VTT'HEN Antipater had thus taken off his brethren, and» * had brought his father into the highest degree ofimpiety, till he was haunted with furies for what he had done,,his hopes did not succeed to his mind, as to the rest of his life ;for. although he was delivered from the fear of his brethren be-HI- A ing







OCR Output








WARS OF TOE JEWS. Book tf.


for the elders of the Jews were not able to put a stop to theirown people that were disposed to be tumultuous, and theGreeks thought it a shame for them to be overcome by the Jews.Now these Jews exceeded the others in riches, and strength ofbody; but the Grecian part had the advantage of assistance fromthe soldiery ; for the greatest part of the Roman garrison wasraised out of Syria, and being thus related to the Syrian part,they were ready to assist it. However, the governors of the-city were concerned to keep all quiet, and whenever they caughtthose that were most for fighting on either side, they punishedthem with stripes and bands. Yet did not the sufferings ofthose that were caught affright the remainder, or make themdesist; but they were still move and more exasperated, and deepengaged in the sedition. And as Felix came once into the mar­ket-place, and commanded the Jews, when they had beaten theSyrians, to go their ways, and threatened them if they wouldnot, and they would not obey him, he sent his soldiers out uponthem, and slew a great many of them, upon which it fell outthat what they had was plundered. And as the sedition stillcontinued, he chose out the most eminent men on both sides asambassadors to Nero, to argue about their several privileges.
CHAP. XIV.
Festus succeeds Ftlix, wlo is succeeded by Albinus, as he is byFloras; who, by the barbarity of his government, forces tieinto the war.


§ 1 . "VTO W it was that Festus succeeded Felix, as procurator,JLN and made it his business to correct those that made dis­turbances in the country. So he caught the greatest part ofthe robbers, and destroyed a great many of them. But thenAlbinus, who succeeded Festus, did not execute his office as theother had done; nor was there any sort of wickedness that couldbe named but he had an hand in it. Accordingly, he did not on­ly, in his political capacity, steal and plunder every one's sub­stance, nor did he only burden the whole nation with taxes, buthe permitted the relations of such as were in prison for robbery,and had been laid there, either by the senate of every city, or bythe former procurators, to redeem them for money; and no bo­dy remained in the prisons, as a malefactor, but he who gavehim nothing. At this time it was, that the enterprises of theseditious at Jerusalem, were very formidable ; the principal menamong them purchasing leave of Albinus to go on with theirseditious practices; while that part of the people who delightedin disturbances joined themselves to such as had fellowship with
Albinus ;







OCR Output








Chap. IX. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 99


Whereupon he rejoiced at this coincidence as to the death of Cai­ns, and admired God's providence, who without the least delay,and immediately, gave him a reward for the regard he had tothe temple, and the assistance he afforded the Jews for avoidingthe dangers they were in. And by this means Petronius. esca­ped that danger of death which he could not foresee.
CHAP. IX.
What lifel the Jews that were in Babylon, on occasion of Asineiii •and Atnleuif two brethren.
$ 1. A very sad calamity now befel the Jews that were in-^Mesopotamia, and especially those'that dwelt in Baby­lonia. Inferior it was to none of the calamities which had gonebefore, and came together with a great slaughter of them, andthat greater than upon any record before ; concerning all which1 shall speak accurately, and shall explain the occasions whencethese miseries came upon them. There was a city in Babylo­nia called Neerda ; not only a very populous one, but one thathad a good and a large territory about it, and, besides its otheradvantages, full of men also. It was, besides, not easily to beassaulted by enemies, from the river Euphrates encompassing itnil round, and from the walls that were built about it. Iherewas also the city Nisibis, situate on the same current of the ri­ver. For which reason, the Jews, depending on the naturalstrength of these places, deposited in them that half shekel whichevery one, by the custom of our country, offers unto God, as wellas they did other things devoted to him, for they made use ofthese cities as a treasury, whence, at a proper time, they weretransmitted to Jerusalem ; and many ten thousand men.under­took the carriage of those donations, out of fear of the ravagesof the Parthians, to whom the Babylonians were then subject.Now, there were two men, Asineus and Anileus, of the cityNeerda by birth, and brethren to one another. They were des­titute of a father, and their mother put them to learn the art ofweaving curtains, it not being esteemed a disgrace among themfor men to be weavers of cloth. Now, he that taught them thatart, and was set over them, complained that they came too lateto their work, and punished them with stripes : but they tookthis just punishment as an affront, nnd carried oft" all the weaponswhich were kept in that house, which were not a few, and wentinto a certain place where was a partition of the rivers, and wasa place naturally very fit for the feeding of cattle, and for pre­serving such fruits as were usually laid up against winter. Thepoorest sort of the young men also resorted to them, whom they
N 2 armed







OCR Output








Chap. I. ANTIQJJITIES OF THE JEWS.


lectiug the taxes. And indeed he did not only affront him in otherrespects, but when he gave him the watch-word of the day, towhora it was to be given by his place, he gave him femininewords, and those of a nature very reproachful; and these watch­words he gave out, as having been initiated in the secrets of cer­tain mysteries, which he had been himself the author of. No>-% al­though he had sometimes put on women's clothes, a::d had beenwrapt in some embroidered garments to them belonging, anddone a great many other things, in order to make the companymistake him for a woman ; yet did he, byway of reproach, objectthe like womanish behaviour to Cherea. But when Ch ere a re­ceived the watch-word from him, he had indignation at it, hut'had greater indignation at the delivery of it to others, as beinglaughed at by those that received it; insomuch that his fellow-tribunes made him the subject of their drollery ; for they wouldforetell that he would bring them some of his useful watch-words,when he was about to take the watch-word from Caesar, andwould thereby make him ridiculous ; on which accounts he tookthe courage of assuming certain partners to him, as having justreasons for his indignation against Caius. Now there was onePompedius, a senator, and one who had gone through almost allposts in the government, but otherwise an Kpicurian, and forthat reason loved to lead an inactive life. Now Timidius, anenemy of his, had informed Caius that he had used indecent re Jproaches against him, and he made use of Quintilia 'for a wit­ness to them ; a woman she was much beloved by many that fre­quented the theatre, and particularly by Pompedius, on account ofher great beauty. Now this woman thought it an horrible thingto attest to an accusation that touched the life of her lover, whichwas also a lie. Timidius, however, wanted to have her broughtto the torture. Caius was irritated at this reproach upon hlm,and commanded Cherea, without any delay j to torture t£uintiliafas he used to employ Cherea in such bloody matters, and thosethat required the torture, because he thought he would do it themore barbarously, in order to avoid that imputation of effemina­cy which he had laid upon him. But Quintilia, when she wasbrought to the rack, trod upon the foot of one of her associates,and let him know, that he might be of good courage, and not beafraid of the consequence of her tortures ; for that she would'bear them with magnanimity. Cherea tortured this womanafter a cruel manner; unwillingly indeed) but because hecould not help it. He then brought her, without being inthe least moved at what she had suffered, into the presence ofCains, and that in such a state as was sad to behold ; and Caius,being somewhat affected with the sight of Quintilia> who had herVOL. III. ¥ * body


 







OCR Output








WARS OF THE JEWS. Book !.


CHAP. XV.
Antigonus besieges tlose that -were in Masada, ivhom Herod fretsfrom confinement, when he came back from Rome, and present­ly marches to "Jerusalem, where he findt Silo corrupted bybribes.


$ 1. T^T'OW during this time Antigonus besieged those thatJ,N were in Masada, who had all other necessaries in suffi­cient quantity, but were in want of water ; on which accountJoseph, Herod's brother, was disposed to run away to the Ara­bians, with two hundred of his own friends, because he hadheard that Malichus repented of his offences with regard toHerod ; and he had been so quick as to have been gone out of thefortress already, unless, on that very night when he was goingaway, there had fallen a great deal of rain, insomuch that his re­servoirs were full of water, and so he was under no necessity ofrunning away. After which, therefore, they made an irruptionupon Antigonus's party, and slew a great many of them, somein open battles, and some in private ambush; nor had they al­ways success in their attempts, for sometimes they were beatenand ran away.
2. In the mean time Ventidius, the Roman general, was sentout of Syria, to restrain the incursions of the^Parthians, and afterhe had done that, he came into Judea, in pretence indeed to assistJoseph and his party, but in reality to get money of Antigonusjand when he had pitched his camp very near to Jerusalem, assoon as he had got money enough, he went away with the great-estpart of his forces; yet still did he leave Silo with some partof them, lest if he had taken them all away, his taking of bribesmight have been too openly discovered. Now Antigonus hopedthat the Parthians would come again to his assistance, and there-
O *
fore cultivated a good understanding with Silo in the mean time,lest any interruption should be given to his hopes.
3. Now by this time Herod had sailed out of Italy, and wascome to Ptolemais : and as soon as he had gotten together nosmall army of foreigners, and of his own countrymen, he march­ed through Galilee against Antigonus, wherein he was assisted byVentidius andSilo7bothwbom*Dtllius, a person sent by Antony,persuaded to bring Herod [into his kingdom]. Now Ventidiuswas at tills time among the cities, and composing the disturban­ces which had happened by means ot the Parthians, as was Siloin Judea corrupted by the bribes that Antigonus had given him;yet was not Herod himself destitute of power, but the number of
his
« This Dellius U famors, or rather infamous, in the history of Mark AMony..ai Spanheim and Aldrich here note, from the coins from Plutarch and Die.







OCR Output








Chap. III. ANTIQJJITIES OF THE JEWS. 137


diery got together, the crowd about' him ran away, and Clau­dius could hardly go on, his body was then so weak ; and thosewho carried his sedan, upon an inquiry that was made about hisbeing carried off, ran away and saved themselves, as despairingof their lord's preservation. Bat, when they were come intothe large court of the palace, (which, as the report goes aboutit, was inhabited first of all the parts of the city of Rome), andhad just reached the public treasury, many more soldiers cameabout him as glad to see Claudius's face, and thought it exceed­ing right to make him emperor, on account of their kindness forGermanicus, who was his brother, and had left behind him a vastreputation among all that were acquainted with him. They re­flected also on the covetous temper of the leading men of the se­nate, and what great errors they had been guilty of, when the se­nate had the government formerly ; they also considered the im­possibility of such an undertaking, as also what dangers theyshould be in, if the government should come to a single person,and that such an one should possess it, as they had no hand in ad­vancing, and not to Claudius, who would take it as their grant,and as gained by their good-will to him, and would rememberthe favours they had done him, and would make them a sufficientrecoinpence for the same.
3. These were the discourses the soldiers had one with ano­ther by themselves, and they communicated them to all such ascame into them. Now, those that inquired about this matter,willingly embraced the invitation that was made them to joinwith the rest : so they carried Claudius into the camp, crowdingabout him as his guard, and encompassing him about, one chair­man still succeeding another, that their vehement endeavours mightnot be hindered. But, as to the populace and senators, they dis­agreed in their opinions. The latter were very desirous to recovertheir former dignity, and were zealous to get clear of the slaverythat had been brought on them by the injurious treatments of thetyrants, which the present opportunity afforded them ; but forthe people, who were envious against them, and knew that theemperors were capable of curbing their covetous temper, andwere a refuge from them, they were veYy glad that Claudius hadbeen seized upon, and brought to them, and thought, that ifClaudius were made emperor, he would prevent a civil war,such as there was in the days of Pompey. But, when the se­nate knew that Claudius was brought into the camp by the sol­diers, they sent to him those of their body which had the bestcharacter for their virtues, that they might inform him, " that" he ought to do nothing by violence, in order to gain the gc-" vernment; that he who was a single person, one either already,
VOL. III. S " or







OCR Output








Chap. XIII. WARS OF THE JEWS. 285


Antony took fifteen of them and put them into custody, whomhe was also going to kill presently, and the rest he drove awaywith disgrace, on which occasion a still greater tumult arose atJerusalem ; so they sent again a thousand ambassadors to Tyre,where Antony now abode, as he was marching to Jerusalem;upon these men, who made a clamour, he sent out the governorof Tyre, and ordered him to punish all that he could catch ofthem, and to settle those in the administration whom he had madetetrarchs.
7. But before this, Herod and Hyrcanus went out upon thesea-shore, and earnestly desired of these ambassadors that theywould neither bring ruin upon themselves, nor war upon theirnative country, by their rash contentions ; and when they grewstill more outrageous, Antony sent out armed men, and slew agreat many, and wounded more of them ; of whom those thatwere slain were buried by Hyrcanus, as were the wounded putunder the care of physicians by him; yet would not those thathad escaped be quiet still, but put the affairs of the city into suchdisorder, and so provoked Antony, that he slew those whom hehad in bonds also.
CHAP. XIII.
The Parthians firing Antigonus lack into Judca, and cast Hyrca­nus and Phasaelus into prison. The flight of Herod, and thetaking of Jerusalem, and what Hyrcanus and Phasaelus suffer­ed.
$ 1. "VTOW two years afterward, when Barzapharnes, a gover--*• nor among the Parthians, and Pacorus, the king's son,had possessed themselves of Syria, and when Lysanias had al­ready succeeded upon his father Ptolemy the son of Menneus'sdeath, in the government [of Chalcis], he prevailed with the go­vernor, by a promise of a thousand talents, and five hundred wo­men, to bring back Antigonus to his kingdom, and to turn Hyr­canus out of it. Pacorus was by these means induced so to do,and marched along the sea coast, while he ordered Barzapharnesto fall upon the Jews as he went along the Mediterranean partof the country ; but of the maritime people the Tyrians wouldnot receive Pacorus, although those of Ptolemais and Sidon hadreceived him ; so he committed a troop of his horse to a certainpup-bearer belonging to the royal family, of his own name [Pa­corus], and gave him orders to march into Judea, in order tolearn the state of affairs among their enemies, and to help Anti-gpnus when he should want his assistance.
2. Now, as these men were ravaging Carmel, many of the Jews
ran







OCR Output








Chap. I. ANTIQJJITIES OF THE JEWS. 123


he said about it, he got the dispersed conspirators together; heprepared every thing after a prudent manner, and by suggestinggood advice, shewed himself far superior to the rest, and madeobliging speeches to them, insomuch that he even compelled themall to go on, who otherwise had not courage enough for that pur­pose ; and when opportunity served to use his sword in hand,he appeared first of all ready so to do, and gave the first blow inthis virtuous slaughter ; he also brought Caius easily into thepower of the rest, and almost killed him himself, insomuch thatit is but just to ascribe all that the rest did to the advice, and•bravery, and labours, of the hands of Cherea.
15. Thus did Caius come to his end, and lay dead, by themany wounds which had been given him. Now Cherea andhis associates, upon Caius's slaughter, saw that it was impos­sible for them to save themselves, if they should all go the same,way, partly on account of the astonishment they we.re under ;for it was no small danger they had incurred by killing an em­peror, who was honoured and loved by the madness of thepeople, especially when the soldiers were likely to make a bloodyinquiry after his murderers. f The passages also were narrowwherein the work was done, which were also crowded with agreat multitude of Csius's attendants, and of such of the soldiersas were of the emperor's guard that day ; whence it was thatthey went by other ways, and came to the house of Germani-cus, the father of Caius, whom they had now killed, (whichhouse adjoined to the palace ; for while the edifice was one, itwas built in its several parts by those particular persons whohad been emperors, and those parts bare the names of those thatbuilt them, or the name 01 him who had begun to build any ofits parts.) So they got away from ttie insults of the multitude,and then were for the present out of danger, that is, so long asthe misfortune which had overtaken the emperor was not known.The Germans were the first that perceived that Cams was slain.These Germans were Caius's guard, and carried the name of thecountry whence they were chosen, and composed the Celtic le­gion. The men of that country are naturally passionate, whichis commonly the temper of some other of the barbarous nationsalso, as being not used to consider much about what they do ;they are of robust bodies, and fall upon their enemies as soon asever they are attacked by them ; and which way soever they go,they perform great exploits. When, therefore, these Germanguards understood that Caius was slain, they were very sorryfor it, because they did not use their reason in judging aboutpublic affairs, but measured all by the advantages themselves re-teived, Ca'us being beloved by them, because of the money he







OCR Output








'Chap. XXI. WARS OF THJE JEWS. >15


those Laodiceans who lived by the sea side; and for those ofAscalon he built baths and costly fountains, as also cloistersround a court, that were admirable, both for their workman­ship and largeness. Moreover, he dedicated groves and meadowsto some people; nay, not a few cities there were who had landsof his donation, as if they were parts of his own kingdom. Healso bestowed annual revenues, and those for ever also, on thesettlements for exercises, and appointed for them, as well as forthe people of Cos, that such rewards should never be wanting.He also gave corn to all such as wanted it, and conferred upon.Rhodes large sums of money for building ships, and this he didin many places, and frequently also. And when Apollo'stemple had been burnt down, he rebuilt it at his own charges,after a better manner than it was before. What need I speakof the presents he made to the Lycians and Samnians ? or of hisgreat liberality through all Ionia? and that according to everybody's wants of them. And are not the Athenians, and Lace­demonians, and Nicopolitans, and that Pergamus which is inMysia, full of donations that Herod presented them withal? Andas for that large open place belonging to Antioch in Syria, didnot he pave it with polished marble, though it were twenty fur­longs long? and this when it was shunned by all men before,because it was full of dirt and filthiness, when he besides- adorn-,ed the same place with a cloister of the same length.
12. It is true, a man may say, these were favours peculiar tothose particular places, on which he bestowed his benefits; butthen what favours he bestowed on the Eleans was a donation notonly in common to all Greece, but to all the habitable earth, asfar as the glory of the Olympic games reached. For when heperceived that they were come to nothing, for want of money,and that the only remains of ancient Greece were in a mannergone, he not only became one of the combatants in that return,of the fifth-year games, which in his sailing to Rome he hap.pened to be present at, but he settled upon them revenues ofmoney for perpetuity, insomuch, that his memorial as a com­batant there can rrever fail. It would be an infinite task if Ishould go over his payments of people's debts, or tributes, forthem, as he eased the people of Phasaelus, of Batanea, and of thesmall cities about Cilicia, of those annual pensions they beforepaid. However, the fear he was in much disturbed the great­ness of his soul, lest he should be exposed to envy, or seem tohunt after greater things than he ought, while he bestowedmore liberal gifts upon these cities, than did their ownersthemselves.
13. Now Herod had a body suited to his soul, and was
' R r 2 ' ever







OCR Output








184 ' ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS, , Book XX.


were wont to be supported with those tithes, died for want offood.
3. But now the Sicarii went into the city by night, just be.fore the festival, which was now at hand, and took the scribebelonging to the governor of the temple, whose name was Elea-'s&art who was the son of Ananus [Ananias] the high-priest, andbound him,' and carried him away with them ; after which th^rsent to Ananias, and said that they would send the scribe to him,if he would persuade Albinus to release ten of those prisonerswhich he had caught of their party; so Ananias was plainlyforced to persuade Albinus, and gained his request of him. Thiswas the beginning of greater calamities ; for the robbers perpe­tually contrived to catch some of Ananias's servants, and whenthey had taken them alive, they would not let them go, till theythereby recovered some of their own Sicarii. And as they wereagain become no small in number, they grew bold, and were agreat affliction to the whole country.
4. About this time it was that king Agrippa built CesareaPhilippi larger tha.i it was before, and, in honour of Nero, namedit Neronias. And when he had built a theatre at Berytus, withvast expences, he bestowed on them shows, to be exhibited everyyear, and spent therein many ten thousand [drachmae] ; he alsogave the people a largess of corn, and distributed oil among them,and adorned the entire city with statues of his own donation, andwith original images made by ancient hands; nay, he almost trans­ferred all that was most ornamental in his own kingdom thither.This made htm more than ordinarily hated by his subjects ; be­cause he took those things away that belonged to them, to adorna foreign city. And now Jesus, the son of Gamaliel, becamethe successor of Jesus, the son of Damneus, in the high-priesthood,which the king had taken from the other ; on which account asedition arose between [the high-pr-iests, with regard to one an­other ; for they got together bodies of the boldest sort of thepeople, and frequently came, from reproaches, to throwing ofstones at each other. But Ananias was too hard for the rest, byhis riches, which enabled him to gain those that were most readyto receive. Costobarus also, and Saulus, did themselves get to­gether a multitude of wicked wretches, and this because theywere of the royal family ; and so they obtained favour amongthem, because of their kindred to Agrippa ; but still they used:violence with people, and were very ready to plunder those thatwere weaker than themselve's. And from that it principallycame to pass, that our city was greatly disordered, and that allthings grew worse and worse among us. . .
5. But when Albinus heard that Gcssins Floras was coming
to







OCR Output








Chap XXII. WARS OF THE JEWS. 317


try, he came back to it. Herod's provocation was" this, notthat Hyrcanus made any attempt to gain the kingdom, but thatit was fitter for him to be their king than for Herod. .,-
2. Now of the five children which Herod had by Mariamtw,two of them were daughters, and three were sons; and the young­est of these sons was educated at Rome, and there died; but thetwo eldest he treated as those of royal blood, on account of thenobility of their mother, and because they w«re not born till hewas king. But then what was stronger than all this, was thelove that he bare to Mariamne, and which inftamed him every­day to a great degree, and so far conspired with the other mo­tives, that he felt no other troubles on account of her he lovedso entirely'. But Mariarane's hatred to him, was not inferior tohis love to her. She had indeed but too just a cause of indigna­tion, from what he had done, while her boldness proceeded fromhis affection to her; so she openly reproached him with what hehad done to her grandfather Hyrcaaus, and to her brother A-ristobulus; for he had not spared this Aristobulus, though hewere but a child; for when he had given him the high-priest­hood at the age of seventeen, he slew him quickly after he hadconferred that dignity upon him; but when Aristobulus had p«ton the holy vestments, and had approached to the altar, at a festi­val, the multitude, in great crowds, fell into tears; whereupon thechild was s«nt by night to Jericho, and was there dipped bythe Gall^ at Herod's command, in a pool till be was drowned.
3- For these reasons Mariamne reproached Herod, and hissister and mother, after a most contumelious manner, while hewas*dumb on account of his affection for her; yet had the wo­men great indignation at her,'and raised a calumny against her,that she was false to his bed; which thing they thought mostlikely to move Herod to anger. They also contrived to havemany other circumstances believed, in order to make the thingmore credible, and accused her of having sent her picture intoEgypt to Antony, and that her lust was so extravagant, as to havethus shewed herself, though she was absent, to a man that ranmad after women, and to a man that had it in his power to useviolence to her. This charge fell like a thunderbolt upon He­rod, and put him into disorder; and that especially, because hislove to her occasioned him to be jealous, and because he consi­dered with himself that Cleopatra was a shrewd woman, andthat on her account Lysanias the king was taken off, as well asMalichus the Arabian; for his fear did not only extend to thedissolving of his marriage, but to the danger of his life.
4. When th&refore he was about to take a journey abroad,he committed his wife to Joseph, his sister SalotBe's husband, as
to







OCR Output








Chap. III. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEW&.


bility of temper, which had been improved by much exerciseand pains-taking: for as he was the grandson* of the brotherof Tiberius, whose successor he was, this was a strong induce­ment to his acquiring of learning, because Tiberius aspired afterthe highest pitch of that sort of reputation ; and Cains aspiredafter the like glory for eloquence, being induced thereto by theletters of his kinsman and his emperor. He was also among thefirst rank of his own citizens. But the advantages he receivedfrom his learning did not countervail the mischief he broughtupon himself in the exercise of his authority; so difficult it isfor those to obtain the virtue that is necessary for a wise man,who have the absolute power to do what they please withoutcontroul. At the first he got himself such friends as were inall respects the most worthy, and was greatly beloved by them,while he imitated their zealous application to the learning andto the glorious actions of the best men ; but when he becameinsolent towards them, they laid aside the kindness they had forhim, and began to hate him ; from which hatred came that plotwhich they raised against him, and wherein he perished.
CHAP. III.
How Claudius was seized upon, and brought out of his house, andbrought to the camp, and how the Senate sent an embassageto him.
§ 1. "VTOW Claudius, as I said above, went out of that way•*• ' along which Caius was gone ; and, as the family wasin a mighty disorder upon the sad accident of the murder ofCaius, he was in great distress how to save himself, and wasfound to have hidden himself in a certain narrow place f, thoughhe had no other occasion for suspicion of any dangers, besides thedignity of his birth ; for, while he was a private man, he beha­ved himself with moderation, and was contented with his presentfortune, applying himself to learning, and especially to that ofthe Greeks, and keeping himself entirely clear from every thingthat might bring on any disturbance. But as at this time themultitude were under a consternation, and the whole palace wasfull of the soldiers madness, and the very emperor's guards seem­ed under the like fear and disorder with private persons, the bandcalled pretonan, which was the purest part of the army, was inconsultation what was to be done at this juncture. Now all those
that


* This Caius was the son of that excellent person Germanicus, who was theson of Drusus, the brother ot Tiberius the emperor.
,f The first place Claudius came to was inhabited, and called llcr/neum, asSpanheim here inform* ui from Suetonius, in Claud, ch. x.







OCR Output








Chap. XVII. WARS OF THE j£xy»;


under Darius the master of his horse, and Philip the son of Ja»-cimus, the general of his army.
5. Upon this the men of power, with the high priests, as alsoall the part of the multitude that were desirous of peace, tookcourage, and seized upon the upper city [Mount Sion] j for theseditious part had the lower city and the temple in their power:so they made use of stones and slings perpetually against oneanother, and threw darts continually on both sides; and sometimesit happened that they made incursions by troops, and fought itjout hand to hand, while the seditious were superior in boldness,but the king's soldiers in skill. These last strove chiefly to gainthe temple, and to drive those out of it who profaned it; as didthe seditious, with Eleazar, besides what they had already, la­bour to gain the upper city. Thus were there perpetual slaugh­ters on both sides for seven days time j but neither side wouldyield up the parts they had seized on. : j
6. Now the next day was the festival of Xylophory, uponwhich the custom was for every one to bring wood for the altar(that there might never be a want of fuel for that fire which wasunquenchable audalways burning); upon that day they excludedthe opposite party from the observation of this part of religion.And when they had joined to themselves many of the Sicarii,who crowded in among the weaker people (that was the namefor such robbers as had under their bosoms swords called Sicx),they grew bolder, and carried their undertaking farther ; inso-much, that the king's soldiers were overpowered by their mul­titude and boldness, and so they gave way, and were driven outof the upper city by force. The others then set fire to the houseof Ananias the high-priest, and to the palaces of Agrippa andBernice: after which they carried the fire to the place where thearchives were reposited, and made haste to burn the contracts be­longing to their creditors, and thereby to dissolve their obliga­tions for paying their debts; and this was done in order to gain.the multitude of those who had been deb tors, and that they mightpersuade the poorer sort to join in their insurrection with safetvagainst the more wealthy j so the. keepers of the records fledaway, and the rest set fire to them. And when they had thusburnt down the nerves of the city, they fell upon their enemies;at which time some of the men of power, and of the high-priests,went into the vaults under ground, and concealed themselves,while others fled with the king's soldiers to the upper palace,and shut the gates immediately ; among whom were A nanias thehigh-priest, and the ambassadors that had been sent to Agrippa.And now the seditious were contented with the victory they had
gotten,







OCR Output








128 AXTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book XIX.


f
from their seats, and those that were within made a very greatdisturbance ; the cause of which was this, that the spectatorswere too hasty in getting away. There was also one Alcyon, aphysician, who hurried away, as if to cure those that were wound­ed, and, under that pretence, he sent those that were with him tofetch what things were necessary for the healing of those wound­ed persons, but in reality to get them clear of the present dan.gers they were in. Now the senate, during this interval, hadmet, and the people also assembled together in the accustomedform, and were both employed in searching after the murderersof Caius. The people did it very zealously, but the senate in ap­pearance only : for there was present Valerius of Asia, one thathad been consul ; this man went to the people, as they were indisorder, and very uneasy that they could not yet discover who,they were that murdered the emperor ; he was then earnestlyasked by them all, " Who it was that had done it ?" He replied,'' I wish Ihad been the man." The consuls * also published anedict, wherein they accused Caius, and gave order to the peoplethen got together, and to the soldiers, to go home, and gave thepeople hopes of the abatement of the oppressions they lay under ;and promised the soldiers, if they lay quiet as they used to do,and would not go abroad to do mischief unjustly, that theywould bestow rewards upon them ; for there was reason to fearlest the city might suffer harm by their wild and ungovernablebehaviour, if they should once betake themselves to spoil thecitizens, or plunder the temples. And now the whole multitudeof the senators were assembled together, and especially those thathad conspired to take away the life of Caius, who put on at thistime an air of great assurance, and appeared with great magna­nimity, as if the administration of the public affairs were alreadydevolved upon them.
CHAP. II.
How the senators determined' to restore the democracy ; lut the sol­diers were for preserving the monarchy. Concerning the slaugh­ter of Caius's wife and daughter. A character of Caius''s mo­rals.
$ !• 'V\/HEN tne public affairs were in this posture, Claudius* was on the sudden hurried away out of his house :for the soldiers had a meeting together, and when they had de­bated about what was to be done, they saw that a democracy
was-
« These consuls are named in the War of the Jews, B. II. ch. xi. sect. i. Setiu» Saturninus, and Pomponius Secundus, as Spanheim notes here. The spec0'1of the former of them is set down in the next chapter, sect. a.







OCR Output








440 WARS OF THE JEWS. Book II.


neighbouring country, when they were informed of this plot,and of the plotter, they got together in great multitudes to op­pose John. But he prevented their attempt, and fled away toGischala, his native city, while the Galileans came running outof their several cities to Josephus; and as they were now becomemany ten thousands of armed men, they cried out, that they werecome against John the common plotter against their interest, andwould at chesame time burn him,and that city which had receivedhim. Hereupon Josephus told them that he took their good,will to him kindly, but still he restrained their fury, and intend­ed to subdue his enemies by prudent conduct, rather than byslaying them ; so he excepted those of every city which had join­ed in this revolt with John, by name, who had readily beenshewed him by these that came from every city, and caused pub­lic proclamation to be made, that he would seize uppn the effectsof those that d id not forsake J ohn within five days time, and wouldburn both their houses and their families with fire. Whereuponthree thousand of John's party left him immediately, who cameto Josephus, and threw their arms down at his feet. John thenbetook himself, together with his two thousand Syriaan runa­gates, from open attempts, to more secret ways of treachery.Accordingly he privatelysent messengers to Jerusalem, to accuseJosephus, as having too great power, and to let them know thathe would soon come, as a tyrant, to their metropolis, unlessthey prevented him. This accusation the people were aware ofbeforehand, but had no regard to it. However, some of thegrandees, out of envy, and some of the rulers also, sent money toJohn privately, that he might be able to get together mercenarysoldiers, in order to fight Josephus; they also made a decree ofthemselves, and this for recalling him from his government, yetdid they not think that decree sufficient; so they sent withal twothousand five hundred armed men, and four persons of the high­est rank amongst them; Joarar, the son of Nomicus, and Ana­nias, the son of Sadduk,as alsoSimon and Judas,the sons of Jona­than,all veryablemen in speaking.that these personsmightwith­draw the good-will of the people from Josephus. These had itincharge if he would voluntarily come away, they should permithim to [come and] give an account of his conduct,but if he obstinrately insisted upon his continuing in his government,they shouldtreat him as an enemy. Now Josephus's friends had sent himword that an army was coming against him, but they gave nonotice beforehand what the reason of their coming was, that beingoily known among some secret councils of his enemies; andby this means it was that four cities revolted from him imme­diately, Sepphoris, and Gamala, and Gischala, and 1 iberias.Ytt did he recover these cijies without war, and when he had
routed







OCR Output








246 Book XIX. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


" my kindness to them with moderation, and not to shew a con-** tempt of the superstitious observances of other nations, but to** keep their own laws only. And I will that this decree of mine" be engraven on tables by the magistrates of the cities and colo-" nies, and municipal places, both those within Italy, and those" without it, both kings and governors, by the means pf the" ambassadors, and to have them exposed to the public for full" thirty days, in such a place *, whence it may plainly be readfrom the ground.''
CHAP, VI.What things were done by Agrippa at Jerusalem, when he was re-*turned back into Judea : and what it was that Petronius wroteto the inhabitants of Doris, in behalf of, the Jews.
§ 1. TVTOW Claudius Caesar, by these decrees of his which was' sent to Alexandria, and to all the habitable earth, madeknown what opinion he had of the Jews. So he soon sentAgrippa away, to take his kingdom, now he was advanced to amore illustrious dignity than before, and sent letters to the pre­sidents and procurators of the provinces, that they should treathim very kindly. Accordingly, he returned in haste, as waslikely he would, now he returned in much greater prosperitythan he had before. He also came to Jerusalem, and offeredall the sacrifices that belonged to him, and omitted nothing fwhich the law required ; on which account he ordained thatmany of the Nazarites should have their heads shorn. Andfor the golden chain which had been given him by Caius, ofequal weight with that iron chain wherewith his royal hands hadbeen bound, he hung it up within the limits of the temple, overthe treasury t, that it might be a memorial of the severe fatahe had lain under, and a testimony of his change for the better ;that it might be a demonstration how the greatest prosperity mayhave a fall, and that God sometimes raises up what is fallendown : for this chain thus dedicated afforded a document to all
men,
* This form was so known and frequent among the Romans, as Dr Hudsonhere tells us, from the great Selden, that it used to be thus represented at thebottom of their edicts by the initial letters only, U. D. P. R. L. Vnde De PianoXecte Lrgi Poisit. ". Whence it may be plainly read from the ground."
f Josephus shews both here and ch. vii. sect. 3. that he had a much greateropinion of kins; Agrippa I. than Simon the learned rabbi, than the people of Ce.sarea and Sebaste, ch. vii. sect. 4. and ch. ix. sect. t. and indeed than his doubleiiealing between the senate and Claudius, chap. iv. sect 2. than his slaughter o£lames, the brother of John, and his imprisonment of Peter, or his vain-gloriousbehaviour before he died, both in Acts xii. f, 1, 3. and here, ch. iv. sect. t. willjustify or allow. Josephus's character was probably taken from his son AgrippaJ nior.
i. This treasury-chamber seems to have been the very same in which our Sa­viour taught, and where the people offered their charity-money for the repairspr other uses of the temple. Mark, xii. 41. &c. Luke, xxii. I.John, viii. 20.







OCR Output








426 WARS or THE JEWS. v Book 1L


and marched to Antipatris. And when he was informed thatthere was a great body of Jewish forces gotten together in a cer­tain tower called sJpbet:, he sent a party before to fight them;but this party dispersed the Jews by affrighting them before itcame to a battle: so they came, and finding their camp deserted,they burnt it, as well as the villages that lay about it. But whenCestius had marched from Antipatris to Lydda, he found thecity empty of its men, for the * whole multitude were gone upto Jerusalem to the feast of tabernacles; yet did he destroy fiftyof those that shewed themselves, and burnt the city, and somarched forwards; and ascending by Bethoron, he pitched hiscamp at a certain place called Ga&io, fifty furlongs distant fromJerusalem.
2. But as for the Jews, when they saw the war approachingto their metropolis, they left the feast, and betook themselves totheir arms; and taking courage greatly from their multitude,went in a sudden and disorderly manner to the fight, with a greatnoise, and without any consideration had of the rest of the seventhday, although the Sabbath was the day to which they had the,greatest regard; but that rage which made them forget the reli.gious observation [of the Sabbath] made them too hard for theirenemies in the fight: with such violence therefore did they fallupon the Romans, as to break into their ranks, and to marchthrough the midst of them, making a great slaughter as theywent, insomuch, that unless the horsemen, and such part of thefootmen as were not yet tired in the action, had wheeled round,and succoured that part of the army which was not yet broken,Cestius, with his whole army, had been in danger: however,five hundred and fifteen of the Romans were slain, of whichnumber four hundred were footmen, and the rest horsemen,while the Jews lost only twenty-two, of whom the most valiant
were


* Here we have in eminent example of that Jewish language, which Dr Walltruly observes we several times find used in the sacred writings; I mean where thewords all or -whole multitude, &c. are used for much the greatest part only; but notso as to include every person, without exception; for when Josephus had said, thatthe -whole multitude [all the males] of Lydda were gone to the feast of tabernacles,he immediately adds, that however no fewer than fifty of them appeared, andwere slain by the Romans. Other examples somewhat like this I have observedelsewhere in Josephus, but, as I think, npne so remarkable as this. See Wall'sCritical Obiervations on the Old Testament, pag. 49.-jo.
We have also in this and the next section, two eminent facts to be observed, viz.the first example, that I remember in Josephus, of the onset of the Jews' enemiesupon their country when their males were gone up to Jerusalem to one of theirthree sacred festivals; which, daring the theocracy, God had promised to preservethem from, Exod. xxxiv. 24. The second fact is this, the breach of the Sabbathby the seditious Jews in an offensive fight, contrary to the universal doctrine andpractice of their nation in these ages, and even contrary to what they themselvesafterward practised in the rest of this war. See the aote on Antiq. B. XVI. ch.3. § 4. vol. H.







OCR Output








WARS OF THE JEWS. Book II.


came about him not fewer in number than* three millions:these besought him to commiserate the calamities of their na­tion, and cried out upon Floras as the bune of their country.But as he was present, and stood by Cestius, he laughed at theu-words. However Cestius, when he had quieted the multitude,and had assured them, thut he would take care that Florus shouldhereafter treat them in a more gentle manner, returned to An-tioch : Fiorus also conducted him as far as Cesarea, and delud­ed him, though he had at that very time the purpose of shewinghis anger at the nation, and procuring a war upon them, bywhich means alone it was that he supposed he might conceal hisenormities; for heexpectedthat,if the peace continued,he shouldhave the Jews for his accusers before Caesar ; but that if hecould procure them to make a revolt, he should divert theirlaying lesser crimes to his charge, by a misery that was so muchgreater ; he therefore did every day augment their calamities,in order to induce them to a rebellion.
4. Now at this time it happened, that the Grecians at Cesa­rea had been too hard for the Jews, and had obtained of Nerothe government of the city, and had brought the Judicial deter­mination ; at the same time began the war, in the twelfth yearof the reign of Nero, and the seventeenth of the reign of Agrip-pa, in the month of Artemisius [Jyar]. Now the occasion of thiswar was by no means proportionable to those heavy calamitieswhich it brought upon us. For the Jews that dwelt at Cesareahad a synagogue near the place, whose owner was a certain Ce.sareau Greek ; the Jews had endeavoured frequently to havepurchased the possession of the place, and had offered many timesits value for its price; but as the owner overlooked their of­fers, so did he raise other buildings upon the place, in way ofaffront to them, and made working shops of them, and left thembut a narrow passage, and such as was very troublesome forthem to go along to their synagogue. Whereupon the warm­er part of the Jewish youth went hastily to the workmen, andforbade them to build there : but as Florus would not permitthem to use force, the great men of the Jews, with John the pub­lican, being in the utmost distress what to do, persuaded Floi us,with the ofter of eight t-aler.ts, to hinder the work. He then,being intent upon nothing but getting money, promised he woulddo for them all they desired of him, and then went away fromCesarea to Sebaste, and left the sedition to take its full course,as if he hi.d sold a licence to the Jews to fight it out.
5. Now


* Heie we may note, that 3,000,000 of the Jews were present at the passover,A. D. 65, which confirms what Josephus elsewhere informs us of, that at a passovera little later, they counted 256,500 paschal lambs, which, at twelve to er'ch lamb,which is no immoderate calculation, come to 3,078,030' See B; VI. chup .9. § 3.







OCR Output








Chap. V. ANTIQJTITIES OF THE JEWS. 145


'' have been joint inhabitants in the earliest times with the Alex-" andnans, and have obtained from their kings equal privileges" with them, as is evident by the public records ih it are in" their possession, and the edicts themselves ; and that after" Alexandria had been subjected to our empire by Augustus," their rights and privileges have been preserved by those pre-" sidents who have at divers times been sent thither ; and tint" no dispute had been raised about those rights and privileges,"even when Aquila was governor of Alexandria; and that" when the Jewish ethnarch was dead, Augustus did not pro-" hibit the making such ethnarchs, as willing that all men should" be so subject [to the Romans] as to continue in the observa-" tion of their own customs, and not be forced to transgress the''' ancient rules of their own country religion ; but that in the" time of Caius, the Alexandrians became insolent towards the" Jews that were among them, which Caius, out of his great" madness, and want of understanding, reduced the nation of the" Jews very low, because they would not transgress the religious" worship of their country, and call him a god. I will, there -" fore, that the nation of the Jews be not deprived of their" rights and privileges, on account of the madness of Caius ;11 but that those rights and privileges, which they formerly en." joyed, be preserved to them, and that they may continue in" their own customs. Ai-.d I charge both parties to take very" great care that no troubles may arise after the promulgation'«' of this edict."
3. And such were the contents of thi-s edict 0:1 behalf of the,Jews that were sent to Alexandria. But the edict that was sentinto the other parts of the habitable earth was this which fol­lows: «' Tiberius Claudius Caesar, Augustus, Germanicus," high-priest, tribune of the people, chosen consul the second" time, ordains thus. Upon the petition of king Agrippa, and" king Herod, who are persons very dear to me, that I would" grant the same rights and privileges, should be preserved to" the Jews which are in all the Roman empire, which I have" granted to those of Alexandria, I very willingly comply there-" with ; and this grant I make not only for the sake of the pe-" titioners, but as judging those Jews for whom I have been" petitioned worthy of such a favour, on account of their fidelity" and friendship to the Romans. I think it also very just that" no Grecian city should be deprived of such rights and privi-" leges, since they were preserved to them under the great Au." gustus. It will therefore be fit to permit the Jews, who are" in all the world under us, to keep their ancient customs without" being hindered so to do. And I do charge them also to use this
VOL. III. T u nvy







OCR Output








THE LIFE OF FLAVIUS JOSEPHU3. 201


the furniture, which was done without our approbation ; for,after we had discoursed Capellus and the principal men of thecity, we departed from Bethmaus, and went into the upper Ga­lilee. But Jesus and his party slew all the Greeks that wereinhabitants of Tiberias, and as many others as were their ene­mies before the war began.
13. When 1 understood this state of things, I was greatly pro­voked, and went down to Tiberias, and took all the care I couldof the royal furniture, to recover all that could be recoveredfrom such as had plundered it. They consisted of candlesticksmade of Corinthian brass, and of royal tables, and of a greatquantity of uncoined silver ; and I resolved to preserve whatso­ever came to my hand for the king. So I sent for ten of the prin­cipal men of the senate, and for Capellus the son of Antyllus,and committed the furniture to them, with this charge, thatthey should part with it to nobody else but to myself. Fromthence I and my fellow-legates went to Gischala to John, as de­sirous to know his intentions, and soon saw that he was for in­novations, and had a mind to the principality ; for he desired meto give him authority to carry off that corn which belonged toCaesar, and lay in the villages of Upper Galilee ; and he pretend­ed that he would expend what it came to in building the wallsof his own city. But when I perceived what he endeavouredat, and what he had in his mind, I said I would not permit himso to do; for that I thought either to keep it for the Romans,or for myself, now I was entrusted with the public affairs thereby the people of Jerusalem. But, when he was not able toprevail with me, he betook himself to my fellow-legates ; forthey had no sagacity in providing for futurity, and were veryready to take bribes. So he corrupted them with money to de­cree, that all that corn which was within his province should bedelivered to him; while I, who was but one, was outvoted bytwo, and held my tongue. Then did John introduce anothercunning contrivance of his ; for he said, that those Jews who in­habited Cesarea Philippi, and were shut up by the order of theking's deputy there, had sent to him to desire him, that, sincethey had no oil that was pure for their use, he would providea sufficient quantity of such oil that came from the Greeks, andthereby transgress their own laws. Now this was said by John,not out of his regard to religion, but out of his most flagrantdesire of gain ; for he knew, that two sextaries were sold withthem of Cesarea for one drachma, but that at Gischala four­score sextaries were sold for four sextaries. So he gave order,that all the oil which was there should be carried away, as ha­ving my permission for so doing ; which yet I did not grant himVOL. III. Cc voluntarily,







OCR Output








334 WARS OF THE JEWS. Book f.


her, who was his mother-in-law and his aunt, into the like dan­gers with themselves; so he sent to her to take care of her ownsafety, and told her, that the king was preparing to put her todeath, on account of the accusation that was laid againt her, asif when she formerly endeavoured to marry herself to Sylleusthe Arabian, she had discovered the king's grand secrets to him,who was the king's enemy; and this it was that came as thelast storm, and entirely sunk the young men when they werein great danger before. For Salome came running to the king,and informed him of what admonition had been given her, where­upon he could bear no longer, but commanded both the youngmen to be bound, and kept the one asunder from the other. Healso sent Volumnius, the general of his army, to Caesar imme­diately, as also his friend Olympus with him, who carried theinformations in writing along with them. Now as soon as theyhad sailed to Rome, and delivered the king's letters to Caesar,Caesar was mightily troubled at the ease of the young men; yetdid not he think he ought to take the power from the father ofcondeming his sons; so he wrote back to him, and appointed himto have the power over his sons; but said withal, that " he would'* do well to make an examination into this matter of the plot" against him, in a public court, and to take for his assessors'« his own kindred, and the governors of the province. And if" those sons be found guilty, to put them to death; but if they«« appear to have thought of no more than fly ing away from him," that he should moderate their punishment."
2. With these directions Herod complied, and came to B«ry-tus, where Caesar had ordered the court to be assembled, andgot the judicature together. The presidents sat first, as Caesar'9letters had appointed, who were Saturninus, and Pedanius, andtheir lieutenants that were with them, with whom was the pro­curator Volumnius also; next to them sat the king's kinsmenand friends, with Salome also, and Pheroras; after whom satthe principal men of all Syria, excepting Archekus; for Herodhad a suspicion of him, because he was Alexander's father-in-law. Yet did not he produce his sons in open court; and thiswas done very cunningly, for he knew well enough that hadthey but appeared only, they would certainly have been pitied;and if withal they had been suffered to speak, Alexander wouldeasily have answered what they were accused of; but they werein custody at Platane, a village of the Sidoniaiis.
3. So the king got up, and inveighed against his sons as if theywere present ; and as for that part of the accusation that theyhad plotted p.gainst him, he urged it but faintly, because he wasdestitute of proofs; but he insisted before the assessors on the re­proaches, and jests, and injurious carriage, and ten thousand the
like







OCR Output








330" ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. -. fiocfc XIX..


" live virtuously, than which nothing can be more to our ad--" vantage ; which course of virtue it is alone that can preserve" our liberty ; for, as to our ancient state, I have heard of it by" the relations of others, but as to our later state, during my" life-time, I have known it by experience, and learned thereby" what mischiefs tyrannies have brought upon this common-" wealth, discouraging all virtue, and depriving persons of mag-'" nanimity of their liberty, and proving the teachers of flattery"' and slavish fear, because it leaves the public administration not" to be governed by wise laws, but by the humour of those that" govern. For since Julius Caesar took it into his head to dissolvert our democracy, and, by overbearing the regular system of our" laws, to bring disorders into our administration, and to get" above right and justice, and to be a slave to his own inclina-" tions, there is no kind of misery but what hath tended to« the subversion of this city ; while all those that have succeed-" ed him have striven one with another to overthrow the ancient*« laws of their country,- and have left it destitute of sueh citizens" as were of generous principles; because they thought it tend-(< ed to their safety to have vicious men to converse withal, and" not only tp break the spirits of those that were best esteemed" for their virtue, but to resolve upon their utter destruction." Of all which emperors, who have been many in number, and" who laid upon us insufferable hardships during the times of* their government, this Caius, who hath been slain to-day,«' hath- brought more terrible calamities upon us than did all*' the rest, not only by exercising his ungoverned rage upon his" fellow-citizens, but also upon his kindred and friends, and a." like upon all others, and by inflicting still greater miseries up-" on them, as punishments, which they never deserved, he being" equally furious against men, and against the gods. For ty-" rants are. not content to gain their sweet pleasure, and this by" acting injuriously, and in the vexation they bring both upon*' men's estates, and their wives ; but they look upon that to•" be their principal advantage, when they can utterly overthrow«' the entire families of their enemies ; while all lovers of li-" berty are the enemies of tyranny. Nor can those that pa-" tiently endure what miseries they bring on them, gain their" friendship ; for as they are conscious of the abundant mis-" chiefs they have brought on these men, and how magnani-" mously they have borne their hard fortunes, they cannot" but be sensible what evils they have done, and thence only** depend on security from what they are suspicious of, if it** may be in their power to take them quite out of the world." Since, then, v,Te are now gotten clear of such great misfortune3,
f- and







OCR Output








246 PREFACE.


language of our country, and sent to the Upper Barbarians *; I'Joseph, the son of Matthias, by birth an Hebrew, a priest also,and one who at first fought against the Romans myself, and wasforced to be present at what was done afterwards, [am the authorof this work].
2. Now at the time when this great concussion of affairs happen­ed, the affairs of the Romans were themselves in great disorder.Those Jews also, who were for innovations, then arose when thelimes were disturbed ; they were also in a flourishing conditionfor strength and riches, insomuch that the affairs of the east werethen exceeding tumultuous, while some hoped for gain, andothers were afraid of loss in such troubles ; for the Jews hopedthat all of their nation which were beyond Euphrates wouldhave raised an insurrection together with them. The Galls al­so, in the neighbourhood of the Romans, were in motion, and theCelta e were not quiet ; but all was in disorder after the death ofNero. And the opportunity now offered induced many to aimat the royal power ; and the soldiery affected change, out of thehopes of getting money. L thought it therefore an absurd thingto see the truth falsified in affairs of such great consequence,and to take no notice of it; but to suffer those Greeks and Ro­mans that were not in the wars to be ignorant of these things, andto read either flatteries or fictions, while the Parthians, and theBabylonians, and the remotest Arabians, and those of our nationbeyond Euphrates, with the Adiabeni, by my means, knew accu­rately both whence the war begun, what miseries it broughtupon us, and after what manner it ended.
3. It is true, these writers have the confidence to call theiraccounts histories ; wherein yet they seem to me to fail of theirown purpose, as well as to relate nothing that is found. Forthey have a mind to demonstrate the greatness of the Romans,while they still diminish and lessen the actions of the Jews; as not"discerning how it cannot be that those must appear to be greatwho have only conquered those that were little. Nor are theyashamed to overlook the length of the war, the multitude of theRoman forces who so greatly suffered in it, or the might of thecommanders; whose great labours about Jerusalem will be.deemed inglorious, if what they atchieved be reckoned but a:small matter.
4. However,


* Who these Upper Barbarians, remote from the sea, were, Josephus himselfwill inform us, sect. 2. viz. the Parthians and Babylonians, and remotest Arabi.ans [or the Jews among them] ; besides the Jews beyond Euphrates, and theAdiabeni, or Assyrians. Whence we also learn, that these Parthians, Babylo.nians, the remotest Arabians [or at least the Jews among them], as also theJews beyond Euphrates, and tiie Adiibeni, or Assyrians, understood Josephus'sHebrew, or rather Chaldiac, books of the Jewish War, before they were put intothe Greek language.
,







OCR Output








36 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book XVII.


and acquainted with whatsoever he did, and with the circum­stances of his affairs, proceeded to what remained, and explainedall that concerned the demonstrations and evidences of the facts.Upon which Antipater-, in order to make his legal defence, turn,td himself to his father, and " enlarged upon the many indie a-" tions he had given of his good-will to him; and instanced" in the honours that had been done him, which yet had not'' been done, had he not deserved- them by his virtuous con-cern about him ; for that he had made provision for every' thing that was fit to be foreseen beforehand, as to giving him' his wisest advice ; and whenever there was occasion for the la­bour of his own hands, he had not grudged any such painsfor him. And that it was almost impossible that he, who haddelivered his father from so many treacherous contrivances" laid against him, should be himself in a plot against him, and" so lose all the reputation he had gained for his virtue, by his" wickedness which succeeded it; and this while he had nothing" to prohibit him, who had already appointed his successor, to en-" joy the royal honour with his father also at present; and that" therewasno likelihood that a person who had the one half of that", authority without any danger, and with a good character, should" hunt after the whole with infamy and danger, and this when" it was doubtful whether he could obtain it or not; and when" he sawthe sadexample of his brethren before him, and was both" the informer and the accuser against them, at a time when they" might not otherwise have been discovered ; nay, was the au-'' thor of the punishment inflicted upon them, when it appeared'« evidently that they were guilty of a wicked attempt against" their father ; and that even the contentions there were in the" king's family, were indications that he had ever managed affairs" out of the srncerest affection to his father. And as to what he" had done at Rome, Caesar was a witness thereto ; who yet was'' no more to be imposed upon than God himself: of whose opi-" nions his letters sent hither are sufficient evidence; and that it" was not reasonable to prefer the calumnies of such as proposed" to raise disturbances, before those letters ; the greatest part of" which calumnies had been raised during his absence, which" gave scope to his enemies to forge them, which they had not" been able to do if he had been there." Moreover he shewedthe weakness of the evidence obtained by torture, which was com­monly false; because the distress men are in under such torturesnaturally obliges them to say many things in order to please thosethat govern them. He also offered himself to the torture.
5. Hereupon there was a change observed in the assembly,while they greatly pitied Antipater, who by weeping and put­ting







OCR Output








Chap. XXVII. WARS OF THE JEWS. 335


like offences against him, which were heavier than death itself jand when nobody contradicted him, he moved them to pity hiscase, as though he had been condemned himself, now he hadgained a bitter victory against his sons. So he asked every one'ssentence, which sentence was first of all given by Saturninus,and was this, Tiiat he condemned the young men, but not todeath; for that it was not fit for him, who had three sons ofhis own now present, to give his vote for the destruction of theson of another. The two lieutenants also gave the like vote;some others there were also who followed their example; butVolumnius began to vote on the more melancholy side, and allthose that came after him condemned the young men to die,some out of flattery, and some out of hatred to Herod; but noneout of indignation at their crimes. And now all Syria and Ju-dea was in great expectation, and waited for the last act of thistragedy; yet did not nobody suppose that Herod would be sobarbarous as to murder his children; however, he carried themaway to Tyre, and thence sailed to Caesarea, and deliberatedwith himself what sort of death the young men should suffer.
4. Now there was a certain old soldier of the king's, whosename was Tcro, who had a son that was very familiar with, anda friend to Alexander, and who himself particularly loved theyoung men. This soldier was in a manner distracted out of theexcess of the indignation he had at what was doing; and at firsthe criedoutaloud, ashehe went about, " That justicewas tramp-" led under foot; that truth was perished, and nature confound-" ed; and that the life of man was full of iniquity," and everything else that passion could suggest to a man who spared nothis own life; and at last he ventured to go to the king, and said," Truly, I think, thou art a most miserable man, when thou" hearkenest to most wicked wretches, against those that ought" to be dearest to thee; since thou hast frequently resolved that" Pheroras and Salome sbould be put to death, and yet believest" them against thy sons; while these, by cutting off the sac-" cession of thine own sons, leave all wholly to Antipater, and" thereby choose to have thee sueh a king as may be thorough-" ly in their own power. However, consider whether this" death of Antipater's brethren will not make him hated by the" soldiers; for there is no body but commiserates the young" men, and of the captains a great many shew their indignation-" at it openly." Upon his saying this, he named those thathad such indignation; but the king ordered those men, withTero himself, and his son, to be seized upon immediately.
5. At which time there was a certain barber, whose name wa
This man leaped out from among the people in a kind
of







OCR Output








Chap; XXI. WARS OF THE JEWS. 431.


I
for Ptolemy, who was'Agrippa's and Bernice's steward, and tookfrom him all that he had with him, among which things therewere a great many costly garments, and no small number of sil­ver cups, and six hundred pieces of gold, yet were they notableto conceal what they had stolen, but brought it all to Josephns,to Taricheae. Hereupon he blamed them for the violence theyhad offered to the king and queen, and deposited what theybrought to him with Eneas, the most potent man of Tariche«B,with an intention of sending the things back to the owners at aproper time; which act of Josephus brought him into the greatestdanger; for those that had stolen the things, had an indignationat him, both because they gained no share of it for themselves,and because they perceived before hand what was Josephus's in­tention, and that he would freely deliver up what had cost themso much pains to the king and queen. These ran away by nightto their several villages, and declared to all men that Josephuswas going to betray them: they also raised great disorders in allthe neighbouring cities, insomuch that in the morning an hun­dred thousand armed men came running together', which multi­tude was crowded together in the hippodrome at Taricheae, andmade a very peevish clamour against him; while some criedout, That " they should depose the traitor;" and others, " That" they should burn him." Now John irritated a great many,as did also one Jesus, the son of Sapphias, who was then go­vernor of Tiberias. Then it was that Josephus's friends, andthe guards of his body, were so affrighted at this violent assaultof the multitude, that they all fled away but four; and as hewas asleep, they awaked him, as the people were going to setfire to the house. And although those four that remained withhim persuaded him to run away, he was neither surprised athis being himself deserted, nor at the great multitude that cameagainst him, but leaped out to them with his clothes rent, andashes sprinkled on his head, with his hands behind him, and hissword hanging at his neck. At this sight his friends, especiallythose of Taricheae, commiserated his condition; but those thatcame out of the country, and those in their neighbourhood, towhom his government seemed burdensome, reproached him, andbid him produce the money which belonged to them all imme­diately, and to Confess the agreement he had made to betraythem; for they imagined from the habit in which he appeared,that he would deny nothing of what they suspected concerninghim, and that it was in order to obtain pardon, that he had puthimself entirely into so pitiable a posture. But this humble ap­pearance was only designed as preparatory to a stratagem of his,who thereby contrived to set those that were so angry at him
at







OCR Output








Charp. XXXITI. WARS OF THE JEWS. 353


fcim in his old age, and when he was in a melancholy condition;for he was already almost seventy years of age, and had beenbrought low by the calamities that happened to him about hischildren, whereby he had no pleasure in life, even when he wasin health; the grief also that Antipater was still alive aggrava­ted his disease, whom he resolved to put to death now not atrandom, but as soon as he should be well again, and resolvedto have him slain [in a public manner].
2. There ako now happened to him, among bis other calami­ties, a certain popular sedition. There were two men of learn­ing in the city [Jerusalem], who were thought the most skilfulin the laws of their country, and were on that account had invery great esteem all over the nation; they were, the one Judas,the son of Sephoris, and the other Matthias, the son of Margalus.There was a great concourse of the young men to these men,when they expounded the laws, and there got together everyday a kind of an army of such as were growing up to be men.Now when these men were informed that the king was wearingaway with melancholy, and with a distemper, they droppedwards to their acquaintance, how it was now a very proper timeto defend the cause of God, and to pull down what had beenerected contrary to the laws of their country; fer it was unlaw­ful there should be any such thing in the temple as images, orfaces, or the like representation of any animal whatsoever. Nowthe king had put up a golden eagle over the great gate' of thetemple, which these learned men exhorted them to cut down,and told them, that if there should any danger arise, it T-vas a glo­rious thing to die for the laws of their country ; because thatthe soul was immortal, and that an eternal enjoyment cf hap­piness did await such as died on that account; while the meanspirited, and those that were not wise enough to shew a rightlove of their souls, preferred a death by a disease, before thatwhich is the result of a virtuous behaviour.
3. At the same time that these men made thie speech to theirdisciples, a rumour was spread abroad, that the king was dying,,which made the young men set about the work with greaterfcoldness ; they therefore let themselves down from the top ofthe temple with thick cords, and this at mid-day, and while agreat number of people were in the temple, and cut down thatgolden eagle with axes. This was presently told to the king'scaptain of the temple, who came running with a great body of'soldiers, and caught about forty of the young men, and brought,them to the king. And when he asked them, first of all, whe­ther they had been so hardy as to cut down the golden eagle ?they confessed they had done so ; and when he as'ked them byVou III, v '-<' Y y whose







OCR Output








Chap. XVII. WARS OF THE JEWS. 413


selves into the villages, and collected the tributes, and soongottogether forty talents, which was the sum that was deficient.And thus did Agrippa then put a stop to that war which wasthreatened. Moreover,he attempted to persuade the multitudeto obey Florus, until Caesar should send one to succeed him;'but they were hereby more provoked, and cast reproaches uponthe king, and got him excluded out of the city; nay, some ofthe seditious had the impudence to throw stones at him. Sowhen the king saw that the violence of those that were for in­novations was not to be restrained, and being very angry atthe contumelies he had received, he sent their rulers, togetherwith their men of power, to Florus, to Cesarea, that he mightappoint whom he thought fit to collect the tribute in the coun­try, while he retired into his own kingdom.
2. And at this time it was that some of those that principally-excited the people to go to war, made an assault upon a certainfortress called Massada. They took it by treachery, and slewthe Romans that were there, and put others of their own partyto keep it. At the same time Eleazar, the son of Ananias thehigh-priest, a very bold youth, who was at that time governorof the temple, persuaded those that officiated in the divine ser­vice to receive no gift or sacrifice for any foreigner. And thiswas the true beginning of our war with the Romans; for theyrejected the sacrifice of Caesar on this account: and when manyof the high-priests and principal men besought them not toomit the sacrifice, which it was customary for them to offerfor their princes, they would not be prevailed upon. Theserelied much upon their multitude, for the most flourishingpart of the innovators assisted them; but they had the chief re­gard to Eleazar, the governor of the temple.
3. Hereupon the men of power got together, and conferredwith the high-priests, as did also the principal of the Pharisees;and thinking all was at stake, and that their calamities were be­coming incurable, took counsel what was to be done. Accord­ingly they determined to try what they could do with the sedi­tious by words, and assembled the people before the brazen-gate, which was that gate of the inner temple [court of thepriests] which looked toward the sun rising. And, in the firstplace, they shewed the great indignation they had at this attemptfor a revolt, and for their bringing so great a war upon theircountry: after which they confuted their pretence as unjusti­fiable, and told them, That " their forefathers had adorned their" temple in great part with donations bestowed on them by fo-" rejgners, and had always received what had been presented tof'' tjiem frpm foreign Rations; and (hat they had been so far from
(l " rejecting







OCR Output








Chap. XXIX. WARS OF THE JEWS. 9S9


prevailed upon cunningly by his flatteries, and changed the mar­riages ; he married Aristobulus's daughter to him, and his sonto Pheroras's daughter.
0. Now one may learn, in this instance, how very much thisflattering Antipater could do, even what Salome in the like cir­cumstances could not do ; for when she, who was his sister, andwho, by the means of Julia, Caesar's wife, earnestly desired leaveto be married to Sylleus the Arabian, Herod swore he wouldesteem her his bitter enemy, unless she would leave off that pro­ject: he also eaused her, against her own consent, to be marriedto Alexas^ a friend of his, and that one of her daughters shouldbe married to Alexas's son, and the other to Antipater's uncleby the mother's side. And for the daughters the king had byMariambe, the one was married to Antipater, his sister's son,and the other to his brother's son, Phasaelus.
CHAP. XXIX.
Antipater becomes Intolerable. He is sent to Rome, and carriesHerod's testament viith him- Pheroras leaves his brother,that be may keep his wife. He dies at home.
J 1. '^^T'OW when Antipater had cut off the hopes of the or-JL.NI phans, and had contracted such affinities as would bemost for his own advantage, he proceeded briskly, as having acertain expectation of the kingdom, and as he had now assur­ance added to his wickedness, he became intolerable ; for notbeing able to avoid the hatred of all people, he built his securityUpon the terror he struck into them. Pheroras also assisted himin his designs, looking upon him as already fixed in the kingdom.There Was also a company of women in the court, which ex­cited new disturbances ; for Pheroras's wife, together with hermother and siste^ as also Antipater's mother, grew very im­pudent in the palace. She also was so insolent as to affront theking's * two daughters, on which account the king hated her toa great degree; yet although these women were hated by him, 'they domineered over others: there was only Salome who op­posed their good agreement, and informed the king of theirmeetings, as not being for the advantage of his affairs. Andwhen those women knew what calamities she had raised againstthem, and how much Herod was displeased, they left off theirpublic meetings, and friendly entertainments of one another;


« These daughters of Herod, whom Pheroras's wife affronted, were Salome andRoxana, two virgins, who were born to him of his two wives, Elpide and Phedra.S«e Herod's genealogy, Antiq. B. XVII. ch. i. sect 3. Vol. III.- U U 2'







OCR Output








Chap. XVIII. WARS OF THE JEWS. 421


«' those that were related to me. Wherefore we very justly" experience the perfidiousness of foreigners, while we acted" after a most wicked manner against our own nation, I will" therefore die, polluted wretch as I am, by mine own hands;" for it is not fit I should die by the hand of our enemies ; and" let the same action be to me both a punishment for my great" crimes, and a testimony of my courage to my commendation," that so no one of our enemies may have it to brag of, that he*' it was that slew me, and no one may insult upon me as I" fall." Now when he had said this, he looked round abouthim upon his family with eyes of commiseration, and of rage,(that family consisted of a wife, and children, and his aged pa­rents); so, in the first place, he caught his father by the greyhairs, and ran his sword through him, and after him he did thesame to his mother, who willingly received it; and after them hedid the like to his wife and children, every one almost offeringthemselves to his sword, as desirous to prevent being slain bytheir enemies; so when he had gone overall his family, hestood upon their bodies to be seen by all, and stretching out hisright hand, that his action might be observed by all, he sheath­ed his entire sword into his own bowels. This young man wasto be pitied on account of the strength of his body and the cour­age of his soul; but since he had assured foreigners of his fideli­ty [against his own countrymen]; he suffered deservedly.
5. Besides this murder at Scythopolis, the other cities rose upagainst the Jews that were among them; those of Askalon slewtwo thousand five hundred, and those of Ptolemaistwo thousand,and put not a few into bonds; those of Tyre also put a greatnumber to death, but kept a greater number in prison ; more­over, those of Hippos, and those of Gadara did the like, whilethey put to death the boldest of the Jews, but kept those ofwhom they were afraid in custody; as did the rest of the citiesof Syria, according as they every one either hated them, or wereafraid of them; only the Antiochians, the Sidonians, and Apa-mians, spared those that dwelt with them, and would not en­dure either to kill any of the Jews, or to put them in bonds.And perhaps they spared them, because their own number wasso great that they despised their attempts; but I think the great­est part of this favour was owing to their commiseration of thosewhom they saw to make no innovations. As for the Gerasans,they did no harm to those that abode with them, and for thosewho had a mind to go away, they conducted them as far as theirborders reached.
6. There was also a plot laid against the Jews in Agrippa'skingdom; for he was himself gone to Cestius Gallus, to An­


tioch,







OCR Output








Chap. IV. ANTIQJJITIES OF THE JEWS. 67


embraced the Jewish religion, to send purple and gold to thetemple at Jerusalem, and, when they had gotten them, they em­ployed them for their own uses, and spent the money them­selves ; on which account it was that they at first required it ofher. Whereupon Tiberius, who had been informed of thething by Saturninus, the husband of Fulvia, who desired inqui­ry might be made about it, ordered all the Jews to be banishedout of Rome; at which time the consuls listed 4000 men outof them, and sent them to the island Sardinia ; but punished agreater number of them, who were unwilling to become soldiers,on account of keeping the laws of their forefathers *. Thuswere these Jews banished out of the city by the wickedness offour irien:
CHAP. iv.
*
How the Samaritans made a tumult, and Pilate destroyed many ofthem : bow Pilate was accused, and what things were done byVitellius relating to the Jews and the Parthians. •
J 1. T>UT the nation of die Samaritans did not escape without-"-^ tumults. The man who excited them to it, was onewho thought lying a thing of little consequence, and who con­trived every thing so that the multitude might be pleased ; sdhe bid them to get together upon Mount Gerixzim, which isby them looked upon as the most holy of all mountains, andassured them, that when they were come thither, he wouldshew them those sacred vessels which were laid under that place,because Moses f put them' there. So they came thither armed,
I 2 and


* Of the banishment of these 4000 Jews into Sardinia by Tiberius, see Stieto-aius in Tiber' seel. 36. But as for Mr Reland's nore here, which supposes, thatJews could not, consistently with their laws, be soldiers, it is contradicted byOne branch of the history before us, and contrary to innumerable instances oftheir fighting, and proving excellent soldiers in war; and indeed many of thebest of them, and even under heathen kings themselves, did so,' those, 1 mean,who allowed them their rest on the Sabbath-day, and other soiemn festivals, andlet them live according to their own laws, as Alexander the Great and the Pto­lemies of Egypt did. It is true, they could not always obtain those privileges,and then they got excused as well as they could, or sometimes absolutely refusedto fight, which seems to have been the case here, as to the major part of theJews now banished, but nothing more. See several of the Roman decrees hitheir favour as to such matters, B. XIV. ch. jt.
t Since Moses never came himself bc'yond Jordan, nor particularly to MountGerizzim, and since these Samaritans have a tradition among them, related hereby Dr Hudson, from Reland, who was very skilful in Jewish and Samaritanlearning, that in the days of Uzzi or Ozzi the high priest, i Chron. vi. 6' the arkand other sacred vessels were, by God's command, laid up or hidden in MountGerizzim, it is highly probable that this was the foolish foundation the present;Samaritans went upon, in the sedition here described, and that we Should readhere anas, instead of MVWIM, in the text of Josephus.







OCR Output








102 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book XVIII.


those who converse with them ; for none of them will deceiveyou, when once they have given you their right hands, nor willany one doubt of their fidelity, when that is once given, eventhough they were before suspected of injustice. When Arra-banus had done this, he sent away Anileus to persuade his bro­ther to come to him. Now this the king did, because he want­ed to curb his own governors of provinces by the courage ofthese Jewish brethren, lest they should make a league withthem ; for they were ready for a revolt, and were disposed torebel, had they been sent on an expedition against them. Hewas also afraid, lest when he was engaged in a war in order tosubdue those governors of provinces that had revolted, the partyof Asineus, and those in Babylonia, should be augmented, andeither make war upon him, when they should hear of that re­volt, or, if they should be disappointed in that case, they wouldnot fail of doing farther mischief to him. .
4. When the king had these intentions, he sent away Anileus,and Anileus prevailed on his brother [to come to the king], whenhe had related to him the king's good-will, and the oath that hehad taken. Accordingly they made haste to go to Artabanus,who received them, when they were come with pleasure, andadmired Asineus's courage in the actions he had done, and thisbecause he was a little man to see to, and at first sight appearedcontemptible also, and such as one might deem a person of no va­lue at all. He also said to his friends, how, upon the comparison,he shewed his soul to be, in all respects, superior to his body ;and when, as they were drinking together, he once shewed Asi­neus to Abdagases, one of the generals of his army, and told himhis name, and described the great courage he was of in war, andAbdagases had desired leave to kill him, and thereby to inflicton him a punishment for those injuries he had done to the Par­thian government, the king replied, " I will never give thee" leave to kill a man who hath depended on my faith, especially" not after I have sent him tny right hand, and endeavoured to" gain his belief by oaths made by the gods. But, if thou beest** a truly warlike man, thou standest not in need of my perjury." Go thou then, and avenge the Parthian government; attack** this man, when he is returned back, and conquer him by thef forces that are under thy command, without my privity."Hereupon the king called for Asineus, and said to him, " It is.** time for thee, O thou young man ! to return home, and notf provoke the indignation of my generals in this place any far-" ther, lest they attempt to murder thee, and that without my ap-*! probation. I commit to thee the country of Babylonia in trust,M that it may, by thy care, be preserved free from robbers, and.
" from.







OCR Output








Chap. XXXIII. WARS or THE jswrs. 955


convulsion of all his members, insomuch that the diviners said,those diseases were a punishment upon him for what he had doneto the Rabbins. Yet did he struggle with his numerous disor­ders, and still had a desire to live, and hoped for recovery, andconsidered of several methods of cure. Accordingly, he wentover Jordan, and made use of those hot baths at Callirhoe,whieh ran into the lake Asphaltitis, but are themselves sweetenough to be drunk. And here the physicians thought properto bathe his whole body in warm oil, by letting it down intoa large vessel full of oil; whereupon his eyes failed him, and hecame, and went as if he were dying; and as a tumult was thenmade by his servants, at their voice he revived again. Yet didhe after this despair of recovery, and gave orders that each sol­dier should have fifty drachms a-piece, and that his comman­ders and friends should have great sums of mo: ey given them.
6. He then returned back and came to Jericho, in such a me­lancholy state of body as almost threatened him with presentdeath, when he proceeded to attempt an horrid wickedness; forhe got together the most illustrious men of the whole Jewishnation, out of every village, into a place called the Hippodrome,and there shut them in. He then called for his sister Salome,and her husband Alexas, and made this speech to them: " I" know well enough that the Jews will keep a festival upon" my death; however it is in my power to be mourned for on" other accounts, and to hav« a splendid funeral, if you willbe'" but subservient to my commands. Do you but take care to" send soldiers to encompass these men that are now in custody," and slay them immediately upon my death, and then all Ju-" dea, and every family of them, will weep at it whether they" will or no."
7. These were the commands he gave them: when there cameletters from his ambassadors at Rome, whereby information wasgiven that Acme was put to death at Caesar's command, and thatAntipater was condemned to die; however, they wrote withal,that if Herod had a mind rather to banish him, Caesar permittedhim so to do. So he for a little while revived, andhad a desire tolive; but presently after he was overborne by his pains, and wasdisordered by want of food, and by a convulsive cough, andendeavoured to prevent a natural death; so he took an apple, andasked for a knife, for he used to pare apples and eat them; hethen looked round about to see that there was nobody to hinderhim, and lift up his right hand as if he would stab himself; butAchiabus, his first cousin, came running to him,andheld his hand,and hindered him frotu so doing; on which occasion a very greatlamentation was made in the palace,as if the king were expiring.
Y r 2 As







OCR Output








Chap. XI. WARS OF THE JEWS. 381


strained the violence of these men, who were in a fit of madnessagainst the patricians, he would lose those on whose account itwas most desireable to rule, and would be emperor over a desert.
5. When Claudius heard this, he restrained the violence ofthe soldiery, and received the senate into the camp, and treatedthem after an obliging manner, and went out with them present­ly to offer their thank-offerings to God, which were proper up­on his first coming to the empire. Moreover, he bestowed onAgrippa his whole paternal kingdom immediately, and added toit, besides those countries that had been given by Augustus toHerod,' Trachoniti-s and Auranitis, and still besides these, thatkingdom which was called the kingdom of Lysaniat, This gifthe declared tothe people by a decree, but ordered the magistratesto have the donation engraved on tables of brass, and to be setap in the capitol. He bestowed on his brother Herod, who wasalso his son-in-law, by marrying [his daughter] Bernice, thekingdom of Chalcis.
6. So now riches flowed in to Agrippa by his enjoyment ofso large a dominion, nor did he abuse the money he had onsmall matters, but he began to encompass Jerusalem with sucha wall, which, had it been brought to perfection, had made it im­practicable for the Romans to take it by siege; but his death,which happened at Cesarca, before he had raised the walls totheir due height, prevented him. He had then reigned threeyears,as he had governed his tetrarchies three other years. Heleft behind him three daughters, born to him by Cyprus, Ber­nice, Mariamne, and Brasilia, and a son born of the same mo­ther, whose name was Agrippa: he was left a very young child,so that Claudius made the country a Roman province, and sentCuspius Fadus to be its procurator, and after him TiberiasAlexander, who, making no alterations of the ancient laws,kept the nation in tranquillity. Now after this, Herod the kingof Chalcis died, and left behind him two sons, born to him ofhis brother's daughter Bernice; their names were Bernicianus,and Hyreanm. £He also left behind him] Aristobulus, whomhe had by his former wife, Mariamne. There was besides ano­ther brother of his that died a private person, his name was al­so Aristobulus, who left behind him a daughter, whose namewas Jotape: and these, as I have formerly said, were the chil­dren of Aristobulus the son of Herod, which Aristobulus andAlexander were born to Herod by Mariamne, and were slainby him. But as for Alexander's posterity, they reigned inArmenia.
3 C 3 CHAP.







OCR Output








418 WARS OF THE JEWS. Book If.


gotten, and the buildings they had burnt down, and proceededno farther.
7. But on the next day, which was the fifteenth of the monthLous, [Ab], they made an assault upon Antonia, and besiegedthe garrison which was in it two days, and then took the garri­son, and slew them, and set the citadel on fire; after which theyinarched to the palace, whither the king's soldiers were fled, andparted themselves into four bodies, and made an attack upon thewalls. As for those that were within it, no one had the courageto sally out, because those that assaulted them were so numerous,but they distributed themselves into the breast-works and tur­rets, and shot at the besiegers, whereby many of the robbers fellunder the walls; nor did they cease to fight one with anothereither by night or by day, while the seditious supposed that thosewithin would grow weary for want of food, and those withoutsupposed the others would do the like by the tediousness of thesiege.
8. In the mean time one Manahem, the son of Judas, that wascalled the Galilean ^who was a very cunning sophister, and hadformerly reproached the Jews under Cyrenius, that after Godthey were subject to the Romans,), took some of the men of notewith him, and retired toMassada, where he broke open King He­rod's armoury, and gave arms not only to his own people, but toother robbers also. These he made use of for a guard, and re­turned in the state of a king to Jerusalem; he became the leaderof the sedition, and gave orders for continuing the siege, but theywanted proper instruments, and it was not practicable to under­mine the wall, because the darts came down upon them from,above. But still they dug a mine from a great distance under oneof the towers, and made it totter, and having done that, they setfire on what was combustible, and left it, and when the founda­tions were burnt below, the tower fell down suddenly. Yet didthey then meet with another wall that had been built within, forthe besieged were sensible beforehand of what they were doing,and probably die tower shook as it was undermining; so theyprovided themselves of another fortification ; which, when thebesiegers unexpectedly saw, while they thought they had already-gained the place, they were under some consternation. However,those that were within sent to Manahem, and to the other lead*ers of the sedition, and desired they might go out upon a capitu­lation : this was granted to the king's soldiers, and their owncountrymen only, who went out accordingly ; but the Romansthat were left alon« were greatly dejected, for they were notable to force their way-through such a multitude ; and to desirethem to give them their right hand for their security, they
thought







OCR Output








,'WARS OF THE JEWS. .- Book I.


conceal the money he had used in hiring men [to write the let-' ters]; for he brought in an aecount of his expences, amounting' to two hundred talents, his main pretence for which was thelaw-suit he had been in with Sylleus. So while all his rogue-'! tits, even' those of a lesser sort also, were covered by his greatervillainy, while all the examinations by torture proclaimed hisattempt to murder his father, and the letters proclaimed hissecond attempt to murder his brethren; yet did noone of thosethat came to Rome inform him of his' misfortunes in Judea, al­though seven months had intervened between his conviction andhis return, so great was the hatred which they all bore to him.; And perhaps they were the ghosts of those-brethren of his thathad been murdered, that stopped the mouths of those that in­tended to have told him. He then wrote from Rome, and in­formed [his friends] that he would soon come to them, and howhe was dismissed with honour by Caesar.
3. Now the king,being desirous to get this plotter against himintohishands,and berngalso afraid lest heshould some waycometo the knowledge how his affairs stood, and be upon his guard,he dissembled his anger in his epistle to him, as in other points,he wrote kindly to him, and desired him to make haste, because,if he came quit kly, he would then lay aside the complaints hehad against his mother; for Antipater was not ignorant thathis mother had been expelled out of the palace. However, hehad before received a letter, which contained an account of thedeath of Pheroras, at * Tarentum, and made great lamentationsat it; for which some commended him, as being for his ownuncle; 'though probably this confusion arose on account of hishaving thereby failed in his plot [on his father's life], and histears were more for the loss of him that was to have been sub­servient therein, than for [an uncle] Pheroras: moreover, asort of fear came upon him as to his designs, lest the poisonshould have been discovered. However, when he was in Cilicia,he received the forementioned epistle from his father, and madegreat haste accordingly. But when he had sailed to Celenderis,a suspicion came into his mind relating to his mother's misfor­tunes; as if his soul foreboded some mischief to itself. Thosetherefore of his friends which were the most considerate, ad­vised him not rashly to goto his father, till he had le irned whatwere the occasions v/hy his mother had been ejected, becausethey were afraid that he might be involved in the calumnies thathad been cast upon his mother: but those that were less con­siderate, and had more regard to their own desires of seeing theirnative country, than to Antipater's safety, persuaded him tomake haste home, and not, by delaying his journey, afford his-


father*This Tarcntum ha« coins ctiil extant, as RehtiJ informs us here in his note.







OCR Output








£06 THE LIFE OF FLAVIUS JOSEPHUS*


round about him, was terrified, and complied ; and as for thoseof his followers that were excluded, when they were informedthat he was seized, they ran away. I then called Jesus to me byhimself, and told him, that " I was not a stranger to that treach-" erous design he had against me, nor was I ignorant by whom** he was sent for ; that, however, I would forgive what he had*' done already, if he would repent of it, and be faithful to me** hereafter."' And thus, upon his promise to do all that I de­sired, I let him go, and gave him leave to get those whom hehad formerly had with him together again. But I threatenedthe inhabitants of Sepphoris, that, if they would not leave offtheir ungrateful treatment of me, I would punish them sufficiently.
23. A( this time it was that two great men, who were underthe jurisdiction of the king [Agrippa], came to me out of theregion of Trachonitis, bringing their horses and their arms, andcarrying with them their money also ; and when the Jews wouldforce them to be circumcised, if they would stay among them, Iwould not permit them to have any force put upon them *, butsaid to them, u Every one ought to worship God according tort his own inclinations, and not to be constrained by force ; andu that these men, who had fled to us for protection, ought not*' to be so treated as to repent of their coming hither." Andwhen I had pacified the multitude, I provided for the men thatwere come to us whatsoever it was they wanted, according totheir usual way of living, and that in great plenty also.
24. Now king Agrippa sent an army to make themselvesmasters of the citadel of Gamala, and over it Equiculus Modius;but the forces that were sent were not enow to encompass thecitadel quite round, but lay before it in the open places, and be­sieged it. But when Ebutius the decurion, who was intrustedwith the government of the great plain, heard that I was at Si-monias, a village situated in the confines of Galilee, and was dis­tant from him sixty furlongs, he took an hundred horsemen thatwere with him by night, and a certain number of footmen, a-bout two hundred, and brought the inhabitants of the city Gi-bea along with him as auxiliaries, and marched in the night,and came to the village where I abode. Upon this I pitched mycamp over against him, which had a great number of forces init; but Ebutius tried to draw us down into the plain, as great­ly depending on his horsemen t but we would not come down ;
for
* Josephns's opinion is here welllworth noting, that every one is to be permit t-ed to worship God according to his own conscience, and is not to be compelled inmatters of religion ; as one may here observe on the contrary, that the rest of theJews were still for obliging all those who married Jews to be circumcised, andbecome Jews, and were ready to destroy all that would not submit to do so. Seelest, 31. and Luke, ix. 54.







OCR Output








iiiiiii :


HX IHT3 B


 







OCR Output








6hap. XXV. WARS OF THE JEWS. 327


pater, Jie insulted Alexander, now he was under his misfortunes,and got a stout company of his kindred together, and raised allsorts of calumny against him: and for the king, he was broughtto such a degree of terror by those prodigious slanders and con­trivances, that Tie fancied he saw Alexander coming to him witha drawn sword in his hand; so he caused him to be seized up­on immediately and bound, and fell to examining his friendsby torture, many of whom died [under the torture], but woulddiscover nothing, aor say any thing against their consciences;but some of them, being forced to speak falsely by the painsthey endured, said that Alexander, and his brother Aristobulus,plotted against him, and waited for an opportunity to kill him.as he was hunting, and then fly away to Rome. These acci .-sations, though they were of an incredible nature, and onlyframed upon the great distress they were in, were readily be­lieved by the king, who thought it some comfort to him, afterhe had bound his son; that it might appear he had not dqne itunjustly.
;: CHAP. XXV.
Archelaus procures a reconciliation between Alexander, Pheroras,and Herod.


§ 1. "VTOW as to Alexander, since he perceived it impossibleJL\J to persuade his father [that he was innocent], he re­solved to meet his calamities, how severe soever they were; sohe composed four books against his enemies, and confessed thatjiehadbeen in aplotjbut declared withal that the greatest part [ofthe courtiers] were in a plot with him, and chiefly Pheroras, andSalome ; nay, that Salome once came and forced him to lie withher in the night time, whether he would or no. These bookswere put into Herod's hands, and made a great clamour againstthe men in power. And now it was that Archelaus came hasti­ly into Judea, as being affrighted for his son-in-law, and hisdaughter; and he came as a proper assistant, and in a very pru­dent manner, and by a stratagem he obliged the king not toexe-cute what he had threatened; for when he was come to him,he cried out, " Where in the world is this wretched son-in-law" of mine? Where shall I see the head of his which contrivedf' to murder his father, which I will tear to pieces with my" own hands. I will do the same also to my daughter, who«' hath such a fine husband: for although she be not a partner in*'' the plot, yet, by being the wife of such a creature, she is pol«' luted. And I cannot but admire at thy patience, against" whom this plot is laid, if Alexander be still alive ; for as I
" eame;







OCR Output








Chap. IX. WARS OF THE JEWS. 381


days, both Herod and Philip continued in their tetrachies, andthe latter of them built the city Caesarea, at the fountains ofJordan, and in the region of Paneas; as also the city Julias, inthe lower Gaulanitis. Herod' also built the city Tiberias inGalilee, and in Perea [beyond Jordan] another that was alsocalled Julias.
2. Now Pilate, who was sent as a procurator into Judea byTiberius, sent by night those images of Caesar that are calledtnsigns, into Jerusalem. This excited a very great tumult amongthe jews when it was day; for those that were near them wereastonished at the sight of them, as indications that their lawswere trodden underfoot; for those laws do not permit any sortof image to be brought into the city. Nay, besides the indigna­tion which the citizens had themselves at this procedure, a vastnumber of people came running out of the country. These camezealously to Pilate to Cesarea, and besought him to carry thoseensigns out of Jerusalam, and to preserve them their ancient lawsinviolable ; but upon Pilate's denial of their request, they felldown prostrate upon the ground, and continued immoveable inthat posture for five days and as many nights.
3. On the next day Pilate sat upon his tribunal, in the openmarket place, and called to him the multitude, as desirous togive them an answer; and then gave a signal to the soldiers,that they should all by agreement at once encompass the Jewswith their weapons; so the band of soldiers stood round aboutthe Jews in three ranks. The Jews were under the utmost con­sternation at that unexpected sight. Pilate also said to them,that they should be cut in pieces, unless they would admit ofCaesar's images, and gave intimation to the soldiers to drawtheir naked swords. Hereupon the Jews, as it were at onesignal, fell down in vast numbers together, and exposed theirnecks bare, and cried out that they were sooner ready to beslain, than that their law should be transgressed. Hereupon Pi­late was greatly surprised at their prodigious superstition, andgave order that the ensigns should be presently carried out ofJerusalem.
4. After this he raised another disturbance, by expending thatsacred treasure which is called * Corban upon aqueducts, where­by he brought water from the distance of four hundred fur­longs. At this the multitude had indignation ; and when Pilatewas come to Jerusalem, they came about his tribunal, and madea clamour at it. Now when he was apprised aforehand of this
disturbance,


* This use of the corban, or oblation, a? here applied to the sacred money dedi-eated to God in the treasury of the ternple, illustrates our Saviour's words, MarkV'i. II, I*. ".' -







OCR Output








THE LIFE OF FLAVIUS JOSEPHUS. 203


that do as they ought to do, delivered me still out of the handsof these my enemies, and afterward preserved me when I fellinto those many dangers which I shall relate hereafter.
16. Now the multitude of the Galileans had that great kind­ness for me, and fidelity to me, that when their cities were takenby force, and their wives and children carried into slavery, theydid not so deeply lament for their own calamities, as they weresolicitous for my preservation. But when John saw this, he en­vied me, and wrote to me, desiring that I would give him leaveto come down, and make use of the hot-baths of Tiberias forthe recovery of the health of his body. Accordingly, I did nothinder him, as having no suspicion of any wicked designs ofhis ; and I wrote to those to whom I had committed the admi­nistration of the affairs of Tiberias by name, that they shouldprovide a lodging for John, and for such as should come withhim, and should procure him what necessaries soever he shouldstand in need of. Now at this time my abode was in a villageof Galilee, which is named Cana.
17. But when John was come to the city of Tiberias, he per­suaded the men to revolt from their fidelity to me, and to adhereto him ; and many of them gladly received that invitation of his,as ever fond of innovations, and by nature disposed to changes,and delighting in seditions ; but they were chiefly Justus and hisfather Pistus, that were earnest in their revolt from me, andtheir adherence to John. But I came upon them, and preventedthem ; for a messenger had come to me Irom Silas, whom I hadmade governor of Tiberias, as I have said already, and had toldme of the inclinations of the people of Tiberias, and advised meto make haste thither ; for that, if I made any delay, the citywould come under another's jurisdiction. Upon the receipt ofthis letter of Silas, I took two hundred men along with me, andtravelled all night, having sent before a messenger to let thepeople of Tiberias know that I was coming to them. When Icame near to the city, which was early in the morning, the mul­titude came out to meet me ; and John came with them, and sa­luted me, but in a most disturbed manner, as being afraid thatmy coming was to call him to an account for what I was nowsensible he was doing. So he, in great haste, went to his lod­ging. But when I was in the open place of the city, having dis­missed the guards I had about me, excepting one, and ten armedmen that were with him, I attempted to make a speech to themultitude of the people of Tiberias: and, standing on a certainelevated place, I entreated them not to be so hasty in their re­volt ; for that such a change in their behaviour would be to theirreproach, and that they would then justly be suspected by those
C c 2 ' that­







OCR Output








WARS OF THE JEWS. Book II.


sarea, as he ought to have done, and quenching the flame of warwhich was beginning thence, and so taking away the occasion ofany disturbances, on which account it was that he had receiveda reward [of eight talents], he marched hastily with an armyof horsemen and footmen against Jerusalem, that he might gainhis will by the arms of the Romans, and might hy his terror,and by his threatenings, bring the city into subjection.
7. But the people were desirous of making Florus ashamed ofhis attempt, and met his soldiers with acclamations, and putthemselves in order to receive him very submissively. But he sentCapito, a centurion, before hand, with fifty soldiers, to bid themgo back, and not now make a shew of receiving him in an o-bliging manner, whom they had so fondly-reproached before;and said, that it was incumbent on them, in case they had ge­nerous souls, and were free speakers, to jest upon him to hisface, and appear to be lovers of liberty, not only in words, butwith their weapons also. With this message was the multitudeamazed, and upon the coming of Capito's horsemen into themidst of them, they were dispersed before they could salute Flo­rus, or manifest their submissive behaviour to him. Accord­ingly, they retired to their own houses, and spent that night infear and confusion of face.
8. Now at this time Florus took up his quarters at the pa-lace; and on the next day he had his tribunal set before it, andsat upon it, when the high-priests, and the men of power, andthose of the greatest eminence in the city, came all before thattribunal; upon which Florus commanded them to deliver upto him those that had reproached him, and told them that theyshould themselves partake of the vengeance to them belonging,if they did not produce the criminals; but these demonstratedthat the people were peaceably disposed, and they begged for­giveness for those that had spoken amiss; for that it was nowonder at all that in so great a multitude there should be somemore daring than they ought to be, and by reason of their young­er age foolish also; and that it was impossible to distinguish thosethat offended from the rest, while every one was sorry for whathe had done, and denied it out of fear of what would follow;that he ought, however, to provide for the peace of the nation,and to take such counsels as might preserve the city for theRomans, and rather for the sake of a great number of innocentpeople, to forgive a few that were guilty, than for the sake ofa few of the wicked, to put so large and good a body of men in­to disorder.
9. Florus was more provoked at this, and called out aloud tothe soldiers to plunder that which was called Tie Upper Mar­ket







OCR Output








Chap. II. ANTIOJJITES OF THE JEWS. r


befallen the Romans, and that habitable world which was sub­ject to them. So that at length it was determined that she mustdie ; nor could those of the .contrary opinion at all prevail tohave her saved ; and Lupus was sent accordingly. Nor wasthere any delay made in executing what he went about, but hewas subservient to those that sent him on the first opportunity,as desirous to be no way blameable in what might be done forthe advantage of the people. So, when he was come into thepalace, he found Cesonia, who was Cains'a wife, lying by iierhusband's dead body, which also Jay down on the ground, anddestitute of all such things as the law allows to the dead, and allover herself besmeared with the blood of her husband's wounds,and bewailing the great affliction she was under, her daughterlying by her also : and nothing else was heard in these her cir.cumstances, but her complaint of .Caius, as if he had not regard­ed what she had often told him of before-hand ; which wordsof hers were taken in a different sense even at that time, and arenow esteemed equally ambiguous by those that hear of them,and are still interpreted according to the different inclinations ofpeople. Now some said that the words denoted, that she had ad­vised him to leave off his mad behaviour and his barbarouscruelty to the citizens, and to govern the public with modera­tion and virtue, lest he should perish by the same way, upontheir using him as he had used them. But some said, that, ascertain words had passed concerning the conspirators, she desi­red Caius to make no delay, but immediately to put them all todeath, and this whether they were guilty or not, and that there­by he would be out of the fear of any danger; and that thiswas what she reproached him for, when she advised him so to do,but he was too slow and tender in the matter. And this waswhat Cesonia said, and what the opinions of men were about it.But, when she saw Lupus approach, she shewed him Caius'sdead body, and persuaded him to come nearer, with lamentationand tears; and as she perceived that Lupus was in disorder, andapproached her in order to execute some design disagreeable tohimself, she was well aware for what purpose he came, andstretched out her naked throat, and that very chearfully to him,bewailing her case, like one utterly despaired of her life, andbidding him not to boggle at finishing the tragedy they had re­solved upon relating to her. So she boldly received her death'swound at the hand of Lupus, as did the daughter after her. SoLupus made haste to inform Cherea of what he had done.
5. This was the end of Caius, after he had'reigned four years,within four months. He was, even before he came to be em­peror, ill-natured, and one that had arrived at the utmost pitch
' flf







OCR Output








Chap. XVIII. WARS OF THE JEWS. SOI


sent it to his brother Pheroras, by way of punishment for theirslain brother, for he was the man that slew Joseph. Now aswinter was going off, Herod marched to Jerusalem, and broughthis army to the wall of it; this vas the third year s>ince hehad been made king at Rome; so he pitched his camp beforethe temple, for on that side it might be besieged, and there itwas that Pompey took the city. So he parted the work amongthe army, and demolished the suburbs, and raised three banks,and gave orders to have towers built upon those banks, and leftthe most laborious of his acquaintance at the works. But hewent himself to Samaria, to take the daughter of Alexander,the son of Aristobulus to wife, who had been betrothed to himbefore, as we have already said; and thus he accomplished thisby the bye, during the siege of the city, for he had his enemyin great contempt already.
9. When he had thus married Mariamne, he came back to Je­rusalem w ith a greater army; Sosius also joined him with alarge army, both of horsemen and footmen, which he sent be­fore him through the midland parts, while he marched himselfalong Phenicia; and when the whole army was gotten together,which were eleven regiments of footmen, and six thousandhorsemen, besides the Syrian auxiliaries, which was no smallpart of the army, they pitched their camp near to the north wall.Herod's dependence was upon the decree of the senate, by whichhe was made king, and Sosius relied upon Antony, who sentthe army that was under him to Herod's assistance.
CHAP. XVIII.
How Herod and Sosius took Jerusalem by force; and what deathAntigonus came to. Alto concerning Cleopatra's aiiariciouttemper.
§ 1. "^T'OW the multitude of the Jews that were in the city-L\l were divided into several factions; for the people ihatcrowded about the temple, being the weaker part of them,gave it out, that as the times were, he was the happiest andmost religious man who should die first. But as to the morebold and hardy men, they got together in bodies, and fell a rob­bing others after various manners, and these particularly plun­dered the places that were about the city, and this because therewas no food left either for the horses or the men; yet some ofthe warlike men xvlio were used to fight regularly, were ap­pointed to defend the city during the siege, and these drovethose that raided the banks aivay from the wall, and these werealways inventing one engine or another to be an hindrance to
tl*







OCR Output








AttTIOJUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book XX.


CHAP. VII.
Felix is made procurator of 'Judea ; as also concerning Agrippajunior and his sisters.
§ 1. CO Claudius sent Felix, the brother of Pallans, to take^ care of the affairs of Judea ; and, when he had alreadycompleted the twelfth year of his reign, he had bestowedupon Agrippa the tetrarchy of Philip and Batanea, and addedthereto Trachonitis, with Abila; which last had been the tetrar-'\ chy of Lysanias; but he took from him Chalcis, when he had^ been governor thereof four years. And, when Agrippa hadreceived these countries as the'gift of Caesar, he gave his sisterIXrusilla in marriage to Azizus, king of Emesa, upon his con­sent to be circumcised ; for Epiphaaes, the son of king An-tiochus, had refused to marry her, because, after he had pro­mised her father formerly to come over to the Jewish religion,he would not now perform that promise. He also gave Ma-riamne in marriage to Archelaus, the son of Helcias, to whomshe had formerly been betrothed by Agrippa her father ; fromwhich marriage was derived a daughter, whoie name was Ber*nice.
2. But for the marriage of Drusilla with Azizus, it was inno long time afterward dissolved upon the following occasion ;While Felix was procurator of Judea, he saw this Drusilla, andfell in love with her ; for she did indeed exceed all other womenin beauty ; and he sent to her a person whose name was Simon *,
one


* This Simon, a friend of Felix, a Jew, born in Cyprus, though he pretendedto be a magician, and seems to have been wicked enough, could hardly be thatfamous Simon the magician, in the Acts of the Apostles, viii. 9. &c as some areready to suppose. This Simon mentioned in the Acts was not properly a Jew, bata Samaritan, of the town of Gittae, in the country of Samaria, as the ApostolicalConstitutions, VI. 7. the Recognitions of Clement, II. 6. and Justin Martyr, him-self born in the country of Samaria, Apology, 1. 34. inform us. He was also theauthor, not of any ancient Jewish, but of the first Gentile heresies, as the fore-mentioned authors assure us. So I suppose him a different person from the other.I mean this only upon the hypothesis, that Josephus was not misinformed as tohisfeeing a Cypriot Jew ; for otherwise the time, the name, the profession, and thewickedness of them both, would strongly incline one to believe them the very same.As to that Drusilla, the sister of Agrippa junior, as Josephus informs us here,:md a Jewess, as St Luke informs us, Acts, xxiv. 74. whom this Simon mentionedby Josephus, persuaded to leave her former husband, Azizus, king of Emesa, aproselyte of justice, and to marry Felix, the heathen procurator of Judea, Tacit.Hist. V. 9. supposes her to be an heathen, and the grand-daughter of Antoniusand Cleopatra, contrary both to St Luke and Josephus. Now Tacitus lived some­what too remote, both as to time and place, to be compared with either of thoseJewish writers, in a matter concerning the Jews in Judea in their own days, andconcerning a sister of Agrippa junior, with which Agrippa Josephus was himselfso well acquainted. It is probable that Tacitus may say true, when he informsus, that this Felix (who had in all three wives, or queens, as Suetonius in Clau*dius, sect. 28. assures us) did once marry such a grandchild of Antonius andCleopatra; and, finding the name of one of them to have been Drusilla, he mis­took her for that other wife, whose name he did not know.







OCR Output








1"6 Book XX. ANTIOJJITIES OF THE JEWS.


father was Germanicus, the brother of Caesar. Her husbandwas Domitius ^Enobarbus, one of the most illustrious personsthat was in the city of Rome ; after whose death, and her longcontinuance in widowhood, Claudius took her to wife. Shebrought along with her a son, Domitius, of the same name withhis father. He had before this slain his wife Messalina, out ofjealousy, by whom he had his children Britannicus and Octavia ;their eldest sister was Antonia, whom he had by Pelina his firstwife. He also married Octavia to Nero ; for that was the namethat Caesar gave him afterward, upon his adopting him for hisSon.
2. But now Agrippina was afraid, lest, when Britannicus shouldcome to man's estate, he should succeed his father in the govern­ment, and desired to seize upon the principality beforehand forher own son [Nero] ; upon which the report went, that she thencecompassed the death of Claudius. Accordingly she sent Burrhus,the general of the army, immediately, and with him the tribunes,and such also of the rreed-men as were of the greatest authority,to bring Nero away into the camp, and to salute him emperor.And when Nero had thus obtained the government, he got Bri­tannicus to be so poisoned, that the multitude should not perceiveit; although he publicly put Jlis own mother to death not longafterward, making her this requital, not only for being born ofher, but by bringing it so about by her contrivances, that he ob­tained the Roman empire. He also slew Octavia his own wife,and many other illustrious persons, under this pretence, that theyplotted against him.
3. But I omit any farther discourse about these affairs ; forthere have been a great many who have composed the historyof Nero; some of which have departed from the truth of factsout of favour, as having received benefits from him ; whileothers, out of hatred to him, and the great ill-will which theybare him, have so impudently raved against him with their lies,that they justly deserve to be condemned. Nor do I wonder atsuch as have told lies of Nero, since they have not in their wri­tings preserved the truth of history as to those facts that wereearlier than his time, even when the actors could have no wayincurred their hatred, since those writers lived a long time afterthem. But as to those that have no regard to truth, they maywrite as they please ; for in that they take delight: but as toourselves, who have made truth our direct aim, we shall brief­ly touch upon what only belongs remotely to this undertaking,but shall relate what hath happened to us Jews with great accu­racy, and shall not grudge our pains in giving an account both ofthe calamities we have suffered, and of the crimes we have beenguilty of. I will now therefore return to the relation of ourswn affairs. 4. For







OCR Output








Chap. XXIV. WARS or THE JEWS. .


fences, if they would amend for the time to come. But theyrefuted the calumnies that had been raised of them, and said theywere false, and alleged that their actions were sufficient for theirvindication, and said withal, that he himself ought to shut hisears against such tales, and not to be too easy in believing them,for that there would never be wanting those that would tell liesto their disadvantage, as long as any would give ear to them.
5. When they had thus soon pacified him, as being their fa­ther, they got clear of the present fear they were in. Yet didthey see occasion for sorrow in some time afterward; for theyknew that Salome, as well as their uncle Pheroras, were theirenemies; who were both of them heavy and severe persons, andespecially Pheroras, who was a partner with Herod in all the af­fairs of the kingdom, excepting his diadem. He had also anhundred talents of his own revenue, and enjoyed the advantageof all the land beyond Jordan, which he had received as a giftfrom his brother, who had asked of Caesar to make him a te--trarch, as he was made accordingly. Herod had also given hima wife out of the royal family, who was no other than his owawife's sister, and after her death had solemnly espoused to himhis own eldest daughter, with a dowry of three hundred talents ;but Pheroras refused to consummate this royal marriage outof his affection to a maid servant of his. Upon whkh accountHerod was very angry, and gave that daughter in marriage toa brother's son of his [Joseph], who was slain afterward by theParthians; but in some time he laid aside his anger against Phe­roras, and pardoned him, as one cot able to overcome his fool­ish passion for the maid-servant.
6. Nay, Pheroras had been accused long before, while thequeen [Mariamne] was alive, as if he were in a plot to poisonHerod; and there came then so great a number of informers,that Herod himself, though he was an exceeding lover of hiabrethren, was brought to believe what was said, and to be afraidof it also: and when he had brought many of those that wereunder suspicion to the torture, he came at last to Pheroras'sownfriends; none of which did openly confess the crime, but theyowned that he had made preparation to take her whom he loved,and ran away to the Parthians. Costobarus also, the husband ofSalome, to whom the king had given her in marriage, after herformer husband had been put to death for adultery, was instru­mental in bringing about this contrivance and flight of his. Nordid Salome escape all calumny upon herself; for her brotherPheroras accused her, that she had made an agreement to marrySilleus, the procurator of Obodas, king of Arabia, who was atbitter enmity with Herod; but when she was convicted of this,
and







OCR Output








Chap. XII. -WARS OF TH£ JEWS. SS9


were in a flame, and assembled themselves so many of them bytheir zeal for their religion, as by an engine, and ran togetherwith united clamour to Cesarea, to Cumanus, and made suppll-cation to him, that he would not overlook this man, who hadoffered such an affront to God, and to his law, but punish himfor what he had done. Accordingly, he, perceiving that the mul­titude would not be quiet unless they had a comfortable answerfrom him, gave order that the soldier should be brought, anddrawn through those that required to have him punished to ex­ecution, which being done, the Jews went their ways.
3. After this there happened a fight between the Galileans andthe Samaritans; it happenedatavillage called Geman, which is si­tuate in the great plain of Samaria, where, as a great number ofJews were going up to Jerusalem to the feast [of tabernacles],a certain Galilean was slain; and besides a vast number of peopleran together out of Galilee, in order to fight with the Samaritans jbut the principal men among them came to Cumanus, and be­sought him, that before the evil became incurable, he wouldcome into Galilee,and bring the authorsof thismurdertopunish­ment, for that there was no other way to make the multitude se­parate without coming to blows. However, Cumanus postpon­ed their supplications to the other affairs he Mas then about, andsent the petitioners away without success.
4. But when the affair of this murder came to be told' at Je­rusalem, it put the multitude into disorder, and they left the feast,and without any generals to conduct them, they marched withgreat violence to Samaria; nor would they be ruled by any ofthe magistrates that were set over them, but they were mana­ged by one Eleazar, the son of Dineus, and by Alexander, inthese their thievish and seditious attempts. These men fell up­on those that were in the neighbourhood of the Acrabatene top-archy, and slew them, without sparing any age, and set the vil­lages on fire.
5. But Cumanus took one troop of horsemen, called the troopof Sebaste, out of Cesarea, and came to the assistance of thosethat were spoiled; he also seized upon a great number of thosethat followed Eleazar, and slew more of them. And as for therest of the multitude of those that went so zealously to fight withthe Samaritans, the rulers of Jerusalem ran out clothed withsackcloth, and having ashes on their head, and begged of themto go their ways, lest by their attempt to revenge themselvesupon the Samaritans, they should provoke the Romans to comeagainst Jerusalem; to have compassion upon their country andtemple, their children and their wives, and not bring the utmostdangers of destruction upon them, in order to avenge themselves
upon







OCR Output








j.ju* ANTIOJJITIES OF THE JEWS. Book XIX.


it, to approve themselves to so many excellent persons as earnest­ly wished to be partakers with them in their design, for the de-Jivery of the city and of the government, even at the hazard oftheir own lives. But still Cherea was the most zealous of themall, both out of a desire of getting himself the greatest name, andalso by reason of his access to Caius's presence, with less danger,because he was tribune, and could therefore the more easily killhim.
4. Now, at this time came on the horse-races [Circensiangames] ; the view of which games was eagerly desired by thepeople of Rome , for they come with great alacrity into the hip­podrome [circus] at such times, and petition their emperors, ingreat multitudes, for wJiat they stand in need of; who usuallydid not think fit to deny them their requests, but readily andgratefully granted them. Accordingly they most importunate­ly desired, that Caius would now ease them in their tributes, andabate somewhat of the rigour of the taxes imposed upon them ;but he would not hear their petition ; and, when their clamoursincreased, he sent soldiers, some one way, and some another, andgave order, that they should lay hold on those that made the cla­mours, and without any more ado, bring them out, and put themto death. These were Caius's commands, and those who werecommanded execute the same ; and the number of those whowere slain on this occasion was very great. Now the people sawthis, and bore it so far, that they left off clamouring, because theysaw with their own eyes, that this petition to be relieved, as tothe payment of theirmoney, brought immediate death upon them.These things made Cherea more resolute to go on with his plot,in order to put an end to this barbarity of Caius against men.He then at several times, thought to fall upon Caius even as hewas feasting ; yet did he restrain himself by some considerations ;not that he had any doubt on him about killing him, but aswatching for a proper season, that the attempt might not be frus­trated, but that he might give the blow so as might certainlygain his purpose.
5. Cherea had been in the army a long time, yet was he notpleased with conversing so much with Caius. But Caius hadset him to require the tributes, and other dues, which, when notpaid in due time, were forfeited to Caesar's treasury ; and he hadmade some delays in requiring them, because those burdens hadbeen doubled, and hath rather indulged his own mild disposition,than performed Caius's command; nay, indeed, he provokedCaius to anger by his sparing men, and pitying the hard fortunesof those from whom he demanded the taxes, and Caius upbraid­ed him with his sloth and effeminacy in being so long about col­lecting







OCR Output








Chap. XIV. WARS OF THE JEWS. 289


for Herod, having a long while had a suspicion of the perfidious-ness of the barbarians, had taken care to have what was mostsplendid among his treasures conveyed into Idumea, as every onebelonging to him had in like manner done also. But the Par-thians proceeded to that degree of injustice, as to fill all the coun­try with war without denouncing it, and to demolish the cityMarissa, and not only to set up Antigonus for king, but to deli­ver Phasaelus and Hyrcanus bound into his hands, in order totheir being tormented by him. Antigonus himself also bit offHyrcanus'sears with his own teeth, as he fell down upon his kneesto him, that so he miyht never be able, upon any mutation ofaffairs, to take the high-priesthood again ; for the high-prieststhat officiated were to be complete and without blemish.
10. However, he failed in his purpose of abusing Phasaelus, byreason of his courage, for though he neither had the command ofhis sword nor of his hands, he prevented all abuses by dashinghis head against a stone ; so he demonstrated himself to be He­rod's own brother, and Hyrcanus a most degenerate relation, anddied with great bravery, and made the end of his life agreeable tothe actions of it. There is also another report about his end,viz. that he recovered of that stroke, and that a surgeon, whowas sent by Antigonus to heal him, filled the wound with poi­sonous ingredients, andsokilledhim; which soever of these deathshe came to the beginning of it was glorious. It is also report­ed, that before he expired he was informed by a certain poorwoman how Herod had escaped out of his hands, and that he.said thereupon, " 1 now die with comfort, since I leave behind" me one alive, that will avenge me of mine enemies."
H. This was the death of Phasaelus; but the Parthians, al­though they had failed of the woman they chiefly desired, yetdid they put the government of Jerusalem into the hands of An­tigonus, and took away Hyrcanus, and bound him', and carriedhim to Parthia.
CHAP. XIV.
When Herod is rejected in Arabia, ie makes laste to Rome,where Antony and C<ssar join their interest to make him kingof the Jews.


§ 1. '^TOW Herod did the more zealously pursue his journey
.LN into Arabia, as making has'te to get money of the king,
while his brother was yet alive, by which money alone it was
that he hoped to prevail upon the covetous temper of the barba­
rians to spare Phasaelus; for he reasoned thus with himself, that
if the Arabian king was too forgetful of his father's friendship
with him, and was too covetous to make him a free gift,he would
VOL. III. O o however







OCR Output








Chap. VI. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Ill


he sent soldiers immediately, and ordered them to plunder theneighbouring villages, and to bring the most eminent persons a-mong them in bonds to him. Now, as this devastation wasmaking, one of the soldiers seized the laws of Moses that lay inone of those villages, and brought them out before the eyes of allpresent, and tore them to pieces ; and this was done with re-proachful language, and much scurrility. Which things whenthe Jews heard of, they ran together, and that in great numbers,and came down to Cesarea, where Cuvnanus then was,, and be­sought him that he would avenge, not themselves, but God him-self, whose laws had been affronted; for that they could not beatlo live any longer, if the laws of their forefathers must be affront­ed after this manner. Accordingly Cumanus, out of fear leftthe multitude should go into a sedition, and by the advice of hisfriends also, took care that the soldier who had offered the affrontto the laws should be beheaded, and thereby put a stop to the'^edition which was ready to be kindled a second time.
CHAP. VI.
flo'ui there happened a quarrel between the Jews and the Samari­tans, and how Claudius put an end to their differences.
$ 1. "TVTOW there arose a quarrel between the Samaritans and,*-* the Jews on the occasion following : It was the customof the Galileans, when they came to the holy city at the festi­vals, to take their journeys through the country of the Sama­ritans * ; and at this time there lay, in the road they took, avillage that was called Ginoa, which was situated in the limitsof Samaria and the great plain, where certain persons theretobelonging fought with the Galileans, and killed a great many ofthem. But, when the principal of the Galileans were informedof what had been done, they came to Cumanus, and desired himto avenge the murder of those that were killed ; but he was in­duced by the Samaritans, with money, to do nothing in thematter; upon which the Galileans were much displeased, andpersuaded the multitude of the Jews to betake themselves toarms, and to regain their liberty, saying, That " slavery was" in itself a bitter thing, but that, when it was joined with di-" rect injuries, it was perfectly intolerable." And when theirprincipal men endeavoured to pacify them, and promised to en­deavour to persuade Cumanus to avenge those that were killed,
Y 2 ° they


* This constant passage of the Galileans through the country of Samaria, asthey went to Judea and Jerusalem, illustrates several passages in the gospels tothe same purpose, as Dr Hudson rightly observes. See Luke' xvii. i. John, iv. 4.See also Josephus in his own life, sect. 52 where that journey is determined t*three davs.







OCR Output








00 ANTIQUITIES or THE JEWS. Book XVIII.


manner as he was able, and spared for nothing, and went up toRome, and took Herodias along with him. But Agrippa,- whenhe was made Sensible of their intentions and preparations, healso prepared to go thither; and as soon as they heard they set sail,he sent Fortunatus, one of his freed-mea, to Rome, to carrv pre­sents to the emperory and letters against Herody and to give Caiusa particular account of those matters, if he should have any op­portunity. This man followed Herod so-quick, and had so pros­perous a voyage, and came so little after Herod, that while He­rod was with Caius, he came himself, and delivered his letters;for they both sailed to Dicearchiaj and found Caius at Baiae,which is itself a little city of Campania, at the distance of aboutfive furlongs from Dicearehia. There are in that place royalpalaces, with sumptuous apartments, every emperov still endea­vouring to out-do his predecessor's magnificence : the place alsoaffords warm baths, that spring out of the ground of their ownaccord, which are of advantage for the recovery of the health ofthose that make use of them, and, besides, they minister to men'sluxury also. Now Caius saluted Herod, for he first met withhim, and then looked upon the letters which Agrippa had seathim, and which were written in order to accuse Herod ; where­in he accused him, that he had been in confederacy with Sejanus,against Tiberius's government, and that he was now confederatewith Artabanus, the king of Parthia, in opposition to the govern­ment of Caius ; as a demonstration of which he alledged, that hehad armour sufficient for seventy thousand men ready in his ar­moury. Caius was moved at this- information and asked He­rod, whether what w&s said about the armour was true ? andwhen he confessed there was such armour there, for he could notdeny the same, the truth of it being too notorious, Caius took thatto be a sitfficient proof of the accusation, that he intended to revolt.So he took away from him his tetrarchy, and gave it by way ofaddition to Agrippa's kingdom ; he also gave Herod's money toAgrippa, and, by way of punishment, awarded him a perpetualbanishment, and appointed Lyons, a city of Gaul, to be his placeof habitation. But when he was informed that Herodias wasAgrippa's sister, he made her a present of what money was herown, and told her, that u it was her brother who prevented her" being put under the same calamity with her husband." Butshe made this reply; " Thou, indeed, O emperor ! actest after a" magnificent manner, and as becomes thyself in what thou of-" ferest me ; but the kindness which I have for my husband bin-" ders me from partaking of the favour of thy gift; for it is not" just, that I, who have been made a partner in his prosperity," should forsake him in his misfortunes." Hereupon Gaiiis was
'angry







OCR Output








«o« WAts or THE JEWS. , • Book II,


" your liberty? but if you think all servitude intolerable, to* what purpose serve your complaint against your particular«' governors? for if they treated you with moderation, it would" still be equally an unworthy thing to be in servitude. Con-" sidernow the several cases that may be supposed, how little oc-" casion there is for your going to war. Your first occasion is the" accusations you have to make against your procurators: now" here you ought to be submissive to those in authority, and" not give them any provocation: but when you repfoach men" greatly for small offences, you excite thos^e whom you re-" proach to be your adversaries; for this will only make them" leave off hurting you privately, and with some degree of mo-" desty, and to lay what you have waste openly. Now no-" thing so much damps the force of strokes as bearing them" with patience, and the quietness of those who are injured di-" verts the injurious persons from afflicting. But let us tak*" it for granted, that the Roman ministers are injurious to you," and are incurably severe; yet are they not all the Romans" who thus injure you; nor hath Caesar, against whom you" are going to make war, injured you; it is not by their com-" n iand that any wicked governor is sent to you; for they who" are in the west cannot see those that are in the east; nor in." deed is it easy for them there, even to hear what is done in" those parts. Now it is absurd to make war with a great many," for the sake of one; to do so with such'mighty people, for" a small cause;' and this when these people are not able to«' know of what you complain; nay, such crimes as we com-" plain of may soon be corrected, for the same procurator will" not continue for ever ; and probable it is, that the successors" will come with more moderate inclinations. But as for war,'' if it be once begun, it is not easily laid down again, nor borne" without calamities coming therewith. However, as to the" desire of recovering your liberty, it is unseasonable to indulge'' it so late ; whereas you ought to have laboured earnestly in" old time that you might never have lost it; for the first ex-" perience of slavery was hard to be endured, and the struggle'< that you might never have been subject to it would have been" just; but that slave who hath been once brought into subjee-" tion, and then runs away, is rather a refractory slave than a" lover of liberty, for it was then the proper time for doing all" that was possible, that you might never have admitted the" Romans [into your city], when Pompey came first into the" country. But so it was, that so our ancestors and their kings," who were in much better circumstances than we are, both as" to money and [strong] bodies, and [valiant J souls, did not
" bear







OCR Output








®4 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book XVIII,


4. When matters were in this state, Aristobulus, king Agrip..pa's brother, and Kelcias the Great, and the other principal menof that family with them, went in unto Petronius, and besoughthim, that " since he saw the resolution of the multitude, he" would not make any alteration, and thereby drive them to" despair; but would wrire to Caius, that the Jews had an in-" superable aversion to the reception of the statue, and how" they continued with him, and left off the tillage of their"• ground : that they were not willing to go to war with him," because they were not able to do it, but were ready to die with«* pleasure, rather than suffer their laws to be transgressed : and-"• how, upon the lands continuing unsown, robberies would" grow up, on the inability they would be under of paying their" tributes; and that perhaps Caius might be thereby moved to" pity, and not order any barbarous action to be done to them,'' nor think of destroying the nation : that if he continues inflexi-" ble in his former opinion to 'bring a war upon them, he may" then -set about it himself." And thus did Aristobulus, and therest with him, supplicate Petronius. So Petronius*, partly onaccount of the pressing instances which Aristobulus and the nestwith him made, and because of the great consequence of whatthey desired, and the earnestness wherewith they made their sup-,plication ; partly on account of the firmness of the oppositioamade by ihe Jews, which he saw, while he thought it an hor­rible thing for him to be such a slave to the madness of Caius, asto slay so many ten thousand men, only because of their religiou?disposition towards God, and after that to pass his life in'expec­tation of punishment; Petronius, I say, thought it much betterto send to Caius, and to let him know how intolerable it was tohim to bear the anger he might have against him for not servingJhim sooner, in obedience to his-«pistle, for that perhaps he mightpersuade him ; and that if this mad resolution continued, he mightthen begin the war against them; nay, that in case he shouldturn his hatred against himself, it was .fit for virtuous personseven to die for the sake of such vast multitudes of men. ACTcordiugly he determined to -hearken to the petitioners in thismatter.
5. He then called the Jews together to Tiberias, who came,many ten thousands in number ; he also olaced that army he now
had


* This Publius Petronius was after this still president of Syria, under Clau.rfius, and, at the desire of Agrippa, published a severe decree against the inha­bitants of Dora, who, in a sort of imitation of Caius, had set up a statue ofClaudius in a Jewish synagogue there. This decree is extant, B. XIX ch. vi.sect. 3. and greatly confirms the present accounts of Josephus, as do the otherdecrees of Claudius, relating to the like Jewish affairs, B. XIX. ch. T. sect. 2, 3,to «jrhich I refer the inquisitive reader.







OCR Output








326 ANTIQJJITIES OF THE JEWS. Book XIX.


fear of being accused, if they should go out before the rest;for they should not be sentenced according to the real intentionwith which they went out, but according to the supposals of theaccusers, and of the judges.
17. But now a multitude of Germans had surrounded thetheatre with their swords drawn ; all the spectators looked fornothing but death, and at every one's coming in a fear seizedupon them, as if they were to be cut in pieces immediately ; andin great distress they were, as neither having courage enough togo out of the theatre, nor believing themselves safe from dangersif they tarried there. And when the Germans came upon them,die cry was so great, that the theatre rang again with the entrea­ties of the spectators to the soldiers, pleading that they were en­tirely ignorant of every thing that related to such seditious con­trivances, and that if there were any sedition raised, they knewnothing of it; they therefore begged that they would spare them,and not punish those that had not the least hand in such boldcrimes as belonged to other persons, while they neglected tosearch after such as had really done whatsoever it be that hathbeen done. Thus did these people appeal to God, and deploretheir infelicity with shedding of tears, and beating their faces,and said every thing that the most imminent danger, and the ut­most concern for their lives, could dictate to them. This brakethe fury of the soldiers, and made them repent of what theyminded to do to the spectators, which Would have been thegreatest instance of cruelty. And so it appeared to even thesesavages, when they had once fixed the heads of those that wereslain with Asprenas upon the altar ; at which sight the specta­tors were sorely afflicted, both upon the consideration of the dig­nity of the persons, and out of a commiseration of their suf­ferings ; nay, indeed, they were almost in as great disorder atthe prospect of the danger themselves were in, seeing it was stilluncertain whether they should entirely escape the like calamity.Whence it was, that such as thoroughly and justly hated Caius,could yet no way enjoy the pleasure of his death, because theywere themselves in jeopardy of perishing together with him ;nor had they hitherto any firm assurance of surviving.
18. There was at this time, one Euaristus Arruntius, a pub­lic crier in the market, and therefore of a strong and audiblevoice, who vied in wealth with the richest of the Romans, andwas able to do what he pleased in the city, both then and after­ward. This man put himself into the most mournful habit hecould, although he had a greater hatred against Caius than anyone else, his fear and his wise contrivance to gain his safetytaught him so to do, and prevailed over his present pleasure ; so







OCR Output








Chap. XT. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWSt


cy, and the high-priests were intrusted with a dominion overthe nation. And thus much may suffice to be said concerningour high-priests.
CHAP XI.
Concerning Florus the procurator, who necessitated the Jaw to takeup arms against the Romans. The conclusion.
$ 1. "IVTOW Gessius Florus, who was sent as successor to Albi-•*•" nus by Nero, filled Judea with abundance of miseries.He was by birth of the city of Claz'omenae, and brought alongwith him his wife Cleopatra, (by whose friendship with Poppea,Nero's wife, he obtained this government), who was no way dif­ferent from him in wickedness. This Florus was so wicked, andso violent in the use of his authority, that the Jews took Albi-nus to have been [comparatively] their benefactor ; so excessiveWere the mischiefs that he brought upon them. For Albinusconcealed his wickedness, and was careful that it might not bediscovered to all men; but Gessius Florus, as though he hadbeen sent on purpose to shew his crimes to every body, made apompous ostentation of them to our nation, as never omittingany sort of violence, nor any unjust sort of punishment; for hewas not to be moved by pity, and never was satisfied with anydegree of gain that came in his way ; nor had he any more re­gard to great than to small acquisitions, but became a partnerwith the robbers themselves. For a great many fell then into thatpractice without fear, as having him for their security, and de­pending on him, that he would save them harmless in their par-,ticular robberies ; so that there were no bounds set to the nation'*miseries ; but the unhappy Jews, when they were nqt able to bearthe devastations which the robbers made among them, were allunder a necessity of leaving their own habitations, and of flyingaway, as hoping to dwell more easily any where else in the worldamong foreigners, [than in their own country]. And what needI say any more upon this head? since it was this Florus who ne­cessitated us to take up arms against the Romans, while wethought it better to be destroyed at once, than by little and little.Now this war began in the second year of the government ofFlorus, and the twelfth year of the reign of Nero. 3ut then*what actions we were forced to do, or what miseries we wereenabled to suffer, may be accurately known by such as will perusethose books which I have written about the Jewish war.
2. I shall now, therefore, make an end here of my Antiquities;after the conclusion of which events, I began to write that account'of the war ; and thess Antiquities contain what hath been deli-• ' vered







OCR Output








380 WARS OF THE JEWS. Book II.


cees are those that compose the second order, and take awayfate' entirel) , and suppose that God is not concerned in our do­ing or not doing what is evil; and they say, that to act what isgood, or what is evil, is at men's own choice, and that the oneor the other belongs so to every one, that they may act as theyplease. They also take away the belief of the immortal dura-tion of the soul, and the punishments and rewards in Hades.Moreover, the Pharisees are friendly to one another, and are forthe exercise of concord, and regard for the public; but the be­haviour of the Sadducees one towards another is in some degreewild, and their conversation with those that are of their ownparty is as barbarous as if they were strangers to them. Andthis is what 1 had to say concerning the philosophic sects amongthe Jews,
CHAP. IX.
The death of Salome. The cities which Herod and Philip built.Pilate occasions disturbances. Tiberius puts Agrippa intobonds, but Cains frees him from them, and makes him king.Herod Antipas is banished.
§ 1. A ND now as the ethnarchy of Archelaus was fallen in-JT\. to a Roman province, the other sons of Herod, Philip,and that Herod who was called Antipas, each of them took uponthem the administration of their own tetrarchies; for when Sa­lome died, she bequeathed to Julia, the wife of Augustus, bothher toparchy, and Jamnia, as also her plantation of palm-treesthat were in Phasaelis *. But when the Roman empire wastranslated to Tiberius, the son of Julia, upon the death of Au­gustus, who had reigned fifty-seven years six months and two
days,


been virtuous or vicious in the present world; that to the bad is allotted an eternalprison, but that the good are permitted to live again in this world, are nearly agree.?ble to the doctrines of Christianity. Only Josephus's rejection of the return ofthe wicked into other bodies, or into this world, which he grants to the good, looks?omewhat like a contradiction to St Paul's account of the doctrine of the Jews,that " they themselves a] lowed that there should be a resurrection of the dead, both" of the just and ui'just," Acts ch. xxiv. (5. Yet because Josephus's account isthat of the Pharisees, and St Paui'i that of t>,e Jews in general, and of himself, theContradiction is not very certain.
* We have here, in that Greek MS. which was once Alexander Petavius's, butis now in the lib:ary at I'erden, two most remarkable additions to the commonCopies, though deemed worth little remark by the editor; which, upon the mentionof Tiberius's coming to the empire, inserts first the famous testimony of Josephuscorcerning Jesus Christ, as it stands verbatim in the Antiquities, B- XVIII' chap'iii. § 3' vol' III. with some parts of that excellent discourse or homily of Jojephusconcerning Hades, annexed to the work. But, what is here principally to be looted,is this, that in this homily, Josephus, having just mentioned Christ, a> " God tl.e' Word, and the Judge of the world, appointed by the Father," &c adds' ThatI* he had himself elsewhere spoken about him more nicely or particularly."







OCR Output








372 Book II. WARS OF THE JEWS.


man to him. But when Caesar saw him, he immediately dis­cerned a difference in his countenance, and when he had discover­ed that his whole body was of a more robust texture, and likethat of a slave, he understood the whole was a contrivance. Butthe impudence of what hesaid greatly provoked him to be angry'at him; for when he was asked about Aristobulus, he said, That** he was also preserved alive, and was left on purpose in Cy-*' prus, for fear of treachery, because it would be harder for*' plotters to get them both into their power while they were' separate." Then did Caesar take him by himself privately,arid said tp him.," I will give thee thy life, if thou wilt discoverf* who it was that persuaded thee to forge such stories." So hesaid, that he would discover him, and followed Caesar, and point­ed to that Jew who abused the resemblance of his face to getmoney; for that he had received more presents in every citythan ever Alexander did when he was alive. Caesar laughedat the contrivance, and put this spurious Alexander among hisrowers, on account of the strength of his body, but ordered himthat persuaded him to be put to death. But for the people ofMelos, they had been sufficiently punished for their folly, bythe expences they had been at on his account.
3. And now Archelaus took possession of his ethnarchy, andused not the Jews only, but the Samaritans also, barbarously;and this out of his resentment of their old quarrels with him.Whereupon they both of them sent ambassadors against him toCaesar, and in the ninth year of his government he was banishedto Vienna, a city of Gaul, and his effects were put into Caesar'streasury. But the report goes, that before he was sent for byCaesar, he seemed to see nine ears of corn, full and large, but de­voured by oxen. When, therefore, he had sent for the diviners,and some of the Chaldeans, and inquired of them what theythought it portended, and when one of them had one interpreta­tion, and another had another, Simon, one of the sect of the EsTsens, said, That t he thought the ears of corn denoted years, and" the oxen denoted a mutation of- things, because by their" ploughing they made an alteration of the country. Thatf* therefore he should feign as many years as there were ears of*' corn, and after he had passed through various alterations off* fortune, should die.1' Now five days after Archelaus hadheard this interpretation, he was called to his trial.
4. I cannot also but think it worthy to be recorded, whatdream Glaphyra, the daughter of Archelaus, king of Cappado-cia, had, who had at first been wife to Alexander, who was thebrother of Archelaus, concerning whom we have been discoursing.This Alexander was the son of Herod the king, by whom he







OCR Output








363 WARS or THE JEWS, Book II,


Romans, than assisted those that had revolted. There had be­fore this met him Joseph, the first cousin of Archelaus, andGratus, together with Rufus, who led those of Sebaste, as wellas the king's army: there also met him those of the Roman le­gion, armed after their accustomed manner; for as to Sabinus,he durst not come into Varus's sight, but was gone out of thecity before this, to the sen-side; but Varus sent a part of hisarmy into the country, against those that had been the authors ofthis commotion, and as they caught great numbers of them,those that appeared to have been the least concerned in these tu­mult he put into custody, but such as were the most guilty hecrucified; these were in number about two thousand.
3. He was also informed, that there continued in Idumeatenthousand men still in arms; but when he found that the Ara­bians did not act like auxiliaries, but managed the war accord­ing to their own passions, and did mischief to the country other­wise than he intended, and this out of their hatred to Herod,he sent them away, but made haste, with his own legions, tomarch against those that had revolted; but these,by the adviceof Achiabus, delivered themselves up to him before it came to abattle. Then did Varus forgive the multitude their offences,but sent their captains to Caesar to be examined by him. NowCaesar forgave the rest, but gave orders that certain of theking's relations (for some of those that were among them whowere Herod's kinsmen), should be put to death, because theyhad engaged in a war against a king of their own family. Whentherefore Varus had settled matters at Jerusalem after thismanner, and had left the former legion there as a garrison, hereturned to Antioch.
CHAP. VI.
The Jews greatly complain of Archelaus, and desirf flat tleymay be made subject to Roman governors. But when Ccesarhad heard what they had to say, he distributed Herod's do­minions among his sons, according to his own pleasure,j 1. TJUT now came another accusation from the Jews against-t) Archelaus at Rome, which he was to answer to. Itwas made by those ambassadors, who, before the revolt, hadcome, by Varus's permission, to plead for the liberty of theircountry; those that came were fifty in number, but there weremore than eight thousand of the Jews at Rome who supportedthem. And when Caesar had assembled a council of the prin­cipal Romans in * Apollo's temple, that was in the palace (this
was


* This holding a council in the temple of Apollo, in the *mperer's pake* atRome, by Augustus, and even the building of this temple magnificently by him­self in that palace, »re exactly agreeable to Augustus, in his elder years, as Aldiiiehand Srauhci.il observe and prove, frosn Suetonius and Propenius.







OCR Output








262 Book r WARS OF THE JEWS.


and the greatest part of his army were destroyed, either in tjteaction or the flight; and for the rest, who fled to the village ofCana, it happened that they were all consumed by want of ne­cessaries, a few only excepted. . ,
8. About this time it was that the people of Damascus, out oftheir hatred to Ptolemy, the son of Menneus, invited Aretas [totake the government],, and made him king of Ceiesyria. Thisman also made an expedition against Judea, and beat Alexanderin battle ; but afterwards retired by mutual agreement. ButAlexander, when he had taken Pella, marched to Gerasa again,out of the covetous desire he had of Theodorus's possessions ;and when he had built a triple wall about the garrison, he tookthe place by force. He also demolished Golan, and Seleucia,and what was called The trolley of Antiochus ; besides which, hetook the strong fortress of Gamala, and stripped Demetrius,who was governor therein, of what he had, on account of themany crimes laid to his charge, and then returned into Judea,after he had been three whole years in this expedition. Andnow he was kindly received of the nation, because of the goodsuccess he had. So, when he was at rest from war, he fell intoa distemper ; for he was arBicted with a quartan ague, and sup­posed that byexercising himself again in martial affairs, he should-get rid of this distemper ; but, by making such expeditions atunseasonable times, and forcing his body to undergo greaterhardships than it was able to bear, he brought himself to hisend. He died, therefore, in the midst of his troubles, after hohad reigned seven and twenty years. ,
CHAP V.
Alexandra reigns nine years, during which time the Pharisees vecrethe real rulers of the nation.
§ 1. 'VTOW Alexander left the kingdom to Alexandra his wife,and dependedupon it, that the Jews would nowvery rea­dily submit to her ; because she had been very averse to suchcruelty as he had treated them with, and had opposed his viola­tion of their laws, and had thereby got the good-will of thepeople. Nor was he mistaken as to his expectations; for thiswoman kept the dominion, by the opinion that the people hadof her piety ; for she chiefly studied the ancient customs of hercountry, and cast those men out of the government that offendedv against their holy laws. And, as she had two sons by Alexan­der, she made Hyrcanus the elder high-priest, on account of hisage, as also, besides that, on account of his inactive temper, noway disposing him to disturb the public. But she retained the
younger







OCR Output








THE LIFE OF FLAVItIS JOSEPJIUS. 229


Very angry at them for this, for they perceived the wickedness
of the men, I understood that a tumult was going to arise ; and
being desirous to provoke the public to a greater rage against the
men, I said, " But if I have not done well in paying our ambas-
" sadors out of the public stock, leave off your anger at rr.e, for
* I will repaythe twenty pieces of gold myself."
58. When I had said this, Jonathan and his colleagues heldtheir peace ; but the people were still more irritated against them,upon their openly shewing their unjust ill-will to me. WhenJesus saw this change in the people, he ordered them to depart,but desired the senate to stay ; for that they could not examinethings of such a nature in tumult; and, as the people were cry­ing out that they would not leave me alone, there came one andtold Jesus and his friends privately, that John and his armedmen were at hand : whereupon Jonathan and his colleagues,being able to contain themselves no longer, ("and perhaps the pro­vidence of God hereby procuring my deliverance, for, had notthis been so, I had certainly been destroyed by John), said, " O" you people of Tiberias ! leave off this inquiry about the twenty" pieces of gold ; for Josephus hath not deserved to die for them :*' but he hath deserved it by his desire of tyrannizing, and by" cheating the multitude of the Galileans with his speeches, in" order to gain the dominion over them." When he had saidthis, they presently laid hands upon me, and endeavoured to killme : but, as soon as those that were with me saw what they did,they drew their swords, and threatened to smite them, if theyoffered any violence to me. The people also took up stones, andwere about to throw them at Jonathan; and so they snatched mefrom the violence of my enemies.
59. But, I was going out a little way, I was just upon meet­ing John, who was inarching with his armed men. So I wasafraid of him, and turned aside, and escaped by a narrow pas­sage to the lake, and seized on a ship, and embarked in it, andsailed over to Taricheae. So, beyond my expectation, I escapedthis danger. Whereupon I presently sent for the chief of theGalileans, and told them after what manner, against all faithgiven, I had been very near to destruction from Jonathan andhis colleagues, and the people of Tiberias. Upon which the mill- 'titude of the Galileans were very angry, and encouraged me todelay no longer to make war upon them, but to permit them togo against John, and utterly to destroy him, as well as Jonathanand his colleagues. However, I restrained them, though theywere in such a rage, and desired them to tarry a while, till weshould be informed what orders those ambassadors, that weresent by them to the city of Jerusalem, should bring thence ; for







OCR Output








Chap. XIX. WARS OF THE JEWS. 305


the multitude eomply with those orders, but were so embold­ened by their foregoing victory, that they presently attackedthe Arabians, and beat them at the first onset, and then pursu­ed them; yet were there snares laid for Herod in that pursuit}while Athenio, who was one of Cleopatra's'generals, and al­ways an antagonist to Herod, sent out of Kanatha the men ofthat country against him; for, upon this fresh onset, the Ara­bians took courage, and returned back, and both joined theirnumerous forces about stoney places, that were hard to be goneover, and there put Herod's men to the rout, and made a greatslaughter of them: but those that escaped out of the battle fledto Ormiza, where the Arabians surrounded their camp, andtook it, with all the men in it.
3. In a little time after this calamity, Herod came to bringthem succours; but he came too late. Now the occasion of thatblow was this, that the officers would not obey orders; for hadnot the fight began so suddenly, Athenio had not found a properseason for tbe snares he laid for Herod: however, he was evenwith the Arabians afterward, and over-run their country, anddid them more harm than their single victory could compensate.But as he was avenging himself on his enemies, there fell uponhim another providential calamity ; for in the * seventh year ofhis reign, when the war about Actium was at the height, at thebeginning of the spring, the earth was shaken, and destroyed animmense number of cattle, with thirty thousand men; but thearmy received no harm, because it lay in the open air. In themean time, the fame of this earthquake elevated the Arabians togreater courage, and thisby augmenting it to a fabulous height,as is constantly the case in melancholy accidents, and pretendingthat all Judea was overthrown; upon this supposal, therefore,'that they should easily get a landthat was destituteof inhabitantsinto their power, they first sacrificed those ambassadors who werecome to them from the Jews, and then marched into Judea im­mediately. Now the Jewish nation were affrighted at this in­vasion, andquite dispiritedatthegreatnessoftheircalamities oneafter another; whom yet Herod got together, and endeavoured
to
* Th's seventh year of the reign of Herod [from the conquests or death of An-tigonus],-with the great earthquake in the beginning of the same spring, whichare here fully implied to be not much before the fight at Actium, between Ocuviusand Antony, and which is known from the Roman historians to have been in thebeginning of September, in the 3151 year before the Christian sra, determines thechronology of Joessphus as to the reign of Herod, viz' that he began in the year ^ 7,beyond rational contradiction. Nor is it quite unworthy of our notice, that thi§seventh year of the reign of Herod, or the jlst before the Christian jera, con­tained the latter part of a Sabbatic year; on which Sabbatic year, therefore, it isplain this great earthquake happened in Judea.
VOL. III.







OCR Output








Chap. VIII. WARS OF THE JEWS. 271 .


Petra. However, he laid waste the country about the Pella,though even there he was under great hardship ; for his armywas afflicted with famine. In order to supply which want,Hyrcanus afforded him some assistance, and sent him provisionsby the means of Antipater; whom also Scaurus sent to Aretas,as one well acquainted with him, to induce him to pay him mo­ney to buy his peace. The king of Arabia * complied withthe proposal, and gave him three hundred talents ; upon whichScaurus drew his army out of Arabia.
2. But as for Alexander, that son of Aristobulus who ran a-way from Pompey, in some time he got a considerable band ofmen together, and lay heavy upon Hyrcanus, and over-ran Judea,and was likely to overturn him quickly ; and indeed he hadcome to Jerusalem, and had ventured to rebuild its wall thatwas thrown down by Pompey, had not Gabinius, who was sentas successor to Scaurus into Syria, shewed his bravery, as inmany other points, so in making an expedition against Alexan­der ; who, as he was afraid that he would attack him, so he gottogether a large army, composed of ten thousand armed foot­men, and fifteen hundred horsemen. He also built walls aboutproper places, Alexandrium, and Hyrcanium, and Macherus,that lay upon the mountains of Arabia.
3. However, Gabinius sent before him Marcus Antonius, andfollowed himself with his whole army ; but for the select bodyof'soldiers that were about Antipater, and another body of Jewsunder the command of Malithus and Pitholaus, these joinedthemselves to those captains that were about Marcus Antonius,and met Alexander ; to which body came Gabinius, with hismain army soon afterward ; and as Alexander was not able tosustain the charge of the enemies forces, now they were joined,he retired. But when he was come near to Jerusalem, he was.forced to fight, and lost six thousand men in the battle ; threethousand of which fell down dead, and three thousand were taken,alive ; so he fled with the remainder to Alexandrium.
4. Now, when Gabinius was come to Alexandrium, becausehe found a great many there encamped, he tried, by promisingthem pardon for their former offences, to induce them to comeover to him, before it came to a fight; but when they wouldhearken to no terms of accommodation, he slew a great number of
them,


* Take the like attestation to the truth of this submission of Aretas king ofArabia, to Scaurus the Roman general, in the words of Dean Aldnch. " Hence" (says he) is derived that old and famous Denarius belonging tothg Emilian fa-" mily [represented in Havercamp's edition], wherein Aietas appears in a pos." tare of supplication, and taking hold of a camel's bridle with his left hand, and" with his right hand presenting a branch of the frankincense tree, with this m," scription, M. SCAURUS EX t>. C. and beneath, REX ARETAS."







OCR Output








266 WARS OF THE JEWS. Book I.


Aretas was terrified, and retired out of Judea to Philadelphia, asdid Scaurus return to Damascus again : nor was Aristobulussatisfied with escaping [out of his brother's hands], but gather-td all his forces together, and pursued his enemies, and foughtthem at a. place 'called Papyron, and slew above six thousand ofthem, and, together with them, Antipater's brother, Phalion.
4. When Hyrcanus and Antipater were thus deprived of theirhopes from the Arabians ; they transferred the same to theiradversaries ; and because Pompey had passed through Syria, andwas come to Damascus, they fled to him for assistance ; and *,without any bribes, they made the same equitable pleas that theyhad used to Aretas, and besought him to hate the violent be­haviour of Aristobulus, and to bestow the kingdom upon him towhom it justly belonged, both on account of his good character,and on account of his superiority in age. However, neither wasAristobulus wanting to himself in this case, as relying on thebribes that Scaurus had received : he was also there himself, andadorned himself after a manner the most agreeable to royaltythat he was able. But he soon thought it beneath him to comein such a servile manner, and could not endure to serve his ownends in a way so much more abject than he was used to ; so hedeparted from Diospolis.
5. At this his behaviour Pompey had great indignation ; Hyr-canus also and his friends made great intercession to Pompey ; sdhe took not only' his Roman forces, but many of his Syrianauxiliaries, and marched against Aristobulus. But when hehad passed by Pella and Scythopolis, and was come to Corea,where you enter into the country of Judea, when you go up toit through the Mediterranean parts, he heard that Aristobuluswas fled to Alexandrum, which is a strong hold fortified withthe utmost magnificence, and situated upon an high mountain,and he seiat to him, and commanded him to come down. Nowhis inclination was to try his fortune in a battle, since he wascalled in such an imperious manner, rather than to comply withthat call. However, he saw the multitude were in great fear,'and his friends exhorted him to consider what the power of theRomans was, and how it was irresistible ; so he complied withtheir advice, and came down to Pompey ; and when he had made


that the 1
offered
sect. 6. ; although his remarkable abstinence from the 2000 talents that were in
the Jewish temple, when he took it a little afterward, ch. vii. sect. 6. and Antiq.
B. XIV. ch. iv. sect. 4. will hatdly permit us to desert the Greek cepits, all
which agree that h« did not take them.







OCR Output








Chap. VIII. ANTIQtTITIES OF THE JEWS, ITS


one of his friends ; a Jew he was, and by birth a Cypriot, andone who pretended to be a magician, and endeavoured to persuadeher to forsake her present husband, and marry him ; and pro­mised, that if she would not refuse him, he would make her ahappy woman. Accordingly she acted ill, and because she wasdesirous to avoid her sister Bernice's envy, for she was very illtreated by her on account of her beauty, was prevailed upon totransgress the laws of-her forefathers, and to marry Felix ; and,when he had had a son by her, he named him Agrippa. But afterwhat manner that young man, with his wife, perished at theconflagration * of the mountain Vesuvius, in the days of TitusCaesar, shall be related hereafter f.
3. But as for Bernice, she lived a widow a long while afterthe death of Herod [king of Chalcis], who was both her hus­band and her uncle ; but, when the report went that she hadcriminal conversation with her brother, [Agrippa junior,] shepersuaded Polemo, who was king of Cilicia, to be circumcised,and to marry her, as supposing, that by this means she shouldprove those calumnies upon her to be false ; and Polemo wasprevailed upon, and that chiefly on account of her riches. Yetdid not this matrimony endure long ; but Bernice left Polenjo,and, as was said, with impure intentions. So he forsook at oncethis matrimony, and the Jewish religion : and, at the same time,Mariamne put away Archelaus, and was married to Demetrius,the principal man among the Alexandrian Jews, both for his fa­mily and his wealth; and indeed he was then their alabarch.So she named her son whom she had by him Agrippinus. Butof all these particulars we shall hereafter treat more exactly. J
CHAP. VIII.
After -what manner, upon the death of Claudius, Ifcro succeededin the government ; at also what barbarous things he did. Con­cerning the robbers, murderers, and Impostors, that arose, whileFelix and Festus were procurators of Judea.
J 1. "VTOW Claudius Caesardied when he had reigned thirteen
-^ years, eight months, and twenty days | ; and a report
went about, that he was poisoned by his wife Agrippina. Her
father
* This eruption of Vesuvius was one of the greatest we have in history. See-Bianchini's curious and important observations on this Vesuvius, and its seven se- 'veral great eruptions, with their remains vitrified, and still existing, in so manydifferent ifata under ground, till the diggers came to the antediluvian waters,with their propqrtionabfe intersiices, implying the deluge to have been above 2500years before the Christian aera, according to our exactest chronology.
+ This is now wanting.
J This also is now wanting.
|| This duration of the reign of Claudius agrees with Dio, as Dr Hudson hereremarks; as he also remarks, that Nero's name, which was at first L. DomitivtJE.i:obarbus, after Claudius had adopted him, was Nero Claudius Ceesar Drnsn*.







OCR Output













OCR Output








44 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book XVII.


public. They were in some small measure indeed, and in smallmatters, hurtful to the Romans ; but the murders they commit­ted upon their own people lasted a long while.
0. As soon as Varus was once informed of the state of .Tudeaby Sabinus's writing to him, he was afraid for the legion he hadleft there ; so he took the two other legions, (for there werethree legions in all belonging to Syria), and four troops of horse­men, with the several auxiliary forces which either the kings orcertain of the tetrarchs afforded him, and made what haste hecould to assist those that were then besieged in Judea. He alsogave order, that all that were sent out for this expedition, shouldmake haste to Ptolemais. The citizens of Berytus also gave him1500 auxiliaries, as he passed through their city. Aretas also,the king of Arabia Petrea, out of his hatred to Herod, and in'order to purchase the favour of the Romans, sent him no smallassistance, besides their footmen and horsemen: and, when he hadriow collected all his forces together, he committed part of them,to his son, and to a friend of his, and sent them upon an expe­dition into Galilee, which lies in the neighbourhood of Ptole­mais ; who made an attack upon the enemy, and put them to'flight, and took Sephoris, and made its inhabitants slaves, andburnt the city.' But Varus himself pursued his march for Sa­maria with his whole army : yet did not he meddle with the ci­ty of that name, because it had not at all joined with the sedi­tious ; but pitched his camp at a certain village that belonged toPtolemy, whose name was Arus, which the Arabians burnt, outof their hatred to Herod, and out of the enmity they bore to his,fnends; whence they marched to another village, whose name-was Sampho, which the Arabians plundered and burnt, althoughit was a fortified and a strong place ; and all along this march-nothing escaped them, but all places were full of fire and ofslaughter. Emmaus was also burnt by Varus's order, after itsinhabitants had deserted it, that he might avenge those that hadthere been destroyed. From thence he now marched to Jeru­salem ; whereupon those .lews whose camp lay there, and who<had besieged the Roman legion, not bearing the coming of thisarmy, left the siege imperfect: But as to the Jerusalem-Jews,'when Varus reproached them bitterly for what had been done,they cleareu themselves of the accusation, and alledged, that theconflux of the people was occasioned by the feast; that the war-was not made with their approbation, but the rashness of .thestrangers, while they were on the side of the Romans, and be­sieged together with them, rather than having any inclination tobesiege them. There also came before-hand to meet Varus, Jo­seph, the cousin-german of king Herod, as also Gratus and Ru­







OCR Output








THE LIFE OF FLAVIUS JOSEPHUSV


and to demonstrate to those that light upon this history, that you!bare no good-will, neither to the Romans, nor to the king. To'bs sure, the greatest cities of Galilee, O Justus ! were Sepphoris,and thy country Tiberias. But Sepphoris, situated in the verymidst of Galilee, and having many villages about it, and ablewith ease to have been bold and troublesome to the Romans, ifthey had so pleased, yet did it resolve to continue faithful to thosetheir masters, and at the same time excluded me out of their ci­ty, and prohibited all their citizens from joining with the Jews inthe war, and that they might be out of danger from me, they bya wile got leave of me to fortify their city with walls ; they al­so, of their own accord, admitted of a garrison of Roman legionsrsent them by Cestius Gallus, who was then president of Syria,and so had me in contempt, though I was then very powerful,and all were greatly afraid of me ; and at the same time that thegreatest of our cities, Jerusalem, was besieged, and that templeof ours, which belonged to us all, was in danger of falling underthe enemy's power, they sent no assistance thither, as not willingto have it thought they would bear arms against the Romans^But as for thy country, O Justus! situated upon the lake of Gen-nesareth, and distant from Hippos thirty furlongs, from Gadarasixty, and from Scythppolis, which was under the king's juris-diction-, an hundred and twenty ; when there was no Jewish citynear, it might easily have preserved its fidelity [to the Romans],if it had so pleased them to do ; for the city and its people hadplenty of weapons. But, as thou sayest, I was then the author[of thtir revolt]. And pray, O Justus ! who was that authorafterwards? For thou knowest that I was- in the power of theRomans before Jerusalem wasbesieged, and before the same timeJotapata was taken by force, as well as many other fortresses,and a great many of the Galileans fell in the war. It was there­fore then a proper time, when you were certainly freed fromany fear on my account, to throw away your weapons, and todemonstrate to the king and to the Romans, that it was not ofchoice, but as forced by necessity, that you fell into the war a-gainst them ; but you staid till Vespasian came himself as far asyour walls, with his whole army ; and then you did indeed layaside your weapons out of fear, and your city had for certainbeen taken by force, unless Vespasian had'complied with theking's supplication for you, and had excused your madness. Itwas not 1, therefore, who was the author of this, but your owninclinations to war. Do not you remember how often 1 got youunder my power, and yet put none of you to death ? nay, youonce fell into a tumult one against another, and slew one hundredand eighty.fivj of your citizens,' not on account of your good­will







OCR Output








THE LIFE OF FLAVIUS JOSEPHUS. 337


G6. Now, when I had settled the affairs of Tiberias, and hadassembled my friends as a Sanhedrim, I consulted what I shoulddo as to John. Whereupon it appeared to be the opinion of allthe Galileans, that I should arm them all, and march againstJohn, and punish him as the author of all the disorders that hadhappened. Yet was not I pleased with their determination ;as purposing to compose these troubles without bloodshed. Up­on this I exhorted them to use the utmost care to learn the namesof all that were under John ; which when they had done, and Ithereby was apprised who the men were, I published an edict,wherein I offered security and my right hand to such of John'sparty as had a mind to repent; and I allowed twenty days timeto such as would take this qiost advantageous course for them­selves. I also threatened, that unless they threw down theirarms, I would burn their houses, and expose their goods to pub­lic sale. When the men heard of this, they were in no smalldisorder, and deserted John; and to the number of four thou­sand threw down their arms, and came to me. So that no o-thers staid with John but his own citizens, and about fifteenhundred strangers that came from the metropolis of Tyre ; and,when John sawrthat he had been 'outwitted by my stratagem, hecontinued afterward in his own country, and was in great fearof me.
67. But about this time it was that the people of Sepphorisgrew insolent, and took up arms, out of a confidence they hadin the strength of their walls, and because they saw me engagedin other affairs also. So they sent to Cestius Gallus, who waspresident of Syria, and desired that he would either come quick­ly to them, and take their city under his protection, or send thema garrison. Accordingly Gallus promised them to come, butdid not send word when he would come : and, when I had learn­ed so much, I took the soldiers that were with me, and madean assault upon the people of Sepphoris, and took the city byforce. The Galileans took this opportunity as thinking theyhad now a proper time for shewing their hatred to them, sincethey borfe ill-will to that city also. Then they exerted them­selves, as if they would destroy them all utterly, with those thatsojourned there also. So they ran upon them, and set theirhouses on fire, as finding them without inhabitants ; for the menout of fear ran together to the citadel. So the Galileans carriedoff every thing, and omitted no kind of desolation which theycould bring upon their countrymen. When I saw this, I wasexceedingly troubled at it, and commanded them to leave off,and put them in mind that it was not agreeable to piety to doSi*ch things to their countrymen : but since they neither would
hearken







OCR Output








194 THE LIFE OF FLAVICS JOSEFHUS.


So when I had accomplished my desires, I returned back to thecity, being now nineteen years old, and began to conduct myselfaccording to the rules of the sect of the Pharisees, which is ofkin to the sect of the Stoics, as the Greeks call them.
3. But, when I was in the twenty-sixth year of my age, ithappened that 1 took a voyage to Rome, and this on the Occasionwhich I shall now describe. At the time when Felix was pro­curator of Judea, there were certain priests' of my acquaintance,and very excellent persons they were, whom on a small and trif*ling occasion he had put into bonds, and sent to Rome to pleadtheir cause before Caesar. These I was desirous to procure de­liverance for, and that especially because I was informed thatthey were not unmindful of piety towards God even under theirafflictions, but supported themselves with figs and nuts*. Ac­cordingly I came to Rome, though it were through a great num­ber of hazards by sea ; for, as our ship was drowned in the A-driatic sea, we that were in it, being about six hundred in num­ber f, swam for our lives all the night; when, upon the first ap­pearance of the day, and upon our sight of a ship of Cyrene, Iand some others, eighty in all, by God's providence, preventedthe rest, and were taken up into the other ship. And when Ihad thus escaped, and was come to Dicearchia, which the Italianscall Puteoli. I became acquainted with Aliturius, an actor of plays,and much beloved by Nero, but a Jew by birth ; through hisinterest became known to Poppea, Caesar's wife, and took care,as soon as possible, to entreat her to procure, that the priestsmight be set at liberty. And when, besides this favour, I hadobtained many presents from Poppea, I returned home again.
4. And now I perceived innovations were already begun, andthat there were a great many very much elevated in hopes of arevolt from the Romans. 1 therefore endeavoured to put a stopto these tumultuous persons, and persuaded them to change theirminds ; and laid before their eyes against whom it was that theywere going to fight, and told them that they were inferior to theRomans not only in martial skill, but also in good fortune; and de­sired them not rashly, and after the most foolish manner, to bringon the dangers of the most terrible mischiefs upon their country,upon their families, and upon themselves. And this I said with
vehement
* We may note here, that religions men among the Jews, or at least thosethat were priests, were sometimes asceticks also, and, like Daniel and his com-panions in Babylon, Dan. i. 8.—16. ate no flesh, but Jigs and nuts, &c. only.This was like the \ip€*yi*, or austere diets of the Christian asceticks in Passionweek. Constitut. V. iS.
t It hath been thought the number of Paul and his companions on ship-board,Acts, xxvii. 38 which aie 776 in our copies, are too many; whereas wc find here,that Josephus and his companions, a very few years after the other, were about60s.







OCR Output








V7AKS OF THE JEWS. Book I.


ran together to Antigonus, and shewed themselves ready to makean incursion into the country ; so he sent them before into thatplace called *Drymus, £the wood-land^], to seize upon the place ;whereupon a battle was fought between them, and they drovethee neaiy away, and pursued them, and ran after them as far asJerusalem, and as their numbers increased, they proceeded as faras the king's palace ; but as Hyrcanus and Phasaelus receivedthem with a strong body of men, there happened a battle in themarket-place, in which Herod's party beat the enemy, and shutthem up in the temple, and set sixty men in the houses adjoiningas a guard on them. But the people that were tumultuous againstthe brethren came in, and burnt those men ; while Herod, in hisrage for killing them, attacked and slew many of the people, tillone party made incursions on the other by turns, day by day, inthe way of ambuihes, and slaughters were made continuallyamong them.
3. Now, when that festival which we call Pentecost was athand, all the places about the temple, and the whole city, wasfull of a multitude of people that were come out of the country,and which were the greatest part of them armed also, at whichtime Phasaelus guarded the wall, and Herod, with a few, guardedthe royal palace ; and when he made an assault upon his ene­mies, as they were out of their ranks, on the north quarter of thecity, he slew a very great number of them, and put them all toflight, and some of them he shut up within the city, and otherswithin the outward rampart. In the mean time Antigonus de­sired that Pacorus might be admitted to be a reconciler betweenthem ; and Phasaelus was prevailed upon to admit the Parthian intothe city with five hundred horse, and to treat him in an hospitablemanner, who pretended that he came to quell the tumult, but inreality he came to assist Antigonus ; however, he laid a plot forFhasaelus, and persuaded him to go as an ambassador to Barza-pharnes, in order to put an end to the war ; although Herod was• very earnest with him to the contrary, and exhorted him to killthe plotter, but not expose himself to the snares he had laid forhim, because the barbarians are naturally perfidious. However,Pacorus went out and took Hyrcanus with him, that he might bethe less suspected ; he also left some of the horsemen f, called
the


* This large and noted wood, or woodland, belonging to Carmel, calledby the Septuagint, is mentioned in the Old Testament, 2 Kings, xix. 23. and Isa.xxxviii. 24. and by Strabo, B. XVI. p. 758. as both Aldrich and Spanheim hereremark very pertinently.
t These accounts, both here fand Antiq. B. XIV. ch. xiii. sect. 5. that theParthians fought chiefly on horseback, and that only some few of their sol­diers were "freemen, perfectly agree with Trogus'Pompeius, in Justin, B. XI'!z. 3. as Dean Aldrich well observes on this place.







OCR Output








142 AffTIQJJITIES OF THE tews. Book XIX.


would become of them, because Claudius was very angry atthem; so they fell a-reproaching one another, and repented ofwhat they had done. At which juncture Sabinus, one of Caius'smurderers, threatened that he would sooner come into the midstof them and kill himself, than consent to make Claudius empe­ror, and see slavery returning upon them ; he also abused Chereafor loving his life too well, while he who was the first in his con­tempt of Caius, could think it a good thing to live, when, evenby all that they had done for the recovery of their liberty, theyfound it impossible to do it. But Cherea said, he had no man­ner of doubt upon him about killing himself; that yet he wouldfirst sound the intentions of Claudius before he did it.
5. These were the debates [about the senate] ; but in thecamp every body was crowding on all sides to pay their court toClaudius ; and the other consul, Quintus Pomponius, was re­proached by the soldiery, as having rather exhorted the senateto recover their liberty ; whereupon they drew their swords,and were going to assault him, and they had done it, if Clau­dius had not hindered them, who snatched the consul out of thedanger he was in, and set him by him. But he did not receivethat part of the senate which was with Quintus, in the like ho­nourable manner ; nay, some of them received blows, and werethrust away as they came to salute Claudius; nay, Aponiuswent away wounded, and they were all in danger. However,king Agrippa went up to Claudius, and desired he would treatthe senators more gently ; for if any mischief should come to the•enate, he would have no others over whom to rule. Claudiuscomplied with him, and called the senate together into the palace,and was carried thither himself through the city, while the soldieryconducted him, though this was to the great vexation of the mul­titude; for Cherea and Sabinus, two of Caius's murderers, went inthe fore-front of them, in an open manner, while Polio, whomClaudius, a little before, had made captain of his guards, had sentthem an epistolary edict, to forbid them to appear in public.Then did Claudius, upon his coming to the palace, get his friendstogether, and desired their suffrages about Cherea. They said,that the work he had done was a glorious one, but they accusedhim that he did it of perfidiousness, and thought it just to in­flict the punishment [of death] upon him, to discountenance suchactions for the time to come. So Cherea was led to his execu­tion, and Lupus, and many other Romans with him ; now it is(reported, that Cherea bore this calamity courageously, and this,not only by the firmness of his own behaviour under it, but by therepr.oaches he laid upon Lupus, who fell into tears; for when.. , • Lupug







OCR Output








Chap. VIII. WARS OF THE JEWS. 313


was put to death, as we have already related. This Gkphyrawas married, after his death, to Juba, king of Lybia, and, af­ter his death, was returned home, and lived a widow with herfather. Then it was that Archelaus, the ethnarch, saw her,and fell so deeply in love with her, that he divorced Mariamne,who was then his wife, and married her. When, therefore,she was come into Judea, and had been there for a little while,she thought she saw Alexander stand by her, and that he said toher, " Thy marriage with the king of Lybia might have been" sufficient for thee; but thou was not contented with him," but art returned again to my family, to a third husband, and" him, thou impudent woman, hast thou chosen for thine hus-" band, who is my brother. However, I shall not overlook" the injury thou hast offered me; I shall [soon] have thee" again, whether thou wilt or no." Now Glaphyra hardly sur­vived the narration of this dream of her's two days..
CHAP. VIII.
Archelaus's etinarchy is reduced into a [Roman] province. Thesedition of Judas of Galilee. The three sects of the Jeias.
f 1. A ND now Archelaus's part of Judea was reduced into ai'V province, and Coponius, one of the equestrian orderamong the Romans, was sent as a procurator, having the powerof [life and] death put into his hands by Caesar. Under his ad­ministration it was, that a certain Galilean, whose name wasJudas, prevailed with his countrymen to revolt, and said theywere cowards if they would endure to pay a tax to the Romans,and would, after God, submit to mortal men as their lords.This man was a teacher of a peculiar sect of his own, and wasnot at all like the rest of those their leaders.
2 For there are three philosophical sects among the Jews.The followers of the first of which are the Pharisees, of the se­cond the Sadducees, and the third sect, which pretends to a se­verer discipline, are called Essens. These last are Jews by birth,and seem to have a greater affection for one another than theother sects have. 'I hese Essens reject pleasures as an evil, butesteem continence, and the conquest over our passions, to be vir­tue. They neglect wedlock, but choose out other persons chil­dren while they are pliable, and fit for learning, and esteemthem to be of their kindred, and form them according to theirown manners. They do not absolutely deny the fitness of mar-<riage, and the succession of mankind thereby continued; batthey guard against the lascivious behaviour of women, and arepersuaded that none of them preserve their fidelity to one man.» 3. These







OCR Output








Chap. IT. WARS OF THE JEWS. 253


posing that Antiochus himself was upon him, he ran a greatI « way before his own army, and cutting his way through the ene­mies troops, he got up to the elephant; yet could not reach himwho seemed to be the king, by reason of his being so high ; butstill he ran his weapon into the belly of the beast, and broughthim down upon himself, and was crushed to death, having doneno moire than attempted great things, and shewed that he pre­ferred glory before life. Now he that governed the elephant wasbut a private man, and had he proved to be Antiochus, Eleazarhad performed nothing more by this bold stroke than that itmight appear he chose to die, when he had the bare hope ofthereby doing a glorious action ; nay, this disappointment pro­ved an omen to his brother [Judas] how the entire battle wouldend. It is true that the Jews fought it out bravely for a longtime, but the king's forces, being superior in number, and havingfortune on their side, obtained the victory. And when a greatmany of his men were slain, Judas took the rest with him, andfled to the toparchy of Gophra. So Antiochus went to Jerusa­lem, and staid there but a few days, for he wanted provisions,and so he went his way. He left indeed a garrison behind him,such as he thought sufficient to keep the place, but drew the restof his army off, to take their winter-quarters in Syria.
6. Now, after the king was departed, Judas was not idle ; foras many of his own nation came to him, so did he gather thosethat had escaped out of the battle together, and gave battle againto Antiochus's generals at a village called Adasa ; and being toohard for his enemies in the battle, and, killed a great numberof them, he was at last himself slain also. Nor was it many daysafterward that his brother John had a plot laid against him byAntiochus's party, and was slain by them.
CHAP. II.
Concerning the successors of Judas, ivho were Jonathan and Simeon tand John Hyrcanus.
$ 1. \T7'HEN Jonathan, who was Judas's brother, succeededv r him, he behaved himself with great circumspectionin other respects, with relation to his own people ; and he corro­borated his authority by preserving his friendship with the Ro­mans. He also made a league with Antiochus the son. Yetwas not all this sufficient for his security ; for the tyrant Trypho,who was guardian to Antiochus's son, laid a plot against him ;and, besides that, endeavoured to take of his friends, and caughtJo.natb.an by a wile, as he was going to Ptolemais to Antiochus,jyith a few persons in his company, and put them in bonds, and
then







OCR Output








Chap. VIII. ANTIQJJITIES OF THE JEWS. 51


went up into the temple; he had also acclamations and praisesgiven him, which way foever he went, every one striving withthe rest who should appear to use the loudest acclamations. Sohe ascended an high elevation made for him, and took his seat,in a throne made of gold, and spake kindly to the multitude, anddeclared, " with what joy he received their acclamations, and" the marks of the good will they shewed to him ; and returned" them thanks that they did not remember the injuries his fa-'' ther had done them, to his disadvantage ; and promised them" he would endeavour not to be behindhand with them in re-" warding their alacrity in his service, after a suitable manner ;" but that he should abstain at present from the name of king," and that he should have the honour of that dignity, if Caesar" should confirm and settle that testament which his father had" made ; and that it was on this account, that when the army" would have put the diadem on him at Jericho, he would not«' accept of that honour, which is usually so much desired, be-" cause it was not yet evident that he who was to be principally" concerned in bestowing it, would give it him ; although, by" his acceptance of the government, he should not want the abi-" lity of rewarding their kindness to him ; and that it should be" his endeavour, as to all things wherein they were concerned," to prove in every respect better than his father." Where­upon the multitude, as it is usual with them, supposed that thefirst days of those that enter upon such governments, declare theintentions of those that accept them ; and so by how much Ar-chelaus spake the more gently and civilly to them, by so muchdid they more highly commend him, and made application tohim for the grant of what they desired. Some made a clamourthat he would ease them of some of their annual payments ; butothers desired him to release those that were put into prison byHerod, who were many, and had been put there at severaltimes; others of them required that he would take away thosetaxes which had been severely laid upon what was publicly soldand bought. So Archelaus contradicted them in nothing, sincehe pretended to do all things so as to get the good will of themultitude to him, as looking upon that good will to be a grcttStep towards his preservation of the government. Hereupon hewent and offered sacrifice to God, and then betook hiniielf to£east with his friends.


C H A P,







OCR Output








Chap. XVf. WARS or THE JEWS. 403


but not that which had fought with the Jews, because the multitude bare ill will against that band on account of what theyhad suffered from it; so he changed the band as they desired,and, with the rest of his forces, returned to Cesarea.
CHAP. XVI.
Cettias sends Neopolitanus the tribune to see in what condition theaffairs ofthejewt were. Agrippa makes a speech to the peo­ple of the Jews, that he may divert them from their intentionsof making war with the Romans.
§ l, TTO WE VER, Floras contrived another way to obligeA JL the Jews to begin the war, and sent to Cestius, andaccused the Jews falsely of revolting [from the Roman govern­ment], and imputed the beginning of the former fight to them,and pretended they had been the authors of that disturbance,wherein they were only the sufferers. Yet were not the go­vernors ef Jerusalem silent upon this occcasion, but did themselveswrite to Gestius, as did Bernice also, about the illegal practicesof which Floras had been guilty against the city ; who, uponreading both accounts, consulted with his captains [what he'should do]. Now some of them thought it best for Cestius togo up with his army, either to punish the revolt, if it was real,or to settle the Roman affairs on a surer foundation, if the Jewscontinued quiet under them ; but he thought it best himself tosend one of his intimate friends before hand, to see the state ofaffairs, and 'to give him a faithful account of the intention ofthe Jews. Accordingly he sent one of his tribunes, whose nameWas Neopolitanus, who met with king Agrippa, as he was re­turning from Alexandria at Jamnia, and told him who it wasthat sent him, and oa what errands he was sent.
2. And here it was that the high-priests, and men of poweramong the jews, as well as the sanhedrim, came to congratulatethe king [upon his safe return], and after they had paid himtheir respects, they lamented their own calamities, and relatedto him what barbarous treatment they had met with fromFlorus. At which barbarity Agrippa had great indignation,but transferred after a subtle manner, his anger towards thoseJews whom he really pitied, that he might beat down their highthoughts of themselves, and would have them believe that theyhad not been so unjustly treated, in order to dissuade them fromavenging themselves. So these great men, as of better under-Standing than the rest, and desirous of peace, because of the pos­sessions they had, understood that this rebuke which the kinggave them was intended for their good-, but as to the people,
3 E 2 they







OCR Output








Chap. XIX. WARS OF THE JEWS. 3O7


" force limited by themselves, [without foreboding any other" calamity]. And indeed what greater mischief can the war," though it should be a violent one, do to us, than the earth-" quake hath done ? Nay, there is a signal of our enemies de, '" struction visible, and that a very great one also; and this is" not a natural one, nor derived from the hand of foreigners" neither, but it is this, that they have barbarously murdered" our ambassadors, contrary to the common law of mankind ;" and they have destroyed so many, as if they esteemed them" sacrifices for God, in relation to this war. But they will" not avoid his great eye, nor his invincible right hand; and we" snail be revenged of them presently, in case we still retain" any of the courage of our forefathers, and rise up boldly to" punish these covenant breakers. Let every one therefore go" on and fight, not so much for his wife or his children, or for" the danger his country is in, as for these ambassadors of ours;" those dead ambassadors will conduct this war of ours better" than we ourselves who are alive. And if yoil will be ruled" by me, I will myself go before you into danger ; for yon" know this well enough, that your courage is irresistible, unless" you hurt yourselves by acting rashly *."
5. When Herod had encouraged them by this speech, and hesaw with what alacrity they went, he offered sacrifice to God;and after that sacrifice, he passed over the river Jordan with hisarmy, and pitched his camp about Philadelphia, near the enemy,and about a fortification that lay between them. He then shot' at them at a distance, and was desirous to come to an cngage,-ment presently ; for some of them had been sent beforehand toseize upon that fortification : but the king sent some who im­mediately beat them out of (he fortification, while he himselfwent in the forefront of the army, which he put in battle arrayevery day, and invited the Arabians to fight. But as none otthem came out of their camp, for they were in a terrible fright,and their general, Elthemus, was not able to say a word for fear;so Herod came upon them, and pulled their fortification to pieces,by which means they were compelled to 'come out to fight,which they did in disorder, and so that the horsemen and foot­men were mixed together. They were indeed superior to theJews in number, but inferior to their alacrity, although they wereobliged to expose themselves to danger by their very despair ofvictory;.,
,..,,.:'.„' 6. Now


* This speech of Herod is set down twice by Josephus, here and Antiq. B. XV.ch. v. sect. 3. Vol. II. to the very came purpose, but by no means in the samewords; whence it appears, that the sense WES Herod's, but the composition
Josephus's.


QJ12







OCR Output








THE LIFE OF FLAVIUS JOSEPflUS. 219


44. About this time it was that Jonathan and his fellow-legates came. They were sent, as we have said already, bySimon, and Ananus the high-priest. And Jonathan contrivedhow he might catch me by treachery ; for he durst not makeany attempt upon me openly. So he wrote me the followingepistle : " Jonathan and those that are with him, and are sent" by the people of Jerusalem, to Josephus, send greeting. We" are sent by the principal men of Jerusalem, who have heard" that John of Gischala hath laid many snares for thee, to re-" buke him, and to exhort him to be subject to thee hereafter.u We are also desirous to consult with thee about our common" concerns, and what is fit to be done. We therefore desire',' thee to come to us quickly, and to bring only a few men'> with thee ; for this village will not contain a great number of" soldiers." Thus it was that they wrote, as expecting one ofthese two things, either that I should come without armed men,and then they should have me under their power; or, if Icame with a great number, they should judge me to be a pub-Hc enemy. Now it was an horseman who brought the letter,a man at other times bold, and one that had served in the armyunder the king. It was the second hour of the night that hecame, when I was feasting with my friends, and the principalof the Galileans. This man, upon my servant's telling me,that a certain horseman of the Jewish nation was come, wascalled in at my command, but did not so much as salute meat all, but held out a letter, and said, " This letter is sent," thee by those that are come from Jerusalem ; do thou write" an answer to it quickly, for I am obliged to return to them" very soon." Now my guests could not but wonder at theboldness of the soldier. Uut 1 desired him to sit down andsup with us ; but when he refused so to do, I held the letterin my hands as I received it, and fell talking with my guestsabout other matters. But a few hours afterwards, I got up, and,when I had dismissed the rest to go to their beds, I bid onlyfour of my intimate friends to stay, and ordered my servant toget some wine ready. I also opened the letter so, that nobodycould perceive it ; and understanding thereby presently the pur­port of the writing, I sealed it up again, and appeared as if Ihad not yet read it, but only held it in my hands. I ordered -twenty drachma should be given the soldier for the charges ofhis journey ; and when he took the money, and said he thank­ed me for it, I perceived that he loved money, and that he wasto be caught chiefly by that means, and I said to him, " If thou," wilt but drink with us, thou shall have a drachma for every*,' glass thou drinkest." So he gladly embraced the proposal,
E e 2' " and







OCR Output








Chap. V. ANTIQJJITIES OF THE JEWS.


should advise), thought it best, by putting him to death, toprevent any mischief he might cause, and not bring himself into-difficulties, by sparing a man who might make him repent of itwhen it should be too late. Accordingly he was sent a prisoner,out of Herod's suspicious temper, to Macherus, the castle I be­fore mentioned, and was there put to death. Now, the Jews hadan opinion that the destruction of this army was sent as a pu­nishment by Herod, and a mark of God's displeasure to him.
3. So Vitellius prepared to make war with Aretas, havingwith him two legions of armed men ; he also took with him allthose of light armature, and of the horsemen which belongedto them, and were drawn out of those kingdoms which were un­der the Romans, and made haste for Petra, and came to Ptole-mais. But as he was marching very busily, and leading his ar­my through Judea, the principal men met him, and desired thathe would not thus march through their land ; for that the lawsof their country would not permit them to overlook those ima­ges which were brought into it, of which there were a great ma-ny in their ensigns ; so he was persuailid by what they said, andchanged that resolution of his, which he had before taken in thismatter. Whereupon he ordered the army to march along thegreat plain, while he himself, with Herod the tetrarch, and hisfriends, went up to Jerusalem to offer sacrifice to God, an ancientfestival of the Jews being then just approaching ; and when he hadbeen there, and been honourably entertained by the multitude ofthe Jews, he made a stay there for three days, within which timehe deprived Jonathan of the high-priesthood, and gave it to hisbrother Theopbilus. But when on the fourth day letters cameto him, which informed him of the death of Tiberius, he obligedthe multitude to take an oath of fidelity to Caius ; he also recall­ed his army, and made them every one go home, and take theirwinter-quarters there, since, upon the devolution of the empireupon Caius, he had not the like authority of making this warwhich he had before. It was also reported, that when Aretasheard of the coming of Vitellius to fight him, he said, upon hisconsulting the diviners, that it was impossible that this army ofVitellius's could enter Petra ; for that one of the rulers woulddie, either he that gave orders for the war, or he that wasmarching at the other's desire, in order to be subservient to hiswill, or else he against whom this army is prepared. So Vitel­lius truly retired to Antioch ; but Agrippa, the son of Aristobu-lus, went up to Rome, a year before the death of Tiberius, inorder to treat of -some affairs with the emperor, if he.might beermitted so to do. 1 have now a mind to describe Herod andis family, how it fared with them, partly because it is suitableVol. III. K tp







OCR Output








182 ANTIQJJITIES OF THE JEWS. Book XX.


gave * them what they had already done, but also gave themleave to let the wall they had built stand. This was grantedthem in order to gratify Poppea, Nero's wife, who was a re­ligious woman, and had requested these favours of Nero, andwho gave order to the ten ambassadors to go their way home ;but retained Helcias and Ismael as hostages with herself. Assoon as the king heard this news, he gave the high-priesthood toJoseph, who was called Cabi, the son of Simon, formerly high-priest.
CHAP. IX.
Concerning Albinus, under whose procuratorship James was slain ?-as also what edifices were built by Agrippa.
§ 1. A ND now Caesar, upon hearing the death of Festus, sentAlbinus into Judea, as procurator. But the king de­prived Joseph of the high-priesthood, and bestowed the successionto that dignity on the son of Ananus, who was also himself calledAnanas. Now the report goes, that this eldest Ananus proveda most fortunate man i for he had five sons, who had all perform­ed the office of an high-priest to God, and who had himself en­joyed that dignity a long time formerly, which had never hap­pened to any other of our high-priests. But this younger Ananus,who, as we have told you already, took the high-priesthood, wasa bold man in his temper, and very insolent; he was also of thesect of the Sadducees f, who are very rigid in judging offendersabove all the rest of the Jews, as we have already observed ;when, therefore, Ananus was of this disposition, he thought hehad now a proper opportunity [to exercise his authority]. Fes­tus was now dead, and Albinus was put upon the road ; so heassembled the sanhedrim of judges, and brought before themthe brother of Jesus, who was called Christ, whose name wasfames, and some others, [or, some of his companions]. Andwhen he had formed an accusation against them as breakers of
the
* We have here one eminent example of Nero's mildness and goodness in hisgovernment towards the Jews, during the five first years of his reign, so famousin antiquity; we have perhaps another in Josephus's own Life, sect. 3. and a third,though of a very different nature here, in sect. 9. just before. However, boththe generous acts of kindness were obtained of Nero by his queen Poppea, whowas a religious lady, and perhaps privately a Jewish proselyte, and so were notowing entirely to Nero's own goodness.
t It hence evidently appears, that Sadducees might be high.priests in the daysof Josephus, and that these Sadducees were usually very severe and inexorablejudges, while the Pharisees were much milder, and more merciful, as appears byIceland's instances in his note on this place, and on Josephus's Life, sect. 34. andthose taken from the New Testament, from Josephus himself, and from the rab­bins; nor do we meet with any Sadducees later than this high-priest in all Jost-phes.







OCR Output








298 Book t. WARS OF THE JEWS.


CHAP. XVII.
The death of Joseph, [Herod's brother], which had been signifiedto Herod in dreams. How Herod was preserved twice, after, a wonderful manner. He cuts off'the head, of Pappus, who wasthe murderer of his brother, and sends that head to [his otherbrother] Pheroras. Andin no long time he besieges Jerusalem,and marries Mariamne.
} 1. TN the mean time Herod's affairs in Judea were in an illX state. He had left his brother Joseph with full power,but had charged him to make no attempts against Antigonus, tillhis return; for that Macheraswould not be such an assistantas hecould depend on, as it appeared by what he had done already ;but as soon as Joseph heard that his brother was at a very greatdistance, he neglected the charge he had received, and marchedtowards Jericho with five cohorts, which Macheras sent with,him. This movement was intended for seizing on the corn, asit was now in the midst of summer ; but when his enemies at­tacked him in the mountains, and in places which were difficultto pass,he was both killed himself, as he was very bravely fightinginthebattle,andtheentireRomancohortswere destroyed; forthesecohorts were new-raised men, gathered out of Syria, and therewas no mixture of those called veteran soldiers among them,who might have supported those that were unskilful in war.
2. This victory was not sufficient for Antigonus, but he pro­ceeded to that degree of rage, as to treat the dead body of Jo­seph barbarously: for when he had gotten possession of the bodiesof those'that were slain, he cut off his head, although his brotherPheroras would have given fifty talents as a price of redemptionfor it. And now the affairs of Galilee were put in such disorderafter this victory of Antigonus's that those of Antigonus's partybrought the principal men that were on Herod's side to the lake,and there drowned them. There was a great change made alsoin Idumea, where Macheras was building a wall about one ofthe fortresses, which was called Gittha. But Herod had notyet been informed of these things ; for after the taking of Samc-sata, and when Antony had set Sosius over the affairs of Syria,and given him orders to assist Herod against Antigonus, he de­parted into Egypt; but Sosius sent two legions before him intoJudea, to assist Herod, and followed himself soon after with therest of his army.
3. Now when Herod was atDaphne, by Antioch, he had somedreams which clearly foreboded his brother's death, and as heleaped outof hisbedin a disturbedmanner,therecame messengersthat acquainted him with that calamity. So whenhe had lament­ed







OCR Output








838 WARS OF THE JEWS. ^ • ' Book I.


of madness, and accused himself, and said, " This Tero endea-" voured to persuade me also to cut thy throat with my ra-" zor, when I trimmed thee, and promised that Alexander" should give me large presents for so doing." When Herodheard this, he examined Tero, with his son and the barber, bythe torture; but as the others denied the accusation, and hesaid nothing farther, Herod gave order that Tero should beracked more severely; but his son, out of pity to his father,promised to discover the whole to the king, if he would grant[that his father should be no longer tortured]; when he hadagreed to this, he said, That " his father, at the persuasion of" Alexander, had an intention to kill him." Now some saidthis was forged, in order to free his father from his torments,and some said it was true.
6. And now Herod accused the captains, and Tero, in an as­sembly of the people, and brought the people together in a bodyagainst them ; and accordingly there were they put to death, to­gether with [Trypho] the barber; they were killed by the pie­ces of wood, and the stones, that were thrown at them. He alsosent his sons to Sebaste, a city not far from Caesarea, and order­ed them to be there strangled: and as what he had ordered wasexecuted immediately, so he commanded that their dead bodiesshould be brought to the fortress Alexandrium, to be buriedwith Alexander, their grandfather by the mother's side. Andthis was the end of Alexander and Aristobulus.
CHAP. XXVIII.
How dntipater is hated of all men ; and iow the king espousesthe sons of those that had been slain to his kindred: 'But thatAntipater made him change them Jor other women. Of He­rod's marriages, and children.
§ 1. TJUT an intolerable hatred fell upon Antipater from the-D nation, though he had now an indisputable title to thesuccession; because they all knew that he'was the person whocontrived all the calumnies against his brethren. However, hefeegan to be in a terrible fear, as he saw the posterity of thosethat had been slain growing up; for Alexander had two sons byGlaphyra,Tigranesand Alexander; and Aristobulus had Herod,-gnd Agrippa, and Aristobulus, his sons, with Herodias and Ma-riamne, his daughters, and all by Bernice, Salome's daughter; astor Glaphyra, Herod, as soon as he had killed Alexander, senther back, together with her portion, to Cappadocia. He marriedBernice, Aristobulus's daughter^ to Antipater's uncle by his mo­ther, and it was Antipater, who, in order to reconcile her to him,' ' * when







OCR Output








144 Book XIX. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


CHAP V.
How Claudius restored to Agrippa his grandfather's kingdoms,and augmented hts dominions : and how he published an edict inbehalf of the Jews.
$ 1. 'VTOW, when Claudius had taken out of the way all those^ soldiers whom he suspected, which he did immediate­ly, he published an edict, and therein confirmed that kingdom toAgrippa, which Caius had given him, and therein commendedthe king highly. He also made an addition to it, of all that coun­try over which Herod, who was his grandfather, had reigned,that is, .Tudea and Samaria ; and this he restored to him as due tohis family. But for Abila * -of Lysanias, and all that lay atmount Libanus, he bestowed them upon him, as out of his ownterritories. He also made a league with this Agrippa, confirm­ed by oaths, in the middle of the forum, in the city of Rome:he also took away from Antiochus that kingdom which he waspossessed of, but gave him a certain part of Cilicia and Com-magena : he also set Alexander Lysimachus, the alabarch, at li­berty, who had been his old friend, and steward to his motherAntonia, but had been imprisoned by Caius, whose son [Marcus]married Bernice, the daughter of Agrippa. But when Marcus,Alexander's son, was dead, who had married her when she wasa virgin, Agrippa gave her in marriage to his brother Herod,and begged for him of Claudius the kingdom of Chalcis.
2. Now, about this time, there was a sedition between the Jewsand the Greeks, at the city of Alexandria ; for, when Caius wasdead, the nation of the Jews, which had been very much morti­fied under the reign of Cains, and reduced to very great distressby the people of Alexandria, recovered itself, and immediatelytook up their arms to fight for themselves. So Claudius sentan order to the president of Egypt, to quiet that tumult; he al­so sent an edict, at the requests of king Agrippa and king He­rod, both to Alexandria and to Syria, whose contents were asfollows : '* Tiberius Claudius Ciesar, Augustus, Germanicus,*' high-priest, and tribune of the people, ordains thus. Since I<* am assured that the Jews of Alexandria, called Alexandrians,
** have
" Here St Luke is in some measure confirmed, when he informs us, ch. iii. i.that Lysanias was some time before tetrarch of Abilene, whose capital was Abila;as he is farther confirmed by Ptolemy, the great geographer, which Spanheimhere observes, when he calls that city Abila of Lysaniat. See the note on B.XVII. ch. xi. sect. 4 and Prid. at the years 36. and 22. I esteem this principa­lity to have belonged to the land of Canaan originally, to have been the buryingplace of Abel, and referred to as such, Matt, xx-iii. 35. Luke xi. 51. See Au-thent. Rec. Part II. p. 883—885.







OCR Output








Chap. XVI. yrARS OF THE JEWS. 295


securely, he marched to take the remaining parts of Galilee, andto drive away the garrisons placed there by Antigonus.
2. But when Herod had reached * Sepphoris, in a very greatsnow, he took the city without any difficulty; the guards thatshould have kept it, flying away before it was assaulted; wherehe gave an opportunity to his followers that had been in distressto refresh themselves,there bein'g in that city a great abundanceof necessaries. After which he hasted away to the robbers thatwere in the caves, who over.ran a great part of the country,and did as great mischief to its inhabitants as a war itself couldhave done. Accordingly, he sent before-hand three cohorts offootmen, and one troop of 'horsemen' to the village Arbela,and came himself f forty days afterwards with the rest of hisforces. Yet were not the enemy affrighted at his assault,' butmet him in arms; for their skill was that of warriors, but theifboldness was the boldness of robbers: when, therefore, it cam6to a pitched battle, they put to flight Herod's left wing withtheir right one; but Herod, wheeling about on the' sudden fromhis own right wing, came to their assistance, and both madehis own left wing return back from its flight, and fell upon thepursuers, and cooled their courage, till they could not bear theattempts that were made directly upon them, and so turnedback and ran away.
3. But Herod followed them, and slew them as he followedthem, and destroyed a great part of them, till those that re.imained were scattered beyond the river [Jordan], and Galileewas freed from the terrors they had been under, exceptingfrom those that remained, and lay concealed in caves, which re­quired longer time ere they could be conquered. In order towhich Herod, in the first place, distributed the fruits of theirformer labours to the soldiers, and gave every one' of them anhundred and fifty drachmae of silver, and a great deal more totheir commanders, and sent them into their winter quarters.He also sent to his youngest brother Pheroras, to take care of agood market for them, where they might buy themselves pro­visions, and to build a wall about Alexandrium, who took careof both those injunctions accordingly.
4. In


* This Sepphoris, the metropolis of Galilee, so often mentioned by Josephu»thas coins still remaining, rsvptapwair, as Spanheim here informs U3.
f This way of speaking, after 40 dayi, is interpreted by Josephus himself, onthe &fitb day; Aiitiq. B. XIV. ch. xv. sect. iv. Vol. TI. In like manner, when.Josephus Says, ch. xxxiii. &ect. 8. that Herod lived after he had ordered Antipaterto be slain 5 da\s; this is by himself interpreted, Anriq. B. XV11. ch. viii. sect. i.Vol. HI. that he died on the 5/A day afterivard. See also what is in this book, chap'xiii. sect. I. after ttvo years, is, Antiq. B. XIV. ch. xiii. sect. 3. Vol. II. on Ibtear. And Dean Aldrich here notes that this way of speaking is familiar te,' , '







OCR Output








Chap. VIII. WARS OF THE JEWS; 3T0


12. There are also those among them who undertake to *foretel things to come, by reading the holy books, and usingseveral sorts of purifications, and being perpetually conversantin the discourses of the prophets ; and it is but seldom thatthey miss in their predictions. -
13. Moreover, there is another order of Essens, who agreewith the rest as to their way of living, and customs, andlaws, but differ from them in the point of marriage, as thinkingthat by not marrying they cut off the principal part of humanlife, which is the prospect of succession; nay rather, that if allmen should be of the same opinion, the whole race of mankindwould fail. However, they try their spouses for three years,and if they find that they have their natural purgations thrice,as trials that they are likely to be fruitful, they then actuallymarry them. But they do not use to accompany with theirwives when they are with child, as a demonstration that they donot marry out of regard to pleasure, but for the sake of poste,rity. Now the women go into the baths with some of theirgarments on, as the men do with somewhat girded about them.And these are the customs of this ordej; of 'fesens.
14. But then as to the two other orders at first mentioned, thePharisees are those who are esteemed most skilful in the exactexplication of their laws, and introduce the first sect. Theseascribe all to fate, [or providence], and to God, and yet allow,that to act what is right, or the contrary, is principally in th«power of men; although fete does co-operate in every action.They say, that all souls are incorruptible, but that the f soulsof good men only are removedintootherbodies,but thatthe soulsof bad men are subject to eternal punishment. But the Saddu.
cees


* Dean Aldrich reckons up three example* of this gift of prophecy in severalof these Essens out of Josephns himself, viz. in the History of the War, B' I.'ch.iii. § 5. vol. HI. Judas foretold the death of Antigonus at Strato's Tower; B. II.chap. vii. § 3. Simon foretold that Archdaus should reign but nine or cen years;and Antiq. B. XV. «hap' x. § 4, 5. vol. II. Menehem foretold that Herod shouldbe king, and should reign tyrannically, and that for more thap twenty or eventhirty years. AH which came to pass accordingly.
f There is so much more here about the Essens' than ia cited from Josephus inPorphyry and Eusebius, and yet so much lets about the Pharisees and Sadducees,the two other Jewish sects, than would naturally be expected in proportion to theEssens or third sect, nay, than teems to be referred to by himself elsewhere, thatone is tempted to suppose Josephus had at first written le-'E of the one, and moreof the two others than his present copies afford UB; as also, that, by some unknownaccident, our present copies are here made up of the larger edition in the first case,and of the smaller in the second. See the note in Havercamp's edition. Howe­ver, what Josephus says in the name of the Pharisees, that only the souls of goodmen go out of one body into another, although all souls be immortal, and still thesouls of the bad are liable to eternal punishment; as also what he says afterwards,Antiq. B. XVIII' chap. i. § 3. vol.111' that the soul's vigour is immortal, and thattr'd<:r the earth thsy receive rewards or punishments according as their lives huv­







OCR Output








218 THE LIFE OF FLAVIUS JOSEFHU9.


42. But wonderful it was what a dream I saw that verynight; for when I had betaken myself to my bed, as grieved anddisturbed at the news that had been written to me, it seemed tome, that a certain person stood by me*, and said, " O Josephus !" leave off to afflict thy soul, and put away all fear ; for what" now grieves thee will render thee very considerable, and in" all respects most happy ; for thou shalt get over not only these" difficulties, but many others, with great success. However," be not cast down, but remember that thou art to fight with" the Romans." When I had seen this dream, I got up with anintention of going down to the plain. Now, when the wholemultitude of the Galileans, among whom were the women andchildren, saw me, they threw themselves down upon their faces,and, with tears in their eyes, besought me not to leave them'exposed to their enemies, nor to go away and permit theircountry to be injured by them. But, when I did not complywith their entreaties, they compelled me to take an oath, that Iwould stay with them : they also cast abundance of reproachesupon the people of Jerusalem, that they would net let tlieircountry enjoy peace.
43. When I heard this, and saw what sorrow the people werein, I was moved with compassion to them, and thought it be­came me to undergo the most manifest hazards for the sake ofso great a multitude ; so I let them know I would stay withthem. And when I had given order that five thousand of themshould come to me armed, and with provisions for their main­tenance, I sent the rest away to their own homes ; and, whenthose five thousand were come, I took them, together with threethousand of the soldiers that were with me before, and eightyhorsemen, and marched to the village of Chabolo, situated in theconfines of Ftolemais, and there kept my forces together, pre­tending to get ready to fight with Placidus, who was come withtwo cohorts of footmen, and one troop of horsemen, and was sentthither by Cestius Gallus to burn those villages of Galilee thatwere near Ptolemais. Upon whose casting up a bank beforethe city Ptolemais, I also pitched my camp at about the distanceof sixty furlongs from that village. And now we frequentlybrought out our forces as if we would fight, but proceeded nofarther than skirmishes at a distance ; for, when Placidus per­ceived that I was earnest to come to battle, he was afraid, andavoided it. Yet did he not remove from the neighbourhood ofPtolemais.
' '44. About


* This I take to be the Erst of Josephus's remarkable or divine dreams, whichwere predictive of the great things that afterward came to pass; of which seemore in the note on Antiq' B. III. chap. viii. sect. 5. The other is in the War,B. III. ch. viii. sect. 3. 5.







OCR Output








256 . WARS OF THE JEWS. Book I*


Antigonus, over the siege ; who pushed it on so hard, that a fa.mine so far prevailed within the city, that they were forced toeat what never was esteemed food. They also invited Anti-ochus, who was called Cyzicenus, to come to their assistance ;whereupon he got ready, and complied with their invitation,but was beaten by Aristobulus and Antigonus ; and indeed heWas pursued as far as Scythopolis by these brethren, and fledaway from them. So they returned back to Samaria, and shutthe multitude again within the wall; and when they had takenthe city, they demolished it, and made slaves of its inhabitants.And, as they had still great success in their undertakings, theydid not suffer their zeal to cool, but marched with an army as faras Scythopolis, and made an incursion upon it, aud laid waste allthe country that lay within Mount Carmel.
8. But then, these successes of John and of his sons made thembe envied, and occasioned a sedition in the country, and manythere were who got together, and would not be at rest till theybrake out into open war, in which war they were beaten. SoJohn lived the rest of his life very happily, and administered thegovernment after a most extraordinary manner, and this for thir­ty-three entire years together. He died, leaving five sons be­hind him. He was certainly a very happy man, and afforded nooccasion to have any complaint made of fortune on his account.He it was who alone had three of the most desirable things inthe world, the government of his nation, and the high-priest­hood, and the gift of prophecy. For the Deity conversed withhim, and he was not ignorant of any thing that was to come af­terward ; insomuch, that he foresaw and foretold that his twoeldest sons would not continue masters of the government ; andit will highly deserve our narration, to describe their catas­trophe, and how far inferior these men were to their father infelicity.
CHAP. III.
How Aristobulus wa.t the Jirst that put a diadem about Ms lead,and after he had put his mother and brother to dsath, died him­self, when he had reigned no more than a year.
§ 1. T^OR after the death of their father, the elder of them, A--*- ristobnlus, changed the government into a kingdom, andwas the first that put a diadem upon his head, four hundred se­venty and one years, and three months, after oar people camedown into this country, when they were set free from the Baby­lonian slavery. Now, of his brethren, he appeared to have an af­fection for Antigonus, who was next to him, and made him hisermal ; but, for the rest, he bound them, and pnt them in prison.
He!







OCR Output








Chap. XVIII. WARS OF THE JEWS. 419


CHAP. XVIII.
The calamities and slaughters that came upon tbt Jews.
• § l. 1VTOW the people of Cesarea had slain the Jews that wereJ- ^ among them on the very same day and hour [whenthe soldiers were slain], which one would think must have cometo pass by the direction of Providence; insomuch, that in onehour's time above twenty thousand Jews were killed, and allCesarea was emptied of its Jewish inhabitants; for Floruscaught such as ran away and sent them in bonds to the gallies.Upon which stroke that the Jews received at Cesarea, the wholenation was greatly enraged; so they divided themselves intoseveral parties, and laid waste the villages of the Syrians, andtheir neighbouring cities, Philadelphia, and Sebonitis, andGerasa, and Pella, and Scythopolis, and after them Gadara,and Hippos; and falling upon Gaulanitis, some cities they de­stroyed there, and some they set on fire, and then went to Keda-sa, belonging to the Tyrians, and to Ptolemais, and to Gaba, andto Gesarea, nor was either Sebaste [Samaria], or Askelon ableto oppose the violence with which they were attacked; andwhen they had burnt these to the ground, they entirely demolishedAnthedon and Gaza; many also of the villages that were aboutevery one of those cities were plundered, and an immenseslaughter was made of the men who were caught in them.
2. However the Syrians were even with the Jews in the mul­titude of the men whom they slew; for they killed those whomthey caught in their cities, and that not only out of the hatredthey bear them, as formerly, but to prevent the danger underwhich they were from them; so that the soldiers in all Syriawere terrible, and every city was divided into two armies en­camped one against another, and the preservation of the oneparty was in the destruction of the other; so the day time wasspent in shedding of blood, and the night in fear, which was of thetwo the more terrible; for when the Syrians thought they hadruined the Jews, they had the Judaizer's in suspicion also; and aseach side did not care to slay those whom they only suspected onthe other, so did they greatly fear them when they were ming­led with the other, as if they were certainly foreigners. More­over, greediness of gain was a provocation to kill the oppositeparty, even to such of old as had appeared very mild and gentl*towards them; for they without fear plundered the effects ofthe slain, and carried off the spoils of those whom they slew totheir own houses, as if they had been gained in a set battle; andhe was esteemed a man of honour who got the greatest share, ashaving prevailed over the greatest number of his enemies. It
3 G 2 was







OCR Output








418 WARS or THE JEWS* Book II.


captains under him also, and particularly by the principal in­strument of his tyranny, whose name was Apsulom,
10. And, as 1 said, so far truly the people assisted them,while they hoped this might afford some amendment to the se­ditious practices; but the others were not in haste to put anend to the war, but hoped to prosecute it with less danger, nowthey had slain Manahem. It is true, that when the peopleearnestly desired that they would leave off besieging the soldiers,they'were the more earnest in pressing it forward, and this tillMetilius, who was the Roman general, sent toEleazar, and de­sired that they would give them security to spare their livesonly, but agreed to deliver up their arms, and what else theyhad with them. The others readily complied with their peti­tion, sent to them Gorion, the son of Nicodemus, and Ananias,the son of Sadduk, and Judas, the son of Jonathan, that theymight give them the security of their right hands, and of theiroaths; after which Metilius brought down his soldiers, whichsoldiers while they were in arms, were not meddled with byany of the seditious, nor was there any appearance of treachery ;but as soon as, according to the articles of capitulation, theyhad all laid down their shields, and their swords, and were un­der no farther suspision of any harm, but were going away,Eleazar's men attacked them after a violent manner, and en­compassed them round, and slew them, while they neither de­fended themselves, nor entreated for mercy, but only cried outupon the breach of their articles of capitulation, and their oaths.And thus were all these men barbarously murdered, exceptingMetilius; for when he entreated for mercy, and promised thathe would turn Jew, and be circumcised, they saved him alive,but none else. This loss to the Romans was but light, therebeing no more than a few slain out of an immense army ; butstill it appeared to be a prelude to the Jews own destruction,while men made public lamentation when they saw that suchoccasions were afforded for a war as were incurable; that thecity was all over polluted with such abominations, from whichit was but reasonable to expect some vengeance, even thoughthey should escape reverence from the Romans ; so that the citywas filled with sadness, and every one of the moderate men init were under great disturbance, as likely themselves to under­go punishment for the wickedness of the seditious; for indeedit so happened, that this murder was perpetrated on the Sab­bath day, on which day the Jews have a respite from theirworks on account of divine worship,
CHAP*







OCR Output








Chap. V. Al?fl<iUlllES OF THE JEWS.' 169


CHAP V.
Concerning Theudas, and the sons of Judas the Galilean : as alsowhat calamity fell upon the Jews on the day ofthe passover.
j 1. "VJOW it came to pass, while Fadus was procurator of Ju-,*•" dea, that a certain magician, whose name was Theu-das *, persuaded a great part of the people to take their effectswith them, and follow him to the river Jordan ; for he told themhe was a prophet, and that he would, by his own command, di­vide the river, and afford them an easy passage over it; and ma­ny were deluded by his words. However, Fadus did not per­mit them to make any advantage of his wild attempt' but sent atroop of horsemen out against them ; who, falling upon them un­expectedly, slew many of them, and took many of them alive.They also took Theudas alive, and cut off his head, and carriedit to Jerusalem. This was what befel the Jews in' the time ofCuspius Fadus's government.
2. Then came Tiberius Alexander as successor to Fadus ; hewas the son of Alexander the Alabarch of Alexandria, which A-lexander was a principal person among all his contemporaries,'both for his family and wealth : he was also more eminent forhis piety than this his son Alexander, for he did not continue inthe religion of his country. Under thes'e procurators that greatfamine happened in Judea, in which queen Helena bought corninEgypt at a great expence, and distributed it to those that were inwant, as I have related already. And besides this, the sons ofJudas of Galilee were now slain, I mean of that Judas who cau­sed the people to revolt, when Cyrenius came to take an accountof the estates of the Jews, as we have shewed in a foregoing book.The names of those sons were JameS and Simon, whom Alex­ander commanded to be crucified. But now Herod, king ofChalcis, removed Joseph,' the son of Camydus, from the high-priest-hood, and made Ananias, the sou of Nebedus,hissuccessor.And now it was that Cumanus came a successor to Tiberius A-lexander ; as also that Herod, brother of Agrippa the great king,departed this life, in the eighth year of the reign of Claudius Cx-sar. He left behind him three sons, Aristobulus, whom lie hadby his first wife, with Bemictanus, and Hircanus', both whonihe had by Bernice his brother's daughter. But Claudius Caesarbestowed his dominions on Agrippa junior.
3. Now, while the Jewish affairs were under the administra­tion of Cumanus, there happened a great tumult at the city of Je-
VOL. III. Y rusalem,'


* This Theudas, who arose under Fadas the procurator, about A. D. 45. or46. could not bear that Theudas who arose in the days of the taxing, under Cy-renius; or about A. D. 7. Acts, v. 36. 37. Who that 'earlier Theudas was, see







OCR Output








Chap. XXI. WARS OF THE JEWS. 311


part of his magnanimity was extended tp the promotion of
piety. iJ'' .j :','' s.tw
CHAP. XXI.
Of the [temple and'\ cities that were built by Herod, and erectedfrom the very foundations; as also of those other ed.if.ces thatwere erected by him: and what kiagnificence he shewed to fo­reigners ; and how fortune was in all things favourable to him.
J 1. A CCORDINGLY, in the sixteenth year of his reign,JT\. Herod rebuilt the temple, and encompassed a piece ofland about it with a wall, which land was twice as large' as thatbefore inclosed. The expences he laid out upon it were vastlylarge also, and the riches about it were unspeakable. A sign ofwhich you have in the great cloisters that were erected about thetemple and*thecitadel which was on its north side. The cloistershe built from the foundation, but the citadel he repaired at a vastexpence; nor was it other than a royal palace, which he calledjtntonia, in honour of Antony. He also built himself a palacein the upper city, containing two very large and most beautifulapartments. To which the holy house itself could not be com*pared [in largeness]. The one apartment he named Ctesarevm,and the other Agrippiwn, from his [two great] friends. . .
2. Yet did he not preserve their memory by particular build­ings only, with their names given them, but his generosity wentas far as entire cities; for when he had built a most beautifulwall round a country in Samaria, twenty furlongs long, and hadbrought six thousand inhabitants into it, and had allotted to ita most fruitful piece of land, and in the midst of this city, thusbuilt, had erected a very large temple to Caesar, and had laidround about it a portion of sacred land of three furlongs and anhalf, he called the' city Sebaste, from Sebastus or Augustus, andsettled the affairs of the city after a most regular manner.
3. And when Caesar had further bestowed upon him anotheradditional country, he built there also a temple of white marble,hard by the fountains of Jordan: the place is called Panium,where is a top of a mountain that is raised to an immense height,and at its side, beneath, or at its bottom, a dark cave opens itself;within which there is an horrible precipice, that descends abrupt­ly to a vast depth; it contains a mighty quantity of water, which
is


* This fort was first built, as it is supposed, by John Hyrcanus. See Prid. atthe year 107. and called Saris, the tower or citadel. It was afterwards rebuilr,with great improvements, by Herod, under the government of Antonius, and wainamed from him the Tower efAnttmia; and about the time when Herod rebuiltthe temple, he seems to have put his last hand to it. See Antiq. B. XVIII. ch. v.«ect. 4, voL III. Of the war, B. I. ch. iii. sect. 4. It lay; on the north-west side ofthe temple,. and was a quarter as large.


 







OCR Output








230 THE LIFE OF FLAVIUS JOSEPHUS.


I told them, that it was best for them to act according to their de­termination ; whereupon they were prevailed on. At whichtime also, John, when the snares he had laid did not take effect,returned back to Gischala.
GO. Now, in a few days those ambassadors whom he had sent,'came back again and informed us, that the people were greatlyprovoked at Ananus, and Simon, the son of Gamaliel, and theirfriends ; that, without any public determination, they had sent toGalilee' and had done their endeavours that I mitjht be turned otit
' O
of the government. The ambassadors said farther, that the peoplewere ready to burn their houses. They also brought letters, where­by the chief men of Jerusalem, at the earnest petition of thepeople, confirmed me in the government of Galilee, and enjoinJonathan and his colleagues to return home quickly. When Ihad gotten these letters, I came to the village Arbela, where Iprocured an assembly of the Galileans to meet, and bid the am­bassadors declare to them the anger of the people of Jerusalemat what had been done by Jonathan and his colleagues, and howmuch they hated their wicked doings, and how they had con­firmed me in the government of their country, as also what re­lated to the order they had in writing for Jonathan and his col­leagues to return home. So I immedie.tely sent them the letter,and bid him that carried it to inquire, as well as lie could, howthey intended to act [on this occasion.]
til. Now, when they had received that letter, and were there­by greatly disturbed, they sent for John, and for the senators ofTiberias, and for the principal men of the Gabarens, and propo­sed to hold a council, and desired them to consider what was to-be done by them. However, the governors of Tiberias weregreatly disposed to keep the government to themselves ; for theysaid it was not fit to desert their city, now it was committed tdtheir trust, and that otherwise I should not delay to fall uponthem ; for they pretended falsely that so I had threatened to do.Now John was not only of their opinion, but advised them, thattwo of them should go to accuse me before the multitude [at Je­rusalem], that I do not manage the affairs of Galilee as I ought'to do; and that they would easily persuade the people, because oftheir dignity, and because the whole multitude are very mutable.When, therefore, it appeared that John had suggested the wisestadvice to them, they resolved that two of them, Jonathan and A-nanias, should go to the people of Jerusalem, and the other two[Simon and Joazar] should be left behind to tarry at Tiberias.f They also took along with them an hundred soldiers for theirguard.
62. However, the governors of Tiberias took care to have their
city







OCR Output








, I. AN17QJJIT1ES Of THE JEWS. 115


" but to his own pleasure), we shall also ourselves be exposed to" his cruelty ; whereas we ought to be the means of confirming" the security and liberty of all, and at the same time to resolve«« to free ourselves from dangers."
7. Hereupon Clement openly commended Cherea's intentions;but bid him " hold his tongue ; for that in case his words" should get out among many, and such things should be spread'* abroad as were fit to be concealed, the plot would come to" be discovered before it was executed, and they should be" brought to punishment; but that they should leave all to" futurity, and the hope which thence arose, that some fortunate«' event would come to their assistance : that, as for himself, his" age would not permit him to make any attempt in that case." However, although perhaps I could suggest what may be" safer than what thou, Cherea, hast contrived and said, yet" how is it possible for any one to suggest what is more for" thy reputation ?" So Clement went his way home, withdeep reflections on what he had heard, and what he had himselfsaid. Cherea also was under a concern, and went quickly toCornelius Sabinus, who was himself one of the tribunes, andwhom he otherwise knew to be a worthy man, and a lover ofliberty, and on that account very uneasy at the present manage­ment of public affairs, he being desirous to come immediatelyto the execution of what had been determined, and thinking itright for him to propose it to the other, and afraid lest Clementshould discover them, and besides looking upon delays and put­tings off to be the next to desisting from the enterprise.
8. But as all was agreeable to Sabinus, who had himself,«qually with Cherea, the same design, but had been silent forwant of a person to whom he could safely communicate thatdesign, so having now met with one, who not only promised toconceal what he heard, but who had already opened his mindto him, he was much more encouraged, and desired of Cherea,that no delay might be made therein. Accordingly they wentto Minucianus, who was as virtuous a man, and as zealous todo glorious actions as themselves, and suspected by Cains onoccasion of the slaughter of Lepidus ; for Minucianus and Lepi-dus were intimate friends, and both in fear of the dangers thatthey were under; for Caius was terrible to all the great men,as appearing ready to act a mad part towards each of them inparticular, and towards all of them in general; and these menwere afraid of one another, while they were yet uneasy at theposture of affairs, but avoided to declare their mind and theirhatred against Caius to one another, out of fear of the dangersfhey might be in thereby, although they perceived by other
P 2 means







OCR Output








38 ' ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book XVII.


" ring Herod's whole life, had on all occasions been joint parta-«' kers of power with him, and yet do zealously endeavour to'' injure his determination, while they have not themselves had'' the same regard to their kinsman, [which Archelaus had]," Casar will not therefore disannul the testament of a man" whom he had entirely supported, of his friend and confede." rate, and that which is committed to him in trust to ratify :" nor will Caesar's virtuous and upright disposition, which are" known and uncontested through all the habitable world, imi-" tate the wickedness of these men in condemning a king as a" madman, and as having lost his reason, while he hath bequeath.«' ed the succession to a good son of his, and to one who flies" to Ccesar's upright determination for refuge. Nor can He-" rod at any time have been mistaken in his judgment about a" successor, while he shewed so much prudence as to submit all'' to Caesar's determination."
7. Now when Nicolaus had laid these things before Caesar, heended his plea; whereupon Caesar was so obliging to Arche­laus, that he raised him up when he had cast himself down at hisfeet, and said, that " he well deserved the kingdom ;" and he soonlet them know, that he was so far moved in his favour, that hewould not act otherwise than his father's testament directed, andthan was for the advantage of Archelaus. However, while hegave this encouragement to Archelaus to depend on him secure­ly, he made no full determination about him ; and, when the as­sembly was broken up, he considered by himself, whether heshould confirm the kingdom to Archelaus, or whether he shouldpart it among all Herod's posterity ; and this because they allstood in need of much assistance to support them.
CHAP. X.
A /edition of the Jews against Sabinus ; and how Varus broughtthe authors of it to punishment. ' .
J I. "DUT before these things could be brought to a settlement,-*-* Malthace, Archelaus's mother, fell into a distemper,and died of it; and letters came from Varus, the president ofSyria, which informed Caesar of the revolt of the Jews; for, af­ter Archelaus was sailed, the whole nation was in a tumult. SoVarus, since he was there himself, brought the authors of thedisturbance to punishment; and when he had restrained them forthe most part from this sedition, which was a great one, he tookhis journey to Antioch, leaving one legion of his army at Jeru­salem to keep the Jews quiet, who were now very fond of inno­vation. Yet did not this at all avail to put an end to that their
sedition ;







OCR Output








Chap. XVIII. WARS OF THE JEWS. 393


same time, the spoiling of the city, asking Sosius in the mostearnest manner, whether the Romans, by thus emptying the ci­ty of money and men, had a mind to leave him king of a desertjand told him, That " he judged the dominion of the habitable" earth too small a compensation for the slaughter of so many ci-" tizens." Andwhen Sosius said, " That it was but just to allow" the soldiers this plunder as a reward for what they sufferedduring the siege," Herod made answer, that" he would give e-" very one of the soldiers a reward out of his own money.',' Sohe purchased the deliverance of his country, and performed hispromises to them, and made presents after a magnificent man­ner to each soldier, and proportionably to their commanders, andwith a most royal bounty to Sosius himself, whereby nobodywent away but in a wealthy condition. Hereupon Sosius dedi­cated a crown of gold to God, and then went away from Jerusa­lem, leading Antigonus away in bonds to Antony; then did the* ax bring him to his end, who still had a fond desire of life,and some frigid hopes of it to the last, but by his cpwardly be­haviour well deserved to die by it.
4. Hereupon king Herod distinguished the multitude thatwas in the city, and for those that were of his side, he madethem still more his friends by the honours he conferred on them;but for those of Antigonus's party he slew them; and as hismoney ran low, he turned all the ornaments he had into money,and sent it to Antony, and to those about him. Yet could henot hereby purchase an exemption from all sufferings; for An­tony was now bewitched by his love to Cleopatra, and was en­tirely conquered by her charms. Now Cleopatra had put todeath all her kindred, till no one near her in blood remained a-live, and after that she fell a slaying those no way related to her.So she calumniated the principal men among the Syrians to An-tony,andpersuaded him to have them slain, that so she might ea­sily gain to be mistress of what they had; nay, she extended heravaricious humour to the Jews and Arabians, and secretly la­boured to have Herod and Malichus, the kings of both thosenations, slain by his order.
5. Now as to these her injunctions to Antony, he complied inpart; for though he esteemed it too abominable a thing to killsuch good and great kings, yet was he thereby alienated fromthefriendship he had for them. He also took away a great deal oftheir country; nay, even the plantation of palm trees at Jericho,where also grows the balsam tree, and bestowed them upon her':
as


* This death of Atuiponus is confirmed by Plutarch and Strabo; the latter ofwhom is cited for it by Josephu* himself, Antiq. B. XV. cli. i. sect. z. Vol. II.as Dean Aldrich here observes.







OCR Output








162 ANTIQJJITIES OF THE JEWS.' ' Book XX.


him to forbear. And when he had related what she had said toAnanias, he confirmed what his mother had said, and when hehad also threatened to leave him, unless he complied with him,he went away from him, and said, that «' he was afraid lest such'" an action being once become public to all, he should himself" be in danger of punishment, for having been the occasion of" it, and having been the king's instructor in actions that were'« of ill reputation ; and he said, that he might worship God" without being circumcised, even though he did resolve to fol-" low the Jewish law entirely, which worship of God was of a" superior nature to circumcision. He added, that God would" forgive him, though he did not perform the operation, while'l it was omitted out of necessity, and for fear of his subjects."So the king at that time complied with these persuasions of A-nanias. But afterwards, as he had not quite left off his desire ofdoing this thing, a certain other Jew that came out of Galilee,whose name was Eleazar, and who was esteemed very skilful inthe learning of his country, persuaded him to do the thing ; foras he entered into his palace to salute him, and found him read­ing the law of Moses,' he said to him, u Thou dost not consider," O king ! that thou unjustly breakest the principal of those«« laws, and art injurious to God himself, [by omitting to be cir-" cumcised] ; for thou oughtest not only to read them, but chiefly«' to practise what they enjoin thee. How long wilt thou con-" tinue uncircumcised ? But, if thou hast not yet read the law" about circumcision, and dost not know how great impiety thou" art guilty of by neglecting it, read it now." When the kinghad heard what he said, he delayed the thing no longer, but re­tired to another room, and sent for a surgeon, and did what hewas commanded to do. He then sent-for his mother, and Ana­nias his tutor, and informed them that he had done the'thing jupon which they were presently struck with astonishment andfear, and that to a great degree, lest the thing should be openlydiscovered and censured, and the king should hazard the loss ofhis kingdom, while his subjects would not bear to be governedby a man who was so zealous in another religion ; and lest theyshould themselves run some hazard, because they would be sup­posed the occasion of his so doing. But it was God * himselfwho hindered what they feared from taking effect ; for he pre­served both Izates Himself, and his sons when they fell into manydangers, and procured their deliverance when it seemed to beimpossible, and demonstrated thereby, that the fruit of piety does
not


* Josephus is very full and express in these three chapters, iii. iv. and v. inobserving how carefully Divine Providence preserved this Izates, king of Adi-abene, and his sons, while he did what he tti%'ught was his bomideu duty, not­withstanding the strongest political motives to the coutrary







OCR Output








THE LIFE OF FLAVIUS JOSEPHUS.


£ity secured with walls, and commanded their inhabitants to taketheir arms. They also sent for a great many soldiers from Johnto assist them against me, if there should he occasion for them.Now John was at Gischala. Jonathan, therefore, and those thatwere with him, when they were departed from Tiberias, and assoon as they were come to Dabaritta, a village that lay in the ut­most parts of Galilee, in the great plain, they, about midnight,fell among the guards I had set, who both commanded them tolay aside their weapons, and kept them in bonds upon the placf,as I had charged them to do. This news was written to me byjl-evi, who had the command of that guard committed to him byme. Hereupon I said nothing of it for two days ; and, pretend­ing to know nothing about it, I sent a message to the people ofTiberias, and advised them to lay their arms aside, and to dis­miss their men, that they might go home. But, supposing thatJonathan, and those that were with him, were already arrived atJerusalem, they made reproachful answers to me ; yet was I notterrified thereby, but contrived another stratagem against them,for I did not think it agreeable with piety to kindle the fire ofwar against the citizens. As I was desirous to draw those menaway from Tiberias, I chose out ten thousand of the best of myarmed men, and divided them into three bodies, and ordered themto go privately, and lie still as an ambush, in the villages. Ialso led a thousand into another village, which lay indeed inthe mountains, as did the others, but only four furlongs distantfrom Tiberias, and gave order, that when they saw my signal,they should come down immediately; while I myself lay withiny soldiers in the sight of every body. Hereupon the peopleof Tiberias, at the sight of me, came running out of the cityperpetually, and abused me greatly. Nay, their madness wascome to that height, that they made a decent bier for me, and,standing about it, they mourned over me in the way of jestand sp6rt; and I could not but be myself in a pleasant humourupon the sight of this madness of theirs-
63. And now being desirous to catch Simon by a wile, andJoazar with him,"!1 sent a message to them, and desired them tocome a little way out of the city, with many of their friends toguard them ; for I said I would come down to them, and makea league with them, and divide the government of Galilee withthem. Accordingly, Simon was deluded on account of his im­prudence, and out of the hopes of gain, and did not delay to come;but Joazar, suspecting snares were laid for him, staid behind.So, when Simon was come out, and his friends with him for hisguard, I met him, and saluted him with great civility, and pro­fessed that I was obliged to him for his coming up to me: but a


little







OCR Output








400 WARS OF THE JEWS. Book II,


in order to perform a * vow which she had made to God; forit is usual with those that had been either afflicted with a dis­temper, or with any other distresses, to make vows ;' and forthirty days before they are to offer their sacrifices, to abstainfrom wine, and to shave tire hair of their head. Which thingsBernice was now performing, and stood barefoot before Florus'stribunal, and besought him [to spare the Jews]. Yet could sheneither have any reverence paid to her, nor could she escapewithout some danger of being slain herself.
2. This happened upon the sixteenth day of the month Arte-misius, [Jyar]. Now on the next day, the multitude, who werehi a great agony, ran together to the upper market-place, andmade the loudest lamentations for those that had perished; andthe greatest part of the cries were such as reflected on Florus;at which the men of power were affrighted, together with thehigh-priests, and rent their garments, and fell down before eachof them, and besought them to leave off, and not to provokeFlorus to some incurable procedure, besides what they had al­ready suffered. Accordingly, the multitude complied imme­diately, out of reverence to those that had desired it of them,and out of the hope they had that Florus would do them nomore injuries.
3' So Florus was troubled that the disturbances were over,and endeavoured to kindle that flame again, find sent for the high-priests, with the other eminent persons, and said, The only de­monstration that the people would not make any other innova­tions should be this, that they must go out and meet the soldiers
that


* This vow which Bernice (here and elsewhere called Queen, not only as daugh­ter and sister to two kings, Agrippa the Great, and Agrippa junior, but the wi­dow of Herod king of Chalci'-) came now to accomplish at Jerusalem, was notthat of a Nazarite, but such an one as religious Jews used to make in hopes of anydeliverance from a disease, or other danger, as Josephus here intimates. However,these thirty days abode at Jerusalem, for fasting and preparation against the obla­tion of a proper saoifice, seems to be too long, uij!«ss it were wholly voluntary inthis great lady. It is not required in the law of Moses relating to Nazarites, Numb.vi. and is very different from St Paul's time for tuch preparation, which was butone day, Acts xxi 26. So we want already the continuation of the Antiquities,to afford us light here, as they have hitherto done, on so many occasions elsewhere.Perhaps in this age the traditions of the Pharisees had obliged the Jews to this de­gree of rigour, not only as to these thirty days preparation, but as to the goingbarefoot all that time, which here Bernice submitted to also. For we know thatei God's and our Siviour's yoke is usually easy, and his burden comparatively light,in such positive injunctions, Mat. xi. 30. so did the Scribes and Pharisees some­times " bind upon men heavy burdens, and grievous to be born," even when" they themselves would not touch them with one of their fingers," Mat. xxiii. 4.Luke xi. 46. However, Noldius well observes, Be Herod. No. 404, 414. thatJuvenal, in his sixth satire, alludes to this remarkable ptnance of submission of thisBernice to Jewish discipline,'and jests upon her for it; as do Tacitus, Dio, Sueto­nius, and Sextus Aurelius mention her as one well known at Rome, it:j'







OCR Output








46 ANTIiJUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book XVII.


themselves with him, out of their hatred to him ; and yet theythought it too gross a thing for them to assist the ambassadors£ against him], as supposing' it would be a disgrace to them inCaesar's opinion to think of thus acting in opposition to a man oftheir own kindred *. Philip also was come hither out of Syria,by the persuasion of Varus, with this principal intention to as­sist his brother [Archelaus] ; for Varus was his great friend:but still so, that if there should any change happen in the form,of government (which Varus suspected there would), and ifany distribution should be made on account of the number thatdesired the liberty of living by their own laws, that he mightnot be disappointed, but might have his share in it.
2. Now, upon the liberty that was given to the Jewish am­bassadors to speak, they who hoped to obtain a dissolution ofkingly government, betook themselves to accuse Herod of hisiniquities; and they declared, " That he was indeed in name a'' king, but that he had taken to himself that uncontroulable au-*' thority which tyrants exercise over their subjects, and had'' made use of that authority for the destruction of the Jews, and«' did not abstain from making many innovations among them, be-" sides, according to his own inclinations ; and that whereas there«' were a great many who perished by that destruction he brought" upon them, so many indeed as no other history relates, they" that survived were far more miserable than those that suffered" under him, not only by the anxiety they were in from his" looks and disposition towards them, but from the danger their''' estates were in of being taken away by him. That he did«' never leave off adorning these cities that lay in their neigh-" bourhood, but were inhabited by foreigners ; but so that the" cities belonging to his own government were ruined, and ut-«' terly destroyed: that whereas, when he took the kingdom,«' it was in an extraordinary flourishing condition, he had filled« the nation with the utmost degree of poverty ; and when," upon unjust pretences, he had slain any of the nobility, he took.*' away their estates i and when he permitted any of them to.' live, he condemned them to the forfeiture of what they pos-*' sessed. And, besides the annual impositions which he laid*' upon every one of them, they were to make liberal presents" to himself, to his domestics and friends, and to such of his*' slaves as were vouchsafed the favour of being his tax-gather-," ers ; because there was no way of obtaining a freedom from«' unjust violence, without giving either gold or silver for it." Tjjat they would say nothing of the corruption of the chastity." of their virgins, and the reproach laid on their wives for in-
«' contuiency,
# He was tetrarch afterward.







OCR Output








WARS OF THE JEWS. Book II.


BOOK II.
Containing the interval of Sixty-nine Years.
From the death o/Herod /;'// Vespasian was sent tosubdue tie Jews by Nero.
CHAP. I.
jirchelaus makes a funeralfeast for the people, on the account ofHerod. After ivbich a great tumult is raised by the multitude,and he sends the soldiers out upon them, who destroy about threethousand of them.§ 1. VTOW the necessity which Archelaus was under of ta-X\ king a journey to Rome was the occasion of new dis­turbances; for when he had mourned for his father seven *days,and had given a very expensive funeral feast to the multitude,(which custom is the occasion of poverty to many of the Jews,because they are forced to feast the multitude; for if any oneomits it, he is not esteemed an holy person), he put on a whitegarment, and went up to the temple, where the people accostedhim with various acclamations. He also spake kindly to themultitude from an elevated sear, and a throne of gold, and re­turned them thanks for the zeal they had shewn about hisfather's funeral, and the submission they had made to him,as if he were already settled in the kingdom ; but he toldthem withal, that " he would not at present take upon him" either the authority of a king, or the names thereto belong-*' ing, until Caesar, who is made lord of this whole affair by the** testament confirm the succession; for that when the soldiers** would have set the diadem on his head at Jericho, he would*< not accept of it; but that he would make abundant requitals,*' not to the soldiers only, but to the people for their alacrityand good-will to him, when the superior lords [the Romans]'' should have given him a complete title to the kingdom; for" that it should be his study to appear in all things better than" his father."
2. Upon
* Hear Dean Aldrich's note on this place, " The law or custom of the Jews" (says hp) requires seven days mourning for the dead, Antiq. B. XVli. ch viii." sect. iv. Vul. III. Whence the author of the book of Ecclesiasticus, ch. xxii. x x,u assigns seven days a? the proper time of mourning for the dead, and ch. xxxviii." 17. enjoins men to mourn for the dead, that they may not be evil spoken of;" for as Josephus says pretently, if any one omits this mourning [funeral feast]" he is not esteemed an holy person. Now it is certain that such a seven days" mourning has been cus'omary from times of the greatest antiquity, Gen. J. 10." Funeral feasts are also mentioned as of a considerable antiquity, Ezek xxiv. 17.'■ Jer. xvi. 7. Prov. xxxi. 6, Deut. iavi. 14. Josephus, Of the War, B. III. ch. ix.- sect. }' VoL HI."







OCR Output








120 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book XIX.


they sat at random, men and women together, and free-men weremixed with the slaves. So Caius came out in a solemn manner,and offered sacrifice to Augustus Ciesar, in whose honour in­deed these shews were celebrated. Now it happened, upon thefall of a certain priest, that the garment of Asprenas, a' senator,was filled with blood, which made Caius laugh, although thiswas an evident omen to Asprenas, for he was slain at the sametime with Caius. It is also related, that Caius was that day,contrary to his usual custom, so very affable and good-naturedin his conversation, that every one of those that were presentwere astonished at it. After the sacrifice was over, Caius be­took himself to see the shews, and sat down for that purpose, as,did also the principal of his friends sit near him. Now the parts.of the theatre were so fastened together, as it used to be everyyear, in the manner following : It had two doors, the one doorled to the open air, the other was for going into, or going outof the cloisters, that those within the theatre might not be there­by disturbed ; but out of one gallery there went an inward pas­sage, partly into partitions also, which led into another gallery,to give room to the combatants, and to the musicians to go outas occasion served. When the multitude were set down, andCherea, with the other tribunes also, were set down also, andthe right corner of the theatre was allotted to Caesar, one Va-tinius, a senator, commander of the pretorian band, asked ofCluvius, one that sat by him, and was of consular dignity alsQj" Whether he had heard any thing of news or not ?" but topk:care that nobody should hear what he said ; and when Cluvius'replied, That " he had heard no news," " Know then," saidVatinius, " that the game of the slaughter of tyrants is to b,e" played this day." But Cluvius replied, " O brave comrade r.lf hold thy peace, lest some other of the Achaians hear thy" tale." And, as there was abundance of autumnal frititthrown among the spectators, and a great number of birds, thatwere of great value to such as possessed them, on account oftheir rareness, Caius was pleased with the birds fighting forthe fruits, and with the violence wherewith the spectators seizedupon them ; and here he perceived two prodigies that happenedthere ; for an actor was introduced, by whom a leader of rob­bers was crucified, and the pantomime brought in a play calledCinyras, wherein he himself was to be slain, as well as- hisdaughter Myrrha, and wherein a great deal of fictitious bloodwas shed, both about him that was crucified, and also aboutCinyras. It is also confessed, that this was the same day where­in Pausanias, a friend of Philip, the son of Amyntas, who wasking of Macedonia, slew him, as he was entering into the theatre.
And'







OCR Output








S38 THE LIFE OF FLAVIUS JOSEPHUS."


4
hearken to what I exhorted, nor to what I commanded them todo, (for the hatred they bore to the people there was too hard formy exhortations to them), I bid those my friends, who weremost faithful to me, and were about me, to give out reports, as ifthe Romans were falling upon the other part of the city with agreat army ; and this I did, that, by such a report's being spreadabroad, I might restrain the violence of the Galileans, and pre­serve the city of Sepphoris. And at length this stratagem hadits effect; for, upon hearing this report, they were in fear forthemselves, and so they left off plundering and ran away ; andthis more especially, because they saw me, their general, do thesame also , for, that I might cause this report to be believed, Ipretended to be in fear as well as they. Thus were the inhabi­tants of Sepphoris unexpectedly preserved by this contrivanceof mine.
68. Nay, indeed, Tiberias had like to have been plundered by'the Galileans also upon the following occasion : The chief menof the senate wrote to the king, and desired that he would cometo them, and take possession of their city. The king promisedto come, and wrote a letter in answer to theirs, and gave it toone of his bed-chamber, whose name was Crispus, and who wasby birth a Jew, to carry it to Tiberias. When the Galileansknew that this man carried such a letter, they caught him, andbrought him to me ; but as soon as the whole multitude heardof it, they were enraged, and betook themselves to their arms.So a great many of them got together from all quarters thenext day, and came to the city Asochis, where I then lodged,and made heavy clamours, and called the city of Tiberias atraitor to them, and a friend to the king ; and desired leave ofme to go down, and utterly destroy it; for they bore the likeill-will to the people of Tiberias, as they did to those of Sep­phoris.
69. When I heard this, I was in doubt what to do, and he­sitated by what means I might deliver Tiberias from the rage-of the Galileans ; for I could not deny that those of Tiberiashad written to the king, and invited him to come to them ; forhis letters to them, in answer thereto, would fully prove thetruth of that. So 1 sat a long while musing with myself, andthen said to them, " I know well enough that the people of'' Tiberias have offended ; nor shall I forbid you to plunder the«' city. However, such things ought to be done with discretion ;" for they of Tiberias have not been the only betrayers of our*' liberty, but many of the most eminent patriots of the Gah-" leans, as they pretended to be, have done the same. Tarry*' therefore till I shall thoroughly find out those authors of our


" danger,







OCR Output








296 WARS OF THE JEWS. Book I.


4. In the mean time Antony abode at Athens, while ,•dius called for Silo andHerod to come to the war against the Par-thians, but ordered them first to settle the affairs of Judea: soHerod willingly dismissed Silo to go to Ventidius, but he madean expedition himself against those that lay in the caves. Nowthese caves were in the precipices of craggy mountains, andcould not be come at from any side, since they had only somewinding path-ways, very narrow, by which they got up tothem; but the rock that lay on their front had beneath it val­leys of a vast depth, and of an almost perpendicular declivity;insomuch that the king was doubtful for a long time what todo, by reason of a kind of impossibility there was of attackingthe place. Yet did he at length make use of a contrivance thatwas subject to the utmost hazard; for he let down the mosthardy of his men in chests, and set them at the mouths of thedens. Now these men slew the robbers and their families, andwhen they made resistance, they sent in fire upon them, [andburnt them] ; and as Herod was desirous of saving some of them,he had proclamation made, that they should come and deliverthemselves up to him; but not one of them came willingly tohim, and of those that were compelled to come, many preferreddeath to captivity. And here a certain old man, the father ofseven children, whose children, together with their mother, de­sired him to give them leave to go out, upon the assurance andright hand that was offered them, slew them after the followingmanner: He ordered every one of them to go out, while hestood himself at the cave's mouth, and slew that son of his per­petually who went out. Herod was near enough to see thissight, and his bowels of compassion were moved at it, and hestretched out his right hand to the old man, and besought himto spare his children; yet did not he relent at all upon what hesaid, but over and above reproached Herod on the lowness ofhis descent, and slew his wife as well as his children; and whenbe had thrown their dead bodies down the precipice, he at lastthrew himself down after them.
5. By this means Herod .subdued these caves, and the robbersthat were in them. He then left there a part of his army, asmany as he thought sufficient to prevent any sedition, and madePtolemy their general,and returned to Samaria: heled also with himthree thousand armed footmen, and six hundred horsemen againstAntigonua» Now here those that used' to raise tumults in Ga­lilee, having liberty so. to do upon his departure, fell unexpected­ly upon Ptolemy, the general of his forces, and slew him: theyalso laid the country waste, and then retired to the bogs, and toplaces not easily to be found. But when Herod was informed ofthis insurrection, he came to the assistance of the country imme­
diately







OCR Output








THE LIFE OF FLAVIUS JOSEPHUS. 225


titude was too angry with them to be dissuaded, and all of themwent immediately to the house in which Jonathan and his col­leagues abode. However, when I perceived that their ragecould not be restrained, I got on horseback, and ordered the mul­titude to follow me to the village Sogane, which was twenty fur­longs off Gabara ; and by using this stratagem, I so managed my­self, as not to appear to begin a civil war amongst them.
52. But when 1 was come near Sogane, I caused the multitudeto make an halt, and exhorted them not to be so easily provokedto anger, and to the inflicting such punishments as could not beafterwards recalled : I also gave order, that an hundred men,who were already in years, and were principal men among theui,should get themselves ready to go to the city Jerusalem, andshould make a complaint before the people, of such as raised se­ditions in the country. And I said to them, that " in case they" be moved with what you say, you shall desire the community«' to write to me, and to enjoin me to continue in Galilee, and to" order Jonathan and his colleagues to depart out of it." WhenI had suggested these instructions to them, and while they weregetting themselves ready as fast as they could, I sent them onthis errand the third day after they had been assembled : I alsosent five hundred armed men with them [as a guard]. I thenwrote to my friends in Samaria, to take care that they mightsafely pass through the country : for Samaria was already underthe Romans, and it was absolutely necessary for those that goquickly [to Jerusalem], to pass through that country ; for in thatroad you may, in three days time, go from Galilee to Jerusa­lem. I also went myself, and conducted the old men as far asthe bounds of Galilee, and set guards in the roads, that it mightnot be easily known by any one that these men were gone. Andwhen I had thus done, I went and abode at Japha.
53. Now Jonathan and his colleagues- having failed of accom­plishing what they would have done against me, they sent Johnback' to Gischala, but went themselves to the city Tiberias, expect­ing it would submit itself to them ; and this was founded on a letterwhich Jesus, their then governor, had written them, promising,that if they came, the multitude would receive them, and chooseto be under their government ; so they went their ways withthis expectation. But Silas, who, as I said, had been left curatorof Tiberias by me, informed me of this, and desired me to makehaste thither. Accordingly, I complied with his advice imme­diately, and came thither ; but found myself in danger of my life,from the following occasion : Jonathan and his colleagues hadbeen at Tiberias, and had persuaded a great many of such as hada quarrel with me to desert me ; but when they heard of my
VOL, III. F f coming







OCR Output








Chap. IX. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 103


" from other mischiefs. I have kept my faith inviolable to" thee, and that not in trifling affairs, but in those that concern-** ed thy safety, and do therefore deserve thou shouldst be kind" to me." When he had said this, and given Asineus some pre­sents, he sent him away immediately ; who, when he was comehome, built fortresses, and became great in a little time, and ma­naged things with such courage and success, as no other person,that had no higher a beginning, ever did before him. ThoseParthian governors also, who were sent that way, paid him greatrespect; and the honour that was paid him by the Babyloniansseemed to them too small, and beneath his deserts, although hewere in no small dignity and power there : nay, indeed, all theaffairs of Mesopotamia depended upon him, and he more andmore flourished in this happy condition of his for fifteen years.
5. But as their affairs were in so flourishing a state, theresprang up a calamity among them on the following occasion.When once they had deviated from that course of virtue where­by they had gained so great power, they affronted and transgress­ed the laws of their forefathers, and fell under the dominion oftheir lusts and pleasures. A certain Parthian, who came as ge­neral of an army into those parts, had a wife following him, whohad a vast reputation for other accomplishments, and particular­ly was admired above all other women for her beauty ; Auileus,the brother of Asineus, either heard of that her beauty fromothers, or perhaps saw her himself also, and so became at once herlover and her enemy ; partly because he could not hope to en­joy this woman but by obtaining power over her as a captive,and partly because he thought he could not conquer his inclina­tions for her ; as soon therefore as her husband had been decla­red an enemy to them, and was fallen in the battle, the widowof the deceased was married to this her lover. However, thiswoman did not come into their house without producing greatmisfortunes both to Anlleus himself, and to Asineus also ; butbrought great mischiefs upon them on the occasion following.Since she was led away captive, upon the death of her husband,she concealed the images of those gods which were their countrygods, common to her husband and to herself: now, it is the cus­tom * of that country for all to have the idols they worship intheir own houses, and to carry them along with them when they
go
* This custom of the Mesopotamians to carry their household-gods along withthem wherever they travelled, is as old as the days cf Jacob, when Kacluiel hiswife did the same, Gen. xxxi. 19. 3c—35.nor is it to pass here unobserved, whatgreat miseries came on these Jews, because they sitfirred one of their leaders tomarry an idolatrous wife, contrary 10 the law of Moses, d which matter see­the note on B. XIX. ch. v. sect. 3.







OCR Output








Chap. IX. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. , 35


Nicolaus, one that had been Herod's most honoured friend, andwas now zealous for Antipas : but it was Ireneus the orator,and one who, on account of his reputation for sagacity, was en­trusted with the affairs of the kingdom, who most of all encou­raged him to attempt to gain the kingdom; by whose means itwas, that when some advised him to yield to Archelaus, as tohis elder brother, and who had been declared king by their fa­ther's last will, he would not submit so to do. And when hewas come to Rome, all his relations revolted to him ; not out of*their good-will to him, but out of their hatred to Archelaus;though indeed they were most of all desirous of gaining theirliberty, and to be put under a Roman governor ; but, if therewere too great an opposition made to that, they thought Antipaspreferable to Archelaus, and so joined with him, in order toprocure the kingdom for him. Sabinus also, by letters, accusedArchelaus to Caesar.
5. Now, when Archelaus had sent in his papers to Caesar,wherein he pleaded his right to the kingdom, and his father'stestament, with the accounts of Herod's money, and with Pto­lemy, who brought Herod's seal, he so expected the event; butwhen Caesar had read these papers, and Varus's and Sabinus'sletters, with the accounts of the money, and what were the an­nual incomes of the kingdom, and understood that Antipas hadalso sent letters to lay claim to the kingdom, he summoned hisfriends together, to know their opinions, and with them Caius,the son of Agrippa, -and of Julia his daughter, xvhom he hadadopted, and took him, and made him sit first of all, and desiredsuch as pleased to speak their minds about the affairs now be­fore them. Now Antipater, Salome's son, a very subtle orator,and a bitter enemy to Archelaus, spake first to this purpose :That " it was ridiculous in Archelaus to plead now to have the" kingdom given him, since he had, in reality, taken alreadya the power over it to himself, before Caesar had granted it to" him ; and appealed to those bold actions of his, in destroying" so many at the Jewish festival; and, if the men had acted un-* justly, it was but fit the punishing of them should have been" reserved to those that were out of the country, but had the" power to punish them, and not been executed by a man that," if he pretended to be a king, he did an injury to Caesar, by" usurping that authority before it was determined for him by" Caesar ; but, if he owned himself to be a private person, his" case was much worse, since he who was putting in for the" kingdom, could by no means expect to have that power" granted him, of which he had akeady deprived Ctesar [by'' taking it to himself]. He also touched sharply upon him,
E 2 " and







OCR Output








Chap. II, ' ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 61


4. About this time died Phraates, king of the Parthians, bythe treachery of Phraataces his son, upon the occasion following.When Phraates had had legitimate sons of his own, he had alsoan Italian maid-servant, whose name was Thermusc, who hadbeen formerly sent to him by Julius Caesar, among other pre­sents. He first made her his concubine ; but he being a greatadmirer of her beauty, in process of time having a son by herrwhose name was Paraataces, he made her his legitimate wife,and had a great respect for her. Now, she was able to persuadehim to do any thing that she said, and was earnest in procuringthe government of Parthia for her son ; but still she saw that herendeavours would not succeed, unless she could contrive how toremove Phraates's legitimate sons [out of the kingdom] ; so shepersuaded him to send those his sons as pledges of his fidelity toRome; and they were sent to Rome accordingly, because it wasnot easy for him to contradict her commands. Now, whileFhraataces was alone brought up in order to succeed in the go.vernment, he thought it very tedious to expect that governmentby his father's donation [as his successor] ; he therefore formeda treacherous design against his father, by his mother's assist­ance, with whom, as the report went, he had criminal conver­sation also. So he was hated for both these vices, while hissubjects esteemed this [wicked] love of his mother to be noway inferior to his parricide ; and he was by them, in a sedi-.tion, expelled out of the country before he grew too great, anddied. 'But, as the best sort of Parthians agreed together, that itwas impossible they should be governed without a king, whilealso it was their constant practice to chuse one of the family ofArsaces, [nor did their law allow of any others ; and theythought this kingdom had been sufficiently injured already bythe marriage with an Italian concubine, and by her issue], theysent ambassadors, and called Orodes [to take the crown] ; forthe multitude would not otherwise have borne them ; andthough he were accused of very great cruelty, and was of anuntraciable temper, and prone to wrath, yet still he was one ofthe family of Arsaces. However, they made a conspiracy rugainst him, and slew him, and that, as some say, at a festival,and among their sacrifices ; (for it is the universal custom thereto carry their swords with them) ; but, as the more general re­port is, they slew him when they had drawn him out a-hunt-ing. So they sent ambassadors to Rome, and desired theywould send one of those that were there as pledges, to be theirking. Accordingly, Vonones was preferred before the rest,and sent to them; (for he seemed capable of such great fortune,which two of the greatest kingdoms under the sun now offeredhim, his own, and a foreign one^ However, the barbarians
sooa







OCR Output








Chap. XVI. WAfts OF THE JEWS. 409


« because they are of effeminate minds, or because they are of" an ignoble stock, as having borne a war of eighty years, in" order to preserve their liberty: but by reason of the great" regard they have to the power of the Romans, and their good" fortune, which is of greater efficacy than their arms. These" Gauls, therefore, are kept in servitude by twelve hundred sol-" diers, which are hardly so many as are their cities; nor hath" the gold dug out of the mines of Spain been sufficient for the" support of a war to preserve their liberty, nor could their" vast distance from the Romans by land and by sea do it; nor" could the martial tribes of the Lusitanians and Spaniards" escape; no more could the ocean, with its tide, which yet was" terrible to the ancient inhabitants. Nay, the Romans have" extended their arms beyond the pillars of Hercules, and have«' walked among the clouds, upon the Pyrenean mountains, and" have subdued these nations. And one legion is a sufficient" guard for these people, although they were so hard to be con-" quered, and at a distance so remote from Rome. Who is" there among you who hath not heard of the great number of" the Germans ? You have, to be sure, yourselves seen them" to be strong and tall, and that frequently, since the Romans" have them among their captives every where; yet these" Germans who dwell in an immense country, who have minds" greater than their bodies, and a soul that despises death," and who are in rage more fierce than wild beasts, have theRhine for the boundary of their enterprises, and are tamedby eight Roman legions. Such of them as were taken cap­tive became their servants ; and the rest of the entire nationwere obliged to save themselves by flight. Do you also, whodepend on the walls of Jerusalem, consider what a wall theBritons had; for the Romans sailed away to them, and sub*" dued them while they were encompassed by the ocean, and in-" habited an island that is not less than the [continent of this]" habitable earth; and four legions are a sufficient guard to so" large an island. And why should I speak much more about«' this matter? while the Parthians, that most warlike body of" men, and lords of so many nations, and encompassed with such." mighty forces, send hostages to the Romans; whereby you" may see if you please, even in Italy, the noblest nation of the*' east, under the notion of peace submitting to serve them. Now,•' when almost all people under the sun submit to the Roman" arms, will you be the only people that make war against" them? and this without regarding the fate of the Carthagi-" nians, who, in the midst of the brags of the great Hannibal,«« and the nobility of their Phenician original, jfell by the handVOL. III. 3 F gf







OCR Output








290 WARS OF THE JEWS. Book I.


however borrow of him zs much as might redeem his brother,aiid put into his hands, as a pledge, the son of him that was tobe redeemed ; accordingly he led his brother's son along withhim, who was of the age of seven years. Now he was ready togive three hundred talents for his brother, and intended to desirethe intecession of the Tyrians, to get them accepted ; howeverfate had been too quick for his diligence ; and since Phasaeluswas dead, Herod's brotherly love was now in vain. Moreover,he was not able to find any lasting friendship among the Arabi­ans; for their king, Mali thus,,sent to him immediately, and com­manded him to returnback out of his country, and used the nameof the Parthenians as a pretence for so doing, as though these haddenounced to him by their ambassadors to cast Herod out ofArabia ; while in reality they had amind to keep back what theyowed to Antipater, and not be obliged to make requitals to hissons for the free gifts the father had made them. He alsotook the impudent advice of those who, equally with himself,were willing to deprive Herod of what Antipater had depositedamong them ; and these men were the most potent of all whomhe had in his kingdom.
2. So when Herod had found that the Arabians were his ene­mies,and this for those very reasons whence he hoped they wouldhave been the most friendly, and had given them such an answer ashispassion suggested,he returnedback and went for Egypt. Nowhe lodged the first evening at one of the temples of that country, inorder to meet with those whomhe left behind; but on the next dayword was brought him, as he was going to Rhinocurura, that hisbrother was dead, and how he came by his death ; and when hehad lamented him as much as his present circumstances couldbear, he soon laid aside such cares, and proceeded on his journey.But now, after some time, the king of Arabia repented of whathe had done, and sent presently away messengers to call him back:Herod had prevented them, and was come to Pelusium, where hecould not obtain a passage from those that lay with the fleet, sohe besought their captains to let him go by them ; accordingly,out of the reverence they bore to the fame and dignity of theman, they conducted him to Alexandria; and when he came in­to the city, he was received by Cleopatra with great splendour,who hoped he might be persuaded to be commander of her for-*ces in the expedition she was now about; but he rejected thequeen's solicitations,and being neither affrighted at the height ofthat storm which then happened, nor at the tumults that werenow in Italy, he sailed for Rome. i
3. But as he was in peril about Pamphilia, and obliged to castcm the greatest part of the ships lading, he, with difficulty, got







OCR Output








IS8 . ASTIOPITIES OF THE JEWS.' Book XX.


put on his head a diadem for one year. And when Alexander:had been both king and high-priest twenty-seven years, he de­parted this life, and permitted his wife Alexandra to appoint himthat should be high-priest ; so she gave the high-priesthood toHyrcanus, but retained the kingdom herself nine years, and thendeparted this life. The like duration [and no longer] did herson Hytcanus enjoy the high-priesthood ; for after her death hisbrother Aristobulus fought against him, and beat him, and de-
o O ' *
prived him of his principality ; and he did himself both reign,and perform the office of high-priest to God. But when he hadreigned three years, and as many months, Pompey came uponhim, and not only took the city of Jerusalem by force, but puthim and his- children in bonds, and sent them to Rome. He alsarestored the high-priesthood to Hyrcanus, and made him governorof the nation, but forbade him to wear a diadem. This Hyrca­nus ruled, besides his first nine years, twenty-four years more,when Barzapharnes and Parcorus, the generals of the Parthians,passed over Euphrates, and fought with Hyrcanus, and took himalive, and made Antigonus, the son of Aristobulus, king ; and
' when he had reigned three years and three months, Sosius andHerod besieged him, and took him, when Antony had him brought
• to Antioch, and slain there. Herod was then made king by theRomans, but did no longer appoint high-priests out of the fami­ly of Asamoneus •, but made certain men to be so that were ofno eminent families, but barely of those that were priests, except­ing that he gave that dignity to Aristobulus; for when he hadmade this Aristobulus, the grandson of that Hyrcanus who wasthen taken by the Parthians, and had taken his sister Mariamneto wife, he thereby aimed to win the good-will of the people,who had a kind remembrance of Hyrcanus [his grandfather].Yet did he afterward, out of his fear lest they should all bendtheir inclinations to Aristobulus, put him to death, and that bycontriving how to have him suffocated, as he was swimming atJericho, "as we have already related that matter; but after thisman he never intrusted the'high-priesthood to the posterity ofthe sons of Asamoneus. Archelaus also, Herod's son,.did likehis father in the appointment of the high-priests, as did the Ro­mans also, who took the government over the Jews into theirhands afterward. Accordingly the number of the high-priests,from the days of Herod until the day when Titus took the tem­ple and the city, and burnt them, were in all twenty-eight; thetime also "that belonged to them was an hundred and seven years.Some of these were the political governors of the people underthe reign of Herod, and under the reign of Archelaus his son^although, after their death, the government became an aristocra­







OCR Output








Chap. VIII. .WARS or THE JEWS. 373


into which it is not permitted to any of another sect to enter;while they go, after a pure manner, into the dining-room, as in­to a certain holy temple, and quietly set themselves down; up­on which the baker lays them loaves in order; the cook alsobrings a single plate of one sort of food, and sets it before everyone of them; but a priest says grace before meat, and it is un­lawful for any one to taste of the food before grace be said. Thesame priest, when he hath dined, says grace again after meat,and when they begin, and when they end, they praise God, ashe that bestows their food upon them; after which they layaside their [white] garments, and betake themselves to their la­bours again till the evening; then they return home to supper,after the same manner, and if there be any strangers there, theysit down with them. Nor is there ever any clamour or distur­bance to pollute their house, but they give every one leave tospeak in their turn; which silence thus kept in their house, ap­pears to foreigners like some tremendous mystery; the cause ofwhich is that perpetual sobriety they exercise, and the same set­tled measure of meat and drink that is allotted them, and thatsuch as is abundantly sufficient for them.
6. And truly, as for other things, they do nothing but accord­ing to the injunctions of their curators; only these two thingsare done among them at every one's own free will, which areto assist those that want it, and to shew mercy; for they are per­mitted of their own accord to afford succour to such as deserveit, when they stand in need of it, and to bestow food on thosethat are in distress; but they cannot give any thing to their kin­dred without the curators. They dispense their anger after ajust manner, and restrain their passion. They are eminent forfidelity, and are the ministers of peace; whatsoever they say al­so is firmer than an oath; but swearing is avoided by them,and they esteem it * worse than perjury; for they say, that hewho cannot be believed, without [swearing by] God, is already
condemned.


* This practice of the Essens, in refusing to siviar, and esteeming rwtaring onordinary occasions, worse than perjury, is delivered here in general words, as arethe parallel injunctions of our Saviour, Matt' vi. 34. xxiii. 16. and of St lames, v.II. but all admit of particular exceptions, for solemn causes, and on great and ne­cessary occasions. Thus these very Essens, who here do so zealously avoid swear­ing, are related, in the very next sec:ion, to admit none till they take tremtndautcatbt to perform their several duties to God, and to their neigh''our, without sup­posing they thereby break this rule not to swear at all. The case is the same inChristianity, as we learn from the Apostolical Constitutions, which although theyagree with Christ, and St James, in forbidding to swear in general, ch< v. II. ch.vi. 23. yet do they explain it elsewhere, by avoiding to " swear falsely, and to swear" often and in vain," ch. ii. 36. and again, by " not swearing at all," but withaladding, that " if that cannot be avoided, to swear truly," ch. vii. 3. which abun­dantly explain to us the nature of the measures of this general injunction.







OCR Output








Chap.V. 13 THE ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


scious of all this, and had resolved to conceal it; for which rea­son Herod divorced her, and blotted her son out of his teftament,wherein he had been mentionecVas one that was to reign afterhim ; and he took the high-priesthood away from his father-in-law, Simeon the son of Boethus, and appointed Matthias the sonof Theophilus, who was born at Jerusalem, to be high-priestin his room.
3. While this was doing, Bathyllus, also Antipater's freed-man,came from Rome, and, upon the torture, was found to havebrought another potion, to give it into the hands of Antipater'smother, and of Pheroras, that if the former potion did not ope­rate upon the king, this at least might carry him off. There camealso letters from Herod's friends at Rome, by the 'approbationand at the suggestion of Antipater, to accuse Archelaus and Phi­lip, as if they calumniated their father on account of the slaugh­ter of Alexander and Aristobulus, and as if they commiseratedtheir deaths, and as if, because they were sent for home, (fortheir father had already recalled them), they concluded they werethemselves also to be destroyed. These letters had been procu­red by great rewards, by Antipater's friends ; but Antipaterhimself wrote to his father about them, and laid the heaviestthings to their charge ; yet did he entirely excuse them of anyguilt, and said, they were but young men, and so imputed theirwords to their youth. But he said, that he had himself beenvery busy in the affair relating to Sylleus, and in getting interestamong the great men ; and on that account had bought splendidornaments to present them withal, which cost him two hundredtalents. Now, one may wonder how it came about, that while'so many accusations were laid against him in Judea during sevenmonths before this time, he was not made acquainted with anyof them. The causes of which were, that the roads were ex­actly guarded, and that men hated Antipater; for there wereno body who would run any hazard himself, to gain him anyadvantages.
CHAP. V.
Antipater's navigation from Rome to his father ; and how he wasaccused by Nicolaus of Damascus, and condemned to die by hisfather, and by ®hiintilius Varus, who was then president of Sy­ria ; and how he was then bound till Ceesar should be informedof his cause.
$ i» 'VTOW Herod, upon Antipater's writing to him, that ha--*• * ving done all that he was to de, and this in the man­ner he was to do it, he would suddenly come to him, concealed


his







OCR Output








!• ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book XVII.


many oaths that he would not come again, till he heard thatHerod was dead. And indeed, when, upon a sickness of theking's, he was desired to come to him before he died, that hemight intrust him with some of his injunctions, he had such aregard to his oath, that he would not come to him ; yet did notHerod so retain his hatred to Pheroras, but remitted of his pur­pose [not to see him,] which he before had, and that for suchgreat causes as have been already mentioned: but as soon as hebegan to be ill he came to him, and this without being sent for ;and when he was dead, he took care of his funeral, and had hisbody brought to Jerusalem, and buried there, and appointed asolemn mourning for him. This [death of Pheroras] becamethe origin of Antipater's misfortunes, although he were alreadysailed for Rome, God now being about to punish him for themurder of his brethren. I will explain the history of this mat­ter very distinctly, that it may be for a warning to mankind,that they take care of conducting their whole lives by the rulesof virtue.


CHAP. IV.
Pberoras's -wife is accused by bis freed-men, as guilty of poison­ing him ; and how Herod, upon examining of the matter by tor­ture, found the poison ; but so that it had been prepared for him­self by his son Antipater : and, upon an enquiry by torture} heDiscovered the dangerous designs of jintipater.
1. A S soon as Pheroras was dead, and his funeral was over,•**• two of Pheroras's freed-men, who were much esteemedby him, came to Herod, and intreated him not to leave the mur­der of his brother without avenging it, but to examine into suchan unreasonable and unhappy death. When he was moved withthese words, for they seemed to him to be true, they said, That" Pheroras supped with his wife the day before he fell sick, and" that a certain'potion was brought him in such a sort of food" as he was not used to eat; but that when he had eaten he died«' of it: that this potion was brought out of Arabia by a wo-" man, under pretence indeed as a love-potion, for that was its" name, but in reality to kill Pheroras ; for that the Arabian" women are skilful in making such poisons : and the woman to" whom they ascribe this, was confessedly a most intimate friend" of one of Sylleus's mistresses ; and that both the mother and" the sister of Pheroras's wife had been at the places where she"'lived, and had persuaded her to sell them this potion, and had
" come







OCR Output








THE
WARS OF THE JEWS,
OR,
THE HISTORY
OF THE
DESTRUCTION OF JERUSALEM.


PREFACE.
$ 1. * "V1T HEREAS the war which the Jews made with the' Romans hath been the greatest of all those, not onlythat have been in our times, but, in a manner, of those thatever were heard of; both of those wherein cities have foughtagainst cities, or nations against nations; while some men whowere not concerned in the affairs themselves, have gotten toge­ther vain and contradictory stories by hearsay, and have writtenthem down after a sophistical manner; and while those that werethere present have given false accounts of things, and this eitherout of a humour of flattery to the Romans, or of hatred towardsthe Jews; and while their writings contain sometimes accusa­tions, and sometimes encomiums, but no where the accurate truthof the facts ; I have proposed to myself, for the sake of such aslive under the government of the Romans, to translate thosebooks into the Greek tongue, which I formerly composed in the
language


* I have already observed more than once, that this history of the Jewish war
wai Josephus's first work, and published about A.D. 75. when he was but 38
years of age; and that when he wrote it, he was not thoroughly acquainted with
several circumstances of history from the days of Antiochus Epiphanes, with
,vrhich it begins, till near his own times, contained in the first and former part
of the second book, and so committed many involuntary errors therein. That
he published his Antiquities 18 years afterward, perused those most authentic
histories, the first book of Maccabees, in the rjth year of Domitian, A.D. 93,
"when he was much more completely acquainted with those ancient times, and
"after he had wrote the Chronicles of the Priesthood of John Hyrcanus, &c.—
That accordingly he then reviewed those parts of this work, and gave the pub.
,Jic a more faithful, complete, and accurate account of the facts therein related ;
aui'd honestly corrected the errors he had before run into.







OCR Output








382 WARS OF THE JEWS. Book II.


disturbance, he mixed his own soldiers in their armour withthe multitude, and ordered them to conceal themselves underthe habits of private men, and not indeed to use their swords,but with their staves to beat thnSe that made the clamour. Hethen gave the signal from his tribunal [to do as he had biddenthem]. Now the Jews were so sadly beaten, that many ofthem perished by the stripes they received, and many of themperished as trodden to death by themselves; by which means themultitude was astonished at the calamity of those that wereslain, and held their peace.
5. In the mean time Agrippa, the son of that Aristobulus,who had been slain by his father Herod, came to Tiberius, toaccuse Herod the tetrarch ; who not admitting of his accusa­tion, he stayed at Rome, and cultivated a friendship with othersof the men of note, but principally with Caius the son of Ger-manicus, who was then but a private person. Now this Agrippa>at a certain time, feasted Caius; and .as he was very complai­sant to him on several other accounts, he at length stretched outhis hands, and openly wished that Tiberius might die, and thathe might quickly see him emperor of the world. This was toldto Tiberius by one of Agrippa's domestics, who thereupon wasvery angry, and ordered Agrippa to be bound, and had hintvery ill treated in the prison for six months, until Tiberius died,after he had reigned twenty-two years six months and three days.
6. But when Caius was made Caeiar, he released Agrippafrom his bonds, and made him king of Philip's tetrachy, whowas now dead; but when Agrippa had arrived at that degree ofdignity, he euflaincd the ambitious desires of Herod the tetrarch,who was chiefly induced to hope for the royal authority by hiswife Herodias, who reproached him for his sloth, and told himthat it WHS only because he would not sail to Caesar, that he wasdestitute of that great dignity; forsince Caesar had made Agrippaa king, from a private person, much more would he advancehim from a tetrarch to that dignity. These arguments pre­vailed with Herod, so that he came to Caius, by whom he waspunishei for his ambition, by being banished into Spain ; forAgrippa followed him, in order to accuse him; to whom alsoCaius gave his tetrarchy, by way of addition. So Herod diedin Spain, whither his wife had followed him,
CHAP. X.
Caius commands that his statue should le set up in the templeitself; and what Petronius did thereupon.
• 1- T^fO^ Caius Caesar did so grossly abuse the fortune hehad arrived at, as to take himself to be a god, and- to
desire







OCR Output








Chap. V. WARS OF THE JEWS. 3<n


vered himself up to Archelaus, upon his giving him his righthand for his security. However, this their end was not till after­ward, while at present they filled all Judea with a piratic war.
CHAP. V.
Varus composes tbt tumults in Judea, and crucifies about twothousand of the seditious.
j 1. T 7 PON Varus's reception of the letters that were writtenV/ by Sabinus, and the captains, he could not avoid beingafraid for the whole legion [he had left there}. So he madehaste to their relief, and took with him the other two legions,with the four troops of horsemen to them belonging, and inarch,ed to Ptolemais; having given orders for the auxiliaries thatwere sent by jhe kings and governors of cities to meethim there.Moreover, he received from the people of Berytus, as he pas­sed through their city, fifteen hundred armed men. Now assoon as the other body of auxiliaries were come to Ptolemais,as well as Aretas the Arabian, (who, out of the hatred he boreto Herod, brought a great army of horse and foot), Varus senta part of his army presently to Galilee, which lay near to>Ptolemais, and Caius one of his friends, for their captain. ThisCains put those that met him to flight, and took the city Sep-phoris, and burnt it, and made slaves of its inhabitants; but asfor Varus himself, he marched to Samaria with his whole army,where he did not meddle with the city itself, because he foundthat it had made no commotion during these troubles, but pitch­ed his camp about a certain village which was called Arut* Itbelonged- to Ptolemy, and on that account was plundered by theArabians, who were very angry even at Herod's friends also.He thence marched on to the village Sampho, another fortifiedplace, which they plundered, as they had done the other. Asthey carried off all the money they light upon belonging to thepublic revenues, all was now full of fire and bloodshed, and no­thing could resist the plunders of the Arabians. Emmaus wasalso burnt, upon the flight of its inhabitants, and this at the com­mand of Varus, out of his rage at the slaughter of those thatwere about Arius.
2. Thence he marched on to Jerusalem, and as soon as he wasbut seen by the Jews, he made their camps disperse themselves:they also went away, and fled up and down the country; butthe citizens received him and cleared themselves of having any-hand in this revolt, and said, that they had raised no commotions,but had only been forced to admit the multitude because of thefestival, and that they were rather besieged together with the
Romans,







OCR Output








Chap. IV. ANTIQJJITIES OF THE JEWS. 11


«' come back and brought it with them the day before that his" supper." Hereupon the king was provoked, and put the wo­men-slaves to the torture, and some that were free with them :and as the fact did not yet' appear, because none of them wouldconfess it, at length one of them, under the utmost agonies, saidno more but this, That " she prayed that God would send the«' like agonies upon Antipater's mother, who had been the oc-" casion of these miseries to all of them." This prayer inducedHerod to increase the women's tortures, till thereby all was dis­covered : '" Their merry meetings, their secret assemblies, and«' the disclosing of what he had said to his son alone, unto Phe-" roras's * women." (Now what Herod had charged Antipa-ter to conceal, was, the gift of an hundred talents to him not tohave any conversation with Pheroras). " And what hatred he" bore to his father ; and that he complained to his mother how" very long his father lived ; and that he was himself almost an" old man, insomuch, that if the kingdom should come to him, it" would not afford him any great pleasure; and that there were a" great many of his brothers, or brother's children, bringing up," that might have hopes of the kingdom as well as himself, all" which made his own hopes of it uncertain ; for that even" now, if he should himself not live, Herod had ordained that the" government should be conferred, not on his son, but rather on" a brother. He also had accused the king of great barbarity," and of the slaughter of his sons ; and that it was out of the" fear he was under, lest he should do the like to him, that" made him contrive this his journey to Rome, and Pheroras'' contrive to go to his own tetrarchy."
2. These confessions agreed with what his sister had told him,and tended greatly to corroborate her testimony, and to freeher from the suspicion of her unfaithfulness to him. So theking having satisfied himself of the spite which Doris, Antipa­ter's mother, as well as himself, bore to him, took away fromher all her fine ornaments, which were worth many talents, andthen sent her away, and entered into friendship with Pheroras'swomen. But he who most of all irritated the king against hisson, was one Antipater, the procurator of Antipater the king's
B 2 son,
• His wife, her mother and sister.
It seems to me, by this whole story put together, that Pheroras was not himselfpoisoned, as is commonly supposed; for Antipater had persuaded him to poisonHerod, ch. v. (j i. which would fall to the ground, if he were himself poisoned;nor could the poisoning of Pheroras serve any design that appears now goingforward; it was only the supposal of two of his freed-men, that this love-potion,or poison, which they knew was brought to Pheroras's wife, was made use of for'poisoning him ; whereas it appears to have been brought for her husband to poi­son Herod withal, as the future examinations demonstrate .







OCR Output








266 WARS OF THE JEWS; Book T<


heard from others that his brother was seized ; and Alexandra**the shrewdest woman in the world, Hyrcanus's daughter, beggedof him that he would not go out, nor trust himself to those bar­barians, who now were come to make an attempt upon himopenly.
7. Now, as Pacorus and his friends were considering howthey might bring their plot to bear privately, because it was notpossible to circumvent a man of so great prudence, by openlyattacking him, Herod prevented them, and went off with the per­sons that were the most nearly related to him by night, and thiswithout their enemies being apprised of it. But, as soon as theParthians perceived it, they purfued after them, and, as he gaveorders for his mother, and sister, and the young woman who wasbetrothed to him, with her mother, and his youngest brother, tomake the best of their way, he himself, with his fervants, tookall the care'they could to keep off the barbarians ; and when, atevery assault, he had slain a great many of them, he came tothe strong hold of Masada.
8. Nay, he found by experience that the Jews fell more hea.vily upon him than did the Parthians, and created him troublesperpetually, and this ever since he was gotten sixty furlongsfrom the city; these sometimes brought it to a sort of a regularbattle. Now, in the place where Herod beat them, and killed agreat number of them, there he afterward built a citadel, in me­mory of the great actions he did there, and adorned it with themost costly palaces, and erected very strong fortifications, andcalled it from his own name Herodium. Now, as they were intheir flight, many joined themselves to him every day ; and, at aplace called Thressa of Idumea, his brother Joseph met him, andadvised him to ease himself of a great number of his followers;because Masada would not contain so great a multitude, whichwere above nine thousand. Herod complied with this advice,and sent away the most cumbersome part of his retinue, that theymight go into Idumea, and gave them provisions for their jour­ney ; but he got safe to the fortress with his nearest relations,and retained Wlthjhitn only the stoutest of his followers; and thereit was that he left eight hundred of his men as a guard for thewomen, and provisions sufficient for a siege, but he made hastehimself to Petra of Arabia.
9. As for the Parthians in Jerusalem, they betook themselvesto plundering, arid fell upon the houses of those that were fled,and upon the king's palace, and spared nothing but Hyrcanus'smoney, which was not above three hundred talents. They lightef other men's money also, but not of so much as they hoped for;
for« Mariamne here, in the copies.







OCR Output








294 WARS of the JEWS. Book I*


laid waste by the means of Antigonus's army, which had takenall things away. By this he moved the army, and attempted toget them off the siege; but Herod went to the captains thatwere under Silo, and to a great many of the soldiers, and beggedof them not to leave him who was sent thither by Caesar, andAntony, and the senate; for that he would take care to havetheir wants supplied that very day. After the making ofwhich entreaty, he went hastily into the country, and broughtthither so great an abundance of necessaries, that he cut off allSilo's pretences; and in order to provide that for the followingdays they should not want supplies, he sent to the people thatwere about Samaria^ which cityhad joined itself tohim),to bringcorn, and wine, and oil, and cattle to Jericho. When Antigonusheard of this, he sent some of his party with orders to hinder,and lay ambushes for these collectors of corn. This commandwas obeyed, and a great multitude of armed men were gatheredtogether about Jericho, and lay upon the mountains, to watchthose that brought the provisions. Yet was Herod not idle, buttook with him ten cohorts, five of them were Romans, and fivewere Jewish cohorts, together with some mercenary troops in­termixed among them, and besides those a few horsemen, andcame to Jericho; and when he came he found the city deserted,but that there were five hundred men, with their wives and chil­dren,who had taken possession of thetopsof the mountains, thesehe took and dismissed them, while the Romans fell upon the restof the city, and plundered it, having found the houses full of allsorts of good things. So the king left a garrison at Jericho, andcame back, and sent the Roman army into those cities whichwere come over to him, to take their winter quarters there, visa.ints Judea, [or Idumea], and Galilee, and Samaria. Antigonusalso by bribes obtained of Silo to let a part of his army be re­ceived at Lydda, as a compliment to Antonius.
CHAP. XVI.
Herod takes Sepphoru, and subdues the robbers that were in thecaves: be after that avenges himsilf upon Macheras, as uponan enemy of his, and goes to Antony, as he was besiegingSamosata.
} 1, QO the Romans lived in plenty of all things, and restedk3 from war. However, Herod did not lie at rest, butseiied upon Idumea, and kept it, with two thousand footmen,and four hundred horsemen; and this he did by sending his bro­ther Joseph thither, that no innovation might be made by Anti­gonus. He dso removed his mother, and all his relations, whohad beer, in Masada, to Samaria, and when he had settled them
securely,







OCR Output








THE LIFE OF FLAVIUS JOSEPHUSi 213


and follow him to the city of Tiberias. I also myself went onboard one of those ships, with my friends, and the seven arme 'men already mentioned, and sailed for Tiberias.
33. But now, when the people of Tiberias perceived that therewere no forces come from the king, and yet saw the whole lakefull of ships, they were in fear what would become of their city,and were greatly terrified, as supposing that the ships were fullof men on board ; so then they changed their minds, and threwdown their weapons, and met me with their wives and children,and made acclamations to me with great commendations ; torthey imagined that I did not know their former inclinations [tohave been against me] ; so they persuaded me to spare the city.But when I was come near enough, I gave order to the mastersof the ships to cast anchor a good way off the land, that the peo­ple of Tiberias might not perceive that the ships had no men onboard ; but I went nearer to the people in one of the ships, andrebuked them for their folly, and that they were so fickle as,without any just occasion in the world, to revolt from their fide­lity to me. However, I assured them, that I would entirelyforgive them for the time to come, if they would send ten ofthe ringleaders of the multitude to me ; and when they com­plied readily with this proposal, and sent me the men foremen-tioned, I put them on board a ship, and sent them away to Ta-richeae, and ordered them to be kept in'prison.
34. And by this stratagem it was, that I gradually got all thesenate of Tiberias into my power, and sent them to the cityforementioned, with many of the principal men among the po­pulous, and those not fewer in number than the other. But,when the multitude saw into what great miseries they hadbrought themselves, they desired me to punish the author ofthis sedition : his name was Clitus, a young man, bold and rashin his undertakings. Now, since I thought it not agreeable topiety to put one of my own people to death, and yet found icnecessary to punish him, I ordered Levi, one of my own guards,to go to him, and cut off one of ClitUs's hands ; but as he thatwas ordered to do this, was afraid to go out of the ship alone,among so great a multitude, I was not willing that the timo-rousness of the soldier should appear to the people of Tiberias.So I called to Clitus himself, and said to him, " Since thou de-'« sefvest to lose both thine hands for thy ingratitude to me, be" thou thine own executioner, lest, if thou refusest so to be," thou undergo a worse punishment." And, when he earnestly
begged
plainly ships; so that we need not wonder at our Evangelists, who still call themshipi; nor ought we to render them boats, ai some do. Their number was iaall 130, as we learn from our author elsewhere, Of the War, B. II. ch. xxi. sect. 8.







OCR Output








Chap. XIX. WARS OF THE JEWS. 425


and gave order, that if they could take that city [by surprise]they should keep it; but that in case the citizens should perceivethey were coming to attack them, that they then should stay forhim, and for the rest of the army. So some of them made abrisk march by the sea side, and some by land, and so coming up­on them On both sides, they took the city with ease: and as theinhabitants had made no provision aforehand for a flight, nor hadgotten any thing ready for fighting, the soldiers fell upon them,and slew them all, with their families, and then plundered andburnt the city. The number of the slain was eight thousandfour hundred. In like manner Cestius sent also a considerablebody of horsemen to the toparchy of Narbatene, that adjoinedto Cesarea, who destroyed the country, and slew a great multi­tude' of its people; they also plundered what they had, and burnttheir villages.
11. But Cestius sent Gallus, the commander of the twelfthlegion, into Galilee^ and delivered to him as many of his forcesas he supposed sufficient to subdue that nation. He was receiv­ed by the strongest city of Galilee, which was Sepphoris, withacclamations of joy; which wise conduct of that city occasionedthe rest of the cities to be in quiet; while the seditious part, andthe robbers ran away to that mountain which lies in the very-middle of Galilee, and is situated over against Sepphoris; it iscalled Asamon. So Gallus brought his forces against them:but while those men were in the superior parts above the Ro-iiians, they easily threw their darts upon the Romans, as theymade their approaches, and slew about two hundred of them.But when the Romans had gone round the mountains, and weregotten into the parts above their enemies, the others were soonbeaten; nor could they who had only light armour on, sustainthe force of them that fought them armed all over; nor whenthey u'ere beaten could they escape the enemies horsemen; in­somuch that only some few concealed themselves in certain placeshard to become at, among the mountains, while the rest, abovetwo thousand in number, were slain.
CHAP. XIX.
What Cestius did against the Jews ; and how, upon bis besiegingJerusalem, he retreatedfrom the city, without any just occasionin the world. As also -what severe calamities he under went fromthe Jews in his retreat.
$ 1. A ND now Gallus seeing nothing more that looked to-
£\. wards an innovation in Galilee, returned with his
arany to Cesarea; but Cestius removed with his whole army,
VOL. III. 3 H and







OCR Output








Chap. IX. .' ANTIQJJITIES OF THE JEWS. 105


for the future to leave them off, and send the woman back toher relations. But nothing was gained by these reproofs ; for,as the woman perceived what a tumult was made among thepeople on her account, and was afraid for Anileus, lest "he shouldcome to any harm for his love to her, she infused poison into A-sineus's food, and thereby took him off, and was now secure ofprevailing, when her lover was to be judge of what should bedone about her.
So Anileus took the government upon himself alone, andled his army against the villages of Mithridates, who was a manof principal authority in Parthia, and had married king Arta-banus's daughter; he also plundered them, and among that prevwas found much money, and many slaves, as also a great numberof sheep and many other things, which, when gained, makemen's condition happy. Now, when Mithridates, who was thereat this time, heard that his villages were taken, he was verymuch displeased to find that Anileus had first begun to injure him,and to affront him in his present dignity, when he had not offer­ed any injury to him before-hand ; and he got together the great­est body of horsemen he was able, and those out of that numberwhich were of an age fit for war, and came to fight Anileus ; andwhen he Was arrived at a certain village of his own, he lay stillthere, as intending to fight him on the day following, because itwas the Sabbath, the days on which the Jews rest. And whenAnileus was informed of this by a Syrian stranger of anothervillage, who not only gave him an exact account of other cir­cumstances, but told him where Mithridates would have a feast,he took his supper at a proper time, and marched by night, withan intent of falling upon the Parthians while they were unap-prised what they should do; so he fell upon them about the fourthwatch of the night, and some of them he slew while they wereasleep, and others he put to flight, and took Mithridates alive^and set him naked upon an ass *, which, among the Parthians,is esteemed the greatest reproach possible. And, when he hadbrought him into a wood with such a resolution, and his friendsdesired him to kill Mithridates, he soon told them his own mindto the contrary, and said, that " it was not right to kill a man" who was one of the principal families among the Parthians," and greatly honoured with matching into the royal family j" that so far as they had hitherto gone was tolerable ; for al-
VOL. III. O . '' though


* This custom in Syria and Mesopotamia, of setting men upon an ass, by waytof disgrace, is still kept up at Damascus in Syria; where, in order to show theirdespite against the Christians, the Turks will not suffer them to hire horses,but asses only, when they go abroad to see (he country, as Mr Maundrell asiuresUs, p. 128.







OCR Output








212 THE LIFE OF FLAVIUS JOSEPHUS.


caped at length, and king Agrippa forgave them their offences.And this'was the conclusion of what concerned th'ese men.
32. But as for the inhabitants of the city of Tiberias, theywrote to the king, and desired him to send them forces sufficientto be guard to their country ; for that they were desirous to comeover to him: this was what they wrote to him. But when I cameto them, they desired me to build their walls, as I had promisedthem to do; for they had heard that the walls of Tarichea e werealready built. I agreed to the proposal accordingly ; and whenI had made preparation for the entire building, I gave order tothe architects to go to work ; but on the third day, when I wasgone to Taricheae, which was thirty furlongs distant from Tibe­rias, it so fell out, that some Roman horsemen were discovered on'tbeir march, not far from the city, which made it to be supposedthat the forces were come from the king; upon which they shout­ed, and lifted up their voices in commendations of the king, andin reproaches against me. Hereupon one came running to me,and told me what their dispositions were, and that they had re­solved to revolt from me ; upon hearing which news I was verymuch alarmed; for I had already sent away my armed menfrom Taricheae to their own homes, because the next day wasour Sabbath ; for I would not have the people of Taricheae dis­turbed [on that day] by a multitude of soldiers; and indeed,whenever I sojourned at that city, I never took any particularcare for a guard about my own body, because I had had frequentinstances of the fidelity its inhabitants bore to me. I had nowabout me no more than seven armed men, besides some friends,and was doubtful what to do ; for to send to recall my own for­ces I did not think proper, because the present day was almostover ; and had those forces been with me, I could not take uparms on the next day, because our laws forbade us so to do, eventhough our necessity should be Tery great; and if I should per­mit the people of Taricheae, and the strangers with them, to guardthe city, I saw that they would not be sufficient for that purpose,and I perceived that I should be obliged to delay my assistance agreat while ; for I thought with myself that the forces that camefrom the. king would prevent me, and that I should be drivenout of the city. I considered, therefore, how to get clear of theseforces by a stratagem ; so I immediately placed those my friendsof Taricheae, on whom I could best confide, at the gates, to watchthose very carefully who went out at those gates ; I also calledto me the heads of families, and bid every one of them to seizeupon a ship *, to go on board it, and to take a master with them,
and


* In this section, as well as sect. 18. and sect. 33. those small vessels that saii-ed on the sea of Galilee, are called by JosephuJ Nw, and na.««, and mafn, i. e.







OCR Output








THE LIFE OF FLAVIUS IOSEPHUS. 193


chelaus ; as was I born to Matthias on the first year of the rcigtlof Caius Caesar. I have three sons ; Hyrcanus, the eldest, wasborn on the fourth year of the reign of Vespasian, as was Justusborn on the seventh, and Agrippa on the ninth. Thus have Iset down the genealogy of my family as I have found it descri­bed* in the public records, and so bid adieu to those who ca.lumniate me, [as of a lower original.]
2. Now my father Matthias was not only eminent on accountof his nobility, but had a higher commendation on account ofhis righteousness, and was in great reputation in Jerusalem, thegreatest city we have. I was myself brought up with my bro­ther, whose name was Matthias, for he was my own brother,by both father and mother ; and I made mighty proficiency inthe improvements of my learning, and appeared to have botha great memory and understanding. Moreover, when I was achild, and about fourteen years of age, I was commended by allfor the love 1 had to learning ; on which account the high-priestsand principal men of the city came then frequently to me toge­ther, in order to know my opinion about the accurate understand­ing of points of the law. And when I was about sixteen years old,I had a mind to make trial of the several sects that were amongus. These sects are three ; the first is that of the Pharisees, thesecond that of the Sadducees, and the third that of the Essens, aswe have frequently told you ; for I thought that by this meansI might chuse the best, if I were once acquainted with them all;so I contented myself with hard fare, and underwent great diffi­culties, and went through them all f. Nor did I content myselfwith these trials only ; but when I was informed that one whosename was Banus, lived in the desart, and used no other cloathingthan grew upon trees, and had no other food than what grew ofits own accord, and bathed himself in cold water frequently, bothby night and by day, in order to preserve his chastity, 1 imita­ted him in those things, ;md continued with him three years f-VOL. III. B b So


* An eminent example of the care of the Jews about their genealogies, espe -eially as to the priests See Contr. Ap' B. I. ch. 7."
t When Joseplms here says, that from sixteen to nineteen, or for three years,he made trial of the three Jewish sects, the Pharisees, the Sadducecs, and theEssens, and yet says presently, in all our copies, that he stayed besides with oneparticular ascetick, called Eanus, ira} iu-ru, with him, and this still before hewas nineteen, there is little room left lor his trial of the thi ee other sects. Isuppose, therefore, that for axf aura' uiitb him, the old reading might be «,«/> iu-vtil, with them; which is a very small emendation, and takes away the diffi­culty before us. Nor is Dr Hudson's conjecture, hinted at by Mr H'all in his pre­face to the doctor s edition of Josephus, at all improbable, that this Banus, bythis his description, might well be a follower of John the Baptist, and that fromhim Josephus might easily imbibe such notions, as afterward prepared him tohave a favourable opinion about Jesus Christ himself, who was attested to byJohn the Bsptist.







OCR Output








-64 ANTIQJJITIES OF THE JEWS. - Book XVIII.


bout this water ; and many ten thousands of the people got to­gether, and made a clainour against him, and insisted that heshould leave off that design. Some of them also ussd reproaches,and abused the man, as crowds of such people usually do. Sohe habited a great number of his soldiers in their habit, whocarried daggers under their garments, and sent them to a placewhere they might surround them. So he bid the Jews himselfgo away j but they boldly casting reproaches upon him, he gavethe soldiers that signal which had been beforehand agreed oa ;who laid upon them with much greater blows than Pilate hadcommanded them, and equally punished those that were tumul­tuous, and those that were not; nor did they spare them in theleast; and since the people were unarmed, and were caught bymen prepared for what they were about, there were a greatnumber of them slain by this means, and others of them ranaway wounded. And thus an end was put to this sedition.
3. Now, there was about this time Jesus, a wise man, if it belawful to call him a man, for he was a doer of wonderful works,a teacher of such men as receive the truth with pleasure. Hedrew over to him both many of the Jews, and many of theGentiles. He was [the] Christ. And when Pilate, at the sug­gestion of the principal men amongst us, had condemned hioi to(he cross *, those that loved him at the first did not forsake him ;for he appeared to them alive again the third day f ; as the di­vine prophets had foretold these and ten thousand other wonder­ful things concerning him. And the tribe of Christians, soiiamed from him, are not extinct at this day.
4. About the same time, also, another sad calamity put theJews into disorder, and certain shameful practices happenedabout the temple of Isis that was at Rome. 1 will now first takenotice of the wicked attempt about the temple of Isis, and willthen give an account of the Jewish affairs. There was at Romea woman whose name was Paulina ; one who, on account of thedignity of her ancestors, and by the regular conduct of a vir­tuous life, had a great reputation : she was also very rich ;. andalthough she were of a beautiful countenance, and in that flowerof her age wherein women are the most gay, yet did she lead alife of great inodcstv. She was married to Saturninus, one that
was


spel teaches us, I.'jfce, xxiii. 6. 7. that, " when Pilate heard of Galilee, he askedwhether Jesus were a Galilean! And as soon as he knew that he belonged to He-rocl's jurisdiction, he sent him to Herod." And, ver. 12. " The same day Pilateand Herod were nude friends together; for before they had been at enmity be-tween themselves'" Take the very probable key of this matter in the words ofthe learned Noldins de Herod, No. 149. " The cause of the enmity between He-" rod and Pilate (says he) seems to have been this, that Pilate had intermeddled" with the tetrar ch's jurisdiction, and had slain some of his Galilean subjects,"' Luke, xiii. i.; and, as he was willing to correct that error, he sent Christ to" Herod at this time.''
* A. 0.33. April 3. t April 5.







OCR Output








104 ANTiojriTiES or THE JEWS. Book XVIII;


go into a foreign land ; agreeably to which custom of theirs shecarried her idols with her. Now, at first she performed herworship to them privately, but when she was become Anileus'smarried wife, she worshipped them in her accustomed manner,'and with the same appointed ceremonies which she used in herformer husband's days ; upon which their most esteemed friendsblamed him at first, that he did not act after the manner of theHebrews, nor perform what was agreeable to their laws, in mar­rying a foreign wife, and one that transgressed the accurate ap­pointments of their sacrifices and religious ceremonies ; that heought to consider, lest by allowing himself in many pleasures ofthe body, he might lose his principality, on account of the beau­ty of a wife, and that high authority which, by God's blessing,he had arrived at. But, when they prevailed not at all upon'him, he slew one of them for whom he had the greatest respect,because of the liberty he took with him ; who, when he wasdying, out of regard to the laws, imprecated a punishment up­on his murderer Anileus, and upon Asineus also, and that alltheir companions might come to a like end frorn their enemies ;upon the two first as the principal actors of this wickedness, andupon the rest as those that would not assist him when he sufferedin the defence of their laws. Now these latter were sorely grie­ved, yet did they tolerate thefe doings, because they remember­ed that they had arrived at their present happy state by no othermeans than their fortitude. But when they also heard of theworship of those gods whom the Parthians adore, they thoughtthe injury that Anileus offered to their laws was to be borne nolonger; and a greater number of them came to Asineus, andloudly complained of Anileus, and told him, that " it had been" well that he had of himself seen what was advantageous to them," but that however it was now high time to correct what had" been done amiss, before the crime thathad been committed pro-' ved the ruin of himself and all the rest of'them. They added,' that the marriage of this woman was made without their con-' sent, and without a regard to their old laws ; and that the' worship which this woman [paid to their gods] was a reproach«' to the God whom they worshipped." Now, Asineus was sen --sible of his brother's offence, that it had been already the causeof great mischiefs, ajid would be so for the time to come ; yetdid he tolerate the same from the good-will he had to so near arelation, and forgiving it to him, on account that his brother wasquite over-borne by his wicked inclinations. But as more andmore still came about him every day, and the clamours about itbecame greater, he at length spake to Anileus about these cla-taours, reproving him for his former actions, and desiring him
for







OCR Output













OCR Output








Chap. XXV. WARS OF THE JEWS. 329


" kindness for him; but that if he would do so, he would afford" him all the assistance he was able."
4. With this advice Pheroras complied, and, putting himselfinto such a habit as might most move compassion, he came withblack cloth upon his body, and tears in his eyes, and threw him­self down at Herod's feet, and begged his pardon for what he haddone, and confessed that he had acted very wickedly, and wasguilty of every thing that he had been accused of, and lamentedthat disorder of his mind, and distraction which his love to a wo­man, he said, had brought him to. So when Archelaus hadbrought Pheroras to accuse and bear witness against himself, he.then made an excuse for him, and mitigated Herod's anger to-wards-him, and this by using certain domestical examples; " For" that when he had suffered much greater mischiefs from a bro-" ther of his own, he preferred the obligations of nature, before'•' the passion of revenge; because it is in kingdoms, as it is in'' gross bodies, where some member or other is ever swelled by" the bodies weight, in which case it is not proper to cut off" such member, but to heal it by a gentle method of cure."
5. Upon Archelaus's saying this, and much more to the samepurpose, Herod's displeasure against Pheroras was molified; yetdid he persevere in his own indignation against Alexander, andsaid, he would have his daughter divorced, and taken away fromhim, and this till he had brought Herod to that pass, that, con.trary to his former behaviour to him, he petitioned Archelausfor the young man, and that he would let his daughter continueespoused to him: but Archelaus made him strongly believe thathe would permit her to be married to any one else, but not toAlexander, because he looked upon it as a very valuable advan­tage, that the relation they had contracted by that affinity, andthe privileges that went along with it might be preserved. Andwhen the king said, that his son would take it for a great favourto him, if he would not dissolve that marriage, especially sincethey had already children between the young man and her, andsince that wife of his was so well beloved by him, and that aswhile she remains his wife she would*be a great preservative tohim, and keep him from offending, as 'he had formerly done; soif she should be once torn away from him, she would be the causeof his falling into despair; because such young men's attemptsare best molified, when they are diverted from them by settlingtheir affections at home. So Archelaus complied with whatHerod desired, but not without difficulty, and was both himselfreconciled to the young man, and reconciled his father to him al­so. However, he said he must, by all means, be sent to RomeVOL. III. T t to







OCR Output








360 wars or the jews. Book II.


whole multitude, and gave orders that they should constrainthose that began the tumult, by force, to be quiet. At thesethe whole multitude were irritated, and threw stones at manyof the soldiers, and killed them : but the tribune fled awaywounded, and had much ado to escape so. After which theybetook themselves to their sacrifices, as if they had done no mis -chief; nor did it appear to Archelaus that the multitude couldbe restrained without bloodshed; so he sent his whole army up­on them, the footmen in great multitudes, by the way of thecity, and the horsemen by the way of the plain, who, fallingupon them on the sudden, as they were offering their sacrifices,destroyed about three thousand of them; but the rest of themultitude were dispersed upon the adjoining mountains; these-were followed by Archelaus's heralds, who commanded everyone to retire to their own homes, whither they all went, andleft the festival.
CHAP. II.
Archelaus goes to Rome with a great number of his kindred- Heis there accused before C<esar by Antipater ; but is superior tohis accusers in judgment, by the means of that defence whichNicolaus made for him.
f 1. \ RCHELAUS went down now to the sea side, withJTjl his mother and his friends, Poplas, and Ptolemy, andNicolaus, and left behind him Philip, to be his steward in thepalace, and to take care of his domestic affairs. Salome wentalso along with him with her sons, as did also the king'sbrethren and sons-in-law. These, in appearance, went to givehim all the assistance they were able, in order to secure his- succession, but in reality to accuse him for his breach of thelaws, by what he had done at the temple.
2. But as they were come to Cesarea, Sabinus, the procura­tor of Syria, met them: he was going up to Judea, to secureHerod's effects; but Varus, [president of Syria], who was comethither, restrained him from going any farther. This VarusArchelaus had sent for, by the earnest entreaty of Ptolemy. Atthis time indeed, Sabinus, to gratify Varus, neither went to thecitadels, nor did he shut-up the treasuries where his father's mo­ney was laid up, but promised that he would lie still, untilCaesar should have taken cognisance of the affair. So he abodeat Cesarea; but as soon as those that were his hindrance weregone, when Varus was gone to Antioch, and Archelaus wassailed to Rome, he immediately went on to Jerusalem, andseized upon the palace. And when he had called for the go­vernors of the citadels, and the Stewards [of the king's private
affairs],







OCR Output








£00 THE LIFE OF FLAVIUS JOSEPHUS.


things, he also came to the citadel of Gamala ; and when he wascome, the multitude cried aloud, and desired him to resume thegovernment, and to make an expedition against Varus, and theSyrians of Cesarea; for it was reported that they had slain theking. But Philip restrained their zeal, and put them in mindof the benefits the king-had bestowed upon them ; and told themhow powerful the Romans were, and said it was not for theiradvantage to make war with them ; and at length he prevailedwith them. But now, whtn the king was acquainted with Va-rus's design, which was to cut off the Jews of Cesarea, beingmany ten thousands, with their wives and children, and all inone day, he called to him Equiculus Modius, and sent him tobe Varus's successor, as we have elsewhere related. But stillPhilip kept possession of the citadel of Gamala, and of thecountry adjoining to it, which thereby continued in their alle­giance to the Romans. •
12. Now, as soon as I was come into Galilee, and had learnedthis state of things by the information of such as told me of them,I wrote to the sanhedrim at Jerusalem about them, and requiredtheir direction what 1 should do. Their direction was, that Ishould continue there, and that, if my fellow-legates were will­ing, I should join with them in the care of Galilee. But thosemy fellow-legates, having gotten great riches from those titheswhich as priests were then" dues, and were given to rhem, deter­mined to return to their own country. Yet when 1 desired themto stay so long, that we might first settle the public affairs, theycomplied with me. So I removed, together with them, from thecity of Sepphoris, and came to a certain village called Bethmaus,four furlongs distant from Tiberias ; and thence I sent messen­gers to the senate of Tiberias, and desired that the principal menof the city would come to me : and when they were come, Justushimself being also with them, I told them, that I was sent to themby the people of Jerusalem as a legate, together with these otherpriests, in order to persuade them to demolish that house whichHerod the tetrarch had built there, and which had the figures ofliving creatures in it, although our laws have forbidden us tomake any such figures; and I desired, that they would give usleave so to do immediately. But for a good while Capellus and theprincipal men belonging to the city would not give us leave, butwere at length entirely overcome by us, and were induced to beof our opinion. So Jesus the son of Sapphias, one of those whomwe have already mentioned as the leader of a seditious tumult ofmariners and poor people, prevented us, and (took with him cer­tain Galileans, and set the entire palace on fire, and thought heshould get a great deal of money thereby, because he saw someef the roofs gilt with gold. They also plundered a great deal of
the







OCR Output








15* Book XX: ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


junctions of Fadus should force the Jews to rebel), that theymight, in the first place, have leave to send ambassadors to Cae-sar, to petition him that they may have the holy vestments un­der their own power, and that, in the next place, they wouldtarry till they knew what answer Claudius would give to thattheir request. So they replied, that they would give them leaveto send their ambassadors, provided they would give them theirsons as pledges [fortheir peaceable behaviour]. And when theyhad agreed so to do, and had given them the pledges they desi­red, the ambassadors were sent accordingly. But when, upontheir coming to Rome, Agrippa junior, the son of the deceased,understood the reason why they came, (for he dwelt with Clau­dius Caesar, as we said before), he besought Caesar to grant theJews their request about the holy vestments, and to send a mes­sage to Fadus accordingly.
2. Hereupon Claudius called for the ambassadors, and toldthem, that " he granted their request;" and bade them to re­turn their thanks to Agrippa for this favour, which had beenbestowed on them upon his entreaty. And, besides these an­swers of his, he sent the following letter by them : " Claudius** Caesar, Germanicus, tribune of the people the fifth time, and" designed consul the fourth time, and imperator the tenth time,*' the father of his country, to the magistrates, senate, and" people, and the whole nation of the Jews, sendeth greeting." Upon the presentation of your ambassadors to me by Agrippa," my friend, whom I have brought up, and have now with me," and who is a person of very great piety, who are come to give*' me thanks for the care I have taken of your nation, and to en-** treat me, in an earnest and obliging manner, that they mayu have the holy vestments, with the crown belonging to them,*' under their power; I grant their request, as that excellent" person Vitellius, who is very dear to me, had done before me.* And I have complied with your desire, in the first place, outf* of regard to that piety which I profess, and because I would** have every one worship God according to the laws of their** own country; and this I do also because I shall hereby highly'* gratify king Herod, and Agrippa junior, whose sacred regards tow me, and earnest good-will to you, I am well acquainted with, and** with whom I have the greatest friendship, and whom I high-" ly esteem, and look on as persons of the best character. Now" 1 have written about these affairs to Cuspius Fadus, my procu-u rator. The names of those that brought me your letter are," Cornelius, the son of Cero, Trypho, the son of Theudio, Do-" rotheus, the son of Nathaniel, and John, the son of John. This
<. . was







OCR Output








138 ANTIQJJIHES OF THE JEWS. Book XIX.


u or hereafter to be a member of their body, ought to yield to" the senate, which consisted of so great a number : that he ought" to let the law take place in the disposal of all that related to" the public order, and to remember how greatly the former ty-* rants had afflicted their eity ; and what dangers both he and" they had escaped under Caius ; and that he ought not to hate" the heavy burden of tyranny, when the injury is done by others," while he did himself wilfully treat his country after a mad and" insolent manner ; that if he would comply with them, and de-" monstrate that his firm resolution was to live quietly and vir-" tuously, he would have the greatest honours decreed to him," that a free people could bestow, and by subjecting himself to" the law, would obtain this branch of commendation, that he" acted like a man of virtue, both as a ruler and a subject; but*' that if he would act foolishly, and learn no wisdom by Caius's" death, they would not permit him to go on ; that a great part of" the army was got togetherfor them, with plenty of weapons, and" a great number of slaves, which they could make use of: that** good hope was a great matter in such cases, as was also good*' fortune, and that the gods would never assist any others but" those that undertook to act with virtue and goodness, who can" be no other than such as fight for the liberty of their country."
4. Now these ambassadors, Veranius and Brocchus, who wereboth of them tribunes of the people, made this speech to Clau­dius, and falling down upon their knees, they begged of him,that he would not throw the city into wars and misfortunes;but when they saw what a multitude of soldiers encompassed andguarded Claudius> and that the forces that were with the con­suls were, in comparison of them, perfectly inconsiderable, theyadded, that " if he did desire the government, he should accept" of it as given by the senate ; that he would prosper better, and" be happier, if he came to it, not by the injustice, but by the** good-will of those that would bestow it upon him."
CHAP. IV.
What things king Agrippa did for Claudius ; and how Claudius,when he had taken the government, commanded the murderers ofCaius to be slain.
$ 1. "VTOW Claudius, though he was sensible after what aninsolent manner the senate had sent to him, yet did he,according to their advice, behave himself for the present withmoderation; but not so far that he could not recover himself outof his fright: so he was encouraged [to claim the government]partly by the boldness of the soldiers, and partly by the persua­sion







OCR Output








WARS OF THE JEWS. Book I


and Moabites, he enjoined them to pay him tribute, and return­ed to Amathus; and, as Theodorus was surprised at his greatsuccess, he took the fortress, and demolished it.
4. However, when he fought with Obodus, king of the Ara­bians, who had laid an ambush for him near Golan, and a plotagainst him, he lost his entire army, which was crowded togetherin a deep valley, and broken to pieces by the multitudes of camels.And, when he had made his escape to Jerusalem, he provoked themultitude, which hated him before, to make an insurrectionagainst him, and this on account of the greatness of the calamitythat he was under. However, he was then too hard for them,and in the several battles that were fought on both sides, he slewnot fewer than fifty thousand of the Jews, in the interval of sixyears. Yet had he no reason to rejoice in these victories, sincehe did but consume his own kingdom ; till at length he fell off'fighting, and endeavoured to come to a composition with them,by talking with his subjects. But this mutability and irregula­rity of his conduct made them hate him still more. And, whenhe asked them why they so hated him ? and what he should doin order to appease them ? they said, by killing himself; forthat it would be then all they could do to be reconciled to him,who had done such tragical things to them, even when he wasdead. At the same time they invited Demetrius, who was call­ed Eucerus, to assist them; and, as he readily complied withtheir requests, in hopes of great advantages, and came with his ar­my, the Jews joined with those their auxiliaries about Shechem.
5. Yet did Alexander meet with these forces with one thousandhorsemen, and eight thousand mercenaries, that were on foot. Hehad also with him that part of 'the Jews which favoured him, tothe number of ten thousand; while the adverse party had threethousand horsemen, and fourteen thousand footmen. Now, beforethey joined battle, the kings made proclamation, and endeavour­ed to draw off each other's soldiers, and make them revolt twhile Demetrius hoped to induce Alexander's mercenaries toleave him, and Alexander hoped to induce the Jews that werewith Demetrius to leave him. ' But, since neither the Jewswould leave off their rage, nor the Greeks prove unfaithful, theycame to an engagement, and to a close fight with their weapons.In which battle Demetrius was the conqueror, although Alexan­der's mercenaries shewed the greatest exploits, both in soul andbody. Yet did the upshot of this battle prove different fromwhat was expected, as to both of them ; for neither did thosethat invited Demetrius to come to them continue firm to him,though he were conqueror ; and six thousand Jews, out of pityto the change of Alexander's condition, when he was fled to







OCR Output








314 WARS OF THE JEWS." ." Book I.


Agrippeum. Moreover, he had so very great a kindness forhis friend Agrippa, that he had his name engraved upon thatgate which he had himself erected in the temple.
9. Herod was also a lover of his father, if any other personever was s'o; for he made a monument for his father, even thatcity which he built in the finest plain that was in his kingdom,and whicli had rivers and trees in abundance, and named it Anti-patris. He also built a wall about a citadel that lay above Je­richo, and was a very strong and very fine building, and dedi­cated it to his mother, and called it Cypros. Moreover, he dedi­cated a tower that was at Jerusalem, and called it by the nameof his brother Phasaelus, whose structure, largeness, and mag­nificence, we shall describe hereafter. He also built anothercity in the valley that leads northward from Jericho, and namedit Phasaelis.
10. And as he transmitted to eternity his family and friends,so did he not neglect a memorial for himself,but built a fortressupon a mountain towards Arabia, and named it from himself *Jferodiums and he called that hill that was the shape of awoman's breast, and was sixty furlongs distant from Jerusalem,by the same name. He also bestowed much curious art upomit, with great ambition, and built round towers all about the topof it, and filled up the remaining space with the most costly pa­laces round about, insomuch, that not only the sight of the in­ner apartments was splendid, but great wealth was laid out onthe outward walls, and partitions, and roofs also. Besides this,he brought a mighty quantity of water from a great distance,and at vast charges, and raised an ascent to it of two hundredsteps of the whitest marble, for the hill was itself moderatelyhigh, and entirely factitious. He also built other palaces aboutthe roots of the hill, sufficient to receive the furniture that wasput into them, with his friends also, insomuch, that on accountof its containing all necessaries, the fortress might seem to be acity, but, by the bounds it had, a palace only.
Jl. And when heliad built so much, he shewed the greatnessof his soul to no small number of foreign cities. He builtplaces for exercise at Tripoli, and Damascus, and Ptolemais; hebuilt a wall about Byblus, as also large rooms, and cloisters,and temples, and market places at Berytus and Tyre, withtheatres at Sidpn and Damascus. He also built aqueducts for
those


* Ther« were two cities, or citadels, called Herodiums, in Judea, and both men-tioned by Josephus, not only here, but Antiq. B. XIV. ch. xiii. sect. 9.6. XV.ch. ix. sect. 6. Vol. II. Of the War, B. I. chap. xiii. sect. 8. B. III. ch. iii. sect. 'J.One of them wai ioo,and the other 60 furlongs distant from Jerusalem. One ofthem is mentioned by Pliny, Hist. Nat. B. V. chap. xiv. as Dean Aldrich observeshere.







OCR Output








JOB ANTIQJJITIES OF THE JEWS. Book XVIII.


dangers, and very ready to fight upon any occasion. Now, whenthe Greeks had the worst in this sedition, and saw that they hadbut one way of recovering their former authority, and that was,if they could prevent the agreement between the Jews and theSyrians, they every one discoursed with such of the Syrians aswere formerly their acquaintance, and promised they would beat peace and friendship with them. Accordingly, they gladlyagreed so to do; and xvhen this was done by the principal men ofboth nations, they soon agreed to a reconciliation, and when theywere so agreed, they both knew that the great design of such theirunion, would be their common hatred to the Jews. According­ly they fell upon them, and slew about fifty thousand of them ;nay, the Jews were all destroyed, excepting a few who escaped,either by the compassion which their friends or neighbours af­forded them, in order to let them fly away. These retired toCtesiphon, a Grecian city, and situated aear to Seleucia, wherethe king [of Parthia] lives in winter every year, and where thegreatest part of his riches are reposited ; but the Jews had here.no certain settlement, those of Seleucia having little concern forthe king's honour. Now the whole nation of the Jews were infear both of the Babylonians, and of the Seleucians, because allthe Syrians that live in those places agreed with the Seleuciansin the war against the Jews ; so the most of them gathered them­selves together, and went to Neerda, and Nisibis, and obtainedsecurity there by the strength of those cities ; besides whichtheir inhabitants, who were a ijreat many, were all warlike men.And this was the state of the Jews at this time in Babylonia.


BOOK







OCR Output








PREFACE. 247


4. However, I will not go to the other extreme, out of op.position to those men who extol the Romans, nor will I determineto raise the actions of my countrymen too high ; but I will pro­secute the actions of both parties with accuracy. Yet shall I suitmy language to the passions I am under, as to the affairs I describe,and must be allowed to indulge some lamentations upon themiseries undergone by my own country. For that it was a se­ditious temper of our own that destroyed it, and that they werethe tyrants among the Jews who brought the Roman power uponus, who unwillingly attacked us, and occasioned the burningof our holy temple, Titus Caesar, who destroyed it, is himself awitness, who, during the entire war, pitied the people who werekept under by the seditious, and did often voluntarily delay thetaking of the city, and allowed time to the siege, in order to letthe authors have opportunity for repentance. But if any onemakes an unjust accusation against us, when we speak so passion­ately about the tyrants, or the robbers, or sorely bewail the mis­fortunes of our country, let him indulge my affections herein,though it be contrary to the rules for writing history ; becauseit had so come to pass, that our city Jerusalem had arrived at auhigher degree of felicity than any other city under the Romangovernment, and yet at last fell into the sorest of calamities again.Accordingly it appears to me, that * the misfortunes of all men,from the beginning of the world, if they be compared to these ofthe Jews, are not so considerable as they were; while the authorsof them were not foreigners neither. This makes it impossiblefor me to contain my lamentations. But, if any pne be inflexi­ble in his censures of me, let him attribute the facts themselvesto the historical part; and the lamentations to the writer him­self only.
5. However, I may justly blame the learned men among theGreeks, who, when such great actions have been done in theirown times, which, upon the comparison, quite eclipse the oldwars, do yet sit as judges of those affairs, and pass bitter censuresupon the labours of the best writers of antiquity; which mo­derns, although they may be superior to the old writers in elo­quence, yet are they inferior to them in the execution of whatthey intended to do. While these also write new histories aboutthe Assyrians and Medes; as if the ancient writers had not de­scribed their affairs as they ought to have done ; although thesebe as far inferior to them in abilities, as they are different in
their


* That these calamities of the Jews, who were our Saviour's murderers, wereto be the greatest that had ever been since the beginning of the world, our Sa­viour had directly foretold, Matt. xxiv. n. Mark, xiii. 19. Luke, xxi. 23, 24 ;and that the/ proved to be such accordingly, Josephus is here a most authenticWitness.







OCR Output








Chap. II. WARS OF THE JEWS. 255


in other respects, but was overcome by him as to the Just af­fection [he had for his relations] ; for when Ptolemy was dis­tressed, he brought forth his mother, and his brethren, and setthem upon the wall, and beat them with rods in every body's-sight, and threatened, that unless he would go away immediate­ly, he would throw them down headlong ; at which sight Hyr-canus's commiseration and concern were too hard for his anger.But his mother was not dismayed, neither at the stripes she re­ceived, nor at the death with which she was threatened ; butstretched out her hands, and prayed her son not to be moved withthe injuries that she had; suffered to spare the wretch ; since itwas to her better to die by the means of Ptolemy than to liveever so long, provided he might be punished for the injuries hehad done to their family. Now John's case was this ; when heconsidered the courage of his mother, and heard her entreaty,he set about his attacks ; but when he saw her beaten, and tornto pieces withthe stripes, he grew feeble, and was entirely over­come by his affections. And as the seige was delayed by thismeans, the year of rest came on, upon which the Jews rest everyseventh year as they do on every seventh day. On this year,therefore, Ptolemy was freed from being besieged, and slew thebrethren of John, with their mother, and fled to Zeno, who wa*also called Cotylas, who was the tyrant of Philadelphia.
5. And now Antiochus was so angry at what he had sufferedfrom Simon, that he made an expedition into Judea, and satdown before Jerusalem, and besieged Hyrcanus ; but Hyrcanusopened the sepulchre of David, who was the richest of all kings,and took thence about three thousand talents in money, and' in­duced Antiochus, by the promise of three thousand talents, toraise the siege-. Moreover, he was the first of the Jews that hadmoney enough, and began to hire foreign auxiliaries also.
6. However, at another time, when Antiochus was gone uponan expedition against the Medes, and so gave Hyrcanus an op­portunity of being revenged upon him, he immediately madean attack upon the cities of Syria, as thinking what proved tabe the case with them, that they would find them empty of goodtroops. So he took Medeba and Samea, with the towns in theirneighbourhood, as also Sechem and Gerizaim; and besides thess[he subdued] the nation of the Chutheans, who dwelt round aboutthat temple which was built in imitation of the temple at Jeru­salem ; he also took a great many other cities of Idumea, withAdoreon and Marissa.
7. He also proceeded as far as Samaria, where is now thecity Sebaste, which was built by Herod the king, and encom­passed it all round with a wall, and set his sons, Aristobulus and
Anti'gonuSj







OCR Output








68 Book XVIII. ANTIQJJITIES OF THE JEWS.


and thought the discourse of the man probable ; and as theyabode at a certain village, which was called Tirathaba, they gotthe rest together to them, and desired to go up the mountain ina great multitude together ; but Pilate prevented their going up,by seizing upon the roads with a great band of horsemen andfootmen, who fell upon those that were gotten together in thevillage ; and when it came to an action, some of them they slew,and others of them they put to flight, and took a great manyalive, the principal of which, and also the most potent of thosethat fled away, Pilate ordered to be slain.
2. But when this tumult was appeased, the Samaritan senatesent an embassy to Vitellius, a man that had been consul, andwho was now president of Syria, and accused; Pilate of the mur­der of those that were killed; for that they did not go to Tira­thaba in order to revolt from the Romans, but to escape theviolence of Pilate. So Vitellius sent Marcellus, a friend of hisrto take care of the affairs of Judea, and ordered Pilate to go toRome, to answer before the emperor to the accusations of theJews. So Pilate, when he had tarried ten years in Judea, madehaste to Rome, and this in obedience to the orders of Vitellius,which he durst not contradict; but before he could get to Rome,.Tiberius was dead.
3. But Vitellius came into Judea, and went up to Jerusa­lem ; it was at the time of that festival which is called the Pass­over. Vitellius was there magnificently received, and releasedthe inhabitants of Jerusalem from all the taxes upon the fruits,that were bought and sold, and gave them leave to have the careof the high-priest's vestments, with all their ornaments, and to-have them under the custody of the priests in the temple, whichpower they used to have formerly, although at this time theywere laid up in the tower of Antcnia, the citadel so called, andthat on the occasion following : There was one of the [high}priests, named Hyrcanus, and as there were many of that name,he was the first of them t this man built a tower near the temple,and when he had so done, he generally dwelt in it, and hadthese vestments with him ; because it was lawful for him aloneto put them on, and he had them there reposited when he wentdown into the city,, and took his ordinary garments; the samethings were continued to be done by his sons, and by their sonsafter them. But when Herod came to be king, he rebuilt thistower, which was very conveniently situated, in a magnificentmanner j and because he was a friend to Antonius, he called itby the name of Antonia. And as he found these vestmentslying there, he retained them in the same place, as believing,that while he had them in his custody, the people would make
no­







OCR Output








AUTi<vuitiES oF tnt JEW9. Book XIX


that were at this consultation, had little regard to the punishmentCaius had suffered, because he justly deserved such his fortune ;but they were rather considering their own circumstances, howthey might take the best care of themselves, especially while theGermans were busy in punishing the murderers of Caius ; whichyet was rather done to gratify their own savage temper, thanfor the good bf the public : all which things disturbed Claudius,who was afraid of his own safety, and this particularly becausehe saw the heads of Asprenas and his partners carried about.His station had been on a certain elevated place, whither a fewsteps led him, and whither he had retired in the dark by himself.But when Gratus, who was one of the soldiers that belonged tothe palace, saw him, but did not well know by his countenancewho he was, because it was dark, though he could well judge thatit was a man who was privately there on some design, he camenearer to him, and when Claudius desired that he would retire,he discovered who he was, and owned him to be Claudius. Sohe said to his followers, " This is a Germanicus* ; come on, let" us chuse him for our emperor." But when Claudius saw theywere making preparations for taking him away by force, andwas afraid they would kill him, as they had killed Caius, he be­sought them to spare him, putting them in mind how quietly hehad demeaned himself, and that he was unacquainted with whathad been done. Hereupon Gratus smiled upon him, and tookhim by the right hand, and said, " Leave off, Sir, these low" thoughts of saving yourself, while you ought to have greater" thoughts, even of obtaining the empire, which the gods, out of" their concern for the habitable world, by taking Caius out of" the way, commit to thy virtuous conduct. Go to, therefore,*' and accept of the throne of thy ancestors." So they took himup and carried him, because he was not then able to go on foot,such was his dread and his joy at what was told him.
2. Now there was already gathered together about Gratus agreat number of the guards ; and when they saw Claudius car­ried off, they looked with a sad countenance, as supposing that hewas carried to execution for the mischiefs that had been latelydone ; while yet they thought him a man who never meddledwith public affairs all his life-long, and one that had met with nocontemptible dangers under the reign of Caius ; and some ofthem thought it reasonable, that the consuls should take cogni­zance of these matters ; and, as still more and more of the sol­diery
* How Claudius, another son of Drusus, which Drusus was the father of Oct-manicus, could be here himself called Germanicus, Suetonius informs us, whenhe assures us, that, by a decree of the senate, the sirname of Germanicm w*sbestowed upon Drusus, and his posterity also.—In Claud, ch. i.







OCR Output








WARS OF THE JEWS. Book I.


dn iinreproachable witness to Caesar of the great actions ofAntrpater.
5. "Whereupon Citsar encouraged Antipater to undertakeother hazardous enterprises for him, and that by giving himgreat commendations, and hopes of reward. In all which en­terprises he readily exposed himself to many dangers, and be­came a most courageous warrior ; and had many wounds almostall over his body, as demonstrations of his valour. And, whenCo:sar had settled the affairs of Egypt, and returning into Syriaagain, he gave him the privilege of a Roman citizen, and free­dom from taxes, and rendered him an object of admiration bythe honours and marks of friendship he bestowed upon him.On this account it was that he also confirmed Hyrcanus in thehigh-priesthood.
CHAP.. X.
Cxsar makes Antipattr procurator of Judta ; as does Antipaterappoint Phasael to be governor of Jerusalem, and Herod gover­nor of Galilee ; who, in same time, was called to answer forhimself [before the Sanhedrim'\t -where he is acquitted. SextusCifsar is treacherously tilled by Bassus, and is succeeded byMarcus.
j 1. A BOUT this time it was that Antigonus, the son of Aris-•**• tobulus, came to Caesar, and became, in a surprisingmanner, the occasion of Antipater's farther advancement; for,whereas he ought to have lamented that his father appeared tohave been poisoned on account of his quarrels with Pompey, andto have complained of Scipio's barbarity towards his brother, andnot to mix any invidious passion when he was suing for mercy ;besides those things, he came before Coesar, and accused Hyrca­nus and Antipater, how they had driven him and his brethren en­tirely out of their native country, and had acted in a great manyinstances unjustly and extravagantly with relation to their nation,and that as to the assistance they had sent him into Egypt, it wasnot done out of good-will to him, but out of the fear they werein from former quarrels, and in order to gain pardon for theirfriendship to [his enemy] Pompey.
2. Hereupon Antipater threw away his garments, and shewedthe multitude of the wounds he had, and said, that " as to his" good-will to Caesar, he had no occasion to say a word, because«' his body cried aloud. though he said nothing himself : that he«' wondered at Antigonus's boldness, while he was himself no" other than the son of an enemy to the Romans, and of a fugi-'• tive, and had it by inheritance from' his father to be fond of
" innovations







OCR Output








 


^arbart College Htbrarg.


THE PARKMAN COLLECTION.
BEQUEATHED BY
Francis f* ar k m a n ,
(H.C. 1844).


Received January /'. rflgt.







OCR Output








Hi ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book XVII.


cf taxes. Of which matter I shall treat more accurately inthe progress of this history *.
3. At length Zamaris the Babylonian, to whom Herod hadgiven that country for a possession, died ; having lived vir­tuously, and left children of a good character behind him;one of whom was Jacim, who was famous for his valour, andtaught his Babylonians how to ride their horses ; and a troop
. of them were guards to the fore-mentioned kings. And whenJzicim was dead in his old age, he left a son, whose name wasPhilip, one of great strength in his hands, and in other re­spects also more eminent for his valour than any of his con­temporaries ; on which account there was a confidence andfirm friendship between him and King Agrippa. He had alsoan army which he maintained, as great as that of 'a king ;which he exercised and led wheresoever he had occasion toinarch.
4. When the affairs of Herod were in the condition I havedescribed, all the public affairs depended upon Antipater ; andhis power was such, that he could do good turns to as manyas he pleased, and this by his father's concession, in hopes of.his good will and fidelity to him; and this till he ventured to.use his power still farther, because his wicked designs wereconcealed from his father, and he made him believe everything he said. He was also formidable to all, not so much'jpn account of the power and authority he had, as for theshrewdness of his vile attempts before-hand: but he whoprincipally cultivated a friendship with him was Pheroras,who received the like marks of his friendship ; while Anti-.pater had cunningly encompassed him about by a company ofwomen, whom he placed as guards about him : for Pheroraswas greatly enflaved to his wife, and to her mother, and toher sister ; and this notwithstanding the hatred he bare them,ior the indignities they had offered to his virgin daughters.Yet did he bear them, and nothing was to be done withoutthe women, who had got this man into their circle, and con­tinued still to assist each other in all things, insomuch thatAntipater was entirely addicted to them, both by himself andby his mother ; for these four women f said all one and thesame thing ; but the opinions of Pheroras and Antipater weredifferent in some points of no consequence. But the king'ssister [Salome] was their antagonist, who for a good whilehad looked about all their affairs, and was apprifed that thistheir friendship was made in order to do Herod some mischief,
and
» This is now wanting.
t Pheroras's wife, and her mother and sister, and Doris, Antipater'« nm.then







OCR Output








Chap. It. WARS OF THE JEWS. 3di


affairs], he tried to sift out the accounts of the money, and totake possession of the citadels. But the governors of those cita­dels were not unmindful of the commands laid upon them byArchelaus, and continued to guard them, and said, the custodyof them rather belonged to Caesar, than to Archelaus.
3. In the mean time Antipas went also to Rome, to strive forthe kingdom, and to insist that the former testament, whereinhe was named to be king, was valid before the latter testa­ment. Salome had also promised to assist him, as had many ofArchelaus's kindred, who sailed along with Archelaus himselfalso. He also carried along with him his mother, and Ptolemy,the brother of Nicolaus, who seemed one of great weight, on'account of the great trust Herod put in him, he having been oneof his most honoured friends. However, Antipas dependedchiefly uponlreneus, the orator; upon whose authority he hadrejected such as advised him to yield to Archelaus, because hewas his elder brother, and because the second testament gavethe kingdom to him. The inclinations also of all Archelaus'skindred, who hated him, were removed to Antipas, when theycame to Rome, although in the first place every one rather de­sired to live under their own laws, [without a king], and to beunder a Roman governor; but if they should fail in thatpoint^these desired that Antipas might be their king.
4. Sabinus did also afford these his assistance to the samepurpose, by the letters he sent, wherein he accused Archelausbefore Caesar, and highly commended Antipas. Salome also>and those with her, put the crimes which they accused Arche^laus of in order, and put them into Caesar's hands: and afterthey had done that, Archelaus xyrote down the reasons of hisclaim, and, by Ptolemy, sent in his fathers ring, and his father'saccounts. And when Caesar had maturely weighed by himselfwhat both had to alledge for themselves, as also had consideredof the great burden of the kingdom, and largeness of the reve-fiues, and withal the number of the children Herod had left be-ihind him, and had moreover read the letters he had receivedfrom Varus and Sabinus on this occasion, he assembled the;principal persons among the Romans together; (in which as­sembly Caius, the son of Agrippa, and his daughter Julias, butby himself adopted for his own son, sat in the first seat), andgave the pleaders leave to speak.
5. Then stood up Salome's son, Antipaterj (Vho of all Ar<-chtlaus's antagonists was the shrewdest pleader), and accusedhim in the following speech: " That Archelaus did in words" contend for the kingdom, but that in deeds he had long exer.a" cised royal authority, and so did but insult Gaesar in desiring
VOL. JIL " Z -L "to







OCR Output








Chap. VIII. AN-TIQJJITIES OF THE JEWS. ©1


angry at her, and sent her with Herod into banishment, and gaveher estate to Agrippa. And thus did God punish Herodias forher envy at her brother, and Herod also for giving ear to thevain discourses of a woman. Now, t/aius managed public af­fairs with great magnanimity, during the first and second year ofhis reign, and behaved himself with such moderation, that hegained the good-will of the Romans themselves, and of his othersubjects. But, in process of time, he went beyond the bounds ofhuman nature, in his conceit of himself, and by reason of the vast-ness of his dominions, made himself a god, and took upon him-«elf to a'ct in 'all -things to the reproach of the Deity itself.


CHAP. VIII.
Concerning * the amlassqge of the Jews to Caius ,- and Ixw Caiussent Petronius into Syria to make war against the Jew, unlessthey would receive bis statue.
§ 1. ' I 'HERE was now a tumult arisen al Alexandria, betweenthe Jewish inhabitants and the Greeks ; and three fambassadors were chosen out of each party that were at variance,who came to Caius. Now, one of these ambassadors from thepeople of Alexandria, was Apion, who uttered many blasphemiesagainst the Jews ; and, among other things that he said, he char­ged them with neglecting the honours that belonged to Caesar; forthat while all who were subject to the Roman empire b,uilt altarsand temples to Caius, and in other regards universally receivedhim as they received the gods. these Jews alone thought it a dis­honourable thing for them to erect statues in honour of him, aswell as to swear by his name. Many of these severe things weresaid by Apion, by which he hoped to provoke Caius to anger atthe Jews, as he was likely to be ; but Philo, the principal ofthe Jewish ambassage, a man eminent on all accounts, brother to
M 2 Alexander


» This is a most remarkable chapter, as containing such instances of the in-terpocition of Providence, as have been always 'very rare among the other ido­latrous nations, but of old very many among the pos erify ot Abraham, the wor­shippers of the time God; nor do these seem much inferior to those in the OMTestament, which are the more remarkable, because, among all other follies andvices, the Jews were not at this time idolaters; and the deliverances here men-tioned were done in order to prevent their relapse into that idolatry'
t Josephus here assures us. that the ambassadors from Alexandria to' Cainswere on each part no more than three in number, for the Jews, and for the Gen.tiles' which are but six in all: whereas Philo, who was the principal ambassa­dor from the Jews, as Josepnus here confesses (as was Apion for the Gentiles),viys, the Jews ambassadors were themselves no fewer than five, towards the endof his legation to Caius; which, if there be no nrstake in the copies, must beSupposed the truth ; nor, in that case, would Josephus have contradicted so au­thentic a witness, had he sven that account of Philo's«; which that he ever did,Mies not appear.







OCR Output








Chap. XXVII. WARS OF THE JEWS. 333


did not they confess any thing of what the king had been inform­ed; but a certain letter was produced, as written by Alexanderto the governor of a castle, to desire him to receive him and A-ristobulus into the castle when he had killed his father, and togive them weapons, and what other assistance he could, upon thatoccasion. Alexander said, that this letter was a forgery of Dio-phantus. ThisDiophantuswasthe king's secretary, a bold man,and cunning in counterfeiting any one's hand; and after he hadcounterfeited a great numberj^he was at last put to death for it.Herod did also order the governor of the castle to be tortured,but got nothing out of him of what the accusations suggested.
4. However, although Herod fonnd the proofs too weak, hegave order to have his sons kept in custody; for till'now theyhad been at liberty. He also called that pest of his family, andforger of all this vile accusation, Eurycles, his saviour and be­nefactor, and gave him a reward of fifty talents. Upon whichhe prevented any accurate accounts that could come of what hehad done, by going immediately into Cappadocia, and there hegot money of Archelaus, having the impudence to pretend thathe had reconciled Herod to Alexander. He thence passed overinto Greece, and used what he had thus wickedly gotten to thelike wicked purposes. Accordingly, he was twice accused be­fore Caesar, that he had filled Achaiawith sedition, and had plun­dered its cities; and so he was sent into banishment. And thuswas he punished far what wicked actions he had been guilty of,about Aristobulus and Alexander.
5. But it will be now worth while to put Euaratos of Cos inOpposition to this Spartan ; for as he was one of Alexander'smost intimate friends, and came to him in his travels at the sametime that Eurycles came, so the king put the question to him,whetherthose things of which Alexander was accusedweretrue?He assured him upon oath, that he had never heard any suchthings from the young men; yet did this testimony avail no­thing for the clearing those miserable creatures; for Herodwas only disposed and most ready to hearken to what made a-gainst them ; and every one was most agreeable to him, thatwould believe they were guilty, and shewed their indignation atthem.
CHAP. XXVII.
Herod, ly Cxsar's direction, accuses hit sons at fcerytus. Tt>eyare not produced before the court, but yet are condemned; andin a little time they are sent to Sebaste, and strangled thert.
§ 1. A/T OREO VER Salome exasperated Herod's cruelty a-i-YJL gainst his sons; for Aristobulus was desirous tobring
her,







OCR Output








S54 WARS OF THE JRW3. Book I.


then made an expedition against the Jews ; but when he was af­terward driven away by Simeon, who was Jonathan's brother,and was enraged at his defeat, he put Jonathan to death.
2. However, Simeon managed the public affairs after a cou­rageous manner, and took Gazara, and Joppa, and Jamnia, whichwere cities in the neighbourhood. He also got the garrison un­der, and demolished the citadel. He was afterward an auxiliaryto Antiochus, against Trypho, whom he besieged in Dora, beforelie went on his expedition against the Medes ; yet could not hemake the king ashamed of his ambition, though he had assistedhim in killing Trypho ; for it was not long ere Antiochus sentCendebeus his general with an army to lay waste Judea, and to-subdue Simeon ; yet he, though he were now in years, conduct­ed the war as if he were a much younger man. He also sent hishons with a band of strong men against Antiochus, while he tookpart of the army himself with him, and fell upon him from ano­ther quarter : lie also laid a great many men in ambush in manyplaces of the mountains, and was superior in all his attacks uponthem ; and when he had been conqueror after so glorious a man­ner, he was high-priest, and also freed the Jews from the domi­nion of the Macedonians, after an hundred and seventy years ofthe empire [of Seleucus],
3. This Simeon also had a plot laid against him, and was slainat a feast by his son-in-law Ptolemy, who put his wife and twosons into prison, and sent some persons to kill John, who was al-'so * called Hyrcanus. But when the young man was informedof their coming beforehand, he made haste to get to the city, ashaving a very great confidence in the people there, both on ac­count of the memory of the glorious actions of his father, andof the hatred they could not but bear to the injustice of Ptolemy.Ptolemy also made an attempt to get into the city by anothergate ; but was repelled by the people, who had just then admit­ted' Hyrcanus ; so he retired presently to one of the fortressesthat were about Jericho, which was called Dagon. Now, when.Hyrcanus had received the high-priesthood, which Uis fatherhad held before, and had offered sacrifice to God, he madegreat haste to attack Ptolemy, that he might afford relief to hismother and brethren.
4. So he laid siege to the fortress, and was superior to Ptolemy
in


* Why this Johntbe son of Simeon, the high-priest, and governor of the Jews,was called Hyrcanus, Josephus no where informs us; nor is he called other thanJohn at the end of the first book of the Maccabees. However, Sixtus Senensis,when he gives us an epitome of the Greek version of the book here abridged byJosephus, or of the Chronicles of this John Hyrcanus, then extant, assures us thathe was called Hyrcanus from his conquest of one of that name. See Authent. Rec.' Part I. p. 27. Bat of this younger Antiochus, see Dean Aldrich's note here.







OCR Output








Chap. IV. WARS OF THE Jfiws. 259


" I have committed ; bat the vengeance of the blood of my kins-" man pursues me hastily. O thon most impudent body ! how" long xvilt thoa retaia a soul that ought to die 0:1 account of that> " punishment it ought to suffer for a mother and a brother slain !" how long shall I myself spend my blood drop by drop ? let" them take it all at once ; and let their ghosts no longer be dis-" appointed by a few parcels of my bowels offered to them."As soon as he had said these words, he presently died, when hehad reigned no longer than a year.
CHAP. IV.
What actions "Mere done by Alexander jf&nneuS) who reigned.• • twenty-seven years.
§ 1, AND now the king's wife loosed the king's brethren,•j' and made Alexander king, who appeared both elderi;i age, and more moderate iu his temper than the rest; who,when he came to the government, slew one of his brethren, asaffecting to govern himself; but had tl>e other of them in greatesteem, as loving a quiet life, without meddling with public af-fairs.
2. Now it happened, that there was a battle between him andPtolemy, who was called Lathyrus, who had taken the city Aso-chis. He' indeed slew a great many of his enemies, but the vie.tory rather inclined to Ptolemy. But, when this Ptolemy waspursued by his mother Cleopatra, and retired into Egypt, Alex­ander besieged Gadara, and took it; as also he did Amathus,which was the strongest of all the fortresses that were aboutJordan, and therein were the most precious of all the posses­sions of Theodorus, the sou of Zeno. Whereupon Theodorasmarched against him, and took what belonged to himself, aswell as the king's baggage, and slew ten thousand of the .Tews.However, Alexander recovered this blow, and turned his forcetowards the maritime parts, and took Raphia, and Gaza, withAnthedon also, which was afterwards called Agrippias by kingHerod.
3. But when he had made slaves of the citizens of all these ci­ties, the nation of the Jews made an insurrection against him at afestival; for at those feasts seditions are generally begun, and itlooked as if he should not be able to escape the plot they had laidfor him, had not his foreign auxiliaries, the Pisidians and Cici-lians, assisted him; for, as to the Syrians, he never admitted themamong his mercenary troops, on account of their innate enmityagainst the Jewish nation. And when he had slain more than sixthousand of the rebels, he made an incursion into Arabia, andivhen he had taken that country, together with the Gileadites
K k a and







OCR Output








424 WARS OF THE JEWS, Book II.


thousand of them lay dead upon heaps ; nor had the remainderbeen preserved,had they not betaken themselves to supplication.So Alexander commiserated their condition, and gave orders tothe Romans to retire: accordingly, these being accustomed toobey orders, left off killing at the first intimation ; but the po­pulace of Alexandria bare so very great hatred to the Jews, thatit was difficult to recal them, and it was an hard thing to makethem leave their dead bodies.
0. And this was the miserable calamity which at this timebefel the Jews at Alexandria. Hereupon Cestius thought fit nolonger to lie still, while the Jews were every where up in arms;so he lookout of Antioch the twelfth legion entire, and out of eachof the rest he selected two thousand, with six cohorts of footmen,and four troops of horsemen,besides those auxiliaries which weresent by the kings; of which* Antiochus sent two thousand horse­men, and three thousand footmen, with as many archers ; andAgrippa sent the same number of footmen, and one thousandhorsemen ; Sohemus also followed with four thousand, a thirdpart whereof were horsemen, but most part were archers, andthus did he march to Ptolemais. There were also great num­bers of auxiliaries gathered together from the [free] cities, whoindeed had not the sameskillin martial affairs,but madeupin theiralacrity,andin their hatred to the Jews what they wanted in skill.There came also along with Cestius, Agrippa himself, both as aguide in his march of the country, and a director what was fit tobe done; so Cestius took part of his forces, and marched hastilyto Zabulon, a strong city of Galilee, which was called the cityof men, and divides the country of Ptolemais from our nation:this he found deserted by its men, the multitude having fled tothe mountains, but full of all sorts of good things j those he gaveleave to the soldiers to plunder, and set fire to the city, althoughit was of admirable beauty, and had its houses built like those inTyre, and Sidon, and Berytus. After this he over-ran all thecountry, and seized upon whatsoever came in his way, and setfire to the villages that were round about them, and then return­ed to Ptolemais. But when the Syrians, and especially those ofBerytus, were busy in plundering, the Jews pulled up their cou­rage again, for they knew that Cestius was retired, and fell uponthose that were left behind unexpectedly, and destroyed abouttwo thousand of them.
10. And now Cestiushimself marched from Ptolemais and cameto Cesarea; but he sent part of his army before him to Joppa,
and


* Spanheim notes on the place, that this later Antiochui, who wai called Efi-ptamei, is mentioned by Dio, LIX. page 645. and that he is mentioned by Josi phus-elsewhere twice al»o, B. V. ch' xi. § 3. vol. 111. and Aatiq. B, XIX, cb, tiii. $ itvol III.







OCR Output








Chap. V. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS; 17


ting on a countenance suitable to his sad case, made them cotn-tniserate the same ; insomuch that his very enemies were mc^ved to compassion ; and it appeared plainly that Herod himselfwas affected in his own mind, although he was not willing itshould be taken notice of. Then did Nicolaus begin to prose­cute what the king had begun, and that with great bitterness ;and summed up all the evidence which arose from the tortures,or from the testimonies. " He principally and largely cried up" the king's virtues, which he had exhibited in the maintenance" and education of his sons ; while he never could gain any ad-" vantage thereby, but still fell from one misfortune to another;" Although he owned that he was not so much surprised with" that thoughtless behaviour of his former sons, who were but" young, and were besides corrupted by wicked counsellors;'' who were the occasion of their wiping out of their minds the'' righteous dictates of nature, and this out of a desire of coming'' to the government sooner than they ought to do ; yet that he" could not but justly stand amazed at the horrid wickedness of" Antipater, who, although he had not only had great benefits" bestowed on him by his father, enough to tame his reason, yet'' could not be more tamed than the most envenomed serpents ;'' whereas even those creatures admit of some mitigation, and'' will not bite their benefactors, while Antipater hath not let'' the misfortunes of his brethren be any hindrance to him, but" he hath gone on to imitate their barbarity notwithstanding.'' Yet wast thou, O Antipater ! (as thou hast thyself confessed)," the informer as to what wicked actions they had done, and the" searcher out of the evidence against them, and the author of'' the punishment they underwent upon their detection. Nor'' do we say this as accusing thee for being so zealous in thy an-'' ger against them, but are astonished at thy endeavours to imi-" tate their profligate behaviour ; and we discover thereby, that" thou didst not act thus for the safety of thy father, but for the" destructioa of thy brethren, that by such outside hatred of their'' impiety, thou mightest be believed a lover of thy father, and" mightest thereby get thee power enough to do mischief with'' the greatest impunity ; which design thy actions indeed demon-" strate. It is true, thou tookest thy brethren off, because thou" didst convict them of their wicked designs ; but thou didst not"yield up to justice those who were.their partners ; and there-" by didst make it evident to all men, that thou madest a cove-" nant with them against thy father, when thou chosest to be" the accuser of thy brethren, as desirous to gain to thyself alone" this advantage of laying plots to kill thy father; and so to en-
. ' c "







OCR Output








20* THE LIFE Of FLAVIUS JOSEPHUS.


that should be their governors hereafter, as if they were notlikely to be faithful to them neither.
18. But, before I had spoken all I designed, I heard one ofmy own domestics bidding me come down ; for that it was not aproper time to take care of retaining the good-will of the peopleof Tiberias, but to provide for my own safety, and escape myenemies there ; for John had chosen the most trusty of those armedmen that were about him out of those thousand that he had withhim, and had given them orders, when he sent them, to kill me,having learned that I was alone, excepting some of my domestics.So those that were sent came as they were ordered, and they hadexecuted what they came about, had I not leaped down from theelevation I stood on, and with one of my guards, whose namewas James, been carried [out of the crowd] upon the back ofone Herod of Tiberias, and guided by him down to the lake,where I seized a ship, and got into it, and escaped my enemiesunexpectedly, and came to Taricheae.
19. Now, as soon as the inhabitants of that city understood theperfidiousness of the people of Tiberias, they were greatly pro­voked at them. So they snatched up their arms, and desired meto be their leader against them ; for they said they would avengetheir commander's cause upon them. They also carried the re­port of what had been done to me to all the Galileans, and ea­gerly endeavoured to irritate them against the people of Tibe­rias, and desired that vast numbers of them would get together,and come to them, that they might act in concert with their com­mander, what should be determined as fit to be done. Accord­ingly, the Galileans came to me in great numbers, from all parts,with their weapons, and besought me to assault Tiberias, to takeit by force, and to demolish it, till it lay even with the ground,and then to make slaves of its inhabitants, with their wives andchildren. Those that were Josephus' friends also, and had esca­ped out of Tiberias, gave him the same advice. But I did notcomply with them, thinking it a terrible thing to begin a civilwar among them ; for I thought that this contention ought notto proceed farther than words ; nay, I told them that it was notfor their own advantage to do what they would have me to do,while the Romans expected no other than that we should- de­stroy one another by our mutual seditions. And by saying this,I put a stop to the anger of the Galileans.
20. But now John was afraid for himself, since his treacheryhad proved unsuccessful. So he took the armed men that wereabout him, and removed from Tiberias to Gischala, and wrote tome to apologise for himself concerning what had been done, asif it had been done without his approbation, and desired me to
have







OCR Output








Chap. X. WARS OF THE JEWS. 27a


7. Now Hyrcanus was, by degrees, inflamed with these dis­courses, and at length could bear no longer, but he summonedHerod to take his trial. Accordingly, by his father's advice, andas soon as the affairs of Galilee would give him leave, he cameup to [Jerusalem], when he had first placed garrisons in Galilee :however, he came with a sufficient body of soldiers, so many in­deed that he might not appear to have with him an army able tooverthrow Hyrcanus's government, nor yet so few as to exposehim to the insults of those that envied him. However, SextusCaesar was in fear for the young man, lest he should be takenby his enemies, and brought to punishment; so he sent some todenounce expressly to Hyrcanus, that he should acquit Herodof the capital charge against him ; who acquitted him according­ly, as being otherwise inclined also so to do, for he loved Herod.
8. But Herod, supposing that he had escaped punishment, withthe consent of the king, retired to Sextus, to Damascus, and gotevery thing ready in order not to obey him, if he should summonshim again ; whereupon those that were evil disposed irritatedHyrcanus, and told him, that Herod was gone away in anger,and was prepared to make war upon him ; and as the king be­lieved what they said, he knew not what to do, since he saw hisantagonist was stronger than he was himself. And now, sinceHerod was made general of Celefyria, and Samaria, by SextusCaesar, he was formidable, not only from the good-will which thenation bore him, but by the power he himself had ; insomuch,that Hyrcanus fell into the utmost degree of terror, and expect­ed he would presently march against them with his army.
9. Nor was he mistaken in the conjecture he made, for He­rod got his army together, out of the anger he bare him for histhreatening him with the accusation in a public court, and led itto Jerusalem, in order to throw Hyrcanus down from his king­dom ; and this he had soon done, unless his father and brotherhad gone out together and broken the force of his fury, and thisby exhorting him to carry his revenge no farther than to threat­ening and affrighting, but to spare the king, under whom he hadbeen advanced to such a degree of power ; and that he ought notto be so much provoked at his being tried, as to forget to bethankful that he was acquitted ; nor so long to think upon whatwas of a melancholy nature, as to be ungrateful for his deliver­ance ; and if we ought to reckon that God is the arbitrator ofsuccess in war, an unjust cause is of more disadvantage than an.army can be of advantage ; and that therefore he ought not tobe entirely confident of success in a case where he is to fightagainst his king, his supporter, and one that had often been his be­nefactor, and that had never been severe to him, any otherwise
than







OCR Output








WARS Of THE JEWS. Book II.


" rejecting any person's sacrifice (which would be the highest" instance of impiety), that they had themselves placed those" donations about the temple which were still visible, and had" remained there so long a time: that they did now irritate the" Romans to take arms against them, and invited them to make" war upon them, and brought up novel rulersof a strange divine" worship, and determineci to run the hazard of having their" city condemned for impiety, while they would not allow any" foreigner but Jews only either to sacrifice or to worship there-'" in. And if such a law should be introduced in the case of atf single private person only, he would have indignation at it, as«' an instance of inhumanity determined against him; while they" have no regard to the Romans or to Ceesar, and forbid even" their oblations to'be received also: that however they cannot" but fear, lest by his rejecting their sacrifices, they shall not"be allowed to offer their own; and that this city will lose its" principality, unless they grow wiser quickly, and restore the."sacrifices as formerly, and indeed amend the injury [they" have offered foreigners] before the report of it comes to the"ears of those that have been injured."
4. And as they said these things, they produced those prieststhat Were skilful in the customs of their country, who made thereport, That " all their forefathers had received the sacrifices" from foreign nations." But still not one of the innovatorswould hearken to what was said; nay, those that ministered a-bout the temple would not attend their divine service, but werepreparing matters for beginning the war. So the men of power,perceiving that the sedition was too hard for them to subdue,and that the danger which would arise from the Romans wouldcome upon them first of all; endeavoured to save themselves, andsent ambassadors, some to Florus, the chief of which was Simonthe son of Ananias; and others to Agrippa, among whom themost eminent were Saul and Antipas, and Costobarus, who wereof the king's kin'dred; and they desired of them both that theywould come with an army to'the city, and cut off the sedition be­fore it should be too hard to be subdued. Now this terriblemessage was good news to Florus; and because his design wasto have a war kindled, he gave the ambassadors no answer at all.But Agrippa was equally Solicitous for those that were revolt­ing, and for those against whom the war was to be made, andwas 'dtesirous to preserve the Jews for the Romans, and the tem­ple a,n<J metropolis for the Jews; he was also sensible that it wasnot'for his own advantage that: 'the disturbances should proceed;so'he sent three thousand horsemen to the assistance of the peo-j^out'of^Auranitis and'Ba'tanea, and Trachonitis, and"these• d-i^rj-j. under







OCR Output








.Ii' : ,r'\- i i-ii' .


L I F E
. - ' . . '.. . or . - .-v
FLAVIUS JOSEPHUS.


 


) 1. HPHE family from which I am derived is not an ignoble4i one, but hath descended all along from the priests ; andas nobility among several people is of a different origin, so withus to be of a sacerdotal dignity, is an indication of the splendourof a family. Now, I am not only, sprung from a sacerdotal farmily in general, but from the first of the twenty-four* courses;and as among us there is not only a considerable difference be­tween one family of each course and another, 1 am of the chieffamily of that first course also; nay, farther, by my mother Iam of the royal blood ; for the children of Asamoneus, fromwhom that family was derived, had both the office of the high-priesthood, and the dignity of a king, for a long time together. Iwill accordingly set down my progenitors in order. My grand­father's father was named Simon, with the addition of Psellus :he lived at the same time with that son of Simon the high-priest,who first of all the high-priests was named Hyrcanus. This Si­mon Psellus had nine sons, one of which was Matthias, calledEphlias ; he married the daughter of Jonathan the high-priest,which Jonathan was the first of the sons of Asamoneus whowas high-priest, and was the brother of Simon the high-priestalso. This Matthias had a son called Matthias Curtus, and thatin the first year of the government of Hyrcanus ; his son's namewas Joseph, born in the ninth year of the reign of Alexandra:his son Matthias was born in the tenth year of the reign of Ar-
chelaus:
* We may hence correct the error of the Latin copy of the second bookagainst Apion, sect. 7. 8. '(for the Greek is there lost), which says, there werethen only four tribes of courses of the priests instead of twenty-four. Nor isthis testimony to be disregarded, as if Josephus there contradicted what he hadaffirmed here i because even the account there given better agrees to twenty-fourthan to four courses, while he says that each of those courses contained above5000 men, which, multiplied by only four, will make not more than 20,000priests: whereas the number 120,000, as multiplied by 14, seems much the mostprobable, they being about one-tenth of the whole people, even after the capti­vity. See Ezra. ii. 36—30—Nehem. vii. 39.—42. 1. Esd. v. 24, 25. with Ezra,ii. 64. Nehem. vii. 66. 1 Esd. v. 41. Nor will this common reading or notionof but four courses of priests, agree with Josephus's own farther assertion else­where, Antiq. B. VII. ch. xiv. sect. 7. that David's partition of the priests intotwenty.four courses had continued to that day.







OCR Output








.-> Chap. XXII. WAR THE QF JEWS. 443


<*
war with the Romans. Now in Jerusalem the high-priestAnanus, and as many of the men of power as were not in the in­terest of the Romans, both repaired the walls, and made a greatmany warlike instruments, insomuch that in all parts of thecity darts and all sorts of armour were upon the anvil. Al­though the multitude of the young men were engaged in exer­cises, without any regularity, and all places were full of tu­multuous doings: but the moderate sort were exceedingly sad,and a great many there were who, out of the prospect they hadof the calamities that were coming upon them, made great la-mentations. There were also such omens observed as were un­derstood to be forerunners of evils, by such as loved peace, butwere by those that kindled thejwar interpreted so as to suit theirown inclinations ; and the very state of the city, even b.efore theRomans came against it, was that of a place doomed to destruc­tion. However, Ananus's concern was this, to lay aside, for awhile, the preparations for the war, and to persuade the seditiousto consult their own interest, and to restrain the madness of thosethat had the name of zealots ; but their violence was too hardfor him, and what end he came to we shall relate hereafter.
2. But as for the Acrabbene tpparchy, Simon, the son ofGioras, got a great number of those that were fond of innova*tions together, and betook himself to ravage the country; nordid he only harrass the rich mens houses, but tormented theirbodies, and appeared openly and before-hand to affect tyranny i^his government. And when an army was sent against him byAnanus, and the other rulers, he and his band retired to therobbers that were at Masada, and staid there, and plundered thecountry of Idumea^with them, till both Ananus, and his otheradversaries were slain, and until the rulers of that country werego afflicted with the multitude of those that were slain, and withthe continual ravage of what they had, that they raised an army,*ind put garrisons into th? villages, to secure them from thoseinsults; and in this state were the affairs of Judea at that tipne.


PUP or VoLUM? THIRD.







OCR Output








124 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book XIX;


gave them, by which he had purchased their kindness to him :so they drew their swords, and Sabinus led them on. He wasone of the tribunes, not by the means of the virtuous actions ofhis progenitors, for he had been a gladiator, but he had obtainedthat post in the army by his having a robust body. So theseGermans marched along the houses in quest of Cassar's murder­ers, and cut Asprenas to pieces, because he was the first man theyfell upon, and whose garment it was that the blood of the sacri­fices stained, as 1 have said already, and which foretold that thishis meeting the soldiers would not be for his good. Then didNorbanus meet them, who was one of the principal nobility ofthe cfty, and could shew many generals of armies among his an­cestors ; but they paid no regard to his dignity ; yet was he ofsuch great strength, that he wrested the sword of the first of thosethat assaulted him out of his hands, and appeared plainly not tobe willing to die without a struggle for his life, until he Was sur­rounded by a great number of assailants, and died by the multi­tude 'of the wounds which they gave him. The third manwas Anteius, a senator, and a few others with him. He did notmeet with these Germans by chance, as the rest did before, butcame to shew his hatred to Caius, and because he loved to seeCaius lie dead with his own eyes, and took a pleasure in thatfight; for Caius had banished Antcius's father, who was of thesame name with himself, and, being not satisfied with that, hesent out his soldiers, and slew him; so he was come to rejoice atthe sight of him, now he was dead. But as the house was nowall in a tumult, when he was aiming to hide himself, he couldnot escape that accurate search which the Germans made, whilethey barbarously slew those that were guilty, and those that werenot guilty, and this equally also. And thus were these [three}persons slain.
. 10. Bnt when the rumour that Caius was slain reached thetheatre, they were astonished at it, and could not believe it :even some that entertained his destruction with great pleasure,and were more desirous of its happening than almost any othersatisfaction that could come to them, were under such a fear,that they could not believe it. There were also those whogreatly distrusted it, because they were unwilling that any suchthing should come to Caius, nor could believe it, though it wereever so true, because they thought no man could possibly haveso much power as to kill Caius. These were the women, andthe children, and the slaves, and some of the soldiery. This lastsort hud taken his pay, and in a manner tyrannized with him,and h;id abused the best of his citizens, in being subservient tohis.unjust commands, in order to gaiu honours and advantages
to







OCR Output








WARS OF THE JEWS. Book II.


I
" of Scipio. Nor indeed have the Cyrenians, derived from the" Lacedemonians, nor the Marmaridae, a nation extended as far'' as the regions uninhabitable for want of water, nor have the'' Syrtes, a place terrible to such as barely tear it described," the Nasamons and Moors, and the immense multitude of the'' Numidians, been able to put a stop to the Roman valour.'' And as for the third part of the habitable earth, [Africa},'' whose nations are so many that it is not easy to number them," and which is bounded by the Atlantic sea and the pillars of" Hercules, and feeds an innumberable multitude of Ethiopians,'' as far as the Red Sea, these have the Romans subdued entire-" ly. And besides the annual fruits of the earth, which main-'' tain the multitude of the Romans for eight months in the'' year, this, over and above, pays all sorts of tribute, and af-" fords revenues suitable to the necessities of the government?" Nor do they, like you, esteem such injunctions a disgrace to'' them, although they have but one Roman legion that abides'' among them. And indeed what occasion is there for shew-" ing you the power of the Romans over remote countries,1? when jt is so easy to learn it from Egypt, in your neighbour-'' hood ? This country is extended as far as the Ethiopians,"' and Arabia the Happy, and borders upon India; it hath se-" ven millions five hundred thousand men, besides the inhabi-'' tants of Alexandria, as may be learned from the revenue of"' 'the pole tax; yet it is not ashamed to submit to the Roman'' government, although it hath Alexandria as a grand tempta-'' tion to a revolt, by reason it is so full of people and of rich-" es, and is besides exceeding large, its length being thirty fur-'' longs, and its breadth no less than ten; and it pays more tri-" bute to the Romans in one month than you do in a year; nay," besides what it pays in money, it sends corn to Rome that" supports it for four months [in the year]: it is also walled" round on all sides, either by almost impassible deserts, or seas11 that have no havens, or by rivers, or by lakes; yet have none" of these things been found too strong for the Roman good« fortune; however, two legions that lie in that city are a bri-" die both for the remoter parts'of Egypt, and for the parts in-" habited by the more noble Maced -mans. Where then are" those people whom you are to have for your auxiliaries ?" Must they come from the parts of the world that are uiiin-«« habited? for all that are in the habitable earth are [under the}'' Romans. Unless any of you extend his hopes as far as beyond" the Euphrates, and suppose that those of your own nation that" dwell in Adiabene will come to your assistance; but certain.** ly those will not embarrass themselves with an unjustifiable
"war,







OCR Output








Chap. XXXIII. WARS OF THE JEWS. 357


deceased. There was a bier all of gold, embroidered with pre­cious stones, and a purple bed of various contexture, with thedead body upon it, covered with purple; and a diadem was putupon his head, and a crown of gold above it, and a sceptre inhis right hand; and near to the bier were Herod's sons, and amultitude of his kindred; next to which came his guards, andthe regiment of Thracians, the Germans also and Galls, all ac-coutered as if they were going to war; but the rest of the ar­my went foremost, armed, and following their captains and offi­cers in a regular manner; after whom, five hundred of his do­mestic servants and freed-men followed with sweet spices intheir hands: and the body was carried two hundred furlongs, toHerodium, where he had given order to be buried. And thisshall suffice for the conclusion of the life of Herod.


BOOK







OCR Output








412 WARS OF THE JEWS. Book II.


" concerns not those Jews that dwell here only, but those of** them which dwell in others cities also; for there is no people*' upon the habitable earth which have not some portion of you" among them, whom your enemies will slay, in case you go to" war, and on that account also; and so every city which hath" Jews in it will be filled with slaughter for the sakeof afew men," and they who slay them will be pardoned: but if that slaugh-" ter be not made by them, consider how wicked a thing it is" to take arms against those that are so kind to you. Have pity," therefore, if not on your and children wives, yet upon this" your metropolis, and its sacred walls; spare the temple, and" preserve the holy house, with its holy furniture, for yourselves;" for if the Romans get you under their power, they will no" longer abstain from them when their former abstinence shall" have been so ungratefully requitted. I call to witness your" sanctuary, and the holy angels of God, and this country com-" mon to us all, that I have not kept back any thing that is for" your preservation ; and if you will follow that advice which" you ought to do, you will have that peace which will be" common to you and to me; but if you indulge your pas-«' sions, you will run those hazards which I shall be free from."5. When Agrippahadspoken thus,both he and hissister wept,and by their tears repressed a great deal of the violence of thepeople, but still they cried out. That " they would not fight a-« gainst the Romans, but against Florus, on account of what« they had suffered by his means." To which Agrippa replied,« that what they had already done was like such as make war«i against the Romans; for you have not paid the * tribute«« which is due to Caesar; and you have cut off the cloisters [of«i the temple] from joining to the tower Antonia. You will'« therefore prevent any occasion of revolt if you will but join« these together again, and if you will but pay your tribute;" for the citadol does not now belong to Florus, nor are you to" pay the tribute money to Florus.^'
* '.*"
CHAP. XVII.
Hotv tie war of tbf Jews with the Romans began. And con­cerning Manabem.
9 1. r I i HIS advice the people hearkened to, and went up into
• ,L the temple with the king and Bernice, and began torebuild the cloisters: the rulers also and senators divided them-
,i selves


* Julius C.tsar had decreed, that the Jew: of Jerusalem should pay an annualtribute to the Romans, excepting the city Joppa, and for the Sabbatical year ; a*Spanheim observes from the Antiq. B, XIV. ch. x. § 6. vol. II.







OCR Output








pg ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Bopk XVII.


were to row among the mariners; but slewJiim that inducedhim to do what he had done ; for as for the people of Melos,he thought them sufficiently punished, in having thrown awayso much of their money upon this spurious Alexander. Andsuch was the ignominious conclusion of this bold contrivance a-rbout the spurious Alexander^ . • . ,.-. -r.. .:
i. • , - . • .
CHAP. XIII.
How ArcT}elaust upon a second Accusation, -Mas latusbed toVienna.


Archelaus was entered on his ethnarchy, andwas come into Judea, he accused .loazar, the son ofBoethus, of assisting the seditious, and took away the high-priest-hood from him, and put Eleazer his brother in his place. Healso magnificently rebuilt the royal palace that had been at Jeri­cho, and he diverted half the water with which the village ofNeara used to be watered, and drew off that water into the plain,to water those palm-trees which he had there planted , he alsobuilt a village, and put his own name upon it, and called itArchekis. Moreover, he * transgressed the law of our fathers,and married Glaphyra, the daughter of Archelaus, who hadbeen the wife of his brother Alexander, which Alexander hadthree children by her, while it was a thing detestable among theJews, to marry the brother's wife ; nor did this Eleazer abidelong in the high-priesthood, Jesus, the son of Sie, being put inhis room while he was still living.
2. But in the tenth year of Archelaus's government, both hisbrethren, and the principal men of Judea and Samafia, notbeing able to bear his barbarous and tyrannical usage of them;accused him before Caesar, and that especially because they knewhe had broken the commauds of Caesar, which obliged him tobehave himself with moderation among them. WhereuponCaesar, when he heard it, was very angry, and called for Arche­laus's steward, who took care of his affairs at Rome, and whosename was Archelaus also, and thinking it beneath him to writeto Archelaus, he bid him sail away as soon as possible, and bringhim to us ; so the man made haste in his voyage, and when hecame into Judea he found Archelaus feasting with his friends ;BO he told him what Ctcsar had sent him about, and hastened himaway. And when he was come [to Rome], Caesar, upon hear­ing what certain accusers of his had to say, and what reply he
could


* Spanheim seasonably observes here, that it was forbidden th'e Jews to marrytheir brother's wife, when she had children by her first husband, and that 2p-aoras (cites, or) interprets the clause before us accordingly.







OCR Output








432 WARS OF THE JEWS. Book II.


2. In the mean time, the people of Damascus, when theywere informed of the destruction of the Romans, set about theslaughter of those Jews that were among them; and as they hadthem already cooped up together in the place of public exercises,which they had done out of the suspicion they had of them,they thought they should meet with no difficulty in the attempt;yet did they distrust their own wives, which were almost allof them addicted to the Jewish religion; on which account itwas that their greatest concern was, how they might concealthese things from them; so they came upon the Jews, and cuttheir throats, as being in a narrow place, in number ten thou­sand, and all of them unarmed, and this in one hour's time,without any body to disturb them.
3. But as to those who had pursued after Cestius, when theywere returned back to Jerusalem, they overbore some of thosethat favoured the Romans by violence, and some they persuad­ed [by entreaties] to join with them, and got together in greatnumbers in the temple, and appointed a great many generals forthe war. * Joseph also the son of Gorion, and Ananus the high-priest, were chosen as governors of all affairs within the city,and with a particular charge to repair the walls of the city; forthey did not ordain Eleazar the son of Simon to that office, al­though he had gotten into his possession the prey they had takenfrom the Romans, and the money they had taken from Cestius,together with a great part of the public treasures, because theysaw he was of a tyrannical temper, and that his followers were,in their behaviour, like guards about him. However, the wantthey were in of Eleazar's money, and the subtile tricks used byhim, brought all so about, that the people were circumvented,and submitted themselves to his authority in all public affairs.
4. They also chose other generals for Idumea, Jesus the sonof Sapphias, one of the high-priests, and Eleazar the son ofAnanias, the high-priest; they also enjoined Niger, the thengovernor of f Idumea, who was of a family that belonged toPerea, beyond Jordan, and was thence called the Peraite, that heshould be obedient to those forenamed commanders. Nor did
they


* From this name of Joseph the son of Gorion, or Gorion the son of Joseph,as B. IV. ch. iii. § 9. Vol. IV. one of the governors of Jerusalem, who was slainat the beginning of the tumults by the zealots, B. IV. ch. vi. § i. the much t»t«cJewish author of an history of that nation takes his title, and vet personates ourtrue Jnsephus, the son of Matthias: but the cheat is too gross to be put upon thelearned world.
f We may observe here, that the Idumeans, as having been proselytes of justicesince the days of John Hyrcanus, duriug about 195 years, were now esteemed aspart of a Jewish nation, and here provided of a Jewish commander accordingly,See the note upon Antiq. B. XIII. ch. a'. § I. Vol. II.







OCR Output








Chap. IX. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 101


" our enemies were doing, nor will those enemies be injurious" to people any longer. We are caught by their intrigues like" brute beasts, and there is a large body of cavalry marching*' upon us, while we are destitute of hands to defend ourselvesM withal, because we are restrained from doing it by the" prohibition of our law, which obliges us to rest [on this day]-"But Asineus did not by any means agree with the opinion of hisspy as to what was to be done, but thought it more agreeable tothe law to pluck up their spirits .1 this necessity they werefallen into, and break their law by avenging themselves, althoughthey should die in the action, than by doing nothing to pleasetheir enemies in submitting to be slain by them. Accordinglyhe took up his weapons, and infused courage into those that werewith him, to act as courageously as himself. So they fell upontheir enemies, and slew a great many of them, because they de­spised them, and came as to a certain victory, and put the restto flight.
3. But when the news of this fight came to the king of Par-thia, he was surprised at the boldness of these brethren, and wasdesirous to see them, and speak with them. He therefore sent themost trusty of all his guards to say thus to them, " That king Ar-" tabanus, although he had been unjustly treated by you, who" have made an attempt against his government, yet hath he more" regard to your courageous behaviour, than to the anger he bears" to you, and hath sent me to give you his right-hand *, and secu-" rity, and he permits you to come to him safely, and without any"violence upon the road, and he wants to have you address'" yourselves to him as friends, without meaning any guile or" deceit to you. He also promises to make you presents, and" to pay you those respects which will make an addition of his" power to your courage, and thereby be of advantage to you."Yet did Asineus himself put off his journey thither, but senthis brother Anileus with all such presents as he could procure.So he 'went, and was admitted to the king's presence ; and whenArtabanus saw Anileus coming alone, he inquired into the rea­son why Asineus avoided to come along with him ; and whenhe understood that he was afraid, and staid by the lake, he tookan oath, by the gods of his country, that he would do them noharm, if they came to him upon the assuranpes he gave them,and gave them his right hand f- This is of the greatest forcethere with all these barbarians, and affords a firm security to-
those


* The joining of the right hands was esteemed among the Persians [and Par.thiitis] in particular, a most inviolable obligation to fidelity, as Dr Hudson hereobserves, and refers to the commentary on Justin, B. XI. ch. xv. lor its confirma­tion. We often meet with the like use of it in Josephus.
t See the above note.







OCR Output








Chap. XII. ANTIQJJITIES OF THE JEWS. 51


of his mother's family. And when he was come, he was car.Sried in a royal litter through the streets, and all the ornamentsabout him was such as kings are adorned withal; and this wasat the expence of those that entertained him. The multitudealso flocked about him greatly, and made mighty acclamationsto him, and nothing was omitted which could be thought suit­able to such as had been so unexpectedly preserved.
2. When this thing was told Caesar, he did not believe it, be­cause Herod was not easily to be imposed upon in such affairs aswere of great concern to him ; yet, having some suspicion itmight be so, he sent one Celadus, a freed man of his, and onethat had conversed with the young men themselves, and bade himbring Alexander into his presence : so he brought him, being nomore accurate in judging about him than the rest of the multi­tude. Yet did not he deceive Caesar; for although there werea resemblance between him and Alexander, yet was it not so ex­act as to impose on such as were prudent in discerning ; for thisspurious Alexander had his hands rough, by the labours he hadbeen put to, and instead of that softness of body which the otherhad, and this as derived from his delicate and generous educartion, this man, for the contrary reason, had a rugged body.When, therefore, Caesar saw how the master and the scholaragreed in this lying story, and in a bold way of talking, he in­quired about Aristobulus, and asked what became of him, who(it seems) was stolen away together with him, and for whatreason it was that he did not come along with him, and endea­vour to recover that dominion which was due to his high birthfclso? And when he said, That " he had been left in the isle" of Crete, for fear of the dangers of the sea, that, in case any«' accident should come to himself, the posterity of Mariamne" might not utterly perish, but that Aristobulus might sur-" vive, and punish those that laid such treacherous designs a-'' gainst them." And when he persevered in his affirmations,and the author of the imposture agreed in supporting it, Caesartook the young man by himself, and said to him, «' If thou wilt" not impose upon me, thou shalt have this for thy reward, that" thou shalt escape with thy life ; tell me, then, who thou art!" and who it was that had boldness enough to contrive such a" cheat as this. For this contrivance is too considerable a piece" of villany to be undertaken by one of thy age." According­ly, because he had no other way to take, he told Caesar the con­trivance, and after what manner, and by whom it was laid to­gether. So Caesar, upon observing the spurious Alexander to'be a strong active man, and fit to work with his hands, that heAnight not break his promise to him, put him among those that
G 2 were







OCR Output








228 THE LIFE OF FLAVIUS JOSEPHUS.


on account of ray stratagem, which was opposite to their under­takings.
56. Now there was one whose name was Ananias, a wickedman he was, and very mischievous ; he proposed that a generalreligious fast * should be appointed the next day fpr all the peo­ple, and gave order that at the same hour they should cometo the same place, without any weapons, to make it manifestbefore God, thatwhile they obtained his assistance, they thoughtall these weapons useless. This he said, not out of piety, butthat they might catch me and my friends unarmed. Now, I was] .reupon forced to comply, lest I should appear to despise a pro­posal that tended to piety. As soon, therefore, as we were gonehome, Jonathan and his colleagues wrote to John, to come tothem in the morning, and desiring him to come with as manysoldiers as he possibly could, for that they should then be ableeasily to get me into their hands, and to do all that they desired todo. When John had received this letter, he resolved to com­ply with it: As for myself, on the next day, I ordered two ofthe guards of my body, whom I esteemed the most courageous,and most faithful, to hide daggers under their garments, and togo along with me, that we might defend ourselves, if any attackshould be made upon us by our enemies. I also myself took mybreast-plate, and girt on my sword, so that it might be, as far aswas possible, concealed, and came into the Proseucha.
57. Now Jesus, who was the ruler, commanded that theyshould exclude all that came with me, for he kept the door him­self, and suffered none but his friends to go in. And while wewere engaged in the duties of the day, and had betaken ourselvesto our prayers, Jesus got up, and inquired of me what wasbecome of the vessels that were taken out of the king's palace,when it was burnt down, [and] of that uncoined silver : and inwhose possession they now were ? This he said, in order to drivenway time till John should come. I said that Capellus, and theten principal men of Tiberias had them all; and I told him thatthey might ask them whether I told a lie or not. And whenthey said they had them, he asked me, what is become of thosetwenty pieces of gold which thou didst receive upon the sale of acertain weight of uncoined money ? I replied, that I had giventhem to those ambassadors of theirs, as a maintenance for them,when they were sent by them to Jerusalem. So Jonathan andhis colleagues said, that I had not done well to pay the ambassa­dors out of the public money. And, when the multitude were
very
* One mavo'nserve here, that this lay-Pharisee Ananias, as we have seen hexvas, sect. 3>p. took upon him to appoint a fast at Tiberias, and was obeyed;tho''igh iniked ii was not cut of religion, but knavish polic/.







OCR Output








110 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book XIX.


montory to another, of the length of thirty furlongs, as measu­red over the sea. And this was done, because he esteemed it tobe a most tedious thing to row over it in a small ship, and thoughtwithal, that it became him to make that bridge, since he waslord of the sea, and might oblige it to give marks of obedience aswell as the earth ; so he inclosed the whole bay within his bridge,and drove his chariot over it, and thought that, as he was a god,it was fit for him to travel over such roads as this was. Nor didhe abstain from the plunder of any of the Grecian temples, andgave order that all the engravings and sculptures, and the rest ofthe ornaments of the statues and donations therein dedicated,should be brought to him, saying, that " the best things ought" to be set no where but in the best place, and that the city of'' Rome was that best place." He also adorned his own houseand his gardens with the curiosities brought from those temples,together with the houses he lay at when he travelled all overItaly; whence he did not scruple to give a command, that thestatue of Jupiter Olympius, so called because he was honouredat the Olympian games by the Greeks, which was the work ofPhidias the Athenian, should be brought to Rome. Yet did nothe compass his end, because the architects told Memmius Regu-lus, who was commanded to remove that statue of Jupiter, that theworkmanship was such as would be spoiled, and would not bearthe removal. It was also reported that Memmius, both on thataccount, and on account of some such mighty prodigies as are ofan incredible nature, put off the taking it down, and wrote toCaius those accounts, as his apology for not having done whathis epistle required of him ; and that when he was thence in dan­ger of perishing, he was saved by Caius, being dead himself,before he had put him to death.
2. Nay, Caius's madness came to this height, that when hehad a daughter born, he carried her into the capitol, and put herupon the knees of the statue, and said, that the child was com­mon to him and to Jupiter, and determined that she had two fa­thers, but which of these fathers were the greatest, he left un­determined ; and yet mankind bore him in such his pranks. Healso gave leave to slaves to accuse their' masters of any crimeswhatsoever they pleased ; for all such accusations were terrible,because they were in great part made to please him, and at hissuggestion, insomuch that Pallux, Claudius's slave, had the bold.ness to lay an accusation against Claudius himself, and Caius wasnot ashamed to be present at his trial of life and death, to hearthat trial of his own uncle, in hopes of being able to take himoff, although he did not succeed to his mind. But when he hadfilled the whole habitable world, which he governed, with false
, , accusations







OCR Output








438 WARS OF THE JEWS. Book II.


at variance one with another about the things they were angryat. However, he promised he would confess all: hereupon hewas permitted to speak, when he said, " I did neither intend to" send this money back to Agrippa, nor to gain it myself; for" I did never esteem one that was your enemy to be my friend," nor did 1 look upon what would tend to your disadvantage, to" be my advantage. But, O you people of Taricheae, I saw'' that your city stood in more need than others of fortifications" for your security, and that it wanted money in order for the" building it a wall. I was also afraid lest the pepoleof Tibe-" Has and other cities should lay a plot to seize upon these spoils," and therefore it was that I intended to retain this money pri-" vately, that I might encompass you with a wall. But if this" does not please you, 1 will produce what was brought me," and leave it to you to plunder it; but if I have conducted" myself so well as to please you, you may if you please punish" your benefactor."
4. Hereupon the people of Taricheae loudly commended him,but those of Tiberias, with the rest of the company, gave himhard names, and threatened what they would do to him; so bothsides left off quarrelling with Josephus, and fell on quarrellingwith one another. So he grew bold upon the dependence he hadon his friends, which were the people of Taricheae, and aboutforty thousand in number, and spake more freely to the wholemultitude, and reproached them greatly for their rashness, andtold them, That " with this money he would build walls about" Taricheae, and would put the other cities in a state of secu-" rity also; for that they should not want money, if they would" but agree for whose benefit it was to be procured, and would" not suffer themselves to be irritated against him who procured" it for them."
5. Hereupon the rest of the multitude that had been deludedretired; but yet so that they went away angry, and two thou­sand of them made an assault upon him in their armour; and ashe was already gone to his own house, they stood without Midthreatened him. On which occasion Josephus again used a secondstratagem to escape them; for he got upon the top of his house,and with his right hand desired them to be silent, and said to them," I cannot tell what you would have, nor can hear what you say," for the confused noiseyoumake: but hesaidthathe would com-" ply with all their demands, in case they would but send some" of their number in to him that might talk with him about it."And when the principal of them, with their leaders, heard this,they came into the house. He then drew them to the most re­tired part of the house, and shut the door of that hall where he
put







OCR Output








Chap. Vll. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEW3. 14&


' nations, although God hath judged that I am not at all worthy
' of the high-priesthood. I am satisfied with having once put
' on the sacred garments ; for I then put them OH after a more
' holy manner, than. I should now receive them again. But, if
' thou desirest that a person more worthy than myself should
' have this honourable employment, give me leave to name thec
*' such a one. I have a brother that is pure from all sin
" against God, and of all offences against thyself; I recommend
" him to thee, as one that is fit for this dignity." So the king
was pleased with these words of his, and passed by Jonathan, and,
according to his brother's desire, bestowed the high-priesthood
upon Matthias. Nor was it long before Marcus succeeded Pe-
tronius, as president of Syria.
CHAP. VII.
Concerning Silas, and on what account it was that King Agrippa•was angry at him. How Agrippa began to encompass Jerusa­lem with a wall ,• and what benefits he bestowed on the inhabi­tants of Berytus.
J 1. TVj OW Silas, the general of the king's horse, because he,*^ had been faithful to him under all his misfortunes, andhad never refused to be a partaker with him in any of his dan­gers, but had oftentimes undergone the most hazardous dangersfor him, was full of assurance, and thought he might expect asort of equality with the king, on account of the firmness ofthe friendship he had shewed to him. Accordingly, he wouldno where let the king sit as his superior, and took the like li­berty in speaking to him upon all occasions ; till he became trou­blesome to the king, when they were merry together, extollinghimself beyond measure, and of putting the king in mind of theseverity he had undergone, that he might, by way of ostentation,demonstrate what zeal he had shewed in his service ; and wascontinually harping upon this string, what pains he had takenfor him, and much enlarged still upon that subject. The repe­tition of this so frequently seemed to reproach the king, inso­much that he took the ungovernable liberty of talking very illat his hands. For the commemoration r.f times, when men havebeen under ignominy, is by no means agreeable to them ; and heis a very silly man, who is perpetually relating to a person whatkindness he had done him. At last, therefore, Silas had sothoroughly provoked the king's indignation, that he acted ratherout of passion than good consideration, and did not only turn Si•«las out of his place, as general of his horse, but sent him in bondsinto his own country. But the edge of his anger wore off bylength of time, and made room for more just reasonings as to


his







OCR Output








170 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book XX.


rusalem, and many of the Jews perished therein. But I shallfirst explain the occasion whence it was derived. When thatfeast, which is called the Passover, was at hand, at which timeour custom is to use unleavened bread, and a great multitude wasgathered together from all parts to that feast, Cumanus was a-fraid lest some attempt of innovation should then be made bythem ; so he ordered that one regiment of the army should taketheir arms,.. and stand in the temple cloisters, to repress any at­tempts of innovation, if perchance any such should begin ; andthis was no more than what the former procurators of Judea didat such festivals. But on the fourth day of the feast. a certainsoldier let down his breeches, and exposed his privy members tothe multitude, which put those that saw him into a furious ragerand made them cry out, that this impious action was not done toreproach them, but God himself; nay, some of them reproach­ed Cumanus, and pretended that the soldier was set on by him,which, when Cumanus heard, he was also himself not a littleprovoked at such reproaches laid upon him ; yet did he exhortthem to leave off such seditious attempts, and not to raise a tu­mult at the festival. But when he could not induce them to bequiet, for they still went on in their reproaches to him, he gaveorder that the whole army should take their entire armour, andcome to Antonia, which was a fortress, as we have said already,which overlooked the temple ; but when the multitude saw thesoldiers there, they were affrighted at them, and ran away hasti­ly ; but as the passages out were but narrow, and as they thoughttheir enemies followed them, they were crowded together in theirflight, and a great number were pressed to death in those narrowpassages ;. nor indeed was the number fewer than twenty thou­sand that perished in this tumult. So, instead of a festival, theyhad at last a mournful day of it; and they all of them forgottheir prayers and sacrifices, and betook themselves to lamentationand weeping ; so great an afHiction did the impudent obscene-ness of a single soldier bring upon them *.
4. Now before this their first mourning was over, anothermischief befell them also ; for some of those that raised the fore­going tumult, when they were travelling along the public road,about an hundred furlongs from the city, robbed Stephanus, aservant of Caesar, as he was journeying, and plundered him of allthat he had with him. Which things when Cumanus heard of,
he


* This, and many more tumults and seditions, which arose at the Jewish festi­vals, in Josephus, illustrate the cautious procedure of the Jewish governors, when,they said, Matt. xxvi. 5. " Let us not take Jesus on the feast- day, lest there be" an uproar among the people;" as Reland well observes on this place. Josephus.also takes notice of the same thing. Of the War, B. I. ch. iv. sect 3.







OCR Output








Chap, II. ANTIOJJITIIS OF THE JEWS. 1


and was disposed to inform the king of it. And since thesepeople knew that their friendship was very disagreeable toHerod, as tending to do him a mischief, they contrived thattheir meetings should not be discovered ; so they pretendedto hate one another, and to abuse one another when time ser­ved, and especially when Herod was present, or when anyone was there that would tell him ; but still their intimacywas firmer than ever, when they were private. And this was-the course they took ; but they could not conceal from Salomeneither their first contrivance, when they set about these theirintentions, nor when they had made some progress in them ;but she searched out every thing ; and, aggravating the rela­tions to her brother, declared to him, " As well their secret" assemblies and compotations, as their counsels taken in a" clandestine manner, which, if they were not in order to" destroy him, they might well enough have been open and" public. But, to appearance, they are at variance, and" speak about one another as if they intended one another a" mischief, but agree so well together when they are out of" the sight of the multitude ; for when they are alone by" themselves, they act in concert, and profess that they will" never leave off their friendship, but will fight against those" from whom they conceal their designs." And thus didshe search out these things, and get a perfect knowledge ofthem, and then told her brother of them, who understoodalso of himself a great deal of what she said, but still durstnot depend upon it, because of the suspicions he had of hissister's calumnies. For there was a certain sect of men thatwere Jews, who valued themselves highly upon the exactskill they had in the law of their fathers, and made men be­lieve they were highly favoured by God, by whom this- setof women were inveigled. These are those that are calledthe sect of the Pharisees, who were in a capacity of greatly-opposing kings. A cunning sect they were, ami soon eleva­ted to a pitch of open fighting, and doing mischief. Accord­ingly, when all the people of the Jews gave assurance of theirgood-will to Caesar, and to the king's government, these verymen did not swear, being above six thousand ; and when theking imposed a fine upon them, Pheroras's wife paid theirfine for them. In order to requite which kindness of her's,since they were believed to have the foreknowledge of thingsto come by divine inspiration, they foretold how God had de­creed, that Herod's government should cease, and his posterityshould be deprived of it; but that the kingdom should comelo her and Pheroras> and to their childcen. These predictions
were







OCR Output








Chap. XXIV. WARS OF THE JEWS. 323


points, and wrought himself a passage by his calumnies with thegreatest shrewdness; while he put on a face as if he were a kindbrother to Alexander and Aristobuliis, but suborned other mento inform of what they did td Herod, And when any thing wastold against Alexander, he would come in and pretend [to be ofhis side], and would begin to contradict what was said; butwould afterward contrive matters so privately, that the kingshould have an indignation at him. His general aim was this,to lay a plot, and to make it believed that Alexander lay in-waitto kill his father ; for nothing afforded so great a Confirmationto these calumnies as did Antipater's apologies for him.
2. By these methods Herod was inflamed, and, as much ashis natural affection to the young men did every day diminish,so much did it increase towards Antipater. The Courtiers alsoinclined to the same conduct, some of their own accord, andothers by the king's injunction, as particularly did Ptolemy , theking's dearest friend, as also the king's brethern, and all hischildren ; for Antipater was all in all: and what was the bit­terest part of all to Alexander, Antipater's mother was also allin all; she was one that gave counsel against them, and Was moreharsh than a stepmother, and one that hated the queen's sonsmore than is usual to hate sons-in-law. All men did thereforealready pay their respects to Antipater, in hopes of advantage;and it was the king's command whieh alienated every body[from the brethren], he having given this charge to his mostintimate friends, that they should not come near, nor pay anyregard to Alexander, or to his friends. Herod was also becometerrible, not only to his domestics about the court, but to hisfriends abroad; for Caesar had given such a privilege td no otherking as he had given to him, which was this, that he mightfetch back any one that fled from him, even out of a city thatwas not under his own jurisdiction. Now the young men were*'not acquainted with the calumnies raised against them ; fot1which reason they could not guard themselves against them, butfell under them; for their father did not make any publie com­plaints against either of them; though in a little time they per­ceived how things were by his coldness to them-, and by thegreat uneasiness he shewed upon any thing that troubled him.Antipater had also made their uncle Pheroras to be their enemy,as well as their aunt Salome, while he was always talking withher, as with a wife, and irritating her against them. Moreover,Alexander's wife, Glaphyra, augmented this hatred againstthem, by deriving her nobility and genealogy [from great per­sons], and pretending that she was a lady superior to all othersin that kingdom, as being derived by her father's side from
S s 2 Temenus,







OCR Output








32* Boot I. WARS «T THE JEWS.


Temenus, and by her mother's side from D'arius, the son ofHystaspes. She also frequently reproached Herod's sister andwives, with the ignobility of their descent; and that they wererevery one chosen by him for their beauty, but not for their fa­mily. Now those wives of his were not a few; it being of oldpermitted to the Jews to * marry many wives t, and this kingdelighting in many, all which hated Alexander, on account ofGlaphyra's boasting and reproaches.
3. Nay, Aristobulus had raised a quarrel between himselfand Salome, who was his-mother-in-law, besides the anger hehad conceived at Glaphyra's. reproaches -T for he perpetually up­braided bis wife with the meanness of her family, and com­plained, that as he had married a woman of a low family, so-had his brother Alexander married one of royal blood. At this-Salome's daughter wept, and told it her with this addition, that.Alexander threatened the mothers of his other brethren, thatwhen he should come to the crown,he would make them weavewith their maideps,and would make those brothers of his coun­try schoolmasters, and brake this jest upon them, that theyhad been very carefully instructed to fit them for such an em­ployment. Hereupon Salome could not contain her anger, buttold all to Herod; nor could her testimony be suspected, sinceit was against her own son-in-law. There was also another ca­lumny that ran abroad, and inflamed the king's mind; for heheard that these sons of his were perpetually speaking of theirmother, and, among their lamentations for her, did not abstainfrom cursing him; and tha t when he made presents of any ofMammae's garments to his later wives, these threatened, thatin a little time, instead of royal garments, they would clothethem in no better than hair-cloth.
4. Now upon these accounts, though Herod was somewhatafraid of the young men's high spirit, yet did he not despair ofreducing them to a better mind; but before he went to Rome,,whether he was now going by sea, he called them to him, andpartly threatened them a little, as a king? but for the main, headmonished them as a father, and exorted them to love theirbreihren, and told them that he would pardon their former of­fences,
• That it was an immemorial custom among the Jews, and their forefathers, thepatriarchs, to have sometimes more wires, or wives and concubines, than one atthe same time, and that this polygamy was not directly forbidden in the law ofMoses, is e»ident; but that ptlygamy was ever properly and distinctly permitted inthat law of Moses, in the places here cite'd by Dean Aldrich, Deut xvii. 16, 17.or xxi. 15. or indeed any where else, does not appesr to me. And what our Sa­viour says about the common Jewish divorces, which may lay much greater claimto such a permission than ptlygaay, seems to me true in this case also: that Moses,for the hardness of their hearts, suffered them to have several wives at the sametime, but that " from the beginning it was not so," Matt. xix, 8. Mark x. 5.


/







OCR Output








Chap. XX. WARS OF THE JEWS. 431


find gave order, that when they went up to the morning guard,they should erect their ensigns, that the Jews might be made tobelieve that the entire army was there still, while he himselftook the rest of his forces with him, and marched, without anynoise, thirty furlongs. But when the Jews perceived, in themorning, that the camp was empty, they ran upon those fourhundred who had deluded them, and immediately threw theirdarts at them, and slew them, and they pursued after Cestius.But he had already made use of a great part of the night in hisflight, and still marched quicker when it was day. Insomuchthat the soldiers, through the astonishment and fear they werein, left behind them their engines for sieges, and for throwingof stones, and a great part of the instruments of war. So theJews went on pursuing the Romans as far as Antipatris, afterwhich, seeing they could not overtake them, they came back,and took the engines, and spoiled the dead bodies, and gatheringtheir prey together which the Romans had left behind them,and came back running and singing to their metropolis. Whilethey had themselves lost a few only, but had slain of the Ro­mans five thousand and three hundred footmen, and three hund­red and eighty horsemen. This defeat happened on the eighthday of the month Dius, [Marhesvan], in the twelfth year ofthe reign of Nero.
CHAP. XX.
Cestius sends ambassadors to Nero. The people of Damascusslay those Jews that lived with them. The,people of Jerusa­lem, after they had \Jeft off] pursuing Cestius, return to thecity, and get things ready for its defence, and make a greatmany generals for their armies, and particularly Joscphus, thewriter of these looks. Some account of his administration.
§ I. A FTER this calamity had befallen Cestius, many of the./JL most eminent of the Jews swam away from the city,as from a ship when it was going to sink; Costobarus, therefore,and Saul, who were brethren, together with Philip, the son ofJacimus, who was the commander of King Agrippa's forces, ran,away from the city, and went to Cestius. But then how Anti-pas, who had been besieged with them in the king's palace, heyvould not fly away with them, was afterward slain by the sedi­tious, we shall relate hereafter. However, Cestius sent Sauland his friends, at their own desire, to Achaia, to Nero, to in­form him of the great distress they were in, and to lay the blameof their kindling the war upon Florus, as hoping to alleviateShis own danger, by provoking his indignation against Florus.


2. In







OCR Output








4tO WARS OF THE JEWS. Uook IL


was then common to see cities filled with dead bodies, still lyingunburied, and those of old men, mixed with infants, all dead,and scattered about together; women also lay amongst them,without any covering for their nakedness; you might then seethe whole province full of inexpressible calamities, while thedread of still more barbarous practices which were threatened,were every where greater than what had been already per­petrated.
3. And thus far the conflict had been between Jews andforeigners, but when they made excursions to Scythopolis, theyfound Jews that acted as enemies; for as they stood in battlearray with those of Scythopqlis, and preferred their own safetybefore their relation to us, theyfought against their own country­men ; nay, their alacrity was so very great, that those of Scytho-polis suspected them. These were afraid, therefore, lest theyshould make an assault upon the city in the night time, and, totheir great misfortune, should thereby make an apology forthemselves to their own people for their revolt from them. Sothey commanded them, that in case they would confirm theiragreement and demonstrate their fidelity to them, who were ofa different nation, they should go out of the city, with their fa­milies to a neighbouring grove: and when they had done asthey were commanded, without suspecting any thing, the peopleof Scythopolis lay still for the interval of two days, to temptthem to be secure; but on the third night they watched theiropportunity, and cut all their throats, some as they lay unguard­ed, and some as they lay asleep. The number that was slain was'above thirteen thousand, and then they plundered them of allthat they had.
4. It will deserve our relation what befel Simon; he wasthe son of one Saul, a man of reputation among the Jews. Thisman was distinguished from the rest by the strength of his body,and the boldness of his conduct, although he abused them bothto the mischieving of his countrymen; for he came every dayand slew a great many of the Jews of Scythopolis, and he fre­quently put them to flight, and became himself alone the causeof his army's conquering. But a-just punishment overtook him'for the murders he had committed upon those of the same na­tion with him; for when the people of Scythopolis threw theirdarts at them in the grove, he drew his sword, but did not at­tack any of the enemy; for he saw that he could do nothingagainst such a multitude; but he cried out after a very movingmanner, and, " O, you people of Scythopolis, 1 deservedly suffer" for what 1 have done with relation to you, when I gave you" such security of my fidelity to you, by slaying so many of
-« those







OCR Output








Chap.'II. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS,


CHAP. II.
Concerning Zamaris, the Babylonian Jew. Concerning the plotslaid by Antipater against bis father ; and somewhat about thePharisees.
§ 1. A ND now it was that Herod, being desirous of secu-f-t*- ring himself on the side of the Trachonites, resolved-fo build a village as large as a city for the Jews, in the middleof that country, which might make his own country difficultto be assaulted, and whence he might be at hand to makesallies upon them, and do them a mischief. Accordingly,when he understood that there was a maa that was a Jew coineout of Babylon, with five hundred horsemen, all of whomcould shoot their arrows as they rode on horseback, and withan hundred of his relations, had passed over Euphrates, andnow abode at Antioch by Daphne of Syria, where Saturni-nus, who was then president, had given them a place for ha­bitation, called Valatha, he sent for this man, with the mul­titude that followed him, and promised to give him land inthe toparchy called Batanca^ which country is bounded withTrachonites, as desirous to make that his habitation a guardto himself. He also engaged to let h;m hold the country freefrom -tribute, and that they should dwell entirely without pay.ing such customs as used to be paid, and' gave it him tax-cfree.
2. The Babylonian was induced by theae offers to come hi­ther ; so he took possession of the land, and built in it for­tresses and a village, and named it Bathyra. Whereby thistnan became a safeguard to the inhabitants against the Tra­chonites, and preserved those Jews who came out of Babylon,to offer their sacrifices at Jerusalem, from being hurt by theTrachonite robberies ; so that a great number came to himfrom all those parts where the ancient Jewish laws were ob­served, and the country became full of people, by reason oftheir universal freedom' from taxes. This continued duringthe life of Herod ; but when Philip, who was [tetrarch] afterhim, took the government, he made them pay some smalltaxes, and that for a little while only ; and Agrippa the Great,and his son of the same name, although they harassed -themgreatly, yet would they not take their liberty away. Fromwhom, when the Romans have now taken the governmentinto their own hands, they still gave them the privilege oftheir freedom, but oppress them entirely with the imposition1 • of







OCR Output








Chap. IX. WARS OF THE :EWSi 5275


laid against him before his tribunal, for the mischiefs he haddone to the Romans. But Ptolemy, the son of Menneus, whowas then ruler of Chaleis, under Libanus, took his brethren tohim, by sending his son Philippic for them to Ascalon, who tookAntigonus, as well as his sisters, away from Aristobulus's wife,and brought them to his father; and falling in love with theyounger daughter, he married her, and was afterward slain byhis father, on her account; for Ptolemy himself, after he hadslain his son, married her, whose name was Alexandra ; on ac­count of which marriage, he took the greater care of her brotherand sister.
3. Now, after Pompey was dead, Antipater changed sides, andcultivated a friendship with Caesar. And, since Mithridates ofPergamus, with the forces he led against Egypt, was excludedfrom the avenues about Pelusium, and was forced to stay at As­calon, he persuaded the Arabians, among whom he had lived, toassist him, and came himself to him, at the head of three thousandarmed men^ He also encouraged the men of power in Syria tocome to his assistance, as also of the inhabitants of Libanus, Pto­lemy, and Jamblicus, and another Ptolemy; by which means thecities of that country came readily into this war; insomuch, thatMithridates ventured now, iri dependence upon the additionalstrength that he had gotten by Antipater, to march forward toPelusium ; ahd^ when they refused him a passage through it, hebesieged the city; in the attack of which place, Antipater prin­cipally signalized himself, for he brought down that part of thewall which was over against him, and leaped first Of all into thecity, with the men that were about him.
4. Thus was Pelusium taken. But still, as they were march­ing on, those Egyptian Jews that inhabited the country, calledthe country of Chiias, stopped them. Then did Antipater notonly pesuade them not to stop them, but to afford provisions fortheir army ; on which account even the people about Memphiswould not fight against them, but, of their Own accord, joinedMithridates. Whereupon he went round about Delta, andfought the rest of the Egyptians At a place called the JewsCamp : nay^ when he Was in danger in the battle with all hisright wing, Antipater wheeled about, and came along the bankof the river to him ; for he had beaten those that opposed himas he led the left wing. After which success he fell upon thosethat pursued Mithridates, and slew a great many of them, andpursued the remainder so far that he took their camp, whilehe lost no more than fourscore of his own men; as Mithridateslost, during the pursuit that was made after him, about eighthundred. He was also himself saved unexpectedly, and became
M m2 an







OCR Output








JCO .ANTIQJJITIES: OF .THE JEWS. Book


these their paffions, yet did he forgive them, as not indulgingthose passions out of art ill disposition, but out of a desire eachof them had to be beloved by their father. However, he sentIzates with many presents, to Abennerig, the king of Charax-Spasini, and that out of the great dread he was in about him, lesthe should come to some misfortune by the hatred his brethrenbore him ; and iie committed his son's preservation to him.Upon which Abennerig gladly received the young man, and hada great affe&ion for him, and n&arried him to his own daughter,whose name was Samacba : he also bestowed. a country uponhim, from which he received large revenues. .' .,,
2. But when Monobazus was grown old, and saw that he hadbut a little time to live, he had a mind to come to the sight ofhis son before he died. So he seat for him, and embraced himafter the most affectionate manner, add bestowed on him the coun­try called Carrx; it was a soil that bare ammomUm in greatplenty : there are also in it the remains of that ark, wherein itis related that Noah escaped the' deluge, and where they are stillshewn to such' as are desirous' to see them *. Accordingly IzateSabode in that country until' his father's death. But the very daythat Monobazus died, queen:Helena sent for all the grandees, andgovernors of the kingdom, and for those that had the armies com­mitted to their command ; and when they were come, she madethe following speech to them ; " I believe you are not unac-" quainted that mv husband was desirous Izates should succeed" him in the government, and thought him worthy so to do. How-" ever, I wait your determination ; for happy is he who receives" a kingdom not from a single person only, hut from the willing" suffrages of a great many." This she said in order to try thosethat were invited, and to discover their sentiments. Upon thehearing of which, they first of all paid their homage to the queen,as their custom was, and then they said, That " they confirmed«' the king's determination, and would submit to'it; and they" rejoiced that Izates's father had preferred htm before the rest" of his brethren, as being agreeable to all their wishes^: but that" they were desirous first of all to slay his brethren and kins-" men, that so the government might come securely to Izates;l< because if they were once destroyed, all that fear would'' be over which might arise from their hatred and envy" to him." Helena replied to this, That " she returned'' them their thanks for their kindness to herself, and to
" Izates ;


* It is here very remarkable, that the remains of Noah's ark were believed to<x stH! Jn beifij in the days of josephus. Set the nctc on B. I. cli. 3. sect. 5.







OCR Output








430 WARS OF THE JEHTS. Book II.


commander of a troop of horsemen. So it was not without dif­ficulty that they got to Gabao, their former camp, and that notwithout the loss of a great part of their baggage. There it wasthat C--stiiis staid two days, and was in great distress to knowwhat he should do in these circumstances ; but when, on thethird day, he saw a still much greater number of enemies, andall the parts round about him full of Jews, he understood thathis delay was to his own detriment, and that if he stayed anylonger there, he should have still more enemies upon him.
8. That therefore he might fly the faster, he gave orders tocast away what might hinder his army's march, so they killedthe mules, and other creatures, excepting thosethat carried theirdarts, and machines, which they retained for their own use, andthis principally because they were afraid lest the Jews shouldsieze upon them. He then made his army march on as far asBethoron. Now the Jews did not so much press upon themwhen they were in large open places, but when they werepenn'd up in their descent through narrow passages, then didsome of them get before, and hindered them from getting outof them, and others of them thrust the hinder most down into thelower places, and the whole multitude extended themselves overagainst the neck of the passage, and covered the Roman armywith their darts. In which circumstances, as the footm enknewnot how to defend themselves, so the danger pressed the horse­men still more, for they were so pelted, that they could notmarch along the road in their ranks, and the ascents were so high,that the cavalry were not able to march against the enemy; theprecipices also, and valleys into which they frequently fell, andtumbled down, were such on each side of them, that there wereneither place for their flight, nor any contrivance could bethought of for their defence ; till the distress they were at lastin was so great, that they betook themselves to lamentations,and to such mournful MICH as men use in the utmost despair;the joyful acclamations of the Jews also, as they encouraged oneanother, echoed the sounds back again, these last composing anoise of those that at once rejoiced, and were in a rage. Indeed,things were come to such a pass, that the Jews had almost takenCestius's entire army prisoners, had not the night come on, whenthe Romans fled to Bethoron, and the Jews seized upon all theplaces round about them, and watched for their coming out [inthe morning].
0. And then it was that Cestius, despairing of obtaining roomfor a public march, contrived how he might best run away; andwhen he had selected four hundred of the most courageous of hissoldiers, he placed them at the strongest »: their fortifications,







OCR Output








Chap. VI. WARS or THE JEWS. 267


a long apology for himself, and for the justness of his cause in'taking the government, he returned to the fortress. And whenhis brother invited him again [to plead his cause], he came downand spake about the justice of it, and then went away withoutany hindrance from Pompey : so he was between hope and fear.And when he came down, it was to prevail with Pompey toallow him the government entirely ; and when he went up tothe citadel, it was that he might not appear to debase himself4oo low. However, Pompey commanded him to give up hisfortified places, and forced him to write to every one of theirgovernors to yield them up ; they having had this charge giventhem, to obey no letters but what were of his own hand-writing.Accordingly he did what he was ordered to do ; but had still anindignation in what was done, and retired to Jerusalem, and pre­pared to fight with Pompey.
6. But Pompey did not give him time to make any prepara­tions [for a siege], but followed him at his heels : he was alsoobliged to make haste in his attempt, by the death of Mithri-dates, of which he was informed about Jericho. Now here is themost fruitful country of Judea, which bears a vast number of*palm-trees, besides the balsam-tree, whose sprouts they cut withsharp stones, and at the incisions they gather the juice, whichdrops down like tears. So Pompey pitched his camp in thatplace one night, and then hasted away the next morning to Jeru­salem ; but Aristobulus was so affrighted at his approach, that hecame and met him by way of supplication. He also promisedhim money, and that he would deliver up both himself and thecity into his disposal, and thereby mitigated the anger of Pompey.Yet did not he perform any of the conditions he had agreed to ;for Aristobulus's party would not so much as admit Gabiniusinto the city, who was sent to receive the money that he hadpromised.
CHAP. VII.
How Pompey iad the city 'Jerusalem delivered up to Jnm, luttook the temple [byforce'\. Hoiv be vent into the Holy ofHolies ; as a/so what were his other exploits in Judea.
5 1. A T this treatment Pompey was very angry, and took"^^ Aristobulus into custody. And when he was come tothe city he looked about where he might make his attack ; forhe saw the walls were so firm that it would be hard to overcomethem, and that the valley before the walls was terrible ; and that
L 1 2 the


* Of the famous palm-trees and balsam about Jericho and Engaddi, seethenotes in Havercamp's edition, both here and B. 11 ch. U. sect. i. The/ are some,what too long to be transcribed in this place.







OCR Output








262 WARS OF THE JEWS. Book I.


live in the management of affairs, and one that recovered the go­vernment to Hyrcanus, and preserved it in his hands.
5. ^However, Maliclms, when he Was suspected of poisoningAntipater, and when the multitude was angry with him for it, de­nied it, and made the people believe he was not guilty. He alsoprepared to make a greater figure, and raised soldiers ; for he didnot suppose that Herod would be quiet, who indeed came uponhim with an army presently, in order to revenge his father'sdeath ; but, upon hearing the advice of his brother Phasaelus,not to punish him in an open manner, lest the multitude shouldfall into a sedition, he admitted of Malichus's apology, and pro-ifessed that he cleared him of the suspicion ; he also made a pom­pous funeral for his father.
6. So Herod went to Samaria, which was then in a tumult,and settled the city in peace; after which, at the [Pentecost}festival, he returned to Jerusalem, having his armed men withhim : hereupon Hyrcanus, at the request of Malichus, who fear­ed his reproach, forbade them to introduce foreigners to mixthemselves with the people of the country, while they were pu­rifying themselves ; but Herod despised the pretence, and himthat gave that command, and came in by night. Upon whichMalichus came to him, and bewailed Antipater; Herod alsomade him believe [he admitted of his lamentations as real], al­though he had much ado to restrain his passion at him ; however,he did himself bewail the murder of his father, in his letters toCassius, who, on other accounts, also hated Malichus ; Cassiussent him word back tha£,'he should avenge his father's death uponhim, and privately gave order to the tribunes that were under him,that they should assist Herod in a righteous action he was about.
T. And because, upon the taking of Laodicea by Cassius, themen of power were gotten together from all quarters, with pre­sents and crowns in their hands, Herod allotted this time for thepunishment of Malichus. When Malichus suspected that, andwas- at Tyre, he resolved to withdraw his son privately from a-rr.ong the Tynans, who was an hostage there, while he got readyto fly away into Judea ; the despair he was in of escaping, ex­cited him to think of greater things ; for he hoped that he shouldraise the nation to a revolt from the Romans, while Cassius wasbusy about the war against Antony, and that he should easilydepose Hyrcanus, and get the crown for himself. ,
8. But fate laughed ct'the hopes he had ; for Herod foresawwhat he vyassp icalqus about, and invited both Hyrcanus and himto supper ; , but calling one of the principal servants that stood byhim, to him, he sent him out, as though it Xvere to get things rea­dy for supper, but in reality to give notice beforehand, about the
plot







OCR Output








Chap. I. THE ANTIQJJITIES Of THE JEWS. ' . S


preventing his pernicious designs. Although Antipafer'suncle by the mother's side were married to her daughter, and,this by his own connivance and management, while she hadbefore been married to Aristobulus, and while Salome's otherdaughter by that husband were married to the son of Calleas ;yet that marriage was no obstacle to her, who knew howwicked he was, in her discovering his designs, as her formerkindred to him could not prevent her hatred of him. NowHerod had compelled Salome, while she was in love with Syl-leus the Arabian, and had taken a fondness for him, to marryAlexas.; which match was by her submitted to at the instanceof Julia, who persuaded Salome not to refuse it, lest she shouldherself be their open enemy, since Herod had sworn that hewould never be friends with Salome, if she would not acceptof Alexas for her husband ; so she submitted to Julia as beingCaesar's wife, and, besides that, she advised her to nothingbut what was very much for her own advantage. At thistime,' also, it was that Herod sent back King Archelaus'sdaughter, who had been Alexander's wife, to her father, re­turning tiie portion he had with her out of his own estate, thatthere might be no dispute between them about it.
Now 'Herod brought up his son's children with great care ;for Alexander had two sons by Glaphyra ; and Aristobulushad three sons by Bernice, Salome's daughter, and two daugh­ters ; and, as his friends were one with him, he presented thechildren before them ; and deploring the hard fortune of hisown sons, he prayed that no such ill fortune would befal thesewho were their children, but that they might improve in vir­tue, and obtain what they justly deserved, and might makehim amends for his care of their education. He also causedthem to be betrothed against they should come to the properage of marriage ; the .elder of Alexander's sons to Pheroras'sdaughter, and Antipater's daughter to Aristobulus's eldestson. He also allotted one of Aristobulus's daughters to An­tipater's son, and Aristobulus's other daughter to Herod, ason of his own, who was born to him by the high-priest'sdaughter ; for it is the ancient practice among us to havemany wives at the same time. Now, the king made theseespousals for the children, out of commiseration of them nowthey were fatherless, as endeavouring to render Antipater kindto them by these intermarriages. But Antipater did not fail'to bear the same temper of mind to his brothers' children,which he had borne to his brothers themselves ; and his fa­ther's concern about them provoked his indignation against•them upon this supposal, that they would become greater than
A 2 , ever







OCR Output








284r ' WARS OF THE JEWS. Book I.


* set tyrants over all Syria ; and out of hatred to Herod it wasthat he assisted Antigonus, the son of Aristobulus, and principal-ly on Fabius's account, whom Antigonus had made his assistantby money, and had him accordingly on his side when he madehis descent; but it was Piolemy, the kinsman of Antigonus, thatsupplied all that he wanted.
3. When Herod had fought against these in the avenues of Ju-dea, he was conqueror in the battle, and drove away Antigonus,returned to Jerusalem beloved by every body, for the gloriousaction he had done; for those who did not before favour him,did join themselves to him now, because of his marriage into thefamily of Hyrcanus ; for as he had formerly married a wife outof his own country of no ignoble blood, who was called Doris, ofwhom he begat Antipater; so did he marry Mariamne, the daugh­ter of Alexander, the son of Aristobulus, and the grand daugh­ter of Hyrcanus, and was become thereby a relation of the king.
4. But when Caesar and Antony had slain Cassius near Philip-pi, and Caesar was gone to Italy, and Antony to Asia, amongst therest of the cities which sent ambassadors to Antony unto Bithy-nia, the great men of the Jews came also, and accused Phasae-lus and Herod, that they kept the government by force, and thatHyrcanus had no more than an honourable name. Herod ap­peared ready to answer this accusation, and, having made Anto­ny his friend by the large sums of money which he gave him,he brought him to such a temper as not to hear the others speakagainst him, and thus did they part at this time.
5. However, after this, there came an hundred of the princi­pal men among the Jews to Daphne by Antioch to Antony, whowas already in love with Cleopatra to the degree of slavery ;these Jews put those menthatwere the most potent, both indignityand eloquence, foremost, and accused the brethren f. But Mes-sala opposed them and defended the brethren, and that while Hyr­canus stood by him, on account of his relation to them. WhenAntony had heard both sides, he asked Hyrcanus which partywas the fittest to govern ? who replied, that Herod and his partywere the fittest. Antony was glad of that answer, for he hadbeen formerly treated in an hospitable and obliging manner byhis father Antipater, when he marched into Judea with Gabinius;so he constituted the brethren tetrarchs, and committed to themthe government of Judea.
6. Butwhen the ambassadors had indignation at this procedure,
Antony


* Here we see that Cassius «et tyrants over all Syria; so that his assisting pf'rstroy Caesar does not seem to have proceeded from his true zeal for public li­berty, but from a desire to be a tyrant himself.
t Fhaiaelus and Herod.







OCR Output








43-6 WARS OF THE JEWS. Book II.


great things, and he encouraged his hopes from those mean wick­ed tricks which he was the author of. He had a peculiar knackat thieving; but in some time he got certain companions in hisimpudent practices; at first they were but few, but as he pro­ceeded on in his evil course, they became still more and morenumerous. He took care that none of his partners should beeasily caught in their rogueries, but chose such out of the restas had the strongest constitutions of body, and the greatest cou­rage of soul, together with great skill in martial affairs; so hegot together a band of four hundred men, who came principallyout of the country of Tyre, and were vagabonds that had runaway from its villages; and by the means of these he laid wasteall Galilee, and irritated a considerable number, who were in,great expectation of a war then suddenly to arise among them.2. However John's want of money had hitherto restrained himin his ambition after command, and in his attempts to advancehimself. But when he saw that Josephus was highly pleasedwith the activity of his temper, he persuaded him, in the firstplace, to intrust him with the repairing of the walls of his na­tive city [Gischala], in which work he got a great deal of mo­ney from the rich citizens. He after that contrived a veryshrewd trick, and pretending that the Jews who dwelt in Syriawere obliged to make use of oil that was made by others thanthose of their own nation, he desired leave of Josephus to sendoil to their borders: so he bought four amphorae with such Ty-rian money as was of the value of four Attic drachmae, and1sold every half amphoric at the same price. And as Galileewas very fruitful in oil, and was peculiarly so at that time, bysending away great quantities, and having the sole privilege so10 do, he gathered an immense sum of money together, whichmoney he immeditatelyusedtothe disadvantage of him who gavehim that privilege; and, as he supposed, that if he could onceoverthrow Josephus, he shouldhimself obtain the government ofGalilee, so he gave order to the robbers that were under hiscommand, to be more zealous in their thievish expeditions, thatby the rise of many that desired innovations in the country, hemight either catch their general in his snares, as he came to thecountry's assistance, and then kill him; or if he should overlook'the robbers, he might accuse him for his negligence to the peo­ple of the country. He also s-pread abroad a report far and near;that Josephus was delivering up the administration of affairsto the Romans; and many such plots did he lay, in order t»ruin him.
3. Now at the same time that ceftian young men of the vil­lage Dabaritta, who kept guard in the great plain, laid snar&S
for







OCR Output








Chap. VI. WARS OF THE JEWS. 265


went to the royal palace, and Hyrcanus retired to the house ofAristobulus.
2. Now, those other people which were at variance with Ari­stobulus were afraid upon his unexpected obtaining the govern­ment ; and especially this concerned * Antipater, whpm Aristo­bulus hated of old. He was by birth an Idumean, and one of theprincipal of that nation on account of his ancestors and riches,and other authority to him belonging : he also persuaded Hyr-canus to fly to Aretas, the king of Arabia, and to lay claim tothe kingdom ; as also he persuaded Aretas to receive Hyrcanus,and to bring him back to his kingdom : he also cast great re­proaches upon Aristobulus, as to his morals, and gave great com­mendations to Hyrcanus, and ^exhorted Aretas to receive him,and. told him how becoming a thing it would be for him, whoruled so great a kingdom, to afford his assistance to such as areinjured ; alleging that Hyrcanus was treated unjustly, by beingdeprived of that dominon which belonged to him by the prero­gative of his birth. And when he had predisposed them bothto do what he would have them, he took Hyrcanus by night>and ran awayfrom the city, and, continuing his flight with greatswiftness, he escaped to the place called Petra, which is theroyal seat of the king of Arabia, where he put Hyrcanus intoAretas's hand ; and by discoursing much with him, and gainingupon him with many presents, he prevailed with him to givehim an army that might restore' him to his kingdom. Thisarmy consisted of fifty thousand footmen and horsemen, againstwhich Aristobulus was not able to make resistance, but was de­serted in his first onset, and was driven to Jerusalem : he alsohad been taken at first by force, if Scaurus, the Roman general,had not come and seasonably interposed himself, and raised thesiege. This Scaurus was sent into Syria from Armenia byPompey the Great, when he fought against Tigranes ; so Scauruscame to Damascus, which had been lately taken by Metellusand Lollius, and caused them to leave the place ; and, upon hishearing how the affairs of Judea stood, he made haste thither asto a certain booty.
3. As soon, therefore, as he was come into the country, therecame ambassadors from both the brothers, each of them desiringhis assistance ; but Aristobulus's three hundred talents had moreweight with him than the justice of the cause ; which sum,when Scaurus had received, he sent an herald to Hyrcanus andthe Arabians, and threatened them with the resentment of the-Romans, and of Pompey, unless they would raise' the siege. So
VOL. Hit-.v LI , J>: ,': , Aretas
* That this Antipater, the father of Herod the Great, was an Idumean, as Jo.SNepJius affirms here; see the note on Amiq B. XIV. ch. xv. sect. z.







OCR Output








402 WARS OF THE JEWS. Book II.


they fled away, the horsemen trampled them down, so that agreat many fell down dead by the strokes of the Romans, andmore by their own violence in crushing one another. Nowthere was a terrible crowding about the gates, and while everybody was making haste to get before another, the flight of themall was retarded, and a terrible destruction there was amongthose that fell down, for they were suffocated, and broken topieces by the multitude of those that were uppermost; nor couldany of them be distinguished by his relations in order to thecare of his funeral; the soldiers also who beat them, fell uponthose whom they overtook, without shewing them any mercy,and thrust the multitude through the place called* Bezetha, asthey forced their way in order to get in and seize upoa thetemple, and the tower Antonia. Florus also being desirous toget those places into his possession, brought such as were withliim out of the king's palace, and would have compelled them toget as far as the citadel [Antonia.]; but his attempt failed, forthe people immediately turned back upon him, and stopped theviolence of his attempt, and as they stood upon the tops of theirhouses, they threw their darts at the Romans, who, as theywere sorely galled thereby, because those weapons came fromabove, and they were not abl« to make a passage through themultitude, which stopped up the narrow passages, they retiredto the camp which was at the palace.
6. But for the seditious, they were afraid lest Florus shouldcome again, and get possession of the temple, through Antonia;so they got immediately upon those cloisters of the temple thatjoined to Antonia, and cut them' down. This cooled the ava­rice of Florus, for whereas he was eager to obtain the treasuresof God [in the temple], and on that account was desirous of get­ting into Antonia, as soon as the cloisters were broken down,he left off his attempt; he then sent for the high-priests and theSanhedrim, and told them, that he was indeed himself going outof the city, but that he would leave them as large a garrison asthey should desire. Hereupon they promised that they wouldmake no innovations, in case he would leave them one band;
but


* I take this Bezetha to be that small hill adjoining to the north side of thetemple, whereon was the hospital with live porticoes or cloisters, and beneathwhich was the sheep pool of Bethesda, into which an angel or messenger, at acertain season, descended, and where he or they, who were the " first put into" the pool," were cured,!John v. I, &c. This situation of Bezetha, in Josephus,on the north side of the temple, and not far off the tower Antonia, exactly agreesto the place of the same pool at this day. Only the remaining cloisters are butthree. See Maundrel, page 106. The entire buildings seem to have been calledthe Ntia City, and this part, where was the hospital, peculiarly Bezetha or Beth-See chap. six. § 4.







OCR Output








4V2 WARS OF THE JEWS. Book II,


down to him presently, and when he had taken them into one ofhis vessels, he ordered them to be carried a great way off fromthe city. He then commanded that fifty others of their senate,such as were men of the greatest eminence, should come to him,that they also might give him some security on their behalf.After which, under one new pretence or another, he called forthothers, one after another, to make the leagues between them.He then gave order to the masters of those vessels which he hadthus filled, to sail away immediately for Taricheae, and to con.,fine those men in the prison there; till at length he took alltheir senate, consisting of six hundred persons, and about twothousand of the populace, and carried them away to Tarichea;.10. And when the rest of the people cried out, that it wasone Clitus that was the chief author of this revolt, they desiredhim to spend his anger upon him [only]; but Josephus, whose in.tention it was to slay nobody, commanded one Levius, belongingto his guards, to go out of the vessel in order to cut off bothGlitus's hands; yet was Levius afraid to go out by himselfalone, to such a large body of enemies, and refused to go. NowClitus saw that Josephus was in a great passion in the ship, andready to leap out of it, in order to execute the punishment him­self; he begged therefore from the shore, that he would leavehim one of his hands, which Josephus agreed to, upon conditionthat he would himself cut off the other hand; accordingly hedrew his sword, and with his right hand cut off his left, so greatwas the fear he was in of Josephus himself. And thus he tookthe people of Tiberias prisoners, and recovered the city againwith empty shius * and seven of his guard. Moreover, a fewdays afterward he retook Gischala, which had revolted with theTropic of Sepphoris, and gave his soldiers leave to plunder it;vet did he get all the plunder together, and restored it to the in­habitants, and the like he did to the inhabitants of Sepphoris,and Tiberias. For when he had subdued those cities, he hada mind, by letting them be plundered, to give them some goodinstruction, while at the same time he regained their good-willby restoring them their money again.
CHAP. XXII.
The Jews mate all ready for the war. And Simon the son of
Gioras fulls to the plundering.
S. 1. A ND thus were the disturbances of Galilee quieted,+ \. when, upon their ceasing to prosecute their civil dis­sensions, they betook themselves to make preparations for the
war


* I cannot bat think this stratagem of Josephus,which is related both here a^Jin his life, § 31, 33. Vol. III. to be one of the liiiesc thai i;ver wss inyentijd atA-•,-srutcd by any v;arr:or whatsoever.







OCR Output








Chap. III. 139 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


sion of king Agrippa, who exhorted him not to let such a do­minion slip out of his hands, when it came thus to him of itsown accord. Now, this Agrippa, with relation to Caius, didwhat became one that had been so much honoured by him; forhe embraced Caius's body after he was dead, and laid it upon abed, and covered it as well as he could, and went out to theguards, and told them that Caius was still alive ; but he said thatthey should call for physicians, since he was very ill of hiswounds. But when he had learned that Claudius was carriedaway violently by the soldiers, he rushed through the crowd tohim, and when he found that he was in disorder, and ready toresign up the government to the senate, he encouraged him, anddesired him to keep the government; but when he had said thisto Claudius, he retired home. And, upon the senate's sendingfor him, he anointed his head with ointment, as if he had latelyaccompanied with his wife, and had dismissed her, and theacame to them : he also asked of the senators what Claudius did ;who told him the present state of affairs, and then asked his opi­nion about the settlement of the public. He told them inwords, that he was ready to lose his life for the honour of thesenate, but desired them to consider what was for their advantage,without any regard to what was most agreeable to them; forthat those who grasp at government, will stand in need ofweapons, and soldiers to guard them, unless they will set upwithout any preparation for it, and so fall into danger. Andwhen the senate replied, That " they would bring in weapons'f in abundance, and money, and that as to an army, a part of" it was already collected together for them, and they would" raise a larger one by giving the slaves their liberty." Agrip­pa made answer, " O senators ! may you be able to compass
what you have a mind to ; yet will I immediately tell you" my thoughts, because they tend to your preservation : take*' notice, then, that the army which wiil fight for Claudius hath" been long exercised in warlike affairs ; but our army will be" no better than a rude multitude of raw men, and those such" as have been unexpectedly made free from slavery, and ungo-" vernable ; we must then fight against those that are skilful in" war, with men who know not so much as how to draw theira swords. So that my opinion is, that we should send some" persons to Claudius, to persuade him to lay down the govern-" ment, and I am ready to be one of your ambassadors."
2. Upon this speech of Agrippa, the senate complied withhim, and he was sent among others, and privately informedClaudius of the disorder the senate was in, and gave insructions'to answer them in a somewhat commanding strain, and as one in-
S 2 vested







OCR Output








Chap. XXI. WARS OF THE JEWS. 313


ten in breadth, and some still larger. But when the haven wasfilled up to that depth, he enlarged that wall which was thus al­ready extant above the sea, till it was two hundred feet wide :one hundred of which had buildings before it, in order to breakthe force of the waves, whence it was called Procumasia, or thefirst breaker of the waves; but the rest of the space was undera stone wall that ran round it. On this wall were very largetowers, the principal and most beautiful of which was calledDrusium, from Drusus, who was son-in-law to Caesar.
7. There was also a great number of arches, where the mari­ners dwelt; and all the places before them round about was alarge valley, or walk, for a key for landing place] to those thatcame on shore; but the entrance was en the north, because thenorth wind was there the most gentle of all the winds. At themouth of the haven were on each side three great Colossi, sup­ported by pillars, where thoseCollossi that arejonyour left handas you sail into the port, are supported by a solid tower, butthose on the right hand are supported by two upright stonesjoined together, which stones were larger than that tower whichwas on the ether side of the entrance. Now there were con­tinual edifices joined to the haven, which were also themselvesof white stone; and to this haven did the narrow streets of thecity lead, and were built at equal distances one from anotheq.And over against the mouth of the haven, upon an elevation,there was a temple for Caesar, which was excellent both in beau­ty and largeness; and therein was a Colossus of Caesar, not lessthan that of Jupiter Olympius, which it was made to resemble.The other Colossus of Rome was equal to that of Juno at Argos.So he dedicated the city to the province, and the haven to thesailors there; but the honour of the building he ascribed to *Caesar, and named it Cesarea accordingly.
8. He also built the other edifices, the amphitheatre, and thea­tre, and market place, in a manner agreeable to that denomina­tion; and appointed games every fifth year, and called them inlike manner, Cedar's Games, and he first himself proposed thelargestprizes upon the hundred ninty-secondOlympiad; in whichnot only the victors themselves, but those thatcamenext to them,and even those that came in the third place, were partakers ofhis royal bounty. He also rebuilt Anthedon, a city that lay onthe coast, and had been demolished in the wars, and named it
Agrippeum.
« These building« of cities by the name of Cssar/ and institution of solemngame* in honour of Augustus Cassar, as here, and in the antiquities, related of Herrod by Josephus, the Roman historians atteit to' as things then frequent in theprovinces of that empire, as Dean Aldrich observes on this chapter.VOL. III. R r







OCR Output








 


Pa


-


ssa







OCR Output








Chap. XIII. WARS OF THE JEWS. 393


these prevailed with the multitude to act like madmen, andwent before them into the wilderness, as pretending that Godwould there shew them the signals of liberty. But Felixthought this procedure was to be the beginning of a revolt; sohe sent some horsemen and footmen both armed, who destroy­ed a great number of them.
. 5. But there was an Egyptian false prophet that did the Jewsmore mischief than the former: for he was a cheat, and pre­tended to be a prophet also, and got together thirty thousandmen that were deluded by him; these he led round about fromthe wilderness to the mount which was called the Mount of O-lives, and was ready to break into Jerusalem by force from thatplace; and if he could but once conquer the Roman garrison,and the people, he intended to domineer over them by the assis­tance of those guards of his that were to break into the citywith him. But Felix prevented his attempt, and met him withhis Roman soldiers, while all the people assisted him in his at­tack upon them, insomuch that, when it came to a battle, theEgyptian ran away, with a few others, while the greatest partof those that were with him were either destroyed or takenalive; but the rest of the multitude were dispersed every oneto their own homes, and there concealed themselves.
6. Now, when these were quieted, it happened, as it does ina diseased body, that another part was subject to an inflammation,for a company of deceivers and robbers got together, and per­suaded the Jews to revolt, and exhorted them to assert their li­berty, inflicting death on those that continued in obedience tothe Roman government, and saying, that such as willingly choseslavery, ought lo be forced from such their desired inclinations;for they parted themselves into different bodies, and lay in waitup and down the country, and plundered the houses of the greatmen, and slew the men themselves, and set the villages on fire;a>id this till all Judea was filled with the effects of their mad­ness. And thus the flame was every day more and more blownup, till it came to a direct war.
7. There was also another disturbance at Cesarea, those Jewswho were mixed with the Syrians that lived there, raising atumult against them. The Jews pretended that the city wastheirs, and said, that he who built it was a Jew, meaning kingHerod. The Syrians confessed also, that its builder was a Jew,but they still said, however, that the city was a Grecian city;for that he who set up statues and temples in it could not designit for Jews. On which account both parties had a contest withone another; and this contest increased so much, that it cameat last to arms, and the bolder sort of them marched out to fight;
VOL. Ill, 3 D for







OCR Output








Chap. IX. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 107


great victory over them. But there now came in to Anileus aconflux of bad men, who regarded their own lives very little, ifthey might but gain some present ease, insomuch that they, bythus coming to him, compensated the multitude of those thatperished in the fight. Yet were not these men like to those that fell,because they were rash, and unexercised in war ; however, withthese he came upon the villages of the Babylonians, and a mightydevastation of all things was made there by the injuries that An­ileus did them. So the Babylonians, and those that had alreadybeen in the war, fentto Neerda to the Jews there, and demandedAnileus. But, although they did not agree to their demands,(for if they had been willing to deliver him up, it was not intheir power so to do) ; yet did they desire to make peace withthem. To which the other replied, that they also wanted to set­tle conditions of peace with them, and sent men together with theBabylonians, who discoursed with Anileus about them. But theBabylonians, upon taking a view of his situation, and having learn­ed where Anileus and his men lay, fell secretly upon them asthey were drunk, and fallen asleep, and slew all that they caughtof them, without any fear, and killed Anileus himself also.
8. The Babylonians were now freed from Anileus's heavyincursions, which had been a great restraint to the effects of thathatred they bore to the Jews ; for they were almost always atvariance, by reason of the contrariety of their laws ; and whichparty soever grew boldest before the other, they assaulted theother : and at this time in particular it was, that, upon the ruinof Anileus's party, the Babylonians attacked the Jews, whichmade those Jews so vehemently to resent the injuries they re­ceived from the Babylonians, that being neither able to fight them,nor bearing to live with them, they went to Seleucia, the princi­pal city of those parts, which was built by Seleucus Nicator.It was inhabited by many of the Macedonians, but by more ofthe Grecians ; not a few of the Syrians also dwelt there ; andthither did the Jews fly, and lived there five years, without anymisfortunes. But, on the sixth year, a pestilence came upon theseat Babylon, which occasioned new removals of men's habitation?out of that city ; and because they came to Seleucia, it happenedthat a still heavier calamity came upon them on that account,which I am going to relate immediately.
9. Now the way of living of the people of Seleucia, whichwere Greeks and Syrians, was commonly quarrelsome, and fullof discords, though the Greeks wefe too hard for the Syrians.When, therefore, the Jews were come thither, and dwelt amongthem, there arose a sedition, and the Syrians were too hard forthe other, by the assistance of the Jews, who are men that despise
O 2 dangers,







OCR Output








Chap. XL WARS OF THE JEWS. „ 385


" rage, I will be ready to expose my own life for such a great" number as you are." Whereupon he dismissed the multitude,who prayed greatly for his prosperity ; and he took the .armyout of Ptolemais, and returned to Antioch ; from whencehe presently sent an epistle to Caesar, and informed him of theirruption he had made into Judea, and of the supplications of thenation ; and that unless he had a mind to lo'^e both the country,and the men in it, he must permit them to keep their law, andmust countermand his former injunction. Cams answered thatepistle in a violent way, and threatened to have Petronius putto death for his "being so tardy in the execution of what he hadcommanded. But it happened that those who brought Caius'sepistJe were tossed by a storm, and were detained on the sea forthree months, while others that brought the news of Caius'sdeath had a good voyage. Accordingly, Petronius received theepistle concerning'Caius seventand twenty days before he receivedthat which was against himself.
CHAP. XI.
Concerning tie government of Claudius, and the reign of Agrippa.Concerning the deaths of Agrippa, and of Hero J, and whatchildren they both left behind them*


§ 1. "VTOW when Caius had reigned three years and eight-L\ months, and had been slain by treachery, Claudiuswas hurried away by the armies that were at Rome to takethe government upon htm: but the senate' upon the reference ofthe consuls, Sentius Saturninus, and Pomponius Secundus, gaveorders to the three regiments of soldiers that stayed with them tokeep the city quiet, and went up into the capitol in great num­bers, and resolved to oppose Claudius by force, on account ofthe barbarous treatment they had met with from Caius ; andthey determined either to settle the nation under an aristocracy,as they had of old been governed, or at least to choose by votesuch an one for emperor as might be worthy of it.
2. Now it happened that at this time Agrippa sojourned atRome, and that both the senate called him to consult with them,and at the same time Claudius sent for him out of the camp,that he might be serviceable to him, as he should have occa­sion for his service. So he, perceiving that Claudius was ineffect made Caesar already, went to him, who sent him as anambassador to the senate, to let them know what his intentionswere : That " in the first place, it was without his seeking," that he was hurried away by the soldiers; moreover, that he" thought it was not just to desert those soldiers in such theirVOL. III. 3 C " zeal







OCR Output













OCR Output








42 Book XVII. ANTIQJJITIES OF THE JEWS.


das having gotten together a multitude of men of a profligate-character about Sephoris in Galilee, made an assault upon the pa­lace [there], and seized upon all the weapons] that were laid upiin it, and with them armed every one of those that were withhim, and carried away what money was left there ; and he be­came terrible to all men, by tearing and rending those that came-near him ; and all this in order to raise himself, and out of art, ambitious desire of the royal dignity ; and he hoped to obtainthat as the reward, not of his virtuous-skill in war, but of hisextravagance in doing injuries.
6. There was also Simon, who had been a slave of Herod theking, but in other respects a comely person, of a tall and robustbody ; he was one that was much superior to others of his order,and had had great things committed to his care. This man waselevated at the disorderly state of things, and was so bold as toput a diadem on his head, while a certain number of the peoplestood by him, and by them he was declared to be a king, andthought himself more worthy of that dignity than any one else.He burnt down the royal palace at Jericho, and plundered whatwas left in it. He also set fire to many other of the king's hou­ses in several places of the country, and utterly destroyed them,,and permitted those that were with him to take what was leftin them for a, prey and he would have done greater things,unless care had been taken to repress him immediately ; forGratus, when he had joined himself to some Roman soldiers,took the forces he had with him, and met Simon, and after a greatand a long fight, no small part of those that came from Perea,.who were a disordered body of men, and fought rather in a boldthan in a skilful manner, were destroyed; and although Simon hadsaved himself by flying away through a certain valley, yet Gra­tus overtook him, and cut off his head. The royal palace, also,-at Amathus, by the river Jordan, was burnt down by a party ofmen that were got together, as were those belonging to Simon.And thus did a great and wild fury spread itself over the na­tion, because they had no king to keep the multitude in goodorder, and because those foreigners, who came to reduce the se­ditious to sobriety, did, on the contrary, set them more in aflame, because of the injuries thay offered them, and the avari­cious management of their affairs.
7. But because Athronges, a person neither eminent by thedignity of his progenitors, nor for any great wealth he was pos-sessed'of,. but one that had in all respects been a shepherd only,,and was not known by any body ; yet because he was a tall man,,and excelled others in the strength of his hands,, he was so boldas to set up for king. Tin's man thought it So sweet- a thing to







OCR Output








Gfcap. VII. ANTIQJJITIES OF THE JEWS. *9


CHAP. VII.How Herod lhe tetrarch was banished'.
| 1. "DUT Herodias, Agrippa's sister, who now lived as wife•^ to that Herod who was tetrarch of Galilee and Perea,took this authority of her brother in an envious manner, parti­cularly when she saw that he had a greater dignity bestowed onhim than her husband had ; since when he ran away, it was be­cause he was in a way of -dignity, and of great good fortune.She was therefore grieved, and much displeased, at so great amutation of his affairs, and chiefly when she saw him marchingamong the multitude with the usual ensigns of royal authority,She was not able to conceal how miserable she was, bv reasonof the envy she had towards him ; but she excited her husband,and desired him that he would sail to Rome, to court honoursequal to his : for she said, that " she could not bear to live any" longer, while Agrippa, the son of that Aristobulus who was" condemned to die by his father, one that came to her husband'' in such extreme poverty, that the necessaries of life were"forced to be entirely supplied him day by day ; and whsn he*' fled away from his creditors by sea, he now returned a king :" while he was himself the son of a king, and while the near" relation he bare to royal authority, called upon him to gain" the like dignity, he sat still, and was contented with a pri-" vater life. But then, Herod, although thou wast formerly" not concerned to be in a lower condition than thy father, from"' whom thou wast derived, had been j yet do thou now seek" after the dignity which thy kinsman hath attained to ; and do" not thou bear this contempt, that a man who admired thy" riches should be in a greater 'honour than thyself, nor suffer" his poverty to shew itself able to purchase greater things than" our abundance ; nor do thou esteem it other than a shameful*' thing to be inferior to one, who, the other day, lived upon thy"'charity. But, let us go to Rome, and let us spare no pains" nor expences, either of silver or gold, since they cannot be kept" for any better use, than for the obtaining of a kingdom,"
2. But, for Herod, he opposed her request at this time, out ofthe love of ease, and having a suspicion of the trouble he shouldhave at Rome ; so he tried to instruct her better. But the morash£ saw him draw back, the more she pressed him to it, and de-Sired him to leave no stone unturned in order to be king: and atlast she left not off till she engaged him, whether he would or not,to be of her sentiments, because he could no otherwise avoid herimportunity. So he got all things ready, after as sumptuous a
VOL. III. M







OCR Output








310 Book I. WARS OF THE JEWS.


rer for them, when they were to march as far as Pelusium,through a dry country, which he did also in like manner at theirreturn thence; nor were there any necessaries wanting to thatarmy. It was therefore the opinion, both of Caesar and of hissoldiers, that Herod's kingdom was too small for those generouspresentshe made them; for which reason, when Caesar was comeinto Egypt, and Cleopatra and Antony were dead, he did notonly bestow other marks of honour upon him, but made an ad­dition to his kingdom, by giving him not only the country whichhad been taken from him by Cleopatra, but besides that, Gada-ra, and Hippos, and Samaria; and moreover, of the maritimecities, * Gaza and Anthedon, and Joppn, and Strato's Tower.He also made him a present of four hundred Galls [Galatians]as a guard for his body, which they had been to Cleopatra be­fore. Nor did any thing so strongly induce Caesar to make thesepresents as the generosity of him that received them.
4. Moreover, after the first games at Actium, he added to hiskingdom both the region called Trachonitis, and what lay in itsneighbourhood, Batanea, and the country of Auranitis; and thaton the following occasion: Zenodoru3, who had hired the houseof Lysanias,had all along sent robbersout of Trachonitis amongthe Damascens; who thereupon had recourse to Varro, thepresident of Syria, and desired of him thathe would representthecalamity they were in to Caesar: when Caesar was acquaintedwith it, he sent back orders that this nest of robbers should bedestroyed. Varro therefore made an expedition against them,and cleared the land of those men, and took it away from Zeno-dorus. Caesar did also afterward bestow it on Herod, that itmight not again become a receptacle for those robbers that hadcome against Damascus. He also made him a procurator of allSyria, and this on the tenth year afterward, when he came a.gain into that province; and this was so established, that theother procurators could not do any thing in the administrationwithout his advice: but when Zenodorus was dead, Caesar be­stowed on him all that land which lay between Trachonitis andGalilee. Yet what was still of more consequence to Herod, hewas beloved by Caesar next after Agrippa, and by Agrippa nextafter Caesar; whence he arrived at a very great degree of feli­city. Yet did the greatness of his soul exceed it, and the main
part
* Since Josephus, both here, and in his Antiq. B. XV. ch. vii. sect. 3. Vol. II.reckons G,iza, which had been a free city, among the cities given Herod by Au­gustus, and yet implies that Herod had made Costobarus a governor of it before.Antiq. B. XV. ch. viil sect. 9. Harduin has some pretence for saying that Jose­ph us here contradicted himself. But perhaps Herod thought he had sufficient au­thority to put a governor into Gaza, after he was made tetrarch or king, in times0! war, before the city was entirely delivered into his hands by Augustus,







OCR Output








Chap. I. ANTIQJJITIES OF THE JEWS. tl


this the rather, because the infection which spread thence amongthe younger sort, who were zealous for it, brought the publicto destruction.
2. The Jews had for a great while had three sects of philoso­phy peculiar to themselves, the sect of the Essens, and the sectof the Sadducees, and the third sort of opinions was that of thosecalled Pharisees ; of which sects, although I have already spokenin the second book of the Jewish war, yet will I a little touchupon them now.
3. Now, for the Pharisees, thty live meanly, and despise de­licacies in diet; and they follow the contract of reason ; and whatthat prescribes to them as good for them, they do ; and they thinkthey ought earnestly to 'strive to observe reason's dictates foepractice. They also pay a respect to such as are in years ; norare they so bold as to contradict them in any thing which theyhave introduced; and, when they determine that all things aredone by fate, they do not take away the freedom from men ofacting as thej think fit; since their notion is, that it hath pleasedGod to make a temperament, whereby what he wills is done,but so that the will of man can act virtuously or viciously. Theyalso believe, that souls have an immortal vigour in them, andthat under the earth there will be rewards or punishments, ac­cording- as they have lived virtuously or viciously in this life; andthe latter are to be detained in an everlasting prison, but that theformer shall have power to revive and live again ; on account ofwhich doctrines, they are able greatly to persuade the body ofthe people ; and whatsoever they do about divine worship,prayers, and sacrifices, they perform them according to theirdirection ; insomuch that the cities gave great attestations t6them on account of their entire virtuous conduct, both in theactions of their lives, and their discourses also.
4. But the doctrine of the Sadducees is this, That souls diewith the bodies ; nor do they regard the observation of any thingbesides what the law enjoins them ; for they think it an instanceof virtue to dispute with those teachers of philosophy whom theyfrequent; but this doctrine is received but by a fewj yet by thosestill of the greatest dignity. But they are able to do almost no­thing of themselves ; for when they become magistrates* as theyare unwillingly and by force sometimes obliged to be, they ad­dict themselves to the notions of the Pharisees, because the mul­titude would not otherwise bear them.
5. The doctrine of the Essens is this, That all things are bestascribed to God. They teach the immortality of souls, and e-Steem that the rewards of righteousness are to be earnestly stri-
Voi'. III. H ^ vea







OCR Output








Chap. XV. WARS or THE JEWS. 2Q3


his forces increased every day as he went along, and all Galileewith few exceptions joined themselves to him. So he proposedto himself to set about his most necessary enterprise, and thatwas Masada, in order to deliver his relations from the siege theyendured. But still Joppa stood in his way, and hindered his go­ing thither; for it was necessary to take that city first, whichwas in the enemies hands, that when he should go to Jerusalem,no fortress'might be left in the enemies' power behind him. Siloalso willingly joined him, as having now a plausible occasionof drawing off his forces [from Jerusalem]; and when the Jewspursued him and pressed upon him, [in his retreat], Herod madean excursion upon then with a small body of his men, and soonput them to flight, and saved Silo when he was in distress.
4. After this Herod took Joppa, and then made haste to Masa­da to free his relations. Now as he was marching, many camein to him, induced some by their friendship to his father, someby the reputation he had already gained himself, and some in^rder to repay the benefits they had received from them both;but still what engaged the greatest number on his side, was thehopes from him, when he should be established in his kingdom ;so that he had gotten together already an army hard to be con­quered. But Antigonus laid an ambush for him as he marchedout, in which he did little or no harm to his enemies. However,he easily recovered his relations again that were in Masada, aswell as the fortress Ressa, and then marched to Jerusalem, wherethe soldiers that were with Silo joined themselves to his own,as did many out of the city, from a dread of his power.
5. Now when he had pitched his camp on the west side of thecity, the guards that were there shot their arrows, and.threwtheir darts at them, while others ran out in companies, and at­tacked those in the forefront; but Herod commanded procla mation'to be made at the wall, that " he was come for the good of the" people and the preservation of the city, without any design to" be revenged on his open enemies,but to grant oblivion to them," though they had been the most obstinate against him." Nowthe soldiers that were for Antigonus made a contrary clamour,and did neither permit any body to hear that proclamation, norto change their party; so Antigonus gave order to his forcesto beat the enemy from the walls; accordingly, they soon threwtheir darts at them from the towers, and put them to flight.
6. Andhere it wasthatSilo discovered hehad taken bribes; forhe set many of the soldiers to clamour about their want of ntces-saries, and to require their pay, in order to buy themselves food,and to demand that he would lead them into places convenientfortheir winter quarters; because all the parts about the city were







OCR Output








Chap. VIII. WARS of f HE JEWS.


8. But for those that are caught in any heinous sins, they castthem out of their society, and he who is thus separated fromthem, does often die after a miserable manner; for as he isbound by the oath he hath taken, and by the customs he hathbeen engaged in, he is not at liberty to partake of that food thathe meets with elsewhere, but is forced to eat grass, and to fa­mish his body with hunger, till he perish; for which reason theyreceive many of them again, when they are at their last gasp>out of compassion to them, as thinking the miseries they haveendured till they came to the very brink of death, to be a suf­ficient punishment for the sins they had been guilty of.
9. But in the judgments they exercise they are most accurateand just, nor do they pass sentence by the votes of acourt that isfewer than an hundred. And as to what is once determined bythat number, it is unalterable. What they most of all honour,after God himself, is the name of their legislator [Moses], whom'if any one blaspheme, he is punished capitally. They also thinkit a good thing to obey their elders, and the major part. Ac*cordingly, if ten of them be sitting together, no one of them willspeak while the other nine are against it. They also avoidspitting in the midst of them, or on the right side. Moreover,they are stricter than any other of the Jews in restmg fromtheir labours on the seventh day; for they not only get theirfood ready the day before, that they may not be obliged tokindle a fire on that day, but they will not remove any vesselout of its place, nor go to stool thereon. Nay, on other daysthey dig a small pit, a foot deep, with a paddle, (which kind ofhatchet is given them, when they are first admitted amongthem), and covering themselves round with their garment, thatthey may not affront the divine rays ef light, they ease them-selves into that pit, after which they put the earth that wasdug out again into the pit; and even this they do only in themore lonely places, which they choose out for this purpose;and although this easement of the body be natural, yet it is arule with them to wash themselves after it, as if it were a de­filement to them.
10. Now after the time of their preparatory trial is over,they are parted into four classes; and so far are the juniors in­ferior to the seniors, that if the seniors should be touched by thejuniors, they must wash themselves, as if they had intermixedthemselves with the company of a foreigner. They are long-lived also, insomuch that many of them live above an hundredyears, by means of the simplicity of their diet, nay, as 1 think,by means of the regular course of life they observe also. Theycontemn the miseries of life, ai}d are above pain, by thegenero-
Vot. III. 3 B sity







OCR Output








404 WARS OF THE JEWS. Book If.


they came sixty furlongs out of Jerusalem, and congratulatedboth Agrippa and Neopolitanus ; but the wives of those thathad been slain, came running first of all and lamenting. Thepeople also, when they hard their mourning, fell into lamenta­tions also, and besought Agrippa to assist them: thej also criedout to Neopolitanus, and complained of them any miseries theyhad endured under Florus, and they shewed them, when theywere come into the city, how the market-place was made deso­late, and the houses plundered. They then pursuaded Neopoli­tanus, by the means of Agrippa, that he would walk roundthe city, with one only servant, as far as Siloam, that he mightinform himself that the Jews submmited to all the rest of the Ro­mans, and were only displeased at Florus, by reason of his ex­ceeding barbarity to them. So he walked round, and had suf­ficient experience of the good temper the people were in, andthen went up to the temple, where he called the multitude to­gether, and highly commended them for their fidelity to theRomans, and earnestly exhorted them to keep the peace, andhaving performed such parts of divine worship at the temple ashe was allowed to do, he returned to Cestius.
3. But as for the multitude of the Jews, they addressed them­selves to the king, and to the high-priests, and desired they mighthave leave to send ambassadors to Nero against Florus, and notby their silence afford a suspicion that they had been the occa­sions of such great slaughters as had been made, and were dis­posed to revolt, alleging, that they should seem to have been thefirst beginners of the war, if they did not prevent the report byshewing who it was that began it; and it appeared openly thatthey would not be queit, if any body should hinder them fromsending such an ambassage. But Agrippa, although he thoughtit too dangerous a thing for them to appoint men to go as theaccusers of Florus, yet did he not think it fit for him to over­look them, as they were in a disposition for war. He thereforecalled the multitude together into a large gallery, and placedhis sister Bernice in the house of the Asamoneans, that she mightbe seen by them, (which house was over the gallery, at Che pas­sage to the upper city, where the bridge joined the temple tothe gallery), and spake to them as follows :
4. * " Had I perceived that you were all zealously disposed
" to


* In this speech of King Agrippa we have an authentic account of the extentand strength of the Roman empire when the Jewish war began. And this speech. 'with other circumstances in Josephus, demonstrate how wise, and how great a perrson Agrippa was, and why Josephus elsewhere calls him QxuiAxffiwr&'roSi a " most" wonderful" or " admirable man," Contr. Ap. I. 9, He is the same Agrippawho said to Paul, «' Almost thou persuadest me to be a Christian," Acts zxvi, jg.







OCR Output








166 Book XX. ANTIQJJIIUS OF THE JEWS..


himself upon the ground, and put ashes upon his head, in testi­mony of his confusion, and fasted, together with his wives andchildren. When he called upon God, and said, " O Lord and" Governor, if I have not in vain committed myself to thy** goodness, but have justly determined that thou only art the" Lord and principal of all beings, come now to my assistance," and defend me from my enemies, not only on my own account,'< but on account of their insolent behaviour with regard to thyM power, while they have not feared to lift up their proud and" arrogant tongue against thee." Thus did he lament and be.moan himself, with tears in his eyes ; whereupon God heard hisprayer. And immediately that very night Vologases receivedletters, the contents of which were these, that a great band ofDahae and Sahae, despising him, now he was gone so long a jour­ney from home, had made an expedition, and laid Parthia waste ;so that he [was forced to] retire back, without doing any thing.And thus it was that Izates escaped the threatenings of the Par­tisans, by the providence of God.
3. It was not long ere Izates died, when he had completedfifty-five years of his life, and had ruled his kingdom twenty-four years. He left behind him twenty-four sons and twenty-four daughters. ' However, he gave order that his brother Mo-nobazus should succeed in the government, thereby requitinghim, because, while he was himself absent, after their father'sdeath, he had faithfully preserved the government for him. Butwhen Helena, his mother, heard of her son's death, she was ingreat heaviness, as, was but natural upon her loss of such a mostdutiful son ; yet was it a comfort to her, that she heard thesuccession came to her eldest son. Accordingly she went to himin haste ; and when she was come into Adiabene, she did not longoutlive her son Izates. But Monobazus sent her bones, as wellas those of Izates, his brother, to Jerusalem, and gave order thatthey should be buried at the pyramids * which their mother haderected ; they were three in number, and distant more than three,furlongs from the city Jerusalem. But for the actions of Mo­nobazus the king, which he had during the rest of his life, wewill relate them hereafter f. , - .
CHAP.
* These pyramids or pillars, erected by Helena, queen of Adiabene, near Je­rusalem, three in number, are mentioned by Eusebius, in his Eccles. Hist. B. II.ch. ii. for which Dr. Hudson refers us to Valesius's notes upon that place.—They are also mentioned by Pausanias, as hath been already noted, chap. ii. sect.-0. Eel and guesses that that now called Absalom's pillar may be one of them.
f This account is now wanting;.







OCR Output








Chap. IX. ANTIQJHTIES OF THE JEWS. 185


to succeed him, he wa's desirous to appear to do somewhat that'might be grateful to the pefople of Jerusalem ; so he brought outall those prisoners who seemed to him to be the most plainlyworthy of death, and brdef&d fherii to be put to death according­ly. But as to those who had been put into prison on some tri­fling occasions, he took nioney of them, and dismissed them ; bvwhich means the'prisons were emptied, but the country was filledwith 'robbers.' ,
6. Now,'as many ef the Levites*, which' is a tribe of ours, aswere singers of hymns,' persuaded the king to assemble a sanhe-'drim, and to give them leave to wear linen garments, as well asthe priests ; for they said, that this would be a work worthy thetimes of his government, that he might have a memorial of such
' a novelty, as being his doing. Nor did they fail of obtainingtheir desire ; for the king, with the suffrages of those that canit:into the sanhedrim, granted: the singers of hymns this privilege,that they might lay aside their former garments, and wear such alinen one as they desired ; and as a pan-of -this tribe ministeredin the temple, he also permitted them to learn those hymns asthey had besought him for. ' Now all this was contrary to thelaws of our country, whichy whenever they have been transgress­ed, we have never been able to avoid the punishment of suchtransgressions.
7. And now it was that the temple *j- was finished. So, whenthe people saw that the workmen were unemployed, who wereabove eighteen thousand, and that they, receiving no wages,were in want, because they had earned their bread by their la­bours about the temple, and while they were unwilling to keepthem by the treasures that were there deposited, out of fear off their being carried away by] the Romans: and while they hada regard to the making provision for the workmen, they had amind to expend those treasures upon them; for if any one ofthem did but labour for a single hour, tye received his pay im­mediately ; so they persuaded him to rebuild the eastern clois­ters. These cloisters belonged to the outer coart, and were si­tuated in a deep valley, and had walls that reached four hundredcubits [in length], and were built of square and very whitestones, the length of each of which stones was twenty cubits, andtheir height six cubits. This was the work of king Solomon *,
VOL. III. A a who


* This insolent petition of some of the Levites, to wear the sacerdotal gar.ments, when they sung hymns to God in the temple, was very probably owingto the great depression and contempt the haughty high-priests had nnwbroughttheir brethren the priests i'nto; of which see chap. viii. sect. S. and chap. ix.sect. 2.
+ Of this finishing, not of the N«t«», or holy house, but of the /:j«, or court*it, called in general the ferrule, see the note on E. XVII. ch. x. sect. 2.







OCR Output








Chap. I. ANTIQJJITIES OF THE JEWS. 121


And now Gaius was in a doubt whether he should tarry to theend of the shews, because it was the last day, or whether heshould not go first to the bath, and to dinner, and then returnand sit down as before. Hereupon Minucianus, who sat overCaius, and was afraid that the opportunity should fail them, gotup, because he saw Cherea was already gone out, and madehaste out, to confirm him in his resolution ; but Gaius took holdof his garment, in an obliging way, and said to him, " O braveK man ! whither art thou going ?" Whereupon, out of-reverenceto Caesar, as it seemed, he sat down again 5 but his fear prevail­ed over him, and in a little time he got up again, and thenCaius did no way oppose his going out, as thinking that he wentout to perform some necessities of nature. And Asprenas, whowas one of the confederates, persuaded Caius to go out to thebath, and to dinner, and then to come in again, as desirous thatwhat had been resolved on misrht be brought to a conclusion im-
O O ,*
mediately.
14. So Cherea's associates placed themselves in order, as thetime would permit them, and they were obliged to labour hard,that the place which was appointed them should not be left bythem ; but they had an indignation at the tediousness of the de­lays, and that what they were about should be put off any longer,for it was already about the ninth * hour of the day ; andCherea, upon Caius's tarrying so long, had a great mind to goin, and fall upon him in his seat, although he foresaw that thiscould not be done without much bloodshed, both of the senators,and of those of the equestrian order that were present ; and al­though he knew this must happen, yet had he a great mind todo so, as thinking it a right thing to procure security and free­dom to all, at the expence of such as might perish at the sametime. And as they were just going back into the entrance tothe theatre, word was brought them that Caius was arisen,whereby a tumult was made ; hereupon' the conspirators thrustaway the crowd, under pretence as if Caius was angry at them,but in reality as desirous to have a quiet place, that should havenone in it to defend him, while they set about Caius's slaughter.Now Claudius, his uncle, was gone out before, and Marcus Vi-nitius, his sister's husband, as also Valerius of Asia ; whomthough they had such a mind to put out of their places, the re­verence to their dignity hindered them so to do ; then followedCaius, with Paulus Arruntius : and because Caius was now got­ten within the palace, he left the direct road, along which thosehis servants stood that were in waiting, and by which road Clau-
VOL. III. £ " dius
« Suetonius says Caius was slain about the seventh hour of the d»y, Josephusatom the ninth. The series of the narration favours Josephus.







OCR Output








Ctap.X. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS* 3»


sedition ; for, after Varns was gone away, Sabinus, Caesar's pro­curator, staid behind, and greatly distressed the Jews, relying onthe forces that were left there, that they would by their multi­tude protect him ; for he made use of them, and armed them ashis guards, thereby so oppressing the Jews, and giving them sogreat disturbance, that at length they rebelled ; for he used forcein seizing the citadels, and zealously pressed on the search af­ter the king's money, in order to seize upon it by force, onaccount of his love of gain, and his extraordinary covetousness.2. But the approach of Pentecost, which is a festival of ours socalled from the days of our forefathers, a great many ten thou­sands of men got together ; nor did they come only to celebrate,the festival, but out of their indignation at the madness of Sabi-nns, and at the injuries he offered them. A great number therewas of Galileans, and Idumeans, and many men from Jericho,and others who had passed over the river Jordan, and inhabitedthose parts. This whole multitude joined themselves to all therest, and were more zealous than the others in making an assaulton Sabinus, in order to be avenged on him : so they parted them­selves into three bands, and encamped themselves in the placesfollowing : some of them seized on the Hippodrome, and of theother two bands, one pitched themselves from the northern partof the temple to the southern, on the east quarter; but the thirdband held the western part of the city, where the king's palacewas. Their work tended entirely to besiege the Romans, andto inclose them on all sides. Now, Sabinus was afraid of thesemens number, and of their resolution, who had little regard totheir lives, but were very desirous not to be overcome, whilethey thopght it a point of puissance to overcome their enemies ;so he sent immediately a letter to Varus, and, as he used to do, wasvery pressing with him, and entreated him to come quickly tohis assistance ; because the forces he had left were in imminentdanger, and would probably, in no long time, be seized upon, andcut to pieces ; while he did himself get up to the highest towerof the fortress Fhasaelus, which had been built in honour of Pha-saelus, king Herod's brother, and called so when the * Parthianshad brought him to his death. So Sabinus gave thence a signalto the Romans to fall upon the Jews, although he ihd not him­self venture so much as to come down to his friends, and thoughthe might expect that the others should expose themselves first todie on account of his avarice. However, the Romans venturedto make a sally out of the place, and a terrible battle ensued ;wherein, though it is true the Romans beat their adversaries,
yet


* See Anti<j. B. XIV. ch. xiii.J 10. and Of the War, B. H. ch. xii. § 9.







OCR Output








WARS OF THE JEWS. Book f,


with great alacrity to fight them, and it came to a close fight'.Now other parts of their army made resistance for a while; butHerod running the utmost hazard out of the rage he was in atthe murder of his brother, that he might be avenged on thosethat had been the authors of it, soon beat those that opposed him,and, after he had beUen them, he alwavs turned his force againstthose that stood to it still, and pursued them all; so that a greatslaughter was made, while some were forced back into that vil­lage whence they came out; he also pressed hard upon the hin-dermost, and slew a vast number of them; he also fell into thevillage with the enemy, where every house was filled with arm­ed men, and the upper rooms were crowded above with soldiersfor their defence; and when he had beaten those that were oathe outside, he pulled the houses to pieces, and plucked outthose that were within; upon many he had the roofs shakendown, whereby they perished by heaps, and as for those that fledout of the ruins, the soldiers received them with their swordsin their hands, and the multitude of those slain, and lying onheaps was so great that the conquerors could not pass along theroads. Now the enemy could not bear this blow, so that whenthe multitude of them which was gathered together, saw thatthose in the village were slain, they dispersed themselves and fledaway; upon the confidence of which victory, Herod had march­ed immediately to Jerusalem, unless he had been hindered bythe depth of winter's [coming on]. This was the impedimentthat lay in the way of this his entire glorious progress, and waswhat hindered Antigonus from being now conquered, who wasalready disposed to forsake the city.
1. Now when at the evening Herod had already dismissedhis friends to refresh themselves after their fatigue, and whenhe was gone himself, while he was still hot in his armour, likea common soldier to bathe himself, and had but one servantthat attended him, and before he was gotten into the bath, oneof the enemies met him in the face with a sword in his hand,and then a second, and then a third, and after that more of them ;these weremenwhohad run away out of the battle into the bathin their armour, and they had lain there for some time in greatterror, and in privacy, and when they saw the king, they trem­bled for fear, and ran by him in a fright, although he. were na­ked, and endeavoured to get oft'into the public road; now therewas by chance nobody else at hand that might seize upon thesemen, and for Herod, he was contented to have come to no harmhimself, so that they all got away in safety.
S. But on the next day Herod had Pappus's head cut off, whowas the general for Antigonus, and was slain in the battle, and
sent







OCR Output








2TO WARS OF THE JEWS. . Book I.


been the means of hindering the multitude that was in the coun­try from fighting for Aristobulus, which they were otherwisevery ready to have done ; by which means he acted the part ofa good general, and reconciled the people to him more by bene­volence than by terror. Now, among the captives, Aristobulus'sfather-in-law was taken, who was also his uncle : so those thatwere the moft guilty he punished with decollation ; but reward­ed Faustus, and those with him that had fought so bravely, withglorious presents, and laid a tribute upon the country and uponJerusalem itself.
7. He also took away from the nation all those cities they hadformerly taken, and that belonged to Celesyria, and made themsubject to him that was at that time appointed to be the Romanpresident there, and reduced Judea within its proper bounds.He also rebuilt* Gadara, that had been demolished by the Jews,in order to gratify one Demetrius, who was of Gadara, and wasone of his own freed-men. He also made other cities free fromtheir dominion, that lay in the midst of the country, such, Imean, as they had not demolished before that time, Hippos, andScythopolis, as also Pella, and Samaria, and Marissa ; and be­sides these, Ashdod, and Jamnia, and Arethusa ; and in like man­ner dealt he with the maritime cities, Gaza, and Joppa, and Do­ra, and thnt which was anciently called Strata1* Tower; but wasafterward rebuilt with the most magnificent edifices, and hadits name changed to Cesarta by king Herod. All which he re­stored to their own citizens, and put them under the province of.Syria ; which province, together with Judea, and the countriesas far as Egypt and Euphrates, he committed to Scaurus as theirgovernor, and gave him two legions to support him ; while hemade all the haste he could himself .to go through Celicia, in hisway to Rome, having Aristobulus and his children along withhim, as his captives. They were two daughters and two sons ;the one of which sons, Alexander, ran away as he was going ; butthe younger, Antigonus, with his sisters, were carried to Rome.
CHAP. VIII.
Alexander, the son of Aristobulus,, who ran away from Pompey,makes an expedition against Hyrcanus ,• but being overcome byGabinius, be delivers up the fortresses to Jnm. After this Aris­tobulus escapes from Rome, and gathers an army together ,- butbeing beaten by the Romans, be is brought back to Rome ; -withother things relating to Gabinius, Crassus, and Cassiut.§ 1. 1N the mean time, Scaurus made an expedition into Arabia,•*, but was stopped by the difficulty of the places about
Petra.
* The coin of this Gadara, still extant, with its date from this aera, is a cer-tain evidence of this its rebuilding by Pompey, as Spanheirn here assures us.







OCR Output








1« ANTIQJJITIES OF THE JEWS. Book XVII.


" joy double pleasure, which is truly worthy of thy evil disposi-" tion, which thou hast openly shewed against thy brethren ; on'1 which account thou didst rejoice, as having done a most famous" exploit, nor was that behaviour unworthy of thee. But if" thy intention were otherwise thou art worse than they ; while" thou didst contrive to hide thy treachery against thy father," thou didst hate themr not as plotters against thy father, for in" that case thou hadst not thyself fallen upon the like crime," but as successors of his dominions, and more worthy of that" succession than thyself. Thou wouldst kill thy father after" thy brethren, lest thy lies raised against them might be detect-«' ed ; and lest thou shouldst suffer what punishment thou hadst" deserved, thou hadst a mind to exact that punishment of thy" unhappy father, and didst devise such a sort of uncommon par-" ricide as the world never yet saw. For thou who art his son" did not only lay a treacherous design against thy father, and'c didst it while he loved thee, and had been thy benefactor, hadM made thee in reality his partner in the kingdom, and had open-" ly declared thee his successor, while thou wast not forbidden" to taste the sweetness of authority already, and hadst the firm" hope of what was future by thy father's determination, and" the security of a written testament. But for certain, thou" didst not measure these things according to thy father's va-'' rious disposition, but according to thy own thoughts and incli-" nations ; and wast desirous to take the part that remained" away from thy too indulgent father, and soughtest to destroy«' him with thy deeds, whom thou in words pretendedst to pre-M serve. Nor wast thou content to be wicked thyself, but thou" filledst thy mother's head with thy devices, and raised distur-" bances among thy brethren, and hadst the boldness to call thy" father a wild beast; while thou hadst thyself a mind more cruel" than any serpent, whence thou sendest out that poison among thy" nearest kindred and greatest benefactors, and invitedst them to" assist thee and guard thee, and didst hedge thyself in on all'' sides by the artifices of both men and women, against an old" man ; as tho' that mind of thine was not sufficient of itself to" support so great an hatred as thou baredst to him. And here" thou appearest, after the tortures of free-men, of domestics, of" men and women, which have been examined on thy account," and after the informations of thy fellow-conspirators, as ma-«' king haste to contradict the truth ; and hast thought on ways," not only how to take thy father out of the world, but to dis-" annal that written law which is against thee, and the virtue" of Varus, and the nature of justice ; nay, such is that impu-" dence of thine on which thou confidest, that thou desirest to be
" put







OCR Output








Chap. <XXVIII. WAKS OF-THE JEWS. 837


when she had been at variance with him, contrived this match:he also got into Pheroras's favour, and into the favour of Cae­sar's friends by presents, and other ways of obsequiousness, and«ent no small sums of money to Rome: Saturninus also, and hisfriends in Syria, were all well replenished with the presents hemade them^ yet the more he gave, the more he was hated, asnot making these presents out of generosity, but spending hismoney out of fear. Accordingly, it so fell out, that the receiversbore him no more good-will than before, but that those towhom he gave nothing were his more bitter enemies. How­ever, he bestowed his money every day more and more pro­fusely, on observing that, contrary to his expectations, the kingwas taking care about the orphans, and discovering at the sametime his repentance for killing their fathers, by his commisera­tion of those that sprang from them.
2. Accordingly, Herod got together his kindred and friends;and set before them the children, and with his eyes full of tears,said thus to them: " It was an unlucky fate that took away" from me these children's fathers, which children are recom-" mended to me by that natural commiseration which their or-'" phan condition requires; however, I will endeavour, though" 1 have been a most unfortunate father, to appear a better" grandfather, and to leave these children such curators after" myself as are dearest to me. I therefore betroth thy daughter,u Pheroras, to the elder of these brethren, the children of Alex-" ander, that thou mayest be obliged to take care of them. I" also betroth to thy son, Antipater, the daughter of Aristobu-«' lus; be thou therefore a father to that orphan, and my son" Herod [Philip] shall have her sister, whose grandfather, by" the mother's side, was high-priest. And let every one that," loves me be of my sentiments in these dispositions, which" none that hath an affection for me will abrogate. And I pray" God that he will join these children together in marriage, to" the advantage of my kingdom, and of my posterity, and may" he look down with eyes more serene upon them than heM looked' upon their fathers."
3.-While he spake these words, he wept, and joined the child­ren's right hands together; after which he embraced them everyone after an affectionate manner, and dismissed the assembly.Upon this, Antipater was in great disorder immediately, andlamented publicly at what was done; for he supposed that thisdignity which was conferred on these orphans was for his owndestruction, even in his father's lifetime, and that he should runanother risk of losing the government, if Alexander's son should,bavfi both Archelaus [a king], and Pheroras a tetarch, to sup-
VOL. III. U u port







OCR Output








Chap. if. ANTltjUITIES Of THE JEWS. Isgft


was incapable of managing such a vaft weight of public affairs ;and that if it should be set up, it would not be for their advan­tage ; and in case any one of those already in the governmentshould obtain the supreme power, it would in all respects be totheir grief, if they were not assisting to him in this advancement:that it would therefore be right for them, while the public af­fairs were unsettled, to chuse Claudius emperor, who was uncleto the deceased Cains, and of a superior dignity and worth toevery one of those that were assembled together in the senate,both on account of the virtues of his ancestors, and of the learn­ing he had acquired in his education, and who, if once settled inthe empire, would reward them according to their deserts, andbestow largesses upon them. These were their consultations,and they executed the same immediately. Claudius was there­fore seized upon suddenly by the soldiery. But Cneas SentiusSaturninus, although he understood that Claudius was seized,and that he intended to claim the government, unwillingly in­deed in appearance, but in reality by his own free conSentj stoodtip in the senate, and, without being dismayed, made an exhor-tatory oration to them, and such an one indeed as was fit for menof freedom and generosity, and spake thus : I
2. *' Although it be a thing incredible, O Romans ! because" of the great length of time, that so unexpected an event hath" happened, yet are we now in possession of liberty. How long" indeed this will last is uncertain, and lies at the disposal of the" gods, wlrose grant it is; yet such it is as is sufficient to make" us rejoice, and be happy for the present, although we may soon" be deprived of it ; for one hour is sufficient to those that are" exercised in virtue, wherein we may live with a mind account-" able to ourselves, in our own country, now free, and governed" by such laws as this country once flourished under. As for*' myself, I cannot remember our former time of liberty, as*' being born after it was gone ; but I am beyond measure filledu with joy at the thoughts of our present freedom. I also*' esteem those that were born and bred up in that our former" liberty happy men, and that those men are worthy of no less" esteem than the gods themselves, who have given us a taste of" it in this age; and I heartily wish, that this quiet enjoyment of" it, which we have at present, might continue to all ages. How-" ever, this single day may suffice for our youth, as well as for" us that are in years. It will seem an age to our old men, if" they might die during its happy duration : it may also be for" the instruction of the younger sort, what kind of virtue those"men, from whose loins we are derived, w'ere. exercised in." As for ourselveSi our business is, during the space of time,-to
Vol. IH. R ** live







OCR Output








558 WARS OF THE JEWS. Book I.


brother not allowing him to suspect any harm from him, he camealong with his armour on, to shew it to his brother; but whenhe was going ''along that dark passage, which was called Strato'sTower, he was slain by the body-guards, and became an eminentinstance how calumny destroys all good-will and natural affection,and how none of our good affections are strong enough to resistenyy perpetually.
5. And truly any one would be surprised at Judas upon thisoccasion. He was of the sect of the Es'sens, and had never failedor deceived men in his predictions before. Now, this man sawAntigonus as he was passing along by the temple, and cried outlp his acquaintance, (they were not a few who attended uponliim as his scholars^,' " P strange'! said he, it is good for me toV die now, since truth is dead before me, and somewhat that I" have foretold hath proved false ; for this Antigonus is this day" alive, who ought to have died this day ; and the place where«' he ought to be slain, according to that fatal decree, was Strato's" Tower, whrch is at the distance of six hundred furlongs from«' this place ;' and yet four hours of this day are over already,<V which point of time renders the prediction impossible to be
'' fulfilled." A'nd, when the old man had said this, he was de­jected in hi? mind, and so continued- But, in a little time, newscame,-that Antigonus was slain in a subterraneous place, whichwas itself also called Strato's Tower, by the same name withthai Cesarea which lay by the serf-side, and this ambiguity itwas which caused the prophet's disorder. ' '' ' ,
6. Hereupon Aristohulus repented of the great crime he hadbeen guilty of, and this gave occasion to the increase of his dis-femper. He also grew worse .and worse, and his soul was con­stantly disturbed at the thoughts'of what he had done," till hisvery .bowels being torn to pieces'by the intolerable grief he wasunder, he threw up a great quantity of blood. And, as one ofthose servants that attended him carried out that blood, he, , bysome supernatural providence, slipped and fell down in the very.place where Antigonus had been slain ; and so he spilt some ofthe murderer's blood upon the spots-of the blood of him that hadbeen murdered, which' still appeared. Hereupon a lamentablecry arose airiohg the' spectators,- as if the servant had spilled theblood on purpose in that place ; and, as the king heard that cry,he inquired what Was the cause of it ? and while no body durstleli him, he pressed them so-much the more to let him knowwhat was the matter; so, at length, when he had threatenedthem, and forced them to sjjeak out, they told ; whereupon heburst into tears, and groaned, and said, " So I perceive 1 am noi*.' like to escape thf) all-seeing eye-of God, as to the great crimes
.'. " ,'*'." " I have







OCR Output








THE LIFE OF FLAVIUS JOSEPHUS. 211


/
they had sent in one of the boldest of them all, I had him whip­ped severely, and I commanded that one of his hands should becut off, and hung about his neck ; and in this case was he putout to those that sent him. At which procedure of mine theywere greatly affrighted, and in no small consternation, and wereafraid that they should themselves be served in like manner, ifthey stayed there ; for they supposed that I had in the housemore armed men than they had themselves; so they ran awayimmediately, while I, by the use of this stratagem, escaped thistheir second treacherous design against me.
31. But there were still some that irritated the multitudeagainst me, and said that those great men that belonged to theking, ought not to be suffered to live, if they would not changetheir religion to the religion of those to whom they fled for safe­ty : they spake reproachfully of them also, and said, that theywere wizards*, and such as called in the Romans upon them.So the multitude was soon deluded by such plausible pretencesas were agreeable to their own inclinations, and were prevailedon by them. But when I was informed of this, I instructed thsmultitude again, that those that fled to them for refuge oughtnot to be persecuted : I also laughed at the allegation aboutwitchcraft *, and told them that the Romans would not maintain'so many ten thousand soldiers, if they could overcome their ene­mies by wizards. Upon my saying this, the people assented fora while ; but they returned afterward, as irritated by some illpeople, against the great men : nay, they once made an assaultupon the house in which they dwelt at Taricheae, in order to killthem ; which, when I was informed of, I was afraid lest so hor­rid a crime should take effect, and no body else would make thatcity their refuge any more. I therefore came myself, and someothers with me, to the house where these great men lived, andlocked their doors, and had a trench drawn from their houseleading to the lake, and sent for a ship, and embarked thereinwith them, and sailed to the confines of Hippos : I also paid them.the value of their horses, nor in such a flight could I have theirhorses brought to them. I then dismissed them, and begged ofthem earnestly that they would courageously bear this distresswhich befel them. I was also myself greatly displeased that Iwas compelled to expose those that had fled to me to go again in­to an enemy's country ; yet did I think it more eligible that theyshould perish among the Romans, if it should so happen, than inthe country that was under my jurisdiction. However, they es-
D d 2 caped


* Here we may observe the vulgar Jewish notions of witchcraft; but that ourJoscphus was too wise to give any countenance to.







OCR Output








37fl WARS OF THE JEWS. Book IT.


" bodies at that festival: that, however, those tliat were left af-" ter so many miseries, had just reason to consider now at last" the calamities they had undergone, and to oppose themselves," like soldiers in war, to receive those stripes upon their faces;'1 [but not upon their backs, as hitherto]. Whereupon they" prayed that the Romans would have compassion upon the [poor]" remains of Judea, and not expose what was left of them to'« such as barbarously tore them to pieces, and that they would" join their country to Syria, and administer the government" by their own commanders; whereby it would [soon] be de-" monstrated that those who arc under the calumny of seditious" persons, and lovers of war, know how to bear governors that" are set over them, if thev be but tolerable ones." So the Jewsconcluded their accusation with this request. Then rose upNicolaus, and confuted the accusations which were brought a-gainst the kings, and himself accused the Jewish nation, as hardto be ruled, and as naturally disobedient to kings. He also re­proached all those kinsmen of Archelaus who had left him, andwere gone over to his accusers.
3. SoC:esar,after he had heard both sides,dissolved the assem­bly for that time-, but a few days afterward, he gave the onehalf of Herod's kingdom to Archelaus, by the name of Etbnarcb,and promised to make him king also afterward, if he renderedhimself worthy of that dignity. But as to the other half, he di­vided it into two tetrarchies, and gave them to two other sons ofHerod, the one of them to Philip, and the other to that Antipaswho contested the kingdom with Archelaus. Under this last wasPerea, and Galilee, with a revenue of two hundred talents: butBatanea, and Trachonitis, and Auranitis, and certain parts ofZeno's house about Jamnia, with a revenue of an hundred ta­lents, were made subject to Philip j while Idume?', and all Ju­dea, and Samaria, were parts of the ethnarchy of Archelaus, al­though Samaria was eased of one quarter of its taxes, out of re­gard to their not having revolted with the rest of the nation.He also made subject to him the following cities, viz. Strato'sTower, and Sebaste, and Joppa, and Jerusalem; but as to theGrecian cities, Gaza, and Gadara, and Hippos, he cut them offfrom the kingdom, and added them to Syria. Now the revenueof the country that was given to Archelaus, was four hundredtalents. Salome also, besides what the king had left her in histestaments, was now made mistress of Jamnia, and Ashdod, andPhasaelis. Caesar did moreoverbestow uponher the royal palaceof Ascalon; by all which she got together a revenue of sixty ta­lents; buthe put her house under the ethnarchyof Archelaus. Andfor the rest of Herod's offspring, they received what was be­queathed







OCR Output








14 ANTIQJJITIES OF THE iews. Book XVIL


his anger against him, and wrote back to him, and bid him notdelay his journey, lest any harm should befal himself in his ab­sence. At the same time also he made some little complaintabout his mother, but promised that he would lay those com­plaints aside when he should return. He withal expressed hisentire affection for him, as fearing lest he should have some sus­picion of him, and defer his journey to him ; and lest, while helived at Rome, he should lay plots for the kingdom, and, more­over, do somewhat against himself. This letter Antipater metwith in Cilicia ; but had received an account of Pherofas's deathbefore at Tarentum. This last news affected him deeply ; notout of any affection for Pheroras, but because he was dead with­out having murdered his father, which he had promised him todo. And when he was at Celenderis in Cilicia, he began to de­liberate with himself about his sailing home, as being much grie­ved with the ejection of his mother. Now, some of his friendsadvised him that he should tarry a while somewhere, in expec­tation of farther information. But others advised him to sailhome without delay ; for that if he were once come thither, hewould soon put an end to all accusations, and that nothing af­forded any weight to his accusers at present but his absence. Hewas persuaded by these last, and sailed on, and landed at the ha­ven called Sebastus, which Herod had built at vast expences inhonour of Caesar, and called Sebastus. And now was Antipaterevidently in a miserable condition, whjle no body came to himnor saluted him, as they did at his going away, with good wishesor joyful acclamations ; nor was there now any thing to hinderthem from entertaining him, on the contrary, with bitter curses,while they supposed he was come to receive his punishment forthe murder of his brethren.
2. Now, Quintilius Varus was at this time at Jerusalem, be­ing sent to succeed Saturninus as president of Syria, and wascome as an assessor to Herod, who had desired his advice in hispresent affairs ; and as they were sitting together, Antipatercame upon them, without knowing any thing of the matter ; sohe came into the palace clothed in purple. The porters indeedreceived him in, but excluded his friends. And now he was ingreat disorder, and presently understood the condition he was in,while upon his going to salute his father, he was repulsed byhim, who called him a murderer of his brethren, and a plotterof destruction against himself, and told him that Varus shouldbe his auditor and his judge the very next day; so he found, thatwhat misfortune he now heard of was already upon him, withthe greatness of which he went away in confusion; upon whichhis mother and. his wife met him, (which wife was the daugh­ter of Antigonus, who was king of the Jews before Herod), from
whom







OCR Output








232 THE LIFE OF FLAVIUS JOSEFHUS.


little while afterward I walked along with him, as though Iwould say something to him by himself, and, when I had drawnhim a good way from his friends, I took him about the middle,and gave him to my friends that were with me, to carry himinto a village ; and, commanding my armed men to come down,I wvth them made an assault upon Tiberias. Now, as the fightgrew hot on both sides, and the soldiers belonging to Tiberiaswere in a fair way to conquer me, (for my armed men were al­ready fled away), I saw the posture of my affairs ; and encoura­ging those that were with me, I pursued those of Tiberias, evenwhen they were already conquerors, into the city. 1 also sentanother band of soldiers into the city by the lake, and gave themorders to set on fire the first house they could seize upon. Whenthis was done, the people of Tiberias thought that their city wastaken by force, and so threw down their arms for fear, and im­plored, they, their wives and children, that I would spare theirpity. So I was over-persuaded by their entreaties, and restrainedthe soldiers from the vehemency with which they pursued them ;while I myself, upon the coming on of the evening, returnedback with my soldiers, and went to refresh myself. I also invi­ted Simon to sup with me, and comforted him on occasion ofwhat had happened ; and I promised that I would send him safeand secure to Jerusalem, and withal would give him provisionfor his journey thither. ,
64. But, on the next day, I brought ten thousand men withme, and came to Tiberias. I then sent for the principal men ofthe multitude into the public place, and enjoined them to tell mewho were the authors of the revolt; and when they had toldme who the men were, I sent them' bound to the city Jotapa.But, ns to Jonathan and Ananias, I freed them from their bonds,and gave them provisions for their journey, together with Simon'and Joazar, and five hundred armed men who should guard them,and so I sent them to Jerusalem. The people of Tiberias alsocame to me again, and desired that I would forgive them forwhat they had done, and they said they would amend what theyhad done amiss with regard to me, by their fidelity for the timeto come ; and they besought me to preserve what spoils remain­ed upon the plunder of the city, for those that had lost them.—Accordingly, I enjoined those that had got them, to bring themall before us ; and when they did not comply for a great while,and I saw one of the soldiers that were about me with a garmenton that was more splendid than ordinary, I asked him whence hehad it; and he replied that he had it out of the plunder of thecity, I had him punished with stripes, and I threatened all the restto inflict a severer punishment upon them, unless they produced
before







OCR Output








Gbap. III. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. , 163


not perish as to those that have regard to him, and fix their faithupon him only. But these events we shall relate hereafter.
5. But as to Helena, the king's mother, when she saw that theaffairs of Izates's kingdom were in peace, and that her son wasan happy man, and admired among all men, and even among fo­reigners, by the means of God's providence over him, she hada mind to go to the city Jerusalem, in order to worship at thattemple of God which was so very famous among all men, andto offer her thank-offerings there. So she desired her son to giveher leave to go thither : upon which he gave his consent to whatshe desired very willingly, and made great preparations for herdismission, and gave her a great deal of money, and she went downto the city Jerusalem, her son conducting her on her journey agreat way. Now her coming was of very great advantage tothe people of Jerusalem ; for whereas a famine did oppress themat that time, and many people died for want of what was neces­sary to procure food withal, queen Helena sent some of her ser­vants to Alexandria with money to buy a great quantity of corn,and others of them to Cyprus, to bring a cargo of dried figs.And as soon as they were come back, and had brought those pro­visions, which was done very quickly, she distributed food tothose that were in want of it, and left a most excellent memo­rial behind her of this benefaction, which she bestowed on ourwhole nation. And when her son Izates was informed of thisfamine, he sent great sums of money to the principal men inJerusalem. However, what favours this queen and king confer­red upon our city Jerusalem, shall be farther related hereafter *.
CHAP. III.
How Artabanus, the king of Partbia, nut of fear of the secret con­trivances of his subjects against Kth, went to Izatcs, and was byhim reinstated in his government ; as also how Bardanes, Us son,denounced war against Izates.
§ 1. 13UT now Artabanus, king of the Parthians, perceiving-*-^ that the governors of the provinces had framed a plotagainst him, did not think it safe for him to continue among them,but resolved to go to Izates, in hopes of finding some way for hispreservation by his means, and, if possible, for his return to his
X 2 own'


* This farther account of the benefactions of Izates and Helena to the Jerusa­lem Jews, which Josephus here promises, is, I think, no where performed by him'in his present works. But of this terrible famine itself in Judea, take Dr Hud­son's note here:—" This (says he) is that famine foretold by Agabus, Acts, xi." 28. which happened when Claudius was consul the fourth time; and not that" other which happened when Claudius was consul the second tinie, and Cc^sina" was his colleague, asScaliger says upon Eusebitis, p. 174." Now, when Jose­phus had said a little afterward, ch. v. sect. 2. that " Tiberius Alexander sue." ceeded Cuspius Fadiis as piocurator," he immediately subjoins, that ' under


 







OCR Output








. XI. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 45


fus, who brought their soldiers along with them, together withthose Romans who had been besieged : but Sabinus did not comeinto Varus's presence, but stole out of the city privately, andwent to the sea-side.
' 10. Upon this Varus sent a part of his army into the country,to seek out those that had been the authors of the revolt; andwhen they were discovered, he punished some of them that weremost guilty, and some he dismissed : now the number of thosethat were crucified on this account we're two thousand. Afterwhich he disbanded his army, which he found nowise useful tohim in the affairs he came about; for they behaved themselvesvery disorderly, and disobeyed his orders, and what Varus de­sired them to do, and this out of regard to that gain which theymade by the mischief they did. As for himself, when he wasinformed that ten thousand Jews had gotten together, he mad*haste to catch them ; but they did not proceed so far as to fighthim, but, by the advice of Achiabus, they came together, anddelivered themselves up to him : hereupon Varus forgave theprime of revolting to the multitude, but sent their several com­manders to Caesar, many of whom Caesar dismissed ; but for theseveral relations of Herod who had been among these men in thiswar, they were the only persons whom he punished, who, with,put the least regard to justice, fought against their own kindred.
CHAP. XI.
,rf« anibatsage of the Jews to Casar ; and imu Casar confirmedHerod's testament,
§ i. CO when Varus had settled these affairs, and had placed^ the former legion at Jerusalem, he returned back toAntioch ; but as for Archelaus, he had new sources of troublecome upon him at Rome, on the occasions following : for an am-bassage of the Jews was come to Rome, Varus having permit­ted the nation to send it, that they might petition for the libertyof living by their own laws *. Now, the number of the am­bassadors that were sent by the authority of the nation was fifty,to which they joined above eight thousand of the Jews that wereat Rome already. Hereupon Caesar assembled his friends, and'the chief men among the Romans, in the temple of Apollo f,which he had built at a vast charge ; whither the ambassadorscame, and a multitude of the Jews that were there already, camewith them, as did also Archelaus and his friends ; but as forthe several kinsmen which Archelaus had, they would not join
themselves
« See Of the War, B. II. ch. ii. sect. 3.
t Set the note, Of the Ww, B. It. eh. vi. sect' i.







OCR Output








40 ANTIOJttTES OF THE JEWS. Book XVIf.


yet were not the Jews daunted in their resolutions, even whenthey had the sight of that terrible slaughter that was made ofthem ; but they went round about, and got upon those cloisters,which encompassed the outer court of the temple, where a greatfight was still continued, and they cast stones at the Romans,partly with their hands, and partly with slings, as being muchused to those exercises. All the archers also in array did theRomans a great deal of mischief; because they used theirhands dextrously from a place superior to the others, and becausethe others were at an utter loss what to do; for when they triedto shoot their arrows against the Jews upwards, these arrowscould not reach them, insomuch that the Jews were easily toohard for their enemies. And this sort of fight lasted a greatwhile, till at last the Romans, who were greatly distressed by whatwas done, set fire to the cloisters so privately, that those whowere gotten upon them did not perceive it. This fire * beingfed by a great deal of combustible matter, caught hold imme­diately on the roof of the cloisters ; so the wood, which was full ofpitch and wax, and whose gold was laid on it with wax, yieldedto the flame presently, and those vast works which were of thehighest value and esteem, were destroyed utterly, while those thatwere on the roof unexpectedly perished at the same time ; for asthe roof tumbled down, some of these men tumbled down withit, and others of them were killed by their enemies who encom­passed them. There was a great number more, who, out of de­spair of saving their lives, and out of astonishment at the mise­ry that surrounded them, did either cast themselves into the fire,or threw themselves upon their own swords, and so got out oftheir misery. But as to those that retired behind the same wayby which they ascended, and thereby escaped, they were all kill­ed by the Romans, as being unarmed men, and their couragefailing them ; their wild fury being now not able to help them,because they were destitute of armour, insomuch that, of thosethat wen-t up to the top of the roof, not one escaped. The Ro­mans also rushed through the fire, where it gave them room soto do, and seized on that treasure where the sacred money wasreposited ; a great part of which was stolen by the soldiers, andSabinus got openly four hundred talents.
3. But this calamity of the Jews friends, who fell in this battle,grieved them, as did also this plundering of the money dedicated to
God
* These great devastations made about the temple here, and of the War, B.II. ch. Hi. J 3. seem uot to have been fully re-edified in the days of Nero; nilwhose time there were 18,000 workmen continually employed in rebuilding andrepairing that temple, as Josephus informs us, Antig. B. XX. ch. ix. j 7. Se« &»note on that place.







OCR Output








328 - WARS OF THE JEWS. Book I.


and of all that Pheroras had accused her of, she obtained her par­don. The king also pardoned Pheroras himself the crimes hehad been accused of.
7. But the storm of the whole family was removed to Alexan­der, and all of ic rested upon his head. There were three eunuchswho were in the highest esteem with the king, as was plain bythe offices they were in about him; for one of them was ap­pointed to be his butler, another of them got his supper readyfor him, and the third put him into bed, and lay down by him.Now Alexander had prevailed with these men, by large gifts,to let him use them after an obscene manner: which, when itwas told to the king, they were tortured, and found guilty, andpresently confessed the criminal conversation he had with them.They also discovered the promises by which they were inducedso to do, and how they were deluded by Alexander, who hadtold them, That " they ought not to fix their hopes upon He-" rod, an old man, and one so shameless as to colour his hair,** unless they thought that would make him young again; but" that they ought to fix their attention to him, who was to be his** successor in the kingdom whether he would or not; and who" in no long time would avenge himself on his enemies, and" make his friends happy and blessed, and themselves in the first" place: that the men of power did already pay respects to" Alexander privately, and that the captains of the soldiery, and" the officers, did secretly come to him." ' *
8. These confessions did so terrify Herod, that he durst notimmediately publish them; but he sent spies abroad privatelyby night and by day, who should make a close inquiry after ail-that was done and said; and when any were but suspected [oftreason] he put them to death, insomuch that the palace was fullof horriblyunjust proceedings; for everybody forged calumnies,as they were themselves in a state of enmity or hatred againstothers; and many there were who abused the king's bloodypassion to the disadvantage of those with whom they had quar-*rels, and lies were easily believed, and punishments were inflic­ted sooner than the calumnies were forged: he who had justthen been accusing another, was accused himself, and was ledaway to execution together with him whom he had convicted;for the danger the king was in of his life made examinationsbe very short. He also proceeded to such a degree of bitterness,that he could not look on any of those that were not accused'with a pleasant countenance, but was in the most barbarousdisposition towards his own friends. Accordingly, he forbade agreat many of them to come to court, and to those whom he hadnot power to punish actually, he spake harshly; but for Anti--
pater.







OCR Output








150 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEW9. Book XlXi


his judgment about this man, and he considered how many la*hours he had undergone tor his sake. So when Agrippa wassolemnizing his birth-day, and he gave festival entertainments toall his subjects, he sent for Silas on the sudden to be his guest.But, as he was a very frank man, he thought he had now a justhandle given him to be angry ; which he could not conceal fromthose that came for him, but said to them, " What honour is«' this the king invites me to, which I conclude will soon be over ?" For the king hath not let me keep those original marks of the" good-will 1 bore him, which I once had from him ; but he hath" plundered me, and that unjustly also. Does he think, that I" leave off that liberty of speech, which, upon the consciousness" of my deserts, I shall use more loudly than before, and shall" relate how many misfortunes I have delivered him from ; how" many labours I have undergone for him, whereby I procured" him deliverance and respect; as a reward for which I have" borne the hardships of bonds, and a dark prison. I shall never" forget this usage. Nay, perhaps, my very soul, when it is" departed out of the body, will not forget the glorious actions" I did on his account." This was the clamour he made, andhe ordered the messengers to tell it to the king. So he percei­ved that Silas was incurable in his folly, and still suffered him tolie in prison.
2. As for the walls of Jerusalem, that were adjoining to thenew city [Bez.etha], he repaired them at the expence of the public,and built them wider in breadth, and higher in altitude ; and hehad made them too strong for all human power to demolish, un­less Marcus, the then president of Syria, had by letter informedClaudius Caesar of what he was doing. And, when Claudiushad some suspicion of attempts for innovation, he sent to Agrip­pa to leave off the building of those walls presently. So heobeyed, as not thinking it proper to contradict Claudius.
3. Now, this king was by nature very beneficent, and liberalin his gifts, and very ambitious to oblige people with such largedonations ; and he made himself very illustrious by the manychargeable presents he made them. He took delight in giving,and.rejoiced in living with good reputation. He was not at alllike that Herod who reigned before him ; for that Herod wasill-natured, and severe in his punishments, and had no mercy onthem that he hated ; and every one perceived, that he was morefriendly to the Greeks than to the Jews ; for he adorned foreigncities with large presents in money ; with building them bathsand theatres besides; nay, in some of those places, he erectedtemples, and porticoes in others ; but he did not vouchsafe toraise one of the least edifices in any Jewish city, or make them
any







OCR Output








48 ANTIQJJITIES OF THE JEWS; Book XVII.


" ed to Syria, and be put under the authority of such presidents" of theirs as should be sent to them; for that it would thereby" be made evident, whether they be really a seditious people," and generally fond of innovations, or whether they would'« live in an orderly manner, if they might have governors of" any sort of moderation set over them."
3. Now, when the Jews had said this, Nicolaus vindicatedthe kings from those accusations, and said, That " as for Herod," since he had never been thus accused * all the time of his life," it was not fit for those that might have accused them of lesser" crimes than those now mentioned, and might have procured him." to be punished during his life-time, to bring an accusation." against him now he is dead. He also attributed the actions" of Archelaus to the Jews injuries to him, who, affecting to go-" vern contrary to the laws, and going about to kill those that" would have hindered them from acting unjustly, when they" were by him punished for what they had done, made their" complaints against him ; so he accused them of their attempts" for innovation, and of the pleasure they took in sedition, by" reason of their not having learned to submit to justice, and'« to the laws, but still desiring to be superior in all things."This was the substance of what Nicolaus said.
4. When Caesar had heard these pleadings, he dissolved theassembly ; but a few days afterwards he appointed Archelaus,not indeed to be king of the whole country, but ethnarch of theone half of that which had been subject to Herod, and promisedto give him the royal dignity hereafter, if he governed his partvirtuously. But as for the other half, he divided it into twoparts, and gave it^to two other of Herod's sons, to Philip andto Antipas, that Antipas who disputed with Archelaus for thewhole kingdom. Now, to him it was that Perea and Galileepaid their tribute, which amounted f annually to two hundred ta­lents,


* This is not tnie. See Antiq. B. XIV. cli. ix. sect. 3. 4. and ch' xii. sect' i,and ch. xiii. sect. i. i. Antiq. B. XV. ch. iii. sect. 5. and ch. z. sect. ». 3. An­tiq. B. XVI. ch. ix. sect. 3. "
t Since Josephus here informs us that Archelaus had one-half of the kingdomof Herod, and presently informs us farther, that Archelaus's annual income, afteran abatement of one quarter for the present, was 600 talents, we may thereforegather pretty nearly what was Herod the Great's yearly income, I mean about1600 talents, which, at the known value of 3000 shekels to a talent, and aboutis. lod. to a shekel, in the days of Josephus, see the note on Antiq. B. III. ch. viii.«ect. 2. amounts to L. 680,000 Sterling per annum ; which income, tjiough greatin itself, bearing no proportion to his vast expences every where visible in Jose,phus, and to the vast sums he left behind him in his will, chap. viii. sect. i. andchap. xii. sect. i. the rest must have arisen either from his confiscation of thosegreat men's esiates whom he put to death, or made to pay fine for the saving oftheir lives, or from some other heavy methods of oppression Which such savagetyrants usually exercise upon their miserable subjects; or rather from these sere­







OCR Output








it ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book. XVII.


son, who, when he was tortured, among other things said, ThatAntipaterhad prepared a deadly potion, and given it to Pheroras,with his desire that he would give it to his father during his ab­sence, and when he was too remote to have the least suspicion castupon him thereto relating ; that Antiphilus, one of Antipater'sfriends, brought that potion out of Egypt; and that it was sentto Pheroras by Theudion, the brother of the mother of Antipa-ter the king's son, and by that means came to Pheroras's wife,her husband having given it her to keep. And when the kingasked her about it, she confessed it; and as she was running tofetch it, she threw herself down from the house-top ; yet did shenot kill herself, because she fell upon her feet: by which means,when the king had comforted her, and.had promised her and herdomestics pardon, upon condition of theirconcealingnothingof thetruth from him, but had threatened her with the utmost miseriesif she proved ungrateful, [and concealed any thing] ; so she pro*mised and swore that she would speak out every thing, and tellafter what manner every thing was done ; and said what manytook to be entirely true, that " the potion was brought out of*' Egypt by Antiphilus; and that his brother, who was a pby-*' sician, had procured it; and that when Theudion brought it*' us, she kept it upon Pheroras's committing it to her ; and that*' it was prepared by Antipater for thee. When, therefore," Pheroras was fallen sick, and thou cafnedst to him and tookedst*' care of him, and when he saw the kindness thou hadst for him," his mind was overborne thereby." So he called me to him,and said to me, " O woman.! Antipater hath circumvented me*' in this, affair of his father .and my brother, by persuading me" to' have a murderous intention to him, and procuring a potion" to be subservient thereto : do thou, therefore, go and fetch my" potion, ('since my brother appears to have still the same vir-" tuous disposition towards me which he had formerly, and I dof< not expect to live long myself, and that I may not defile my*' forefathers by the murder of a brother), and burn it before my" face : that accordingly she immediately brought it, and did as" her husband bade her ; and that she burnt the greatest part" of the potion ; but that a little of it was left, that if the king," after Pheroras's death, should treat her ill, she might poison" herself, and thereby get clear of her miseries." Upon her say­ing thus, she brought out the potion, and the box in which it was,before them all. Nay, there was another brother of Antiphilus's,and his mother also, who, by the extreme of pain and torture,confessed the same things, and owned the box [to be that whichbad been brought out of Egypt]. The high-priest's daughterals6? who was the king's wife, was accused to have been con­scious







OCR Output








818 WARS oF THE JEWS. Book I.


to one who would be faithful to him, and bare him good-will onaccount of their kindred : he also gave him a secret injunction,that if Antony slew him, he would slay .her. But Joseph, with­out any ill design, and only in order to demonstrate the king'slove to his wife, how he could not bear to think of being separa­ted from her, even by death itself, he discovered this grand se­cret to her ; upon which, when Herod was come back, and asthey talked together, confirmed his love to her by many oaths,and assured her that he had never such an affection for any otherwoman as he had for her. " * Yes, says she, thou didst, to be" sure, demonstrate thy love to me by the injunctions thou gavest" Joseph, when thou commandedst him to kill me."
5. When he heard that this grand secret was discovered, hewas like a distracted man, and said, that Joseph would never havedisclosed that injunction of his, unless he had debauched her.His passion also made him stark mad, and leaping out of his bed,he ran about the palace after a wild manner; at which time hissister Salome took the opportunity also to blast her reputation,and confirmed his suspicion about Joseph; whereupon, out of hisungovernable jealousy and rage, he commanded both of them tobe slain immediately; but as soon as ever his passion was over, herepented of what he had done, and as soon as his anger was wornoff, his affections were kindled again. And indeed the flameof his desires for her was so ardent, that he could not thinkshe was dead, but would appear under his disorders to speakto her as if she were still alive, till he were better instructedby time, when his grief and trouble, now she was dead, appearedas great as his affection had been for her while she was living.
CHAP. XXIII.
Calumnies against the sons of Marianne. Antipater is prefer­red before them. They are accused before Ccesar, and Herodis reconciled to them.
§ 2. '\TOW Mariamne's sons were heirs to that hatred which_L\ had been borne their mother, and when they consider­ed the greatness of Herod's crime towards her, they were suspi­cious of him as of an enemy of theirs; and this first while theywere educated at Rome, but still more when they were returnedto Judea. This temper of theirs increased upon them, as they
grew


* Here is either a defect, or a great mistake in Josephus's pretest copies, ormemory, for Mariamne did uot i:ow reproach Herod with this his first injunctionto Joseph to k:!l her, if he himself were slain by Antony, but that he had giventhe like command a second time to Soemus alsn, when he was afraid of being slainby Augustus. Antiq' B. XV. ch' iii. sect. j. Vol. II. &C,







OCR Output








&S AXTIQJJITIES OF THE JEWS. Book XVIII.


sent down great showers of rain, contrary to human expectation ;for that day was a clear day, and gave no sign, by the appearanceof the sky, of any rain ; nay, the whole year had been subject toa great drought, and made men despair of any water from above,even when at any time they saw the heavens over-cast withclouds ; insomuch, that when such a great quantity of rain came,and that in an unusal manner, and without any other expectation'of it, the Jews hoped that Petronius would by no means fail inhis petition for them. But as to Petronius, he was mightily sur­prised when he perceived that God evidently took care of theJews, and gave very plain signs of his appearance*, and this tosuch a degree, that those that were in earnest much inclined tothe contrary, had no power left to contradict it. This was alsoamong those other particulars which he wrote to Caius, whichall tended to dissuade him, and by all means to entreat him not tomake so many ten thousands of these men go distracted ; whomif he should slay, (for without war they would by no means suf­fer the laws of their worship to be set aside), he would lose therevenue they paid him, and would be publicly cursed by themfor all future ages. Moreover, that God, who was their gover­nor, had shewed his power most evidently on their account, andthat such a power of his as left no room for doubt about it.—•And this was the business that Petronius was now engaged in.
1. But king Agrippa, who now lived at Rome, was more andmore in the favour of Caius ; and when he had once made hima supper, and was careful to exceed all other, both in expeneesand in such preparations as might contribute most to his pleasure ;nay, it was so far from the ability of others, that Caius himselfcould never equal, much less exceed it, (such care had he takenbeforehand to exceed all men, and particularly to make all agree­able to Ctesar) : hereupon Caius admired his understanding and,magnificence, that he should force himself to do all to please him,even beyond such expenees as he could bear, and was desirousnot to be behind Agrippa in that generosity, which he exertedin order to please him. So Caius, when he had drank wineplentifully, and was merrier than ordinary, said thus during thefeast, when Agrippa had drunk to him : " I knew before now" f how great a respect thou hast had for me, and how great" kindness thou hast shewed me, though with those hazards to" thyself, which thou underwentest under Tiberius on that a.c-" count; nor hast thou omitted any thing to shew thy good-will" towards us, even beyond thy ability ; whence it would be a" base thing for me to be conquered by thy affection. I am
" therefore


* See the preceding note.
t This behaviour of Caius to Agrippa, is very like that of Herod Antipas, hisuncle, to Herod i its, Agrippu's sister, about John the Baptist, Matt. ziv. 6—n.







OCR Output








74 Book XVIII. ANTIOJJITIES OF THE JEWS.


to this history, to speak of that matter, and partly because thisthing is a demonstration of the interposition of Providence, howa multitude of children is of no advantage, no more than anyother strength that mankind set their hearts upon, besides thoseacts of piety which are done towards God : for it happened, that,within the revolution of an hundred years, the posterity of He­rod, which were a great many in number, were, excepting a few,utterly destroyed *. One may well apply this^ for the instrucrtion of mankind, and learn thence how unhappy they were ; itwill also shew us the history of Agrippa, who, as he was a per­son most worthy of admiration, so was he from a private man,beyond all the expectation of those that knew him, advanced togreat power and authority. I have said something of them for,merly, but I shall now also speak accurately about them.
4. Herod the Great had two daughters by Mariamne, the[grand] daughter of Hyrcanus ; the one was Salampsio, whowas married to Phasaelus, her first cousin, who was himself thefon of Phasaelus, Herod's brother, her- father making the match ;the other was Cypros, wfio was herself married also to her firstcousin Antipater, the son of Salome, Herod's sister. Phasaelushad five children by Salampsio, Antipater, Herod, and Alexan­der, and two daughters, Alexandra, and Cypros, which last A-grippa, the son of Aristobulus, married, and Timius of Cyprusmarried Alexandra ; he was a man of note, but had by her nochildren. Agrippa had by Cypros two sons, and three daugh­ters, which daughters were named Bernice, Mariamne, and Dru-silla ; but the names of the sons were Agrippa, and Drusus, ofwhich Drusus died before he came to the years of puberty ; buttheir father, Agrippa, was brought up with his other brethren,Herod and Aristobulus, for these were also the sons of the sonof Herod the Great, by Bernice ; but Bernice was the daughterof Costobarus and of .Salome, who was Herod's sister. Aristo­bulus left these infants, when he was slain by his father, to­gether with his brother Alexander, as we have already related.But when they were arrived at years of puberty, this Herod, thebrother of Agrippa, married Mariamne, the daughter of Olym-pias, who was the daughter of Herod the king, and of Joseph,the son of Joseph, who was brother to Herod the king, and hadby her a son, Aristobulus ; but Aristobulus, the third brotherof Agrippa, married Jotape, the daughter of Sampsigeramus,
. ' - - - king
* Whether this sudden extinction of almost the entire lineage cf Hercd theGreat, which was very numerous., as we are both here and in the next sectioninl'ormcd, was not in pari as a punishment lor the gross incests they were fre.quently guilty of, in marrying their own nephews and nieces, well deserves to beConsidered. See Levit. xviii. 6. 7. xxi. 10. ar.d Noidius, De Herod, No. 26.9,^o.







OCR Output








224 THE LIFE OF FLAVlUS JOSEPHUS.


/
" is plain yon had been forced, upon the examination of their" characters beforehand, to discharge the accusations: that" therefore you may be informed that I have acted well in" the affairs of Galilee, I think three witnesses too few to be" brought by a man that hath done as he ought to do ; so I gave" you all these for witnesses. Inquire of them * how I have«' lived, and whether I have not behaved myself with all decen-'' cy, and after a virtuous manner, among them. And I farther" conjure you, O Galileans ! to hide no part of the truth, but to" speak before these men as before judges, whether I have in" any thing- acted otherwise than well."
50. While I was thus speaking, the united voices of all thepeople joined together, and called me their benefactor and sa­viour, and attested to my former behaviour, and exhorted me tocontinue so to do hereafter ; and they all said , upon their oaths,that their wives had been preserved free from injuries, and thatno one had ever been aggrieved by me. After this, I read tothe Galileans two of those epistles which had been sent by Jona­than and his colleagues, and which those whom I had appointed toguard the road had taken, and sent to me. These were full ofreproaches, and of lies, as if I had acted more like a tyrant than agovernor against them, with many other things besides thereincontained, which were no better indeed than impudent falsities.I also informed the multitude how I came by these letters, andthat those who carried them delivered them up voluntarily ; forI was not willing that my enemies should know any thing of theguards I had set, lest they should be afraid, and leave off writinghereafter.
5J- When the multitude heard these things, they were great­ly provoked at Jonathan, and his colleagues that were with him,and were going to attack them, and kill them ; and this they hadcertainly done, unless I had restrained the anger of the Galileans,and said, That " I forgave Jonathan and his colleagues what was" past, if they would repent, and go to their own country, and" tell those who sent them the truth, as to my conduct." When Ihad said this, 1 let them go, although I knew they would do no­thing of what they had promised. But the multitude were verymuch enraged against them, and entreated me to give them leaveto punish them for their insolence ; yet did I try all methods topersuade them to spare the men ; for I knew that every instanceof sedition was pernicious to the public welfare. But the mul­titude
« This appeal to the whole body of the Galileans by Josephns, and the testi­mony they gave him of integrity in his conduct.e as their governor, is very likethat appeal and tetsimony in the case of the prophet Samuel, i Sam. xii. I—5.and perhaps Mas done by Josephus in imitation of him.







OCR Output








THE LIFE OF FLAVIUS JOSEPHUS. 221


without success, and came to Sepphoris, the greatest city of allGalilee. Now the men of that city who inclined to the Romansin their sentiments, met them indeed, but neither praised nor re­proached me ; and when they were gone clown from Sepphoristo Asochis, the people of that place made a clamour against them,as those of Japha had done. Whereupon they were able to con­tain themselves no longer, but ordered the armed men that werewith them to beat those that made the clamour with their clubs.And when they came to Gabara, John met them with threethousand armed men ; but, as I understood by their letter, thatthey had resolved to fight against me, I arose from Chabolo, withthree thousand armed men also ; but left in my camp one of myfastest friends and came to Jotapata, as desirous to be near them,the distance being no more than forty furlongs. Whence I wrotethus to them : " If you are very desirous that I should come to"' you, you know there are two hundred and forty cities and vil-" lages in Galilee, I will come to any of them which you please," excepting Gabara and Gischala ; the one of which is John's'' native city, and the other in confederacy and friendship with". him."
46. When Jonathan and his partners had received this letter,they wrote to me no more answers, but called a council of theirfriends together, and taking John into their consultation, theytook counsel together by what means they might attack me.John's opinion was, that they should write to all the cities andvillages that were in Galilee ; for that there must be certainlyone or two persons in every one of them that were at variancewith me, and that they be invited to come to oppose me as anenemy. He would also have them send this resolution of theirsto the city Jerusalem, that its citizens, upon the knowledge of mybeing adjudged to be an enemy by the Galileans, might them­selves also confirm that determination. He said also, that whenthis was done, even those Galileans who were affected to me,would desert me out of fear. When John had given them thiscounsel, what he had said was very agreeable to the rest ofthem. I was also made acquainted with these affairs about thethird hour of the night, by the means of one Saccheus, who hadbelonged to them, but now deserted them and came over to me,and told me what they were about; so I perceived that no timewas to be lost. Accordingly I gave command to Jacob, an armedman of my guard, whom I esteemed faithful to me, to take twohundred men and to guard the passages that led from Gabara toGalilee, and to seize upon the passengers, and send them to me,especially such as were caught with letters about them: I alsosent Jeremias himself, one of my friends, with six hundred arrced
men,







OCR Output








*i6 Book XVIIL ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


conversed with Drusus, the Emperor Tiberius's son, and con­tracted a friendship with Antonia, the wife of Drusus the Great,who had his mother Bernice in great esteem, and was very desi­rous of advancing her son. Now, as Agrippa was by naturemagnanimous and generous in the presents he made, while hismother was alive, this inclination of his mind did not appear,that he might be able to avoid her anger for such his extrava­gance ; but when Bernice was dead, and he was left to his ownconduct, he spent a great deal extravagantly in his daily way ofliving, and a great deal in the immoderate presents he made, andthose chiefly among Caesar's freed-men, in order to gain theirassistance, insomuch that he was, in a little time, reduced to po­verty, and could not live at Rome any longer. Tiberius alsoforbade the fiiendsof his deceased son to come into his sight,because on seeing them he should be put in mind of his son, andhis grief would thereby be revived.
2. For these reasons he went away from Rome, and sailed toJudea, but in evil circumstances, being dejected with the loss ofthat money, which he once had, and because he had not where­withal to pay his creditors, who were many in number, and suchas gave him no room for escaping them. Whereupon he knew notwhat to do ; so, for shame of his present condition, he retired toa certain tower, at Malatha, in Idumea, and had thoughts ofkilling himself; but his wife Cypres perceived his intentions,and tried all sorts of methods to divest him from his taking sucha course : so she sent a letter to his sister Herodias, who wasnow the wife of Herod the tetrarch, and let her know Agrip-pa's present design, and what necessity it was which drove himthereto, and desired her, as a kinswoman of his, to give him herhelp, and to engage her husband to do the same, since .she sawhow she alleviated these her husband's troubles all she could, al­though she had not the like wealth to do it withal. So they senthim, and allotted him Tiberias for his habitation, and appointedhim some income of money for his maintenance, and made hima magistrate of that city, by way of honour to him. Yet did notHerod long continue in that resolution of supporting him, thougheven that support was not sufficient for him for, as once theywere at a feast at Tyre, and in their cups, and reproaches werecast upon one another, Agrippa thought that was not to be borne,while Herod hit him in the teeth with his poverty, and with hisowing his necessary food to him. So he went to Flaccus, onethat had been consul, and had been a very great friend to him atRome formerly, and was now president of Syria.
3. Hereupon Flaccus received him kindly, and he lived withhim. Flaccus had also with him there Aristobulus, who was
indeed







OCR Output








248 PREFACE.


th«ir notions from them. For of old, every one took upon th'enito write what happened in his own time ; where their imme­diate concern in the actions made their promises of value ; andwhere it must be reproachful to write lies, when they must beknown by the readers to be such. But then, an undertaking topreserve the memory of what hath not been before recorded, andto represent the affairs of one's own time to those that come af­terwards, is really worthy of praise and commendation. Now,he is to be esteemed to have taken good pains in earnest, notwho does no more than change the disposition and order of othermen's works, but he who not only relates what had not been re­lated before, but composes an entire body of history of his own :accordingly, I have been at great charges, and have taken verygreat pains [about this history], though I be a foreigner ; and do'dedicate this work, as a memorial of great actions, both to theGreeks and to the Barbarians. But, for some of our own prin­cipal men, their mouths are wide open, and their tongues loosedpresently, for gain and law-suits, but quite muzzled up whenthey are to write history, where they must speak truth and ga­ther facts together with a great deal of pains ; and so they leavethe writing such histories to weaker people, and to such as arenot acquainted with the actions of princes. Yet shall the realtruth of historical facts be preferred by us, how much soever itbe neglected among the Greek historians.
6'. To write concerning the Antiquities of the Jews, whothey were [originally], and how they revolted from the Egyp­tians, and what country they travelled over, and what countrythey seized upon afterward, and how they were removed out ofthem, I think this not to be a fit opportunity, and, on other ac­counts, also superfluous; and this because many Jews before mehave composed the histories of our ancestors very exactly j ashave some of the Greeks done it also, and have translated ourhistories into their own tongue, and have not much mistaken thetruth in their histories. But then, where the writers of these af­fairs, and our prophets leave off, thence shall I take my rise,and begin my history. Now, as to what concerns thatwar whichhappened in my own time, 1 will go over it very largely, andwith all the diligence I am able ; but, for what preceded mineown age, that I shall run over briefly.
7. [For example, I shall relate], how Antiochus, who wasnamed Epiphanes, took Jerusalem by force, and held it threeyears and three months, and was then ejected out of the countryby the sons of Asamoneus ; after that, how their posterity quar­relled about the government, and brought upon their settlementthe Romans and Pompey ; how Herod also, ths son of Antipa-
ter,







OCR Output








84 AN71^111125 OF THE JEWS. Book XVIII.


" tually befal thee, do not forget what misery I am in myself," but endeavour to deliver me." So, when the German hadsaid this, he made Agrippa laugh at him as much as he after- 'wards appeared worthy of admiration. But now Antonia tookAgrippa?s misfortune to heart ; however, to speak to Tiberiuson his behalf, she took to be a very difficult thing, and indeedquite impracticable, as to any hope of success ; yet did she pro­cure of Macro, that the soldiers that kept him should be of agentle nature, and that the centurion who was over them, andwas to diet with him, should be of the same disposition, and thathe might have leave to bathe himself every day, and that hisfreed-men and friends might come to him, and that other thingsthat tended to ease him might be indulged him. So his friendSilas came in to him, and two of his freed-men, Marsyras andStechus, brought him such sorts of food as he was fond of, andindeed took great care of him ; they also brought him garments,under pretenqe of selling them, and, when night came on, theylaid them under him ; and the soldiers assisted them, as Macrohad given them order to do beforehand. And this was Agrippa'scondition for six months time, and in this case were his affairs.8. But for Tiberius, upon his return to Capreae, he fell sick,At first his distemper was but gentle ; but, as that distemperincreased upon him, he had small or no hopes of recovery.Hereupon he bid Euodus, who-was that freed-man whom hemost of all respected, to bring the children * to him ; for thathe wanted to talk to them before he died. Now he had at pre­sent no sons of his own alive ; for Drusus, who was his onlyson, was dead ; but Drusus' s son Tiberius was still living,whose additional name was Gemellus : there was also living Caius,the son of Germanicus, who was the sonf of his brother [Dru-Sus]. He was now grown up, and had a liberal education,and was well improved by it, and was in esteem and favour with)the people, on account of the excellent character of his fatherGermanicus, who had attained the highest honour among themultitude, by the firmness of his virtuous behaviour, by theeasiness and agreeableness of his conversing with the multitude,,and because the dignity he was in did not hinder his familiaritywith them all, as if they were his equals ; by which behaviourhe was not only greatly esteemed by the people and the senate,but by every one of those nations that were subject to the Ro­mans ; some of which were affected, when they came to him,with the gracefulness of their reception by him, and others were' affected
* Tiberius his own grandson, and Caius his brother Drusus's grandson.t So I correct Joseplius'-s copy, which calls Germanicus his brother, who WMhis brother'? son.







OCR Output








Chap. V. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 19


4' put to the torture thyself, while thou alledgest, that the tor-" tures of those already examined thereby have made them tell'' lies ; that those that have been the deliverers of thy father may«' not be allowed to have spoken the truth : but that thy tortures" may be esteemed the discoverers of truth. Wilt not thou, O Va-'' rus ! deliver the king from the injuries of his kindred ? Wilt not" thou destroy this wicked wild beast, which hath pretended kind-"'' ness to his father, in order to destroy his brethren ; while yet he'' is himself alone ready to carry off the kingdom immediately," and appears to be the most bloody butcher to him of them all ?" For thou art sensible, that parricide is a general injury both to" nature and to common life ; and that the intention of parricide" is not inferior to its preparation -, and Tie who does not punish" it, is injurious to nature itself."
6. Nicolaus added farther what belonged to Antipater's mo­ther, and whatsoever she had prattled like a woman ; as also a-hout the predictions and the sacrifices relating to the king ; andwhatsoever Antipater had done lasciviously in his cups and hisamours among Pheroras's women ; the examination upon tor­ture ; and whatsoever concerned the testimonies of the witnes­ses, which were many, and of various kinds ; some preparedbeforehand, and others were sudden answers, which farther de­clared and confirmed the foregoing evidence. 'For those men.who were not acquainted with Antipater's practices, but had'concealed them out of fear, when they saw that he was exposedto the accusations of the former witnesses, and that his greatgood fortune, which had supported him hitherto, had now evi­dently betrayed him into the hands of his enemies, who werenow insatiable in their hatred to him, told all they knew of him.And his ruin was now hastened, not so much by the enmity ofthose that were his accusers, as by his gross, and impudent, andwicked contrivances, and by his ill-will to his father and hisbrethren ; while he had filled their house with disturbance, andcaused them to murder one another ; and was neither fair inhis hatred, nor kind in his friendship, but just so far as servedhis own turn. Now, there 'were a great number who for along time beforehand had seen all this, and especially such aswere naturally disposed to judge of matters by the rules of vir­tue, because they were used to determine about affairs withoutpassion, but had been restrained from making any open complaintsbefore ; these, upon the leave now given them, produced allthat they knew before the public. The demonstrations also ofthese wicked facts could no way be disproved : because the ma­ny witnesses there were did neither speak out of favour to He­rod, nor were they obliged to keep what they had to say silent,
C 2 " out







OCR Output








Chap. XXI. WARS OF THE JEWS. 430


put them, and then had them whipped till every one of their in­ward parts appeared naked. In the mean time the multitudestood round the house, and supposed that he had a long discoursewith those that were gone in, about what they claimed of him.He had then the doors set open immediately, and sent the menout all bloody, which so terribly affrighted those that had beforethreatened him, that they threw away their arms and ran away.
6. But as for John, his envy grew greater [upon this escapeof Josephus], and he framed a new plot against him; he pre­tended to be sick, and by a letter desired that Josephus wouldgive him leave to use the hot baths that were at Tiberias, forthe recovery of his health. Hereupon Josephus, who hithertosuspected nothing of John's plots against him, wrote to the go­vernors of the city, that they would provide a lodging andnecessaries for John; which favours, when he had made useof, in two days time he did what he came about; some he cor­rupted with delusive frauds, and others with money, and so per­suaded them to revolt from Josephus. This Silas who was ap­pointed guardian of the city by Josephus, wrote to him imme­diately, and informed him of the plot against him; which epistlewhen Josephus had received, he marched with great diligenceall night, and came early in the morning to Tiberias; at whichtime the rest of the multitude met him. But John, who sus­pected that coming was not for his advantage, sent however oneof his friends, and pretended that he was sick, and that beingconfined to his bed he could not come to pay him his respects.But as soon as Josephus had got the people of Tiberias to­gether in the Stadium, and tried to discourse with them a-bout the letters that he had received, John privately sentsome armed men, and gave them orders to slay him. Butwhen the people saw that the armed men were about to drawtheir swords, they cried out; at which cry Josephus turned him­self about, and when he saw that the swords were just at histhroat, he marched away in great haste to the sea shore, and leftoff that speech which he was going to make to the people, uponan elevation of six cubits high. He then seized on a ship whichlav in the haven, and leaped into it, with two of his guards, andfled away into the midst of the lake.
1. But now the soldiers he had with him took up their arms,immediately, and marched against the plotters; but Josephuswas afraid lest a civil war should be raised by the envy of a fewmen, and bring the city to rum; so he sent some of his party totell them, that they should do no more than provide for their ownsafety, that they should not kill anybody, nor accuse any for theoccasion they had afforded [of a disorder]. Accordingly thesejnen obeyed his orders, and were quiet; but the people of the
neighbouring







OCR Output








3 2044 020 412 920


 


 


ill
HX IH13


 







OCR Output








«4 AKTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book XVlf.


young men to this action ; and a report being come to them thatthe king was dead, this was an addition to the wise men's per­suasions ; so, in the very middle of the day, they got upon theplace, they pulled down the eagle, and cut it into pieces withaxes, while a great number of the people were iu the temple.And now the king's captain, upon hearing what the undertakingwas, and supposing it was a thing of a higher nature than it provedto be, came up thither, having a great band of soldiers withhim, such as was sufficient to put a stop to the multitude of thosewho pulled down what was dedicated to God : so he fell uponthem unexpectedly, and as they were upon this bold attempt, ina foolish presumption rather than a cautious circumspection, as isusual with the multitude, and while they were in disorder, andincautious of what was for their advantage; so he caught nofewer than forty of the young men, who had the courage to staybehind when the rest ran away, together with the authors of thisbold attempt, Judas and Matthias, who thought it an ignomi->nious thing to retire upon his approach, and led them to theking. And when they were come to the king, and he had askedthem if they had been so bold as to pull down what he had dedi­cated to God ? " Yes, (said they), what was contrived, we con*" trived, and what had been performed, we performed it, and" that with such a virtuous courage as becomes men ; for we" have given our assistance to those things which were dedicated" to the majesty of God, and we have provided for what we" have learned by hearing the law ; and it ought not to be won-" dered at, if we esteem those laws which Moses had suggested«' to him, and were taught him by God, and which he wrote" and left behind him, more worthy of observation than thy'« commands. Accordingly we will undergo death, and all sorts" of punishment which thou canst inflict upon us, with pleasure," since we are conscious to ourselves that we shall die, not for«' any unrighteous actions, but for our love to religion." Andthus they all said, and their courage was still equal to their pro­fession, and equal to that with which they readily set about thisundertaking. And when the king had ordered them to be bound,he sent them to Jericho, and called together the principal menamong the Jews ; and when they were come, he made them as­semble in the theatre, and because he could not himself stand, helay upon a couch, and " enumerated the many labours that he" had long endured on their account, and' his building of the«' temple, and what a vast charge that was to him ; while the" Asamoneans, during the hundred and twenty-five years of their" orovernment, had not been able to perform any so great a work" for the honour of God as that was : that he had also adorned
«« it







OCR Output








202 THE LIFE OF F1AVIUS IOSEPHU3.


voluntarily, but only out of fear of the multitude, since, if I'had forbidden him, I should have been stoned by them. -WhenI had therefore permitted this to be done by John, he gainedvast sums of money by this his knavery.
14. But when I had dismissed my fellow-legates, and sentthem back to Jerusalem, I took care to have arms provided, andthe cities fortified. And, when 1 had sent for the most hardyamong the robbers, I saw that it was not in my power to taketheir arms from them ; but I persuaded the multitude to allowthem money as pay, and told them it was better for them togive them a little willingly, rather than to [be forced to] over­look them when they plundered their goods from them. Andwhen I had obliged them to take an oath not to come into thatcountry, unless they were invited to come, or else when theyhad not their pay given them, I dismissed them, and chargedthem neither to make an expedition against the Romans, noragainst those their neighbours that lay round about them ; formy first care was to keep Galilee in peace. So I was willingto have the principal of the Galileans, in all seventy, as hostagesfor their fidelity, but still under the notion of friendship. Ac­cordingly, I made them my friends and companions as I jour­neyed, and set them to judge causes; and with their approba­tion it was that I gave my sentences, while I endeavoured notto mistake what justice required, and to keep my hands clear ofall bribery in these determinations.
15. I was now about the thirtieth year of my age ; in whichtime of life it is a hard thing for any one to escape the calumniesof the envious, although he restrain himself from fulfilling anyunlawful desires, especially where a person is in great authority.Yet did I preserve every woman free from injuries ; and, as towhat presents were offered me, I despised them, as not standingin need of them. Nor indeed would I take those tithes, whichwere due to me as a priest, from those that brought them. Yetdo I confess, that I took part of the spoils of those Syrians whichinhabited the cities that adjoined to us, when I had conqueredthem, and that I sent them to my kindred at Jerusalem; although,when I twice took Sepphoris by force, and Tiberias four times,and Gadara once, and when I had subdued and taken John, who, often laid treacherous snares for me, I did not punish [withdeath] either him or any of the people fore-named, as the pro-gress of this discourse will shew. And on this account, I sup­pose, it was that God *, who is never unacquainted with those
that


* Our Josephus shews, both here and every where, that he was a most religiousperson' and one that had a deep sense of -od and his providence upon his mind,and ascribed all his numerous and wonderful escapes and preservations, in times*[' i'anger, to God's blessing him, and taking care of him, and this on accountof bis acts of piety, justice, humanity, and charity, to the Jews his brethren.







OCR Output








Chap. XX. WARS OF THE JEWS. 309


" deed, I did not desert my benefactor after the blow that was" given him at Actium; but I gave him the best advice 1 was" able, when I was no longer able to assist him in the war; and" I told him that there was but one way of recovering his affairs,'' and that was to kill Cleopatra; and I promised him, that it''* she were once dead, I would afford him money and walls for" his security, with an army and myself to assist him in his'' war against thee: but his affections for Cleopatra stopped his" ears, as did God himself also, who hath bestowed the govern-" ment on thee. I own myself also to be overcome together with" him, and with this last fortune I have laid aside my diadem," and am come hither to thee, having my hopes of safety in thyu virtue; and I desire that thou wilt first consider how faithful" a friend^ and not whose friend I have been."
2. Caesar replied to him thus: " Nay, thou shalt not only be" in safety, but shalt be a king, and that more firmly than thou" wert before; for thou art worthy to reign over a great ma-" ny subjects, by reason of the fastness of thy friendship : and" do thou endeavour to be equally constant in thy friendship to" me, upon my good success, which is what 1 depend upon from" the generosity of thy disposition. However, Antony hath" done well in preferring Cleopatra to thee; for by this means" we have gained thee by her madness, and thus thou hast be-" gun to be my friend before I began to be thine; on which ac-" count Quintus Dedius hath written to me that thou sentest" him assistance against the gladiators. I do therefore assure" thee, that I will confirm the kingdom to thee by decree: I" shall also endeavour to do thee some farther kindness here-" after, that thou mayest find no loss in the want of Antony."
3. When Caesar had spoken such obliging things to the king,and had put the diadem again about his head, he proclaimed whathe had bestowed on him by a decree, in which he enlarged inthe commendation of the man after a magnificent manner.Whereupon He rod obliged him to be kind to him by the presentshe gave him, and he desired him to forgive Alexander, one ofAntony's friends, who was become a supplicant to him. ButCaesar's anger against him prevailed, and he complained of themany and very great offences the man whom he petitioned forhad-been guilty of; and by what means he rejected his petition.After this Caesar went for Egypt through Syria, when Herodreceived him with royal and rich entertainments; and then didhe first of all ride along with Ceesar, as he was reviewing hisarmy about Ptolemais, and feasted him with all his friends, andthen distributed among the rest of the army what was-necessaryto feast them withal. He also made a plentiful provision ofwa''
. ' .I'll' • . ' " , ,*, ',, ;
•f ••' •.'.:.•( '.-. •••• ' , ',' t€







OCR Output








12 ANTIQJJITIES OF THE JEWS. Book XVIII.


change her habitation, and come to him as soon as he should re­turn from Rome : one article of this marriage also was this,that he should divorce Aretas's daughter. So Antipas, when hehad made this agreement, sailed to Rome ; but when he had donethere the business he went about, and was returned again, hiswife having discovered the agreement he had made with Hero-dias, and having learned it before he had notice of her knowledgeof the whole design, she desired him to send her to Macherns,which is a place in the borders of the dominions of Aretas andHerod, without informing him of any of her intentions. Ac­cordingly Herod sent her thither, as thinking his wife had notperceived any thing ; now, she had sent a good while before toMacherus, which was subject to her father, and so all things ne­cessary for her journey were made ready for her by the generalof Aretas's army ; and by that means she soon came into Ara­bia, under the conduct of the several generals, who carried herfrom one to another successively, and she soon came to her father,and told him of Herod's intentions. So Aretas made this thefirst occasion of his enmity between him and Herod, who hadalso some quarrel with him about their limits at the country ofGemalitis. So they raised armies on both sides, and preparedfor war, and sent their generals to fight instead of themselves ;and, when they had joined battle, all Herod's army was destroyedby the treachery of some fugitives, who, though they were ofthe tetrarchy of Philip, joined with Herod's army. So Herodwrote about these affairs to Tiberius, who being very angry atthe attempt made by Aretas, wrote to Vitellius, to make warupon him, and either to take him alive, and bring him to him inbonds, or to kill him, and send him his head. This was thecharge that Tiberius gave to the president of Syria.
2. Now, some of the Jews thought that the destruction of He­rod's army came from God, and that very justly, as a punish­ment of what he did against John, that was called the Baptist,for Herod slew him, who was a good man, and commanded theJews to exercise virtue, both as to righteousness towards oneanother, and piety towards God, and so to come to baptism; forthat the washing [with water] would be acceptable to him, ifthey made use of it, not in order to the putting away [or theremission] of some sins [only], but for the purification of thebody ; supposing still that the soul was thoroughly purified be­forehand by righteousness. Now, when [many] others came incrowds about him, for they were greatly moved [or pleased]by hearing his words, Herod, who feared lest the great influenceJohn had over the people might put it into his power and incli­nation to raise rebellion, (for they seemed to do any thing he
should







OCR Output








THE LIFE OF FLAVIUS JOSEPH^S. 211


the practices of their country ; but if, besides these, they shouldsay, they loved me because I was a priest, they should reply,that two of these were priests also.
40. Now, when they had given Jonathan and his companionsthese instructions, they gave them forty thousand [drachmae]out of the public money : but when they heard that there wasa certain Galilean that then sojourned at Jerusalem, whose namewas Jesus, who had about him a band of six hundred armed men,they sent for him, and gave him three month's pay, and gavehim orders to follow Jonathan and his companions, and be obe­dient to them. They also gave money to three hundred menthat were citizens of Jerusalem, to maintain them all, and order­ed them also to follow the ambassadors ; and when they hadcomplied, and were gotten ready for the march, Jonathan and hiscompanions went out with them, having along with them John'sbrother, and an hundred armed men. The charge that wasgiven them by those that Sent them was this, that if I wouldvoluntarily lay down my arms, they should send me alive to thecity Jerusalem, but that, in case I opposed them, they should killme, and fear nothing ; for that it was their command for themso to do. They also wrote to John to make all ready for fight­ing me, and gave order to the inhabitants of Sepphoris and Ga-bara, and Tiberias, to send auxiliaries to John.
41. Now, as my father wrote me an account of this, (forJesus the son of Gamala, who was present in that council, afriend and companion of mine, told him of it), I was very muchtroubled, as discovering thereby, that my fellow-citizens pro­ved so ungrateful to me, as, out of envy, to give order that Ishould be slain ; my father earnestly pressed me also in his letterto come to him, for that he longed to see his son before he died.I informed my friends of these things, and that in three daystime I should leave the country, and go home. Upon hearingthis, they were all very sorry, and desired me, with tears in theireyes, not to leave them to be destroyed; for so they thoughtthey should be, if I were deprived of the command over them :but as I did not grant their request, but was taking care of myown safety, the Galileans, out of their dread of the consequenceof my departure, that they should then be at the mercy of therobbers, sent messengers over all Galilee to inform them of myresolution to leave them. Whereupon, as soon as they heard it,they got together in great numbers, from ail parts, with theirwives and children ; and this they did, as it appeared to me, notmore out of their affection to me, than out of their fear on theirown account; for, while I staid with them, they supposed thatthey should suffer no harm. So they all came into the great.plain, wherein I lived, the name of which was AsoMs.VOL. III. E e 42. But







OCR Output








Chap. X. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 41*


God in the temple. Accordingly, that body of them which con­tinued best together, and was the most warlike, encompassed thepalace, and threatened to set fire to it, and kill all that were in it.Yet still they commanded them to go out presently, and promi­sed, that if they would do so, they would not hurt them, nor Sa-binus neither ; at which time the greatest part of the king'stroops deserted to them, while Rufus and Gratus, who had threethousand of the most warlike of Herod's army with them, whowere men of active bodies, went over to the Romans. Therewas also a band of horsemen under the command of Rufus, which,itself went over to the Romans also. However, the Jews wenton with the siege, and dug mines under the palace-walls, andbesought those that were gone over to the other side, not to betheir hindrance, now they had such a proper opportunity for therecovery of their country's ancient liberty ; and for Sabinus,truly he was desirous of going away with his soldiers, but wasnot able to trust himself with the enemy, on account of whatmischief he had already done them ; and he took this great [pre­tended] lenity of theirs for an argument why he should not com­ply with them : and so, because he expected that Varus was co­ming, he still bore the siege.
4. Now, at this time there were ten thousand other disordersin Judea, which were like tumults; because a great number putthemselves into a warlike posture, either out of hopes of gain tothemselves, or out of enmity to the Jews. In particular, twothousand of Herod's old soldiers, who had been already disband­ed, got together in Judea itself, and fought against the king'stroops ; although Achiabus, Herod's first cousin, opposed them ;but as he was driven out of the plains into the mountainous partsby the military skill of those men, he kept himself in the fast­nesses that were there, and saved what he could.
5. There was also Judas, * the son of that Ezekias who hadbeen head of the robbers ; which Ezekias was a very strong man,and had with great difficulty been caught by Herod. This Ju-
VOL. III. F ' das
« Unless this Judas, the son of Ezekias, be the same with that Thendas men. 'tioned. Acts v. 36. Josephus must have omitted him; for that 01 her Theudas,whom he afterwards mentions under Fadus, the Roman governor, B. XX. ch. v.$ i. is much too late to correspond to him that is mentioned in the Acts. Thenames Theudas, Thaudeui, and Judas, differ but little. Src Abp. Usher's An­nals at A. M. 4001. However, since Josephus does not pretend to reckon upthe heads of all those ten thousand disorders in Judea, which he tells us werethen abroad, see sect. 4. and 8. the Theudas of the Acts might be at the head ofone of those seditions, though not particularly named by him Thin he informsus here, sect. 6. and Of the War. B. 11. ch. iv. sect. 2. that certain of the sedi­tious came and burnt the royal palace at Amathus, or Betharamphta, uponthe river Jordan. Perhaps their leader, who is not namsd by Josephus, mighttitt this Theudas.







OCR Output








£32 Book T; WARS OF THE JEWS.


to keep their infants uncircumcised, and to sacrifice swine's fleshupon the altar; against which they all opposed themselves, andthe most approved among them were put to death. Bacchidesalso, who was sent to keep the fortresses, having these wicked,commands, joined to his own natural barbarity, indulged all sortsof the extremest wickedness, and tormented the worthiest of theinhabitants, man by man, and threatened the city every day withopen destruction ; till at length he provoked the poor sufferersby the extremity of his wicked doings to avenge themselves.
3. Accordingly Matthias, the son of Asamonus, one of thepriests who lived in a village called Modin, armed himself, toge­ther with his own famil}-, which had five sons of his in it, andslew Bacchadas with daggers ; and thereupon, out of the fear ofthe many garrisons [of the enemy], he fled to the mountains;and so many of the people followed him, that he was encoura­ged to come down from the mountains, and to give battle to An-tiochus's generals, when he beat them, and drove them out of Ju-dea. So he came to the government by this his success, andbecame the prince of his own people by their own free consent,and then died, leaving the government to Judas, his eldest son.
4. Now, Judas, supposing that Antiochus would not lie still,gathered an army out of his own countrymen, and was the firstthat made a league of friendship with the Romans, and droveKpighanes out of the country when he had made a second expe­dition into it, and this by giving him a great defeat there ; andwhen he was warmed by this great success, he made an assaultupon the garrison that was in the city, for it had not been cut offhitherto ; so he ejected them out of the Upper City, and drovethe soldiers into the Lower, which part of the city was called theCitadel. He then got the temple under his power, and cleansedthe whole place, and walled it round about, and made new ves­sels forsacred ministrations, and brought theminto thetemple,be-cause the former vessels had been profaned. - He also built ano­ther altar, and began to offer the sacrifices ; and when the cityhad already received its sacred constitution again, Antiochusdied ; whose son Antiochus succeeded him in the kingdom, andin his hatred to the Jews also.
5. So this Antiochus eot together fiftv thousand footmen, andjive thousand horsemen, and fourscore elephants, and marchedthrough Judea into the mountainous parts. He then took Beth-sura, which was a small city ; but at a place called Bethzacha-rias, where the passage vyas narrow, Judas met him with his army.However, before the forces joined battle, Judas's brother Eleaizar, steingthc very highest of the elephants adorned with a largetower, and with military trappings of gold to guard him, and sup­posing







OCR Output













OCR Output








114 ANTIQJJ1TIES OF THE JEWS. Book XIX.


body miserably disordered by the pains she had* undergone, freedboth her and Pompedius of the crime laid to their charge. Healso gave her money to make her an honourable amends, andcomfort her for that maiming of her body which she h-id suffersed, and for her glorious patience under such- unsufferable tor­ments.
6. This matter sorely grieved Cherea, as having been the cause,as far as he could, or the instrument of those miseries to men,which seemed worthy of consolation to Caius himself ; on whichaccount he said to Clement and to Papinius (of whom Clementwas general of the army, and. Papinius was a tribune),- " To" be sure, Clement, we have no way failed in Our guarding the*« emperor ; for as to those that have made conspiracies against" his government, some have been slain by our care and pains,-" and some have been by us tortured, and this to such a degree," that he hath himself pitied them. How great then is our vir-" tue in submitting to conduct his armies !" Clement held his*peace, but shewed the shame he was under in obeying Caius'sorders, both by his eyes and his blushing countenance, while he*thought it by no means right to accuse the emperor in expresswords, lest their own safety should be endangered thereby. Uponwhich Cherea took courage, and spake to him without fear of thedangers that were before him, and discoursed largely of the sorecalamities under which the city and the government then labour-;ed, and said, " We may indeed pretend in words, that Caius is" the person unto whom the cause of such miseries ought to be" imputed ; but, in the opinion of such as are able to judge up-" rightly, it is I, O Clement ! and this Papinius, and before us-«' thou thyself who bring these tortures upon the Romans, and" upon all mankind. It is not done by our being subservient to«' the commands of Caius, but it is done by our own consent;«' for whereas it is in our power to put an end to the life of this" man, who hath so terribly injured the citizens and his subjects^" we are his guard in mischief and his executioners, instead of«' his soldiers, and are the instruments of his cruelty. We bear" these weapons, not for our liberty, not for the "Roman govern-" ment, but only for his preservation, who hath enslaved both'' their bodies and their minds ; and We are every day polluted«' with the blood that we shed, and the torments we inflict upon" others ; and this we do, till somebody becomes Caius's instru-" ment in bringing the like miseries upon ourselves. Nor does he«' thus employ us, because he hath a kindness for us, but rather" because he hath a suspicion of us, as also because when abun-" dance more have been killed (for Caius will set no bounds to«' his wrath, since he aims to do all, not out of regard to justice,
" but







OCR Output








THE LIFE OF FLAVIUS JOSEPHUS. £33


before us whatsoever they had plundered; and when a greatmany spoils were brought together, I restored to every one ofTiberias what they claimed to be their own.
65. And now I am come to this part of my narration, I havea mind to say a few things to Justus, who hath himself writtenan history concerning these affairs, as also to others who professto write history, but have little regard to truth, and are notafraid, either out of ill-will or good-will to some persons, to re­late falsehoods. These men do, like those who compose forgeddeeds and conveyances ; and because they are not brought to thelike punishment with them, they have no regard to truth. When,therefore, Justus undertook to write about these facts, and aboutthe- Jewish war, that he might appear to have been an industriousman, he falsified in what he related about me, and could not speaktruth even about his own country ; whence it is, that being be­lied by him, I am under a necessity to make my defence ; and soI shall say what I have concealed till now. And let no one won­der that I have not told the world these things a great while ago.For although it be necessary for an historian to write the truth,yet is such an one not bound severely to animadvert on the wick­edness of certain men ; not out of any favour to them, but outof an author's own moderation. How, then, comes rt to pass,O Justus ! thou most sagacious of writers, (that I may addressmyself to him as if he were here present), for so thou boastestof.thyself, that 1 and the Galileans have been the authors of thatsedition which thy country engaged in both against the Romansand against the king [Agrippa junior] ? For before ever I wasappointed governor of Galilee by the community of Jerusalem,both thou and all the people of Tiberias had not only taken uparms, but had made war with Dccapolisof Syria. Accordingly,thou hadst ordered their villages to be burnt, and a domestic ser­vant of thine fell in the battle. Nor is it I only who say this ;but so it is written in the commentaries of Vespasian the empe­ror, as also how the inhabitants of Decapolis came clamouringto Vespasian at Ptolemais, and desired that thou, who wast theauthor [of that war], mightest be brought to punishment. Andthou hadst certainly been punished at the command of Vespasian,had not king Agrippa, who had power given him to have theeput to death, at the earnest entreaty of his sister Bernice, chan­ged the punishment from death into a long imprisonment.Thy political administration of affairs afterward do also clearlydiscover both thy other behaviour in life, and that thou wast theoccasion of thy country's revolt from the'Romans ; plain signsof which I shall produce presently. 1 have also a mind to saya few things to the rest of the people of Tiberias on thy account,Irt.FoL. HI. " G g » and







OCR Output








340 THE LIFE OF FLAVIUS JOSEPHUS.


dered a considerable number of my soldiers to scale them withladders, 1 became master of the greatest part of the city. Butsoon after, our unacquaintedness with the places forced us to re­tire, after we had killed twelve of the Roman footmen, and twohorsemen, and a few of the people of Sepphoris, with the lessof only a single man of our own. And when it afterward cameto a battle in the plain against the horsemen, and we had un­dergone the dangers of it courageously for a long time, we werebeaten ; for upon the Romans encompassing me about, my sol­diers were afraid, and fled back. There fell in that battle oneof those that had been intrusted to guard my body, his namewas Justus, who at this time had the same post with the king.At the same time also there came forces, both horsemen andfootmen, from the king, and Sylla their commander, who wasthe captain of this guard ; this Sylla pitched his camp at fivefurlongs distance from Julias, and set a guard upon the roads,both that which led to Cana, and that which led to the fortressGamala, that he might hinder their inhabitants from gettingprovisions out of Galilee.
72. As soon as I had gotten intelligence of this, I sent twothousand armed men, and a captain over them, whose name was"Jtremiab, who raised a bank a furlong off Julias, near to theriver Jordan, and did no more than skirmish with the enemy ;till I took three thousand soldiers myself, and came to them.But on the next day, when I had laid an ambush in a certain'valley, not far from the banks, I provoked those that belong­ed to the king to come to a battle, and gave orders to rny ownsoldiers to turn their backs upon them, until they should havedrawn the enemy away from their camp, and brought themout into the field, which was done accordingly ; for Sylla, sup­posing that our party did really run away, was ready to pursuethem, when our soldiers that lay in ambush took them on theirbacks, and put them all into great disorder. I also imme­diately made a sudden turn with my own forces, and metthose of the king's party, and put them to flight. And I hadperformed great things that day, if a certain fate had notbeen my hindrance ; for the horse on which I rode, andupon whose back 1 fought, fell into a quagmire, and threwme on the ground, and I was bruised on my wrist, and carriedinto a village named Cepharnome, or Capernaum. When mysoldiers heard of this, they were afraid I had been worse hurtthan I was : and so they did not go on with their pursuit anyfurther, but returned in very great concern for me. I there­fore sent for the physicians, and while 1 was under their
hand,







OCR Output








Chap. VIII. AWTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 181


fire, and plundered by them. And then it was that the Sicarii,as they were called, who were robbers, grew numerous. Theymade use of small swords, not much different in length fromthe Psrsian acwacte, but somewhat crooked, and like the Ro.man note [or sickles], as they were called : and from theseweapons these robbers got their denomination ; and with thoseweapons they slew a great many; for they mingled themselvesamong the multitude at their festivals, when they were come upin crowds from all pans to the city to worship God, as we saidbefore, and easily slew those that they had a mind to slay. Theyalso came frequently upon the villages belonging to their ene­mies, vvith their weapons, and plundered them, and set them onfire. So Festus sent forces, both horsemen and footmen, to fallupon those that had been seduced by a certain impostor, who pro­mised them deliverance and freedom from the miseries they wereunder, if they would but follow him as far as the wilderness.Accordingly those forces that were sent destroyed both him thathad deluded them, and those that were his followers also.
11. About the same time king Agrippa built himself a verylarge dining-room in the royal palace at Jerusalem, near to theportico. Now this palace had been erected of old by the chil­dren of Asamoneus, and was situate upon an elevation, and afford­ed a most delightful prospect to those that had a mind to takea view of the city, which prospect was desired by the king;and there he could lie down) and eat, and thence observe whatwas done in the temple : vjhieh thing, when the chief men ofJerusalem saw, they were very much displeased at it; for itwas not agreeable to the institutions of our country or law, thatwhat was done in the temple should be viewed by others, espe­cially what belonged to the sacrifices. They therefore erecteda wall upon the uppermost building which belonged to the innercourt of the temple towards the west, which wall, when it wasbuilt, did not only intercept the prospect of the dining-room inthe palace, but also of the western cloisters that belonged to theouter court of the temple also, where it was that the Romanskept guards for the temple at the festivals. At these doingsboth king Agrippa, and principally Festus the procurator, weremuch displeased ; and Festus ordered them to pull the walldown again ; but the Jews petitioned him to give him leave tosend an ambassage about this matter to Nero ; for they said theycould not endure to live if any part of the temple should be de*molished : and when Festus had given them leave so to do, theysent ten of their principal men to Nero, as also Ismael the high-priest, and Helcias, the keeper of the sacred treasure. Andwhen Nero had heard what they had to say, he not only for­


gave







OCR Output








3$2 WARS OF THE JEWS'. Book I.


stay. The king also bound Antipater, and sent away to informCaesar of his misfortunes. . -
6. Now after this, it was discovered that Antipater had laida plot against Salome also; for one of Antiphilus's domesticservants came, and brought letters from Rome, from a maid­servant of Julia, [Caesar's wife], whose name was Acme. Byher a message was sent to the king, that she had found a let­ter written by Salome, among Julia's papers, and had sent it tohim privately, out of her good-will to him. This letter of Sa­lome contained the most bitter reproaches of the king, and thehighest accusations against him. Antipater had forged this let­ter, and had corrupted Acme, and persuaded her to send it toHerod. This was proved by her letter to Antipater, for thusdid this woman write to him: " As thou desirest, I havewrit-** ten a letter to thy father, and have sent that letter, and am** persuaded that the king will not spare his sister when he reads** it. Thou wilt do well to remember what thou hast promised" when all is accomplished."
7. When this epistle was discovered, and what the epistle for­ged against Salome contained, a suspicion came into the king'smind, that perhaps the letters against Alexander were also for­ged: he was moreover greatly disturbed, and in a passion, be­cause he had almost slain his sister on Antipater's account. Hedid no longer delay therefore to bring him to punishment forall his crimes; yet when he was eagerly pursuing Antipater,he was restrained by a severe distemper he fell into. However,he sent an account to Caesar about Acme, and the' contrivancesagainst Salome, he sent also for his testament, and altered it,and therein made Antipas king, as taking no care of Archelausand Philip, because Antipater had blasted their reputationswith him ; but he bequeathed to Caesar, besides other presentsthat he gave him, a thousand talents ; as also to his wife, andchildren, and friends, and freed-men, about five hundred: healso bequeathed to all others a great quantity of land, and ofmoney, and shewed his respects to Salome his sister, by givingher most splendid gifts. And this was what was contained inhis testament, as it was now altered.
CHAP. XXXIII.
» The golden eagle is cut to pieces. Herod1 s barbarity when he-was ready to die. He attempts to kill himself. He commandsAntipater to be slain. He survives him Jive days, and then dies.
§ 1. "\TOW Herod's distemper became more and more severe±\ to him, and this because these his disorders fell upon
him







OCR Output








$4 AtfTIQUITlES OF THE JEWS. Book XVIf.


the temple, and to kill such as run away from the footmenwhen they thought themselves out of danger, which horsemenslew three thousand men, while the rest went to the neighbour­ing mountains. Then did Archelaus order proclamation to bemade to them all, that they should retire to their own homes ;so they went away, and left the festival out of fear of some­what worse which would follow, although they had been sobold by reason of their want of instruction. So Archelaus wentdown to the sea with his mother, and took with him Nicolausand Ptolemy, and many others of his friends, and left Philip hisbrother as governor of all things belonging both to his own fa­mily, and to the public. There went out also with him Saldme,Herod's sister, who took with her her children, and many of herkindred were with her ; which kindred of hers went, as theypretended, to assist Archelaus in gaining the kingdom, but inreality to oppose him, and chiefly to make loud complaints ofwhat he had done in the temple. But Sabinus, Caesar's stewardfor Syrian affairs, as he was making haste into Judea, to pre­serve Herod's efle&s, met with Archelaus at Caesarea ; but Va-rus ("president of Syria) came at that time, and restrained himfrom meddling witji them, for he was there as sent for by Av-chelaus, by the means of Ptolemy. And Sabinus, out of re­gard to Varus, did neither seize upon any of the castles thatwere among the Jews, nor did he seal up the treasures in them,but permitted Archelaus to have them, until Caesar should de­clare his resolution about them ; so that, upon this his promise,he tarried still at Caesarea. But after Archelaus was sailed forRome, and Varus was removed to Antioch, Sabinus went toJerusalem, and seized on the king's palace. He also sent for thekeepers of the garrisons, and for all those that had the chargeof Herod's effects, and declared publicly, that he should requirethem to give an account of what they had; and he disposed ofthe castles jn the manner he pleased ; but those who kept themdid not neglect what Archelaus had given them in command,but continued to keep all things in the manner they had beenenjoined them ; and their pretence was, that they kept them allfor Caesar. ,,
4. At the same time also did Antipas, another of Herod's sons,sail to Rome, in order to gain the government; being buoyedup by Salome with promises, that he should take that govern­ment ; and that he was a much honester and fitter man than Ar­chelaus for that authority ; since Herod had, in his former tesrtament, deemed him the worthiest to be made king, which oughtto be esteemed more valid than his latter testament. Antipasalso brought with him his mother, and Ptolemy the brother' of
Nicolaus.







OCR Output








S99 WARS OF THE JEWS. Book II.


upon one Galilean only. The Jews complied with these persua­sions of theirs, and dispersed themselves; but still there were agreat number who betook themselves to robbing, in hopes ofimpunity, and rapines and insurrections of the bolder sort hap­pened over the whole country; and the men of power amongthe Samaritans came to Tyre, to * Ummidius Quadratus, thepresident of Syria, und desired that they that had laid waste thecountry might be punished: the great men also of the Jews, andJonathan the son of Ananlis, the high-priest, came thither, andsaid, that the Samaritans were the beginners of the disturbance,oa account of that murder they had committed, and that Cuma-nus had given occasion to what had happened, by his unwilling­ness to punish the original authors of that murder.
6". But Quadratus put both parties off for that time, and toldthem, that when he should come to those places he would make,a diligent inquiry after every circumstance. After which hewent to Cesare?!, and crucified all those whom Cumanus hadtaken alive; and when from thence he was COITC to the cityLydda, he heard the affair of the Samaritans, and sent for eigh.,teen of the Jews whom he had learned to have been concernedin that fight, and beheaded them; but he sent two others ofthose that were of the greatest power among them, and both Jo­nathan and Ananias, the high-priests, as also Ananus the son ofthis Ananias, and certain others that were eminent among theJews, to Caesar; as he did in like manner by the most illustriousof the Samaritans. He also ordered that Cumanus [the procu­rator] and Celer the tribune should sail to Rome, in order to givean account of what had been done to Caesar. When he had fi­nished these matters, he went up from Lydda to Jerusalem, andfinding the multitude celebrating their feast of unleavened breadwithout any tumult, he returned to Antioch.
7. Now when Caesar at Rome had heard what Cumanus andthe Samaritans had to say (where it was done in the hearing ofAgrippa, who zealously espoused the cause of the Jews, as, inlike manner, many of the great men stood by Cumanus), hecondemned the Samaritans, and commanded that three of themost powerful men among them should be put to death; he ba­nished Cumanus, and sent Celer bound to Jerusalem, to be de­livered over to the Jews to be tormented, that he should bedrawn round the city, and then beheaded.
6. After this Caesar sent Felixf, the brother of Pallas, to be
procurator


* This Ummidius, or Numidiiw, or, as Tacitus calls him, VhiJixs QuaJratiu, ismentioned in an ancient inscription, still preserved, as Spanheim here inform us.»?hich calls him UMMIDIUS QUADRATUS.
t Take the character of this Felix (who is well known from the Acts of the







OCR Output








Chap. XIII. WARS OF THE Jtws. 287


the Freemen, with Herod, and conducted Phasaelus with therest.
4. But now, when they were come to Galilee, they found thatthe people of that country had revolted, and were in arms, whocame very cunningly to their leader, and besought him to concealhis treacherous intentions by an obliging behaviour to thetn;accordingly, he at first made them presents, and afterward, as theywent away, laid ambushes for them ; and, when they were cometo one of the maritime cities called Ecdippon, they perceived thata. plot was laid for them ; for they were there informed of thspromise of a thousand talents, and how Antigonus had devoted thegreatest number of the women that were there with them, amongthe five hundred, to the Parthians ; they also perceived that anambush was always laid for them by the barbarians in the night­time ; they had also been seized on before this, unless they hadwaited for the seizure of Herod first at Jerusalem, because, if hewere once informed of this treachery of theirs, he would take careof himself; nor was this a mere report, but they saw the guardsalready not far off them.
5. Nor would Phasaelus think of forsaking Hyrcanus andflying away, although Ophellius earnestly persuaded him to it;for this man had learned the whole scheme of the plot from Sa-ramalla, the richest of all the Syrians. But Phasaelus went upto the Parthian governor, and reproached him to his face, forlaying this treacherous plot against thetn, and chiefly because hehad done it for money ; and he promised him, that he wouldgive him more money for their preservation, than Antigonus hadpromised to give for the kingdom. But the sly Parthian endea­voured to remove all this suspicion by apologies and by oaths,and then went [to the other] Pacorus; immediately after which,those Parthians who were left, and had it in charge, seized uponPhasaelus and Hyrcanus, who could do no more than curse theirperfidiousness and their perjury.
6. In the mean time the cup-bearer was sent [back], and laida plot how to seize upon Herod, by deluding him, and gettinghim out of the city, as he was commanded to do. But Herod sus­pected the barbarians from the beginning, and having then re­ceived intelligence that a messenger, who was to bring him theletters that informed him of the treachery intended, had fallenamong the enemy, he would not go out of the city ; though Pa­corus said very positively, that he ought to go out, and meet themessengers that brought the letters, for that the enemy had notthem, and that the contents of them were not accounts of anyplots upon them, but of what Phasaelus had done ; yet had he
heard







OCR Output








Chap. X. WARS or -fHE JEWS. 383


desire to be so called also, and to cut off those of the greatestnobility out of his country. He also extended his impiety asfar as the Jews. Accordingly, he sent Petronius with an armyto Jerusalem, to place his * statues in the temple, and com­manded him that in case the Jews would not admit of them, heshould slay those that opposed it, and carry all the rest of the-nation into captivity; but God concerned himself with thesehis commands. However, Petronius marched out of Antiochinto Judea, with three legions, and many Syrian auxiliaries.Now as to the Jews, some of them could not believe the sto­ries that spake of a war, but those that did believe them werein the utmost distress how to defend themselves, and the terrordiffused itself presently through them all; for the army was al­ready come to Ptolemais.
2. This Ptolemais is a maritime city of Galilee, built in thegreat plain. It is encompassed with mountains; that on the eastside, sixty furlongs off, belongs to Galilee; but that on the southbelongs to Carmel, which is distant from it an hundred andtwenty furlongs; and that on the north is the highest of themall, and is called by the people of the country, the Ladder ofthe Tyriant, which is at the distance of an hundred furlongs.The very small river f Belus runs by it, at the distance of twofurlongs; near which there isj Memnon'smonument, and hathnear it a place no larger than an hundred cubits, which deservesadmiration; for the place is round and hollow, and affords suchsand as glass is made of, which place, when it hath been emp­tied by the many ships there loaded, it is filled again by thewinds, which bring into it, as it were' on purpose, that sandwhich lay remote, and was no more than bare common sand,while this mine presently turns it into glassy sand. And whatis to me still more wonderful, that glassy sand which is super­fluous, and is once removed out of the place, becomes bare com-vmori sand again. And this is the nature of the place we arespeaking of.
3. But now the Jews got together in great numbers withtheir wives and children into that plain that was by Ptolemaisjand made supplication to Petronius, first for their laws, and, inthe next place, for themselves. So he was prevailed upon by
the


* Tacitus owns that Caius commanded the Jews to place his effigies in theirtemple, though he be mistaken when he adds, that the Jews thereupon took arms.
t This account of a place near the mouth of the river Belus in Phenicia, whencecame that sand out of which the ancients made their glass, is a known thing inhistory, particularly in Tacitus and Strabo, and more largely in Pliny.
\ This Memnon had several monuments, and one of them appears, both byStrabo and Diodorui, to have b«en in Syria, and nut improbably in this very{dace.







OCR Output








Chap. X. WARS Ot THE JEWS.


11 innovations and seditions, that he should undertake t accuse" other men before the Roman governor, and endeavour to gairi" some advantages to himself, when he ought to be contented" that he was suffered to live ; for that the reason of his desire" of governing public affairs, was not so much because he was in" wantof it, butbecause, if he could once obtain the same, he might" stir up a sedition among the Jews, and use what they should gain" from the Romans, to the disservice of those that gave it him."
3. When Caesar heard this, he declared Hyrcanus to be the mostworthy of the high-priesthood, and gave leave to Antipater tdchoose what authority he pleased ; but he left the determinationof such dignity to him that bestowed the dignity upon him ; sohe was constituted procurator of all Judea, and obtained leave,moreover, to rebuild * those walls of his country that had beenthrown down. These honorary grants Ccesar sent orders tohave engraved in the capitol, that they might stand there as in­dications of his own justice, and of the virtue of Antipater.
4. But as soon as Antipater had conducted Caesar out of Sy­ria, he returned to Judea, and the first thing he did, was to re­build that wall of his own country, [Jerusalem], which Pompeyhad overthrown, and then to go over the country, and to quietthe tumults that were therein ; where he partly threatened, andpartly advised every one, and told them, that, " in case they" would submit to Hyrcanus, they would live happily and" peaceably, and enjoy what they possessed, and that with uni-" versal peace and quietness ; but that, in case they hearkened to" such as had some frigid hopes, by raising new troubles to get" themselves some gain, they should then find him to be their" lord, instead of their procurator ; and find Hyrcanus to be a" tyrant, instead of a king ; and both the Romans and Caesar to" be their enemies, instead of rulers ; for that they would not suf-" fer him to be removed from the government, whom they had" made their governor." And, at the same time that he saidthis, he settled the affairs of the country by himself, because liesaw that Hyrcanus was inactive, and not fit to manage the af­fairs of the kingdom. So he constituted his eldest son, Phasaelus,governor of Jerusalem, and of the parts about it; he also senthis next son, Herod, who wasf very young, with equal authori­ty into Galilee.
5. Now


* What is here noted by Hudson and Spanheim, that this grant of leave torebuild the walls of the cities of Judea was made by Julius Cnrsar, not as hereto Antipater, but to Hyrcanus, Ajuiq. B. XIV. ch. viii. sect. 5. has hardly an t[>-pearance of a contradiction; Antipater being now perhaps considered only asHyrcanus's deputy and minister; although he afterwards made a cypher of Hyr­canus, and, under great decency of behaviour to him, took the real authority tohimself.
f Or 25 years gf age. See the(nate on Antiq. E. I, ch, xii. sect. 3. and on B.







OCR Output








55 ANTIOJJITIES OF THE JEWS. Book XVHL


her husband, and at the other instances of her virtue, so she un­dertook to repay it. Accordingly, Alexander paid them five ta­lents at Alexandria, and promised to pay them the rest of thatsum at Dicearchia [Puteoli]; and this he did out of the fear hewas in that Agrippa would soon spend it. So this Cypros sether husband free, and dismissed him to go on with his naviga­tion to Italy, while she and her children departed for Judea.
4. And now Agrippa was come to Puteoii, whence he wrotea letter to Tiberius Caesar, who then lived at Capreoe, and toldhim, that he was come so far in order to wait on him, and to payhim a visit; and desired that he would give him leave to comeover to Caprese ; so Tiberius made no'difficulty, but wrote tohim in an obliging way in other respects, and withal told him,he was glad of his safe return, and desired him to come to C*-preae ; and, when he was come, he did not fail to treat him askindly as he had promised him in his letter to do. But the nextday came a letter to Caesar from Herenr.ius Capito, to informhim, that Agrippa had borrowed 300,cc j drachmae, and not paidit at the time appointed ; but, when it was demanded of him,he ran away like a fugitive, out of the places under his govern­ment, and put it out of his power to get the money of him.When Caesar had read this letter, he was much troubled at it,and gave order that Agrippa should be excluded from his pre­sence, until he had paid that debt: upon which he was no waydaunted at Caesar's anger, but entreated Antonia, the mother'ofGermanicus, and of Claudius, who was afterward Caesar him­self, to lend him those 300,000 drachmae, that he might not bedeprived of Tiberius's friendship ; so, out of regard to the me­mory of Bernice his mother, (for those two women were veryfamiliar with one another), and out of regard to his and Clau­dius's education together, she lent him the money ; and, uponthe payment of this debt, there was nothing to hinder Tiberius'sfriendship to him. After this, Tiberius Caesar recommendedto him his grandson *, and ordered that he should always accom­pany him when he went abroad. But, upon Agrippa's kind re­ception by Antonia, he betook himself to pay his respects toCaius, who was her grandson, and in very high reputation byreason of the good-will they bare his father f. Now there wasone Thallus, a freed-man of Caesar, of whom he borrowed amillion of drachmae, and thence repaid Antonia the debt he owedher; and by sending the overplus in paying his court to Caius,became a person of great authority with him.
5. Now, as the friendship which Agrippa had for Caius wascome to a great height, there happened some words to pass be-
tweed


* Tiberius junior. f Germanicus.







OCR Output








25O KtEPACT."


festivals, and * seven purifications of- purity, and" the sacred1ministrations of the priests, with the garments of the priests,and of the high-priests ; and of the nature of the most holy placeof the temple, without concealing any thing, or adding anything to the known truth of things.
11. After this, I shall relate the barbarity of the tyrants to­wards the people of their own nation, as well as the indulgenceof the Romans in sparing foreigners ; and how often Titus, outof his desire to. preserve the city and the temple, invited the se­ditious to come to terms of accommodation. I shall also distin­guish the sufferings of the people, and their calamities; howfar they were afflicted by the sedition, and how far by the fa­mine, and at length were taken. Nor shall omit to mention themisfortunes of the deserters, nor the punishments inflicted onthe captives; as also, how the temple was burnt, against theconsent of Caesar, and how many sacred things that had beenlaid up in the temple, were snatched out of the fire ; and the de­struction also of the entire city, with the signs and wonders thatwent before it; and the taking the tyrants captives, and themultitude of those that were made slaves,'and into what differentmisfortunes they were every one distributed. Moreover, whatthe Romans did to the remains of the war ; and how they de­molished the strong holds that were in the country; and howTitus went over the whole country, and settled its affairs ; to.gether with his return into Italy, and his triumph.
12. I have comprehended all these things in seven books; andhave left no occasion for complaint or accusation to such as havebeen acquainted with this war; and I have written it down forthe sake of those that love truth, but not for those that pleasethemselves [with fictitious relations]. And I will begin my ac­count of these things, with what I call my First Chapter.
* Tbe;e seven, or rather five, degrees of purily, or purification, are enumera­ted hereafter, B. V. ch. v. sect. 6. The rabbins make ten degrees of them, a»StUnd there informs Us.


BOOK







OCR Output








Chap. III. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 65


was every way answerable to her in an excellent character.Decius Mundus fell in love with this woman, who was a manvery high in the equestrian order ; and as she was of toa greatdignity to be caught by presents, and had already rejected them,though they had been sent in great abundance, he was still moreinflamed with love to her, insomuch that he promised to giveher two hundred thousand Attic drachmae for one night's lod-- ging ; and when this would not prevail upon her, and he was not­able to bear this misfortune in his amours, he thought it thebest way to famish himself to death for want of food, on accountof Paulina's sad refusal ; and he determined with himself to dieafter such a manner, and he went on with his purpose according­ly-. Now, Mundus had a freed woman, who had been made freeby his father, whose name was Ide, one skilful in all sorts ofmischief. This woman was very much grieved at the youngman's resolution to kill himself, (Tor he did not conceal his in­tentions to destroy himself from others), and came to him, and,encouraged him by her discourse, and made him to hope, by somepromises she gave him, that he might obtain a night's lodgingwith Paulina ; and when he joyfully hearkened to her entreaty,she said, she wanted no more than fifty thousand drachmae forthe entrapping of the woman. So when she had encouraged theyoung man, and gotten as much money as she required, she didnot take the same methods as had been taken before, because sheperceived that the woman was by no means to be tempted bymoney, but as she knew that she was very much given to theworship of the goddess Isis, she devised the following stratagem :She went to some of Isis's priests, and upon the strongest assuran­ces [of concealment], she persuaded them by words, but chieflyby the offer of money, of 25,000 drachmae in hand, and as muchmore when the thing had taken effect; and told them the pas­sion of the young man, and persuaded them to use all means pos­sible to beguile the woman. So they were drawn in to promiseso to do, by that large sum of gold they were to have. Accord­ingly, the oldest of them went immediately to Paulina, and uponhis admittance, he desired to speak with her by herself. Wheijthat was granted him, he told her, that " he was sent by the god" Anubis, who was fallen in love with her, and enjoined her to" come to him." Upon this she took the message very kindly,and valued herself greatly upon this condescension of Anubis,and told her husband, that she had a message sent her, and wasto sup and lie with Anubis ; so he agreed to her acceptance o£the offer, as fully satisfied with the chastity of his wife. Accord­ingly, she went to the temple, and after she had supped there,and it was the hour to go to sleep, the priest shut the doors cfthe temple, when in the holy part of it, the lights were also pv.tVOL. III. I " out,







OCR Output








5ft ANTIQJT1ES OF THE JEWS. Book XVII.


self; and they were acceptable to him, not so much for the greatvalue they were of, as because they were memorials of the kingto him.
CHAP. XII.
Concerning a Spurious Alexander,
$ *• "W^^ ^ese affairs had been thus settled by Caesar, a* * certain young man, by birth a Jew, but brought upby a Roman freed-man in the city Sidon, ingrafted himself intothe kindred of Herod, by the resemblance of his countenance,which those that saw him attested to be that of Alexander, theson of Herod, whom he had slain ; and this was an incitementto him to endeavour to obtain the government; so he took tohim as an assistant, a man of his own country, (one that waswell acquainted with the affairs of the palace, bat, on other ac­counts, an ill man, and one whose nature made him capable ofcausing great disturbances to the public, and one that became ateacher of such a mischievous contrivance to the other), and de­clared himself to be Alexander, and the son of Herod, but stolenaway by one of those that were sent to slay him, who, in reali­ty, slew other men in order to deceive the spectators, but savedboth him and his brother Aristobulus. Thus was this man ela­ted, and able to impose on those that came to him ; and when hewas come to Crete, he made all the Jews that came to discoursewith him believe him [to be Alexander]. And when he hadgotten much -money which had been presented to him there, hepassed over to Melos, where he got much more money than hehad before, out of the belief they had that he was of the royalfamily, and their hopes that he would recover his father's prin­cipality, and reward his benefactors ; so he made haste to Rome,and was conducted thither by those strangers who entertainedhim. He was also so fortunate, as, upon his landing at Dice-archia> to bring the Jews that were there into the same delu­sion ; and not only other people, but also all those that had beengreat with Herod, or had a kindness for him, joined themselvesto this man as to their king. The cause of it was this, that menwere glad of his pretences, which were seconded by the likenessof his countenance, which made those that had been acquaintedwith Alexander strongly to believe that he was no other but thevery same person, which they also confirmed to others by oath ;• insomuch that when the report went about him that he was co­ming to Rome, the whole multitude of the Jews that were therewent out to meet him, ascribing it to divine Providence that he'had so unexpectedly escaped, and being very joyful on account
of







OCR Output








TO ANTIQJJITIES OF THE JEWS. Book XVIII.


the means of those bribes which they had taken. And whenArtabanus perceived that the plot laid against him was not to beavoided, because it was laid by the principal men, and those agreat many in number, and that it would certainly take effect;when he had estimated the number of those that were trulyfaithful to him, as also of those who were already corrupted, butwere deceitful in the kindness they professed to him, and werelikely, upon trial, to go over to his enemies, he made his escapeto the upper provinces, where he afterwards raised a great armyout of the Dabae and Sacae, and fought with his enemies, and re­tained his principality.
5. When Tiberius had heard of these things, he desired to havea league of friendship made between him and Artabanus; andwhen, upon this invitation, he received the proposal kindly, Ar­tabanus and Vitellius went to Euphrates, and as a bridge was laidover the river, they each of them came with their guards aboutthem, and met one another on the midst of the bridge. And whenthey had agreed upon the terms of peace, Herod the tetrach erect­ed a rich tent on the midst of the passage, and made them a feastthere, Artabanus also, not long afterward, sent his son Darius, asan hostage, with many presents, among which there was a manseven cubits tall, a Jew he was by birth, and his name was Elect-zar, who, for his tallness, was called a giant. After which Vi­tellius went to Antioch, and Artabanus to Babylon ; but HerodTthe tetrarch] being desirous to give Caesar the first informationthat they had obtained hostages, sent posts with letters, whereinhe had accurately described all the particulars, and had left no­thing for the consular Vitellius to inform him of. But whenVitellius's letters were sent, and Caesar had let him know that hewas acquainted with the affairs already, because Herod had givenhim an account of them before, Vitellius was very much troubledat it; and supposing that he had been thereby a greater suffererthan he really was, he kept up a secret anger upon this occasion,till he could be revenged on him, which was after Caius hadtaken the goverment.
6. About this time it was that Philip, Herod's brother, de­parted this life, in the twentieth year * of the reign of Tiberius,
after
* This calculation from all Josephus's Greek copies, is exactly right i for sinceHerod died about September, in the 4th year before the Christian aera, and Ti­berius ,began, it is well known, Aug. 19. A. D. 14. it is evident that the 37thyear of Philip, reckoned from his father's death, was the 20th of Tiberius, ornear the end of A. D. 33. (the very year of our Saviour's death also), or, how.ever, in the beginning of the next year, A.D. 34. This Philip the tetrarch seemsto have been the best ot all the posterity of Herod, for his love of peace, and hislove of justice.







OCR Output








ANTIQJJItlES OF THE JEWS. Book XVIII.


Gaulonite, of a city whose name was Gamala, who, taking withhim Saddouk *, a Pharisee, became zealous to draw thenv to arevolt, who both said, that this taxation was no better than anintroduction to slavery, and exhorted the nation to assert theirliberty ; as if they could procure them happiness and securityfor what they possessed, and assured enjoyment of a still great­er good, which was that of the honour and glory they wouldthereby acquire for magnanimity. They also said, that Godwould not otherwise be assisting to them, than upon their joiiving with one another in such counsels as might be successful,and for their own advantage ; and this especially, if they wouldset about great exploits, and not grow weary in executing thesame ; so men received what they said with pleasure, and thisbold attempt proceeded to a great height. All sorts of misfor­tunes also sprang from these men, and the nation was infectedwith this doctrine to an incredible degree ; one violent warcame upon us after another, and we lost our friends which usedto alleviate our pains ; there were also, very great robberies andmurders of our principal men. This was done in pretence indeedfor the public welfare, but in reality from the hopes of gain tothemselves; whence arose seditions, and from them murders ofmen, which sometimes fell on those of their own people, (by themadness of these men towards one another, while their desire wasthat none of the adverse party might be left), and sometimes ontheir enemies ; a famine also coming upon us reduced us to thelast degree of despair, as did also the taking and demolishing ofcities; nay, the sedition at last increased so high, that the very-temple of God was burnt down by their enemies fire. Suchwere the consequences of this, that the customs of our fatherswere altered, and such a change was made, as added a mightyweight toward bringing all to destruction, which these men oc­casioned by their thus conspiring together, for Judas and Saddu-cus f, who excited a fourth philosophic sect among us, and hada great many followers therein, filled our civil government withtumults at present, and laid the foundations of our future mise­ries by this system of philosophy, which we were before unac­quainted withal; concerning which I will discourse a little, and
this
* It seems not very improbable to me, that this Sadduc, the Pharisee, was thevery same man of whom the Rabbins speak, as the unhappy, but undesigning oc­casion of the impiety or infidelity of the Sadducees; nor perhaps had the menthis name of Sadducees till this very time, though they were a distinct sect longbefore. See the note on B. XIII. ch. x. sect. 5. and Dean Prideaux, as therequoted; nor do we, that I know of, find the least footsteps of such impiety orinfidelity of these Sadducees before this time, the Recognitions assuring us, thatthey began about the. days of John the Baptist, B. I. ch. Iiv.
, • f See Note above.







OCR Output








365 WARS OF THE JEWS. Book II.


|
strongly fortified; but so as to a void a direct conflict with themin the plains. In Sepphoris also, a city of Galilee, there was oneJudas, (the son of that arch-robber Hezekias, who formerly over­ran the country, and had been subdued by king Herod); thistnan got no small multitude together, and brake open the placewhere the royal armour was laid up, and armed those about him,and attacked those that were so earnest to gain the dominion.
2. In Perea also, Simon, one of the servants to the king, re.lying upon the handsome' appearance, and lallness of his body,put a diadem upon his own head also; he also went about witha cornpany of robbers that he had gotten together, and burntdown the royal palace that was at Jericho, and many other costlyedifices besides, and procuredhimself very easily spoils by rapine,as snatching them out of the fire. And he had soon burnt downall the fine edifices, if Gratus, the captain of the foot of the king'sparty, had not taken the Trachonite archers, and the most war­like of Sebaste, and met the man. His footmen were slain in thebattle in abundance; Gratus also cut to pieces Simon himself, ashe was flying along a strait valley, when he gave him an obliqueStroke upon his neck, as he ran away, and brake it. The royalpalaces that were near Jordan at Betharamptha were also burntdown by some other of the seditious that came out of Perea.
3. At this time it was that a certain shepherd ventured to setiiimself up for a king; he was called Atbrongeus, It was hisStrength of body that made him expect such a dignity, as well ashis soul, which despised death; and, besides these qualifications,he had four brethren like himself. He put a troop of armed menunder each of these his brethren, and made use of them as his ge.nerals and commanders, when he made his incursions, while hedid himself act like a king, and meddled only with the more im.portant affairs: and at this time he put a diadem about his head,and continued after that to over-run the Country for no littletime with his brethren, and became their leader in killing boththe Romans and those of the king's party; nor did any Jewescape him, if any gain could accrue to him thereby. He onceventured to encompass a whole troop of Romans at Emniaus,who were carrying corn and weapons to their legion; his mentherefore shot their arrows and darts, and thereby slew their cen­turion Arius, and forty of the stoutestof his men,whilethe restofthem, who were indanger of the same fate, upon the coming of Gra.tus,with those of Sebaste, to their assistance, escaped. And whenthese men had thus served both theirown countrymen andforeign-crs, and thatthrough this whole war,threeof them were aftersometime subdued, the eldest by Archelaus, the two next by fallinginto the hands of Gratus and Ptolemeus; but the fourth deli­vered







OCR Output








Chap. XI. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 191


will briefly run over this war again, with what befel us thereinto this very day, which is the thirteenth year of the reign ofCaesar Domitian, and the fifty-sixth year of my own life. I havealso an intention to write three books concerning our Jewishopinions about God and his essence, and about our laws; why, ac­cording to them, some things are permitted us to do, and othersare prohibited.
THE
where, whether he performed what he now intended or not. Some of the rea­sons of this design of his might possibly be, his observation of the many errorshe had been guilty of in the two first of those seven books of the War, whichwere written when he was comparatively young, and less acquainted with theJewish antiquities than he now was, and in which abridgement we might havehoped to find those many passages which himself, as well as those several passa­ges which others refer to, as written by him, but which are not extant in hispresent works. However, since many of his own references to what he hadwritten elsewhere, as well as most of his own errors, belong to such early timesas could not well come into this abridgement of the Jewish war i and since noneof those that quote things not now extant in his works, including himself as weltas others, ever cite any such abridgement, 1 am forced rather to suppose that henever did publish any such work at all; I mean, as distinct from his own life,written by himself, for an appendix to these Antiquities, and this at least sevenyears after these Antiquities were finished. Nor indeed does it appear to methat Josephus ever published that other work here mentioned, as intended by himfor the public also. I mean the three or four books concerning Cod and his «-settee, and concerning the Jewish laws; why, according to them, some things•were permitted the 'Jews, and others prohibited; which last seems to be the samework which Josephus had also promised, :/ God pirmitttd, at the conclusion ofhis preface to these Antiquities; nor do 1 suppose that Tie ever published any ofthem. The death of all his friends at court, Vespasian, Titus, and Domitian,and the coining of those he had no acquaintance with to the crown, I meanfc'erva and Trajan, together with his removal from Rome to Judea, with whatfollowed it, might easily interrupt such his intentions, and prevent his publica­tion of those works.







OCR Output








554 AWTIQJJFTIES OF THE JEWS. Book XIX,


chamber, and as he saw them below lying prostrate on the ground,he could not himself forbear weeping. And when he had beenquite- worn out by the pain in his belly for five days, he depart­ed this Life, being in the fifty-fourth year of his age, and in theseventh year of his reign ; for he reigned four years under GainsCaesar, three of them were over Philip's tetrarchy only, and onthe fourth he had that of Herod added to it; and he reigned,besides those, three years under the reign of Claudius Caesar. Inwhich time he reigned over the fore-mentioned countries, andalso had Judea added to them, as well as Samaria and Cesarea.The revenues that he received out of them were very great, no*less than twelve * millions of drachmae. Yet did he borrowgreat sums from others; for he was so very liberal that his ex-pences exceeded his incomes, and his generosity was boundless f.3. But before the multitude were made acquainted with A-grippa's being expired, Herod the king of Chaldis, and Helciasthe master of his horse, and the king's friend, sent Aristo, one ofthe king's most faithful servants, and slew Silas, who had beentheir enemy, as if it had been done by the king's own command.
CHAP. IX,
What things were done after the death of Agrippa ; and JJO'MClaudius, on account of the youth and unskilfulness of Agrippajunior, sent Cuspius Fadus to be procurator of Judea, and ofthe entire kingdom.
§ 1. A ND thus did king Agrippa depart this life. But he•*"*, left behind him a son, Agrippa by name, a youth inthe seventeenth year of his ager and three daughters ; one ofwhich, Berniee, was married to Herod his father's brother, andwas sixteen years old ; the other two, Mariamne and Drusilla,were still virgins ; the former was ten years old, and Drusillasix. Now these his daughters were thus espoused by their fa­ther, Mariamne to Julius Archelaus Epiphanes, the son of An-tiochus, the son of Chelcias, and Drusilla to the king of Comma-gena. But when it was known that Agrippa was departed this
life,
•


* This sum of 12,000,000 dvachmz, which is equal to 3,000,000 shekels, i.e.at is. led. a shekel, equal to L. 425,000 Sterling, was Agrippa the Great's year-ly income, or about three quartersot his grandfather Herod's income; he havingabated the tax upon houses at Jerusalem, ch. vi. sect. 3. and was not so tyranni­cal as Herod had been to the Jews. See the cote on Amiq. B. XVII. ch. xi. sect.4. A large sum this ! but not, it seems, sufficient for his extravagant expences.
,f Reland takes notice here, not improperly, that Josejjhus omits the reconculi<uinn of this llerod-Agrippa to the Tyrians and bidonians, by the means ofBfastus the king s chamberlain, mentioned Acts, xii. 20. Kor is there any histo­ry in the world so complete, as to omit nothing that other historians take nutica»j', ua.kas ilit ons; be taksa out of the other, ami accorcraodated to it.







OCR Output








Chap. XI. WARS OF THE JEWS. 281


and among them he required one Malichus, who was at enmitywith him, to do his part also, which necessity forced him to do.Now Herod, in the first place, mitigated the passion of Gassius,by bringing his share out of Galilee, which was an hundred ta­lents, on which account he was in the highest favour with him ;and when he reproached the rest for being tardy, he was angryat the cities themselves ; so he made slaves of Gophna and Em-maus, and two others of less note ; nay, he proceeded as if hewould kill Malichus, because he had not made greater haste inexacting his tribute ; but Antipater prevented the ruin of thisman, and of the other cities, and got into * Cassius's favour bybringing in' an hundred talents immediately.
3. However, when Cassius was gone, Malichus forgot thekindness that Antipater had done him, and laid frequent plotsagainst him that had saved him, as making haste to get him outof the way, who was an obstacle to his wicked practices ; butAntipater -was so much afraid of the power and cunning of theman, that he went beyond Jordan in order to get an army toguard himself against his treacherous designs ; but when Mali­chus was caught in his plot, he put upon Antipater's sons by hisimpudence, for he thoroughly deluded Phasaelus, who was theguardian of Jerusalem, and Herod who was intrusted with theweapons of war, and this' by a great many excuses and oaths, andpersuaded them to procure his reconciliation to his father. Thuswas he preserved again by Antipater, who dissuaded Marcus,the then president of Syria, from his resolution of killing Mali­chus, on account of his attempts for innpyation.
4. Upon the war between Cassius ancf Brutus on one side, a-gainst the younger Caesar [Augustus] and Antony on the other,Cassius and Marcus got together an army out of Syria ; and be­cause Herod was likely to have a great share in providing neces­saries, they then made him procurator of all Syria, and gave himan army of foot and horse. Cassius promised him also> that afterthe war was over, he would make him king of Judea ; but it sohappened, that tke power and hopes of his son became the causeof his perdition ; for, as Malichus was afraid of this, he corrupt­ed one of the king's cup-bearers with money, to give a poisonedpotion to Antipater; so he became a sacrifice to Malichus's wic­kedness, and died at a feast. He was a man in other respects ac-
VOL. III. N n live


* It appears evidently by Josephus's accounts, both here and in his AntiquitiesB.'XIV. ch. xi. sect. i. that this Cassius, oneof Caesar's murderers, was a bitteroppressor, and exacter of tribute in .judea, these 700 talents amount to aboutL. 300,000 Sterling, and are about half the yearly revenues of king Herod after.wards. See the note on Antiq. B. XVII. ch. xi. sect. 4. It abo appears thatGalilee then paid no more than 100 talents, or the 7th part of the entire sum tobe levied in all the cpuntry.







OCR Output








578 Book llr WARS OF THE JEWS.


sity of their mind. And as for death, if it will be for theirgloryi they esteem it better than living always; and indeed ourwar with the Romans gave abundant evidence what great soulsthey had in their trials, wherein, although they were torturedand distorted, burnt and torn to pieces, and went through allkinds of instruments of torment, that they might be forcedeither to blaspheme their legislator, or to eat what was forbid­den them, yet could they not be made to do either of them, no,nor once to flatter their tormentors, or to shed a tear; but theysmiled in their very pains, and laughed those to acorn who in­flicted the torments upon them, and resigned up their souls withgreat alacrity, as expecting to receive them again.
II. For their doctrine is this, That bodies are corruptible,and that the matter they are made of is not permanent; but thatthe souls are immortal, and continue for ever, and that they comeout of the most subtil air, and are united to their bodies as toprisons, into which they are drawn by a certain natural entice­ment; but that when they are set free from the bonds of theflesh, they then, as released from a long bondage, rejoice andmount upward. And this is like the opinion of the Greeks, thatgood souls have their habitations beyond the ocean, in a regionthat is neither oppressed with storms of rain, or snow, or withintense heat, but that this place is such as is refreshed by thegentle breathing of a weit wind, that is perpetually blowing fromthe ocean i while they allot to bad souls a dark and tempestuousden, full of never-ceasing punishments. And indeed the Greeksseem to me to have followed the same notion, when they allotthe islands of the blessed to their brave men, whom they call he­roes, and demigods; and to the souls of the wicked, the regionof the ungodly, in Hades, where their fables relate that certainpersons, such as Sisyphus, and Tantalus, and Ixion, and Tityus,are punished; which is built on this first supposition, that soulsare immortal; and thence are those exhortations to virtue, anddehortations from wickedness collected, whereby good men arebettered in the conduct of their life by the hope they have ofreward after their death, and whereby the vehement inclination*of bad men to vice are restrained, by the fear and expectationthey are in, that although they should lie concealed in this life,they should suffer immortal punishment after their death. Theseare the divine doctrines of the Essens * about the soul, whichlay an unavoidable bait for such as have once had a taste of theirphilosophy.
IS}. There
* Of these Jewish or Essene, and indeed Christian, doctrines concerning souls,both good and bad, in Hades, see that excellent discourse or homily, of our lots-phus's concerning Hades, at the end of vol, IV.







OCR Output








 







OCR Output








Chap. III. 9 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


off his anger against Pheroras on these accounts, although hehimself thereby underwent a very uneasy punishment. How­ever, he forbade Antipater and his mother to have any con­versation with Pheroras, and bid them to take care to avoid theassemblies of the women : which they promised to do ; butstill got together when occasion served, and both Pherorasand Antipater had their own merry meetings. The reportwent also, that Antipater had criminal conversation with Phe-roras's wife ; and that they were brought together by Antipater'smother.
2. But Antipater had now a suspicion of his father, and wasafraid that the effects of his hatred to him might increase : so hewrote to his friends at Rome, and bid them to send to Herod,that he would immediately send Antipater to Caesar ; which,when it was done, Herod sent Antipater thither, and sent mostnoble presents along with him ; as also his testament, whereinAntipater was appointed to be his successor : and that if Antipa­ter should die first, his [Herod Philip] son by the high-priest's,daughter should succeed. And, together with Antipater, therewent to Rome, Sylleus the Arabian, although ha had done no­thing of all that Caesar had enjoined him. Antipater also accu­sed him of the same crimes of which he had been formerly accu­sed by Herod. Sylleus was also accused by Aretas, that withouthis consent he had slain many of the chief of the Arabians atPetra; and particularly Soemus, a man that deserved to be ho­noured by all men, and that he had slain Fabatus, a servant ofCaesar's. These were the things of which Sylleus was accused,and that on the occasion following: There was one CorintHus,belonging to Herod, of the guards of the king's body, and onewho was greatly trusted by him. Sylleus had persuaded this manwith the offer of a great sum of money, to kill Herod ; and hehad promised to do it. When Fabatus had been acquaintedwith this, for Sylleus had himself told him of it, he informedthe king of it ; who caught Corinthus, and put him to the tor­ture, and thereby got out of him the whole conspiracy. He alsocaught two other Arabians, who were discovered by Corinthus ;the one the head of a tribe,- and the other a friend,to Sylleus,who both were by the king brought to the torture, and confess­ed, that they were come to encourage Corinthus not to fail ofdoing what he had undertaken to do ; and to assist him withtheir own hands in the murder, if need should require their as­sistance. So Saturniuus, upon Herod's discovering the wholeto him, sent them to Rome.
3. At this time, Herod commanded Pheroras, that since hewas so obstinate in his affection for his wife, he should retire in- -to his own tetrarchy ; which he did very willingly, and sware
Vol. III. B ~ ' many







OCR Output








Chap. I. 'ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 117


first suspected that some one of the conspirators had betrayedhim, and he was caught, but at length perceived that it was byway of exhortation. Whether somebody *, that was consciousof what he was about, gave a signal for his encouragement, orwhether it were "God himself, who looks upon the actions ofmen, that encouraged him to go on boldly in his design, is uncer­tain. The plot was now co'mmunicated to a great many, andthey were all in their armour ; sAme of the conspirators beingsenators, and some of the equestrian order, and as many of thesoldiery as were made acquainted with it; for there was not oneof them who would not reckdn it a part of his happiness to killCaius, and on that account they were all very zealous in the af­fair, by what means soever any one could come at it, that hemight not be behind-hand in these virtuous designs, but mightbe ready with all his alacrity or power, both by words and ac­tions, to complete this slaughter of a tyrant. And besides theseCallistus also, who was a freed-man of Caius, and was the onlyman that had arrived at the greatest degree of power under him ;such a power, indeed, as was in a manner equal to the power ofthe tyrant himself, by the dread that all men had of him, and bythe great'riches he had acquired ; for he took bribes most plen-teously, and committed injuries without bounds, and was more ex-travagant in the use df his power in unjust proceedings than anypther. He also'knew the disposition of Caius to be implacable,and never to be turned from what he had resolved on. He hadwithal many other reasons why he thought himself in danger,and the vastness of his wealth was not one of the least of them :on which account he privately ingratiated himself with Claudius,and transferred his courtship to him, out of this hope, that incase, upon the removal of Caius, the government should cometo him, his interest in such changes should lay a foundation forhis preserving his dignity under him, since he laid in before.handa stock of merit, and did Claudius good offices in his promotion.He had also the boldness to pretend, that lie had been persuadedto make away Claudius-, by poisoning him, but had still inventedten thousand excuses for delaying to do it. But it seems pro­bable to me, that Callistus only counterfeited this, in order to in­gratiate himself with Claudius ; for, if Caius had been in ear­nest resolved to take off Claudius, he would not have admittedof Callistus's excuses, nor would Callistus, if he had-been en­joined to do such an act as was desired by Caius, have put it off,nor, if he had disobeyed those injunctions of his master, had he e-scaped immediate punishment; while Claudius was preserved
from
, * Just such a voice as this is related to be, came, ami from an unknown ori­ginal also, to the famous'Polycarp, as he was going to martyrdom, bidding him*' play the'man ;" as the church of Smyrna assures us in their account of thathis mart) rdom, sect.'- 9.







OCR Output








THE LIFE OF FLAVIU3 JOSEPHUS. 209


were among the chief friends of the king, and commanded themto take the furniture that had been plundered, and to send it tohim ; and I threatened that I would order them to be put todeath, by way of punishment, if they discovered this my com­mand to any other person.
27. Now, when all Galilee was filled with this rumour, thattheir country was about to be betrayed by me to the Romans,and when all men were exasperated against me, and ready tubring me to punishment, the inhabitants of Taricheae did alsothemselves suppose that what the young men said was true, andpersuaded my guards and armed men to leave me when 1 wasasleep, and to come presently to the hippodrome, in order thereto take counsel against me their commander. And, when theyhad prevailed with them, and they were gotten together, theyfound there a great company assembled already, who all joined inone clamour, to bring the man who was so wicked to them as tobetray them, to his due punishment; and it was Jesus, the souof bappluas, who principally set them on. He was ruler in 1 i.berias, a wicked man, and naturally disposed to' make disturb,ances in matters of consequence ; a seditious person he was in.deed, and an innovator beyond every body else. He then took.the laws of Moses into his hands, and came into the midst of thepeople, and said, " O my fellow citizens 1 if you are not disposed" to hate Josephus on your own account, have regard, however," to these laws of your country, which your commander in chief" is going to betray ; hate him therefore on both these accounts" and bring the man who hath acted thus insolently, to his de-" served punishment."
28. When he had said this, and the multitude had openly ap_plauded him for what he had said, he took some of the armedmen, and made haste away to the house in which 1 lodged, as it'he would kill me immediately, while I was wholly insensible ofall till this disturbance happened; and by reason of the pains 1 hadbeen taking, was fallen fast asleep. But Simon, who was intrustedwith the care of my body, and was the only person that stayedwith me, and saw the violent incursion the citizens made uponme, he awaked me, and told me of the danger I was in, and de­sired me to let him kill me, that I might die bravely, and like ageneral, before my enemies came in, and forced me [to kill my­self], or killed me themselves. Thus did he discourse to me •but I committed the care of my life to God, and made haste togo out to the multitude. Accordingly, I put on a black gar­ment, and hung my sword at my neck, and went by such a dif­ferent way to the hippodrome, wherein I thought none of my ad-yersaries would meet me j so I appeared among them on the sud-
Vet. III. Dd den,







OCR Output








THE LlFfe OF FLAVJDS JOSEPHtfS.' 243


this in my mind, and went with tears in my eyes to Titus, andtold him of them ; so he immediately commanded them to betaken down, and to have the greatest care taken of them, in or­der to their recovery ; yet two of them died under the physi­cian's hands, while the third recovered.
16. But, when Titus had composed the troubles in Judea, andconjectured that the lands which Ihad in Judea Would bring mein no profit, because a garrison to guard the country was after­ward to pitch there, he gave me another country in the plain.And, when he was going away to Rome, he made choice of mt:to sail along with him, and paid me great respect: and, whenwe were come to Rome, I had great care taken of me by Ves­pasian ; for he gave me an apartment in his own house, whichhe lived in before he came to the empire. He also honoured mewith the privilege of a Roman citizen, and gave me an annualpension ; and continued to respect me to the end of his life,without any abatement of his kindness to me ; which verything made me envied, and brought me into danger; for a cer­tain Jew, whose name was Jonathan, who had raised a tumult inCyrene, and had persuaded two thousand men of that countryto join with him, was the occasion of their ruin. But, when hewas bound by the governor of that country, and sent to the em­peror, he told him, that I had sent him both weapons and mo­ney. However, he could not conceal his being a liar from Ves­pasian, who condemned him to die ; according to which sentencehe was put to death. Nay, after that, when those that enviedmy good fortune did frequently bring accusations against me, byGod's providence I escaped them all. I also'received from Ves­pasian no small quantity of land, as free gift in Judea; aboutwhich time I divorced mv wife also, as not pleased with her be­haviour, though not till she had been the mother of three chil­dren, two of which are dead, and one, whom I named Hyrca-nus, is alive. After this I married a wife who had lived atCrete, but a Jew by birth : a woman she was of eminent parents,and such as were the most illustrious in all the country, andwhose character was beyond that of most other women, as herfuture life did demonstrate. By her I had two sons, the elder'sname was Justus, and the next Simonides, who was also namedAgrippa. And these were the circumstances of my domesticaffairs. However, the kindness of the emperor to me continuedstill the same ; for, when Vespasian was dead, Titus, who suc­ceeded him in the government, kept up the same respect for mewhich I had from his father; and, when I had frequent accusa­tions laid against me, he would not believe them. And Domi-tian, who succeeded, still augmented his respects to me ; for he
H h 2 punished







OCR Output








304 Book I. WARS OF THE JEWS.


as also all the cities on this side the river Eleutherus, Tyre andSidon * excepted. And when she was become mistress of these,and had conducted Antony in his expedition against the Par-thians, as far as Euphrates, she came by Apamia and Damas­cus into Judea; and there did Herod pacify her indignation athim by large presents. He also hired of her those places thathad been torn away from his kingdom, at the yearly rent oftwo hundred talents. He conducted her also as far as Pelusium,and paid all the respects possible. Now it was not long afterthis that Antony was come back from. Parthia, and led withhim Artabazes, Tigranes's son, captive, as a present for Cleo­patra ; for this Parthian was presently given her, with his money,and all the prey that was taken with him.
CHAP. XIX.
ffow Antony, at the persuasion of Cleopatra, sent Herod to fightagainst the Arabians; and how, after several battles, he atlength got the victory. As also concerning a great earthquake.
f l. '^T'OW when the war about Actium was begun, Herod-L^i prepared to come to the assistance of Antony, as beingalready freed from his troubles in Judea, and having gainedHyrcania, which was a place that was held by Antigonus's sis­ter. However, he was cunningly hindered from partaking ofthe hazards that Antony went through by Cleopatra; for since,as we have already noted, she had laid a plot against the kings£of Judea and Arabia], she prevailed with Antony to committhe war against the Arabians to Herod; that so, if he got the^better, she might become mistress of Arabia, or, if he wereworsted, of Judea i and that she might destroy one of thosekings by the other.
2. However, this contrivance tended to the advantage of He­rod; for at the very first he took hostages from the enemy, andgot together a great body of horse, and ordered them to marchagainst them about Diospolis, and he conquered that army al­though it fought resolutely against him. After which defeat,the Arabians were in great motion,and assembledthemselvesto­gether at Kanatha, a city of Celesvria, in vast multitudes, andwaited for the Jews. And when Herod was come thither, hetried to manage this war with particular prudence, and gave or­ders that they should build a wall about their camp; yet did not
the
• This ancient libety of Tyre and Sidon under the Romans, taken notice of byJosephus, both here and Antiq B XV. ch. iv. sect. I. Vol. II. is confirmed bythe testimony oi Strabo, B. XVI. p. 757, as Dean Aldrich remarks; although, a*he justly adds, this liberty lasted but a little while lorger, when Augustus took jr.away from them. - 1







OCR Output








3f 2 WAKS OF THE Jf WS. Book 1.


obliging manner, he dismissed the multitude; some of whichgave their assent to what he had said, and wished it might takeeffect accordingly} but for those who wished for a change ofaffairs, they pretended they did not so much as hear what hesaid.
CHAP. XXIV.
The mahce of Antipater and Doris. Alexander is very uneasyon Glaphyrd's account. Herod pardons Pberoras whom hesuspected, and Salome, vihom be knew to make mischief amongthem. Herod's eunuchs are tortured, and Alexander is bound.
j 1. TQUT now the quarrel that was. between them, still ac--L' companied these brethren when they parted, and thesuspicions they had one of the other grew worse. Alexanderand Aristobulus were much grieved that the privilege of thefirst-born was confirmed to Antipater; as was Antipater veryangry at his brethren, that they were to succeed him. But thenthis last being of a disposition that was mutable and politic, hel:-iev.' how to hold his tongue, and used a great deal of cunning,and thereby concealed the hatred he bore to them; while theformer, depending on the nobility of their births, had el-erything upon their tongues which was in their minds. Many alsothere nvere who provoked them farther, and many of their[seeming] friends insinuated themselves into their acquaintance,to spy out what they did. Now every thing that was said byAlexander was presently brought to Antipater, and from Anti­pater it was brought to Herod with additions. Nor could theyoung man say any thing in the simplicity of his heart, with­out giving offence, but what he said was still turned to calumnyagainst him. And if he had been at any time a little free in hisconversation, great imputations were forged from the smallestoccasions. Antipater also was perpetually setting some to pro­voke him to speak, that the lies he raised of him might seem tohave some foundation of truth; and if, among the many storiesthat were given out, but one of them could be proved true, thatwas supposed to imply the rest to be true also. And as to An-tipater's friends, they were all either naturally so cautious inspeaking, or had been so far bribed to conceal their thoughts,that nothing of these grand secrets got abroad by their means.Nor should one be mistaken if he called the life of Antipater amystery of wickedness; for he either corrupted Alexander's ac­quaintance with money, or got into their favour by flatteries;by which two means he gained all his designs, and brought themto betray their master, and to steal away, and reveal what heeither did or said. Thus did he act a part very cunningly in all
points,







OCR Output








Chap. V. WARS OF THE 3EWSi 203


younger Aristobulus with her, as a private person, by reason ofthe warmth of his temper.
2. And now the Pharisees joined themselves to her, to assisther in the government. These are a certain sect of the Jewsthat appear more religious than others, and seem to interpret thelaws more accurately. Now, Alexandra hearkened to them toan extraordinary degree, as being herself a woman of great pietytowards God. But these Pharisees artfully insinuated them­selves into her favour by little and little, and became themselvesthe real administrators of the public affairs: they banished andreduced whom they pleased ; they bound and loosed [men] attheir pleasure * f, and, to say all at once, they had the enjoy­ment of the ro}-al authority, whilst the expences and the difficul­ties of it belonged to Alexandra. She was a sagacious woman inthe management of great affairs, and intent always upon gather­ing soldiers together ; so that she increased the army the onehalf, and procured a great body of foreign troops, till her ownnation became not only very powerful at home, but terrible alsoto foreign potentates, while she governed other people, and thePharisees governed her.
3. Accordingly they themselves slew Diogenes, a person offigure, and one that had been a friend to Alexander ; and accusedhim as having assisted the king with his advice, for crucifyingthe eight hundred men [before-mentioned]. They also pre­vailed with Alexandra to put to death the rest of those who hadirritated him against them. Now, she was so superstitious as tocomply with their desires, and accordingly they slew whomthey pleased themselves ; but the principal of those that were indanger fled to Aristobulus, who persuaded his mother to sparethe men on account of their dignity, but to expel them out ofthe city, unless she took them to be innocent ; so they weresuffered to go unpunished, and were dispersed all over the coun­try. But, when Alexandra sent out her army to Damascus,under pretence that Ptolemy was always oppressing that city,she got possession of it ; nor did it make any considerable re­sistance. She also prevailed with Tigranes, king of Armenia,who lay with his troops about Ptolemais, and besieged J Cleopa­tra,


* Matt. xvi. 19. xviii. 18.
,f Here we have the oldest and most authentic Jewish exposition of bindingand loosing, for punishing or absolving men, not for declaring actions lawful orunlawful, as some more modern Jews and Christians vainly pretend.
$ Strabo, B. XVI. p. 740. relates, that this Selene Cleopatra was besieged byTigranes, not in Ptolemais, as here, but after she had left Syria in Seleucia, acitadel in Mesopotamia; and adds, that when he had kept her a while in prison,he put her to death. Dean Aldrich supposes here that Strabo contradicts Jose-phus, which does not appear to me ; for although josephus says both here and inthe Antiquities, B. XIII. ch.xvi. sect. 4. that Tigranes besieged her now in Ptole.







OCR Output








Chap. XXTII. WARS OF THE JEWS. 319


grew up to be men, and when they were come to an age fit formarriage, the one of them married their aunt Salome's daughter,which Salome had been the accuser of their mother; t!ie othermarried the daughter of Archelaus, king of Cappadocia. Andnow they used boldness in speaking, as well as bore hatred intheir minds. Now those that calumniated them took a handlefrom such their boldness, and certain of them spake now moreplainly to the king that there were treacherous designs laid againsthim by both his sons, and he that was son-in-law to Archelaus,relying upon his father-in-law, was preparing to fly away, inorder to accuse Herod before Caesar'; and when Herod's head hadbeenlong enough filled with these calumnies,hebroughtAntipater,whom he had by Doris, into favour again, as a defence to him'against his other sons, and began all the ways he possibly couldto prefer him before them.
2. But these sons were not able to bear this change in their af­fairs, but when they saw him that was born of a mother of nofamily, the nobility of their birth made them unable to containtheir indignation; but whensoever they were uneasy, they shew­ed the anger they had at it. And as these sons did day after dayinprove in thattheiranger, Antipateralreadyexercisedallhisownabilities, which were very great, in flattering his father, and incontrivingmany sorts of calumnies against his brethren, while hetold some stories of them himself, and put it upon other properpersons to raise other stories against them, till at length he entire­ly cut his brethern off from all hopes of succeeding to the king­dom ; for he was already publicly put into his father's will ashis successor* Accordingly, he was sent with royal ornaments,and other marks of royalty, to Caesar, excepting the diadem.He was also able in time to introduce his mother again into Mar-riamne's bed. The two sorts of weapons he made use of againsthis brethern, were flattery and calumny, whereby be broughtmatters privately to such a pass, that the king had thoughts ofputting his sons to death.
3. So the father drew Alexander as far as Rome, and chargedhim with an attempt of poisoning him before Caesar. Alexandercould hardly speak for lamentation, but having a judge that wasmore skilful than Antipater,and more wise than Herod, hemodest-ly avoided laying any imputation upon his father, but with greatstrength of reason confuted the calumnies laid against him; andwhen he had demonstrated the innocencyof his brother, who wasin the like danger with himself, he at last bewailed the craftinessof Antipater, and the disgrace they were under. He was enabledalso to justify himself, not only by a clear conscience, which hecarried with him, but by his eloquence; for he was a shrewd
man







OCR Output








32 ANTIQJJITIES OF THE JEWS. Book XVII.


CHAP. IX.
How the people raised a sedition against jArcielaus, and l>ow Jjesailed to Home,
J I. AT this time also it was, that some of the Jews got to--^*- gather, out of a desire of innovation. They lamentedMatthias, and those that were slain with him by Herod, who hadnot any respect paid them by a funeral mourning, out of the fearmen were in of that man ; they were those who had been con­demned for pulling down the golden eagle. The people made agreat clamour and lamentation hereupon, and cast but some re­proaches against the king also, as if that tended to alleviate themiseries of the deceased. The people assembled together, anddesired of Archelaus, that, iu way of revenge on their account,he would inflict punishment on those who had been honoured byHerod ; and that, in the first and principal place, he would de­prive that high-priest whom Herod had made, and would chooseone more agreeable to the law, and of greater purity, to officiateas high-priest. This was granted by Archelaus, although hewas mightily offended at their importunity, because he proposedto himself to go to Rome immediately, to look after Caesar'sdetermination about him. However, he sent the general of hisforces to use persuasions, and to tell them that the death whichwas inflicted on their friends, was according to the law ; and torepresent to them, that their petitions about these things werecarried to a great height of injury to him ; that the time wasnot now proper for such petitions, but required their unanimityuntil such time as he should be established in the government bythe consent of Caesar, antf should then be come back to them ;for that he would then consult with them in common concern­ing the purport of their petitions, but that they ought at pre­sent to be quiet, lest they should seem seditious persons.
2. So when the king had suggested these things, and instruct­ed his general in what he was to say, he sent him away to thepeople ; but they made a clamour, and would not give him leaveto speak, and put him in danger of his life, and as many moreas were desirous to venture upon saying openly any thing whichmight reduce them to a sober mind, and prevent their going onin their-present courses ; because they had more concern to haveall their own wills performed, than to yield obedience to theirgovernors ; thinking it to be a thing insufferable, that, whileHercd was alive, they should lose those that were the most dearto them, and that when he was dead, they could not get the ac­tors to be punished. So they went on with their designs after a
violent







OCR Output








342 Book I. wars of the jewS.


to Jerusalem, and appointed a very great mourning to the wholenation for him, and bestowed a most pompous funeral upon him.And this was the end that one of Alexander's and Aristobulus'smurderers came to.
CHAP. XXX..
When Herod made enquiry about Pheroras* s death, a discovery^was made that Antipater had prepared a poisonous draughtfor him. Herod casts Doris and her accomplices, as ahaMariamne, out of the palace, and blots her son Herod out ofhis testament.
f l. T) UT now the punishment was transferred unto the ori--D ginal author, Antipater, and took its rise from thedeath of Pheroras: for certain of his freed-men came with a sadcountenance to the king, and told him, That " his brother had" been destroyed by poison, and that his wife had brought him" somewhat that was prepared after an unusual manner, and" that upon his eating it, he presently fell into bis distemper;" that Antipater's mother and sister, two days before, brought a" woman out of Arabia that was skilful in mixing such drugs," that she might prepare a love potion for Pheroras; and that" instead of a love potion, she had given him deadly poison ;*' and that this was done by the management of Sylleus, who*' was acquainted with that woman."
2. The king was deeply affected with somany suspicious, andhad the maid servants and some of the free women also tortured;one of which cried out iu her agonies, " May that God that go-*' verns the earth and the heaven, punish this author of all these" our miseries, Antipater's mother I" The king took a handlefrom this confession, and proceeded to inquire farther into thetruth of the matter. So this woman discovered the friendshipof Antipater's mother to Pheroras and Antipater's women, asalso their secret meetings, and that Pheroras and Antipater haddrunk with them fox a whole night together as they returnedfrom the king, and would not suffer any body, either man-ser­vant or maid-servant, to be there; while one of the free womendiscovered the matter.
3. Upon this Herod tortured the maid-servants every one bythemselves separately, who all unanimously agreed in the fore­going discoveries, and that accordingly by agreement they wentaway, Antipater to Rome, and Pheroras ta Perea: for thatthey oftentimes talked to one another thus, " That after Herod" had slain Alexander and Aristobulus, he would fall upon- them," and upon their wives, because, after he, had not spared Ma-
" riarnne







OCR Output








Chap. VI. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. #T


his successor, he outlived but a few days, and then died, after hehad held the government twenty-two years five months and threedays: now Caius was the fourth emperor. But, when the Ro­mans understood that Tiberius was dead, they rejoiced at thegood news, but had not courage to believe it j not because they,frere unwilling it should be true, for they would have givenlarge sums of money that it might be so, but because they wereafraid, that if they had shewed their joy when the news provedfalse, their joy should be openly known, and they should be ac­cused for it, and be thereby undone. For this Tiberius hadbrought a vast number of miseries on the best families of theRomans, since he was easily enflamed with passion in all cases,and was of such a temper as rendered his anger irrevocable, tillhe had executed the same, although he had taken an hatredagainst men without reason ; for he was by nature fierce in afl{he sentences he gave, and made death the penalty for the lightestoffences;' insomuch that when the Romans heard the rumourabout his death gladly, they were restrained from the enjoymeritof that pleasure by the dread of such miseries as they foresawifrould follow, if their hopes proved ill-grounded. Now, Mar.4yas, Agrippa'sfreed-man, as soon as he heard of Tiberius's death,Came running to tell Agrippa the news ; and finding him goingOut to the bath, he gave him a nod, and said, in the Hebrew-tongue, " The lion * is dead :" who, understanding his meaning,and being overjoyed at the news, " Nay, said he, but nil sorts of" thanks and happiness attend thee for this news of thine ; only" I wish that what thou sayest may prove true." Now thecenturion, who was set to keep Agrippa, when he saw with what'haste Marsyascame, and what joy Agrippa had from what he said,he had a suspicion that his words implied some great innovationof affairs, and he asked them about what was said. They at firstdiverted the discourse ; but upon his farther pressing, Agrippa,without more ado, told him, for he was already become hrsfriend ; so he joined with him in that pleasure which this newsOccasioned, because it would be fortunate to Agrippa, and madehim a supper. But, as they were feasting, and the cnps wentabout, there came one who said, That " Tiberius was still alive," and would return to the city in a few days." At which newsthe centurion was exceedingly troubled, because he had donewhat might cost him his life, to have treated so joyfully a pri­soner,


* This nam6 of a lion is often given to tyrants, especially by the Jews, such asAgrippa, and probably his freed-man Marsyas, in effect were, Ezek. xix. I. 9.Esth' xiv. 13. 2 Tim. iv' 17. They are also sometimes compared to, or repre.sented by wild beasts, of which the lion is the principal. Dan. vii' 3. 8. Apoc.xiii. r. 2.







OCR Output








Chap. VI. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 23


of the lower sort of men excited against him, the occasion ofwhich was as follows.
2. There was one Judas, the son of Saripheus, and Matthias,the son of Margalothus, two of the most eloquent men amongthe Jews, and the most celebrated interpreters of the Jewish'laws, and men well beloved by the people, because of their edu­cation of their youth ; for all those that were studious of virtuefrequented their lectures every day. These men, when theyfound that the king's distemper was incurable, excited the youngmen that they would pull down all those works which the kinghad erected contrary to the law of their fathers, and thereby ob­tain the rewards which the law will confer on them for such,actions of piety ; for that it was truly on account of Herod'srashness in making such things as the law had forbidden, thathis other misfortunes, and this distemper also, which was so un­usual among mankind, and with which he was now afflicted, cameupon him : for Herod had caused such things to be made, whichwere contrary to the law, of which he was accused by Judas andMatthias ; for the king had erected over the great gate of thetemple a large golden eagle, of great value, and had dedicated itto the temple. Now, the law forbids those that propose to liveaccording to it, to erect images * or representations of any livingcreature. So these wise men persuaded [their scholars] to pulldown the golden eagle ; alledging, that '' although they should" incur any danger, which might bring them to their deaths," the virtue of the action now proposed to them would appear" much more advantageous to them than the pleasures of life;u since they would die for the preservation and observation of" the law of their fathers ; since they would also acquire an ever-w lasting fame and commendation ; since they would be both" commended by the present generation, and leave an example" of life that would never be forgotten to posterity ; since that" common calamity of dying cannot be avoided by our living so>" as to escape any such dangers ; that therefore it is a right thing'' for those who are in love with a virtuous conduct, to wait for" that fatal hour by such a behaviour as may carry them out of" the world with praise and honour ; and that this will alleviate" death to a great degree, thus to come at it by the perform-" ance of brave actions, which bring us into danger of it; and" at the same time, to leave that reputation behind them to their" children, and to all their relations, whether they be men or" women, which will be of great advantage to them afterward."
j. And with such discourses as this- did these men excite the
young
* That the making of images, without an intention to worship them, was notunlawful to the Jews, see the note on Antiq' B. V'Ul. ch. vii. { 5.







OCR Output








J32 ANTIQUITIES 01 THE JEWS. Book XIXf


which had a stone, with the image of Caius engraven upon it,and which, in his zeal in speaking, and his earnestness in doingwhat he was about, as it was supposed, he had forgotten totake off himself. This sculpture was broken immediately.But, as it was now far in the night, Che:rea demanded of theconsuls the watch-word, who gave him this word, Liberty.These facts were the subjects of admiration to themselves, andalmost incredible ; for it was an hundred years * since the dermocracy had been laid aside, when this giving the watch-wordreturned to the consuls ; for, before the city was subject to ty­rants, they were the commanders of the soldiers. But, whenCherea had received \hat watch-word, he delivered it to thosewho were on the senate's side, which were four regiments, whoesteemed the government without emperors to be preferable totyranny. So these went away with their tribunes. Thepeople also now departed very joyful, full of hope and of conirage, as having recovered their former democracy, and were nalonger under an emperor ; and Cherea was in very great esteem,with them.
4. And now Cherea was very uneasy that Caius's daughtecand wife were still alive, and that all his family did not perishwith him, since whosoever was left of them must be left for theruin of the city and of the laws. Moreover, in order to finishthis matter with the utmost zeal, and in order to satisfy his ha.tred of Caius, he sent Julius Lupus, one of the tribunes, to killCaius's wife and daughter. They proposed this office to Lu­pus as to a kinsman of Clement, that he might be so far a par­taker of this murder of the tyrant, and might rejoice in the vir­tue of having assisted his fellow-citizens, and that he might ap­pear to have been a partaker with those that were first in theirdesigns against him. ' Yet did this action appear to some of theconspirators to be too cruel, as to this using such severity to awoman, because Caius did more indulge his own ill-nature', thanuse her advice in all that he did ; from which ill-nature it wasthat the city was in sp desperate a condition with the miseriesthat were brought on it, and the flower of the city was destroy­ed. But others accused her of giving her consent to thesethings ; nay, they ascribed all that Caius had done to her as thecause of it, and said, she had given a potion to Caius, which hadmade him obnoxious to her, and had tied him down to love herl>y such evil methods ; insomuch-that she, having rendered himdistracted, was become the author of all the mischiefs that had, befallen


* Hence,we learn that, in tlie opinion of Sarurninus, the sovereign authority*of ihe consuls ant) senate had been taken iwuy justice years before ihe death ofCaius. A. 1X41.^ in the <>&th year- before the Christian aers, when thetriumvirate began under Cu sar, 'Pwi)j)cj-x»Bii'







OCR Output








Chap. X. 43 ANTIQU-iTIES OF THE JEWS.


do more then ordinary injuries to others, that although he shouldbe killed, he did not much care if he lost his life in so great a de­sign. He had also four brethren, who were tall men themselves,'and were believed to be superior toothers in the strength of theirhands, and thereby were encouraged to aim at great things, andthought that strength of theirs would support them in retainingthe kingdom. Each of these ruled over a band of men of their-own; for those that got together to them were very numerous.They were every one of them also commanders.; but, when theycame to fight, they were subordinate to him, and fought for him,while he put a diadem about his head, and assembled a council.to debate about what things should be done, and all things weredone according to his pleasure. And this man retained hispower a great while ; he was also called king, and had nothingto hinder him from doing what he pleased. He also, as well ashis brethren, slew a great many both of the Romans, and of theking's forces, and managed matters with the like hatred to eachof them. The king's forces they fell upon, because of the li­centious-conduct they had been allowed under Herod's govern­ment.; and they fell upon the Romans, because of the injuriesthey had so lately received from them. But in process of time,they grew more cruel to all sorts of men ; nor could any one'escape from one or other of these seditions, since they slew someout of the hopes of gain, and others from a mere custom of slay­ing men. They once attacked a company of Romans at Emmaus,who were bringing corn and weapons to the army, and fell up­on Arius, the centurion, who commanded the company, and shotforty of the best of his foot-soldiers ; but the rest of them wereaffrighted at their slaughter, and left their dead behind them,but saved themselves by the means of Gratus, who came withthe king's troops that were about him to their assistance. Now,these four brethren continued the war a long while by such sortof expeditions, and much grieved the Romans ; but did theirown nation also a great deal of mischief. Yet were they after­ward subdued; one of them in a fight with Gratus, anotherwith Ptolemy ; Archelaus also took the eldest of them prisoner ;while the last of them was so dejected at the other's misfortune,and saw so plainly that he had no way now left to save himself,his army being worn away with sickness and continual labours,that he also delivered himself up to Archelaus, upon his promiseand oath to God [to preserve his life]. But these things cameto pass a good while afterward.
8. And now Judea was full of robberies; and, as the several-companies of the seditious light upon any one to head them, bewas created a king immediately, in order to do mischief to the
F 2 public.







OCR Output








719 . Book XX. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


went up'with the greatest security at the festivals after this time,and having weapons concealed in like manner as before, and min'-gling themselves among the multitude, they slew certain of theirown enemies, and were subservient to other men for money, andilew others, not only in remote parts of the city, but in the tem­ple itself also ; for they had the boldness to murder men there,without thinking of the impiety of which they were guilty. Andthis seems to me to have been the reasons why God, out of hishatred of these men's wickedness, rejected ouf city ; and as forthe temple, he no longer esteemed it sufficiently pure for him toinhabit therein, but brought the Romans upon us, and threwa- fire upon the city to purge it, and brought upon us, ourwives and children, slavery, as desirous to make us wiser byour calamities.
6. These works, that were done by the robbers, filled the citywith all sorts of impiety. And now these + impostors and de­ceivers persuaded the multitude to follow them into the wilder­ness, and pretended that they would exhibit manifest wondersand signs, that should be performed by the providence of God;And many that were prevailed on by tb<:m suffered the punish­ments of th*ir folly ; For Felix brought them back, and then pu­nished
Jewish, and of every Christian reader. And, since we are soon coming to thecatalogue of the Jewish high-priests, it may not be amiss, with Reland, toinsert this Jonathan among them, and to transcribe his particular catalogue ofthe last twenty-eight high priests, taken out of Josephus, and begin with Ana-nelus, who was made by Herod the Great. See Antiq. B. XV. ch. ii. sect 4. andthe note there.
X. Anafielus. 15. Theophilus, his brother, and son of
a. Aristabuhn. Ananus.
3. Jesus, the son of Fabus^ 16. Simon, the son of Boethus.
4. Simon, the son of Boethus. XJ. Matthias, the brother of Jonathan,
5. Matthias, the son of Theophilus, and son of Ananus.
6. Joazar, the son of Boethus. IS. Aljoneus.
7. Eleazar, the son of Boethus. ip. Josephus, the son of Camydus.S. Jesus, the son of Sie. 20. Ananias, the son of Nebedeus.9. [Annas, or] Ananus, the son of 2t. Jonathas.
Sethi 22. lsmael, the son of Fabi.
id. Ismael, the son of Fabus. 23. Joseph Cabi, the son of Simon*
11. Eleazar, the son of Ananus. 24. Ananus, the son of Ananus.
12. Simon, the son of Camithus. 25. Jesus, the son of Damneus.
13. Josephus Caiaphas, the son-in-law 26. Jesus, the son of Gamaliel.
to Ananus. 27. Matthias, the son of Theophilus.
14. Jonathan, the son of Ananus. 2S. Phannias, the son of Samuel.
As for Ananus, and Joseph Caiaphas, here mentioned about the middle of thiscitalogue, there are no other than those Annas and Caiaphas, so often mention­ed in the four gospels; and that Ananiasi the son of Ntbedeus, was that high-priest before whom St Paul pleaded his own cause, Acts, xxiv.
t Of these Jewish impostors and false prophets, with many other circumstan­ces and miseries of the Jews, till their utter destruction, foretold by our Saviour.See Lit. Accompl. of Proph. p. 58—75.







OCR Output








Chap. XXIII. WAftS OF THE JEWS. 321


'' ing to the prerogative of their births; for he that pays such" respects unduly, will thereby not make him that is honoured" beyond what his age requires so joyful, as he will make him" that is dishonoured sorrowful. As for the kindred and friends" that are to converse with them. 1 will appoint them to each" of them, and will .so constitute them, that they may be se-" curities for their concord: as well knowing, that the ill" tempers o€ those with whom they converse, will produceu quarrels and contentions among them; but that, if these with" whom they converse be of good tempers, they will preserve*'' their natural affections for one another. But still I desire," that not these only, but all the captains of my army, have for*' the present their hopss placed on me alone; for I do not give" away my kingdom to these my sons, but give them royal hon-" ours only:; whereby it will come to pass, that they will en-" joy the sweet parts of government as rulers themselves, but" that the burden of administration will rest upon myself" whether I will or not. And let every one consider what age" I am of, how I have conducted my life, and what piety I have'1 exercised? for my age is not so great, that men may soon ex-" pect the end of my life; nor have I indulged such a luxuri-" ous -way of living as cuts men off when they are young; and" we have been so religious towards God, that we [have rea-«' son to hope we] may arrive at a very great age. But for'' such as cultivate a friendship with my sons, so as to aim at" my destruction, they shall be punishedby me on their account." I am not one who envy my own children, and therefore forbid,«' men to pay them great respect; but 1 know that such [ex-" travagant] respe»ts are the wayto make them insolent. And if" every one that comes near them does but revolve this in his" mind, that if he prove a good man, he shall receive a reward" from me, that if he proves seditious, his ill intended com-.*« plaisance shall get him nothing from him to whom it is shewn,"•I suppose they will all be of my side, that is of my sons sidej'« for k will be for their advantage that I reign, and that 1 be'' at concord with them. But do you, O my good children," reflect upon the holiness of nature itself, by whose means" natural affection is preserved, even among wild beasts; in the" next place, reflect upon Caesar, who hath made this reconcilia-" tion among us; and, in the third place, reflect upon me who" entreat you to do what I have power to command you; con-«« tinue brethren. I give you royal garments, and royal honours;" and I pray to God to preserve what I have determined, in'' case you be at concord one with another." When the kinghad thus spoken, and had saluted every one of his sons after anVOL. III. S s " obliging







OCR Output








Chap. XV. WARS OF THE JEWS. 401


that were ascending from Cesarea, whence two cohorts werecoming; and while these men were exhorting the multitude soto do, he sent before-hand, and gave directions to the centurionsof the cohorts, that they should give notice to those that wereunder them, not to return the Jews' salutations, and that if theymade any reply to his disadvantage, they should make use oftheir weapons. Now the high-priests assembled the multitudein the temple, and desired them to go and meet the Romans, andto salute the cohorts very civilly, before their miserable caseshould become incurable. Now the seditious part would notcomply with these persuasions, but the consideration of thosethat had been destroyed made them incline to those that werethe boldest for action.
4. At this time it was that every priest, and every servant ofGod, brought out the holy vessels, and the ornamental garmentswherein they used to minister in sacred things. The harpersalso, and the singers of hymns, came out with their instrumentsof music, and fell down before the multitude, and begged ofthem that they would preserve those holy ornaments to them,and not provoke the Romans to carry off those sacred treasures.You might also see then the high-priests themselves, with dustsprinkled in great plenty upon their heads, with bosoms depri­ved of any covering, but what was rent; these besought everyone of the eminent men by name, and the multitude in com-mon, that they would not for a small offence betray their coun­try to those that were desirous to have it laid waste ; saying," What benefit will it bring to the soldiers to have a saluta-" tion from the Jews? or what amendmenlfof your affairs will" it bring you, if you do not now go out to meet them ? and" that if they saluted them civilly, all handle would be cut off" from Florus to begin a war; that they should thereby gain" their country, and freedom from all farther sufferings ; and" that, besides, it would be a sign of great want of command of" themselves, if they should yield to a few seditious persons," while it was fitter for them who were so great a people, to" force the others to act soberly."
5. By these persuasions, which they used to the multitude,and to the seditious, they restrained some by threatenings, andothers by the reverence that was paid them. After this theyled them out, and they met the soldiers quietly, and aftera composed manner, and when they were come up with them,
,they saluted them, but when they made no answer, the se­ditious exclaimed against Florus, which was the signal givenfor falling upon them. The soldiers therefore encompassedthem presently, and struck them With their clubs, and asVOL. III. 3 E ' the/







OCR Output








Chap. XXXII. WARS OF TflE JEWS. - . 349


«' wild beast, when he had beenover and above satiated with that" patience which I shewed him, he made use of that abundance I" had given him against myself; for I seemed to him to live too'' long, and he was very uneasy at the old age I was arrived at;"nor could he stay any longer, but wouldbe a king by parricide." And justly I am served by him for bringing him back out of thef country to court, when he was of no esteem before, and/or" thrustingoutthosesonsof mine that were born of the queen, and'.' for making him a successor to my dominions. I confess to" thee, O Varus, the great folly I was guilty of; for I provoked'.' those sons of mine to act against me, and cut off their just es-'.' pectations for the sake of Antipater; and indeed what kind-" ness did I do to them, that could equal what I have done to" Antipater? to whom I have, in a manner, yielded upmy-' royal authority while I am alive, and whom I have openly'named for the successor to my dominions in my testament, andgiven him a yearly revenue of his own fifty talents, and sup-'plied him with money to an extravagant degree out of myown'revenue; and when he was about to sail to Rome, I gave him" three hundred talents, and recommended him, andhim alone of" all my children, to Caesar, as his father's deliverer. Now" what crimes were those other sons of mine guilty of like these" of Antipater? and what evidence was there brought against-" them so strong as there is to demonstrate this son to have plot-" ted against me? Yet does this parricide presume to speak for«' himself, and hopes to obscure the truth by his cunning tricks." Thou, O Varus, must guard thyself against him; for I know" the wild beast, and 1 foresee howplausibly he will talk, and his" counterfeit lamentation. This was he who exhorted me to" have a care of Alexander, when he was alive, and not to in- •" trust my body with all men! This was he who came to my" very bed, and looked about lest any one should lay snares for" me! This was he who took care of my sleep, and secured me" from any fear of danger, who comforted me under the trouble" I was in upon the slaughter of my sons, and looked to" see what affection mysurviving brethren bore me! This was" my protector, and the guardian of mybody! And when Icallto" mind, O Varus, his craftiness upon every occasion, and his art" of dissembling, I can hardly believe that I am still alive, and I" wonder how I have escaped such a deep plotter of mischief.f However, since some fate or other makes my house desolate," and perpetually raises up those that are dearest to me against" me, I will, with tears, lament my hard fortune, and private-" ty groan under my lonesome condition; yet am 1 resolved that',- " no







OCR Output








'Chap. VII. ' WARS or THE JEWS. 371


queathed to them in his testaments; but, besides that, Caesargranted to Herod's two virgin daughters five hundred thousand[drachmae] of silver, and gave them in marriage to the sons ofFheroras: but after this family distribution, he gave be­tween them what had been bequeathed to him by Herod, which'was a thousand talents, reserving to himself only some inconsi­derable presents, in honour of the deceased.
CHAP. VII.
The history of the spurious Alexander. Archelaus is banished,and Glaphyra dies, after what was to happen to both of themhad been shewed them in dreams.
f 1. TN the mean time there was a man, who was by birth aX "Jew, but brought up at Sidon with one of the Romanfreed-men, who falsely pretended, on account of the resemblanceof their countenances, that he was that Alexander who was slainby Herod. This man came to Rome, in hopes of not being de­tected. He had one who was his assistant, of his own nation, andwho knew all the affairs of the kingdom, and instructed him tosay, how those that were sent to kill him and Aristobulus hadpity upon them, and stole them away, by putting bodies thatwere like theirs in their places. This man deceived the Jewsthat were at Crete, and got a great deal of money of them fortravelling in splendour; and thence sailed to Melos, where he wasthought so certainly genuine, that he got a great deal more mo­ney, and prevailed with those that had treated him to sail along*with him to Rome. So he landed at Dicearchia, [Piiteoii], andgot very large presents from the Jews who dwelt there, and wasconducted by his father's friends as if he were a king; nay, theresemblance ia his countenance procured him so much credit,that those who had seen Alexander, and had known him verywell, would take their oaths that he was the very same person.Accordingly, the whole body of the Jews that were atRome, ranout in crowds to see him, and an innumerable multitude therewas which stood in the narrow places, through which he wascarried; for those of Melos were so far distracted, that theycarried him in a sedan, and maintained a royal attendance forhim at their own proper charges.
2. But Caesar, who knew perfectly -well the lineaments ofAlexander's face, because he had been accused by Herod beforehim, discerned the fallacy in his countenance, even before he sawthe man. However, he suffered the agreeable fame that wentof him to have some weight with him, and sent Celedus, onewho well knew Alexander, and ordered him to bring the young
3 A 2 map







OCR Output








SO* WARS OF THE JEWS. Book I.


0. Now while they made opposition, they had not a greatnumber slain ; but as soon as they turned their backs, a greatmany were trodden to pieces by the Jews, and a great many bythemselves, and so perished, tilf five thousand were fallen downdead in their flight, wliile the rest of the multitude preventedtheir immediate death, by crowding into the fortification. He­rod encompassed these round, and besieged them; and while theywere ready to be takenby their enemies in arms, they hadanother additional distress upon them, which was thirst and wantof water; for the king was above hearkening to their ambassa­dors, and when they offered five hundred talents, as the priceof their redemption, he pressed still harder upon them. And asthey were burnt up by their thirst, they came out and volun­tarily delivered themselves up by multitudes to the Jews, till iafive days time four thousand of them were put into bonds ; andon the sixth d=y the multitude that were left despaired of savingthemselves, and came out to fight; with these Herod fought, andslew again about seven thousand, insomuch, that he punishedAribia so severely, and so far extinguished the spirits of themen, that he was chosen by the nation for their ruler.
, «
CHAP. XX.
Herod is confirmed In his kingdom by Ccesar, and cultivates a
friendship with the emperor by magnificent presents ; while
Caesar returns bis /kindness by bestowing on him that part of
his kingdom which had bten taken away from it by Cleopatra,
ivith the addition of Zenodorus's country also.
§ 1. T)UT now Herod was under immediate concern about-U a most important affair, on account of his friendshipwith Antony, who was already overcome at Actium by Caesar ;yet he was more afraid than hurt; for Caesar did not think hehad quite undone Antony, while Herod continued his assistanceto him. However, the king resolved to expose himself to dan­gers : accordingly he sailed to Rhodes, where Caesar then abode,and came to him without his diadem, and in the habit and ap­pearance of a private person, but in his behaviour as a king. Sohe concealed nothing of the truth, but spake thus before hisface : " O Caesar, as I was ma,de king of the Jews by Antony,<e so do I profess that 1 have used my royal authority in the best" manner, and entirely for his advantage ; nor will I conceal" this farther, that thou hadst certainly found me in arms, and*' an inseparable companion of his, had not the Arabians hin-*' dered me. However, 1 sent him as many auxiliaries as I*' was able, and many tea thqusand [cori] of corn. Nay, inr
'







OCR Output








Chap. I. 35 ANTIQJJITIES OF THE JEWS.


BOOK XVIII.
Containing the interval of thirty-two years.
[From the banishment of Archelaus, to the departure of theJews from Babylon.]


CHAP. I./
Mow Cyrenius was sent by Ccesar to make a taxation of Syria andJudea ; and how Coponius was sent to be procurator of Judea ;concerning Judas of Galilee, and concerning the sects that wereamong the Jews.
( I. 'VTOW, Cyrenius, a Roman senator, and one who hadgone through other magistracies, and had passed throughthem till he had been consul, and ope who, on other accounts,was of great dignity, came at this time into Syria, with a few-others, being sent by Caesar to be a judge of that nation, and totake an account of their substance : Coponius also, a man of theequestrian order, was sent together with him, to have the su­preme power over the Jews. Moreover, Cyrenius came him­self into Judea, which was now added to the province of Syria,to take an account of their substance, and to dispose of Ar"he-laus's money : but the Jews, although, at the beginning, theytook the report of a taxation heinously, yet did they leave offany farther opposition to it, by the persuasion of Joazar, whowas the son of Eoethus, and high-priest; so they being overpersuaded by Joazar's words, gave an account of their estates,without any dispute about it. Yet was there one Judas *, a
Gaulonite,
* Since St Luke, once, Acts v. 37. and Josephus four several times, once here,§ 6. and B. XX. ch. v..$ 2. Of the War, R. II. ch. viii. $ 1. and ch. xvii. S S. callsthis Judas, who was the pestilent author of that seditious doctrine and temper'which brought the Jewish nation to ntter destruction, a Galilean, but here § 1.Josephus calls him a Gaulonite, of the city of Gamali. It is a great questionwhere this Judas was born, whether in Galilee on the west side, or in Gaulonitis,*n the east side of the river Jordan; while, in the place just now cited out of theAntiquities, B. XX. ch. v. § 2. he is not only called a Galilean, but it is addedto his story, as I have signified in the books that go befirt these, as if he hadstill called him a Galilean in those Antiquities before, as well as in that particu­lar place, as Dean Aldrich observes, On the War, B. II. ch. viii. § 1. Nor canone well imagine why he should here call him a Gaulonite, when in the 6th sect,following here, as well as twice Of the War, he still calls him a Galilean. Asfor the city of Gamala, whence this !udas was derived, it determines nothing-,since there were two of that name, the one in Gaulonitis, the other in Galilee.See Reland on the city or town of that name.







OCR Output








118 ANTIQJJIT1ES OF THE JEWS. Book XIX,


from the madness of Caius by a certain divine providence, andCallistus pretended to such a piece of merit as he no way deserved.11. However, the execution of Cherea's designs was put offfrom day to day, by the sloth of many therein concerned ; for asto Cherea himself, he would hot willingly make any delay inthat execution, thinking every time a fit time for it; for fre­quent opportunities offered themselves ; as when Caius went upto the capitol to sacrifice for his daughter, or when he stoodupon his royal palace, and threw gold and silver pieces of moneyamong the people, he might be pushed down' headlong, becausethe top of the palace, that looks toward the market-place, wasvery high ; and also when he celebrated the mysteries, which hehad appointed at that time ; for he was then no way secludedfrom the people, but solicitous to do every thing carefully anddecently, and was free from all suspicion, that he should be then.assaulted by any body ; and although the gods should afford himno divine assistance to enable him to take away his life, yet hadhe strength himself suflicient to dispatch Caius, even without asword. Thus was Cherea angry at his fellow-conspirators, forfear they should suffer a proper opportunity to pass by ; and theywere themselves sensiblethathehad just causeto be angry at them,and that his eagerness was for his advantage; yet did they desirehe would have a little longer patience, lest, upon any disappoint­ment they might meet with, they should put the city into disorder,and an inquisition should be made after the conspiracy, and shouldrender the courage of those that were to attack Caius withoutsuccess, while he would then secure himself more carefully thanever against them; that it would therefore be the best to set aboutthe work when the shews were exhibited in the palace. Theseshews were acted in honour of that Caesar * who first of all chan­ged the popular government, and transferred it to himself; gal­leries being fixed before the palace, where the Romans that werePatricians became spectators, together with their children andtheir wives, and Caesar himself was to be also a spectator; andthey reckoned among those many ten thousands, who would therebe crowded into a narrow compass, they should have a favour­able opportunity to make their attempt upon him as he came in ;because his guards that should protect him, if any of themshould have a mind to do it, would not here be able to give him'any assistance.
12. Cherea consented to this delay, and when the shews wereexhibited, it was resolved to do the work the first day. But for­tune, which allowed a farther delay to his slaughter, was toohard for their foregoing resolution ; and, as three days of the
regular
* Here Josephus supposes that it was Augustus, and not Julius Caesar, who firstchanged the Roman commonwealth into a monarchy! for these shows were ift.honour of Augustus, as we shall )e»ra in the next sec-ion but one.







OCR Output








THE
WORKS
OF
FLAVIUS JOSEPHUS,
THE LEARNED AND AUTHENTIC JEWISH HISTORIANAND CELEBRATED WARRIOR.
VOL. III.







OCR Output








242 THE LIFE OF FLAVIUS JOSEPHUS.


75. 'For, when the siege of Jotapata was over, and I was amongthe Romans, I was kept with much care, by means of the greatrespect that Vespasian shewed me. Moreover, at his command, Imarried a virgin *, who was from among the captives of thatcountry : yet did she not live with me long, but was divorced,npon my being freed from my bonds, and my going to Alex­andria. 'However, I married another wife at Alexandria, andwas thence sent, together with Titus, to the siege of Jerusalem,and was frequently in danger of being put to death ; while boththe Jews were very desirous to get me under their power, inorder to have me punished. And the Romans also, wheneverthey were beaten, supposed that it was occasioned by mytreachery, and made continual clamours to the emperors, anddesired that they would bring me to that punishment, as atraitor to them : but Titus Caesar was well acquainted withthe uncertain fortune of war, and returned no answer to thesoldiers vehement solicitations against me. Moreover, whenthe city Jerusalem was taken by force, Titus Caesar persuadedme frequently to take whatsoever I would of the ruins of mycountry; and said that he gave me leave so to do. Butwhen my country was destroyed, I thought nothing else to beof any value, which I could take and keep as a comfort undermy calamities ; so I made this request to Titus, that my familymight have their liberty : I had also the holy books f by Titus'sconcession. Nor was it long after that I asked of him the lifeof my brother, and of fifty friends with him, and was not de­nied. When I also went once to the temple, by the permissionof Titus, where there were a great multitude of captive womenand children ; I got all those that I remembered as among myown friends and acquaintance to be set free, being in numberabout one hundred and ninety ; and so I delivered them withouttheir paying any price of redemption, and restored them to theirformer fortune. And when I was sent by Titus Caesar withCerealius, and a thousand horsemen, to a certain village calledThccoa, in order to know whether it were a place fit for a camp,as I came back, I saw many captives crucified, and rememberedthree of them as my former acquaintance. 1 was very sorry at
this


« Here Josephus, a priest, honestly confesses that he did that at the command
*of Vcspasian, which he had before told us was not lawful for a priest to do by
the law of Moses, Anti<j. B. 111. ch. xii. sect. 2. 1 mean, the taking a captive
Woman to wife. See also against Appian, B. I. ch. vii. But he seems to have
been quickly sensible that his compliance with the commands of an emperor
xvould *iot excuse him, for he soon put her away, as Reland justly observes here.
,t Of tliis most remarkable clause, and its most important consequences, see
Essay on the Uld Testament, page 1'93—195.







OCR Output








Chap. XXIX. WARS OF THE JEWS. :941


pater with all his might, as to that law-suit which Nicolaus hadwith him before. This Sylleus had also a great contest withAretas his own king; for he had slain many others of Aretas'sfriends, and particularly Sohemus, the most potent man in ihecity Petra. Moreover, he had prevailed with Phabatus, whowas Herod's steward,' by giving him a great sum of money toassist him against Herod; but when Herod gave him more, heinduced him to leave Sylleus, and by his means he demanded ofhim all that Caesar had required of him to pay. But when Syl­leus paid nothing of what he was to pay, and did also accusePhabatus to Caesar, and said that he was not a steward for Cae­sar's advantage, but for Herod's, Phabatus was angry at him onthat account, but was still in very great esteem with Herod, anddiscovered Sylleus's grand secrets,and told the king that Sylleushad corrupted Corinthus, one of the guards of his body, bybribing him, and of whom he must therefore have a care. Ac­cordingly the king complied, for this Corinthus, though hewere brought up in Herod's kingdom, yet was he by birth anArabian, so they king ordered him to be taken up immediately,and not only him, but two other Arabians, who were caughtwith him; the one of them was Sylleus's friend, the other thehead of a tribe. The last being put to the torture, confessedthat they had prevailed with Corinthus, for a large sum of mo­ney to kill Herod; and when they had been farther examinedbefore Saturninus the president of Syria, they were sent to Rome.4. However, Herod did not leave off importuning Pheroras,but proceeded to force him to put away his wife; yet could henot devise any way by which he could bring the woman herselfto punishment, although he had many causes of hatred to her ;till at length he was in such great uneasiness at her, that he castboth her and his brother out of his kingdom. Pheroras took thisinjury very patiently, and went away into his own tetrarchy[Perea beyond Jordan], and sware that there should be but oneend put to his flight, and that should be Herod's death ; and thathe would never return while he was alive. Nor indeed wouldhe return when his brother was sick, although he earnestly sentfor him to come to him, because he had a mind to leave someinjunctions with him before he died; but Herod unexpectedlyrecovered. A little afterward Pheroras himself fell sick, whenHerod shewed great moderation ; for he came to him and pitiedhis case, and took care of him; but his affection for him did himho good, for Pheroras died a little afterward. Now, thoughHerod had so gi'eat an affection for him to the last day of hislife, yet was a report spread abroad that he had killed him bypoison. However, he took care to have his dead body carried• to







OCR Output








THE LIFE OF FLAVIUS JOSEPIIUS. 215


r


out tlieiice all his domestics, and to restore the Babylonians toBatanea again. He also gave it him in charge to take all possi­ble cape that none of his subjects should be guilty of making anyinnovation. Accordingly, upon these directions from the king,he made haste to do what he was commanded.
37. Now there was one Joseph, the -son of a female physician,who excited a great many young men to join with him. He al­so insolently addressed himself to the principal persons at Gamala,and persuaded them to revolt from the king, and take up arms,and gave them hopes that they should, by his means, recovertheir liberty. And some they forced into the service ; and thosethat would not acquiesce in what they had resolved on, theyslew. They also slew Chares, and with him Jesus, one of hiskinsmen, and a brother of Justus of Tiberias, as we have alreadysaid. Those of Gamala also wrote to me, desiring me to sendthem an armed force, and workmen to raise up the walls of theircity ; nor did I reject either of their requests. The region ofGaulonitis did also revolt from the king, as far as the village So-lyma. I also built a wall about Seleucia and Soganni, whichare villages naturally of very great strength. Moreover, I, inlike manner, walled several villages of Upper Galilee, thoughthey were very rocky of themselves. Their names are, Jamnia,and Meroth, and Achabaru. I also fortified, in the Lower Ga­lilee, the cities Taricheae, Tiberias, Sepphoris, and the villages,the Cave of Arbela, Bersobe, Selamin, Jotapata, Caphareccho,and Siggo, and Japha, and Mount Tabor *. I also laid up a greatquantity of corn in these places, and arms withal, that might befor their security afterward.
38. "But the hatred that John, the son of Levi, bore to me, grewnow more violent, while he could not bear my prosperity withpatience. So he proposed to himself, by all means possible, tomake away with me, and built the walls of Gischala, which wasthe place of his nativity. He then sent his brother Simon, andJonathan the son of Sisenna, and about an hundred armed men toJerusalem, to Simon the son of Gamaliel f, in order to persuadehim to induce the commonalty of Jerusalem to take from me ^the government over the Galileans, and to give their suffragesfor conferring that authority upon him. This Simon was ofthe city Jerusalem, and of a very noble family, of the sect of the
Pharisees,


* Part of these fortifications on Mount Tabor may be those still remaining,and which were Seen lately by Mr Maundrel. See his Travels, p. i iz.
t This Gamaliel may be the very same that is mentioned by the rabbins in theMishna in Juchasin and in Porto Mosis, as is observed in the Latin notes. Hemight be also that Gamaliel 11. whose grandfather was Gamaliel I. who is men­tioned Acts, v. 34. and at whose feet St I'aul wai brought up. Acts, xxii. 3. See
d. at the year 445.







OCR Output








Chap. VII. . - WARS OF THE JEWS. 269


in full peace, their daily sacrifices and purifications, and everybranch of their religious worship was still performed to Godwith the utmost exactness. Nor indeed, when the temple wasactually taken, and they were every day slain about the altar,did they leave off" the instances of their divine worship that wereappointed by their law ; for it was in the third month of thesiege before the Romans could even with'great difficulty overthrowone of the towers, and get into the temple. Now he that firstdf all ventured to get over the wall, was Faustus Cornelius theson of Sylla ; and next after him were two centurians, Furiusand Fabius ; and every one of these was followed by a cohortof his own, who encompassed the Jews on all sides, and slewthem, some of them as they were running for shelter to the tem­ple, and others as they, for a while, fought in their own defence.
5. And now did many of the priests, even when they saw theirenemies assailing them with swords in their hands, without anydisturbance, go on with their divine worship, and were slain whilethey were offering their drink-offerings, and burning their in­cense, as preferring the duties about their worship to God, beforetheir own preservation. The greatest part of them were slain bytheir own countrymen, of the adverse faction, and an innumerablemultitude threw themselves down precipices ; nay, some therewere who were so distracted among the insuperable difficultiesthey were under, that they set fire to the buildings that were nearto the wall, and were burnt together with them. Now of theJews were slain twelve thousand ; but of the Romans very fewwere slain, but a greater number was wounded.
6. But there was nothing that affected the nation so much, inthe calamities they were then under, as that their holy place,which had been hitherto seen by none, should be laid open tostrangers ; for * Pompey, and those that were about him, wentinto the temple itself, whether it was not lawful for any to enterbut the high-priest, and saw what was reposited therein, the can­dlestick with its lamps, and the table, and the pouring vessels,and the censers, all made entierly of gold, as also a great quanti­ty of spices heaped together with two thousand talents of sacredmoney. Yet did not he touch that money, nor any thing else thatwas there reposited ; but he commanded the ministers about thetemple, the very next day after he had taken it, to cleanse it, andto perform their accustomed sacrifices. Moreover, he made Hyr-canus high-priest, as one that not only in other respects hadshewed great alacrity, on his side, during the siege, but as he had
been


* Thus says Tacitus, Cn. Pompeius first of all subdued the Jews, and went in­to their temple, by right of conquest, Hist. B. V. ch. ix. nor did he touch any ofits riches, as has been observed on the parallel place of the Antiquities, B. XIV.ch. iv. sect. 4. out of Cicero himself.







OCR Output








99 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book XVIII.


I
tronius, " commending him for his assembling his army, and the«" consulting him about these aiFairs. It' therefore, said he, thou" hast already erected my statue, let it stand ; but, if thou hast" not yet dedicated it, do not trouble thyself farther about it, but" dismiss thy army, go back, and take care of those affairs which" I sent thee about at first, for I have now no occasion for the" erection of that statue. Thus I have granted as a favour to" Agrippa, a man whom I honour so very greatly, that I am not" able to contradict what he would have, or what he desired me" to do for him." And this was what Caius wrote to Petro-nius, which was before he received his letter, informing him thatthe Jews were very ready to revolt about the statue, and thatthey seemed resolved to threaten war against the Romans, andnothing else.' When therefore Caius was much displeased thatany attempt should be made against his government, as he was aslave to base and vicious actions on all occasions, and had no re­gard to what was virtuous and honourable, and against whomso­ever he resolved to shew his anger, and that for any cause what­soever, he suffered not himself to be restrained' by any admoni­tion, but thought the indulging his anger to be a real pleasure,he wrote thus to Petronius : " Seeing thou esteemest the presents" made thee by the Jews, to be of greater value than my com-" mantis, and art grown insolent enough to be subservient to" their pleasure, I charge thee to become thy own judge, and to" consider what thou art to do, now thou art under my displea-''' sure ; for I will make thee an example to the present and to" all future ages, that they may not dare to contradict the com-*' mands of their emperor."
P. This was the epistle which Caius wrote to Petronius, butPetronius did not receive it while Caius was alive, that shipwhich carried it sailed so slow, that other letters came to Petro­nius before this, by which he understood that Caius was dead ;for God would not forget the dangers Petronius had undertakenon account of the Jews, and of his own honour. But when he hadtaken Caius away, out of his indignation of what he had so inso­lently attempted in assuming to himself divine worship, bothRome and all that dominion conspired with Petronius, especiallythose that were of the senatorian order, to give Caius his due re­ward, because he had been unmercifully severe to them ; for hedied not long after he had written to Petronius that epistle whichthreatened him with death. But as for the occasion of his death,and the nature of the plot against him, I shall relate them in theprogress of this narration. Now, that epistle which informedPetronius of Caius's death came first, and a little afterward camethat which commanded him to kill himself with his own hands.
Whereupon







OCR Output








Chap. VIII. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 2»


*
CHAP. VIII.
Concerning Herod's death, and testament, and burial.
* I. A ND now Herod altered his testament upon the altera-** tion of his mind 5 for he appointed Antipas, to whomhe had before left the kingdom, to be tetrarch of Galilee andPerea, and granted the kingdom to Archelaus. He also gaveGaulonitis, and Trachonitis, and Paneas to Philip, who was hisson, but own brother * to Archelaus, by the name of tetrarchy ;and bequeathed Jamnia, and Ashdod, and Phasaelis, to Salomehis sister, with five hundred thousand [drachmae] of silver thatwas coined. He also made provision for all the rest of his kind­red, by giving them sums of money and annual revenues, and soleft them all in a wealthy condition. He bequeathed also to Cae­sar ten millions [of drachmae] of coined money, besides both ves­sels of gold and silver, and garments exceeding costly, to Julia,Caesar's wife ; and to certain others, five millions. When hehad done these things, he died, the fifth day after he had causedAntipater to be slain; having reigned, since he had procured An-tigonus f to be slain, thirty-four years ; but since he had beendeclared king by the Romans, thirty-seven. A man he was ofgreat barbarity towards all men equally, and a slave to his pas­sion ; but above the consideration of what was right: yet washe favoured by fortune as much as any man ever was, for froma private man he became a king ; and though he were encom­passed with ten thousand dangers, he got clear of them all, andcontinued his life till a very old age. But then, as to the affairsof his family and children, in which indeed, according to hisown opinion, he was also very fortunate, because he was able toconquer his enemies, yet, in my opinion, he was herein veryunfortunate.
2. But then Salome and Alaxis, before the king's death wasmade known, dismissed those that were shut up in the hippo­drome,


* When it is here said, that Philip the tetrarch, and Archelaus the king, orfthnarch, were &Ktfm yntui, or genuine brothers, if those words mean ownbrothers, or born ot the same father and mother, there must be here some mis­take; because they had indeed the same father, Herod, but different mothers;the former Cleopatra, and Archelaus Malthace, They were indeed brought spaltogether at Some like own brothers; and Philip was Archelaus's deputy whenhe went to have his kingdom confirmed to him at Rome: ch. ix. § 5. Of the War,B. IF. ch ii. § I.; which intimacy is perhaps all that Josephus intended by thewords before us.
t These numbers of years for Herod's reign, 34 and 37, are the very samewith those of the War, B. 1. ch. xxxiii. § 8. and are among the principal chro­nological characters belonging to the reign or death of Herod. See,Harm. ofthe Evang-. page 150—155.







OCR Output








364 Book II. WARS OF THE JEWS.


multitude of his own servants, all which he armed and used asthe instruments of hiscovetousness. Nowwhenthat feast, whichwas observed after seven weeks, and which the Jews call Pente­cost (i. e. the 50th day) was at hand, its name being takeufromthe number of the days [after the passover], the people got to­gether, but not on account of the accustomed divine worship,but of the indignation they had [at the present state of affairs].Wherefore an immense multitude ran together, out of Galilee,and Idumea, and Jericho, and Perea, that was beyond Jordan ;but the people that naturally belonged to Judea itself were abovethe rest, both in number, and in the alacrity of the men. Sothey distributed themselves into three parts, and pitched theircamps in three places; one at the north side of the temple, ano­ther at the south side, by the Hippodrome and the third partwere at the palace on the west. So they lay round about theRomans on every side, and besieged them.
2. Now Sabinus was affrighted, both at the multitude, and attheir courage, and sent messengers to Varus continually, andbesought him to come to his succour quickly, for that, if hedelayed, his legion would be cut to pieces. As for Sabinushimself, he got up to the highest tower of the fortress, whichwas ealled Phasaelus; it is of the same name with Herod'sbrother, who was destroyed by the Parthians; and then hemade signs to the soldiers of that legion to attack the enemy;for his astonishment was so great, that he durst not go down tohis own men. Hereupon the soldiers were prevailed upon, andleaped out into the temple, and fought a terrible battle with the.Jews; in which, while there were none over their heads todistress thero, they were too hard for them, by their skill, andthe others' want of skill, in war; but when once many of theJews had gotten up to the tqp of the cloisters, and threw theirdarts downwards, upon the heads qf the Romans, there were agreat many of them destroyed. Nor was it easy to avenge them-*.Selves upon those that threw their weapons from on high, norWas it more easy for them to suitain those who came to fightthem hand to hand.
9. Since therefore the Romans were sorely afflicted by boththese circumstances, they set fire to the cloisters, which wereworks to be admired, both;on account of their magnitude andcostliness. Whereupon those that were above them were pre­sently encompassed with the flame, and many of them perishedtherein; as many of them also were destroyed by the enemy,who came suddenly upon them; some of them also threw them­selves down from the walls backward, and some there wereWho, from the desperate condition they were in, prevented the







OCR Output








428 WARS OF THE JEWS. Book II.


the people, they were kept under by the seditious; but the se­ditious themselves were greatly affrighted at the good order ofthe Romans, and retired from the suburbs, and retreated intothe inner part of the city, and into the temple. But when Ces-tius was come into the city, he set the part called JSezetba, whichis called Cenopolis, [or the new city], on fire; as he did also tothe timber market: after which he came into the upper city,and pitched his camp over against the royal palace; and had hebut at this very time attempted to get within the walls by force,he had won the city presently, and the war had been put an endto at once; but Tyrannius Priscus, the muster-,master of thearmy, and a great number of the officers of the horse, had beencorrupted by Florus, and diverted him from that his attempt;and that was the occasion that this war lasted so very long, andthereby the Jews were involved in such incurable calamities.
5. In the mean time, many of the principal men of the citywere persuaded by Ananus, the son of Jonathan, and invitedCestius into the city, and were about to open the gates for himjbut he overlooked this offer, partly out of his anger at the Jews,and partly because he did not thoroughly believe they were inearnest; whence it was that he delayed the matter so long, thatthe seditious perceived the treachery, and threw Ananus andthose of his party down from the wall, and pelting them withstones, drove them into their houses; but they stood themselvesat proper distances in the towers, and threw their darts at thosethat were getting over the wall. Thus did the Romans maketheir attack against the wall for five days, but to no purpose :but on the next day, Cestius took a great many of his choicestmen, and with them the archers, and attempted to break intothe temple at the northern quarter of it; but the Jews beat themoff from the cloisters, and repulsed them several times when theywere gotten near to the wall, till at length the multitude of thedarts cut them off, and made them retire: but the first rank ofthe Romans rested their shields upon the wall, and so did thosethat were behind them, and the like did those that were stillmore backward, and guarded themselves with what they callTestudo, [the back of] a tortoise, upon which the darts thatwere thrown fell, and slided off without doing them any harm ;so the soldiers undermined the wall, without being themselveshurt, and got all things ready for setting fire to the gate of thetemple.
6. And now it was that a horrible fear seized upon the sedi­tious, insomuch, that many of them ran out of the city,as thoughit were to be taken immediately; but the people upon this tookcourage, and where the wicked part of the city gave ground,
thither







OCR Output








G80 WARS OF THE JEWS. Book I.


than as he had hearkened to evil counsellors, and this no fartherthan by bringing a shadow of injustice upon him. So Herod wasprevailed upon by these arguments, and supposed that what hehad already done was sufficient for his future hopes, and that hehad enough shewn his power to the nation.
10. In the mean time, there was a disturbance among the Ro­mans about Apamia, and a civil war occasioned by the treacher­ous * slaughter of Sextus Caesar, by Cicilius Bassus, which heperpetrated out of his good-will to Pompey ; he also took theauthority over his forces ; but, as the rest of Caesar's command­ers attacked Bassus with their whole army, in order to punishhim for the murder of Caesar, Antipater also sent them assistanceby his sons, both on account of him that was murdered, and onaccount of that Caesar who was still alive, both of which weretheir friends ; and as this war grew to be of a considerablelength, Marcus came of Italy as successor to Sextus.
CHAP. XI.
Herod it made procurator of all Syria ; Malichus is afraid ofhim, and takes /Intipatcr off" by poison : whereupon the tribunesof the soldiers are prevailed with to kill him.
$ 1. ' I 'HERE was at this time a mighty war raised among theRomans, upon the sudden aud treacherous slaughter ofCaesar by Cassius and Brutus, after he had held the governmentfor f three years and seven months. Upon this murder therewere very great agitations, and the great men were mightily atdifference one with another, and every one betook himself to thatparty where they had the greatest hopes of their own, of advan­cing themselves. Accordingly, Cassius came into Syria, in or­der to receive the forces that were at Apamia, where he procu­red a reconciliation between Bassus and Marcus, and the legionswhich were at difference with him ; so he raised the siege ofApamia, and took upon him the command of the army, andwent about exacting tribute of the cities, and demanding theirmoney to such a degree as they were not able to bear.
2. So he gave command that the Jews should bring in sevenhundred talents : whereupon Antipater, out of his dread of Cas-sius's threats, parted the raising of this sum among his sons, andamong others of his acquaintance, and to be done immediately ;
and
* Many writers of the Roman history give an account of this murder of Sex-tils Cxsar, and of the war of Apamia upon that occasion. They are cited inDean Aldrich's note.
t In the Antiquities, B. XIV. ch. xi. sect. i. the duration of the reign of JuliusCfesar, is three years six months; but here three years seven months, beginningrightly, says Desn Aldrich, from his second dictatorship. It is probable thereal duration might be three years, and between six and seven months.







OCR Output








Chap. XXXII. 351 WARS &F THE JEWS.


** hatred that was in the kingdom against me. It was thou, O" father, however unwillingly, who hast been my ruin, by
forcing me to allow time for calumnies against me, and envy" at me. However, I am come hither, and am ready to hear" the evidence there is against me. If 1 be a parricide, 1 have" passed by land and by sea, without suffering any misfortune" on either of them : but this method of trial is no advantage" to me; for it seems, O father, that I am already condemned," both before God and before thee; and as 1 am already con-
demned, I beg that thou wilt not believe the others that have" been tortured, but let fire be brought to torment me; let the" racks march through im bowels; have no regard to any" lamentations that this polluted body can make; for if I be" a parricide, I ought not to die without torture." Thus didAntipater cry out with lamentation and weeping, and movedall the rest, and Varus in particular, to commiserate his case-Herod was the only person whose passion was too strong to per*mit him to weep, as knowing that the testimonies against hira.were true. . :\
4. And now it was, that at the king's command, Nicolaus,when he had premised a great deal about the craftiness of Anti-pater, and had prevented the effects of their commiseration tohim, afterwards brought in a bitter and large accusation againsthim, ascribing all the wickedness that had been in the kingdomto him, and especially the murder of his brethren, and demon­strated that they had perished by the calumnies he had raisedagainst them- He also said that he had laid designs against themthat were still alive, as if they were laying plots for the succes­sion; and (said he) how can it be supposed that he who pre­pared poison for his father, should abstain from mischief as tohis brethren? He then proceeded to convict him of the attemptto poison Herod, and gave an account in order of the severaldiscoveries that had been made, and had great indignation as tjthe affair of Pheroras, because Antipater had been for making-him murder his brother, and had corrupted those that weredearest to the king, and filled the whole palace with wickedness;and when he had insisted on many other accusations, and theproofs for them, he left off.
5. Then Varus bid Antipater make his defence; but he layalong in silence, and said no more but this, " God is my witness" that I am entirely innocent." So Varus asked for the potion,and gave it to be drunk by a condemned malefactor, who wasthen in prison, who died upon the spot. So Varus, when hehad had a very private discourse with Herod, and had writtenan account of this assembly to Csesar, went away, after a days







OCR Output








Chap. VIIL ANTIQJJITIES OF THE JEWS* 95


had wrth him opposite to them; but did not discover his ownmeaning, but the commands of the emperor, aud told them,That " his wrath would^ without delay, be executed on such as"had the courage to disobey what he had commanded, and" this immediately ; and that it was fit for him, who had received" so great a dignity by his grant, not to contradict him in anv" thing : yet," said he, '« I do not think it just to have such a" regard to my own safety and honour, as to refuse to sacrifice" them for your preservation, who are so many in number, and" endeavour to preserve the regard that is due to your law," which, as it hath come down to von from your forefathers, so" do you esteem it worthy of your utmost contention to preserve" it: nor, with the supreme assistance and power of God, will'« I be so hardy as to suffer your temple to fall into contempt bv" the means of tire imperial authority. I will, therefore, send«' to Cains, and let him know what your resolutions are, and" will assist your suit as far as I am able, that you may not be" exposed to suffer on account of the honest designs you have" proposed to yourselves -' and may God be your assistant, for" his authority is beyond all the contrivance arid power of men;" and may he procure you the preservation of your ancient" laws, and may not he be deprived, though without your con-" sent, of his accustomed honours. But, if Caius be irritated,' and turn the violence of his rage upon me, I will rather i*n-" dergo all that danger and that affliction that may come either" oa my body or my soul, than see so many of you to perish," while you are acting in so excellent a manner. Do you, there-" fore, every one of you, go your way about your own occupa-*' tions, and fall to the cultivation of your ground ; J will my." self send to Rome, and will not refuse to serve you in all" things, both by myself and by my friends."
6. When Petronius had said this, and had dismissed the as­sembly of the Jews, he desired the principal of them to take careof their husbandry, and to speak kindly to the people, and en­courage them to have good hope of their affairs. Thus did bereadily bring the multitude to be ehearful again. And now didGod shew his presence* to Petronius, and signify to him, thathe would afford him his assistance in his whole design ; for he hadno sooner finished the speech that he made to the Jews, but God
sent


* Josephui here uses the Solemn New Tesl ament words, •ntixirix and }«£««««, thefrttencc and appearance of God, for the extraordinary manifestation oi his puw<*rand providence to Petronius' by sending rain in a time of distivba, immediate')*upon the resolution he had raken to preserve the temple unpolluted' at thehazardof his own life, without any other miraculous appearance at a I in that cas; :which well deserves to be taken notice of here, and gvtaily illuiira'fs severalfexts, both in the Old and New Testament.







OCR Output








Chap. VI. ASTIQJJIT1ES OF THE JEWS. 25


" it with very valuable donations ; on which account he hoped'' that he had left himself a memorial, and procured himself a" reputation after his death. He then cried out, that these men" had not abstained from affronting him, even in his life time," but that, in the very day-time, and in the sight of the multi-" tude, they had abused him to that degree, as to fall upon what" he had dedicated, and in that way of abuse, had pulled it down" to the ground. They pretended, indeed, that they did it to" affront him ; but if any one, considering the thing truly, they" will find that they were guilty of sacrilege against God" therein."
4. But the people, on account of Herod's barbarous temper,and for fear he should be so cruel as to inflict punishment onthem, said, " What was done, was done without their approba-" tion, and that it seemed to them that the actors might well be" punished for what they had done." But as for Herod, he dealtmore mildly with others [of the assembly] ; but he deprivedMatthias of the high-priesthood, as in part an occasion of thisaction, and made Joazar, who was Matthias's wife's brother,high-priest in his stead. Now it happened, that during the timeof the high-priesthood of this Matthias, there was another per­son made high-priest for a single day, that very day which theJews observed as a fast. The occasion was this : This Matthiasthe high-priest, on the night before that day, when the fast wasto be celebrated, seemed, in a dream *, to have conversationwith his wife ; and because he could not officiate himself on thataccount, Joseph, the son of Ellemus, his kinsman, assisted himin that sacred office. But Herod deprived this Matthias of thehigh-priesthood, and burnt the other Matthias, who had raisedthe sedition, with his companions, alive. And that very nighttbere was an eclipse of the moon f.
VOL. III. D -5. But


* This fact, that one Joseph was made high-priest for a single day, on occa­sion of the action here specified, that befel Matthias, the real high-priest, in hissleep, the night before the great day of expiation, is attested tobo;h in the Mish-na and Talmud, as Dr Hudson here informs us' And indeed, from this fact,thus fully attested, we may confute that pretended rule in the Talmud here men­tioned, and endeavoured to be excused by Reland, that the high'priest was notsuffered to ileep the night before that great day of expiation; which watchingwould surely rather unfit him-for the many important duties he was to performon that solemn day, than dispose him duly to perform them. Nor do such Tal.tnudical rules, when unsupported by better evidence, much less when contradict,ed thereby, seem to me of weight enough to deserve that so great a man as Re-land should spend his time in endeavours at their vindication.
t This eclipse of the moon (which is iheonly eclipse of either of the luminarie*mentioned by our Josephus in any of his writings), isof the greatest consequencefor the determination of the time for the death of Herod and Antipater, and forthe birth and entire chronology of Jesus Christ. It happened March I3th, in the







OCR Output








20 x ANTIQJIITIES OF THE JEWS. Book XVII.


out of suspicion of any danger they were in ; but they spakewhat they knew, because they thought such actions very wick­ed, and that Antipater deserved the greatest punishment; andindeed not so much for Herod's safety, as on account of theman's own wickedness. Many things were also said, that thoseby a great number of persons, who were no way obliged to saythem; insomuch, that Antipater, who used generally to be veryshrewd in his lies and impudence, was not able to say oneword to the contrary. When Nicolaus had left off speaking,and had produced the evidence, Varus bid Antipater to betakehimself to tlie making his defence, if he had prepared any thingwhereby it might appear that he was not guilty of the crimeshe was accused of; for that, as he was himself desirous, so didhe know that his father was in like manner desirous also, to havehim found entirely innocent. But Antipater fell down on hisface, and appealed to God, and to all men, for testimonials ofhis innocency, desiring that God would declare, by some evidentsignals, that he had not laid any plot against his father. Thisbeing the usual method of all men destitute of virtue, that,when they set about any wicked undertakings, they fall to workaccording to their own inclinations, as if they believed that Godwas unconcerred in human affairs ; but when once they are foundout, and are in danger of undergoing the punishment due to theircrimes, they endeavour to overthrow all the evidence againstthem, by appealing to God ; which was the very thing whichAntipater now did ; for whereas he had done every thing as ifthere were no God in the world, when he was on all sides dis­tressed by justice, and when he had no other advantage to ex­pect from any legal proofs, by which he might disprove the ac.cusations laid against him, be impudently abused the majesty ofGod, and ascribed it to his power, that he had been preservedhitherto ; and produced before them all what difficulties he hadever undergone in his bold acting for his father's preservation.
7. So when Varus, upon Asking Antipater what he had tosay for himself, found that he had nothing to say besides his ap­peal to God, and saw that there was no end of that, he bid thembring the potion before the court, that he might see what vir­tue still remained in it; and when it was brought, and one thatwas condemned to die had drunk it by Varus's command, hedied presently. Then Varus got up, and departed out of thecourt, and went away the day following to Antioch, where hisu iual residence was, because that was the palace of the Syrians ;u^on which Herod laid his son in bonds. But.what were Va-^ r'as's discourses to Herod, was not known to the generality, andupon what ivords it was that he went away ; though it was
also







OCR Output








62 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book XVIII.


soon changed their minds, they "being natural! j of a mutableuisposition, upon the supposal, that this man was not worthyto be their governor ; for they could not think of obeying thecommands of one that had b?en a slave, (for so they called thosethat had been hostages), nor could they bear the ignominy of thatname; and this was the more intolerable, because then the Par-1 iii'i''.s must have such a king set over them, not by right of war,but in time of peace. So they presently invited Artabanus, kingof Media, to be their king, he being also of the race of Arsaces.Artabanus complied with the offer that was made him, and cameto them with an army. So Vonones met him ; and at first themultitude of the Parthians stood on his side, and he put his armyin array; but Artabanus was beaten, and fled to the moun­tains of Media. Yet did he a little after gather a great armytogether, and fought with Vonones, and beat him ; whereupon.Vonones fled away on horseback, with a few of his attendantsnbout him, to Seleucia [upon Tigris]. So when Artabanus hadslain a great number, and this after he had gotten the victory byreason of the very great dismay the barbarians were in, he re-fired to Ctesiphonwith a great number of his people ; and so henow reigned over the Parthians. But Vonones fled away to Ar­menia ; and as soon as he came thither, he had an inclination tohave the government of the country given him, and sent ambas­sadors to Rome [for that purpose]. But because Tiberius refu­sed it him, and because he wanted courage, and because the Par­thian king threatened him, and sent ambassadors to him to de­nounce war against him if he proceeded, and because he had noivay to take to regain any other kingdom, (for the people of au­thority among the Armenians about Niphates joined themselvesto Artabanus), he delivered up himself to Silanus, the presidentof Syria, who, out of regard to his education at Rome, kept himin Syria, while Artabanus gave Armenia to Orodes, one of hisown sons.
5. At this time died Antiochus, the king of Commagene ;whereupon the multitude contended with the nobility, and bothsent ambassadors to [Rome] ; for the men of power were desi­rous that their form of government might be changed into thatof a [Roman] province ; as were the multitude desirous to beunder kings, as their fathers had been. So the senate made adecree, that Germanicus should be sent to settle the affairs of theeast, fortune hereby taking a proper opportunity for depriving^him of his life ; for when he had been in the east, and settledall affairs there, his life was taken away by the poison whichPiso gave him, as hath been related elsewhere *.
CHAP.
* This citation is now wanting.







OCR Output








AVTIQJJITIES OF THE JEWS. Book XVIII.


armed with the weapons they had gotten, and became their cap­tains ; and nothing hindered them from being their leaders intomischief; for, as soon as they were become invincible, and hadbuilt them a citadel, they sent to such as fed cattle, and orderedthem to pay them so much tribute out of them as might be suffi­cient for their maintenance, proposing also that they would betheir friends, if they would submit to them, and that they woulddefend them from all their other enemies on every side, but thatthey would kill the cattle of those: that refused to obey them. Sothey hearkened to their proposals (for they could do nothing else),and sent them as many sheep as were required of them ; where­by their forces grew greater, and they became lords over all theypleased, because they marched suddenly, and did them a mischief,insomuch that every body who had to do with them, choseto pay them respect, and they became formidable to such ascame to assault them, till the report about them came to the earsof the king of Parthia himself.
'2. But when the governor of Babylonia understood this^ andhad a mind to put a stop to them before they grew greater, andbefore greater mischiefs should arise from them, he got together:is great an army as he could, both of Parthiaus and Babylonians,and marched against them, thinking to attack them,' and destroythem before any one should carry them the news that he had gotan army together. He then encamped at a lake, and. lay still ;but, on the next day, (it was the Sabbath, which is among theJews a day of rest from all sorts of work), he supposed that theenemy would not dare to fight him thereon, but that he'wouldtake them and carry them away prisoners, without lighting. Hetherefore proceeded gradually, and thought to fall upon them onthe sudden. Now Asirieus was silting with the rest, and theirweapons la}- by them ; upon which he said,«' Sirs, I hear a fteigh-" ing of horses; not of such as are feeding, but such as have" men on their backs; I also hear such a noise of their bridles,'< that 1 am afraid that some enemies are coming upon us to en-"> compass us round. However, let somebody go to look about," and make report of what reality there is in the present * state'« of things; and may what I have said prove a false alarm."And, when he had said this, some of them Went out to spy outwhat 'was the matter, and they came again immediately and saidto him, that "neither hast thou been mistaken in telling us what
« our


* 'Ejifwro» is here, and in very many other places of Josepluis, immcdtafe-ly at bani, and is 10 be bo expounded, '- T'hess. ii.- 4. when s->me falsely pre­tended that St Paul had said, cither by word oi mouth or by an epistle, or by both,tliat r;'v any of CLrist was immediately at hard; for still St Paul did then plam-)j think that day not very many years future.' ...'







OCR Output








Chap. 1. ANTIQJJITIES OF THE JEWS. , 119


regular times for these shews were now over, they had much adoto get the business done on the last day. Then Cherea called theconspirators together, and spake thus to them: " So much time" passed away without e.ffect is a reproach to us, as delaying to" go through such a virtuous design as we are engaged in ; but.tc more fatal will this delay prove, if we be discovered, and the" design be frustrated ; for Caius will then become more cruel" in his unjust proceedings. Do not we see how long we de-" prive all our friends of their liberty, and give Caius leave still" to tyrannize over them ? while we ought to have procured«' them security for the future, and, by laying a foundation for" the happiness of others, gain to ourselves great admiration and" honour for all time to come." Now, while the conspiratorshad nothing tolerable to say by way of contradiction, and yet didnot quite relish what they were doing, but stood silent and asto­nished, he said farther, " O, my brave comrades ! why do we*' make such delays ? Do not you see that this is the last day of<* these shews, and that Caius is about to go to sea ? for he is" preparing to sail to Alexandria, in order to see Egypt. Is'it" therefore for your honour to let a man go out of your hands" who is a reproach to mankind, and to permit him to go after'1 a pompous manner, triumphing both at land at sea ? shall" not we be justly ashamed of ourselves, if we give leave to" some Egyptian or other, who shall think his injuries insuffer-M able to free-men, to kill him ? As for myself, I will no longer" bear your slow proceedings, but will expose myself to the dan-'' gers of the enterprise this very day, and bear chearfully what-" soever shall be the consequence of the attempt; nor, let them" be evet so great, will I put them off any longer ; for, to a wise'1 and courageous man, what can be more miserable than that,«' while I am alive, any one else should kill Caius, and deprive" me of the honour of so virtuous an action."
13. When Cherea had spoken thus, he zealously set about thework, and inspired courage into the rest to go on with it, andthey were all eager to fall to it without farther delay. So hewas at the palace in the morning, with his equestrian sword girton him ; for it was the custom that the tribunes should ask forthe watch-word with their swords on, and this was the day onwhich Cherea was, by custom, to receive the watch-word ; andthe multitude were already come to the palace, to be soonenough for seeing the shews, and that in great crowds, and onetumultuously crushing another, while Caius was delighted withthis eagerness of the multitude ; for which reason there was noorder observed in the seating men, nor was any peculiar placeappointed for the senators, or for the equestrian order; but
they







OCR Output








Chap. XVII. Wars of the Jews. 299


ted this misfortune for a while, he put off the main part of hismourning, and made haste to march against his enemies; andwhen he had performed a march that was above his strength,end was gone as far as Libanus, he got him eight hundred menof those that lived near to that mountain, as his assistants, andjoined with them one Roman legion, with which, before it wasday, he made an irruption into Galilee, and met his enemies, anddrove them back to the place which they had left. He alsomade an immediate and continual attack upon the fortress. Yetwas he forced by a most terrible storm to pitch his camp in theneighbouring villages, before he could take it: but when, aftera few days time, the second legion, that came from Antony*joined themselves to him, the enemy were affrighted at his-power, and left their fortifications in the night time.
4. After this he marched through Jericho, as making whathaste he could to be avenged on his brother's murderers: wherehappened to him a providential sign, out of which, when he hadunexpectedly escaped, he had the reputation of being very dearto God, for that evening there feasted with him many of theprincipal men, and after that feast was over, and all the guestswere gone out, the house fell down immediately. And as hejudged this to be a common signal of what dangers he should un­dergo, and how he shouldescape them in the war that he was go­ing about, he, in the morning, set forward with his army, whenabout six thousand of his enemies came running down from themountains, and began to fight with those in his forefront; yetdurst they not be so very bold as to engage the Romans hand tohand, but threw stones and darts at them at a distance; by whichmeans they wounded a considerable number ; in which actionHerod's own side was wounded with a dart.
5. Now as Antigonus had a mind to appear to exceed Herod,not only in the courage, but in the number of his men, he sentPappus, one of his companions, with an army against Samaria,whose fortune it was to oppose Macheras; but Herod over-ranthe enemies country, and demolished five little cities, and des­troyed two thousand men that were in them, and burned theirhouses, and then returned to his camp; but his head quarterswere at the village called Carta.
5. Now a great multitude of Jews resorted to him every day,both out of Jericho, and the other parts of the country. Somewere moved so to do out of their hatred to Antigonus, and someout of regard to the glorious actions Herod had done; but othersWere led on by an unreasonable desire of change; so he fell uponthem immediately. As for Pappus and his party, they were notterrified either at their number, or at their ieal, but marched outPp2 with







OCR Output








196 THE LIFE OF FLAVIUS JOSEFHUS.


assurances they had given these their fellow-citizens and confe­derates, and slew them all, being in number many ten thousand[l 3,000]. The like miseries were undergone by those Jewsthat were the inhabitants of Damascus. But we have given amore accurate account of these things in the books of the Jew­ish war. I only mention them now, because I would demon­strate to my readers, that the Jews war with the Romans wasnot voluntary, but that, for the main, they were forced by ne­cessity to enter into it.
7. So when Gessiushad been beaten, as we have said already,the principal men of Jerusalem, seeing that the robbers and in­novators had arms in great plenty, and fearing lest they, whilethey were unprovided of arms, should be in subjection to theirenemies, which also carne to be the case afterward; and, beinginformed that all Galilee had not yet revolted from the Romans,but that some part of it was still quiet, they sent me and twqothers of the priests, who were men of excellent characters, Jozarand Judas, in order to persuade the ill men there to lay downtheityarms, and to teach them this lesson, that it were betler tohave those arms reserved for the most courageous men that thenation had, [than to be kept there] ; for that it had been resolved,that those our best men should always have their arms readyagainst futurity, but still so, that they should wait to see whatthe Romans would do.
8. When I had therefore received these instructions, I cameinto Galilee, and found the people of Sepphorisin no small agonyabout their country, by reason that the Galileans had resolvedto plunder it, on account oi the friendship they had with the Ro­mans, and because they had given their right-hand, and made aleague with Cestius Gallus, the president of Syria. But I de­livered them all out of the fear they were in, and persuaded themultitude to deal kindly with them, and permitted them to sendto those that were their own hostages with Gessius to Dora,which is a city of Phenicia, as often as he pleased ; though" Istill found the inhabitants of Tiberias ready to take arms, andthat on the occasion following :
9. There were three factions in this city. The first was com­posed of men of worth and gravity ; of these Julius Capellus wasthe head. Now he, as well as all his companions, Herod theson of Miarus, and Herod the son of Gamalus, and Compsus theson of Compsus, (for as to Compsus's brother Crispus, who hadonce been governor of the city under the great king * [Agrip-pa], he was beyond Jordan in his own possessions^ ; all these, ' persons


* That this Herod.Agrippa, the father, was of old called a Great King, ashere appears by his coins still remaining ; to which Havtrca/rp refers us.







OCR Output








Chap. VI. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEW3.


indeed Agrippa's brother, but was at variance with him ; yet. did not their enmity to one another hinder the friendship of Flac-cus to them both, but still they were honourably treated by him.However, Aristobulus did not abate of his ill-will to Agrippa,till at length he brought him into ill terms with Flaccus: theoccasion of bringing on which estrangement was this : The Da-mascens were at difference with the Sidonians about their limits,and when Flaccus was about to hear the cause between them, theyunderstood that Agrippa had a mighty influence upon him ; sothey desired that he would be of their side, and for that favourpromised him a great deal of money ; so he was zealous in assist­ing the Damascens as far as he was able. Now, Aristobulushad gotten intelligence of this promise of money to him, and ac­cused him to Flaccus of the same ; and when, upon a thoroughexamination of the matter, it appeared plainly so to be, he re­jected Agrippa out of the number of his friends. So he was re­duced to the utmost necessity, and came to Ptolemais ; and be.cause he knew not where else to get a livelihood, he thought tosail to Italy; but as he was restrained from so doing by want ofmoney, he desired Marsyas, who was his freed-man, to find somemelhod for procuring him so much as he wanted for that pur­pose, by borrowing such a sum of some person or other. SoMarsyas desired of Peter, who was the freed-man of Bernice,Agrippa's mother, and by the right of her testament was be­queathed to Antonia, to lend so much upon Agrippa's own bondand security ; but he accused Agrippa of having defrauded himof certain sums of money, and so obliged Marsyas, when hemade the bond of 20,000 Attic drachma:, to accept of 2500drachmae * less than what he desired, which the other allowed of,because he could not help it. Upon the receipt of this money,Agrippa came to Anthedon, and took shipping, and was goingto set sail; but Herc-nnius Capito, who was the procurator ofJamnia, sent a band of soldiers to demand of him 300,000 drach­mae of silver, which were by him owing to Caesar's treasurywhile he was at Rome, and so forced him to stay. He then pre­tended that he would do as he bid him : but when night cameon, he cut his cables, and went off, and sailed to Alexandric,where he desired Alexander the Alabarch f to send him 200,0codrachmae ; but he said he would not lend it to him, but wouldnot refuse it to Cypros, as greatly astonished at her affection to
her
* Spanheim observes, that we have here an instance of the Atlic quantity ofuse-money, which was the eighth part of the original sum, or la per cent, forsuch is the proportion of 2500 to 20,coo.
f The governor of the Jews there.







OCR Output








312 WARS OF THE JE1V9. Book I.


is immoveable; and when any body lets down any thing to mea.sure the depth of the earth beneath the water, no length of cordis sufficient to reach it. Now the fountains of Jordan rise at thejoots of this cavity outwardly; and, as some think, this is theutmost origin of Jordan: but we shall speak of that matter moreaccurately in our following history.
4. But the king erected other places at Jericho also, betweenthe citadel Cyprbs and the former palace, such as were betterand more useful than the former for travellers, and named themfrom the same friends of his. To say all at once, there was notany place of his kingdom fit for the purpose, that was permittedto be without somewhat that was for Caesar's honour, and whenhe had filled his own country with temples, he poured out thelike plentiful marks of his esteem into his province, and builtmany cities which he called Cesareas. . , _
5. And when he observed that there was a city by the sea-side,that was much decayed (its name was Strata's Tower), but thatthe place, by the happiness of its situation, was capable of greatimprovements from his liberality, he rebuilt it all with white6tone, and adorned it with several most splendid palaces, whereinhe especially demonstrated his magnanimity ; for the case wasthis, that all the sea shore between Dora and Joppa, in the mid­dle, between which this city is situated, had no good haven, in­somuch that every o.ie that sailed from Pheniciafor Egypt wasobliged to lie in the stormy sea, by reason of the south winds thatthreatened them; which wind, if.it blew but a little fresh, suchvast waves are raised, and dash upon the rocks, that upon theirretreat, the sea is in a great ferment for a long way. But theking, by the expences he was at, and the liberal disposal of them,overcame nature, and built an haven larger than was the Pyree-um * [at Athens]; and in the other retirements of the water hebuilt other deep stations [for the ships also].
6. Now although the place where he built was greatly oppo-sitetohis purposes,yet did he so fully struggle with that difficul­ty, that the firmness of his building could not easily be conquer­ed by the sea ; and the beauty and ornament of the works wassuch, as though he had not had any difficulty in the operation:for when he had measured out asl.irge a space as we have beforementioned, he let down stones into twenty fathom water,the great­est part of which were fity feet in length, and nine in depth, and
ten
* That Joscphus speaks troth, when he assures us that " the haven of this Ce-" sarea was made byi Herod not less, nay rather largefythan that famous haven at* Athens called the Pytcum" will appear, says Dean Aldrich, to him who com­pares the descriptions' of that at Athens in Thucydides »nd Pausanias, with this ofCtsarea in Jo^ephus here,, and in the Antiq. B. XV. ch, is. stct. 6. Vol. II. andB. XVU. eh. ix. jsect. \. vol. lit. .'•--<--. .







OCR Output








5S ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book XVIII.


ven for ; and when they send* what they have dedicated to Godinto the temple, they do not offer sacrifices, because they havemore pure lustrations of their own ; on which account they areexcluded from the common court of the temple, but offer theirsacrifices themselves ; yet is their course of life better thanthat of other men ; and they entirely addict themselves to hus­bandry. It also deserves our admiration, how much they exceedall other men that addict themselves to virtue, and this in righ­teousness ; and indeed to such a degree, that as it hath neverappeared among any other men, neither Greeks nor Barbarians,no not for a little time, so hath it endured for a long while amongthem. This is demonstrated by that institution of theirs, whichwill not suffer any thing to hinder them from having all thingsin common; so that a rich man enjoys no more of his ownwealth than he who hath nothing at all. There are about fourthousand men that live in this way, and neither marry wives,nor are desirous to keep servants ; as thinking the latter temptsmen to be unjust, and the former gives the handle to domesticquarrels ; but as they live by themselves, they minister one toanother. They also appoint certain stewards to receive the in­comes of their revenues, and of the fruits of the ground ; suchas are good men and priests, who are to get their corn and theirfood ready for them. They none of them differ from others ofthe Essens in their way of living, but do the most resemblethose Dacae, who are called Polistis\, [dwellers in cities].
6. But of the fourth sect of Jewish philosophy, Judas the Ga­lilean was the author. These men agree in all other things withthe Pharisaic notions; but they have an inviolable attachmentto liberty, and say, that God is to be their only Ruler and Lord.They also do not value dying any kinds of death, nor indeed dothey heed the deaths of their relations and friends, nor can anysuch fear make them call any man lord. And since this immove­able resolution of theirs is well known to a great many, I shallspeak no farther about that matter; nor am I afraid that anything
I
* It seems by what Josephus says here, and Philo himself elsewhere, Op.p. 679, that these Essens did not use to go to the Jewish festivals at Jernsalem,or to offer sacrifices there, which may be one great occasion why they are nevermentioned in the ordinary books of the New Testament; though, in the Apostoli.cal Constitutions, they are mentioned at those that observed the customs of theirforefathers, and that without any such ill character laid upon them, as is therelaid upon the oiher sects among that people.
t Who these ntXiml in Josephus, or Kt<>«< in Strabo, among the PythagoricDacae were, it is not easy to determine. Scaliger offers no improbable conjecture,that some of these Dace lived alone, like monks, in tents or caves, but thatothers of them lived together in built cities, and thence were called by sucknames as implied the same.







OCR Output








Chap. XVI. WARS OF THE JEWS. 4o5


" to go to war with the Romans, and that the purer and more" sincere part of the people did not propose to live in peace, I" had not come out to you, nor been so bold as to give you" counsel; for all discourses that tend to persuade men to do" what they ought to do is superfluous, when the hearers ard" agreed to do the contrary. But because some are earnest to" go to war, because they are young, and without experience of'' the miseries it brings, and because some are for it, out of an" unreasonable expectation of regaining their liberty, and be-" cause others hope to get by it, and are therefore earnestly" bent upon it, that in the confusion of your affairs they may" gain what belongs to those that are too weak to resist them," I have thought proper to get you all together, and to say to" you what I think to be for your advantage; that so the for-" mer may grow wiser, and change their minds, and that the-" best men may come to no harm by the ill conduct of some'' others. And let not any one be tumultuous against me, in" case what they hear me say do not please them; for as to«' those that admit of no cure, but are resolved upon a revolt,'' it will still be in their power to retain the same sentiments af-'' ter my exhortation is over; but still my discourse will fall to«' the ground, even with a relation to those that have a mind" to hear me, unless you will all keep silence. I am well aware" that they make a tragical exclamation concerning the inju—" ries that have been offered you by your procurators, and con-" cerning the glorious advantages of liberty ; but before I begin" the inquiry, who you are that must goto war? and who they" are against whom you must fight? 1 shall first separate those" pretences that are by some connected together; for if you" aim at avenging yourselves on those that have done you in-" jury, why do you pretend this to be a war for recovering
" your


and of whom St Paul said, " He was expert in all the custom* and questions of the" Jews," ver. 3. See another intimation of the limits of the same Roman empire,of the War B. III' ch. v. § 7. vol. III. But what seems to me very remarkablehere is this, that when Josephus, in imitation of the Greeks and Romans, for whoseuse he wrote his Antiquities, did himself frequently compose the speeches whichhe put into their mouths; they appear by the politeness of their composition, andtheir flights of oratory, to be not the real speeches of the persons concerned, whousually were no orators, but of his own elegant composure: the speech before us isof another nature, full of undeniable facts, and composed in a plain and unartful,but moving way; so it appears to be King Agrippa's own speech, and to havebeen given Josephus by Agrippa himself, with whom Josephus had the greatestfriendship. Nor may we admit Agrippa's constant doctrine here, that this vastRoman empire was raised and supported by divine Providence, and that thereforejt was in vain for the Jews, or any others, to think of destroying it. Nor may weneglect to take notice of Agrippa's solemn appeal to the angels here used; thelike appeals to which we have in St Paul, i Tim. v. n. and by the apostles, ingeneral, in the form of the ordination of Bishops, Constitut. Apost. VIII. 4-







OCR Output








190 'ANTIQUITIES or THE JEWS* Book XX.


vered down to us from the original creation of man, until thetwelfth year of the reign of Nero, as to what hath befallenthe Jews, as well in Egypt as in Syria, and in Palestine, andwhat we have suffered from the Assyrians and Babylonians,and what afflictions the Persians and Macedonians, and afterthem the Romans, have brought upon us ; for I think I maysay that I have composed this history with sufficient accuracyin all things. I have attempted to enumerate those high-prieststhat we have had during the interval of two thousand years : Ihave also carried down the succession of our kings, and relatedtheir actions, and political administration, without [considerable]errors, as also the power of our monarchs ; and all according towhat is written in our sacred books ; for this it was that I pro­mised to do in the beginning of this history. And I am so boldas to say, now I have so completely perfected the work I pro­posed to myself to do, that no other person, whether he were aJew or a foreigner, had he ever so great an inclination to it,could so accurately deliver these accounts to the Greeks as isdone in these books. For those of my own nation freely ac­knowledge, that I far exceed them in the learning belonging toJews ; I have also taken a great deal of pains to obtain the learn­ing of the Greeks, and understand the elements of the Greek lan­guage, although I have so long accustomed myself to speak ourown tongue, that I cannot pronounce Greek with sufficient exact­ness ; for our nation does not encourage those that learn the lan­guages of many nations, and so adorn their discourses with thesmoothness of their periods ; because they look upon this sort ofaccomplishment as common, not only to all sorts of free-men, butto as many of the servants as please to learn them. But theygive him the testimony of being a wise man,who isfullvacquaint-ed with our laws, and is able to interpret their meaning ; onwhich account, as there have been many who have done their en­deavours with great patience to obtain this learning, there haveyet hardly been so many as two or three that have succeededtherein, who were immediately well rewarded for their pains.
And now it will not be perhaps an invidious thing-, if I treatbriefly of my own family, and of the actions of my own life,while there is still living such as can either prove what 1 say tobe false, or can attest that it is true ; with which accounts I shallput an end to these Antiquities, which are contained in twentybooks and sixty thousand verses. And if God * permit me, I
will


 







OCR Output








2 ANTIQJJITIES OF THE JEWS. Book XVII.


ing his rivals as to the government, yet did he find it a very hardthing, and almost impracticable, to come at the kingdom,' be­cause the hatred of the nation against him on that account wasbecome very great ; and, besides this very disagreeable cir­cumstance, the affair of the soldiery grieved him still more,who were alienated from him, from which yet these kingsderived all the safety which they had, whenever they found-the nation desirous of innovation : and all this danger wasdrawn upon him by his destruction of his brethren. How­ever, he governed the nation jointly with his father, being in­deed no other than a king already ; and he was for that veryreason trusted, and the more firmly depended on, for thewhich he ought himself to have been put to-death, as appear­ing to have betrayed his brethren out of his concern for thepreservation of Herod, and not rather out of his ill-will tothem, and, before them, to his father himself; and this wasthe accursed state he was in. Now, all Antipater's contri­vances tended to make his way to take off Herod, that hemight have nobody to accuse him in the vile practices he wasdevising ; and that Herod might have no refuge, nor any toafford him their assistance, since they must thereby have An-tipater for their open enemy ; insomuch that the very plots hehad laid against his brethren, were occasioned by the hatredhe bore his father. But at this time he was more than everset upon the execution of his attempts against Herod, because,if he were once dead, the government would now be firmly se­cured to him ; but if he were suffered to live any longer, heshould be in danger upon a discovery of that wickedness ofwhich he had been the contriver, and his father would of ne­cessity then become his enemy. And on this account it wasthat he became very bountiful to his father's friends, and be­stowed great sums on several of them, in order to surprisemen with his good deeds, and take off their hatred againsthim. And he sent great presents to his friends at Rome parti­cularly, to gain their good-will; and above all to Saturninus,the president of Syria. He also hoped to gain the favour ofSaturninus's brother with the large presents he bestowed onhim ; as also he used the same art to (Salome") the king's sis­ter, who had married one of Herod's chief friends. Arid,when he counterfeited friendship to those with whom he con­versed, he was very subtle in gaining their belief, and very. cunning to hide his hatred against any that he really did hate.But he could not impose upon his aunt, who understood him'of a long time, and was a woman not easily to be deluded';especially while she bad already used all possible caution iii
preventing







OCR Output








Chap. Ilf. WARS OF THE JEWS. S6S


That " the slaughter in the temple could not be avoided; that" those that were slain were become enemies not to Archelaus's'• kingdom only, but to Caesar, who was to determine about" him. He also demonstrated, that Archelaus's accusers had" advised him to perpetrate other things of which he might" have been accused. But he insisted that the latter testament" should, for this reason, above all others, be esteemed valid, be-" cause Herod had therein appointed Caesar to be the person" who should confirm the succession; for he who shewed such" prudence as to recede from his own power, and yield it up".to the lord of the world, cannot be supposed mistaken in his" judgment about him that was to be his heir ; and he that so" well knew whom to choose for arbitrator of the succession," could not be unacquainted with him whom he chose for his'' successor."
7. When Nicolaus had gone through all he had to say, Ar.chelaus came, and fell down before Caesar's knees, without anynoise. Upon which he raised him up, after a very obligingmanner, and declared, that truly he was worthy to succeed hisfather. However, he still made no firm determination in hiscase ; but when he had dismissed those assessors that had beenwith him that day, he deliberated by himself about the allega­tions which he had heard, whether it were fit to constitute anyof those named in the testaments for Herod's successor, or whe­ther the government should be parted among all his posterity,and this because of the number of those that seemed to standin need of support therefrom.
CHAP. III.
The Jews Jigit agrtat battle with Sabinusjssolduri,andagreatdestruction it made at Jerusalem
J 1. "VTOWbefore Caesar had determinedanythingabouttheseJL il affairs, Malthace, Archelaus's mother, fell sick anddied. Letters also were brought out of Syria from Varus,about a revolt of the Jews. This was foreseen by Varus, whoaccordingly, after Archelaus was sailed, went up to Jerusalemto restrain the promoters of the sedition, since it was manifestthat the nation would not be at rest; so he left one of those le­gions which he brought with him out of Syria in the city, andwent himself to Antioch. But Sabinus came, after he wasgone, and gave them an occasion of making innovations ; for hecompelled the keepers of the citadels to deliver them up to him,and made a bitter search after the king's money, as dependingaot only oa the soldiers which were left by Varus, but on theZ z 2 multitude







OCR Output








THE LIFE OP FLAVHJS JOSEPHU9. 193


tnong the Jews against the Romans. So he slew him. Andwhen this freed-man of Philip did not return again, Philip wasdoubtful what should be the occasion of his stay, and sent a se­cond messenger with letters, that he might, upon his return, in-fcrrn him what had befallen the other that had been sent before,and why he tarried so long. Varus accused this messenger also,when he came, of telling a falsehood, and slew him. For he waspuffed up by the Syrians that were at Cesarea, and had great ex­pectations ; for they said that Agrippa would be slain by the Ro­mans for the crimes which the Jews had committed, and that heshould himself take the government, as derived from their kings ;for Varus was, by the confession of all, of the royal family, as be­ing a descendant of Sohemus, who had enjoyed a tetrarchy aboutLibanus ; for which reason it was that he was puffed up, andkept the letters to himself. He contrived, also, that the kingshould not meet with those writings, by guarding all the passes,lest any one should escape, and inform the king what had beendone. He moreover slew many of the Jews, in order to gratifythe Syrians of Cesarea. He had a mind also to join with theTrachonites in Batanea, and to take up arms and make an assaultupon the Babylonian Jews that were at Ecbatana; for that wasthe name they went by. He therefore called to him twelve ofthe Jews of Cesarea, of the best character, and ordered them togo to Ecbalana, and inform their countrymen who dwelt there,that Varus hath heard, that " you intend to march against the" king ; but, not believing that report, he hath sent us to per-" suade you to lay down your arms, and that this compliance" will be a sign, that he did well not to give credit to those that" raised the report concerning you." He also enjoined them tosend seventy of their principal men to make a defence for themas to the accusation laid against them. So when the twelvemessengers came to their countrymen at Ecbatana, and foundthat they had no designs of innovation at all, they persuadedthem to send the seventy men also ; who not at all suspectingwhat would come, sent them accordingly. So these seventy *went down to Cesarea, together with the twelve * ambassadors;where Varus met them with the king's forces, and slew themall, together with the [twelve] ambassadors, and made an ex­pedition against the Jews of Ecbatana. But one there was of theseventy who escaped, and made haste to inform the Jews of theircoming ; upon which they took their arms, with their wives andchildren, and retired to the citadel at Gamala, leaving their ownvillages full of alll sorts of good things, and having many tenthousands of cattle therein. When Philip was informed of these
things,
* The famous Jevrhh numbers of twelve and seventy are here remarkaWe.







OCR Output








CO ANTIQJJITIES OF THE JEWS. Book XVIII.


Julia [Caesar's wife], Jatnnia, all its toparchy, and Phasaelis inthe plain, and Archelais, where is a great plantation of palm-trees, and their fruit is excellent in its kind. After him cameAnnius Rufus, under whom died Caesar, the second emperor ofthe Romans, the duration of whose reign was fifty-seven years,besides six months and two days, (of which time Antonius ruledtogether with him fourteen years ; but the duration of his lifewas seventy. seven years) ; upon whose death Tiberius Nero,his wife Julia's son, succeeded. He was now the third emperor;and he sent Valerius Gratus to be procurator of Judea, and tosucceed Annius Rufus. This man deprived Annus of the high-priesthood, and appointed Ismael, the son of Phabi, to be high-priest. He also deprived him in a little time, and ordained Elea-zar, the son of Ananus who had been high-priest before, to behigh-priest; which office, when he had held for a year, Gratusdeprived him of it, and gave the high-priesthood to Simon, theson of Camithus; and, when he had possessed that dignity nolonger than a year, Joseph Caiaphas was made his successor.When Gratus had done those things, he went back to Rome,after he had tarried in Judea eleven years, when Pontius Pilatecame as his successor^ '
3. And now Herod the tetrarch, who was in great favou^with Tiberius, built a city of the same name with him, and call­ed it Tiberias. He built it in the best part of Galilee, at the lakeof Gennesareth. There are warm baths at a little distance fromit, in a village named E-mmaus. Strangers came and inhabitedthis city ; a great number of the inhabitants %vere Galileans also jand many were necessitated by Herod to come thither out of thecountry belonging to him, and were by force compelled to be itsinhabitants ; some of them were persons of condition. He alsoadmitted poor people, such as those that were collected from allparts, to dwell in it. Nay, some of them were not quite free­men ; and these he xyas a benefactor to, and made them free ingreat numbers; but obliged them not to forsake the city, bybuilding them very good houses at his own expences, and bygiving them land also ; for he was sensible, that to make thisplace an habitation was to transgress the Jewish ancient laws,because many sepulchres were to be here taken away, in orderto make room for the city Tiberias * ; whereas our laws pro­nounce, that such inhabitants are unclean for seven days f.
4. About


* We may here take notice, aswell as in the parallel parts of the hooks Of theWar, B. II, ch. ix. sect. i. that after the death of Herod the Great, and ihe sue-cession of Archelaus, Josephus is very brief in his accounts of Judea, till nearhis own time. I suppose the reason is, that after the large history of N'icolausof Damascus, including the life of Herod, and probably the succession and firstactions of his sons, he had but few good histories of those times before him.
"f- Numb. xfc. 11—14.


 







OCR Output








Chap. I. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 127


he put on such a mournful dress as be would have done had helost his dearest friends in the world ; this man came into the thea­tre, and informed them of the death of Caius, and by this meansput an end to that state of ignorance the men had been in. Ar-runtius also went round about the pillarSi and called out to theGermans, as did the tribunes with him, bidding them put uptheir swords, and telling them that Cams was dead. And thisproclamation it was plainly which saved those that were collect­ed together in the theatre, and all the rest who any way met theGermans; for, while they had hopes that Caius had still anybreath in him, they abstained from no sort of mischief ; and suchan abundant kindness they still had for Caius, that they wouldwillingly have prevented the plot against him, and procured hisescape from so sad a misfortune, at the expcnce of their ownlives. But they now left off the warm zeal they had to punishhis enemies, now they were fully satisfied that Caius was dead,because it was now in vain for them to-shew their zeal and kind­ness to him, when he that should reward them was perished. Theywere also afraid that they should be punched by the senate, ifthey should go on in doing such injuries, that is, in case the au­thority of the supreme governor should revert to them. Andthus at length a stop was put, though not without difficulty, tothat rage which possessed the Germans on account of Caius'sdeath.
19. But Cherca was so much afraid for Minucianus, lest heshould light upon the Germans, now they were in their fury,that he went and spake to every one of the soldiers, and prayedthem to take care of his preservation, and made himself great in­quiry about him, lest he should have been slain. And for Cle­ment, he let Minucianus go when he was brought to him, and,with many other of the senators, affirmed the action was right,and commended the virtue of those that contrived it, and hadcourage enough to execute it; and said, that " tyrants do indeed" please themselves and look big for a while, upon having the" power to act unjustly ; but do not however go happily out of" the world, because they are hated by the virtuous ; and that" Caius, together with all his unhappiness, was become a con-"spirator against himself, before these other men who attacked" him did so ; and by becoming intolerable, in setting aside thfc" wise provision the laws had made, taught his dearest friends" to treat him as an enemy ; insomuch, that although in com-" mon discourse thess conspirators were those that slew Caius.," yet that, in reality, he lies now dead as perishing by his own*' self." ' ' ' .'.. ''.
' 20. Now by this lime the people in the theatre were arisen
from







OCR Output








244 TfiE LIFE OF FLAVIOS JOSEFHUS.


punished those Jews that were my accusers, and gave commandthat a servant of mine, who was an eunuch, and my accuser,should be punished. He also made that country I had in Judea,tax-free, which is a mark of the greatest honour to him whohath it; nay, Domitia, the wife of Caesar, continued to do mekindnesses. And this is the account of the actions of my wholelife ; and let others judge of my character by them as they please'But to thee, O Epaphroditus* ! thou most excellent of men, do Idedicate all this treatise of our Antiquities ; and 'so, for the pre­sent, I here conclude the whole.
« Of this Epaphroditus, see the note on the Preface to the Anti<juities.







OCR Output








Chap, XVI. WARS OF THE JEWS. 44 T


" bear the onset of a small body of the Roman army. And yet" you who have not accustomed yourselves to obedience from',' one generation to another, and who are so much inferior to" those who first submitted, in your circumstances, will venture'' to oppose the entire empire of the Romans; while those A-" thenians, who, in order to preserve the liberty of Greece," did once set fire to their own city; who pursued Xerxes," that proud prince, when he sailed upon the land, and walked" upon the sea, and could not be contained by the seas, but" conducted such an army as was too broad for Europe, and" made him run away like a fugitive in a single ship, and brake" so great a part of Asia at the lesser Salamis, are yet at this'rtime servants to the Romans; and those injunctions which" are sent from Italy, become laws to the principal governing" city of Greece. Those Lacedemonians also, who got the" great victories at Thermopylae and Platea, and had Agesilaus" [for their king}, and searched every corner of Asia, are con." tented to admit the same lords. These Macedonians alsoj who" still fancy what great men their Philip and Alexander were," and see that the latter had promised them the empire over'' the world, these bear so great a change, and pay their obe-'' dience to those whom fortune hath advanced in their stead.'' Moreover, ten thousand other nations there are, who had" greater reason than we to claim their entire liberty, and yet'' do submit. You are the only people who think it a 'disgrace'« to be servants to those to whom all the world hath submitted'.'« What sort of an army do you rely on? What are the arms" you depend on ? Where is your fleet, that may seize upon'« the Roman seas; and where are those treasures which may" be sufficient for your undertakings ? Do you suppose, I pray" you, that you are to make war with the Egyptians, and with" the Arabians? Will you not carefully reflect upon the Ro-«' man empire? Will you not estimate your own weakness?'' Hath not your army been often beaten even by your neigh-'' bouring nations? while the power of the Romans is invinci-'' ble in all parts of the habitable earth; nay rather, they seek" for somewhat still beyond that; for all Euphrates is not a sufti-" cient boundary for them on the east side, nor the Danube on" the north, and for their southern limit, Libya hath beensearch-'' ed over by them, as far as countries uninhabited, as is Cadiz" their limit on the west; nay,indeed, they have sought for an-" other habitable earth, beyond the ocean, and have carried'«their arms as far as such British islands as were never known" before. What therefore do you pretend to? Are you richer" than the Gauls, stronger than the Germans, wiser than the
" Greeks,







OCR Output








Chap. XXXI. WARS OF THE JEWS. 3-4T;


father ground for an ill suspicion, and give an handle to thosethat raised stories against him; for that in case any thing had .beenmovedtohisdisadvantage,itwasowing to hisabsence,whichdurst not have been done had he been present. And they said,it was absurd to deprive himself of certain happiness, for thesake of an uncertain suspicion, and not rather to return to hisfather, and take the royal authority upon him, which was ina state of fluctuation on his account only. Antipater compli­ed with this last advice, for Providence hurried him on [to hisdestruction]. 80 he passed over the sea, and landed at Sebas-tus, the haven of Cesarea. .
4. And here he found a perfect and unexpected solitude, whileevery body avoided him, and no body durst come at him; forhe was equally hated by all men; and now that hatred hadliberty to shew itself, and the dread men were in at the king'sanger made men keep from him; for the whole city [of Jerusa­lem] was filled with the rumours about Antipater, and Anti-pater himself was the only person who was ignorant of them;for as no man was dismissed more magnificently when he beganhis voyage to Rome, so was no man now received back withgreater ignominy. And indeed he began already to suspectwhat misfortunes there were in Herod's family; yet did he cun­ningly conceal his suspicion; and while he was inwardly ready.to die for fear, he put on a forced boldness of countenance. Norcould he now fly any whither, nor had he any way of emerg­ing out of the difficulties which encompassed him; nor indeedhad he even there any certain intelligence of the affairs of theroyal family, by reason of the threats the king had given out:yet had he some small hopes of better tidings; for perhaps no-­thing had been discovered; or, if any discovery had been made,perhaps he should be able to clear himself by impudence, andartful tricks, which were the only things he relied upon for hisdeliverance. /
5. And with these hopes did he screen himself, till he cameto the palace, without any friends with him; for these wereaffronted, and shutout at the first gate. Now Varus, the pre­sident of Syria, happened to be in the palace [at this juncture]:'sp Antipater went in to his father, and, putting on a bold face,he came near to salute him; but Herod stretched out his hands,and turned his head away from him, and cried out, "Even this" is an indication of a parricide, to be desirous to g-:t me intoM his arms, when he is under such heinous accusations. God" confound thee, thou vile wretch, do not thou touch me, till" thou hast cleared thyself of these crimes that are charged uportff thee. J appoint thee a court where thou art to be judged, and
X x 2 " this







OCR Output








Chap. XIV. ' WARS OF THE JEWS. 291


Safe to Rhodes, a place which had been grievously harassed in thewar with Cassius. He was there received by his friends, Pto­lemy and Sappinius ; and, although he was then in want ofmoney, he fitted up a three decked ship of very great magnitude,wherein he and his friends sailed to * Brundusium, and wentthence to Rome with all speed : where he first of all went toAntony, on account of the friendship his father had with him,and laid before him the calamities of himself and his family, andthat he had left his nearest relations besieged in a fortress, andhad sailed to him through a storm, to make supplication to himfor assistance.
4. Flereupon Antony was moved to compassion at the change thathad been made in Herod's affairs, and this both upon his calling tomind how hospitably he had been treated by Antipater,but moreespecially on account of Herod's own virtue; so he then resolvedto get him made king of the Jews, whom he had himself former­ly made tetrach. The contest also that he had with Antigonuswas another inducement, and that of no lessweight than the greatregard he had for Herod; for he looked upon Antigonus as a se­ditious person, and an enemy of the Romans : and as for Caesar,Herod found him better prepared than Antony, as rememberingvery fresh the wars he had gone through together with his fa­ther, the hospitable treatment he had met with from him, andthe entire good will he had shewed to him: besides the activitywhich he saw in Herod himself. So he called the senate toge­ther, wherein Messalas, and after him Atratinus, produced He­rod before them, and gave a full account of the merits of his fa­ther, and his own good-will to the Romans. At the same timethey demonstrated that Antigonus was their enemy, not only be­cause he soon quarrelled with them, but because he now over­looked theRomans,and took thegovernment by the means of theParthians. These reasons greatly moved the senate; at whichjuncture Antony came in and told them that it was for theiradvantage in the Parthian war that Herod should be king; sothey all gave their votes for it. And, when the senate was se­parated, Antony and Csesar went out, with Herod between them;while the consul and the rest of the magistrates went beforethem in order to offer sacrifices, and to lay the decree in thecapitol : Antony also made a feast for Herod on the first dayof his reign.
« This Brentesium or Biundusium has coin still preserved, on which ii writtenSfir^if""t aa Spanheim here informs us.
O o 2 CHAP-







OCR Output








ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book XIX.


" it is but a part of natural justice, that every one should have" the power over the place belonging peculiarly to themselves," according to the determination of Caesar; to say nothing of" my own determination, which it would be ridiculous to men-" tion after the emperor's edict, which gives the Jews leave to(i make use of their own customs, as also gives order, that they" enjoy equally the rights of citizens with the Greeks themselves." J therefore ordain, that Proculus Vitelius, the centurion, bring" those men to me, who, contrary to Augustus's edict, have been" so insolent as to do this thing, at which those very men, who" appear to be of principal reputation among them, have an m-" dignation also, and alledge for themselves, that it was not done" with their consent, but by the violence of the multitude, that** they might give an account of what hath been done. I also*' exhort the principal magistrates among them, unless they have" a mind to have this action esteemed to be one with their con-* sent, and to inform the centurion of those that were guilty of*' it, and take care that no handle be hence taken for raising a" sedition or quarrel among them ; which those seem to me to" hunt after, who encourage such doings; while both I myself,** and king Agrippa, for whom I have the highest honour, have*' nothing more under our care, than that the nation of the Jews" may have no occasion given them of getting together under*' the pretence of avenging themselves, and become tumultuous." And that it may be more publicly known what Augustus*r hath resolved about this whole matter, I have subjoined those" edicts which he hath lately caused to be published at Alexan-** dria, and which, although they may be well known to all," yet did king Agrippa, for whom I have the highest honour," read them at that time before my tribunal, and pleaded that"the Jews ought not to be deprived of those rights which Au-" gustus hath granted them. I therefore charge you, that yon" do not, for the time to come, seek for any occasion of sedition" or disturbance, but that every one be allowed to follow their" own religious customs."
4. Thus did Petronius take care of this matter, that such d>breach of the law might be corrected, and that no such thingmight be attempted afterwards against the Jews. And nowking Agrippa took the [high] priesthood away from SimonCantheras, a'nd put Jonathan, the son of Ananus, into it again,and owned that he was more worthy of that dignity than theother. But this was not a thing acceptable to him, to recoverthat his former dignity. So he refused it, and said, " O king ! £" rejoice in the honour that thou hast for me, and take it kindly" that thou wpuldest give me such a dignity of thy own incli-
" nations,







OCR Output








Chap. V. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 71


after he had been tetrarch of Trachonitis and Gaulanitis, and ofthe nation of the Bataneans also, thirty-seven years. He hadshewed himself a person of moderation and quietness in the con­duct of his life and government; he constantly lived in that coun­try which was subject to him * ; he used to make his progresswith a few chosen friends; his tribunal also, on which he sat injudgment, followed him in his progress; and when any one methim who wanted his assistance, he made no delay, but had histribunal set down immediately, wheresoever he happened to be,and sat down upon it, and heard his complaint: he there orderedthe guilty that were convicted to be punished, and absolved thosethat had been accused unjustly. He died at Julias ; and whenhe was carried to that monument which he had already erectedtor himself before-hand, he was buried with great pomp. Hisprincipality Tiberius took, for he left no sons behind him, andadded it to the province of Syria, but gave order that the tri­butes which arose from it should be collected, and laid up in histetrarchy.
CHAP V.
Herod the tetrarch makes war with Gretas, the king of Arabiarand is beaten by him ; as also concerning the death of ^jfohn theBaptist: bow Vitellius went up to Jerusalem ; together withsome account of sigrippa, and of the posterity of Herod the Great.
§ 1. A BOUT this time, Aretas, the king of Arabia Petrea,,**• and Herod, had a quarrel on the account following :—Herod the tetrarch had married the daughter of Aretas, and hadlived with her a great while, but when he was once at Rome,he lodged with Herod f, who was his brother indeed, but notby the same mother ; for this Herod was the son of the high-priest Simon's daughter. However, he fell in love with Hero-dias, this last Herod's wife, who was the daughter of Aristobu-lus their brother, and the sister of Agrippa the Great; this manventured to talk to her about a marriage between them, whichaddress when she admitted, an agreement was made for her to
change


* An excellent example this.
t This Herod seems to have had the additional name of Philip, as Antipaswas named Herod-Antipas, and as Antipas and Antipater seem to be in a mannerthe very same name, yet were the names of two sons of Herod the Great; somight Philip the tetrarch and this Herod-Philip be two different sons of the samefather, all which Grotius observes on Matt. xiv. 3. Nor was it, as 1 agree with.Grotius and others of the learned, Philip the tetrarch, but this Herod-Philip,Whose wife Herod the tetrarch had married, and that in her first husband's life­time, and when her first husband had issue by her; for which adulterous andincestuous marriage, John the Baptist justly reproved Herod the tetrarch, andfor which reproof Salome, the daughter of Herodias, by her first husband Herod.Philip, who was still alive, occasioned him to be unjus'ly beheaded.







OCR Output








140 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book XIX.


vested with dignity and authority. Accordingly Claudius saidto the ambassadors, That «' he did not wonder the senate had no" mind to have an emperor over them, because they had .been'"• harassed by the barbarity of those that had formerly been at'« the head of their affairs ; but that they should taste of an" equitable government under him, and moderate times, while" he should only be their ruler in name, but the authority" should be equally common to them all ; and since he had pass-" ed through many and various scenes of life before their eyes,«' it would be good for them not to distrust him." So the am­bassadors, upon their hearing this his answer, were dismissed.But Claudius discoursed with the army which was there gather­ed together, who took oaths that they would persist in theirfidelity to him ; upon which he gave the guards every manfive thousand * drachmae a-piece, and a proportionable quantityto their captains, and promised to give the same to the rest ofthe armies wheresoever they were.
3. And now the consuls called the senate together, into thetemple of Jupiter the Conqueror, while it was still night; butsome of those senators concealed themselves in the city, beinguncertain what to do, upon the hearing of this summons, andsome of them went out of the city to their own farms, as fore­seeing whether the public affairs were going, and despairing ofliberty ; nay, these supposed it much better for them to beslaves without danger to themselves, and to live' a lazy and in­active life, than by claiming the dignity of their forefathers, torun the hazard of their own "safety. However, an hundred,and no more, were gotten together ; and as they were in consul­tation about the present posture of affairs, a sudden clamour wasmade by the soldiers that were on their side, " desiring that'' the senate would choose them an emperor, and not bring the*' government into ruin by setting up a multitude of rulers." Sothey fully declared themselves to be for the giving the govern­ment not to all, but to one ; but they gave the senate leave to lookout for a person worthy to be set over them, iiisomuch, that nowthe affairs of the senate were much worse than before ; becausethey had not only failed in the recovery of their liberty, whichthey boasted themselves of, but were in dread of Claudius also.Yet were there those that hankered after the government, both
on


* This number of drachma to be distributed to each private soldier, 5000drachma; equal to 20,000 sesterces, or L.i6i Sterling, seems much too large, amidirectly contradicts Suetonius, ch. x. who makes them in aJl but 15 sesterces, or4s. 4d. Vet might Joseph us have this number from Agrippa junior, thoughtdoubt the thousands, or at least the hundreds have been added by the transori-licrs, of which we have had several examples already in Josephus.







OCR Output








THE LIFE OF FLAVIU S JOSEPHUS. 241


Hand, I continued feverish that day ; and as the physicians di­rected, I was that night removed to Taricheae.
T3. When Sylla and his party were informed what happenedto me, they took courage again ; and understanding that thewatch was negligently kept in our camp, they by night placeda body of horsemen in ambush beyond Jordan, and when it wasday they provoked us to fight; and as we did not refuse it, butcame into the plain, their horsemen appeared out of that ambushin which they had lain, and put our men into disorder, andmade them run away; so they slew six. men of our side. Yetdid they not go off with the victory at last; for when they heardthat some armed men were sailed from Taricheae to Julias, theywere afraid, and retired.
14. It was not now long before Vespasian came to Tyre, andking Agrippa with him ; but the Tyrians began to speak re­proachfully of the king, and called him an enemy to the Ro­mans. For they said, that Philip, the general of his army, hadbetrayed the royal palace, and the Roman forces that were inJerusalem, and that it was done by his command. When Ves­pasian heard of this report, he rebuked the Tyrians for abusinga man who was both a king, and a friend to the Romans; but heexhorted the king to send Philip to Rome, to answer for what hehad done before Nero. But, when Philip was sent thither, hedid not come into the sight of Nero, for he found him very neardeath, on account of the troubles that then happened, and a civilwar ; and so he returned to the king. But, when Vespasian wascome to Ptolemais, the chief men of Decapolis of Syria madea clamour against Justus of Tiberias, because he had set theirvillages 6n fire : so Vespasian delivered him to the king, to beput to death by those under the king's jurisdiction ; yet did theking [only] put him into bonds, and concealed what he had donefrom Vespasian, as I have before related. But the people ofSepphoris met Vespasian, and saluted him, and had forces senthim, with Placidus their commander: he also went up withthem, as I also followed them, till Vespasian came into Galilee.As to which coming of his, and after what manner it was or­dered, and how he fought his first battle with me near the vil­lage Taricheae, and how from thence they went to Jotapata, andhow I was taken alive, and bound, and how I was afterward'loosed, with all that was done by me in the Jewish war, andduring the siege of Jerusalem ; I have accurately related themin the books concerning the War of the Jews. However, itv ill, I think, be fit for me to add now an account of those ac­tions of my life, which I have not related in that book of theJewish War.
VOL. III. H h 75.







OCR Output








Chap. II. ANTIQUITIES OF THF JEWS. .. 59


I have said of them should be disbelieved, but rather fear, thatwhat I have said is beneath the resolution they shew when theyundergo pain. And it was in Gessius Florus's time that the na­tion began to grow mad with this distemper, who was our pro­curator, and who occasioned the Jews to go wild with it by theabuse of his authority, and to make them revolt from the Ro­mans. And these are the sects of Jewish philosophy.
CHAP. II.• • ... j.'
How Herod and Philip luilt several cities in honour of Cccsar.Concerning the succession of priests and procurators ; as also•what befel Phraates and the Parthians.
J i. TTTHEN Cyrenius had now disposed of Archelaus's* * money, and when the taxings were come to a conclu­sion, which were made in the thirty-seventh of Caesar's victoryover Antony at Actium, he deprived Joazar of the high-priest­hood, which dignity had been conferred on him by the multi-tude, and he appointed Ananus, the son of Seth, to be high-priest;while Herod and Philip had each of them received their owntetrarchy, and settled the affairs thereof. Herod also built a wallabout Sepphoris, (which is the security of all Galilee), and madeit the metropolis of the country. He also built a wall round Beth-aramphtha, which was itself a city also, and called it Julias, fromthe name of the emperor's wife. When Philip, also, had builtPaneas, a city at the fountains of Jordan, he named it Cerarea.He also advanced the village Bethsaida, situate at the lake ofGennesareth, unto the dignity of a city, both by the number ofinhabitants it contained, and its other grandeur, and called it bythe name of Julias, the same name with Caesar's daughter.
2. As Coponius, who we told you was sent along with Cyre­nius, was exercising his office of procurator, and governing Judea,the following accidents happened. As the Jews were celebra­ting the feast of unleavened bread, which we call the Passover, itwas customary for the priests to open the temple-gates just aftermidnight. When, therefore, those gates were first opened, someof the Samaritans came privately into Jerusalem, and threw a-bout dead men's bodies in the cloisters; on which account the Jewsafterward excluded them out of the temple, which they had notused to do at such festivals ; and on other accounts also theywatched the temple more carefully than they had formerly done.A little after which accident, Coponius returned to Rome, andMarcus Ambivius came to be his successor in that government;.under whom Salome, the sister of king Herod, died, and left to


Julia







OCR Output








30 ANTIQJJITIES OF THE JEWS. Book XVII.


drome, and told them that the king ordered them to go away totheir own lands, and take care of their own affairs, which wasssteemed by the nation a great benefit. And now the king'sdeath was made public, when Salome and Alexis gathered thesoldiery together in the amphitheatre at Jericho ; and the firstthing they did was, they read Herod's letter, written to the sol­diery, thanking them for their fidelity and good will to him, andexhorting them to afford his son Archelaus, whom he had ap­pointed for their king, like fidelity and good will. After whichPtolemy, who had the king's seal entrusted to him, read theking's testament, which was to be of force no otherwife than asit should stand when Caesar had inspected it: fo there was pre­sently an acclamation made to Archelaus, as king, and the sol­diers came by bands, and their commanders with them, and pro­mised the same good will to him, and readiness to serve him,which they had exhibited to Herod ; and they prayed God to beassistant to him.
3. After this was over, they prepared for his funeral, it beingArchelaus's care that the procession to his father's sepulchreshould be very sumptuous. Accordingly he brought out allhis ornaments to adorn the pomp of the funeral. The body wascarried upon a golden bier, embroidered with very preciousstones of great variety, and it was covered over with purple, aswell as the body itself: he had a diadem upon his head, andabove it a crown of gold ; he also had a sceptre in his right hand.About the bier were his sons and his numerous relations ; nextto these was the soldiery, distinguished according to their seve­ral countries and denominations ; and they were put into thefollowing order : First of all went his guards ; then the band ofThracians ; and after them the Germans; and next the band ofGalatians, every one in their habuiliments of war ; and behindthese marched the whole army in the same manner as*they usedto go out to war, and as they used to be put in array by theirmuster-masters and centurions ; thefe were followed by five hun­dred of his domestics, carrying spices. So they went eight fur­longs*, to Herodium ; for there, by his own command, he wasto he buried. And thus did Herod end his life.
4. Now Archelaus paid him so much respect, as to continuehis mourning till the seventh day ; for so many days are ap­pointed for it by the law of our fathers. And when he hadgiven a treat to the multitude, and left off his mourning, he
went


* At eiglit stadia or furlongs a-day, as here, Herod's funeral, conducted toHerodium, (which lay at the distance from Jericho, where he died, of 100 stadiaor furlongs; Of the War, B' I. ch. xxxiii' J p.) must have taken up no less thantwenty five days. ,







OCR Output








52 ANTIQUITIES OF TJIE JEWS. Book XVIII,


'i
Alexander * the alabarch, and one not unskilful in philosophy,WAS ready to betake himself to make his defence against thoseAccusations ; but Cain? prohibited him, and bid him be gone :}ie was also in such a rage, that it openly appeared he was aboutto do them some very great mis.qhief. So Philo being thus af­fronted, went out, and said to those Jews who were about him,that " they should he of good courage, since Caius's words in-" deed shewed anger at them, but in reality had already set God" against himself."
2.. Hereupon Caius, taking it very heinously that he shouldbe thus despised by the Jews alone, sent Petronius to the presi­dent of Syriaj and successor in the government to ViteHius, andgave him order to make an invasion into Judea, with a greatbody of troops, and, if they would admit of his statue willingly,to erect it in the temple of God ; but, if they were obstinate, toconquer them by wnr, and then to do it. Accordingly Petro­nius took the government of Syria, and made haste to obey Ce­sar's epistle. He got together as great a number of auxiliariesas he possibly could, and took with him two legions of the Ro­man army, and came to Ptolemais, and there wintered, as intend­ing to set about the war in the spring. He also wrote word toCams what he had resolved to do, who commended him far bisalacrity, and ordered him to go on, and to make war with them,in case they would not obey his commands. But there camemany ten thousands of the Jews to Petronius, to Ptolemais, to'bfflr their petitions to him, that " he would not compel them to" transgress and violate the law of their forefathers ; but if, said" they, thou art entirely resolved to bring this statue, and erect*' it, do thou first kill us, and then do what thou hast resolved" on ; for, while we are alive, we cannot permit such things as" are forbidden us to be done by the authority of our legislator," and by our forefathers determination, that such prohibitions are" instances of virtue." But Petronitis was angry at them, and said," If indeed I were myself emperor, and were at liberty to follow«' my own inclination, and then had designed to act thus, these" your words would be justly spoken to me ; but now Ccesar hath" sent to me, I am under the necessity of being subservient to" his decrees, because a disobedience to them will bring upon me" inevitable destruction." Then the Jews replied, " Since," therefore, thou art so disposed, O Petronius ! that thou wilt not" disobey Caius's epistles, neither will we transgress the com-
" mands


* This Alexander, the a'.abarch, or governor of the Jews at Alexandria, andbrother to t'hilo, is supposed by Bishop Pearson, in Act. Apost. p. 41. 47. to b(Jthe same with that Alexander who is mentioned by St. l.uke, as of the kindredof the high-priests, Acts, iv. 6, . ;"







OCR Output








8-a ANTI-<4JJITIES OF THE JEW?, Book


given to astrology *, and the calculation of nativities, and Jiadjpent his life in the esteem of what predictions had proved true,more than those whose profession it was. Accordingly, whenhe once saw Galba coming in to him, he said to his most intimatefriends, that " there came in a man that would one day have the" dignify of the Roman empire." So that this Tiberius wasmore addicted to all such sorts of diviners than any other of theRoman emperors, because he had found them to have told himtruth in his own affairs. And indeed he was now in great dis­tress upon this accident that had befallen him, and was verymuch grieved at the destruction of his son's son, which he foresaw,and complained of himself, that he 'should have made use of such,a method of divination tef ore hand, while it was in his powerto haye died without grief by this knowledge of futurity ; where­as he was now tormented by his foreknowledge of the misfor-Ijtme of such as were dearest to him, and must die under that tor­ment. Now, although he were disordered at this unexpected re­volution of the government to those for whom he did not intendit, he spake thus to Caius, though unwillingly, and against hisown inclination : " O child 1 although Tiberius be nearer related" to me than thou art, I, by my own determination, and the con-" spiring suffrage of the gods, do give, and put into thy hand,," the Roman empire • and I desire thee never to be unmindful*' when thou comest to it, either of my kindness to thee, who set«' thee in so high a dignity, or of thy relation to Tiberius. But" as thou knowest that I am, together with and after the gods,«' the procurer of so great happiness to thee, so I desire that" thou wilt make me a return for my readiness to assist thee,«' and will take care of Tiberius because of his near relation to«' thee. Besides which, thou art to know, that, while Tiberius" is alive, he will be a security to thee, both as to empire and" as to thy own preservation ; but, if he die, that will be but a" prelude to thy own misfortunes ; for, to be alone, under the*' weight of such vast affairs, is very dangerous ; nor will the*' gods suffer those actions which are unjustly done, contrary to*' that law which directs men to act otherwise, to go off unpu-',' rtished." This was the speech which Tiberius made, whichdid not persuade Caius to act accordingly, although he promisedso to do ; but, when he was settled in the government, he tookoff this Tiberius, as was predicted by the other Tiberius ; as he-was also himself, in no long time afterward, slain by a secretplot laid against him.
10. So when Tiberius had at this time appointed Caius to be
his
* This is a known thing among the Roman historians and poets, that Tit«-TIUS was greatly given to astrology and divination.







OCR Output








Chap. VI. ANTIOjnTIES OF THE JEWS. Ifl


knowledge of the truth of that matter. So these men went away 'without success. Yet was it not long ere Quadratus came to ,Samaria, where, upon hearing the cause, he supposed that the \Samaritans were the authors of that disturbance. But, whenhe was informed' that certain of the Jews were making innova­tions, he ordered those to be crucified whom Cumanus had takencaptives. From whence he came to a certain village called Lyd-dn, which was not less than a city in largeness, and there heardtlie Samaritan cause a second time before his tribunal, and therelearned from a certain .Samaritan, that one of the chief of theJews, whose name was Dortu't, and some other innovators withhim, four in number, persuaded the multitude to a revolt fromdie Romans ; whom Quadratus ordered to be put to death : b^fstill he sent away Ananias the high-priest, and Ananus the com­mander [of the temple], in bonds to Rome, to give an accountof what they had done to Claudius Caesar. He also orderedthe principal men, both of the Samaritans and of the Jews, asalso Cumanus the procurator, and Celer the tribune, to go to Italyto th<e emperor, that he might hear their cause, and determinetheir differences one with another. But he came again to thecity of Jerusalem, out of his fear that the multitude of the Jewsshould attempt some innovations ; but he found the city in apeaceable state, and celebrating one of the usual festivals of theircountry to God. So he believed that they would not attemptany innovations, and left them at the celebration of the festival,and returned to Antioch.
3. Now Cumanus, and the principal of th£ Samaritans, whowere sent to Rome, had a day appointed them by the emperor,whereon they were to have pleaded their cause about the quar­rels they had one with another. But now Cfesar's freed-men,and his friends, were very zealous on the behalf of Cumanusand the Samaritans ; and they had prevailed over the Jews, un­less Agrippa junior, who was then at Rome, had seen the prin­cipal of the Jews hard set, and had earnestly entreated Agrip-pina, the emperor's wife, to persuade her husband to hear thecause, so as was agreeable to his justice, and to condemn thoseto be punished who were really the authors of this revolt fromthe Roman government. Whereupon Claudius was so well dis­posed before-hand, that when he had heard the cause, and foundthat the Samaritans had been the ringleaders in those mischie­vous doings, he gave order, that those who came up to him shouldbe slain, and that Cumanus should be banished. He also gaveorder, that Celer the tribune should'be carried back to Jerusa­lem, and should be drawn through the city in the sight of all thepeople, and then should be slair.
CHAP.



