


OCR Output








380 THE .Hl'ST'OR Y


BOOK have deterred them from offering violence to the


iv. r
cenlors.


Y.R. 5t1. XXV. THE plebeian tribunes, by conftantly ha-B.C. 430. ranging the people againft the election of confuls,prevailed at laft, after bringing the affair almoft toan interregnum, that military tribunes with confularpower fhould be elected. In the prize of victorywhich they aimed at, the getting a plebeian elected,they were entirely difappointed. The perfons elect -ed were all patricians, Marcus Fabius Vibulanus,Marcus Foflius, and Lucius Sergius Fidenas. Dur­ing that year, the peftilence kept other matters quiet.For the reftoration of health to the people, a templewas vowed to Apollo, and the decemvirs, by di­rection of the books, performed many rites, for thepurpofe of appeafing the wrath of the gods, andaverting the peftilence. The mortality notwith-ftanding was great, men and cattle periming toge­ther, both in the city and the country. Dreadinga famine, in .confequence of the death of the huf-bandmen, they fent for corn to Etruria; and thePomptine diftritSt, to Cumae, and at laft to Sicilyalfo. No mention was made of electing confuls.Military tribunes with confular power were elected,YR all patricians, Lucius Pinarius Mamercinus, LuciusB.V.4ijj.' Furius Medullinus, and Spurius Poftumius Albus.In this year, the violence of the diforder abated, norwere there any apprehenfions of a fcarcity of corn,care having been taken to provide againft it. Schemesfor exciting wars were agitated in the meetings of the^Equans and Volfcians, and in Etruria at the templeof Voltumna. Here the bufinefs was adjourned fora year, and a decree pafied forbidding any affemblyto be held before that time, while the nation of theVeientians in vain complained, that thp fame mis­fortunes hung over Veii, which had deftroyed Fi-denie. Meanwhile, at. Rome, the leaders of thecommons, who had now, for a long time, in vain,
purfued







OCR Output








OF ROME, 169


which he had feen and heard, and with Jupiter's BOOKhaving appeared to him fo often in his fleep, and . -r-__flikewife the anger and threats of the deity, fo fpeedi- Y.R. i6\.ly fulfilled in the calamities which had befallen him, 8.C.489.in purfuance of the clear and unanimous opinion ofall prefent, he was carried in a litter into the Forum,to the confuls: from thence he was conveyed, byorder of the confuls, into the fenate-houfe 5 where,when he had related to the fenate the fame accounts,to the utter aftonimment of all, behold another mi­racle; it is recorded, that he, who had been carriedinto the lenate-houfe incapable of ufing any of hislimbs, had no fooner difcharged his duty, than he (
was able to walk home without affiftance.
XXXVII. THE fenate decreed that the gamesfhould be exhibited in the moft fplendid manner.To thefe games, in confequence of a plan laid byAttius Tullus, a vaft number of the Volfcians re­paired: before the commencement of the exhibi­tion, Tullus, according to the fchcme concerted athome with Marcius, came to the confuls, told themthat he wifhed to confer with them, in private, onfome matters which concerned the commonwealth,and, every other perfon having retired, he addrefiedthem thus: " It is painful to me, in the extreme,"to fay any thing of my countrymen that is not to"their honour: I do not come, however, to charge"them with having committed any wrong act, but"to guard againft fuch being committed; that the"difpofitions of our people are fickle, to a degree*' infmitely beyond what might be wifhed, numer-'C ous difafters have given fenfible proofs; for, to"your forbearance it is owing, and not to our own'' deferts, that we have not been utterly deftroyed.f' There are great numbers of the Volfcians now hi'' this city; there are games to be celebrated; the'* public will be intent on the exhibition; I well re-«' member the outrage which was committed in this


"city,







OCR Output








OF ROME. $07


chiefly to guard againft; and fuppofmg, that the B o o Keminence had been feized with defign, that when . __' _jthe Gauls thould be engaged in front with the line Y.R. }6S.of the legions, that referved body might make an P. ?• &•attack on their rear and flank, turned his forceagainft the refervc, not doubting, that if he coulddiflodge them from their poft, his troops, fo muchfuperior in number, would find an eafy victory in theplain : thus not only fortune, but judgment alfo ftoodon the fide of the barbarians. In the oppofite armythere appeared nothing like Romans, either amongthe commanders, or the foldiers. Terror and dif-may had taken pofieffion of their minds, and fuch atotal unconcern for the reft of mankind, that greaternumbers by far fled to Veii, a city of their enemy,though the Tiber lay acrofs the way, than by thedirect road to Rome, to their wires and children.The fituation of the ground for fome time defendedthe referve: but thofe who compofed the reft of theline, no fooner heard the fhout, thofe who ftood near-eft on their flank, and thofe at a diftance on theirrear, than, not only without attempting to fight, butwithout even returning the fhout, frefh as they wereand unhurt, they ran away from an untried enemy,at whom they fcarce ventured to look. No liveswere loft in the fight; but their rear was cut topieces while they crowded on one another, in fuchhurry and confufion, as retarded their flight. Greatflaughter was made on the bank of the Tiber, whi­ther the whole left wing, after throwing away theirarms, had directed their flight; and great numberswho knew not how to fwim, or were not very ftrong,being burthened with their coats of mail and otherdefenfive armour, were fwallowed up in the current.However the greateft part efcaped fafe to Veii, fromwhence they neither fent any reinforcement to Rome,nor even a courier to give notice of their defeat.Thofe of the right wing which had been pofted at adiftance from the river, near the foot of the moun­


tain,







OCR Output








O F R O M E, ji


the Romans who ftood neareft were aftonimed at * O O Kfinding their flank left uncovered, by the departure of itheir allies, and, in a fhort time, a horfeman at fullfpeed brought an account to the king that the Al-bans were retreating. Tullus, in this perilous junc­ture, vowed to inftinite twelve new Salian priefts,and alfo to build temples to Palenefs and Terror;then, rebuking the horfeman with a loud voice, thatthe enemy might hear, he ordered him to return tothe fight, telling him, that " there was no occafion"for any uneafinefs; that it was by his order the"Alban army was wheeling round, in order to fall"upon the unprotected rear of the Fidenatians."He commanded him alfo, to order the cavalry toraife their fpears aloft; and, this being performed,intercepted, from a great part of the infantry, theview of the Alban army retreating: thofe who didfee them, believing what the king had faid, foughtwith the greater fpirit. The fright was now tranf-ferred to the enemy, for they had heard what theking had fpoken aloud, and many of the Fidenatiansunderftood the Latine tongue, as having been inter­mixed with Romans in the colony. Wherefore,•dreading left the Albans might run down fuddenlyfrom the hills, and cut off their retreat to the town,they betook themfelves to flight. Tullus prefiedthem clofe, and after routing this wing compofed ofthe Fidenatians, turned back with double furyagainft the Veientians, now difheartened by the dif-may of the other wing. Neither could they with*ftand his attack, and the river intercepting them be..hind, prevented a precipitate flight. As foon asthey reached this, in their retreat, fome, fhamefully. throwing away their arms, plunged defperately intothe water, and the reft, hefitating on the bank,irrefolute whether to fight or fly, were overpoweredand cut off. Never before had the Romans been,engaged in fo defperate an aftion.
« 2 XXVIII. WHEN







OCR Output








O F R O M E. 483


might be fet apart for that religious purpofe. AtB O O Klength, recourfe wa§ had to a method which fecmed. _T_1 _,leaft troublefome, that every man who wifhed to Y.R. 359.acquit himfelf and his family of the obligation of the B.Ct 3»i.vow, making his own eftimate of his fhare of thefpoil, mould pay into the treafury the tenth part ofthe value, in order that a golden offering might bemade, worthy of the grandeur of the temple, the di­vinity of the god, and the dignity of the Romanpeople: this contribution alfo helped to alienate theaffection of the commons from Camiilus. Duringthefe tranfactions, ambaffadors had come from theVolfcians and JEquanS to fue for peace, and peacewas granted them rather out of a defire that the ftate,wearied with fo tedious a war, might enjoy fome re-pofe, than in confideration of the defert of the per-fons petitioning.
XXIV. THE year which followed the taking of J;J;j£;Veil had fix military tribunes, with confular power,the two Publii Cornelii, Coflus, and Scipio, MarcusValerius Maximus a fecond time, Caefo Fabius Am-buftus a third time, Lucius Furius Medullinus afifth time, and Quintus Servilius a third time. Thewar with the Falifcians fell by lot to the Cornelii jthat with the Capenatians to Valerius and Servilius.Thefe latter made no attempt on the towns, eitherby affault or fiege, but fpread devaftation over thelands, and carried off as fpoil every thing found inthe country; not a fruit-tree, nor any ufeful vege-table, was left in the whole territory. Thefe loffesreduced the people of Capena to fubmiflion, and ontheir filing for peace, it was granted. The war withthe Falifcians ftill continued. Meanwhile fcditipnsmultiplied at Rome, and in order to afluage their . ,violence it was refolved, that a colony mould be fentoff to the country of the Volfcians, for which threethoufand Roman citizens fhould be enrolled, and thetriumvirs, appointed to conduct it, diftributed three112 acres







OCR Output








O £ R O M E. 49p


with certainty on human affairs, would have erfectu- BOOKally faved Rome from falling into the hands of an . v'.enemy, the deftined ruin now approached the city y.R. 364.with hafty fteps: ambafladors arrived from the peo- B. C. 388.ple of Clufium, foliciung aid againft the Gauls.According to fome reports, that nation was alluredto crofs the Alps, by the delightfulnefs of the pro­ductions of the foil, and efpecially by the deliciouf-nefs of the wine, a matter then new to them; theytook pofieffion of lands formerly cultivated by theEtrurians, and A runs of Clufium carried wine intoGaul for the purpofe of enticing that people, thathe might, by their means, gratify his refentment forhis wife's being debauched by Lucumo, whofe guar­dian he himfelf had been; a young man of over­grown power, on whom it would have been impofli-ble to inflict punifhment without having recourfe toforeign afliftance. He acted as their guide, inpaffing the Alps, and advifed them to lay fiege toClufium. I do not indeed take upon me to deny,that the Gauls were conducted to Clufium by Aruns,or fome other Clufian, but that thofe who laid fiegeto Clufium, were not the firft who croffed the Alps,is certain; for the Gauls crofied over into Italy, twohundred years before they befieged Clufium, andtook the city of Rome. Nor were thefe the firft ofthe Etrurians with whom they waged war; for longbefore this, the Gallic armies fought many battleswith thofe who dwelt between the Apennines and theAlps. The Tufcans, before the growth of the Ro­man empire, pofiefied very extenfive fway both byland and fea: how great their power was in the up­per and lower feas, by which Italy is almoft fur-rounded, as an ifland, the names of thofe feas de-monftrate ; one being called, by the Italian nations,the Tufcan, the general appellation of that people;the other, the Adriatic, from Adria, a colony of.Tufcans. The Greeks alfo call thofe feas the Tyrr­henian and Adriatic. This people inhabited bothK K 2 the







OCR Output








OF ROME. Soj


that the very perfons whofe punifhment was the B o o Kfubject of deliberation, were appointed military . - '-_,tribunes with confular power for the enfuing year. Y.R. 364.At which proceeding the Gauls being juftly enrag- B. C. 38*.ed, and openly denouncing war, returned to theircountrymen. Together with the three Fabii were Y.R. 365.appointed military tribunes, Quintus Sulpicius Lon- B.c. J8'.gus, Quintus Servilius a fourth time, and ServiusCornelius Maluinenfis.


XXXVII. WHEN fortune is determined uponthe ruin of a people, fhe can fo blind them, as torender them infenfible to danger, even of the great-eft magnitude: accordingly the Roman ftate,which, in its wars with the Fidenatians and Vei-entians and other neighbouring enemies, had leftno means untried to procure aid, and had, on manyoccafions, nominated a dictator; yet now, when anenemy whom they had never met, or even heardof, was, from the ocean and the, remoteft coaft ofthe world, advancing in arms againft them, theylooked not for any extraordinary command or af-fiftance. Tribunes, whofe temerity had broughton the war, were intrufted with the reins of go­vernment, and they ufed no greater diligence inlevying forces, than was aiiual in cafe of a rupturewith any of their neighbours, extenuating the im­portance which fame gave to the war. Meanwhilethe Gauls, hearing that the violators of the rightsof mankind had even been recompenfed with ho­nours, and that their embafly had been flighted,inflamed with anger, a paflion which that nationknows not how to control, inftantly matched uptheir enfigns, and began to march with the utmoftexpedition. When their precipitate march caufedfu£h an alarm wherever they pafied, that the in­habitants of the cities in a fright ran together toarms, »nd the peafants betook themfelves to flight,they fignified to them, by loud fhouts, tbat it was
to







OCR Output








O F R O M E. 3<s7


*'• deemed not more criminal than it was monftrous: B o o K"nor was it fufficiently expiated by his blood; it was ^"Farther neceffary that the roof, the walls, within Y.R."which fuch a defperate defign had been conceived, B.c."mould be levelled to the ground; and that his ef-"fccts fhould be confifcated, being contaminated by"the intention of making them the price of the li-"berty of the public ; and that therefore, he ordered"the quaeftors to fell thofe effects, and depofit the"produce in the public treafury."
XVI. HE then ordered his houfe to be immedi­ately rafed, and that the vacant fpace mould remainas a monument of the fuppreflion of that abominableenterprize. This was called ^EquimEelium. LuciusMinucius was honoured with a prefent of an ox, withits horns gilded, and a ftatue, on the outfide of thegate Trigemina; and this with the approbation ofthe commons, for he diftributed among them thecorn collected by Mfelius, at the rate of an as foreach peck. In fb'me authors, 1 find, that this Mi­nucius had changed fides from the patricians to thecommons, and that having been chofen by the ple­beian tribunes, as an eleventh member of their body,he quieted the commotion which arole on the deathof Maelius. But it is hardly credible, that the patri­cians fuffered the number of tribunes to be augment­ed, and that the precedent mould have been introducedparticularly in favour of a man of patrician rank; andthat the commons did not afterwards maintain, oreven attempt to maintain, a privilege once concededto them. But what above all evinces the falfehoodof that infcription on his ftatue, is, that, a few yearsbefore this, provifion had been made by a law, thatthe tribunes mould not have power to aflume col­leagues in their office. Of the college of tribunesQuintus Caecilius, Quintus Junius, and Sextus Titi-nius alone had neither been concerned in the law forconferring honours on Minucius, nor ceafed to throw
out







OCR Output








THE HISTORY


BOOK« poor? A matter which in all countries has been
, .J\I,-," left to the regulation of people's own prudence;
Y.R. 310." that each woman fhould marry into whatever fa-B. c.441. ct mily fhe has been betrothed to; and each man"take a wife from whatever family he had con-"tracked with; this ye fhackle with the reftraints of'' a moft tyrannical law, whereby ye tear afunder"the bands of civil fociety, and fplit one ftate into"two. Why do ye not enact, that a plebeian fhall'f not dwell in the neighbourhood of a patrician?'' That he fhall not travel on the fame road? That"he fhall not appear at the fame entertainment?"That he fhall not ftand in the fame Forum? For"what more material confequence can in reality en-'' fue, mould a patrician marry a plebeian woman, or'' a plebeian a patrician woman ? What alteration is"thereby made in the rights of any perfon? Surely'' the children follow the condition of the father.'' So that neither have we any advantage in view,"from intermarriage with you, except that of being"confidered on the footing of human beings, and"of fellow-citizens; nor is there any reafon, why'' ye mould conteft the point, unlefs ye feel pleafurc.'' in labouring to fubject us to fcorn and infult.
"V. In fine, let me afk you, whether is the fu-'c preme power vefted in the Roman people, or in"you? Was the expulfion of the kings intended to*' procure abfolute dominion to you, or equal free-"dom to all? Is itt fitting that the Roman peo-"ple mould have the power of enacting fuch laws.'' as they choofe? or whenever any matter of the"kind has been propofed to their confideration,"fhall ye, by way of punifhment, pafs a decree for"a levy of troops? And as foon as, in capacity of"tribune, I fhall begin to call the tribes to give"their fuffrages, will you, ifi the office of conful,"compel the younger citizens to take the military"oath, and lead them out to camp? Will you me-
"nace







OCR Output








THE HISTORY


BOOK and beaten out of their camp by the dictator. Hff^- _J__j had at firft, by a charge of his cavalry, thrown theY.R. 160. centre of the enemy's line into diforder; which,B. C.491. while they extended their wings too far, they had notfufficiently ftrengthened by a proper depth of files:before they could recover from this confufion, theinfantry fell upon them, and continued their attack,without intermiJTion, until they made themfelvesmafters of their camp, and put a conclufion to thewar. Since the battle at the lake Regillus, there hadnot been obtained in thofe times, a more gloriousvictory than this: the dictator entered the city intriumph, and befides the accuftomed honours, there•was a place in the circus affigned to him and hispofterity, for a feat, and a curule chair fixed in it.From the vanquifhed Volfcians the lands of thediftricl: of Velitrse were taken, for which inhabitantswere fent from the city, and a colony eftablifhedthere. Soon after this, a battle was fought with the.fliquans, againft the inclination indeed of the con-ful, who confidered the difadvantage of the groundover which the troops had to march up to the ene­my j but the foldiers, accufing him of protractingthe bufinefs on purpofe, in order that the dictatormight go out of office before they fhould return tothe city; and tb his promifes fall to the ground with­out effect, as had thofe of the conful before, they atlength prevailed on him to march up his troops, atall hazards, againft the fteep of the mountain : ram asthis undertaking was, yet, through the cowardice ofthe enemy, it was crowned with luccefs; for, beforea weapon could be thrown, ftruck with amazementat the boldnefs of the Romans, they abandoned theircamp, which they had fixed in a very ftrong pofition,and ran down precipitately into the vallies, on theoppofite fide: there the Romans gained a bloodlefsvictory, and abundance of'booty. Though theirarms were thus attended with fuccefs, in three differ­ent quarters, neither patricians nor commons were
delivered







OCR Output








144 THE HISTORY


BOOK that after fighting abroad for Ijberty and empire,)_ J*l __, they were made prifoners, and opprefied by theirY.R.159. countrymen, at home, and that the liberty of theB.C. 493. commons was more fecure in war, than in peace,amongft their foes, than amongft their own country­men. This fpirit of difcontent, of itfelf increafingdaily, was kindled into a flame, by the extraordi­nary fufferings of one man: a perfon far advanced inyears, whofe appearance denoted fevere diftrefs,threw himfelf into the Forum; his garb was fqualid^and the figure of his perfon ftill more fhocking, paleand emaciated to the laft degree; befides, a longbeard and hair had given his countenance a favageappearance: wretched as was the plight in which heappeared, he was known notwithftanding; feveraldeclared, that he had been centurion in the army,and, filled with companion for him, mentioned pub­licly feveral other marks of honour, which he hadobtained in the fervice; he himfelf exhibited fearson his breaft, as teftimonies of his honourable beha­viour in feveral actions: to thofe who inquired thecaufe of that wretched condition, both of his perfonand apparel, a crowd meantime having afiembledround him, which refembled, in fome degree, anafiembly of the people, he anfwered, that " while"he ferved in the army during the. Sabine war,"having not only loft the produce of his farm by"the depredations of the enemy, but his houfe"being burnt, all his goods plundered, his cattle"driven off, and a tax being impofed at a time fo"diftrefiing to him, he was obliged to run in debt;"that this debt, aggravated by ufury, had confum-"ed, firft, his farm, which he had inherited from"his father and grandfather; then, the remainder of"his fubftance; and laftly, like a peftilence3 had"reached his perfon: that he had been dragged by"a creditor not into fervitude, but into a houfe of"correction, or rather a place of execution." Hethen fhewed his back disfigured with the marks of
frefh







OCR Output








OF ROME. S5.


•with bitter lamentations, efpecially from the women, B O O K
while they were pafling by the temples which they . ,- _f
had been ufed to revere, now filled with armed fol-
diers, and were leaving their gods, as it were, in cap- ,'
tivity. When the Albans had evacuated the city,
the Romans levelled to the ground all the buildings
in every part of it, both public and private^ and in
one hour ruined and deftroyed the work of four
hundred years, during which Alba had ftood. The
temples of the gods, however, they left untouched,
for fo the king had commanded.
XXX. MEANWHILE from this deftruction ofAlba, Rome received a confiderable augmentation.The number of citizens was doubled. The CEE-lian mount was added to the city; and, in order toinduce others to fix their habitations there, Tulluschofe that fituation for his palace, where, fromthenceforth, he refided. The perfons of chiefnote among the Albans, the Tulii, Servilii, Quintii,Geganii, Curiatii, Clcelii, he enrolled among thefenators, that this part of the ftate alfo mightreceive an addition: and, as a confecrated place ofmeeting for this body, thus augmented, he built aienate-houfe, which retained the name of Hoftilia,even within the memory of our fathers. And, thatevery order in the ftate might receive an acce,Tiortof ftrength, from this new people, he chofe fromamong the Albans ten troops of horfemen. Fromamong them alfo he drew recruits, with which heboth filled up the old, and formed fome new,legions. Encouraged by this formidable ftate of his y R.forces, he declared war againft the Sabincs, a ico.nation the moft powerful of that age, next to the ^ c'Etrurians, both in point of numbers, and of fkillin arms. Injuries had been offered on both fides,and fatisfaction demanded in vain. Tullus com­plained that fome Roman traders had been leizedin an open fair at the temple of Feronia. TheE 4 Sabines,







OCR Output








OF ROME. 481


popular refolution. When the wealth, belonging to B o o Kthe inhabitants, had been carried away from Veii, . -/-_;they then began to remove the treafures of the gods, Y.R. 359.and the gods themfelves, but with the demeanour of B.Ct 3?J.worfhippers rather than of ravifhers: for certainyoung men felected out of the whole army, to whomwas affigned the charge of conveying imperial Junoto Rome, after thoroughly wafhing their bodies, andclothing themfelves in white garments, entered hertemple with tokens of adoration, and approached her,when they firft laid hands upon her, with religiousawe, becaufe, according to the Etrurian rules, noperfon but a prieft of a particular family, had beenufually allowed to touch that ftatue. Afterwards oneof them, either prompted by divine infpiration, or ina fit of youthful jocularity, faying, "Juno, art thou"willing to go to Rome," the reft cried out at once,that the goddefs had afiented. To this fable an ad­dition was afterwards made, that fhe was heard to ut­ter the words, " I am willing." However we areinformed, that fhe was raifed from the place whereonfhe ftood by machines, with flight efforts, and wasfound light and eafy to be removed, as if fhe camewith them with her own confent; that fhe was broughtfafe to the Aventine, her eternal feat, to which thevows of the Roman dictator had invited her, wherethe fame Camillas who had vowed it afterwards de­dicated her temple. Thus fell Veii, the moft power­ful city of the Etrurian nation, even in its final over­throw demonftrating its greatnefs) for, after havingwithftood a fiege during ten fummers and winters,without intermifnon, after inflicting on its enemylofies confiderably greater than itfelf had fels; evennow, even when fate at laft urged its doom, yet ftillit was vanquifhed not by force, but by the art ofengineers.
i
XXIII. WHEN the news arrived at Rome that
Veii was taken, notwithftanding that the prodigies
VOL. i. ii had







OCR Output








OF ROME. 453


"enjoy rank and pay from that date." A certain B o^p Kftipend was alfo afligned to the horfemen. This was . -T--/the firft inftance of the cavalry ferving on their own Y.R. 351.horfes. This army of volunteers, being led to Veii, B. c.400.not only reftored the works which had been de-ftroyed, but erected new ones. Greater care thanever was ufed, in fending them fupplies from thecity, that no kind of accommodation mould bewanting to troops who merited fo highly.
VIII. THE enfuing year had military tribunes Y.R. jjj.with confular power, Caius Servilius Ahala a third BiC. »9.time, Quintus Servilius, Lucius Virginius, QuintusSulpicius, Aulus Manlius a fecond time, ManiusSergius a fecond time. In their tribunate, whilftall men's attention was directed to the Veientianwar, the fecurity of the garrilbn at Anxur was ne­glected, the foldiers obtaining leave of abfence, andthe Volfcian traders being freely admitted: the con-fequence of which was, that the guards at the gateswere fuddenly overpowered, and the place taken byfurprize. The number of foldiers flain was the lefs,becaufe, except the fick, they were all employed likefuttlers, in trafficking about the country and theneighbouring cities. Nor did better fuccefs at­tend the operations before Veu, which were then the .grand object which engrofied all the public folici-tude; for the Roman commanders mewed aftrongerdifpofition to quarrel among themfelves, than to actwith fpirit againft the enemy. And befides, thepower of their adverfaries received an addition, bythe unexpected arrival of the Capenatians andFalifcians. Thefe two ftates of Etruria, contiguousin fuuation to Veii, judged that, fhould that city beconquered, they fhould be the next expofed to theattacks of the Romans. The Falifcians were fartherinduced, by a reafon particularly affecting them­felves, to enter into the quarrel, as having formerlypiade themfelves a party in the war of'the Fidena-c c 4 tians:







OCR Output








356 THE HISTORY


BOOK bitious of fecuring the more fplendid match for herv -^-' daughter, while the guardians, actuated even in aY.R. 311. matter of that fort, by a fpirit of party, exerted them-B. C. 440. felves In favour of the perfon of their own rank.Not being able to come to any conclufion on thepoint, in domeftic conferences, they had recourfe toa court of juftice, where the magiftrates having heardthe claims of the mother and of the guardians, de­creed, that fhe mould marry according to the direc­tion .of her parent: but this was prevented by vio­lence; for the guardians, after haranguing openly inthe Forum, among people of their own faction, onthe iniquity of the decree, collected a party in arms,and forcibly carried off the maiden from her mother'shoufe: the nobles, more highly incenfed againftthem than ever, united in a body, and in military ar­ray followed their young friend, who was renderedfurious by this outrage. A defperate battle wasfought, in which the commons were worfted; and,being incapable of imitating, in any particular, thecommons of Rome, they marched out of the cityin arms, feized on a neighbouring hill, and fromthence made excurfions with fire and fword on thelands of the nobles. Even the city itfelf, which hadhitherto efcaped the effects of their difpute, they pre-• pared to befiege, having, by the hopes of plunder,allured a great number of the artizans to come outand join them: nor is there any mocking form orcalamity of war which was not experienced on theoccafion, as if the whole Hate were infected with themad rage of two youths, who fought the accomplifh-ment of that fatal match through the means of theircountry's ruin. Both parties, thinking that they hadnot enough of hoftilities, and fighting, among them-felves, the nobles called upon the Romans to relievetheir city from a fiege j the commons, the Volfcians,to join them in the ftorming of Ardea. The Vol­fcians, under the command of Cluilius an JEquan,* arrived firft at Ardea, and drew a line of circumval­


lation







OCR Output








OF ROME. . 497


lion with the Salpinians, they made incurfions on the B O, O Klands of the Romans. War was then proclaimed . _^'_ _fagainft thofe two nations. Cains Julius died in the Y.R. 363.office of cenfor, and Marcus Cornelius was fubfti- B. c. 38».tuted in his room; which proceeding came after­wards to be confidered as difpleafing to the gods,becaufe in that luftrum Rome was taken. Nor fincethat time is a cenfor ever fubftituted in the room ofone dying. The confuls being feized by the diftem-pcr, it was reiblved that an interregnum fhould beconftituted, and aufpices taken a-new.
XXXII. IN purfuance therefore of a decree of Y.R. 364.
R f* 9X8
the fenate, the confuls having refigned their office,"Marcus Furius Camillus was created interrex, whoappointed Publius Cornelius Scipio interrex, and he,afterwards, Lucius Valerius.Potitus. By him wereelected fix military tribunes with confular power, tothe end that in cafe any of them mould be difabledby bad health, the commonwealth might ftill have afufficient number of magiftrates. Thefe were Lu­cius Lucretius, Servius Sulpicius, Marcus .flimilius,Lucius Furius Medullinus a feventh time, AgrippaFurius, and Cains /Emilius a fecond time, who en­tered into office on the calends of July. Of thefeLucius Lucretius and Caius ^Emilius had the Volfi-nians as their province; Agrippa Furius and Servi­us Sulpicius the Salpinians. The firft battle happen­ed with the Volfinians. This war, formidable in ap­pearance, from the great number of the enemy, wasterminated without any difficulty: at the firft onfet,their army was put to flight, and eight thoufand oftheir foldiers being furrounded by the cavalry, laiddown their arms, and iurrendered. The accountwhich they received of that battle, made the Salpini­ans determine not to hazard an engagement; theirtroops fecured themfelves in the towns. The Ro­mans, meeting no oppofition, carried off the fpoilfrom all parts, both of the Volfinian and Salpinian. VOL. i, K K territories,







OCR Output








dF RdMfe.


 


1 nothing rafiily, nor in a hurry; but having ftrength-ened the guards at every appt.oach, and oppofing the T_main ftr^ngth of their men on the quarter where they Y.R. 365.faw the battalions advancing, they fuffered the enemy ^.c.to mount the hill, judging that the higher they fhouldafcend, the more eafily they might be driven back,down the fteep. About the middle of the afcent:they met them ; and there making their diarge downthe declivity, which of itfelf bore them againft theenemy, routed the Gauls with fuch flaughter, and.fuch deftruction, occafioned by their falling downthe precipice, that they never afterwards, either inparties, or with their whole force, made another trialof that kind of.fight. Laying afide therefore thehope of effecting their approaches by force of arms,they refolved to form a blockade, for which, havingnever until this time thought of making pfovifion,they were ill prepared, having, in burning thehoufes, confumed whatever even was in the city;and in the courfe of the days they fpent there, allthat was in the country round about had been haftilycarried off to Veii. Wherefore dividing their forces,they determined that one part fhould be employedin plundering among the neighbouring nations, whilethe other carried on the fiege of the citadel, in orderthat the ravagers of the country might fupply thebefiegers with corn.
XLIV. THE party of Gauls, which marchedftwaj' from the city, were conducted merely by th:will of fortune, who c'hofe to make a trial of Romartbravery, to Ardea, where Camillus dwelt in exile,piqing in forrow, and more deeply grieving at thefortune of die public, than at his own; acculinggodsqjid men, burning with indignation, and wonderingwhere were now thofe men who with him had takenVeii, and Falerii; who, in other wars, had everbeen more indebted to their own courage, than tofortune; he heard, on a fudden, that the army ofL L 2 the







OCR Output








312 THE HISTORY


BOOK " the Roman people, torn a free-born maid from the. *_T_L-f st embraces of her father, as if fhe had been a cap-Y.R. 306. " tive taken in war, and given her as a prefent toB. c. 446. ti one of his clients, the pandar of his fecret plea-'c fures; where, by a cruel decree, and a decifion"dictated by the blackeft villainy, he armed the."hand of a father againft his child; where, more"ftrongly affected by the djfappointment of his luft,"than by her untimely death, he had ordered the"uncle, and fpoufe, of the maid, while employed in"raifing her lifelefs body, to be dragged to prifon."The prifon was built for him as well as for others,"though he ufed to call it the manfion of the Ro-"man commons. Wherefore, though he fhould"appeal ever fo often, he would as often infift on'' his abiding the decifion of a judge, on the charge'' pf his having fentenced a free perfon to flavery."And if he declined appearing before a judge,"would now order him, as convicted, to be carried'? into confinement." Accordingly he was throwninto prifon, a ftep, which, though difapproved byrone, yet gave occafion to much ferious reflection ithe commons themfelyes confidering their own pri­vileges as carried rather too far, in the punifhmentinflicted on a perfon of fuch qonfequence. The tri­bune deferred'his trial to a diftant day. Meanwhile,ambafladors came to Rome from the Latines andHernicians, with congratulations on the re-eftablifh-nient of concord between the patricians and com­mons, and, as an offering on that account to Jupiterfupremely good and great, carried to the Capitol a
golden crown, of fmall weight, as riches at that timeid not abound, and the worfhjp of the gods wasperformed with greater piety, than magnificence,The fame perfons alfo brought information that the^Equans and Volfcians were preparing for war withthe utmoft vigour. The confuls were therefore or­dered to divide the provinces between them: theSabines fell to Horatius, the vEquans and Volfcians







OCR Output








O F R O M E.


they not only checked the Sabine legions, who werevigoroufly prefling the troops which gave way, butquickly put them to the rout. The Sabines fledprecipitately toward the mountains, which but fewof them reached. The greateft part, as has beenmentioned, were driven by the cavalry into theriver. Tarquinius, judging it proper to purfuethe enemy clofely, before they mould recover fromtheir difmay, as foon as he had fent off the bootyand prifoners to Rome, and burned the fpoils of theenemy, collected together in a great heap, accord­ing to a vow which he had made to Vulcan, pro.*ceeded to lead his army forward into the Sabineterritories. On the other hand, the Sabines, thoughthey had met with a defeat, and had no reafon tohope that they mould be able to retrieve it, yet, theircircumftances not allowing time for deliberation, ad­vanced to meet him, with fuch troops as they hadhaftily levied; and being routed a fecond time, andreduced almoft to ruin, they fued for peace.
XXXVIII. COLLATIA, and all the land aroundthat city, was taken from the Sabines, and Egerius,fon to the king's brother, was left there with a gar-rifon. This was the manner, as I underftand, inwhich the people of Collatia came under the do»minion of the Romans, and this was the form of thefurrender. The king afked, "Are ye ambafladors"and deputies on behalf of the people of Collatia,"to furrender yourfelves, and the people of Colla-*' tia?" "We are.'W Are the people of Colla-"tia in their own difpofal?" "They are."—" Do"ye furrender yourfelves and the people of Collatia,'i together with your city, lands, waters, boundaries,'c temples, utenfils, all property both facred and"common, under my dominion, and that of the<' Roman people?" "We do furrender them."—-« Well, I receive them." The Sabine war being{hus concluded, Tarquinius returned in triumph to
F 3 Rome.







OCR Output








O'F ROME. 337


'slrhoft: every cafe, they are rather ruled by, than B ° O Krule the multitude, to gratify the populace, who ^ _^L-fwifhed to hear him, gave liberty to Scaptius to fay Y.R. 3o9.•what he pleafed. He then" began with informingthem, that " he was now in his eighty-third year,"and that he had ferved as a foldier in the very"'diftrict indifpute, and was hot young at that time,"that being his twentieth campaign, when th'e"operations againft Corioli were carried on. He"could, 'therefore, fpeak with knowledge of rm"affair, which, though after fuch a length of tims"it was generally forgotten, was deeply fixed in his"memory. The lands in difpute, he faid, had be-"longed to the territory of Corioli, and when Co-"rioli was taken, became, by the right of war,. the"public property of the Roman people. He won-"dered by what precedent the Ardeans and Ari-'" cians could juftify their expectations, of furrep-"titioufly wrefting from the Roman ftate, by mak-"ing it an arbiter inftead of proprietor, its right to"a tract, to which, while the ftate of Corioli fub-"fifted, they had never advanced any kind of claim."For his part, he had but a fhort time to live; yet,'' he could not prevail on himfelf, old as he was,"to decline afierting by his voice, the only meansc' then in his power, a tide to thofe lands, which,•" by his vigorous exertions as a foldier, he had con-"tributed to acquire : and he warmly recommended"it to the people, not to be led by improper no-"tions of delicacy, to pafs a fentence iubverfive of"their own rights."
LXXII. The confuls, when they perceived thatScaptius was heard, not only with filence, but withapprobation, appealed to gods and men againft theinfamy of the proceeding; and, fending for the prin­cipal fenators, went round with them to the tribes,befeeching them " not to be guilty of a crime of the"worft kind, which would afford a precedent ftill'( more pernicious, by converting to their own ufc
VOL. r. z "a matter







OCR Output








OF ROME. 21


his army, and, without much difficulty, taught them BOOKthat rage without ftrength avails but little./ Herouted and difperfed their army; purfued it in itsflight; flew their king in the battle, and feized hisfpoils; and, after the death of the enemy's leader,made himfelf mafter of their city at the firft affault.From thence he led home his victorious army; andbeing not only capable of performing fplendid ac­tions, but aMb fond of difplaying his actions to ad­vantage, he marched up in proceffion to the Capitol,carrying on a frame, properly conftruifted for thepurpofe, the fpoils of the enemy's general whom hehad 'flain'; and there laying them down under anoak, which the fhepherds accounted facred, he, atthe fame timey while he offered this prefent, markedout with his eye the 'bbunds of a temple for Jupiter,to whom he gave a new name, faying, " Jupiter"Feretrius*, in • acknowledgment of the victory"which I have obtained, I, Romulus, king, offer"to thee thofe fpoils of a king, and dedicate a tem-"ple to thee in that fpot which I have now mea-"Aired out in my mind, to be a repofitory for thofe"grand fpoils, which, after' my example, generals"in future times fhall offer, on flayihg the kings"and generals of their enemies." This was theorigin of that temple which was the firft confecratedin Rome. Accordingly, it pleafed the gods fo toorder, afterwards, that neither the prediction of thefounder of the temple, intimating that'future ge­nerals mould carry fpoils thither, proved groundlefs,nor was the honour of making that offering renderedcommon, by being imparted to many. In after-times,during fo many years, and fo many wars, there have
* So called, from the feretnim, or frame, fnpportfng the fpoils. Theeeond fpolia upima, or grand fpoils, were offered by Cornelius Coflus,who killed Tolumnius, king of the Veiaitians; and the third byClaudius Marcellus, who killed Viridorriarus, a king of the Gauls.Tlie fpoiU, called fpolia O|,iaia, or grand, or chief, fpoils, were fo ^denominated when they were taken from a king or general in chief,command ing an army.
c j been







OCR Output








O F R O M E. 33I


<c Still the necefllty of fighting, which ye fo ftudi- BOOK"oufly avoid, purfues you. Was it too great a . _j]I' _j"hardfhip to march out againft the ^quans and Y.R. 309."Volfcians? The war is at your gates. If not re- B.c. 443."pelled from thence, it will fhortly be within the"walls. It will fcale the citadel and the Capitol,." and will purfue you, even into your houfes. A"year ago, the fenate ordered a levy to be made,"and an army to be led into Algidum. Yet we fit"at home in liftlefs inactivity, delighted with the"prefent interval of peace, fcolding each other like"women, and never perceiving, that, after that fhort"fufpenfion, wars double in number muft return"upon us. 1 know that I might find more agree-"able topics to dwell upon; but even though my"own difpofition did not prompt me, neceffity"compels me, to fpeak what is true, inftead of what"is agreeable. I fincerely wifh, Romans, to give"you pleafure j but I feel wifhes, much more ar-"dent, to promote your fafety, let your fentiments"refpecting me, afterwards be what they may. It"refults from the nature of the human mind, that he"who addrefies the public with a view to his own"intereft, renders himfelf more generally agreeable,"than one whofe mind fees no other object but the"advantage of the public. But perhaps ye ima-"gine that it is out of regard to your intereft, that"thofe public fycophants, thofe artful flatterers of"the commons, who neither fuffer you to carry"arms, nor to live in peace, excite and ftimulate"your pafiions. When they have once raifed you"to a ferment, the confequence, to them, is, either"honour or profit. And becaufe they fee, that,'' while concord prevails between the orders of the"ftate, they are of no confequence on any fide,"they wifh to be leaders of a bad caufe, rather than"of none, of tumults even, and feditions. Which'C kind of proceedings, if ye can at length be pre-"vailed on to renounce; and, if ye are willing, in~
"ftead







OCR Output








OF ROME.


was another conteft with the tribunes; the law was BOO Know confidered as a vain project, and the propofers , _ - jof it difregarded as claiming merit from holding out Y.R. 171.to people's view, advantages which were not attain- B.C.***.able. The name of Fabius was now held in thehigheft eftimation after three fucceffive confulates,all of which had been uniformly diftinguifhed byconttfts with the tribunes; and, for that reafon, thisdignity was continued in the fame family, for a con-fiderable time, from a general perfuafion, that itcould not be placed in better hands. Soon after this,war was undertaken againft the Veientians. TheVolfcians alfo revived hoftilities. But for fecurityagainft foreign enemies, the ftrength of the Romanswas more than fufficient; and they perverted it to abad purpofe, to the fupport of quarrels among them-felves. To add to the general difquiet, feveralprodigies appeared; the fky, almoft daily, exhibitingthreatening portents, both in the city and in thecountry: the foothfayers, employed both by theftate, and by private perfons, after confulting bothentrails, and birds, declared that no other caufe ofthe difpleafure of the deity exifted, than that theworfhip of the gods was not duly performed. Alltheir apprehenfions however ended in this, that Op-pia, a veftal, was convicted of a breach of chaftity,and fuffered punifhment.
XLIII. QUINT us Fabius, a fecond time, and Y.R. «?*•Caius Julius, then fucceeded to the confulfhip. B'c.48°'During this year, the domeftic difienfions abated notof their acrimony, and the war abroad wore a moredangerous afpect. The ^Equans took up arms. TheVeientians even carried their depredations into theterritories of the Romans. And as thefe wars appear­ed every day more alarming, Casfo Fabius and Spu- Y.R.t7jfins Furius were made confuls, The ./Equans laid 8.0.4.79!fiege to Ortona, a Latine city. The Veientians now,fatiated with booty, threatened to befiege Rome it-N a felf;







OCR Output








30° THE HISTORY


BOOK quainting them alfo that the affairs of the decemvirsy^i' . at Rome were defperate; and fome, who came later,Y.R. 305. faying, that Appius, having hardly efcaped with life,$.(.'.447. was gone into exile: all this had fuch an effect onthe foldiery, that they cried out, To arms! fnatchedup the ftandards, and marched towards Rome. Thedecemvirs, exceedingly alarmed, both by the tranf-actions which they few, and by thofe which theyheard had pafied at Rome, ran to different parts ofthe camp, in order to quell the commotion. Whilethey acted with mildnefs, they received no anfwer.If any of them offered to exert authority, he wasanfwered, That they were men; and befides, hadarms. They proceeded in a body to the city, andpofted themfelves on the Aventine, exhorting thecommons, whenever they met any of them, to re-aflume their liberty, and create plebeian tribunes.No other violent expreffion was heard. SpuriusOppius held the meeting of the fenate, when it wasrefolved, that no harfh meafures fhould be ufed,becaufe they themfelves had given occafion .to theinfurrection. Three conlulars were fent as deputies,Spurius Tarpeius, Caius Julius, and Servius Sulpi-cius, to aflc, in the name of the fenate, by whofeorders they had quitted their camp; or what wastheir intention in pofting themfelves, in arms, onthe Aventine; in changing the direction of theirhoftile operations from the enemy, and fcizing, byforce, on their native country. The others were atno lofs what to anlwer j but they were at a lofs fora peifon to vgive the anfwer, having not yet ap­pointed any particular leader, and individuals notbeing very forward to take on themfelves the invi­dious office. The multitude only called out toge­ther, that they mould fend Lucius Valerius andMarcus Horatius, and to them they would givetheir anfwer.
LI. WHE>J







OCR Output








T H E H I S T O R T


B o o K" even into that of the patricians. May a perfon
^J^i^t «« then from a foreigner, become a patrician, and,
v.R. 310.'' in confequence, conful; and fhall a citizen of
B.I..;,: <; Rome, if he be a commoner, be cutoff from
"every hope of the confulfhip? Is it, becaufe
<' we think it impoffible that a plebeian can be a
"man of fortitude and activity, qualified to excel
•" in peace and war, like Numa, Lucius Tarquinius,
'' and Servius Tullius? Or, allowing that fuch a one
"fhould appear, fhall we ftill prohibit him from
"medcjling with the helm of government? And
«' fhall we choofe to have confuls rcfembling the
'' decemvirs, the moft profligate of mankind, who
•' in their time were all patricians, rather than like
'' the beft of the kings who were new men *?
"IV, BUT it is argued that, fince the expulfion'c of the kings, there has been no inftance of a ple-•' beian conful. What then? Is no new inftitution"ever to be adopted? Muft every meafure not•• heretofore practifed, (and in a new ftate there muft•' be many meafures not yet introduced into prac-"tice,) be therefore rejected, even though it fhould"be evidently advantageous? In the reign of Ro-"mulus, there were no pontiffs or augurs, Numa"Pompilius introduced them. There was no fuch"thing in the ftate as a general furvey, and diftri-"bution of the centuries, and clafies, until inftituted"by Servius Tullius. There was a time when"there never had been confuls; on the expulfion of"the kings they were created. Of a dictator nei-'' ther the office nor name had exifted; in the time"of our fathers it was introduced. There had ne-"ver been tribunes of the commons, aediles or"quaeftors; and yet it was refolved that thofe of-'t fices mould be created. The office of decemvirs
• The firCt in • family, who attained any of the curule offices, thatis, any of the fuperior magittracics, wa< called' novus homo,' a newman.
"for







OCR Output








1*8 THE HISTORY


contnU-ally in the porch of your pavilion; this is the kind
Y. R.S4.6. " of war in which we, Roman youths, engage againftB. C. 506. " yOu . ftar not an armv m the fjel^ nor in battle .
"the affair will reft between your fingle perfon, and"each of us, feparately." The king, inflamed withrage, and, at the fame time, terrified at the danger,having, with fevere menaces, ordered fires to bekindled round him, unlefs he inftantly explainedwhat thofe plots were, with which he threatened himin thofe ambiguous expreffions, " Behold," faid he,"and perceive what little account is made of the"body, by thofe who have in view the attainment"of great glory:" and thrufting his right hand intoa chafing.difh of coals which had been kindled forthe purpofe of a facrifice, held it there to burn, as ifhe were void of all fenfe of feeling: on which the'king thunderftruck in a manner, by fuch aftonifhingbehaviour, leaped from his feat, ordered the youthto be removed from the altars, and faid to him,"Retire, in fafety, for the treatment which you in-"tended for me, was mild in comparifon of that"which you have practifed on yourfelf. I fhould"wifh increafe and fuccefs to your bravery, if that"bravery were exerted on the fide of my own cbun-"try. However, I difmifs you untouched and un-"hurt; and difcharge you from the penalties,"which, by the laws of war, I might 'inflict."Mucius then, as if to make a return for this act offavour, told him," Since I find you difpofed to ho-"nour bravery, that you may obtain from me, by. " kindnefs, what you could not by threats, know,"that three hundred of us, the principal youths in"Rome, have bound ourfelves to each other by an"oath, to attack you in this manner; my lot hap-"pened to be firft; the others will be with you,"each in his turn, according as the lot fhall fet him"fore moft," until fortune fliall afford an opportunity"of liiccceding againft you."
XIII. Mucius,







OCR Output








124 THE HISTORY


K thc danger, and the mof t furious part of the fight:


 


then, when only a fmall part of the bridge was lefr,Y. R.I...6. and thofe who were employed in breaking it down. called upon them to retire, he obliged thefe alfo toretire to a place of fafety; then darting fierce me­nacing looks at each of the leaders of the Etrurians,he fometimes challenged them fingly, fometimes up­braided them all together, as flaves of haughtykings, who, incapable of relifhing liberty themfelves,had come to wrcft it from others. For a confider-able time they, he Stated, each looking about forfome other to begin the combat: fhame at lengthput their troops in motion, and letting up a fhoutthey poured their javelins from all fides againft theirfingle opponent: all which having ftuck in the fhieldwith which he guarded himfelf, and he ftill perfifting•with the fame undaunted refolution, and with haugh­ty ftrides, to keep poHefiion of the bridge, they hadnow refolved, by making a violent pufh, to thrufthim down from it, when the cram of the fallingbridge, and at the fame time a fhout raifed by theRomans, for joy at having completed their purpofe,filled them with fudden difmay, and flopped themfrom proceeding in the attempt. Then Codes fays,"Holy father, Tiberinus, I befeech thee to receive"thefe arms, and this thy foldier, into thy propitious"ftream." .With thefe words, armed as he was, heleaped down into the Tiber, and through mowers ofdarts which fell around him, fwam fafe acrofs to hisfriends, having exhibited a degree of intrepiditywhich, in after times, was more generally celebrated,than believed. The fhtte mewed a grateful fenfe offuch high defert; a ftatue was erected to him in theComitium, and a portion of land was given to him,as large as he could plough completely in one day.The zeal of private perfons too was confpicuous,amidft the honours conferred on him by the public jfor, great as the fcarcity then was, every one contri­buted fpmething to him, in proportion to the ftock
of







OCR Output








OF 'ROME. ify


places convenient for the purpofe, they could not BOOKdeter the feveral plebeians from attending {he meet- . i' '_jings and cabals, and thereby put a Hop to farther V.R. 261,proceedings. Afterwards, they all came forth in a B'C'489'body, addrefiing the commons with intreaties andfupplications; one would have thought that everyone of the patricians was going to fland his trial:they befought them, if they did not think proper toacquit him as innocent, yet confidering him as guil­ty, to grant as a favour, on their requeft, the pardonof one citizen, one fenator. However, as he himfelfdid not appear on the day appointed, they perfiftedin their refentment. He was condemned in his ab-fence, and went into exile to the Volfcians, utteringmenaces againft his country, and breathing alreadythe refentment of an enemy. The Volfcians re­ceived him kindly on his arrival, and daily increafedtheir attention and refpect, in proportion as they hadopportunities of obterving the violence of his angeragainft his countrymen, and often heard him uttercomplaints, *nd even threats againft them. Helodged in the houfe of Attius Tullius, who was thenthe man of the greateft confequence, by far, of anyamong the Volfcians, and an inveterate enemy to theRomans: and the one, being ftimulated by an oldanimofity, the other, by frefh refentment, they be­gan to concert fchemes for bringing about a war•with Rome: they judged that it would be a difficultmatter to prevail on their people to take arms,which they had fo often tried with ill fuccefs; thatby the many wars which they had fuftaincd at differ­ent times, and lately by the lofs of their young menin the peftilence, their fpirits were broken; and thatit was neceflary to make ufe of art, in order thattheir hatred, which had now loft its keennefs throughlength of time, might be whetted anew by fomefreih caule of relentment.
M 4 XXXVI. IT







OCR Output








OF ROM E. 427


they retook the citadel with great fpirit, driving out BOOKthe troops which defended it. Numbers having. l^ _,carelefsly ftraggled from the garrifon, in fearch of y.R. 545.plunder, had left the place expofed to be attacked 8.0.407.with fuccefs. The plunder was confiderable; be-caufe the whole of what they collected, in their con­tinual depredations, had been ftored up there, as in& place of fafety. This the conful ordered thequaeftors to fell by auction, and to carry the produceinto the treafury, declaring that when the foldiersfhould appear not to have declined the fervice, theyJhould then fhare in the fpoil. This added fuel tothe anger of the commons, and the foldiery, againftthe conful, infomuch that when, in purfuance of adecree of the fenate, he entered the city in ovation,in the couplets of rude verles, thrown out with mi­litary licence, wherein the conful was reflected onwith feverity, the name of Maenius was extolled withpraifes, and on every mention of the tribune the at­tachment of the furrounding populace manifefteditfelf in expreffions of approbation and applaufe,which vied with the verfes of the foldiers. Thiscircumftance more than the wanton raillery of thefoldiery againft the conful, which was in fome mea- .fure cuftomary, gave great uneafinefs to the fenate;fo that, not doubting but Maenius would be honouredwith a place among the military tribunes, if he wereto be a candidate, they put it out of his reach by ap­pointing an election of confuls.
4
LIV. THE confuls elected were Cneius Corne- Y.R.^C,lius Coflus and Lucius Furius Medullinus a fecond B.C.406.time. The commons were never more highly dif-pleafed, at not being allowed to elect tribunes. Acthe election of quaeftors, they both difcovered thisdifpleafure, and at the fame time took their revenge,by electing then, for the firft time, plebeian quaeftors:in the election of the four, there was room left onlyfor one patrician, who was Caefo Fabius Ambuftus;
the







OCR Output








OF R O M E.


had pafied through the higheft dignities with fingular B O O Khonour, finding the intelligence which arrived grow . -t-_jmore and more alarming, and that the confuls would Y.R. 314.not be directed by the fenate, cxprefied himfelfthus: B.4"41*'"Tribunes of the commons, matters having come'' to extremity, the fenate appeals to you, that, in"the prefent alarming ftate of public affairs, ye," may, by the authority vefted in you, oblige the"confuls to name a dictator." This applicationfeemed to the tribunes to afford them a good oppor­tunity of extending their power; wherefore, afterretiring together, they declared, by the authority oftheir body, that " it was their determination that"the confuls mould follow the directions of the fc-"nate, and that if they perfifted in their oppofition"to the fentiments of that moft illuftrious body,"they would order them to be carried to prifon."The confuls were better pleafed to be overcome bythe tribunes than by the fenate, at the fame time re-monftrating, that " the prerogatives of the chief"magiftracy were betrayed by the fenators, and the"confulfhip fubjugated to the tribunitian power. If"the confuls were liable to be over-ruled by a tri-"bune, by virtue of his office, in any particular,"they were liable alfo to be fent to prifon. And"what greater hardfhip could any private perfon"apprehend?" It fell by lot, for even on thatpoint the colleagues could not agree, to Titus Quin-tius to name the dictator, and he named Aulus Pof-tumius Tubertus, his own father-in-law, a man ofremarkable ftrictnefs in command. Lucius Juliuswas by him nominated rnafter of the horfe. At thefame time, a proclamation was iflued for a vacationfrom civil bufirtefs, and that nothing mould be at­tended to, in any part of the city, but preparationsfor the war. The examination of the cafes of thofewho claimed immunity from fervice, was deferred ,
until the conclufion of the war, which induced eventhofe, whole claims were doubtful, to give in their6 • names.







OCR Output








244 THE HISTORY


B o o K A number of exiles and flaves, amounting to fonr. ^' . thoufand five hundred, under the command of Ap-Y.R. 194. pius Herdonius a Sabine, feized on the Capitol andB. c. 458. eitadel by night, and put to death all thofe in the cr-tadel, who refufed to joiir the confpiracy, and takearms along with them. Some, during this tumult,ran down to the Forurn with all the precipitate haftcwhich their fright infpired, and the eries of, " to"arms," and " the enemy are in the city," re-founded alternately. The confuls were afraid ei­ther to arm the commons, or to let them remainwithout arms, not knowing what this danger was,•which had fo fuddenly aflailed the city; whether itwas occafioned by foreign or domeftic forces; whe­ther by the difafft'ftion of the commons, or the trea­chery of the flaves. They exerted themfelves toquiet the.tumults, and, not unfrequently, their veryendeavours to quiet them ferved but to exafperatethem the more: for it was impoffible, in fuch a ftateof terror and confirmation, to make the populaceobey command. They gave them arms notwith-ftanding, but not to all without diflinction, only tofuch as they could fafely rely on in all emergencies,not yet knowing with what enemy they had to con­tend. The reft of the night they fpent in poltingguards, in proper places, all over the city, flill re­maining in anxious fufpence, unable to find out whothe enemy were, or what their number. Day-lightthen arriving, made a difcovery of.the enemy, andof their leader: Appius Herdonius from the Capitolinvited the flaves to liberty, telling them, that " he"had undertaken the caufe of' all the unfortunate*'' with intent of reftoring.to their country thofe who"had been unjuftly driven into banifhment, and of"delivering thofe who groaned under the grievous"yoke of flavery. He rather wifhed that this"might be accomplifhed by the voluntary act of•" the Roman people: but if that was not to be"hoped, he would roufe the Volfcians and JEquans


"HI







OCR Output








394 TH.JL HISTORY


BOOK though more indebted for it to an accidental advan-i_-^l^_i tagc, than to their prowefs in fight, the dictator, afterY.K. 319. waiting a fhort time until he received informationB.C.415. from hjs fcouts that Quintius had reached an emi­nence which ftood near the citadel of Fidenae, putbis troops in motion, and led on his line of infantryin order of battle in their quickeft pace againft the;• enemy. The mafter of the horfe he commanded,not to enter on action without orders, telling him thathe would give a fignal when there fhould be occafionfor the aid of the cavalry, and defiring him to fhewthen by his behaviour, that he ftill bore in mind hisfight with their king, the magnificent offering whichhe had made, and the refpect which he owed to Ro­mulus and Jupiter Feretrius. The legions began theconflict with furious impetuofity. The Romans,inflamed with keen animofity, gratified their rancourboth with deeds and words, upbraiding the Fidena-tians with impiety, the Veientians as robbers, callingthem truce-breakers, polluted with the horrid mur­der of ambaffadors, ftained with the blood of theirown brethren of the colony, perfidious allies, and,daftardly foes.
XXXIII. THEIR very firft onfet had made an im-preflion on the enemy, when, on a fudden, the gatesof Fidenae flying open, a ftrange kind of army lalliedforth, unknown and unheard of before. An immenfemultitude armed with fire, all in a blaze with burn­ing firebrands, as if hurried on by frantic rage, rufhedon againft the •enemy. This very extraordinarymode of fighting filled the Romans for fome timewith terror j on which the dictator, who was active­ly employed in animating the fight, having called upthe mafter of the horfe with the cavalry, and allbQuintius from the mountains, haftened himfelf tothe left wing, which being terrified- by the. conflagra­tion, as'it might more, properly be called than abattle, had retired from the, flames, and with.a loud


voice







OCR Output








O F R O M E. v 319


VII. THE commonwealth in this forlorn ftate, B O O KVithout a head, without ftrength, was protected from ._ I!-fdeftruction by the fortune of the city, and the care YR. >9i.of its guardian deities, who infpired the Volfcians B.c. +6l.and ^Equans with the fpirit of banditti, rather thanof warriors; for fo far were they from conceivingany hope, either of maftering, or even of approach­ing the walls of Rome; and fuch an effect had thediftant view of the houfes and adjacent hills, to di­vert their thoughts from the attempt, that murmursfpread through all the camp, each afking others,"why they fhould throw away their time without"employment, and without booty, in a wafte and"defert country, among the putrid carcafes of men"and cattle; when they might repair to places that"had felt no diftrefs; to the territory of Tufculurn,"where every kind of opulence abounded?" andaccordingly, they haftily put themfelves in motion,and croffing the country, pafied on through the ter­ritory of Lavici, to the Tufculan hills; and to thatquarter was the whole ftorm and violence of the wardirected. Meanwhile, the Hernicians and Latines,prompted not only by compaffion, but alfo bv thefhame which they muft incur, if they neither gaveoppofition to the common enemy, marching to at^tack the city of Rome, nor even when their allies . .
were befieged, afforded them any afliftance, unitedtheir forces, and proceeded to Rome. Not findingthe enemy there, and purfuing their tracks, and fuchintelligence as they could procure, they met themcoming down from the heights of Tufcuium to theAlban vale. There an engagement enfued, in whichthey were by no means a match for the enemy, andthe fidelity of the allies proved, for the prefent, un­fortunate to them. The mortality occafioned by thediftemper at Rome, was not lefs, than what the fwordcaufcd among the allies. The only furvivingconful died. Many other illuftrious perfons alfodied: Marcus Valerius and Titus Virginius Rutj­







OCR Output








OF ROME. 439.


thofe of military age, fcorning the fupport of the B O O K.tribunes, they began at once to vie with each other .^_^-jin paying the tax. The law being then pafftd,, for Y.R. 349.declaring war againft the Veientians, a numerous B.t;. *°3'army, compofed chiefly of volunteers, followed thenew military tribunes, with conlular power, to Veii.
LXI. THESE tribunes were Titus Quintius Capi- Y R 35°.tolinus, Publius Quintius Cincinnatus, Caius Julius ''4°*'lulus a fecond time, Aulus Manlius, Lucius FuriusMedullinus a fecond time, and Manius .flimiliusMamercinus. By thefe Veii was firft invefted. Alittle before this fiege began, a full meeting of theEtrurians being held at the temple of Voltumna, thequeftion whether the Veientians fhould be fupportedby the joint concurrence of the whole confederacy,was left undecided. During the following year thefiege was profecuted with lefs vigour, becaufe fameof the tribunes and their troops were called away tooppofe the Volfcians. The military tribunes, with Y.R. 351.confular power, of this y<ar were, Caius Valerius B.c. +81.Potitus a third time, Manius Sergius Fidenas, Pub­lius Cornelius Maluginenfis, Cneius Cornelius Caflus,Caefo Fabius Ambuftus, Spurius Nautius Rutilus, afecond time. A pitched battle was fought with theVolfcians, between Ferentinum and Eccetra, inwhich the Romans had the advantage. Siege wasthen laid by the tribunes to Artena, a town of theVolfcians. After fome time, the enemy having at­tempted a fally, and being driven back into the town, , .the Romans got an opportunity of forcing their wayin, and made themfclves mafters of every place, ex­cept the citadeL This fortrels was naturally veryftrong, and a body of armed men had thrown them-felves into it. Under its wall great numbers wereflain and made prifoners. The citadel was then be.fieged, but it neither could be taken by ftorm, be­caufe it had a garrifon fufficient for the fize of theplace, nor did it afford any hope of a furfender, be.F F 4 caufc,







OCR Output








274 THE HISTORY


 


[? K cor^'ng to tne rePorts of the people, refpecting eachparticular head of the laws publifhed, they appearedfufficiently correct, then, in an afiembly voting bycenturies, were ratified the laws.of the ten tables,•which even at this prefent time, after ail the multi­plication of laws, which has accumulated to fuch animmenfe heap, continue to be the fource of all ourjurifprudence, refpecting either public or private af­fairs. A rumour was afterwards fpread, that therewere two tables wanting, and that by the additionof thefe, a body, as it were, of the whole Romanlaw might be completed. The expectation of this,when the day of election approached, railed a wifh,that decemvirs fhould be chofen a fecond time;and the commons, befides that they hated the name ofconfuls, as much as they did that of kings, felt, atthe prefenr, no lofs even of the fupport of the tri­bunes, becaufe the decemvirs in turn allowed anappeal to their colleagues.
XXXV. BUT when the afiembly for electingdecemvirs was proclaimed to be held on the thirdmarket-day, people's minds were fo fired with am­bition of obtaining the office, that even perfons ofthe firft dignity in the ftate, dreading, I fuppofe, left ifthe office fhould be left unoccupied by them, an open­ing might be given for improper perfons to intrudeinto a poft of fuch high authority, iolicited votes,humbly fuing for a dignity, the eftablifhment ofwhich they had with their utmoft efforts oppofed,and from thofe fame plebeians, againft whole wifhesthey had hitherto fo ftrenuoufly contended. Per-fons of advanced age, who had pafled through fuchdignified ftations, lowering their pride to hazard aconteft of this fort, made Appius Claudius redoublehis exertions. It were difficult to determine whetherhe mould be reckoned among the decemvirs, oramong the candidates: he appeared fometimes morelike a perfon petitioning for, than one who was in-
veftcd,







OCR Output








O F R O M E. t$9


delivered from their anxiety, refpecting the iffue of B O O Ktheir domeftic affairs; with fuch powerful influence, . -r-_fand with fuch art alfo, .had the lenders of money Y.R. 16o.concerted their meafures, that they were able to dif- Bt c.49i.appoint not only the commons, but even the dicta­tor himfelf: for Valerius, on the return of the con-ful Vetufius, took care that the firft bufinefs whichcame before the fenate fhould be that of the people,who had returned home victorious j and propofedthe queftion, what did they think proper to be donewith refpect to the perfons confined for debt? andwhen they refufed to take the matter into confidera-tion, he faid, " My endeavours to reftore concord"among you, I fee, are difpleafing to you: believe"me when I folemnly declare, that the time will"fhortly come when you will wifh, that the com-"mons of Rome had juft fuch patrons as I am: as"to myfelf, I will neither be the means of farther"difappointments to the hopes of my countrymen,"nor will I hold the office of dictator without effect:'' inteftine dtfcord and foreign wars made it neceffa-"ry for the commonwealth to have fuch a magif-". trate: peace has been procured abroad, at home"it is not fuffered to take place: it is my determi-"nation then, in time of fedition, to appear in the"character of a private citizen, rather than that of"dictator." Then withdrawing from the fenate -houfe, he abdicated the dictatorfhip. The cafe ap­peared to the commons, as if he had refigned hisoffice out of refentment of the treatment fhewn tothem, and therefore, as if he had fulfilled his en­gagements, it not having been his fault that theywere not fulfilled, they attended him, as he re­tired to his houfe, with approbation and applaufe.
XXXII. THE fenate were then fcized with ap-prehenfions, that if the citizens fhould be difchargedfrom the army, their fecret cabals and confpiracieswould be renewed ; wherefore, fuppofing that, though
the







OCR Output








OF ROME. 435


Publius and Cneius Cornelius Coflus, Numefius Fa- B O O &blus Ambuftus, and Lucius Valerius Potitus being • -,-_/military tribunes with confular power* war was com- Y.R. 349.menced againft the Veientians* in refentment of an B.C.403.infolent anfwer of their fenate; who, when the arn-bafladors demanded fatisfa&ion, ordered them to betold* that if they did not fpeedily quit the city, theywould give them the fatisfaction which Lars To-lumnius had given. The fenate being highly offend­ed at this, decreed, that the military tribunes fliould,on the firft day when it could be done, propofe tothe people the proclaiming war againft the Veienti-ans. As foon as that propofal was made public, theyoung men openly exprerfed their difcontent. Thewar" with the Vo'lfcians," they faid, "was not yet"at an end; it was not long fince two garrifons"were utterly deftroyed, and one of the forts was"with difficulty retained. Not a year pafied, iu"which they were not obliged to meet an enemy"in the field, and, as if this drudgery was thought"tpo little, a new war was now fet on foot againft a"neighbouring, and moft powerful nation, who"would foon roisfe all Etruria to arms." Thefedifcontents, fuggeftcd by their own thoughts, werefarther aggravated by the plebeian tribunes, who af­firmed, that " the war of greateft moment fubfifting,"was that between the patricians and plebeians.'' That the latter were defignedly haraffed by mili-"tary ftfrvice, and expofed to the deftructive wea'-"pons of enemies. They were kept at a diftance"from the city, and in a ftate of banifhment, left,"fhould they enjoy reft at home, they might tura*l their thoughts towards liberty, and the eftablifti-"ment of colonies, and form plans, either for ob-"taining pofieflion of the public lands, or afiertinjg"their right of giving their fuffrages with free-"dom." Then taking hold of the veterans, theyrecounted the years each of them had ferved, theirwounds and fears, afking" where was there room,.•" on their bodies to receive new wounds? whatft 2 "quantity







OCR Output








ji THE HISTORY


B o 6 It XXVHl. WHEN all was over, the Alban troops^ -'-_• who had been fpectators of the engagement, march­ed down into the plain, and Mettius congratulatedTullus on his victory over the enemy. Tullus an-fwered him, without mewing any fign of difplea-fure, and gave orders that the Albans fhduld, withthe favour of fortune, join their camp wlth that ofthe Romans, and appointed a facrifke of purifica­tion to be performed next day. As foon as it waslight, all things being prepared in the ufual manner,he commanded both armies to be fummoned to anaffembly. The heralds, beginning at the outfide,fummoned the Albans firft; and they, ftruck withthe novelty of the affair, and wifhing to hear theRoman king delivering a fpeech, took their placesneareft to hirri: the Roman troops, under arms,purfuant to directions previoufly given, formed acircle round them, and a charge was given to theCenturions to execute without delay fuch orders asthey mould receive. Then Tullus began in thismanner; " If ever, Romans, there has hitherto oc-"curred, at any time, or in any war, an occafion"that called on you to return thanks, firft, to the"immortal gods, and, next, to your own valour, it"was the battle of yefterday: for ye had to ftrug-"gle not only with your enemies, but, what is a"more difficult and dangerous ftruggle, with the"treachery and perfidy of your allies: for I will'* now undeceive you; it was not by my order that"the Albans withdrew to the mountains, nor was•" what ye heard me fay, the iffuing of orders, but"a ftratagem, and a pretext of having given orders,"to the end that while ye were kept in ignorance"of your being delerted, your attention might not"be drawn away from the fight; and, that, at the. "fame time, the enemy, believing themfelves to be"furrounded on the rear, might be ftruck with ter-"ror and difmay: but the guilt which I am expofing'' to you, extends not to all the Albans: they fol-
"lowed







OCR Output








198 THE HISTORY


BOOK with the utmoft confidence, infpired by innocence,. ^' . and by the juftice of his claim to the favour of th$Y.R. 179. public: he was charged with mifcondui5t in the bat-B. c.473. £]e witn tne Etrurians at the Janiculum; but beinga man of an intrepid fpirit, as he had done formerlyin the cafe of public peril, fo now in one that threat­ened himfelf, he difpelled the danger by facing itwith boldnefs: in a fpeech full of undaunted forti­tude, he retorted on both tribunes and commorty<.andupbraided them with the condemnation and deathof Titus Meneriius, the fon of that man, to whpfegood offices the commons ftood indebted for thereftoration of their privileges, for thofe very lawsand magiftrates, which enabled them now to let loofetheir paflions, in this unreafonable manner. Hiscolleague Virginius too, being produced as a wit-nefs, greatly affifted his caufe, by attributing tohim a fhare of his own merit; but what did him themoft efiential fervice was, the fentence paffcd onMenenius; fo great a change had taken place in theminds of the people.
LIII. No fooner had thefe domedic difputes fub-fidcd, than a new war broke out with the Veientians,with whom the Sabines had united thfir forces.After auxiliaries had been brought from the Latinesand Hernicians, the confi.il Valerius, being fent withan army to Veii, inftantly attacked the Sabine camp,which they had pitched under the walls of their allies,and occafioned fuch confirmation, that while, with­out collecting' into a body, they ran different ways infmull parties, to repel the enemy's aflaulr, the gate,firlt attacked, was taken j and afterwards, within therampart, there was rather a carnage than a battle.From the camp the alarm tpread into the city, andthe Veientians ran to arms in as great a panic as ifVeil were taken: forrje went to fupport the Sabines,others fell upon the Romans, whole whole force andattention were employed on the camp; and for a lit­tle







OCR Output








442 T H E H I S T O R Y


 


methods. The Romans augmented the nmn-T _ her of their military tribunes with confular power,Y.R. 351. electing eight, a number greater than had hithertoB. c. $00. ^en known. Thefe were Manins .'Emilius Ma-mercinus a fecond time, Lucius Valerius Potitus athird time, Appius Claudius Craflus, Marcus Quin-tilius Varus, Lucius Julius lulus, Marcus Poftumius,Marcus Furius Camillus, Marcus Poftufflius Albi-nus. The Veientians, on the other hand, difguftedat the annual intrigues of candidates, which werefometimes the cauie of violent difienfions, elected aking. This ftep gave great offence to all the ftatesof Etruria, as, befides their abhorrence of kingly go­vernment, they held the perfon eleftcd in no kfs de-teftarion. He, oat of the infolence of wealth, andarrogance of his temper, had, before this, ren­dered himfelf obnoxious to the nation, by violentlybreaking off the performance of certain annualgames, the omiffion of which was deemed zn impi­ety: for, inftigated by pique, beeaufe another can­didate for the office of prieft had been preferred be­fore him, by the fuffrages of the twelve ftates, inthe middle of the folemnity, he abruptly carried awaythe performers, of whom a great part were his flaves.That nation, therefore, devoted beyond all others toreligious performances, the more fo, bccaufe theyexcelled in the condudt of them, pafied a decree,by which all aid was refufed to the Veientians, folong as they fhould continue under the governmentof a king. At Veii, all mention of this decree wasfupprefled by people's dread of the king, whotreated any perfon, reported to have mentioned lucha matter, as a leader of fedition, not as the author ofan idle rumour. Although the Romans received in­telligence that all was quiet in Etrurb, yet, beingalfc> informed that this bufinefs was agitated in everyone of their meetings, they formed their fortificationsin fuch a manner as gave them fecurity on bothfides. Some they raifed on the fide next the town,
againft







OCR Output








76 THE HISTORY


 


00 K lebrate the great games: and would repair and de­dicate the temple of Mother Matuta, which hadbeen formerly dedicated by king Servius Tullius.Marching out of the city at the head of his army,while people's anxiety was ftronger than their hopes,he came to the firft engagement with the Falifciansand Capenatians, in the diftrict of Nepote, on whichoccafion every particular was conducted with confum-mate prudence and fkill; fuccefs of courle enfued.He not only routed the enemy in battle, but tookpofieffion of their camp, and feized a vaft quantity ofIpoil, the greateft part of which was put into the handsof the quaeftor, and no great fhare diftributed to thefoldiers. From thence the troops were led to Veil,where additional forts were erected at fmaller dif-tances from each other, and by an edict, forbiddingany to fight without orders, the foldiers were takenoff from fkirrniming, which had hitherto been fre­quently practifed between the walls and the rampartof the camp, and their labour applied to the works.Of all their works, the greateft by far and moft la­borious was a mine, which they undertook to carryinto the citadel of the enemy. In order that therefhould be no interruption of this work, and at thefame time that the fame fee of perfons fhould not,by uninterrupted labour under ground, be fpent withfatigue, he formed the whole number of pioneersinto fix divifions, and fix hours were allotted foreach divifion to work in rotation; nor did they ftop,either by night or day, until they formed a paflageinto the citadel.
XX. WHEN the dictator now faw conqueft withinhis reach, and that he was on the point of .gettingpofieflion of a city of the greateft opulence, the fpoil.of which would exceed in quantity whatever hadbeen obtained in all former wars taken together,fearing left he might incur either the refentment ofthe foldiers, as being too fparing in his diftribution
of







OCR Output








O F R O M E. 34;


w in the caufe, and would perfevere in the attempt BOOK"to the utmoft extremity." . -*!'_,
Y.R. 194.
XVI. THE affair appeared now to the confuteB. c.+i8.and fenate in a lefs formidable Kght, yet they ftilldreaded left, befides the purpofes which were de­clared, this might be a fcheme of the Veientians orthe Sabines; and left the powerful enemy alreadywithin the city might, in confequence of a concertedplan, be fupported prefently by the Sabine andEtrurian legions; and that their everlafting enemiesthe Volfcians and .fliquans might come, not, as for­merly, to ravage the country, but to feize on thecity, already poffefled in part by the enemy. Manyand various were their fears, among which the prin­cipal was their dread of the flaves, left every onefhould find in his own houle an enemy, whom it wasneither fafe to truft, nor, by apparent diftruft, toprovoke to infidelity and bitterer animofity: and focritical was their fituation, that, had perfect harmo­ny fubfifted in the ftate, they could fcarcely hope tobe extricated from it: but amidft the crowd of dan­gers which ftarted up on every fide, no one enter­tained any fears from the turbulence of the tribunesor the commons; that was deemed an evil of amilder nature; which, as it always began to operatein times undifturbed by other difquietudes, they fup-pofcd would reft in quiet, while danger threatenedfrom abroad: yet this alone, almoft beyond all thereft, proved the heavieft aggravation of their diftrefs;for fuch madnefs pofiefied the tribunes, that theyinfifted, that they were not enemies, but people un­der the counterfeit appearance of enemies, who hadfeized on the Capitol, for the purpofe of divertingthe attention of the commons from the bufmefs ofthe law; and that.thefe guefts and dependants ofthfr patricians, if the law were once pafied, and ii:were perceived that the tumults, which they raifed,hatf not anfwered their purpofe, would depart in,
R 3 greater







OCR Output








4«6 THE HISTORY


B Oiv 1C" ROman enfigns, and the weapons of' the enemy.t '_^ ." He was afterwards carried out of fight of hisY.R. 33i." countrymen: however, from the noife and fhout-B. 0.410." ing, he perceived that the battle was prolonged"until night; nor did he believe, that it was in theirj ".power, on account of the great numbers of the
". enemy, to force their way to the eminence wherete he had taken poft. Wliere the army was, he knew"not. He fuppofed that, as he, in a dangerous"crifis, had taken advantage of the ground to fccure"himfelf and his men, in like manner the conful,"confulting the fafety of his army, had chofen a'• ftrongcr fituation for his camp. Nor did he be."lieve, that the affairs of the Volfciuns were in a"better pofture than thoieof the Roman people : for"fortune and the night had caufed abundance of"miftakes, both on one fide and the other." Hethen begged, that they would not detain him, as hewas much diftrelTed with fatigue, and wounds; andhe was difmifled with the higheft exprefiions of ap-plaufe, no leis for his modefty, than his bravery.Meanwhile the conful had come as far as the Templeof Reft, on the road leading to Lavici; whither•waggons, and other carriages, were fent from thecity, and took up the men who were fpent with thefatigue of the action, and the march by night. Theconful foon after entered the city, and was not moreanxioufly defirous to clear himfelf from blame, thanhe was to beftow on Tempanius the praife which hedeferved. While the minds of the citizens werefull of grief for the ill fuccefs of their affairs, and offefentment againft their commanders, the firft objei5tthrown in the way of their ill humour was MarcusPoftumius, formerly military tribune, with confular.power, at Veii, who was brought to trial, and con­demned in a fine of ten thoufand afes in weight, of. brais*. Titus Quintius, his colleague, endeavoured
* 511. 5 j. 10 J. •••
to







OCR Output








O F R O M E. 395


voice called out, "Will ye fufFer yourfelves to be B O o K"driven from your ground, and retreat from an un- t ^'^"armed enemy, vanquimed with fmoke, like a Y.R. ;i9.'' fwarm of bees? Will ye not extinguifh thofe fires B."with the fword? Or will ye not each in his poft,'c if we muft fight with fire, and not with arms, feizc"on thofe fame brands, and throw them back on"the foe? Advance; recollec t the honour of the"Roman name, your own bravery, and that of your"fathers: turn this conflagration on the city of't your enemy, and with its own flames demolifh"Fidenae, which ye could never reclaim by your'' kindnefs. This is what the blood of your am-.*' bafladors and colonifts, and the defolation of your"frontiers ought to fuggeft." At the command ofthe dictator, the whole line advanced; the firebrandswhich had been thrown, were caught up; otherswere wrefted away by force, and thus the troops onboth fides were armed with fire. The mafter of thehorfe too, on his part, introduced among the cavalrya new mode of fighting: he ordered his men to takeoff the bridles from their horfes, and he himfelf clap­ping fpurs to his own, fprung forward before thereft, and was carried headlong by his unbridled horfeinto the midft of the flames. In like manner, theother horfes, being fpurred on and freed from all re-itraint, carried their riders with full fpeed againft theenemy. The clouds of duft intermixed with thefmoke, excluded the light from the eyes both of menand horfes; and that appearance which had ftruckterror into the men, had no fuch efFect on the horfes.The cavalry therefore, wherever they penetrated,bore down every thing with irrefiftible force. Afhout was now heard from a new quarter, whichhaving furprifed and attracted the attention of botharmies, the dictator called out aloud, that his lieu­tenant-general Quintius and his party had attackedthe enemy's rear; and then, raifing the fhout anew,advanced on the enemy with redoubled vigour. The
Etrurians







OCR Output








OF ROME. , 269


he razed to the ground, in revenge for the treachery B O O Kpractifed tliere againft the garrifon.
XXXI. MARCUS Valerius and Spurius Virginius ^'p'were next elefted confuls. Quiet prevailed both athome and abroad. The price of proviQons was high,in confcquence of an extraordinary fall of rain. Alaw pafTed for difpofing of the Aventine as publicproperty. The fame tribunes of the people werecontinued in office. Thefe, during the followingyear, which had for confuls Titus Romilius and Y.R.Cains Vcturius, warmly recommended the law in all B.c'their harangues. "They were afhamed," they faid,"of the uiclels addition made to their number, if"that affair were to lie, during the courle of their"two years, in the fame hopelels ftate, in which it<c had lain during the whole courfe of the laft five."While they were moft earneftly engaged in this pur-luit, mefiengers arrived, in a fright, from Tufculum,with information that the ^Equans were in the Tuf-culan territory. The recent fervices of that peoplemade the tribunes afhamed of throwing any delay inthe way of affiftance being given them. Both theconfuls were fent with an army, and found the ene­my in their ufual poft, in the diftricct of Algidum.There they fought; above feven thoufand of theenemy were flain, the reft difperfed, and vaft bootywas acquired. This the confuls fold on account of.the emptinefs of the treafury; which proceeding ex­cited a general difTatisf'action among the foldiery, andalfo afforded grounds to the tribunes for bringing anaccufation againft the confuls, before the commons.Accordingly, as foon as they went out of office,Spurius Tarpeius and Aulus Alterius having fuc- y.R.100ceeded them, a charge was inftitutcd againft Romi- B.C.45*,lius by Caius Claudius Cicero, tribune of the people,and againft Veturius, by Lucius Allienus plebeian'aedile. To the great mortification of the patriciansthey were both condemned, Romilius to pay ten
thoufand







OCR Output








O F R O M E. ift3


. _-


all pledged their honour, one after another, and en^ B O O Kdeavoured to comfort her diffracted mind, acquitting .her of blame, as under the compulfion of force, andcharging it on the violent perpetrator of the crime,told her, that " the mind alone was capable of fin-"ning, not the body, and that where there was no"intention, there could be no guilt." "It is your"concern," faid fhe, " to confider what is due to"him.; as to me, though I acquit myfelf of the"guilt, I cannot difpenfc with the penalty, nor mall"any woman ever plead the example of Lucretia,"for furviving her chaftity." Thus faying, fheplunged into her heart a knife, which fhe had con­cealed under her garment, and falling forward on thewound, dropped lifelefs. The hufband and fatherfhrieked aloud.
LIX. BUT Brutus, while they were overpoweredby grief, drawing the knife from the wound of Lu­cretia, and holding it out reeking with blood, beforehim, faid, " By this blood, moft chafte, until in-"jured by royal infolence, I fwear, and call you, O"ye gods, to, witnefs, that I will profecute to de-"ftruiStion, by fword, fire, and every forcible means"in my power, both Lucius Tarquinius the proud,"and his impious wife, together with the whole race"of their defcendants, and never will fuffer one of"them, nor any other perfon whatfoever, to be"king in Rome." He then delivered the knife toCollatinus, afterwards to Lucretius, and Valerius,who were filled with amazement, as at a prodigy,and at a lofs to account for this unufual elevation offentiment in the mind of Brutus. However theytook the oath as directed, and converting their griefinto rage, followed Brutus, who put himfelf at theirhead, and called on them to proceed, inftantly, toabolifh kingly power. They brought out the bodyof Lucretia from the houfe, conveyed it to theForum, and afjembled the people, who came toge-H 4 ther







OCR Output








O F R O M E. j 2$


of their family, abridging themfelves of their own BOOKproper fupport. . JJ; __,
Y. R.z46.
XI. PORSENA, difappointed of fuccefs in this firft B.c. so<s.effort, changed his plan from an aflault to a block­ade; and, leaving a force fufficient to fecure the Ja..niculum, encamped his main body in the plain alongthe bank of the Tiber, and collected fhips from allquarters, both to guard the paffage, that no cornihould be conveyed to Rome, and alfo to enable histroops to crofs over the river, in different places, asoccafion offered, to lay wafte the country. In a fhorttime he extended his depredations fo fuccefsfully,through every part of the Roman territories, thatpeople were obliged to convey not only their othereffects, but even their cattle, into the city, nor wouldany one venture to drive them out of the gates.The Etrurians were permitted to acc t in this uncon­trolled manner, not fo much through fear, as delign;for Valerius the conful, intent on gaining an oppor­tunity of making an unexpected attack on a largenumber of them, at a time when they were unpre­pared, purpofely overlooked trifling advantages, re-ferving his force for a fevere revenge on a more im­portant occafion. With this view, in order to allurethe plunderers, he gave orders to his men that nextday a great many of them mould drive out fome cat­tle through the Efquiline gate, whifh was at theoppofite fide from the enemy; judging that thefewould foon get information of it, becaufe, duringthe blockade, and the fcarcity of provifions, manyof the flaves turned traitors and deferted. Accord­ingly they were informed of it by a deferter, andpafied over the river in much greater numbers thanufual, in hopes of getting poiJefiion of the entirebooty. Publius Valerius then ordered Titus Her-mimus, .with a frnall body of men, to lie concealednear the two mile ftone on the Gabian road; Spuii-us Lartius, with a body of light armed troops, to
Hand







OCR Output








OF ROME. 465


XIII. IN the country of the Volfcians, Anxur was BOOKquietly re.taken, through the neglect of the guards . -^___.on a feftival day. This year was remarkable for a Y.R. jJ5.cold winter and great falls of fnow, fo that the roads B'c. M.Were impaiTable, and the navigation of the Tiberftmt up. There was no change in the price of pro-vifions, confiderable (tores having been previouflycollected. As Publius Licinius had obtained his of­fice without any riotous proceeding, to the great joyof the commons, and the no lefs mortification of thepatricians, fo the fame regularity was preferved throughthe whole courfe of his adminiftration. Hencethe people became enraptured with the thoughts ofchoofing plebeians at the next election of military YR -tribunes. Of the patrician candidates, Marcus Ve- B. C. 354.turius alone carried his election. The centuries al-moft unanimoufly appointed the following plebeiansmilitary tribunes with confular power: Marcus Pom-ponius, Caius Duilius, Volero Publilius, CneiusGenutius, and Lucius Atilius. The fevere winter,whether from the ill temperature of the air, caufedby the fudden tranfition from one extreme to theother, or from tbme other caufe, was fucceeded bya fickly fummer, fatal to all kinds of animals; 2ndneither the caufe nor end of the incurable virulenceof the difbrder being difcoverable, the Sibyllinebooks were confuked, in purluance of a decree ofthe fenate. The decemvirs who had the directionof religious matters, then firft introduced the lecti-. fternium * in the city of Rome, and decking out threecouches, with the utmoft magnificence which' thofetimes could afford, implored thus the favour ofApollo, Latojia, and Diana; and of Hercules, Mer-
• From 'leflus' a bed, or rather couch, and 'ftcr.io' to fpread.Upon couches of ihis kind the Romans reclined at their meals, hut'efueciaily at entertainments. Upon this occafion thefc coud..es werebrought out into the Iheels, and being decorated in the muft magni­ficent manner, the Ibtues of the gods and goddcHts were laid uponthem, and fumptuou* banquets jjlaccd befoic tliun. Ot thclc repattsall comeK were allowed to partake.
VOL. i. H H cury,







OCR Output








O F R O M E. 443


againft the irruptions of the townfmen; by others, B OvO Kthe fide oppofite Etniria was guarded againft any •. -^ .auxiliaries which might perhaps come from thence. Y.R. 351^
, B.C. 400.
II. THE Roman generals, conceivinggreaterhopesfrom a blockade, than from an aflault, refolved tocarry on their operations during the whole winter jand accordingly they began to erect huts, a thingquite new to Roman fbldiers. As foon as an ac­count of this was brought to the plebeian tribunes,who for a long time paft found no pretext for ftart-ing new difturbances, they flew out to meet the peo­ple in affcmbly, and laboured to inflame the mindsof the commons, afierting, that " this was the pur-"pofe for which pay for the foldiery had been ef-"tablifhed; nor had they been fo blind, as not to"fee, that fuch a prefent from their enemies was"tainted with poifon. That the liberty of the"commons had been fold; their young men carried"away without hope of return, exiled from the"city and from the commonwealth, and not per-"mitted to give way even to the feverity of winter,"nor to take a view of their houfes and family af-"fairs. What did they fuppofe was the reafon for"keeping the troops on duty without intermiffion?"They would find it, in fact, to be no other, than'' the apprehenfion, left, in cafe of the attendance""of thofo youths, in whom the whole ftrength. of"the commons confifted, fome fteps might be"taken towards promoting their interefts. Befides,"the men were more harafied, and fubjected to'' greater hardmips, than the Veientians. For the"latter fpent the winter under their own roofs,"having their city fecured by ftrong walls, and its"natural fituation; while the Roman foldiers, in"the midft of labour and toils, lay expofed to"its feverity in tents, overwhelmed in fnow and"froft; never laying their arms out of their hands
"even







OCR Output








OF ROME.


bravery of their king, put the Sabines to the rout. B ^Mettixis plunged into .a lake, his horfe taking frightat the noife of the purfuers: and this circumftanceturned the attention of the Sabines to the danger inwhich they faw a perfon of his confequence. How­ever, his friends beckoning and calling to him, heacquired frerti courage from the affection of themultitude, and accomplifhed his efcape. Both par-ties now renewed the engagement in the plain be­tween the two hills, bur the advantage was on the
fide of tht Romans.
/
Xltl. AT this crifis the Sabine Women, whofefufferings had given caufe to the war, with their hairdifhevelled and garments torn, their natural timiditybeing overcome by the fight of fuch difaftrousfcenes, had the refblution to throw themfelves in theWay of the flying weapons; and, rufhing acrofs be­tween the armies, feparated the incenfed combatants,and afihaged th'eir fury; befeeching, on the ontfhand their parents, on the other their hufbands,"not to pollute themfelves with the impious ftain'' of the blood of father-in-law and fon-in-law, nor"brand with the infamy of parricide their offspring,"the children of one, and grandchildren of the•' other party. If ye wifh, faid they, to deftroy the"affiniry and connexion formed between you by"our marriage, turn ybiir rage againft us; we are"the caufe of the war; We are the caufe of wounds•' and death to our hufbands and fathers. It is.bet-*' ter for ITS to perifh, than to live either widowed"by the lofs of one party, or fatherlefs by that of ."the other." This tranfaction powerfully affected Y. R.both the'multitude and the leaders: filence fudden- 7.ly enfued, and a fufpenfion of the fight. The lead-


errs then came forward, in order to concert mcafurestor a pacification; and they not only concluded apeace, but combined the two nations into one, aflfo-cating the two fovereigns in the government, and
13 cftablifhing Vj







OCR Output








OF ROME. 53


"lowed their leader, as ye would have done, had I B o o K"chofen that the army mould make any movement"from the ground which it occupied. Mettius"there was the leader of that march, the fame Met-"tius was the fchemer of this war. Mettius it was"who broke the league between the Romans and"Albans. May others dare to commit like crimes,"if I do not now make him a confpicuous example"to all mankind." On this the Centurions inarms gathered round Mettius, and the king proceed­ed in his difcourfe: "Albans, be the meafure prof-"perous, fortunate, and happy to the Roman people,"to me, and to you; it is my intention to remove"the entire people of Alba to Rome, to give to the"commons the privileges of citizens, and to enroll"the principal inhabitants among the fathers, to"form of the whole one city, one republic. As"the ftate of Alba, from being one people, was"heretofore divided into two, fo let thefe be now"re-united." On hearing this, the Alban youthwho were unarmed, and furrounded by armed troops,however different their fentiments were, yet, beingall reftrained by the fame apprehenfions, kept a pro­found filence. Tullus then faid, " Mettius Fuf-"fetius, if you were capable of learning to prefcrve"faith, and a regard to treaties, I mould fuffer you"to live, and fupply you with inftruftions; but your"difpofition is incurable : let your punimment, then,"teach mankind to confider thofe things as facred,"which you have dared to violate. As, therefore,"you lately kept your mind divided between the"intereft of the Fidenatians and of the Romans,"fo fhall you now have your body divided and"torn in pieces." Then two chariots beingbrought, each drawn by four horfes, he tied Met­tius, extended at full length, to the carriages ofthem, and the horfes being driven violently in dif­ferent directions, bore away on each carriage part ofJjis mangled body, with the limbs which were faften-13 ed ,







OCR Output








$9* THfi HISTORY


BOOK per would have been inflamed by fuch grofs ill-s^ _!_ , treatment; Icilius faid, " Appius, you muft driveY.R. 305. " me hence with the fword, before you mall ac-B.C..H7. " complifh, in filence, what you wifh to be con-"cealed. This young woman I intend to wed, and"expect to find in her a lawful and a chafte wife."Call together then even all the lictors of your'' colleagues, order the rods and axes to be got"ready. The fpoufe of Icilius fhall not remain in"any other place than her father's houie. Though"you have taken from us the protection of tribunes,"and an appeal to the Roman people, the two bul-"warks which fecured our liberty, yet there has"been no grant made, to your luft, of abfolute do-C' minion over our wives and daughters. Vejit your"fury on our perfons and our lives ; let chaftity, at"leaft, find fafety. If any violence is offered to*' her, 1 fhall appeal for fuccour to the citizens now"prefent, in behalf of my fpoufe j Virginius will"appeal to the foldiers in behalf of his only daugh-"ter; and all of us to the gods, and to all man-"kind: nor fhall you ever carry that fentence"into effect, while we have life to prevent it. I_". charge you, Appius, confide,r again and again to"what lengths you are proceeding: let Virginius,"when he comes, determine what meafures he will"purlue in regard to his daughter; only of this I"would have him allured, that if he fubmits to this'c man's claim of obtaining the cuftody of her, he"muft feek another match for his daughter: as for'' me, in vindication of the liberty of my fpoufe,"I will forfeit my life fooner than my honour."
XLVI. THE pafilons of the multitude were nowraifed, and there was every fign of a violent conteftcnfuing. The lictors had gathered round Icilius, butproceeded, however, no farther than threats, whenAppius faid, " that the defence of Virginia was not'' the motive which actuated Icilius; but, turbulent
"by







OCR Output








O F R O M E. 233


who inveighed againft the propofition, and the author BOOKof it, with fuch vehemence, as to omit no kind of t '__,threats, or means of intimidation, which coutd have v.R. 191.been applied, had both the confuls provoked to the B.c. +*°.higheit, ftood befide the tribune. He urged, that"this man had lain in ambufh, and, watching his"opportunity, had made an atfault on the common-"wealth. If the gods, in their anger, had,fent a"tribune like him, during the laft year, while fick-"nefs and war raged together, his defigns could not"have been prevented. When both the confuls wereti dead, and the enfeebled ftate lay overwhelmed in"univerfal anarchy and confufion, he would have"introduced laws for abolifhing the confular govern-"ment out of the commonwealth, and would have"become a leader to the Volfcians and .fliquans,"in an attack upon the city. And after all, where'c was the occafion for fuch a law? If a conful gave"an inftance of arbitrary or cruel treatment towards"any of the citizens, was it not in that man's power"to bring him to trial? to profecutc him, where his".judges would be thofe very perfons, againft one of"whom the injury was committed? His manner of"acting tended to render, not the confular govern-"ment, but the office of tribune, odious and into-"lerable; becaufe, from being in a ftate of peace"and amity with the patricians, he was forcing it"back into the old evil practices. Nor did he"mean to befeech him to defift from proceeding as"he had begun. Of you, the other tribunes," faidFabius, « we requeft, that ye will, firftof all, confi-"der, that your office was inftituted for the pro-"tedtion of individuals, not for the deftruction of"the whole community; that ye were created tri-"bunes of the commons, not foes of the patricians."It reflects as much difhonour on you, as it does"concern on us, that the commonwealth mould be'' invaded in the abfence of its chief magiftrates.
"Take







OCR Output








xxviii PREFACE.


To the public judgment, therefore, he fub-mits his labour; knowing that every en­deavour of his, except that of rendering itworthy of acceptance, would be ufelefs; andthat, in fpite of his utmoft exertions, his bookwill fland or fall, by its own merit or demerit,whichever fhall be found to preponderate.The public candour he has no reafon to doubt;and he awaits its decifion with tranquillity, butnot without anxiety.


•







OCR Output








OF HOME.


 


"emolument, in general, without the expence of"' labour. Toil and pleafure, in their natures op- _
"pofite, are yet linked together in a kind of Y.R. 3$*."natural connection. Formerly, the foldier deem- B.c."ed it a hardfhip to give up his labour to the'' commonwealth, and to bear his own expences."At the fame time, he found pleafure in having itu in his power, for a part of the year, to rill his"own ground, and to acquire the means of fup-"porting himfelf and his family, at home, and in"the field. At prefent, he has a fource of plea-"fure in the profits conferred on him by the com-. " monwealth, and he receives his pay with joy."Let him, therefore, bear with refignation hisu being detained a little longer from his home, and"from his family affairs, which are not now buiv"thened with his expences. Suppofe the com-"monwealth called him to a ftatement of accounts,"might it not juftly fay, you receive pay by the"year, give me your labour by the year. Do you"think it juft, that for half a-year's fervice, you"fhould receive a whole year's pay? It is difa-"greeable to me, citizens, to dwell on this topic;"for this kind of dealing fuits only thofe who em-"ploy mercenary foldiers; but we wifh to deal, as"with our fellow-citizens; and think it but rea-"fonable, that we mould be dealt with, as their na-'« tive country. Either the war ought not to have"been undertaken, or it ought to be conducted"in a manner fuited to the dignity of the Roman'' people, and to be brought to a conclufion as foon"as poifi'ble. Now it will certainly be brought to"a conclufion, if we prefs forward the fiege, if we"do not retire, until we have attained the object of"our hopes, in the capture of Veii. In truth, ift; there were no other motive, the very difcredit of"acting otherwife ought to bind us to perfeverance.*1 In former times, a city was held befieged for ten"years on account of one woman, by the united
"force







OCR Output








364 THEHISTORY


BOOK " confuls, who, being tied down by the laws con-;_ __y_ •" cerning appeals, enacted for the purpofe of weak-Y.K.3i6. " ening their authority, had nor, in their office, asS.C. 436. " much power, as they had fpirit to inflict condign"punifhment on fuch atrocious proceedings: that"the bufinefs required not only a man of resolution,"but one who fhould be free and unfhackled by"the fetters of thofe laws: that therefore he would"name Lucius Quintius dictator: in him would be"found a fpirit equal to fo great a power." Every­one exprefied his approbation. Quintius at firft re-fufed the office, and afked them, what they meant byexpofing him in the extremity of age to fuch a vio­lent conteft? On which they all joined in afierting,that his aged breaf t was fraught not only with more•wifdom, but with more fortitude alfo, than was tobe found in all the reft, and in loading him with de-ferved praifes, while the conful perfifted in his inten­tion: fo that at length Cincinnatus, after praying tothe immortal gods, that his declining age might not,at a juncture fo dangerous, be the caufe of detrimentor difhonour to the commonwealth, was appointeddictator by the conful, and he then named CaiusServilius Ahala his mafter of the horfe.
XIV. NEXT day, after fixing proper guards, hewent down to the Forum; and the whole attentionof the commons being turned towards him, by thefurprife and the novelty of the affair, whilft the parti-2ans of Maelius, and their leader himfelf, perceivedthat the power of this high authority was aimedagainft them; and thole who were ignorant of theirdefigns, were at a lofs to difcover what tumult, whatfudden war, required either the majefty of a dilator,or the appointment of Quintius, after his eightiethyear, to the adminiftration of government; Servilius,mafter of the horfe, by order of the dictator, cameto Madius, and faid to him, " the dictator calls you."When, ftruck with apprehenfion, he allied the rea-
fon,







OCR Output








OF ROME. 479


by their own prophets, and likewife by foreign ora- BOOKcles; that the gods had been already invited to a . -^--/fhare in their fpoil; that fome of them, liftening to v R. 359.the vows by which they had been folicited to forfakc B.c. 3»J.their city, began to look towards the temples of theenemy, and new habitations, and that this was thelaft day of their exiftence; fearing nothing lefs,than their walls being already undermined, and thecitadel filled with enemies, ran brifkly in arms to thewalls, wondering what could be the reafon, that whenfor fo many days not one Roman had ftirred fromtheir pofts, they mould now run up to the walls with­out apprehenfion, as if ftruck with a fudden fit ofmadnefs. A fabulous account has been given of anincident happening at this juncture, that while theking of the Veientians was offering facrifice, thewords of the arufpex were heard in the mine, de­nouncing, that whoever mould cut up the entrails ofthat victim, fhould obtain the victory; and that thisincited the Roman foldiers to burfi open the mine,feize the entrails, and carry them to the dictator.But in matters of fuch remote antiquity, I think itenough, if relations which carry a refemblance oftruth, be received as true; ftories of this kind,,better calculated for the extravagant exhibitions ofthe ftage, which delights in the marvellous, than for'
gaining belief, it is needlefs either to affirm or refute.The mine at this time full of chofen men, fuddenlydifcharged its armed bands in the temple, of Juno,which ftood in the citadel of Veii, fome of whom at­tacked the rear of the enemy on the walls, fome toreopen the bars of the gates, fome let fire to the houfes,from the roofs of which ftones and tiles were thrownby the women and flaves. Every place was filledwith confufed clamour, compofed of the terrifyingfhouts of the atfailants, and the cries of the affright-adjoined to the lamentations of the women and chil­dren. Thofe who defended the walls were in aninftant beaten off, and the gates forced open, whereiome entering in bodies, others fcaling the deferred







OCR Output








O F R O M E. 6S


at laft his character reached even the palace. Hav- BOOKing thus procured an introduction there, he foonimproved it to fuch a degree, by his politenefs anddexterity in paying his court, that he was admittedto the privileges of familiar friendfhip, and was con-fulted in all affairs both public and private, foreignand dorheftic, and having acquitted lumfelf to fatif-faction in all, was at length, by the king's will, ap­pointed guardian to his children. Ancus reignedtwenty-four years, equal in renown, and in the artsboth of peace and war, to any of the former kings.
XXXV. THE fons of Ancus had now nearlyreached the age of manhood; for which reafonTarquinius the more earneftly prefied, that an afiem-bly might be convened as fpcedy as poflible for theelection of a king. The proclamation for this pur-pofe being iflued, when the time approached, hefent the youths to a diftance, on a hunting party. Heis laid to have afforded the firft inftance of makingway to the crown, by paying court to the people, andto have made a fpeech, compofed forj the purpofe ofgaining the affections of the populace; telling them,that " It was no new favour which he iblicited, for"he was not the firft foreigner; if that were the"cafe, people might indeed be difpleafed and fur-"prized, but the third, who aimed at the govern-i' ment of Rome:—that Tatius, from being not"only a foreigner, but even an enemy, was made"king; and Numa, entirely unacquainted with the"city, and not propofing himfelf as a candidate,<c had been, from their own choice, invited to ac-"cept the crown:—that he, as foon as he became"his own mafter, had removed to Rome, with his"wife and all his fubftance :—that he had fpent the"greater part of that time of life, which men ge-"nerally employ in public bufinefs, at Rome, than"in his former refidence:—that both in civil and"military employments he had learned the Roman
VOL. K F "laws







OCR Output








O F R O M E. 457,


entire blame on his colleague, it was determined, BOOK.that Virginius fhould be called home from the camp, . __Y'Jand that in the mean time the lieutenant.generals Y.R. 353.fhould hold the command. The affair was taken B.c. 399.into confideration by the fenate, where the difputebetween the colleagues was carried on with mutualrecriminations. Few of the members regarded theinterefts of the commonwealth, each adhered to one,or the other, juft as he happened to be prejudicedby private regard, or intereft.
IX. THE principal fenators were of opinion,that, whether the mifconduct, or the misfortune ofthe commanders, had been the caufe of fuch an ig­nominious overthrow, they ought not to wait forthe regular time of ele6Hon, but to create immedi­ately new military tribunes, who fhould enter intooffice on the calends of October. While the mem­bers were proceeding to fhew their afient to thisopinion, the other military tribunes offered no ob­jection; but Sergius and Virginius, to whofe be­haviour it was evidently owing that men wifhed toget rid of the magiftrates of that year, at firft, depre­cated the ignominy which would hereby be thrownupon them, and afterwards protefted againft thepafling of the decree, and declared that they wouldnot retire from office before the ides of December,the ufual day for magiftrates entering into office.On this the tribunes of the commons, who, duringthe general harmony and the profperity of publicaffairs, had unwillingly kept filence, at once aflumingconfidence, threatened the military tribunes, that,unlefs they fubmitted to the direction of the fenate,they would order them to be carried to prifon.Then Caius Servilius Ahala, one of the military tri­bunes, faid, "As to your part, tribunes of the peo-"ple, and your menaces, I alTure you I would with."great pleafure put it to the proof, whether your"threats arc more deftitute of authority, or your-
"felves







OCR Output








. T H E HI S T O R Y


BO o K protection from the rage of. the oppofite party;,_ 1^.1 _f warning them at the fame time, not to fuffer theY.R. 305. commons, by the fpilling of their blood, to comeB. c. 447. into tne practice of infliding punifhment on patri­cians.
LIII. VALERIUS and Horatius were then deputedto invite the commons to return, on fuch conditionsas they mould judge proper, and to adjuft all mattersin difpute. They were ordered alfo to take mea-fures, for fecuring the decemvirs from the rage andviolence 6f the populace. On their arrival at thecamp, they were received by the commons with ex-ceflive joy, as having evidently proved themfelvesthe patrons of liberty, both at the commencement ofthe difturbances, and on the determination of thebufinefs. 'For this, they received thanks on theircoming, Icilius addrefling them in the name of themultitude. The fame perfon, when they began, to"treat about conditions, on the deputies inquiringwhat were the demands of the commons, propofed,in purfuance of a plan which had been already ad-jufted before the arrival of the deputies, fuch termsas plainly evinced, that they grounded their expec­tations on the equity of their caufe, rather than ontheir ftrength: for they only required the reftitutionof the tribunitian office, and the privilege of appeal,by which the rights of the commons had been guard­ed, before the creation of decemvirs; and, that noone fhould fuffer for having inftigated the foldiery, orthe commons, to procure the reftoration of liberty,by a feceflion. They were intemperate, only, intheir demand refpecting the punifhmentof the decem­virs: for they expected that they mould be deliveredinto their hands, and they threatened to burn themalive. In reply, the deputies faid, " fuch of your"demands, as have been the refult of deliberation,*c are fo equitable, that they ought to be voluntarily"offered to you: for the objec t of them is the at-
"tainment







OCR Output








OF ROME. 453


"no longer to obey their officers, fince liberty, ac-B o o K"cording to the prefent notion of it at Rome, con- . .-'__f"fifts in cafting off all reverence for the fcnate, for Y.R. 3S1."the magiftrates, for the laws, for the practices of B.C. *co."our anceftors, for the inftitutions of our fathers,"and for military difcipline."
VII. APPIUS was now fully equal to a contentionwith the plebeian tribunes, even in the aTTemblies ofthe people, when a misfortune fuffered before Veii,by an effect which no one could have expected,threw the fuperiority at once on his fide, and pro­duced both an unufual harmony between the ordersof the ftate, and a general ardour to pufh on the fiegeof Veii with greater vigour. For when the trencheshad been advanced almoft to the very town, and themachines werejuft ready to be applied to the wills,the troops, employing greater afliduiry in formingtheir works by day, than in guarding them by ni^ht,one of the gates was thrown open on a fudJcu, .i.id avaft multitude, armed chiefly with torches, Lliiedforth, and fet fire to them on all fides; lb that theflames deftroyed in an inftant both the ramnart andthe machines, the conftruction of which had coft ibmuch time; and great numbers of men, attempting,.in vain, to fave them, perifhed by the fword and theflames. When news of this difafter arrived at Rome,it diffiifed a general fadnefs through all ranks of men,and filled the fenate alfo with anxiety and itrong ap-prehenfions, left they mould find it impoffible towithftand any longer the machinations of the fcdi-tious, either in the city, or the camp, and left the tri­bunes of the commons mould infuit over the com­monwealth, as if it lay vanquifhed at their feet. Atthis juncture, thofe perfons who poffeiled equeftrianfortunes, and had not had horfes affign.M them by thepublic, after previoufly confulting together, went in abody to the fenate, and having obtained permiflion toJpeak, declared their refolution to ferve in the army,
c c 3 on







OCR Output








88 THEHISTORY


B o o K would expofe that body to the greater contempt;and that they would fhew the lefs refentment, attheir not being confulted on any bufinefs: for hewas the firft of the kings who difcontinued the prac­tice of his predeceffbrs, of confulting the fenateupon every occafion. In the adminiftration ofpublic affairs, he advifed with none, but his ownprivate family. War, peace, treaties, alliances, heof himfelf, with fuch advifers as he chofe, declared,contracted, and diffolved, without any order, ei­ther of the people, or of the fenate. He took par­ticular pain's to attach the nation of the Latines tohis intereft, availing himfelf of foreign aid, the moreeffectually to enfurc his fafety at home: and heformed with their chiefs, not only connections ofhofpitality, but affinities: to Octavius Mamilius ofTufculum he gave his daughter in marriage. Ma­milius was of the moft illuftrious family, by far,of any among the Latines, being defcended, if wemay give credit to fame, from Ulyffes and thegoddefs Circe. By this match he engaged the fup-port of his numerous friends and relations.
• t rM-v^.fc"' A.^.f,~'*^.'*~"**'
L. TARQUINIUS now pofleffed great influenceamong the Latine chiefs, when he iflued orders,that they mould alTemble on a certain day, at thegrove of Ferentina,. acquainting them, that hewifhed to confer with them on fome matters of com-7 * W~-t* t m on concern. They accordingly affembled in greatj tA numbers, at the dawn of.day./.v'Tarquinius himfelf
obferved indeed the day, but did noTcome until alittle before fun-let. Meanwhile, many topics weredifcufied, and various opinions uttered in the affem-bly, during the courfe of the whole day. TurnusHerdonius, of Aricia, inveighed violently againftTarquinius for not attending. "It was no wonder,"he faid, " that the furname of proud had been be-"ftowed on him at Rome j"/or, at this time, theygenerally gave him that appellation, though only in
f private







OCR Output








THE HISTORY


BOOK (hade of his colleague of breach of faith, and fuffer. _TJ __, the bufinefs of the law to proceed. The conful de-Y.R. 194.. clared, that he would not fuffer the bufinefs of theB.C. *s«. law to proceed, until he mould have a colleague ap­pointed in the room of the deceafed. The difputeson this fubject lafted until the affembly was held forfubftituting a conful. In the month of December,in confequence of very zealous efforts of the patri­cians, Lucius Quintius Cincinnatus, father of Caefo,was elected conful, to enter on his office withoutdelay. The commons were quite difmayed, onfinding, that they were to have for conful a perfonhighly incenfcd againft them, and whofe power wasStrengthened by th« fupport of the patricians, by hisown merit, and by three fons, no one of whom wasinferior to Caefo, in greatnefs of fpirit, while theyexcelled him in prudence and moderation on properoccafions. When he came into office, in the fre­quent harangues which he made from the tribunal,he mewed not more vehemence in his cenfures ofthe commons, than in his reproofs to the fenate,"through the indolence of which body," he faid,"the tribunes, now become perpetual, by means of'' their harangues and profecutions, exercifed fove-"reign authority, as if they were not in a republic"of Roman citizens, but in an ill-regulated family."That together with his fon Cxfo, fortitude, con-"ftancy, and every qualification that gives ornament4C to youth either in war or peace, had been driven"out and banifhed from the city of Rome; while"talkative, feditious men, fowcrs of difienfion,"twice, and even thrice, re-elected tribunes, fpent"their lives in the moft pernicious practices, and in"the exercife of regal tyranny. Did that Aulus"Virginius, faid he, becaufe he was not in the Ca-'' pitol, deferve lefs fevere punifhment than Appius"Herdonius ? More, he fwore, undoubtedly, if we'c will judge fairly of the matter. Herdonius, though"nothing elfe could be laid in his favogr, by an-
"nouncing







OCR Output








i33 THE HISTORY


BOOK expended on the war, for that was the condition,_ * *1 _j required. War was proclaimed, but a tacit fufpen-
fion of hoftilitics continued during the remainder of
the year.
Y.R.154. XIX. THE confuls of the next year were Serviusi.C. 498. Sulpicius, and Manius Tullius. Nothing worth men­tion occurred. Then fucceeded Titus /Ebutius andCaius Vetufius. In their confulate, Fidenas was be-fieged, Cruftumeria taken, Praenefte revolted fromthe Latines to the Romans, and a Latine war, thefeeds of which had, for feveral years paft, beengrowing to maturity, could now be no longer de-y.R. 155. ferred. Aulus Poftumius dictator, and Titus /Ebu-B.c.497.tius mafter Of the horfe, marching out a numerousarmy of cavalry and infantry, met the forces of theenemy at the lake Regillus, in the territory of Tuf-culum ; and, as it was known that the Tarquinii werein the army of the Latines, the rage of the Romanscould not be reftrained, but they infifted on engag­ing inftantly; for which reafon, this battle was un-ufually obftinate and bloody; for the generals notonly performed the duty of directing every thing,by their judgment, but, expofing their own perfons,mixed with the combatants, and fbared the fight jand fcarcely one of the principal officers of eitherarmy left the field without being wounded, exceptthe Roman dictator. As Poftumius was encourag­ing and marmalling his men, in the firft line, Tar-quinius Supcrbus, though now enfeebled by age,fpurred on his horfe furioufly againft him ; but re­ceiving a blow from one fide, was quickly furround-ed by his own men, and carried oft" to a place offafety. On the other wing, /Ebutius, the mafter ofthe horfe, made an attack on Octavius Mamilius jnor was his approach unobferved by the Tufculangeneral, who, on his part, advanced in full career tomeet him, and each aiming his fpear at his antago-nift; they encountered with luch violence, that the
arm







OCR Output








O F R O M F. J


inent and a leader, came to the innermoft bay of the B O O KAdriatic fea, and expelling the Euganeans, whothen inhabited the tract between the Alps and thefea, fettled the Trojans and Henetians in the pof-feflion of the country. The place where they firftlanded is called Troy, and from thence the Trojancanton alfo has its name; the nation in general werecalled Venetians. / JEncas, driven from home by thefame calamity, but conduced by the fates to aneftablifhment of more, importance, came firft toMacedonia; thence, in fearch of a fettlement, hefailed to Sicily, and from Sicily proceeded with hisfleet to the country of the Laurentians *. /Here alfo,to the fpot where they landed, was given the nameof Troy, j Here the Trojans difembarked; and as,after wandering about for a great length of time,they had nothing now left, befide their fhips andarms, they began to make prey of whatever theyfound in the country. On this, king Latinus andthe Aborigines, who were then in pofiefiion of tholelands, affembled haftily from the city and country,in order to repel the violence of the ftrangers. 1 Ofwhat followed, there are two different accounts. „Some writers fay, that Latinus, being overcome inbattle, contracted an alliance, and afterwards an af­finity, with tineas; others, that, when the armieswere drawn up in order of battle, before the fignalwas given, Latinus, advancing in the front, invitedthe leader of the ftrangers to a conference; then in­quired who they were, whence they came, what hadinduced them to leave their home, and with whatdefign they had landed on the Laurentian coaft; andthat, when he was informed that the leader was ./Eneas,the fon of Anchifes by Venus, and his followers Tro­jans; that they had made their efcape from theflames of their native city and of their houfes, andwere in fearch of a fettlement, and a place where
'The Trojans were in number about fix hundred.
B 3 they







OCR Output








514 THE HISTORY


BOOK fons, f0 much more defervingof commiferation than. ^' _j any others who were ever befieged; as by the fiegey.U. 165. which they fuftained they were held excluded fromB. C. 387. ti^i,. native cjty, whilft they faw every thing whichthey held dear in the power of their enemy. Norwas the night, which fucceeded liich a fhockingday, attended with more tranquillity. The morningafter this reftlefs night rofe with an afpecT: equallydifmal; nor did any portion of their time relievetherri, from the fight of a conftant fuccefiionof newdifafters. Loaded and overwhelmed with fuch amultiplicity of evils, they notwithftanding remittednought of their firmnefs of refolution; determined,though they mould fee every thing in flames, and le­velled with the duft, to defend by their bravery thehill which they occupied, fmall and ill provided as itwas, yet being the only refuge of their liberry. And asthe fame events now recurred every day, they be­came lb habituated, as it were, to difafters, that, ab-ftra&ing their thoughts from all feeling of their cir-cumftances, they regarded their arms, and thefwords in their hands, as now their only hopes.
XLIII. ON the other fide, the Gauls,.havingfor feveral days only waged an ineffectual war againftthe buildings, when they perceived that among thefires and ruins of the city nothing now remainedbut a band of armed enemies, who were neither ter­rified in the leaft by fo many difafters, nor likely tocondefccnd to treat of a capitulation, unlefs forcewere applied, reiolved to have recourfe to extremi­ties, and make an alTault on the citadel. On a fig-nal given, ut the h'rft light, their whole multitude wasjTiarfhalled in the Forum, from whence, after raif*ing the fhout, and forming a teftudo *, they advan­ced to the attack. The Romans in their defence did
• Forming therafelvec into a com part lirtily, with tlieir (hieUU joinedtogether, and held over their kcatU to piotcct them from the miflileWUIJHUIS of the enemy.
- .i .' nothing







OCR Output








326 THEHISTbfcY


B 'rip K general one. Nor did the Sabines, who were fert-
v_ -T_ _f dered prefumptuous by their fuccefies in the lafc
Y.R. 306. year, ceafe to provoke and urge them to fight;
B'C. 446. afking, " why they wafted time in trifling excur-
"fions and retreats like marauders? and, inftead of
"making one main effort to decide a fingle waf,
"multiply their operations into a number of infig-
"nificant fkirmifhes? Why not come to a general
"engagement in the field, and let fortune determine
"the victory at once?"
LXII. THE Romans, befides that they had now,of themfelves, acquired a high degree of courage,were exafperated at the difhonour which it wouldreflect on them, if the other army were to returnvictorious to Rome, while they lay expofed to theabufe and infults of the enemy: " and when," faidthe)», " fhall we ever be a match for the enemy, if"we are not at prefent?" When the confulunder-ftood that fuch were the fentiments generally ex-preffed by the foldiers in the camp, he called themto an affembiy, and faid, " Soldiers, I fuppofe ye"have heard the iflue of the campaign in Algidum:"the army have behaved as became the army of a"free people. Through the judicious conduct of"my colleague, and the valour of the foldiers, vic-"tory has been obtained. For my part, what plan'' I am to adopt, or what degree of refoludon I am"to entertain, depends, foldiers, upon you. The"war may either be prolonged with advantage, or"it may be brought to a fpeedy conclufion. If it"is to be prolonged, I (hall take care, that, through"means of the lame difcipline with which I began,"your hopes and your valour mall every day in-"create. If ye have already enough of courage,"and wifh for a fpeedy decifion, come on, raife here"a fhout, fuch as ye would raifc in the field. That"will demonftrate your inclinations and your cou-« rage." The fhout being raifed with uncommon
ahcrity,







OCR Output








OF ROME. 221.


icr reafon to hope for fuccefs, from a number of de- BOOKtached parties acting feparately, than from one army , __ '_-,
of unwieldy bulk. Y.R.X89.
B. C.4.63.
III. LEAVING therefore a guard in the camp,they marched out, and fell upon the Roman frontierswith fuch fury, as to carry terror even to the city:fuch an event caufed the greater uneafinefs, becaufeit was entirely unexpected; for nothing could belefs apprehended, than that a vanquifhed enemy,almoft befieged in their camp, fliould entertain athought of committing depredations; and the coun­try people, in a panick, pouring into the gates, and,in the excefs of their fright, exaggerating everything, cried out, that they were not irnall ravagingparties, nor employed in plundering; but that thelegions, and the entire army of the enemy, were ap­proaching, marching with rapid hafte towards thecity, and prepared for an aflault. The firft whoheard thefe rumours from them fpread them aboutamong others, unatithenticated as they were, andtherefore the more liable to exaggeration; whichcaufed fuch a hurry and confufed clamour, every onecalling to arms, as, in fome meafure, refembled theconfternation of a city taken by an enemy. LuckilyQuintius the coniul had corne back to Rome fromAlgidum; this proved a remedy for their fears, forhe calmed the tumult, upbraiding them with beingafraid of a vanquifhed enemy, and pofted guards acthe gates. He then convened the fenate, and hav­ing, by their directions, ifiued a proclamation for aceiTation of all civil bufinefs *, marched out to pro­tect the frontiers, leaving Quintus Servilius to com­mand in the city; but he found no enemy in thecountry. The other conful encountered the enemy


* Jujtitiun; quiajuijijlctitur. In cafes of great immediate danger,all proceedings at law were fufpen.kil; the fhops ;!l'u were fhut, andall civil bufiuefi flopped, until the alarm was over.


with







OCR Output








6 F R O M E, r9i-


fighting, and, inftcad of making head on ^11 fides, B O O'K
bent their whole force towards one point; where, v_-yl ,
forming in the fiiape of a wedge, and exerting every Y.R. 17.'..effort of their bodies and arms, they at length forced B. Ct *7".a paflage. Their courfe led to a hill of moderateacclivity; there, firft, they halted ; and then the ad­vantage of the ground affording them a little time tobreathe, and to recover from the confirmation intowhich they had been thrown, they afterwards evenrepulfed an attack of the enemy; and this little band'would, with the aid of the ground, have come offvictorious, had not a body of Veientians, lent roundfhe ridge of the hill, made their way to the fummit:by this means the enemy became again fuperior;the Fabii were all cut off, to a man, and their forttaken. It is agreed on all hands, that the three hun­dred and fix perifhed; and that only one fingleperfon, then quite a youth, was left, as a ftock forthe propagation of the Fabian race; and who was,afterwards, on many emergencies, both in peace and.war, to prove the firmeft fupport of the ftatt.
LI. AT the time when this difafter happened, v. R.I??.Caius Horatius and Titus Menenius were in the con- •"•c. +7:,.iblfhip. Menenius was immediately lent againft dieEtrurians, elated with their victory. He alfo wasworfted in battle, and the enemy took poffefiion ofthe Janiculum. Nor would the city, which befidesthe war, was diftrefied alfo by fcarcity, have efcupeda fiege, the Etrurians having parted the Tiber, hadnot the conful Horatius been recalled from the coun­try of the Volfcians. And fo near did the enemyapproach to the walls, that the firft engagement wasat the temple of Hope, in which no advantage wasgained on either fide; and the fecond, at the Collinegate, in which the Romans obtained fome fmall ad­vantage i and this, though far from decifive, yet byreftoring to the foldiers their former courage, qua­lified them the better to contend with the enemy ino 2 future.







OCR Output








0 F R O M E. 35


"will that this Numa Pompilius, whofe head I B o o K"shold, mould be king of Rome, difplay to us, we ._J-y.^J"befeech thec, clear tokens of the fame, within"thofe limits which I have marked out." He thennamed the particular aufpices, which he wifhedfhould be fent; and, thefe having appeared, Numawas declared king, and came down from the confe-crated ftand.
,/..
XIX. BEING thus put in pofiefHon of the king-•dom, and confidering that the city was but of moreHanding, and had been founded by means of vio­lence and arms, he formed a defign of founding itanew, upon principles ofjuftice, laws, and morals;and, knowing that the minds of the people, render­ed ferocious by a military life, would never.accom-modate themfelves to the practice of thefe, duringthe continuance of war, he fefolved, by a difufe ofarms, to mollify the fiercenefs of their temper: withthis. view, he built a temple to Janus *, near thefoot of the hill Argiletum f, which was to notify aftate either of war or of peace: when open, it'de-noted that the ftate was engaged in war; when fhut,that there was peace with all the furrounding nations.Since the reign of Numa, it has been fhut but twice;once, in the confulate of Titus Manlius, upon theconclufion of the firft Punic war: the happinefs offeeing it fhut the fecond time, the gods granted toour own times, when, after the battle of Actium, theemperor Caefar Auguftuseftablifhcd univerfil peace,on land and fea. This he then fhutj a::d having, by
• Janns is the moft antient kfng in Inly, cfwh^m any knowledgehas been handed down to poftu.iy: he was the fir'.l who introducedcivilization, and the wilful aits, among the wild inhabitants of thatcountry. He is reprefenteil with two t:tces, as knowing both the pilland the future; fometimes wiih four; in whivh l.nter t'orm, one ofthe many temples dedicated to him at Rome, was nvclcJ; Invii.g tourequal ficies, on each lide one door :inil ihres wiivl;,ws; the tour 'loor1were emblematical of the feafons; the twelve wir.do'A.s, of the months;auil the whole, of the year.
f A fmall hill, to the czft of the Palatine.
B 2 treaties







OCR Output








O F R O M E. 413


clearing the way on all fides, and by the centurions, BOOKtheir indignation burft out with fuch fury, that the . - .' _fmilitary tribune was overwhelmed with ftones by his Y.R. 341.own troops. When this deed of fuch a heinous na- B.c. *"•"ture was reported at Rome, and the military tribunesendeavoured to procure a decree of the fenate, foran inquiry into the death of their colleague, the ple­beian tribunes interpofed their proteft. But this dif-pute was a branch of a conteft of another kind; forthe patricians had been feized with apprehenGonsthat the commons, actuated by refentment and dreadof the inquiries, would clecct military tribunes out oftheir own body; therefore they laboured with alltheir might for an election of confuls. The plebeiantribunes, not fuffering the decree of the fenate topafs, and alfo protefting againft the election of con­fuls, the affair was brought to an interregnum. Thepatricians then obtained the victory.
LI. QUINTUS Fabius Vibulanus, interrex, pre-Y.R.34.1.Tiding in the afiembly, Marcus Cornelius Coffus and B. c.4'1.Lucius Furius Medullinus were chofen confuls. Inthe beginning of their year of office, the fenatepaffed a decree, that the tribunes fhould, withoutdelay, propofe to the commons an inquiry into themurder of Poftumius, and that the commons mouldappoint whomfoever they fhould think proper toconduct the inquiry. The employment was, by avote of the commons, which was approved by thepeople at large, committed to the confuls; who,notwithftanding they proceeded in the bufineis withthe utmoft moderation and lenity, pafiing fentenceof punifhment only on a few, who, as there is goodreafon to believe, put an end to their own lives; yetcould not prevent the commons from conceiving thehigheft difpleafure, and from obferving that " any"conftitutions, enacted for their advantage, lay fo"long dormant and unexecuted; whereas a law pafled,"in the meantime, configning their pcrfons and lives
E E 4 "tO







OCR Output








OF ROME. 119


minds of the populace, from having enjoyed a high BOOKdegree of popularity, became an object not only of. , **',_,jealoufy, but of fufpicion, attended with a charge of Y.R. 145.an atrocious nature: it was given out that he afpired B.c. s°j.at the fovereignty, becaufe he had not fubftituted acolleague in the room of Brutus; and befides, wasbuilding a houfe on the fummit of mount Velia,which, in fuch a lofty and ftrong'fituation, would be ,
an impregnable fortrefs. The conful's mind wasdeeply affected with concern and indignation, atfinding that fuch reports were circulated and be­lieved; he therefore fummoned the people to an af-fembly, and ordering the fafces to be lowered *,mounted the roftrum. It was a fight highly pleafingto the multitude, to find the enfigns of fovereigntylowered to them, and an acknowledgment thusopenly given, that the majefty and power of thepeople were fuperiorto thofe of the conful. Atten­tion being ordered, the conful extolled the good for­tune of his colleague, who, "after having accom-"plifhed the deliverance of his country, and being"raifed to the higheft poft of honour, met with"death, while fighting in defence of the republic,"when his glory had arrived at full maturity, but"had not yet been converted into jealoufy: whereas"he himfelf, having furvived his glory, was become"an object of calumny and jealoufy; and from the"character of deliverer of his country, had funk to"a level with the Aquillii and Vitellii. Will no de-"gree of merit then," faid he, " ever gain your't confidence, fo far as to be fecure from the attacks"of fufpicion? Could I have the leaft apprehenfion"that I, the bittereft enemy to kings, mould un-"dergo the charge of aiming at kingly power?"Suppofing that I dwelt in the very citadel, and in"the Capitol, could I believe that I was an object
• At the fame time, he took the axes out of the fafces, and theywere never, afterwards, carried in the fafcei of the tunl'uis within theciiy.


14 "of







OCR Output








328 THE HISTORY


B o o K LXVII. THERE, as we are told, he fpoke to this. -T_ _j purpofe; *c Although unconfcious of any mifconductY.R. 309. " on my. part, yet it is with the utmoft fhame, Ro-B.C.443. 't mans, that I am come here, to meet you, in af-ti fembly. That ye fhould be witnelTes of fuch an"event, that it mould be handed down, on record,"to pofterity; that, in the fourth confulate of Titus"Quintius, the .fliquans and Volfcians, who, a"fhort time ago, were barely a match for the Her-t' nicians, mould have marched in arms, without mo-"leftation, to the walls of the city of Rome! Could"I have forefeen that this ignominy was referved'' for this particular year, though fuch is the general'•' ftate of manners for a long time paft, fuch the^ condition of affairs, that my mind could prefage"no good, I would yet have avoided this honoura-"ble poft, by exile or by death, if there had been*c no other way of efcaping it. Gould Rome then"have been taken in my confulfhip, if thofe arms,c< that were at our gates, had been in the hands of"men of courage? I had enjoyed enough of ho-"nours, more than enough ot life: I ought not to"have outlived my third confulfhip. But, of whom'c have thofe moft daftardly enemies dared to fhew'' fuch contempt; of us confuls? or of you Ro-«c mans? If the fault lies in us, deprive us of the'' command, as unworthy of it, and if that be not"enough, inflicT: fome farther punifhment upon us:"if in you, may no divine, or human, being punifhf your tranfgrefiions, only may ye yourfelves gain'c a proper fenfe of them. They have not been ac-Cc tuated by contempt of you, as fuppofing you void"of fpirit, nor by confidence in their own valour.*c After being fo often routed and put to flight,<' beaten .out of their camps, ftripped of their terri-f tories, and fent under the yoke, they well know"both themfelves and you. Party difienfions are"the bane of this city; the ftruggles between the"patricians and the plebeians, while neither we fix
"due







OCR Output








49* THE HISTORY


B OvO K the field, and their being routed by an eneifty re-i _.J_ _f markable for cowardice and running away. OnY.R. 361. which the whole army cried out together, that theyB.C. 391. deferved to hear fuch reproaches, and that they ac­knowledged the fhamefulnefs of their behaviour;but that they were at the fame time determined tomake amends for it, and that the enemy's joy on theoccafion mould be but of fhort duration. They re-quefted earneftly that he would lead them thence di­rectly to the camp of the enemy, which lay in theplain within their view, offering to fubmit to anypunifhment if they did not take it before night. Af­ter commending their refolution, he ordered themto refrefh themfelves, and to be in readinefs at thefourth watch: the enemy on the other fide, withde-fign to prevent the Romans from flying from thehill by night through the road which led to Verrugo,were there ready to receive them, and the battle be­gan before day. However the moon was up throughthe" whole night, and the fight was managed with aslittle confufion as it could have been by day. Butthe fhout reaching Verrugo, where it was imaginedthat the Roman camp had been attacked, the troopswere feized with fuch terror, that in fpite, of the in-treaties of ./Emilius, and all his endeavours to detainthem, they fled to Tufculum in the utmoft diforder.From thence a report was carried to Rome, thatPoftumius and his army were cut to pieces. How­ever, as foon as day-light had removed the dangerof falling into ambufcades, in cafe of a hafty purfuit,riding through the ranks, and demanding the per­formance of their promifes, he infufed into the menfuch a degree of ardour, that the ^Equans could nolonger withftand their efforts, but betook themfelvesto flight, when a Daughter of them enfued (as in acafe where anger was more concerned than courage)that ended in the entire deftruction of their army;and the afflicting news from Tufculum which hadcaufed a great, though groundlefs, alarm in the city,
were.







OCR Output








O F R O M E.


over the markets, fhould inftirute a college of mer- BOOKchants, and join the pontiff in the performance of. -w-_rthe ceremonies ufual on fuch occafions. The people Y.R. 159.gave the honour of the dedication to Marcus Laeto- *•c.rius, a centurion of the firft rank, fhewing plainlythat they acted thus, not merely out of refpedr. tothe perfon, on whom they conferred an office ofhigher dignity than became his ftation, but with de-fign to affront the coniuls. This threw the patrici­ans, and one of the conluls particularly, into a rage;but the commons had now affumed a greater degreeof courage, and began to prolecute theirmeafuresina very different method, from that in which they hadfet out: having given up all hopes of protection,from the confuls and the fenate, whenever they fawa debtor led to the court, they flew together from allquarters; fo that neither could the fentence of theconful be heard amidft their noife and clamours, norwhen it was pronounced did any one obey it; allwas managed by force; and the whole dread anddanger, with refpefr. to their freedom, was transferredfrom the debtors to the creditors, who, ftandingfmgle, were abufed by the multitude, under the"veryeye of the conful. To add to the perplexity of thefenate, the alarm was fpread of an attack being in­tended by the Sabines; and, orders being iffued forlevying troops, not a man gave in his name; mean­while Appius in a rage inveighed bitterly againft thecriminal lenity of his colleague, that, by his popularfilence, he was betraying the commonwealth; andthat, befides refufing to enforce the laws with refpeclto creditors, he neglected alfo to execute the decreeof the fenate, for levying troops. He declared that"the intereft of the commonwealth was not yet en.."tirely deferted, nor the confular office yet ftripped"of its authority; that he himfelf would ftand forth"fingly, and vindicate his own dignity, and that of"the fenate." Though furrounded by the multi­tude which aflembled daily, and were of a temper). 4 tOO







OCR Output








Tr. of:


THE


HISTORY


O F


R O ME,


B Y


TITUS LIVIUS.


TRANSLATED FROM THE ORIGINAL,
WITH NOTES AND ILLUSTRATIONS,
BY
GEORGE BAKER, A. M.


 


is PHiLOsopar TEACHING »r EXAMPLES.
BOMNOBROKE.
IN SIX VOLUMES.
•
VOL. I.LONDON:


PRINTED FOR A. STRAHAN, AND T. CADELL JUN. AND
v. DAVIES (SUCCESSORS TO MR. CADELL)
IN THE STRAND.1797.







OCR Output








OF ROME.


 


and then, throwing open his garment, he fhewed Bhis back mangled with ftripes; begging no otherterms of favour, than that " if the accufed could Y.R. 3o6."name any one offence of which he had ever been-B.c'"guilty, he mould have liberty, though a private"citizen, to repeat the fame cruel treatment towards"him." Oppius was thrown into prifon, and be­fore the day of trial put an end to his life. Thetribunes confifcated the property of Appius and Op­pius. Their colleagues went out of the country intoexile, and their property like wife was confifcated.Then Marcus Claudius, who laid claim to Virginia,was brought to trial and condemned j but Virginiushimfelf agreeing to a mitigation of the fentence, fotar as it affected his life, he was difcharged, and wentinto exile to Tibur. And now the fhade of Virgi-pia, whofe caufe proved more fortunate after herdeath, than during her life, after having roamedthrough fo many houfes in queft of vengeance, reftedat length in peace, none of the guilty being left un-punifhed.
/
LIX. THE patricians were filled with dreadful ap-prehenfions, for the tribunes feemed now to wearthe fame countenance which had formerly markedthe decemvirs, when Marcus Duilius, tribune of thecommons, impofed a falutary reftraint on their pow-'cr, now tending to excefs, telling them," We have"proceeded to a fufficient length, both in afferting<c our liberty, and in punifhing our enemies. Where-"fore, during the remainder of this year, I will not"fuffer any perfon either to be brought to trial,"or to be put in confinement. For, I think it"highly improper, that old crimes now buried in*' oblivion, mould be again dragged forth to notice,"after recent ones have been expiated, by the pu-"nifliment of the decemvirs; and we have fuffici-fc ent fecurity, in the unremitting attention, everf' fhewn by both our confuls to the interefts of li-
'' berty.







OCR Output








326 THE HISTORY.


B o o K at the "fame time preferving unhurt the dignity of .^-^L_, the patricians. Wifhing to give time for the mat-Y.R. 308. ter to cool, they reftrained the commons from rifingB.C. 444. in fedition by a proclamation for a levy of troops, toact againft the ^)quans and Volfcians. Giving, as afufficient reafon, that while harmony prevailed in thecity, every thing abroad was alfo in quiet, but when­ever civil difcord broke out, their foreign enemiesaflumed new courage. This care to preferve peaceabroad, proved the caufe of domeftic concord. Buteach of the orders always took an improper advan­tage of moderation in the other. As foon as thecommons grew quiet, the younger patricians beganto infult them. When the tribunes attempted toprotect the weaker party 3 even at firft, they were oflittle ufe; afterwards, they themfelves fhared the ill.treatment, particularly in the laft months, becaufethe combinations, then formed among the morepowerful, encouraged them to ufe thofe officers ill,and the vigour of every magiftracy generally relaxesfomewhat in the latter part of the year. And nowthe commons began to think that they had nothingto hope from their tribunes, unlefs they got fuch asIcilius, for thofe whom they had for two years paftwere but nominal tribunes. On the other fide theelder patricians, although they were convinced thatthe younger part of their body carried their pre-fumption too far, yet were better pleafed, if thebounds of moderation were to be exceeded, that theirown party mould poffefs a redundancy of fpirit, thantheir adverfaries. So difficult it is to preferve mo­deration in the afierting of liberty, while, under thepretence of a defire to balance rights, each elevateshimfelf in fuch a manner, as to deprefs another; formen are apt, by the very meafures which they adoptto free themfelves from fear, to become the objectsof fear to others; and to faften upon them the bur­then of injufticc, which they have thrown off from


their







OCR Output








4}* THE HISTORY


B Oiv"* K w?a^^1 ar|d employed in its fervice, their joy received« -^.' - a manifold addition, and their gratitude was raifed toV".R. 3^9. a higher pitch, from the confideration that this had.B.C.403. bcen a voiujlt;ary grant, having never been agita­ted by the tribunes, nor extorted by any requi-fitions of their own. The plebeian tribunes, alone,partook not of the general joy and harmony diffufedthrough every rank, but averred, that " this would'c not prove fuch matter of joy, nor fo advantageous'c to the body of the patricians, as they themfelves"imagined. That the plan appeared better on the"firft' view, than it would prove on experience.'c For how could that money be procured unlefs by"irnpofing a tax on the people? They were gene-'' rous to fome, therefore, at other people's expence."Beddes, even though others thould put up with"this, thofe who had ferved out their time in the"army would never endure, that others fhould fervc"on better terms than they themfelves had done ,"and that they fhouM bear the expence both of then*"own fervice and of the fervice of others." Thefearguments had an effect on great numbers of thecommons. At laft, on the publication of the decreefor levying the tax, the tribunes went fo far, as, ontheir part, to give public notice, that they would fup-port any perfon who Ihould refule his proportion ofthe tax for payment to the foldiers. The patriciansperfifted with perfeverance in fupport of a matter fohappily begun. They firft of all paid in their ownproportion; and there being no fi.lver coined at thattime, fome of them conveying their weighed brafsto the treafury in waggons, gave a pompous appear­ance to their payments. After she feqat.e had withthe ftricteft punctuality made their payments, in pro­portion to their rated properties, the principal ple­beians, connected in friendfhip with the nobility, inpursuance of a plan laid down, began to pay; and,•when the populace law thefe highly commended bypatricians, and alfo refpected as good citizens by
thofe







OCR Output








»t PREFACE.


fixty years. The fecond decade is loft: it com-prifed a period of feventy-five years; the prin­cipal occurrence in it was the firft Punic war,in which the Romans, after a long and arduousftruggle, were finally victorious. The thirddecade is extant: it contains a particular andwell detailed account of the fecond Punicwar; the longeft, as our author himfelf obferves,and the moft hazardous war, the Romans hadever been engaged in; in the courfe of whichthey gained fo many advantages, and acquiredfo much military experience, that no nationwas ever able, afterwards, to withftand them.The fourth decade contains the Macedonianwar againft Philip, and the Afiatic againft An-tiochus. Thefe are related at confiderable length,infomuch that the ten books comprife a fpace oftwenty-three years only. Of the fifth decadethe five firft' books only remain, and thefe veryimperfect. They give an account of the warwith Perfeus, king of Macedonia, who gainsfeveral advantages againft the Romans, but is,at length, fubdued, and his kingdom reducedto the form of a Roman province; of the cor­ruption of feveral Roman governors in the ad-miniftration of the provinces, and their punifh-ment; and of the third Punic war, which lafteJonly five years.
Of the remaining books, it has been alreadyfaid, that the contents only have been preferv-cd; and they ferve to ihew us the greatnefsof our lofs, the greateft literary lofs, perhaps,owing to the ravages of the time. Livyhad employed forty-live books, in the hiftory
of







OCR Output








O F R O M E. 413


little pains to avoid the imputation of it, which was BOOKgrounded on a fufpicion caufed by her too great gai- . '_,ety ofdrefs, and her temper lefs referved than be- Y.R. 335.came a virgin. The trial having been adjourned to B.Ci w.a farther hearing, and fhe being afterwards acquitted,the chief pontiff, by the direction of the college, or­dered her to refrain from indifcreet mirth; and, inher drefs, to attend more to the fanctity of her cha­racter, than to the fafhion. In this year Cumae, acity then pofiefled by Greeks, was taken by theCampanians.
XLV. THE enfuing year had for military tribunes Y.R.136.with confular power, Agrippa Menenius Lanatus, ' '4r^'Publius Lucretius Tricipitinus, Spurius Nautius, andCaius Servilius; a year, which, through the good for­tune of the Roman people, was rendered remarkable,rather by great dangers, than by lofies. The (lavesformed a confpiracy to fet fire to the city in dlfferentquarters; and, while the people mould be every­where intent on faving the houfes, to take arms, andftize on the citadel and the Capitol. Jupiter frultrat-ed their horrid defigns, and two of their numberhaving made a difcovery, the guilty were leized andfuffcred punifhment. The difcoverers were reward­ed with their freedom, and ten thoufand afes* inweight of brafs, paid out of the treafury, a fum, whichat that time was reckoned wealth. Soon after, in­telligence was received at Rome, from good authori­ty, that the ^Equans were preparing to renew hofti-lities, and that this old enemy was joined in the defignby a new one, the Lavicanians. Fighting with the^Equans was now become to the ftate almoft an anni-verfary cuftom. To Lavici ambafladors were fent,\vho having returned with an evafive anfwer, fromwhich it was evident that, though immediate warwas not intended, yet peace would not be of long
• $,.l. 51. iod.
continuance.







OCR Output








io8 TfcE HISTORY


BOOK forward their operations more vigoroufly, in hopes
.- n' . that the Roman army would be animated with the
Y.R. 1*3. fame fpirit of oppofition againft Appius, which they
B. C. 469. had formerly displayed againft Fabius, when con-
ful; and in fact, in Appius's cafe, it mewed itfelf
with a much greater degree of inveteracy, than in
that of Fabius; for they were not only unwilling to
conquer, like Fabius's troops, but even chofe to be
conquered. When led out to the field, they fled
fhamefully to their camp, nor made a halt, until
they faw the Volfcians advancing to the rampart, and
committing great flaughter on the rear of the army.
The neceffity of repelling the victorious enemy from
the rampart, then prevailed on them to fight, which,
however, they did in fuch a manner, as made it
evident, that they acted only becaufe Roman fol-
.diers would not luffer their camp to be taken: in
other refpects, they rejoiced at their own lofies and
difgrace. All this had fo little effect towards foften-
ing the ftubborn fiercenefs of Appius, that he re-
folved to exhibit farther examples of feverity; but
when he had fummoned an afiembly for the purpofe,
the lieutenant generals and tribunes gathered haftily
about him, and cautioned him " not to hazard a
"trial, of the extent of an authority, whofe whole
"efficacy depended on the will of thofe who were
"to obey it: informed him, that the foldiers in ge-
"neral declared that they would not attend the af-
".fembly; and that, in every quarter, they were
"heard loudly demanding that the camp mould be
"removed out of the Volician territories j they re-
"minded him that the victorious army had, juft
"now, approached almoft dole to the gates and to
"the rampart; and that if he perfifted, there was
"not only reafon to apprehend, but every certain
"indication before their eyes, of a moft grievous
"calamity enfuing." At length, yielding to per-
fuafion, as.nothing but a delay of punifhment could
be the confequence, he prorogued the ail'embly;


gave







OCR Output








OF ROME.


therefore requefted afliftance from the Volfcians of B o o KEcetra, who gladly complied with the requeft; and . - -_ffo inveterate was the hatred which thofe ftates bore Y.R. iqo.towards the Romans, that they eagerly vied with B.c.46>.each other, in making the moft vigorous prepara­tions for war. This coming to the knowledge of theHernicians, they gave notice to the Romans, thatthe people of Ecetra had revolted to the .^Equans.The colony of Antium was alfo fufpected, becaufc,on that town being taken, a great multitude had fledthence for refuge to the ^iquans; and while the warwith that people lafted, theli; proved the moft vali­ant foldiers in their army. Afterwards, when the,/Equans were driven into their towns, this rabblewithdrawing privately, and returning to Antium,feduced the colonifts there, from their allegiance tothe Romans, which, even before that time, was notmuch to be relied on. Before the bufmefs was yetripe, on the firft information being laid before thefenate of their intention to revolt, directions weregiven to the confuls to fend for the heads of thecolony, and enquire into the truth of the matter:thele having readily attended, and being introducedto the fenate by the confuls, anfwered the queftionsput to them in fuch a manner, that the fufpicionsagainft them were ftronger when they were dif-mifled, than when they came. War was then con-fidered as inevitable. Spurius Furius, one of theconfuls, co whofe lot that province had fallen, march­ing againft the ^Equans, found the enemy in thecountry of the Hernicians, employed in collectingplunder j and, being ignorant of their numbers, be-caufe they had never been feen all together, he rafhlyhazarded an engagement, though his army was veryunequal to the forces of the enemy. At the firitonfet, he was driven from his ground, and obligedto retreat to his camp; nor did the danger endthere: in the courfe of the next night, and the fol­lowing day, his carup was furrouudcd on all fides,
and







OCR Output








i8a THE HISTORY


Jj o o K " commonwealth and of the fenate, if not all the. -r-_f " tribunes, yet as many at leaft as they could."Y.R. 174. Convinced of the propriety of Appius's advice, theB. C.478. patricians in general addrefied the tribunes with ci­vility and kindnefsj and thofe of confular dignityemployed whatever perfonal influence they had overeach of them; and thus, partly by conciliating theirregard, and partly by the weight of their influence,they prevailed on the tribunes to let their powers bedirected to the advantage of the ftate: and the con-fuls, being fupported by four tribunes, againft oneoppofer of the public intereft, completed the levy.They then marched their army againft. the Veienti-ans, to whom auxiliaries had flocked from all partsof Etruria, induced to take arms, not fo much byaffection to the Veientians, as by the hopes whichthey had conceived, that the Roman ftate might bebrought to ruin by inteftine difcord. Accordingly,in the afiemblies of each of the ftates of Etruria, theleading men argued warmly, that " the power of"the Romans would be everlafting, unlefs civil dif-"fenfipn armed them with rage againft each other."This was the only infection, the only poifbn thatu operated on powerful ftates, io as to fet limits to"the duration of great empires. This evil, whofe"progrefs had been long retarded, partly by the«c wife management of the patricians, and partly by"the patient conduct of the commons, had now"proceeded to extremity: out of the one, were"formed two diftinct ftates, each of which had its. "own magiftrates, and its own laws: at firft, though"they ufed to give a loofe to their rancorous ani-"mofities, on occaiion when troops were to be le-"vied, yet thefe very men, as long as war conti."nued, paid obedience to their officers; and while"military difcipltne remained in force, whatever'' might be the ftate of affairs in the city, ruin might"be deferred: but now, the Roman foldier carried"with him to the camp, the cuftom of refufing
"obedience







OCR Output








O F R O M E. 155


"and Sabine wars:" Titus Largius was of opinion, BOOKthat " the prefent juncture required fomething more . _' __,"than the making a return for fervices performed j Y.R. Z6o."that the whole body of the commons were over- B. c."whelmed with debt, nor could the progrefs of the"evil be ftopped, unlefs the advantages of the whole"were attended to. On the contrary, if diftinctions"were made, this would add fuel to the difienfions,"inftead ofextinguifhingthem." Appius Claudius,whofe temper, naturally harm, was roufed to a de­gree of ferocity by his hatred to the commons onthe one hand, and the applaufe of the patricians onthe other, affirmed that "all thefe difturbances"were excited, not by the people's fufferings, but"their licentioufnefs; and that the commons were"actuated by a fpirit of wantonnefs, rather than by"refentment of injuries: this was the confequence"of giving them a right to appeal; for all that a"conful could do, was to threaten, he could not"command, when people are allowed to appeal to"thofe, who have been accomplices in their tranf-"greflions. Come, faid he, let us create a dicta-"tor from whom there is no appeal: this madnefs"which has fet the whole ftate in a flame, will"quickly fink into filence. Let me then fee, who"will ftrike a lidtor, when he knows that the very"perfon whofe dignity he infults, has the fole and'' entire difpofal of his perlbn and of his life."
XXX. To many, the expedient recommendedby Appius appeared too rough and violent, and juft-ly fo j on the other hand, the propofitions of Vir-ginius and Largius were confidered as tending toeftablifh a bad precedent; particularly that of Lar­gius, which was utterly fubverfive of all credit.The advice of Virginius was deemed to be thefartheft from excefs, on either fide, and a juft medi­um between the other two. But, through the fpiritof faction, and men's regard to their private inte-
refts,







OCR Output








3'° THE HISTORY


B Oiu K" a ^rcc Perf°n to flavery, I order that you be taken. . - *A_j" into cuftody." Neither in the prote&ion of theY.R. 306. tribunes, nor in a fentence of the people, could Ap-
B. C.446.


bunes for aid, and when that was difregarded, and hewas feized by the bailiff, cried out, " I appeal."This expreflion, the peculiar fafeguard of liberty,uttered from that mouth, which had ib lately threat­ened the fubveriion of liberty, caufed a generalfilence; whilft all with earneftnefs obferved one toajiother, that *' at length it appeared that there were"gods, and that they did not difregard the affairs of"mankind. That the punifhments which attendedc? pride and cruelty, though they might come late,"were not light. That he now pleaded for the*' right of appeal, who had abolimed that right: he"implored the protection of the people, who had"trodden under foot all the people's rights ; and he,"who had fo lately doomed a free perfon to flavery,"was himfelf refufed the privilege of liberty, ancj"dragged to prifon." Amidft thefe murmurs ofthe anembly, Appius's voice was alfo heard implor­ing the protection of the people. He enumerated"the fervices of his anceftors to the ftate, both ia"peace and war; his own unfortunate zeal for the"intereft of the Roman commons, when, for the'' fake of obtaining equitable laws, he refigned the"conlulfhip, to the high difpleafure of the patrici-"ans: mentioning his own laws; and that while"they yet remained in force, the framer of them was"dragged to prifon. But the peculiar advantages,"or diladvantages attending his particular cafe, he"would then endeavour to fet in a proper light,"when he fhould be allowed to make his defence."At prefent, by the common right of every mem-"ber of the ftate, he, a Roman citizen, accufed of"an offence, demanded liberty of fpeaking in his.'f own defence, and the benefit of a trial before the"Roman people. That his apprehenfions from the
"popular







OCR Output








OF ROME. '359


pctration of a murder, which would violate all the B o o lclaws of nations; or that, in fuch an affair, he fhould . _^__,feel no compunction. It is much more probable, Y.R. 317.that his view was, to involve them in fuch guilt, as BtC. 4JJ'to cut off all hope of reconciliation with the Ro­mans. Statues of the ambafladors flain at Fidenaewere erected near the roftrum, at the public ex*pence. A defperate ftruggle was now/ to be ex-pelted with the Veientians and Fidenatians.; as, be-fides the circumftance of their fituation, contiguous •*
to the frontiers, they hadftained the commencementof the war with an action fo abominable. The com.tmons, therefore, and their tribunes, feeing the ne-cefilty of attending to the general welfare, and fuf-fering other matters to pafs ia quiet, there wasno oppofition to the election of confuls, who wereMarcus Geganius Macerinus a third time, and Lu- Y.R. 318.cius Sergius Fidenas, fo called, I fuppofe, from his B'Ci «*•fervices in the fucceeding war. For he was the firftwho engaged in battle with the king of the Veien­tians, on this fide of the Anio, in which he got thebetter; but he gained not an unbloody victory, fothat people's grief for the lofs of their countrymen,exceeded their joy'for the defeat of the enemy; andthe fenate, as in a cafe particularly alarming, or*dered Mamercus ^milius to be named dictator.He chole his mafter of the horfe from among hiscolleagues of the former year, in the office of mili­tary tribunes with confular power, Lucius QuintiusCincinnatus, a young man worthy of the father fromwhom he fprung. To the troops levied by the con­fuls, were added a number of veteran centurions,Ikilled in the bufinefs of war, and the number ofmen loft in the laft battle was replaced. The dicta-tor ordered Quintius Capttolinus and Marcus FabiiisVibulanus to attend him in quality of lieutenant ge*neral. The appointment of a magiftrate with ex­traordinary power, and the character of the perfonappointed being felly foited to thofe powers, bothVOL. i. B B together







OCR Output








THE HISTORY


 


that he himfelf had, with difficulty, made hisefcape from the(weapons and fword of his father,and could in no place confider himfelf fafe, ex.t"cept among the foes of Lucius Tarquinius. TFor,"that they might not be deceived, the war againft"them, which was pretended to be laid afide, was"not at an end; but, on the firft opportunity,"when he found them off their guard, he would"certainly attack them. For his part, if, among"them, fuppliants could find no refuge, he would"traverfe every part of Latium, and if rejected"there, would apply to the Volfcians, the ^Equans,"and the Hernicians, nor reft, until he found fome"who were difpofed to afford protection to chil-"dren, from the cruel and unnatural feverity of"fathers. Perhaps, too, he fhould meet with thofe"who might be infpired with ardour to take arms,"and wage war, againft the proudeft of kings,"and the moft overbearing of nations." The Ga-bians, fuppofing that, if they did not fhow fomeregard to him, he would go from them, full of re-fcntment, to fome other place, received him withevery mark of kindnefs; told him, "he ought not"to be furprifed, that his father's behaviour to-"wards his children now, was no better than what"he had formerly fhewn towards his fubjects and"allies; that if other objects could not be found,C' he would at laft vent his rage on himfelf: afltired"him, that his coming was very acceptable to"them, and that they expected, in amort time, to"fee the feat of war transferred, with his affiftance,"from the gates of Gabii, to the walls of Rome."
&*-•'*- i^-~
LIV. HE was immediately admitted to a mare intheir public councils; and on thefe occafions, whilehe declared, that, in other affairs, he would beguided by the opinion of the Gabian elders, whohad better knowledge of thofe matters than hecould have, he took every opportunity of recom­mending







OCR Output








78 THE HISTORY


BOOK Were firft called, then, the eighty Centuries of thefirft clafs: if there was a difference of opinionamong thefe, which feldom happened, then the Cen­turies of the fecond clafs were to be called; andfcarcely ever did an inftance occur of their defcend-ing beyond this, fo as to come to the loweft clafies.Nor ought it to be wondered at, that the arrange­ment, which fubfifts at prefent, after the tribes hadbeen increafed to thirty-five, and the number ofthem almoft doubled, does not agree in the numberof Centuries younger and elder, with the amount ofthofe inftituted by Servius Tullius: for the city be­ing laid out into four divifions, according to the fe-veral quarters and hills, the parts that were inhabit­ed, thefe were what he called Tribes, I fuppofe fromthe tribute; for the mode of the people's payingtheir fbares of this, in an equal proportion to theirrated property, took its rife alfo from him: nor hadthefe tribes any relation to the number and diftribu-tion of the Centuries.
XLIV. WHEN the Cenfus was completed, whichhe had expedited by the terrors of a law pafied con­cerning fuch as fhould neglect to attend it, with de­nunciations of confinement and death, he iflued aproclamation, that all citizens of Rome, horfe andfootmen, fhould attend in the Campus Martius atthe dawn of day, each in his refpe&ive Century ; andhaving there drawn up the whole army in order, heperformed the luftration or purification of it, bythe ceremonies and facrifices called Suovetaurilia *.This was called the clofing of the luftrum, becaufeit was the conclufion of the Cenfus. In that furveyeighty thoufand citizens are faid to have been rated.Fabius Pictor, the nioft ancient of our writers, adds,that this was the number of thofe who were able to
* So called from the vi.Hiin.., fus, ovis, taurus, a Twine, a iheep,and bull; which, after being three times led rotind the army, wereoffered in lacrifice to Mars, See Adamt.
bear







OCR Output








I3<5 THE^ HISTORY


BOO Kthey renewed their operations againft Pometia, with. _^L . redoubled fury, and augmented ftrength; and whenY.R.ZJX. they had a-new completed their military works, theB. c. 500. foyers being juft on the point of fcaling the walls,the garrifon capitulated. However, although the ci­ty had furrendered, the chiefs of the Auruncians werefrom all parts dragged to execution, with the fame de­gree of cruelty, as if it had been taken by aflault: theother members of the colony were fold by auction:the town was demolifhed, and the land fet up to fale.The confuls obtained a triumph, rather in confidera-tion of their having gratified the people's refentmentby fevere revenge, than of the magnitude of the warwhich they had brought to a conclufion.
B.'c!^! XVIII. THE following year the confuls werePoftumus Cominius and Titus Lartius. In that yearfome Sabine youths having, through wantonnefs, ufedviolence to fome courtezans at Rpme, during the ce­lebration of the public games, and a mob affembling,a fcuffle enfued, which might almoft be called a bat­tle; and, from this trifling caufe, matters feemed tohave taken a tendency towards a renewal of hof-'tilities. Befides the apprehenfion of a war with theSabines, there was another affair which created muchuneafineft; undoubted intelligence was received, thatthirty ftates had already formed a confpiracy, at theinftigation of Octavius Mamilius. While the ftateremained in this perplexity, looking forward withanxious apprehenfion to the ifluc of fuch a perilousconjuncture, mention was made, for the firft time, ofcreating a dictator*. But in what year, or who the
• The dictator was an officer endued with abfolute authority overall orders auil bodies of men whatever; A ml from whom there was, inthe early times ct the republic, no appeal. He could not hold thecflice longer than fix months, nor go out of Italy, nor could lie marchon horlcback without leave previously obtained from the people. It'became the practice, that one of the confute, in the night, within thetcrritoiy of the'republic, named the dictator; and it was required thattin; nomination Aioulil be confirmed bjr aufjiicts.
confuls







OCR Output








O F R O M E. 40$


* felf, when the Roman legions were defeated, did B O £ K
"not, of your own judgment, difmount the cavalry .— _y- j
"and reftore the fight? Did he afterwards, when Y. R. •jji.
"you and the horfemen were fhut out from our ar- B. c.*1°'
"my, either come himfelf to your relief, or fend
"you affiftance? Then again, on the day following,
"did you find fupport any where? Did you and
't your cohort, by your own bravery, make youf
"way into the camp? Did ye in the camp find any
"conful or any army? Or, did ye find the camp
"forfaken, and the wounded foldiers left behind?
"Thefe things, it becomes your bravery and ho-
"nour, which have proved in this war the fecurity
"of the commonwealth, to declare this day. In
"fine, where is Caius Sempronius? where are our
"legions? Have you been dderted, or have you
"deferted the conful and the army? In fhort,
"have we been defeated, or have we gained the
"victory?"
XLI. IN anfwer to thefe interrogatories, Tem-panius is faid to have fpoken, not with ftudied elo­quence, but with the manly firmnefs of a foldier,neither vainly difplaying his own merit, nor mewingpleafure at the cenfure thrown on others: "As to"the degree of military fkill pofiefled by Caius"Sempronius the general, it was not his duty, as a"foldier, to judge; that was the bufinefs of the"Roman people, when, at the election, they chofe"him conful. He defired, therefore, that they"would not require, from him, a detail of the de-"figns and duties becoming the office of a general,"or of a conful; matters which, even from perfons"of the moft exalted capacity and genius, required"much attentive confideration: but what he faw,"that he could relate. He had feeo, before his"communication with the army was cut off, the"conful fighting in the front of the line, encourag-"ing the a»cn, and actively employed, between ther> D ^ "Roman







OCR Output








424 THE HISTORY


B.O o K cured every one of the places, fo as not to
. -r^_' room for any plebeian. There were four eleiSted,
YsR. 348. all of whom had already difcharged that office, Lu-
B. 0.404. cius Furius Medullinus, Caius Valerius Potitus, Nu-
merius Fabius Vibulanus, and Caius Servilius Ahah:
the laft being continued in office, by re-election, as
well on account of his other deferts, as in confequence
of the popularity which he had recently acquired by
his fingular moderation.
LVIfl. IN that year, the term of the truce withthe Veientian nation being expired, ambafiadors andheralds were employed to make a demand of fatis-faction for injuries, who, on coming to the frontiers,were met by an embaffy from the Veientians. Theferequefted that the others would not proceed to Veii,until they fhould firft have accefs to the Roman fe-nate. From the fenate thty obtained, that, in con-fideration of the Veientians being diftrefied by intcf-tine difienfions, fatisfaction fhould not be demanded:fo far were they from feeking in the troubles ofothers, an occafion of advancing their own interefts.In another quarter, in the country of the Volfcians,a difafter was felt in the garrifon ,at Verrugo beingloft. On which occafion fo much depended on time,that though the troops befieged there by the Volfci­ans, had fent for affiftance, and might have beenluccoured, if expedition had been ufed, the armyfent to their relief, came only in time to deftroy theenemy, who, juft after putting the garrifon to theiword, were difperfed in fearch of plunder. Theblame of iuch dilatory conduct was not to be im­puted to the tribunes, fo much as to the fenate; who,becaufe they were told that a very vigorous refiftancewas made, never confidered, that there are certainlimits to human ftrength, beyond which no degreeof .bravery can proceed. Thefe very gallant fol-diers, however, were not without revenge, both be­fore and after their death. In the following year,5 • Pubh'us







OCR Output








OF ROME. 123


 


quire fuch a high degree of popularity by artful in- BOOKtrigues, as the whole fenate then obtained by their'wife adminiftration. .
X. As the enemy drew nigh, every one removedhaftily from the country into the city, on every fideof which ftrong guards were pofted. Some partsfeemed well fecured by the walls, others by the Ti­ber running clofe to them. The Sublician bridgewas very near affording the enemy an entrance, hadit not been for one man, Horatius Cocks: no otherbulwark had the fortune of Rome on that day. Hehappened to be pofted on guard at the bridge, and•when he faw the Janiculum taken by a fudden af-fault, and the enemy pouring down from thence infull fpeed, his countrymen in diforder and confufion,no longer attempting oppofition, but quitting theirranks, he caught hold of every one that he could,endeavoured to ftop them, and appealing to godsand men, afifured.them, that " it was in vain that"they fled, after deferting the poft which could*' protect them; that if they pafied the bridge, and'' left it behind them, they would foon fee greater'' numbers of the enemy in the Palatium and the"Capitol, than in the Janiculum j wherefore he*c advifed and warned them to break down the"bridge, by their fwords, fire, or any other effec-"tual means, while he mould fuftain the attack of'' the enemy, as long as it was poflible for one per-'c fon to withftand them." He then advanced tothe firft entrance of the bridge, and being eafily dif-tinguifhed from thofe who fhewed their backs in re­treating from the fight, by his facing to the front,with his arms prepared for action, he aftonifhed theenemy by fuch wonderful intrepidity; fhame how­ever prevailed on two to remain with him, SpuriusLartius, and Titus Herminius, both of them men ofdiftinguifhed families and characters: with their af-fjftance he, for a tim,e, fupported the firft ftorm of
the







OCR Output








24<S T H E H I S T O R Y


BOOK greater filence than they came. They then called
.^^J^ away the people from their arms, and held an af-
Y R. 194. fembly for parting the law. In the mean time, the
B.C.458. COnfuls convened the fenate, more terrified, by the
danger apprehended from the tribunes, than they
had been by the alarm of the enemy in the night.
XVII. ON hearing that the people were layingdown their arms, and quitting their pofts, PubliusValcrius,leaving his colleague to prefide in the fenate,rufhed forth from the fenate-houfe, and came to theafiembly of the tribunes, whom he thus accofted:"What mean ye, tribunes, by thefe proceedings?"Do ye intend, under the command and aufpices"of Appius Herdonius, to overturn the common-"wealth? Has he been fo fuccefsful in corrupting"you, though he had not authority fufficient to in-"fluence the flaves? Do ye think this a proper"time, when the enemy is upon us, for arms to be"laid afide, and laws to be propofed?" Then di­recting his difcourfe to the populace, " If, Romans,"ye are infenfible to all concern for the city, and"for yourfelves, yet pay refpectto the gods of your"country, taken captive by the enemy. Jupiter"fupremely good and great, Juno queen of heaven,"Minerva, with the other gods and goddetfes, arei' held in confinement: a camp of flaves occupies"the refidence of the tutelar ceities of the ftate."Do ye think this method of acting confident with"found policy? There is a powerful force of the"enemy, not only within the walls, bur in the cita-"del, looking down on the Forum and the fenate -"houfe j mean while, in the Forum, are afiemblies"of the people; in the fenate-houfe, the fenate"fitting; juft as in time of perfect tranquillity"the fenator gives his opinion, the other Romans"their votes. Ought not every man, as well of the"•patricians, as commons, the confuls, tribunes, ci-"tizens, all men, to have fnatched up arms in fuch
"a caufe,







OCR Output








'O F R O M E.


to transfer all the blame of that event from himfelf B O O Kon his colleague, who was already condemned; and, .^^--^as he had conducted bufinefs with fuccefs, both in Y.R. 331.the country of the Volfcians when conful, under the B'c.*10'aufpices of the dictator Poftumius Tubertus; andalfo, at Fidena?, when lieutenant-general to anotherdictator, Mamercus ./Emilius, all the tribes acquittedhim. It is faid, that his caufe was much indebted tothe memory of his father Cincinnatus, a man held inhigh veneration; and likewife to Quintius Capitoli-nus, who, being now extremely old, begged withhumble fupplications, that they would not fuffer himwho had fo fhort a time to live, to carry fuch difmal, tidings to Cincinnatus.
XLII. THE commons created Sextus Tempani- £•£• 3J3.us, Aulus Sellius, Lucius Antiftius, and Sextus Pom-pilius, in their abfence, plebeian tribunes; thefe beingthe perfons whom, by the advice of Tempanius, thehorfemen had appointed to command them as cen­turions. The fenate, finding that, through the gene­ral averfion to Sempronius, the name of conful wasbecome difpleafing, ordered military tribunes, withconfular power, to be chofen. Accordingly therewere elected Lucius Manlius Capitolinus, QuintusAntonius Merenda, and Lucius Papirius Mugillanus.No fooner had the year begun, than Lucius Horten-fius, a plebeian tribune, commenced a profecution *againft Caius Sempronius, conful of the preceding
year.


* A profecution, before the people, was a rery tedious bufinefs, andafforded the perfon acculed many chances of efcaping, even though hefhould not be able to prove his innocence: he might prevail on theprofecutor to relinquifh the charge, or on a plebeian tribune tu inter*pofc, or on the augurs to report ill omens on the day of the aflemblyfor the decifion; or, at the worlt, he might go into voluntary exile;4 vertere folurn exilii gratia.' A magiftrate, who intended to impeacha perfon before the people, mounted theroftrurn, and gave notice, that,on fuch a day, he intended to accufe that perfon of fuch a crime; onwhich the party he accufed was obliged to give bail for his appearance,which if he failed to do, he was thrown into piifon. On the day ap­pointed, the people being affcmbled, by centuries if the crime charged \D D 4. WM







OCR Output








THE HISTORY


 


K fcarct'ty was there any of the public territory, noteven the ground on which the city itfelf was built,y.R. 339. but what had been acquired by arms; all of whichB.C.413. confequently muft have been comprehended in thislaw; nor could the military tribunes, either in thefenate, or in the private meetings of the nobles, de-vife, in this exigency, any promifing plan of con-duet: when Appius Claudius, grandfon of himwho had been decemvir for compiling the laws, be­ing the youngeft fenator in the afiembly, is faid tohave told them, that " he had brought from home,"for their ufe, an old fcheme, which had been firft"devifed by his family:—that his great grandfather"Appius Claudius had fhewn the patricians one me-"thod of baffling the power of the tribunes, by the"protefts of their colleagues:—that new men were"eafily drawn oft from their defigns by the influence"of people of confequencc, if they were addrefied"in language fuited to the times rather than to the^ dignity of the fpeakers. Their fentiments were"ever dictated by their circumftances. When they"fhould fee that their colleagues who firft fet the"bufinefs on foot had got the ftart of them, and*' monopolized the whole credit of it with the com-"mons, and that there was no room left for them"to come in for any fhare, they would, without"reluctance, lean for fupport to the caule of the."fenate, by means of which they might conciliate"the favour, not only of the principal patricians,"but of the whole body." Every one expreffingtheir approbation, and particularly Quintus ServiliusPrifcus, highly commending the youth for not hav­ing degenerated from the Claudian race, a generalcharge was given, that they fhould gain over fuchof the college of tribunes, as any of them could, toenter protefts. On the breaking up of the fenate,the principal patricians made their applications tothe tribunes, and by perfuafions, admonitions, andpromifes that it would be .acknowledged as a favour
by







OCR Output








O F R O M E. 57


fame. At this time an account was brought to the BOOK
king and the fenate that a fhower of ftones had v>'
fallen on the Alban mount. This appearing fcarcelycredible, and fome perfons being fent to examineinto the prodigy, there fell from the air in theirfight, a vaft quantity of ftones, juft as when thewind drives down hail compacted into lumps. Theyimagined alfo that they heard a loud voice fromthe grove on the fummit of the hill, ordering, thatthe Albans fhould perform religious rites accordingto the practice .of their native country. Thefe theAlbans had entirely configned to oblivion, as if,with their country, they had alfo abandoned itsdeities, and had adopted the Roman practice, orperhaps, incenfed againft fortune, had renouncedthe worfhip of the gods. On account of the fameprodigy, the Romans alfo inftituted for themfelves,by order of government, a feftival of nine days,either in obedience to a voice from heaven, utteredon the Alban mount, for that likewife is mentioned,or to the directions of the arufpices; the practicecertainly continued, that, whenever an account wasreceived of the fame prodigy happening, a feftivalfor nine days was celebrated. In a fhort time after,the country was afflicted with a peftilence; andthough this neceflarily rendered men averfe to militaryfervice, yet the king, in himfelf fond of war, andperfuaded that young men enjoyed better healthwhile employed abroad, than when loitering athome, gave them no reft from arms, until he wasfeized by a tedious diforder. Then, together withthe ftrength of his body, the fiercenefs of his fpiritwas reduced to fuch a degree, that he, who, lately,thought nothing lefs becoming a king, than to bufyhis thoughts in matters of religion, became, at once,a flave to every kind of fuperftition, in cafes eitherof great or of trifling import, and even filled theminds of the people alfo with fuperftitious notions.The generality, comparing the prefent ftate of their
affairs,







OCR Output








io6 THE HISTORY, &c.


* o o K The deliverer of the city was received in the camp^-\- . with joy, and the king's fons were driven thence•with difgrace. Two of thefe followed their father,and went into exile at Csere, among the Etrurians.Sextus Tarquinius having retired to Gabii, as if tohis own dominions, was flain by forne perfons, whowere glad of an opportunity of gratifying old ani-mofities, which he had excited there by his rapineand murders. Lucius Tarquinius Superbus reignedtwenty-five years. The government of kings con­tinued from the building of the city to the eftablifh-ment of its liberty, two hundred and forty-foCryears. After that, in an afiembly of the Centuries,held by the Prefect of the city, were elected, con­formably to a plan found in the commentaries ofServius Tullius, two magiftratesi called Confuls.B.C. jo£ Thefe were, Lucius Junius Brutus, and Lucius Tar­quinius Collatinus.


THE







OCR Output








OF ROME. 139


arm of ^Ebutius was pierced through, and Marni- BOOKlius received a wound in his breaft; the latter was . ^ '_,received by the Latines into a place of fafety, in their Y.R. iJ5.fecond line; ./Ebutius, difabled by the wound in his B. c.497.arm from wielding a weapon, retired from the fight:the Latine general, not in the leaft difpirited by hiswound, continued his vigorous exertions; and per­ceiving his men begin to give ground, fent for acohort of Roman exiles, commanded by Lucius thefon of Tarquiniusj thefe, fighting under the impulfeof keen refentment, on account of their having beendeprived of their property, and of their country,kept their battle for fome time in fulpenfe.
XX. THE Romans now giving way on that fide,Marcus Valerius, brother of Publicola, obfervingyoung Tarquinius, with oftentatious fiercenefs, exhi­biting his prowefs in the front of the exiles, and in­flamed with a defire of fupporting the glory of hishoufe, that the fame family which enjoyed the honourof having expelled the royal family, might alfo befignalized by their deftruction, fetfpurs to his horfe,and, with his javelin prefented, made towards Tar­quinius; Tarquinius avoided this violent adverfary,by retiring into the body of his men, and Valeriusrafhly pufhing forward into the line of the exiles,was attacked, and run through, by fome perfon onone fide of him, and as the horfe's fpeed was in nodegree checked by the wound of the rider, the ex­piring Roman funk to the earth, his arms fallingover his body. Poftumius the dictator, feeing aman of fuch rank flain, the exiles advancing to thecharge with fierce impetuofity, his own men dif-heartened, and giving way,, ifltied orders to his owncohort, a chofen band which he kept about his per­fon as a guard, that they mould treat as an enemy,every man of their own army whom they fhould feeretreating: meeting danger thus on both fides, theRomans, who were flying, faced about againft the
enemy,







OCR Output








*T H E II I S T O R <¥


B OvO K" drained, by the payment of the tax for fo mart/. _^_ "years j and that they fhould enjoy the fruits ari ,'i npry.R. 359. " from a war, in which they had employed, one$*C. 393. it might faV, the better part of their lives. That"what a man took with his own hand from the ene-"my, and brought home with him, would afford." him more fatisfaction and delight, than a lhare". many times larger conferred on him by another."That the dictator himfelf was aware of the odi-"um, and the difagreeable reflections to which this'c bufinefs might fubject him, and had for that rea-"fon transferred the determination of it from him-"felf to the fenate: and, that the fenate ought on"their part, fince the bufinefs had been thus thrown"upon them, to hand it over to the commons, and"let every man enjoy what the chance of war fhbuld"give him." This plan was deemed the fafer, as iepromifed to procure popularity to the fenate. Ac­cordingly proclamation was made, that all fuch aschofe might go to the camp to the dictator, to Jharein the plunder of Veii. The vaft multitude who'went entirely filled the camp;
'XXl. THEN the dictator, after taking the aii-fpices, came forth, and having previoufly orderedthe foldiers to take arms, fpoke thus: "O Pythian"Apollo, under thy guidance, and infpired by thy"divinity, I am now proceeding to deftroy the city"of Veii, and I devote to thee the tenth part of the"fpoil thereof. Thee alfo, imperial Juno, who now"dwelleft in Veii, I befeech, that when we fhall have." obtained the victory, thou wilt accompany us into"our city, foon to be thine own, where a temple"fhall receive thee, worthy of thy majefty." Af­ter thefe prayers, having more than a lufficientnum­ber of men, he aflaulted the city on every quarter/in order to prevent their perceiving the dangerwhich threatened from the mine. The Veientians,.ignorant that they had been already doomed to ruia
by







OCR Output








O F R O M E. 83


and thus leaving room in their families for new BOOKnuptials, they were joined in matrimony, Ser- *'vius rather not obftructing, than approving of, thematch.
XLVII. FROM that time forward, Tullius, now inan advanced age, found himfelf daily expofed to newdifquietudes, and his authority to new dangers. Forthat woman now prepared to proceed from onewickednefs to another, and never ceafed, either nightor day, teafing her hufband not to let the parricideswhich they had committed, pafs without effect."She wanted not," fhe faid, "a perfon, who mould"give her the name of a wife, or with whom fhe"might, in filence, fubmit to bondage; what fhe"wanted was, one who would confider himfelf as"worthy of the throne; \vho would remember"that he was the fon of Tarquinius Prifcus; who"would .prefer the prefent pofieffion, to diftant"hopes, of a kingdom. If you be fuch a man as I"took you for, when I married you, I addrefs you"by the titles of my hufband, and my king: if not,"my condition is.now changed fo far for the worfe,"that in you, together with poverty of fpirit, I find"villainy united. Why not proceed in the bufinefs?"You are not obliged to fet out from Corinth"or Tarquinii, as your father was, to ftruggle for"foreign kingdoms. The gods of your family,"and thofe of your native country, and your fa-"ther's image, and the royal palace in which you"refide, and the royal throne in that palace, and"the name of Tarquinius; thefe conftitute you, and"call you king. Or, if you have not a fpirit daring"enough for fuch an enterprize, why deceive the"nation? Why aflume the figure of a youth of"royal blood? Get you hence to Tarquinii, or to"Corinth. Sink back again into the original obfcu-"rity of your race j fitter to be compared with your"brother, than with your father." With thefe, and
o 2 other







OCR Output








OF ROME.' 37T.


on the right wing againft the Falifcians; Quinttus B O O KCapitolinus on the left againft the Veientians; and . _-JL-jthe mafter of the horfe, with the cavalry, advanced" Y.R. 318;in the centre. For a fhort time, all was filence and B.C.quiet; the Etrurians being refolved not to engageunlefs they were compelled, and the dictator keep­ing his eyes fixed on a Roman fort in the rear, untila fignal which had been concerted mould be raifedby the augurs, as foon as the birds gave a favoura­ble omen; on perceiving which, he ordered thecavalry firft to charge the enemy with a loud fhout:the line of infantry following, began the conflict withgreat fury. The Etrurian legions coiald not in anyquarter withftand the attack of the Romans: thecavalry made the greateft refiftance; and the kinghimfelf, diftinguimed in valour far beyond all thecavalry, by frequent charges on the Romans, whilethey were purfuing in diforder, in all parts of thefield, prolonged the conteft.
XIX. THERE was, at that time, among the Ro­man cavalry, a military tribune called Aulus Corne­lius Coflus, remarkable for the extraordinary beautyof his perfon, as well as for his fpirit and bodilyftrength, and attention to the honour of his family,which, having defcended to him with a great degreeof luftre, he conveyed to his pofterity with a largeincreafe, and with additional fplendor: perceivingthat wherever Tolumnius directed his courfe, thetroops of Roman cavalry fhrunk from his charge,and knowing him by the diftinction of his royal ap­parel, as he flew through every part of the army, hecried out, " Is this he who breaks the bands of hu."man fociety, and violates the laws of nations?"This victim will I quickly flay, provided it is the'* will of the gods that any thing fhould remain fa-"cred on earth, and will offer him to the manes of"the amb'afladors." With thefe words, he clappedfpurs to his horfe, and with his fpear prefented,
» B a . tingling







OCR Output








OF ROME.


 


"myfelf to be declared conful, in contradiction to
"the decree of the fenate. And you, Caius Clau-
"dius, I exhort, that you, on your part, reftrain Y.R. i94.
"the Roman people from this licentioufnefs; and B.c.4s».
"be perfuaded, that, on my part, I fhall regard your
"conduct therein in fuch a light, that I mall not
"confider you as obftructiing my attainment of ho-
"nour, but as augmenting the glory of my refufalj
"and protecting me againft the ignominy which I
"fhould incur, by being re-ele&ed." They then
iflued their joint orders, that " no perfon mould vote
"for Lucius Quintius being conful; and, that, if any
"one did, they would not allow fuch vote."
XXII. THE confuls elected were Quintus Fabius Y. R.i95.Vibulanus a third time, and Lucius Cornelius Ma- B. C. *57'luginenfis. The general furvey was performed thatyear. The luftrum could not be clofed, confiftentlywith the rules of religion, on account of the Capitolhaving been taken and the conful flain. In the be­ginning of the year, in which Quintus Fabius andLucius Cornelius were confuls, various difturbancesarofe. The tribunes excited commotions among thecommons. The Latines and Hernicians gave in­formation of a formidable war being commenced bythe Volfcians and JEquans; that the legions of theVolfcians were at Antiumj and that there wereftrong apprehenfions of that colony itfelf revolting.With difficulty the tribunes were prevailed on toallow the bufinefs of the war to be firft attended to.The confuls then divided the provinces betweenthem: Fabius was appointed to march the legionsto Antium, Cornelius to remain at Rome, for theprotection of the city, in cafe any party of the ene­my, as was the practice of the .flSquans, mould cometo make depredations. The Hernicians and Latineswere ordered to fupply a number of men in con­formity to the treaties; and of the army, two partswere compofed of the allies, the third confifted of• natives.







OCR Output








OF ROME. 113


to the conful Brutus, and there were two fons born BOOK.of that marriage, now grown up, Titus and Tibe- . - --frius: thefe were led in, by their uncles, to take part Y.R. 145.in the defign; and feveral others of the young nobi- B.c. s°7.lity were drawn into the confpiracy, whofe names,at this diftance of time, are unknown. In the mean­while, the opinion of thofe, who advifed the givingup of the effects, having prevailed in the fenate, thisafforded the ambaffadors a pretext for delaying inthe city, becaufe they had been allowed time by theconfuls, to procure carriages for the conveyance ofthe effects of the princes; and all this time they fpentin confutations with the confpirators, and had, bypreffing inftances, prevailed upon them, to givethem letters for the Tarquinii; for, "without thefe,"how could they be fo fully aflured, as an affair of"that high importance required, that this report of"the ambafladors was not groundlefs?" Thefe let­ters, given as a pledge of their fincerity, proved themeans of detecting the plot: for the day before thaton which they were to return to the Tarquinii, theambalfadors happening to fup with the Vhellii, andthe confpirators having here in private had muchconverfation, as was natural, on the fubject of their'new enterprife, their difcourfe was overheard by oneof the flaves, who had, before this, difcovered thanfuch a defign was in agitation, but waited for thisopportunity, until the letters mould be given to theambaffadors; becaufe thefe, being feized, would fur-nifh full proof of the tranfaction. As foon as hefound that they were delivered, he made adifcoveryof the affair to the confuls. The confuis, fettingout from home directly, and apprehending the am-baflkdors and confpirators in the faift, effectuallycrufhed the affair without any tumult; taking par­ticular care, with regard to the letters, that theyfhould not efcape them. They inftantly threw thetraitors into chains, but hefitated for fome time withregard to proceeding againft the ambaffadors*; andVOL. i. i though,







OCR Output








THE HISTORY


 


BOOK feeling companion for a city, which had been their? neighbour now near four hundred years, and wasoverpowered by a ftrange and unheard-of enemy,that they made incurfions at that very time on theRoman territory: and, after loading themfelves with-booty, purpofed even to lay fiege to Veii, the bul­wark, and the laft remaining hope of the whole Ro­man race. The Roman foldiers there had feen themftraggling oyer the country, and alfo collected in 4body, and driving the prey before them, and nowperceived their camp pitched at no great diftancefrom Veii. At firft, their minds were filled withmelancholy reflections on their own fituation; thenwith indignation, afterwards with rage. *' Muft"their misfortunes, they faid, be infuked even by"the Etrurians, from whom they had drawn off"the Qaliic war on themfelves?" Scarce could theycurb their paffions fo far as to refrain from attackingthem that inftant; but, being reftrained by QuintusCadicius, a centurion, whom they had appointed!their commander, they confented po defer it untilnight. The action which enfued wanted nothing torender it equal to the former, except that it was notconducted by a general equal to Camillus: jn everyother refpect the courfe of events was the fame, andthe jffue equally fortunate. Not coptent with thisblow, but taking, as guides, fome prifopers whohad furvived the flaughter of the night, and ad-vancing to Salinae againft another body of Tufcans,they furprifed them on the night following, flew a.ftill greater number of them, and then returned toVeii, exulting in ttieir double victory.
to
XLVI. MEANWHILE, at Rome the fiege, in ge-peral, was carried on flowly, and both parties layquiet; for the attention of the Gauls was folely em­ployed in preventing any of the enemy from efcap-jng between their pbfts; when, on a fudden, a Ro­man youth drew on himfelf the attention and ad­miration







OCR Output








THE HISTORY


 


demand thatthofe perfons, and thofe effects, mouldbe given up to me, the meffenger of the Romanpeople, contrary to juftice and the laws of the"nations, then fuffer me not to enjoy my native"country." Thefe words he repeats, when hepafies over the boundaries; the fame, to the firftperfon that he meets; again, when he enters thegate j and laftly, when he enters the Forum, onlymaking the neceffary change of a few words in theform of the declaration and of the oath. If the per­fons whom he demands are not given up, then, onthe expiration of thirty-three days, that being thenumber enjoined by the rule, he declares war in thismanner: " O Jupiter, hear me! and thou, Juno,"Quirinus, and all ye gods of heaven, and ye of"the earth, and ye of the infernal regions, hear, I"call you to witnefs, that that people," namingthem, whoever they are, " are unjuft, and do not"perform what equity requires. But concerning"thofe affairs we will confult the elders in our own"country, by what means we may obtain our"right." After this the meffenger returned toRome, in order that the opinion of the governmentmight be taken. The king immediately confultedthe fenate, nearly in thefe words: "Concerning"thofe matters, controverfies, and arguments, which'' were adjufted between the Pater Patratus of the"Roman people, the Quirites, and the Pater Patra-"tus of the antient Latines, and the antient Latine"people, which matters ought to have been grant-"ed, performed, and difcharged; and which mat-".ters they have neither granted, performed, nor"difcharged, declare," faid he, to the perfon whofevote he firft afked, " what is your opinion." Theother then faid, " I am of opinion, that the per-"formance of them ought to be exacted in juft and"regular war, wherefore I confent to and vote for"it." The reft were then afked in order, and themajority of thofe prefent agreeing in the fame opi.-







OCR Output








OF ROME. 129


Mucius, who afterwards got the furname B O O Kof Scaevola, ^or the left-handed, from the lofs of his . -^-_jright hand, being thus difmified, was followed to Y.R. 146.Rome by ambaffadors from Porfena. He had been BiCi i°s.fo deeply affeded by the danger to which he hadbeen expofed, in the firft attempt, from which no­thing had protedled him, but the miftake of the af-failant; and by the confideration that he was to un­dergo the fame hazard, as many times as the numberof the other confpirators amounted to, that he thoughtproper, of his own accord, to offer terms of accom­modation to the Romans. During the negotiation,mention was made, to no purpofe, of the reftorationof the Tarquinian family to the throne ; and thispropofal he made, rather becaufe he had not been •able to refufe it to the Tarquinii, than from enter­taining the flighteft expectation of its being acceptedby the Romans. He carried the point, refpectingthe giving up of the lands taken from the Veientians,and compelled the Romans to fubmit to give hoft-ages, if they wifhed to fee his forces withdrawn fromthe Janiculum. Peace being concluded on thefeterms, Porfena withdrew his troops from the Jani­culum, and retired out of the Roman territories.To Caius Mucius, as a reward of his valour, the fe-nate gave a tradT: of ground on the other fide of theTiber, which was afterwards called the Mucianmeadows; and, fuch honour being paid to courage,excited even the other fexto merit public diftinctions.A young lady called Clcelia, one of the hoftages, thecamp of the Etrurians happening to be pitched at afmall diftance from the banks of the Tiber, evadedthe vigilance of the guards, and, at the head of a bandof young ladies, fwam acrofs the Tiber, through amower of darts difcharged at them by the enemy,and reftored them all, in fafety, to their friends atRome. When the king was informed of this, be­ing at firft highly incenfed, he fent envoys to Rome,. to infift on the reftoration of the hoftage Clcelia; asVOL. i. .K. to







OCR Output








O F R O M E. 19


°


the city crowded with houfes, they were aflonffl'.ed B O O Kat the rapid increafe of the Roman power in fo fhorta time. i/When the fhew began, and every perlbn'sthoughts and eyes were attentively engaged on it,then, according to the preconcerted plan, the vio- ROEknee began; and, on a fignal given, the Roman 4.youth ran different ways to carry off the young wo- B. c.men. J">SQme the young men bore away, as they 74'happened to meet with them, without waiting tomake a choice; but others of extraordinary beauty,being defigned for fome of the principal among thefenators, were conveyed to their houfes by plebeiansemployed for that purpofe.\3lt is laid, that onehighly diftinguifhed above the reft in appearance.and beauty, w.as carried off by the party of oneTalaflius; and thai in anfwer to many who eagerlyInquired fo whom they were carrying her, they,,every now and then, to prevent any one laying vio-Jent hands on her, cried out, that they were carrying .her to Talaffius: this circumfta.ice gave rife to theufe of thai word at weddings. 1*{The terror occa-fioned by this outrage put an end to the fports, andthe parents of the young women retired full ofgrief, inveighing againft fuch a violation of theTaws of hofpitahty, and appealing to the god, towhofe folemn feftival and games they had come, re,-Jying on the refpect due to religion, and on the/aithof nations, and had been tb cruelly deceived. K Nordid the women who were feifed entertain betterhopes with regard to themfelves, or a leis degree ofindignation ^however Romulus went about to themin perfon, and told them, that " this proceeding"had been occafioned by the haughtinefs of their"parents, who refufed to allow their neighbours to"marry among themjflthat, notwithstanding this,"they thould be united to the men in wedlock, in"the common enjoyment of all property, and of"their common children; a bond of union than"which the human heart feels none more endearing.e 2 "He







OCR Output








OF ROME.


tle time the latter were put to a ftand and diforder- "BOOK.ed j but foon forming two fronts, they faced the ene- ._-t-_'^fmy on both fides; and, at the fame time, the cavalry, Y.R. 1?$.being ordered by the conful to charge, routed andB.C"*73'difperfed the Etrurians. Thus were overcome in thefame hour, two armies of the two greateft, and molj:powerful, of the neighbouring ftates. During thefetranfactions at Veil, the Volfcians and .ffiquans ha4encamped in the Latine territories, and laid waftethe country. The Latines themfelves, being joinedby the Hernicians, without the aid either of Rorna^general, or troops, beat them out of their camp,and there, befides recovering their own effects, .gof•pofieflion of immenfe booty. The conful CaiusNautius was, however, fent againft the Volfciansfrom Rome, where, I fuppofe, it was confidered asimproper, that the allies mould get a cuftom of car­rying on wars, with their own forces, and under theirown direction, without a Roman general and troops.There is no kind of feverity or indignity which wasnot practifed on the Volfcians, yet they could not beforced to come to an engagement in the field.
. LIV. THE next confuls were Lucius Furius and Y.R. 1?o.Aulus Manlius. The Veientians fell to the lot of2.C'4?1'Manlius as his province; but the war there did notcontinue. At their requeft a truce for forty yearswas granted them, and they were obliged to furniflicorn, and to pay the foldiers. No fooner was peacereftored abroad, than difcord immediately began at thome. The commons were fet in a flame by theinftigations of the tribunes, on their conftant fubjecV,the agrarian law, which the confuls, not deterred bythe condemnation of Menenius, or the danger incur­red by Servilius, oppofed with all their might. Onthis account, as foon as they went out of office, Ti­tus Genucius, tribune of the commons, laid hold ofthem. They were fucceeded in the confulmip by Y.R. iiuLucius ^Emilius and Opiter Virginius. In fome'B'c.471«o 4 annals.







OCR Output








O F R O M E. 401


incapable of change, becaufc he commanded B OvO Ka victorious army, againft one which had been ._ \ _,overcome before; fo that there was more of the ¥.11.331.Roman difcipline in the Volfcian army, than in the B.C. 410.Roman. Succefs therefore, as on many other occa-fions, attended merit: in the firft engagement, whichwas entered on by Sempronius, without either pru­dence or caution, the action was begun withoutItengthening the line by a referve, and without poft-ing the cavalry in a proper fituation: the fhout gavea prefage at the very beginning to which fide fuccelswould incline. That raifed by the enemy was loudand full; whilft the moiit of the Romans, difibnant,unequal, lifelefs, and often begun anew, betrayed,by its unfteadinefs, the fears which pofieffed theirminds. This made the enemy charge with thegreater boldnefs; they pufhed with their fhields, andbrandifhed their fwords: on the other fide, the hel­mets were feen to droop as the wearers looked roundforfafety; difconcerted and difordered, every oneclung dole to the crowd. The enfigns fometimeskept their ground, and were deferted by thofe whoought to fupport them; at other times they retreatedbetween their refpective companies. As yet therewas no abfolure flight, nor was victory declared; theRomans covered themfelves rather than foughtjthe Volfcians advanced, pufhed againft the line, andftill faw greater numbers of the enemy falling than.flying.
XXXVIII. THEY now began to give way inevery quarter, while the conful Sempronius in vain- reproached them, and exhorted them to ftand; nei­ther his authority, nor his dignity, had any effect;and they would fhortly have turned their backs tothe enemy, had not Sextus Tempanius, a commanderof a body of horfe, with great prefence of mind,brought them (import, when their fituation was al-moft dcrfperate: he called aloud, that ihe horfemenVOL. j. .D D







OCR Output








OF ROME. 437.


ckr was fuddenly proclaimed, that no one mould B 9. O Kbe injured except thofe who were in arms, which •- r-_•induced all the furviving multitude to lay down Y.R. 3*5.their arms. Of thefe, there were taken alive, BiC.4*3.to. the number of two thoufand five hundred.Fabius would not fuffer his foldiers to meddlewith the reft of the fpoil, until his colleaguesarrived, faying, that thofe armies had alfo a marein the taking of Anxur, who had diverted the othertroops of the Volfcians from the defence of theplace. On their arrival the three armies plunderedthe city, which a long courfe of profperity hadtilled with opulence; and this liberality of thecommanders firft began to reconcile the commons tothe patricians: which end was foon after fartherpromoted; the principal nobility, with a generofitytowards the multitude the moft feafonable that everwas fhewn, procuring a decree of the fenate beforefuch a fcheme fhould be mentioned by the tribunesor commons, that the foldiers fhould receive pay outof the public treafury *, whereas hitherto every onehad difcharged that duty at his own expence.
LX. No meafure, we are told, was ever receivedby the commons with fuch tranfports of joy: theyran in crowds to the fenate-houfc, caught the handsof the fenators as they came out, declaring that theywere fathers in reality, and acknowledging that theirconduct had been fuch, that no man, whilft he hadany fhare of ftrength remaining, would fpare his per-fon, or his blood, in the caule of a country fo liberalto its citizens. Whilft they were delighted with thecomfortable profpect of their private property at allevents refting unimpaired, during fuch time as theirperfons mould be configned over to the common-
* The foot foldiers only. The horfe did not receive pay until threerears after. The pay of a foot foldier, in the time of the fecond Pu.h'ck war, was three afet; too fmall, if they had not received ansllow.anct of corn and lbii,etiu:i:i of clothes.
F F .3 . wealtny







OCR Output








OF ROME. Jit


count, bcfides the load which his own conduft had BOOKdrawn on him j and hardly ever did the patricians. ^.exert fuch ftrenuous efforts, in favour of any other, Y R.feeing this champion of the fenate, the afiertor ofB. c<its dignity, their bulwark againft all the outrageousattempts, both of tribunes and commons, expofedto the rage of the populace, only for having in theconteft exceeded, in fome degree, the bounds of mo­deration. Appius Claudius himfelf was the onlyone, among the patricians, who looked with fcornon the tribunes and commons, and even on his owntrial. Neither the threats of the commons, nor theintreaties of the fenate, could ever prevail on himeither to change his garb *, or ufe a fuppliant ad-drefs, or, even to foften and relax, in any degree,the ufual harfhnefs of his language, when he was toplead his caufe before the people. He ftill pre-ierved the fame expreffion of countenance, the fameftubborn fiercenefs in his looks, and the lame ve­hemence in his difcourfe; fo that a great many of thecommons felt no lefs dread of Appius, while heftood a culprit at their bar, than they had donewhen he was conful. He pleaded once in his de­fence, and that with all the haughtinefs which hecould fhew, if he were the accufer, juft as li£ ufedto behave on every other occafton j and, by his in­trepidity, fo aftonifhed the tribunes and commons,that, of their own choice, they adjourned the trialto another day, and afterwards fuffered the bufinefsto cool. The day of adjournment was not very dif-tant, yet, before it arrived, he was fcized with adiforder and died. The tribunes endeavoured toprevent his being honoured with a funeral panegy­ric, but the commons would not allow that che laftday of fo great a man mould be defrauded of theufual honours. They liftened to the cr.comiurns
* It was ufual for perfont, under aceufation, toput on a mouniinfd«fi, and to let their hair and bearc? grow.
p 2 pro-







OCR Output








522 THE HISTORY


BOOK not only by the military tribunes, but alfo by the. 1 . foldiers univerfally; for every one of them carried toY.R. 365. his houfe, which was in the citadel, a contribution ofB.C. 387. half a pound of corn and half a pine of wine. Aprefent which appears trifling in the relation, yet theScarcity which prevailed, rendered it a very ftrongproof of efteem, as each man abridging his own fuf-tenance, contributed, in honour of a particular pcr-fon, a portion fubtracted from the fupport of his ownperfon, and his neceflary fupplies. Then thofe,who had been on guard at the.place, where the ene­my climbed up unobferved, were cited; and thoughQuintus Sulpicius, military tribune, had declared,that he would punifh every man of them accordingto the rules of rriilitary difripline, yet being deterredby the unanimous remonftrances of the foldiers,who threw all the blame on one particular man ofthe guard, he fpared the reft. The one who wasmanifeftly guilty, he with the approbation of allthrew down from the rock. From this time forth,the guards on both fides became more vigilant:on the fide of the Gauls, becaufe a rumourfpread that mefiengcrs pafied between Veii andRome j and on that of the Romans, from their re-collection of the danger to which they had been ex-pofed in the night.
XLVIJI. BUT beyond all the evils of the warand the fiege, famine diftreflcd both armies. Totfhich was added on the fide of the Gauls, a pefti-lential diforder, occafioned by their lying encampedin low ground furrounded with hills, which befideshaving been heated by the burning of the build­ings, and filled with exhalations, when the windrofe ever fo little, fent up not only afhes but embers.Thefe inconveniencies that nation, of all others, isthe worft qualified to endure, as being accuftomed tocold and moifture, And they fufFered fo fevcrely
from







OCR Output








OF ROME. 133


'C is your fixed and unalterable refolution, I will nei- BOOK"ther teize you by a repetition of fruitlefs applica- ,_^.!-^"tions, on the fame fubject, nor will I difappoint Y.R. 1*7."the Tarquinii, by giving hopes of affiftance, which B.c. $°s."they muft not expect from me. Let them, whe-"ther they look for war or for quiet, feek fome"' other refidence in their exile, that there may fub-"lift no caufe of jealoufy, to difturb, henceforward,"the good underftanding, which I wim to maintain-"between you and me." To thefe exprefiions headded acts ftill more friendly; the hoftages, whichremained in his pofieffion, he reftored, and gaveback the Veientian land, of which the Romans hadbeen deprived by the treaty at the Janiculum. Tar-quinius, finding all hopes of his reftoration cut off,retired for refuge to Tufculum, to his father-in-law,Mamilius Octavius. Thus peace and confidencewere firmly eftablifhed between the Romans andPorfena.
XVI. THE next confuls were Marcus Valerius Y.R. 149.and Publius Poftumius. During this year, war was B.c' i33'carried on, with fuccefs, againft the Sabines, and theconfuls had the honour of a triumph. The Sabines,afterwards, preparing to renew the war, in a moreformidable manner, to oppofe them, and, at thefame time, to guard againft any fudden danger whichmight arifefrom the fide of Tufculum, where, thoughwar was not openly declared, there was reafon toapprehend that it was intended, Publius Valerius, a Y.R. zjo.fourth time, and Titus Lucretius, a fecond time, were Bt v. 501.chofcn confuls. A fedition, which broke out amongthe Sabines, between the advocates for peace andthofe for war, was the means of transferring a con-fiderable part of their ftrength to the fide of the Ro­mans. For Atta Claufus, called afterwards atRome Appius Ciaudius, being zealous in favour ofpeaceful meafures, but overpowered by the turbulentpromcfcers of war, and unable to make head againft
K 3 their







OCR Output








OF ROME./ 501


 


oracle to the Hercinian foreft: to Bellovefus theBgods fhewed a much more delightful route into Ita-ly. He carried with him from the Biturigians, the Y.R.Arvernians, the Senonians, the JEduans, the Ambar-8.c.rians, the Carnutians, and the Aulcrcians, all theirfuperfluous numbers; and fetting out, at the head ofan immenfe body of horfe and foot, arrived in thecountry of the Tricaftinians. The Alps then ftoodin his way, which I do not wonder at thefe peopleconfidering as impaflable, having never before beenclimbed over through any path, at leaf t as far as wehave learned from any tradition handed down to us,unlefs we choofe to believe the fables told of Hercu­les. Whilft the height of the mountains kept theGauls there, penned up as it were, and they werelooking about for foms path by which they mightgain a paflage into another world, between thofclofry fummits which joined the fky, an ominous inci­dent alfo gave them fome delay; for an account wasbrought to them, that fome Grangers, who had comein fearch of lands, were attacked by the nation of theSalyans: thefe were the Maffilians who hzd come byfea from Phocaea *. The Gauis, confidering this asan omen of their own fortune, gave them their af-fiftance, in fortifying the ground, which they hadfirft feized on their landing, covered with wide ex­tended woods. They themfelves climbed over thepathlefs Alps, through the foreft of Taurinum,routed the Tufcans in battle, not far from the river •Ticinus; and, hearing that the di ft riot in which theyhad pofted themfelves, was called Infubria, thefame name by which one of the cantons of theInfubrian ./Eduans was diftinguifhed, they embraced
• A city of Afia Minor, bn'lt by a colony of Athenians. BeingbelVjged and hard prefled by Haqiagus, an officer or Cyrus king ofiVi li i, the inhabitants relieved to abandon the town, and leek anotherrefidence. Accordingly, afier uttering heavy imuiecations on themfclvet,if they fbould ever return, they carried their eltVfts on board their fhips,and, failing [o the coali of Provence, founded the city oi Mai.fellies.
K K 3 the







OCR Output








t?ft T II E H I S T O R Y


B o o K the Fabii took arms, and afiembled in the place ap"-^_-rl _. pointed. The conful, coming forth, in his militaryY.R.Z75. robe *, law his whole family in the court-yard, drawnB.C.477. Up in orcler Of march, and being received into thecentre, ordered them to fet forward. Never did anarmy, either fmaller in number, or more highlydiftinguifhed in fame, and the general admiration ofall men, march through the city. Three hundredand fix foldiers, all of them patricians, all of onerace; not one of whom would be judged unfit forfupreme command by the fenate, when beft filled,at any time whatever, proceeded on their way;threatening deftruction to the ftate of the Veientians,by the prowefs of one family. A crowd attendedthem, compofed, partly, of their own connections,their relations and particular acquaintances, who heldno moderation either in their hopes or anxieties,nor conceived any profpects but fuch as were bound-kfs; and partly, of fuch as were attracted by zealfor the public intereft, all enraptured with efteemand admiration. They bade " the heroes to pro-"ceed; to proceed with happy fortune, and to ob-"tain fucceis proportioned to the merit of their un-"dertaking;" defiring them to expect afterwards,"confulfhips, triumphs, every reward, every ho-"nour' which was in the power of the public to be-"ftow." As they pafied by the Gapirol, the cita­del, and other facrfd places, whatever deities occur­red to the people's fight or thoughts, to them" theyoffered up their prayers, that they would " crown"that band with fuccefs and profperity, and foon"reftore them in fafcty to their country and their"parents." Bur their prayers were fruitlefs. Paff-ing along the unfortunate ftreet, and through theright-hand poftern of the Carmental gate, they arrived
* Before n conful fct out on any rxp^uition, lie ofFtred f.iciifices aftJprayers in ilie Capitol; and then, laying aliHe Ills confular gown<marcheil out of the city, dre/recl in a iiulitaiy robs of ftate, called^Paludumentum.
at







OCR Output








OF ROME. 41


roans received Horatiys with triumphant congratu- B O O Klacions, and a degree of joy proportioned to thegreatnefs of the danger that had threatened theircaufe. Both parties then applied themfelves to theburying of their dead, with very different difpofitionsof mind; the one being elated with the acquifitionof empire, the other deprefied under a foreign ju-rifdiction. The lepulchres ftill remain, in the feve-ral fpots where the combatants fell; thofe of thetwo Romans in one place nearer to Alba, thofe ofthe three Albans, on the fide next to Rome; but,in different places, as they fought.
XXVI. BEFORE the armies feparatcd, Mettius,in conformity to the terms of the treaty, defired toknow from Tullus vvhat commands he would give,.and was ordered to keep the young men in readi-nefe, under arms, as he intended to employ them incafe of a war breaking out with the Veientians.The two parties then retired to their refpectivehomes. Horatius advanced at the head of the Ro­mans, bearing in triumph the fpoils of the threebrothers: near the gate Capena he was met by hisfifter, a maiden who had been betrothed to one ofthe Curiatii: obferving, on her brother's moulder,the military robe of her lover, made by her own,hands, me tore her hair, and, wiiji loud and mourn­ful outcries, called on the name of her deceafedfpoufe: his fifter's lamentations, in the midft of hisown triumph, and of fo great public joy, irritatedthe fierce youth to fuch a degree, that, drawing hisfword, he plunged it into her breaft, at the fame timeupbraiding her, in thefe words, " Begone to thy"fpoufe, with thy unfcafonable love, fince thou". couldft forget what is due to the memory of thy"deceafed brothers, to him who ftill furvives, and"to thy native country: fo perifh every daughter"of Rome that fhall mourn for its enemy." Boththe ftnate and geople were mocked at the horrid







OCR Output








TH.t HISTORY


 


bore no lefs hatred toward the commons; and,though they did not approve the proceedings of thsY.R. 304. former, thought the latter fuffered no more than theyB.C. 448. haddefervedj and they had no inclination to a fliftmen, who, through their intemperate eagernefs inpurfuit of liberty, had fallen into flavery. On thecontrary, they heaped injuries on them, in hopes,that, being thoroughly difgufted with the prefent,they might come to long for the reftoration of theformer ftate of affairs, and the government of twoconfuls. The greater part of the year was now paft,and the two tables of laws had been added to the tenof the former year; nor was there any other circum-ftance, if thefe laws were once ratified in afiembly ofthe centuries, which could make the prefent formof government neceffary to the commonwealth.People were in continual expectation of an afiemblybeing called for the election of confuls, and thethoughts of the commons were folely employed indevifing a reftoration of that bulwark of liberty, thetribunitian office, which had been laid afide fo long.While, in the mean time, not the leaft mention wasmade of an election, and the decemvirs, who, atfirft, had exhibited themfclves to the commons, forthe purpofe of gaining their favour, furrounded bymen who had been tribunes, now collected aboutthem crowds of young patricians. Troops of thefeencompafied every tribunal; they feized, and droveabout at will, the commons and their effects; themoft powerful being fure of fuccefs, in pofieffinghimfelf of any man's property, in which he faw anything defirable. At length, people found, that eventheir perfons were not fecure from injury: fome werebeaten with rods; others felt the ftroke of the axe jand, that this cruelty might have fome view to pro­fit, a grant of his effects followed the execution ofthe owner. The young nobility, corrupted byfuch bribes, not only declined making oppofitionfo the injufticej but openly derrjonftrated that they
preferred







OCR Output








OF ROME. 4-1


"which is ufually called forth, even by fport and BOOK
"amufement? Do we fuppofe the bodies of our , _Y'_
"foldiers fb effeminate, their minds fo feeble, that Y.R. 351.
"they cannot for one winter endure the fatigue of a B. c.4oo.
"camp, and abfence from home? That, like thofe
"who carry on war by fea, they regulate their ope-
"rations by taking advantage of the weather, and
"obferving the leafons of the year? That they are
"incapable of enduring either heat or cold? I a.m
"convinced they would blufh, if fuch things were
"laid to their charge, and would infift that both
"their minds and bodies were poffeffed, of manly
"firmnefs: that they were able to perform the du-
"ties of war, as well in winter, as in fummer: that
"they never had commiffioned the tribunes to pa-
"tronize floth and effeminacy; and remembered
"very well, that it was not under their own roofs,
"nor in the fhade, that their anceftors eftablifhed
"that very office. Such fentiments are worthy of
"the valour of your foldiers, fuch are worthy of the
"Roman name; not to confider merely the city of
"Veii, nor the prefent war, in which ye are employ-
"ed, but to feck a reputation which may laft during . .
"other wars, and among all other nations. Do ye
"look on the difference between the characters
"which will be applied to you, according to your
"condudt in this affair, as a matter of trivial im-
"portance ? Whether the neighbouring nationsdeem
"the Romans to be foldiefs of fuch a kind, that any
"town which can withftand their firft aflault, and
"that of very, fhort continuance, has nothing farther
"to apprehend; or, whether our name be terrible
"on this account, that neither the fatigue of a tedious
"fiege, nor the feverity of winter, can remove a
"Roman army from a place, which it has once in-
"vefted; that it knows no other termination of
"war, than victory; and that its operations are not
"more diftinguifhed by brifknefs of action, than by
"fteady perfeverance? a qualification which, as it
G G 2 "is







OCR Output








THE HISTORY


 


tluant't:y Of blood had they remaining which could- "be fbed for the commonwealth ?" As they had byY.R. 349. .thefe fuggeftions, thrown out in public afiemblies,B.C.403, rcndereti the commons averfe to the war, the deter­mination on the propofition was adjourned to anothertime, becaufe it was manifeft, that if it came beforethem, during the prelent ill-humour, it would cer­tainly be reje&ed.
L.IX. IT wasrefolved, that, in the mean ume, themilitary tribunes fhould lead an army into the terri­tories of the Volfcians. Cneius Cornelius alone wasleft at Rome. The three tribunes, finding that theVolfcians had not formed a camp any where, and thatthey were refolved not to hazard a battle, dividedtheir forces into three parts, and fet out towards dif­ferent quarters to wafte the enemy's country. Va­lerius directed his march to Antium, Cornelius toEccetra, and wherever they came, they made ex-tenfive depredations both on the lands and houfes, inorder to divide the forces of the Volfcians. Fabiusmarched, without any plundering, to attack Anxur,'which was the principal object in view. Anxuris the city which we now call Tarracinae, fituated ona declivity adjoining a morafs. On this fide, Fabiusmade a feint of attacking it, but fent round fourcohorts under Caius Servilius Ahala, who, havingfeized on the eminence which commands the city,from this higher ground aflailed the walls, with greatIhouting and tumult, on a fide where there was noguard to defend them. Thofe, who were employedin defending the lower part of the city againft Fa­bius, being ftunned with amazement at this tumult,gave him an opportunity of applying the fcaling lad­ders. Every place was quickly filled with the enemy,and a dreadful flaughter continued a long time with-'out diftinction of thofe who fled and thole who maderefiftance, of the armed and unarmed. The van-quifhed therefore were undn; a neceffity of fighting,there being no hope for fuch as retired, until an or­der







OCR Output








P fcEFACE. *vii


even received no inconfiderable marks of fa­vour from him. Yet he does not feem to havecdurted this efteerri, or thofe favours, by anyparticular attention on his part; nor to haveendeavoured to repay them, by the only returnwhkh authors can make, the loading their pa­trons with undeferved praifes. Although, atthe time when he wrote his Hiftory, Auguftuswas in complete pofleflion of the Roman em­pire, yet he names him but three times, andthen but in a flight and curfory manner; notavailing himfelf of the opportunity to heapadulation upon him, but fimply giving himthat praife to which he was unqueftionably en­titled. On occafion of fhutting the temple ofJanus, he takes the opportunity of mentioning,that it had been but twice fhut fmcc the reignof Numa: the firft time in the confulfhip ofTitus Manlius, on the termination of the firftPunic war, and that "the happinefs of feeing it'' fhut the fecond time, the gods granted to our'' own times, when, after the battle of Actium,"the emperor, Caefar Auguftus, eftablifhed uni-"verfal peace, on land and fea *." As Auguftuswas highly vain of this circumftance, had ourAuthor's difpofition led him to flatter this ma-fter of the world, it would have afforded himan excellent opportunity; as would anotheroccafion, wjiere, fpeaking of fpolia opima, de-pofited by Coflus in one of the temples, heappeals to the teftimony of Auguftus Caefar,whom he ftyles " the founder or reftorer of all"our templesf." But, above all, he might have
* B. i. 19. t B. iv. 20.
a 2 found







OCR Output








THE HISTORY


BOOK too violent to be controlled, he ordered one of they _ .1 _. principal ringleaders of the mob to be apprehended:Y.R.I59. when the lictors laid hold of him, he appealed; butJ>. C. 493. the conliils would not have allowed the appeal, therebeing no doubt what the fentence of the people•would be, had not his obftinacy been, with difficulty,overcome by the advice and influence of the nobili­ty, father than by the clamours of the people; fofirmly did he withftand the indignation of the multi­tude. From this time, the evil daily gained ground,Shewing itfelf not only in open expreflions of difcon-tent, but, what was much more pernicious, in fecret'meetings and private cabals. At length thele con-ftils, fo odious to the people, went out of office,Appius in high favour with the patricians, Servilius'with neither party.
V.R.i6o. XXVIII. NEXT entered on the confulfhip, Aulus3. C.49I. virginins and. Titus Vetufius. The people now,not being able to judge what fort of coniuls they•were to have, took care to form nightly meetings,forne on the Elquiline, others on the Aventinemount, in order that their proceedings might notbe confufed, by their being obliged to adopt mea-fures haftily in the Forum, and to act, on every oc-cafion, at random, and without a plan. The confuls,confidering this as a very dangerous proceeding,•which it really was, propofed it to the confiderationof the fenate, but were not allowed, after propofing'it, to take the votes regularly, fuch a tumult arofeon the mention of it among the fenators, who ex-•claimed, and exprefied the higheft indignation at theconfuls attempting to throw on the fenate, the odium•of an affair which ought to have been quelled by the•confular authority. They told them, that" if there'• really had been magiftrates in the commonwealth,"there would have been no council at Rome, but"the public one. At prefent the .government was"divided and difperfcd into a thoufand fenate-
'' houfes,







OCR Output








47* THE HISTORY


B OvO K nirerfary folemnities on the Alban mount. The. _/,-! only mode of expiation in this cafe was, that the"V.R. 358. military tribunes mould refign the government, theBiC. 394. aufpices be taken anew, and an interregnum ap­pointed. ' All which was performed, purfuant to adecree of the fenate. There were three interregesin fucceflion: Lucius Valerius, Quintus ServiliusFidenas, and Marcus Furius Camillus. In the mean­time the city was a fcene of unceafing confufion anddiforder, the plebeian tribunes refufing to let theelections proceed, unlefs a previous ftipulation wereagreed to, that the greater number of the militarytribunes mould be chofen out of the commons.During thefe tranfactions, a general afiembly ofEtruria was held at the temple of Voltumna, andthe Capenatians and Falifcians demanding that allthe ftates of Etruria fhould unite unanimouny in thedefign of raifing the fiege of Veii, the anfwer re­turned was, that " they had formerly given a re-"fufal of the fame requeft to the Veientians, be-"caufe thefe ought not to apply for fuccour, where,"in a cafe of fuch confequence, they had not ap-"plied for advice. That at prefent, though they"of themfelves would not, yet the fituation of their"affairs compelled them to refufe it: efpeciallv, as"in that part of Etruria, the Gauls, a race of men'e with whom they were unacquainted, had lately"become their neighbours, with whom they were"not on a footing, either of fecure peace, orofde-"termined war. Neverthelefs, in confideration of"the blood, the name, and the prefent dangers of"their kinlmen, they would go fo for, as that if
irate, offered joint fnrrifices to Jupiter, whom they termed i latialis.'Jn particular, they odVifd a whiie bull, of wliich the deputies of each. ftate received a piece. The public feftivals, 'feriae,' were of fourkimis; ' ftativa;,' iminoveahle; 'conceptivae,' or ' indiflx,' move.able; 'imperativae,1 commande'l on particular occafions; and ' nun-• din*,' lor holding innrkets; fo called, hccaufe the time waj fixedby proclamation: iliey were genemlly celebrated by ihe confuU, be­fore their departure for their provinces.
"any







OCR Output








I94 T H £ H I S T O R Y


B o o Kthat time, the mof t powerful in Etruria. This, aC.___.^_f firft, ftung the Veientians with grief and indignation*Y.R. ^^(,. afterwards, they formed a defign, fuggefted by theB.C. 476. prefent circumftances, of enfnaring, by a ftratagem,their enemy, elated with fuccefs; and they even ob.ferved, with plealure, the confidence of the Fabiidaily increafing, from a fcries of fuccefsful attempts:in pursuance of this defign, cattle were frequentlydriven in the way of the plundering parties, as if theyhad come there by chance j the fields were delertedby the flight of the peafants, and the bodies of troops,fent to repel the invaders, retreated with pretended,oftener than real, fear. The Fabii had now con­tracted fuch a contempt of the enemy, that theythought their own arms invincible, and not to bewithftood in any place, or on any occafion. Thispreemption carried them fo far, that on feeing, from(premera, fomc cattle at a diftance, though a longtiraci: of country lay between, yet as but few of the ene­my's troops appeared, they ran down to feize them,and prefied forward with fuch carelefs hafte, as topafs by the enemy's troops, who lay in ambufh, oneach fide of the very road, through which theymarched, without difcovering them: they then dif-perfed themlelves on all fides to collect the cattle,which ran up and down, as WES natural on beingtightened; when, fuddenly, the enemy rofe fromtheir concealments, and appeared not only in front,but on every fide of them. The lhout, which wascarried entirely round, firft ftruck them with terror,and, in a little time, they were affailed by weaponsoaall fides. As the Etrurians clofed in upon them,they were obliged, hemmed in, as they were, by onecontinued line of troops, to contract the circle whichthey had formed, into a narrower compafs; whichcircumftance fhewed plainly, both the fmallnefs oftheir number, and the great fuperiority of the Etru­rians, whole ranks were multiplied as the fpace grewnarrower. They then changed .their method of
.fighting,







OCR Output








THEHISTORY


B ?nO K " ra<^er which could give offence, heat and vehe-\_f-^_> " mence, diminifhed daily, as he advanced in age;Y.R.19j. " while the only requifite wanting, prudence, wasS.C.439. " continually gathering new ftrength: that as his"faults were on the decline, and his virtue ad-"vancing to maturity, they fhould allow a man of"fuch rare talents to become an old member of"their community." Along with thefe, his fatherLucius Qiiintius, furnamed Cincinnatus, not dwellingon his praifes, for fear of heightening the publicdifpleafure, but intreating their forgivenefs for his'miftakes and his youth, befought them to pardonhis fon for his fake, who, neither in word or deed,had ever given offence to any. But fome, eitherthrough refpect or fear, avoided liftening to his in-treaties; while others, complaining of the ill.treat­ment which they and their friends had received,fliewed beforehand by their harm anfwers what theirfentence would be.
XIII. BESIDES the notorious inftances of his illconduct, there was one charge which bore heavilyon the accufed: Marcus Volfcius Ficctor, who fomeyears before had been tribune of the people, ftoodforth and teftified, that "a fhort time after the"peftilence in the city, he met with a number of"young men rioting in the Suburra*; that a"fcuffle enfued, and that his brother, who was ad-"vanced in years, and not thoroughly recovered"from the diforder, received from Casfo a blow of"his h'ft, which felled him to the ground; that he"was carried home from thence in people's arms,"and that he believed this was the caufe of his"death; but that he was prevented from profecut-"ing him for fuch an atrocious fact, by the confuls"of the preceding years." By the loud aflevera-tions of Volfcius to this purport, the people were fo
* A part of the town, fo called.
enraged^







OCR Output








OF ROME. 127


the city would afford plaufible grounds, he applied BOOKto the fenate, and told them, " Fathers, I intend . _ ^^__f"to crofs the Tiber, and to enter, if I can, the ene- Y.R. 14.6."my's camp, not to feek for plunder, or to revenge B.c. SQS'"their depredations in kind; the blow which I me-"ditate, with the aid of the gods, is of more impor-"tance." The fenate gave their approbation, andhe fet out with a fword concealed under his garment.When he came into the camp, he took his place clofeto the king's tribunal, where a very great crowd wasafiembled. It happened that, at this time, the fol-diers were receiving their pay, and a fecretary, fit­ting befide the king, and drefied nearly in the famemanner, acted a principal part in the bufinefs, andto him the fbldiers generally addreffed themfelves.Mucius, not daring to enquire which was Porfena,left his not knowing the king fhoukl difcover whathe was, fortune blindly directing the ftroke where itwas not intended, flew the fecretary, inftead of theking. Then endeavouring to make his efcapethrough a paflage, which with his bloody weaponhe cleared for himfelf among the difmayed crowd, a,concourfe of the foldiers being attracted by the noife,he was feized by the king's life.guards, and draggedback. Standing there fingle, among a crowd ofene-mies, before the king's tribunal, even in this fituation,in the midft of fortune's feveref t threats, fhewinghimfelf more capable of infpiring terror, than of feel­ing it, he fpoke to this effect, " I am a Roman ci-"tizen, my name is Caius Mucius. As an enemy,"I intended to have flain an enemy, nor is my refo-"lution lefs firmly prepared to fuffer death,, than to"inflict it. It is the part of a Roman both to act,"and to fuffer, with fortitude : nor am I the only one"who have harboured fuch defigns againft you."There is a long lift, after me, of candidates for the"fame glorious diftinction. Prepare therefore, if"you choofe, for a conteft of this fort, wherein"you muft every hour engage at the hazard of your







OCR Output








48(5 THEHISTORY


B OvO K metal could not be procured ; on which the matrons,. -r'-_' after holding fome meetings to deliberate on the fub-Y.R. 360. jeft, with unanimous confenr, engaged to fupply theB.C. 391. military tribunes with gold, and actually carried alltheir ornaments into the treafury. Nothing everhappened which gave greater pleafure to the fenate,and it is faid, that in return for this generofity, thematrons were honoured with the privilege of ufingcovered chariots, when going to public worfliip orgames, and open chaifes on any day whether fdlivalor common. The gold being received from eachby weight, and a valuation being made, in order thatthe price might be repaid, it was refolyed that agolden bowl thould be made thereof, to be carried$o Delphi as an offering to Apollo. No foonerwere men's minds difengaged from religious con­cerns, than the plebeian tribunes renewed their fe-ditious practices, ftimulating the refentment of thepopulace againftall the nobility, but efpecially againftCamillus; alleging that, " by his confutations and"confecrations, he had reduced the fpoils of Veil"to nothing;" daringly abufing the nobles, in theirabfence; and, on their appearing, as they fometimesthrew themfelves in the way of their fury, fhewingthem fome refpect. When they perceived that thebufinefs would be protracled. beyond the prefentyear, they re-elected for the year following fuchtribunes of the commons, as had promoted the paff-ing of the law, and the patricians exerted themfelvesto effect the fame with refpect to fuch of them ashad protefted againft it. By thcie means the fameperfons moftly were re-elected plebeian tribunes.
J;J; ]£; XXVI. AT the election of military tribunes, thepatricians, by ftraining their intereft to tlie utmoft,prevailed to have Marcus Furius Camillus chofen.They pretended, that on account of the wars, inwhich they were engaged, they vyithed to have himas a commander: but, in fact, they wanted him as
an







OCR Output








OF ROME, 41


war, as it was to be waged, in fome manner, be- B O ° Ktween parents and their children, both parties de­riving their defcent frpm Troy: for Lavinium owedits origin to Troy, from Lavinium fprung Alba,and, from the race of the Alban kings, the Romanswere defcended. The ifliie of the war, however,was fuch as rendered the difpute lefs grievous thanmight have been apprehended j for, without a gene­ral engagement, and without any farther damage,than the demolition of the houfes of one of thecities, the two ftates were incorporated into one.The Albans firft, with very numerous forces, madean irruption into the Roman territories; and, at thediftance of no more than five miles from the city,fortified their camp with a trench, which, from thename of their leader, was afterwards called the Clu-jlian Trench, and retained the name for feveral ages,until the occafion being in time forgotten, the nametoo fell into difufe. In this camp, Cluilius the Al­ban king died, on which the Albans created Met-tius Fuftctius their dictator. Tullus, now, impatientforaction, efpecially after the death of the king, af-fured his men that the fupreme power of the gods,winch had already begun with the head, would in­flict:, upon the whole body of the Albans, the pe­nalty incurred by their having occafioned this im­pious war; and, marching paf t the enemy's campin the night, he advanced, with his army ready foraction, into the Alban territories. This proceduredrew out Mettius from the camp where he lay:he led his troops, by the fhorteft road, towards theenemy, fending forward an ambaflador to tell Tul­lus, that " it was highly expedient that they mould"confer together, before they came to an engage-"ment; that, if he would give him a meeting, he'' was confident that what he had to propofe to his'•' confederation would appear to concern the intereft"of Rome, no lefs than that of Alba." Tullus, notthmking^it proper to decline the propofal,. thoughhe fa\v no probability of any good confequence
. ar'ifing







OCR Output








O F R O M E. - 149


Ecetra, who, after the taking of Pometia, felt ap- B OnO Kprehenfions for their own fafety: thefe had peace . -^_rgranted them by decree of the fenate, but were de- Y.R. 159.pri ved of their lands. B.c' «*•
XXVI. IMMEDIATELY after, the Sabines alfocaufed an alarm at Rome; but it was, in facct, a tu­mult rather than a war. An account was brought•by night to the city, that a Sabine army were plun­dering the country, and had advanced as far as theriver Anio, and that they were ravaging and burn­ing all the farms in that neighbourhood: AulusPoftumius, who had been dictator in the Latine•war, was inftantly difpatched thither with all the ca­valry, and the conful Servilius followed, with a cho-fen body of foot: the greater part of the ftragglerswere cut off by the cavalry; nor was the main bodyof the Sabines capable of refifting the infantry ontheir approach; fatigued both by their march andby collecting booty in the night, a great number ofthem in the country houfes, overcharged with meatand wine, had fcarcely ftrength fufficient to enablethem to fly. Thus was this Sabine war finifhedwithin the fame night in which the firft account ofit had been • received. The next day, while fan-guine hopes were entertained that peace with alltheir neighbours was now fecurely eftablifhed, am-bafladors came to the lenate from the Auruncians,denouncing war, unlefs the troops were withdrawnfrom the territories of the Volfcians: the army of theAuruncians had fet out from home, at the fametime with the ambafladors: and intelligence arriv­ing, that it had been feen not far from Aricia, itexcited fuch an alarm among the Romans, that nei­ther could the fenate be confulted in a regular man­ner, nor could they, while bufy themfdves in takingup arms, give a peaceable anfwer to thofe whowere advancing in arms againft them. The troopsmarched againft the enemy to. Aricia, and not far
i. 3 from







OCR Output








fttff


IDG*2.01


Y,/







OCR Output








OF ROME. 34t


confuls. The latter afierted that " the outrageous BOOK"proceedings of the tribunes could not be any .-_vl ->•' longer endured: that matters were now come to Y.R. 3i0.c' a crifis, there being more dangerous hoftilitiesB. c. *4*•'' excited at home than abroad: that for this the"commons were not more to be blamed than the"fenate, nor the tribunes, more than the confuls."In any ftate, whatever practices meet with re­'t wards, thefe are always purfued to the greateft"degree of proficiency, and thefe are the incite-"ments which call forth merit, both in peace and"war. Now, at Rome, there was nothing fo highly"rewarded, as fedition; this was in every inftance"attended with honours both to individuals and to"collective bodies. They ought therefore carefully'' to confider, in what condition they had received"the majefty of the fenate from their fathers, and"in what condition they were likely to hand it"down to their children; whether they could make"the fame boaft which the commons might, with'' refpect to their privileges, that it was improved"both in degree and in fplendor. No end appeared*' of thefe proceedings, nor would, fo long as the"fomentors of fedition were rewarded with ho -"nours, in proportion to the fuccefs of their fedi-'' tious projects. What were the new and impor-"tant fchemes which Caius Canuleius had fet on"foot? No lefs than the proftitution of the privi-"leges of nobility, and the confounding the rights"of aufpices, both public and private'; that nothing"might be left pure and unpolluted; and tha,ty"every diftinction being removed, no perfon might"know what he himfelf was, nor to what order he"belonged. For what other tendency had fucn'' promifcuous intermarriages, than to produce an"irregular intercourfe between patricians and ple-"beians, not very different from that. between"brutes? So that one of their offspring fhould notV be able to tell, of what blood he was, or inz 3 "what







OCR Output








THE HISTORY


B o o K tians: wherefore, after having, by reciprocal em-. - '-_i baffles, ratified their engagements with an oath, theyY.R. 353. advanced with their forces to Veii, at a momentB.C. 399. W}K11 no one thought of their coming. They hap­pened to attack the camp on that quarter, whereManius Sergius, military tribune, commanded, andthey caufed a violent alarm; for the Romans ima­gined that all Etruria had been fet in motion, andhad come out in a mafs againft them. The fameopinion roufed to action the Veientians in the city.Thus the camp was attacked on both fides; and thetroops, in oppofing the attempts of the enemy, be­ing obliged to wheel round their battalions from onefide to another, could neither effectually confine theVeientians within their fortifications, nor repel theafiauh from their own works, and defend themfelvessgair.ft the enemy, on the outer fide. Their onlyhope was, that they might be reinforced _from thegreater camp, and then the feveral different legionswould fupport the different parts of the fight, Tomecgainft the Capenatians and Falifcians, others againftthe fallies from the town. But that camp was com­manded by Virginius, between whom and Sergiusfubfifted a mutual perfonal hatred: on being inform­ed that moft of the forts were attacked, the fortifi­cations fcaled, and that the enemy poured in on bothfides, he kept his men within his own camp, underarms, faying, that if there were need of a reinforce­ment, his colleague would fend to him. His arro­gance was equalled by the obftinacy of the other,who, fooner than he fhould appear to have afked anyaffifb.n.ce from a perfon with whom he was at enmi­ty, chofe to be conquered by the enemy, rather thanto conquer by the help of his countryman. Histroops, inclofcd on,either fide, fuffered great flaugh-ter for a long time; at laft, abandoning the works, avery fVnall part of them made their way to the prin­cipal camp; the greater number, with Sergius him-• felfj proceeded to Rome; here, as he threw the
, entire







OCR Output








OF ROME. lof


as his province. The fame harfh fe verity, which BOOKAppius had fhewn at home, he practifed at the head .^-^^-fof the army abroad, and even with lefs referve, as Y.R. 18j,he .was out of the reach of any control from the tri- B. c.+6>.bunes; he detefted the commons to a degree ofrancour,. even beyond what he inherited from his fa­ther; he confidered himfelfas vanquifhed by theinjand that when he had been fet up as the only perfon,who, in the character of conful, was qualified to"oppofe the tribunitian power, that law had been car­ried, which the former confuls had been able to pre­vent, though they made not fuch ftrenuous exer­tions, nor did the patricians expect fo much fromthem. The anger and indignation, hereby excited,inftigated his refentful temper to wreak on the armyevery kind of feverity, which the command put irthis power: but no degree of violence was able tofubdue the temper of the troops, fuch an uncon­querable fpirit of oppofition had they imbibed. Intvery part of their bufinefs they (hewed indolenceand carelefsnefs, negligence and ftubbornnefs; nei­ther fhame nor fear had any effect on them: if hechofe that the army mould proceed with more expe­dition, they marched flower on purpole; if he cameto encourage them to haften their work, every onerelaxed the diligence, which, of himlclf, he hadufed before; when he was prefent, they caft downtheir eyes; as he paffed by, they muttered curfesagainft him; fo that even his mind, which feemedinvulnerable by any effect of popular diflikc, wasfometimes affected with difagreeable emotions. Af­ter trying every kind of harfh treatment without ef­fect, he renounced all intercourfe with the foldiers,declaring, that the army was corrupted by the cen­turions, whom, in a gibing manner, he fometimescalled plebeian tribunes, and Volcroes.
LIX. NOT one of theie circumftances. was m>-'
known to the Volfciana, who, fur that rcafbn, preffed
- forward







OCR Output








OF ROME.


 


•which have been given, this feems to be the neareft Bto truth: that Porfena, on retiring from the Janicu-him, made a prefent to the Romans of his camp, Y.R.which was plentifully ftored with provifions, collect- B.c.ed from the neighbouring fertile lands of Etruria,the city at that time labouring under a fcarcity, inconfequence of the long fiege; and left the populace,if permitted, might feize on them, as the fpoil of anenemy, they were fet up to fale, and called the goodsof Porfena; the appellation denoting rather grati­tude for the gift, than an auction of the king's pro­perty, which, befides, never came into the power ofthe Romans. After he had put an end to the warwith Rome, Porfena, that he might not appear toHave led his troops into thofe countries to no pur-pofe, fent his fon Aruns, with half of his forces, to layfiege to Aricia: the unexpectednefs of the attackftruck the Aricians at firft with difmay; but after­wards having collected aid, both from the Latineftates, and from Cumae, they affbmed fuch confi­dence, as to venture an engagement in the field: atthe beginning of the battle, the Etrurians rufhed onfo furipufly., that at the very firft onfet they put theAricians to the rout: the cohorts from Cumae, op-pofing art to force, moved a little to one fide; andwhen the enemy, in the impetuofuy of their career,had pafied them by, faced about, and attacked theirrear: by thefe means the Etrurians, after having al-moft gained the vicctory, were furrounded and cut topieces: a very fmall part of them, their general be­ing loft, and no place of fafety nearer, made the beftof their way to Rome, without arms, and in theircircumftances and appearance merely like fuppliants;there they were kindly received, and provided withlodgings: when their wounds were cured, fome ofthem returned home, and gave an account of thehofpitality and kindnefs which they had experienced.A great number remained at Rome, induced by theregard which they had contracted for their hofts andK 2 for







OCR Output








O F R O M E. £7


fcveral of which had been vowed, firft by Tatius, B O O Kduring the very heat of the battle againft Romulus, ,• and afterwards confecrated there, and inaugurated.lltls related, that, during the preparations for found­ing this ftructure, the gods exerted their divinepower, to exhibit indications of the ftability of thisgreat empire; for, whilft the birds admitted the can­celling the inaugurations of all the other chapels, theydid not give the figns of approbation, in the cafe ofthe temple of Terminus; and that omen, and thataugury, were deemed to import that the refidence ofTerminus muft not be changed ; and his being the on­ly one of the Gods who would not fubmit to be calledforth from the boundaries confecrated to him, de­noted that all things there were to ftand firm and im­movable. After the.y had received this prefage ofits perpetual duration, there followed another pro­digy, portending the greatnefs of the empire : a hu­man head, with the face entire, is faid to have ap­peared to thofe who were opening the foundation ofthe temple; which appearance denoted, withoutthe help of any far-fetched allufion, that this wouldbe the metropolis of the empire, and the head ofthe world. Such was the interpretation given of itby the foothfayers, both thofe who were in the city,and others whom they fent for from Etruria, to holda confutation on the fubject. This encouraged theking to enlarge the expence, fo that the fpoilsof Pometia, which, according to his firft defign,were to have completed the edifice, were fcarcely.fufficient for the foundations: for this reafon, befideshis being the more ancient writer, I mould rather be~lieve Fabius, that thele amounted to no more thanforty talents*, than Pifo, who writes, that fortythoufand pounds weight of filver f were fet apart forthat purpofe; a fum of money, that could not beexpected out of the fpoi1 ofany one city in that age,


• 7750!. f 11
VOL. i. H and







OCR Output








CONTENTS OF VOL. I.
P*ge
BOOK I. - - . . . i
BOOK II 107
BOOK III. .... 2I6
BOOK IV 339
BOOK V 44!







OCR Output








504 THEHISTORY


BOOK their right on the points of their fwords, and that allt '- . things were the property of the brave. And thus,Y.R. 364. with minds inflamed on both fides, they haftily fepa-B.C. 388. rated to prepare for battle, which began withoutdelay. Here, fate now prefling the city of Rome,the ambafladors, contrary to the law of nations, tooka part in the action; a fadl: which could not be con­cealed, for three of the noblcft and braveft of theRoman youth fought in the van of the Etrurian ar­my; and the valour of thefe foreigners was emi­nently conlpicuous. Befides, Quintus Fabius rodeforward beyond the line, and Hew a general of theGauls, who was making a furious charge againft thevery ftandards of the Etrurians, running him throughthe fide with his fpear; he was known by the Gauls,while he was ftripping him of his fpoils; on whichnotice was conveyed round through the whole army,that he was one of the Roman ambafladors. Drop­ping therefore their refentment againft the Clufians,they founded a retreat, threatening to wreak theirvengeance on the Romans. Some adviled that theyfhould march inftantly to Rome. But^the opinionof the elders prevailed j that ambafladors mould firftbe fent to complain of the ill treatment which theyhad received, and to demand that the Fabii mouldbe delivered into their hands as a fatisfaction fortheir having violated the law of nations. When theambafladors of the Gauls had explained thofe mat­ters according to their commiffion, the, fenatc werehighly difpleafed at the behaviour of the Fabii, andthought the demand of the barbarians juft: but inthe cafe of nobles, of fuch exalted rank, partialfavour prevented their paffing a decree conformableto their judgment. Left, therefore, they might bechargeable with any misfortune which might per­haps be fuftained in a war with the Gauls, they re­ferred the determination, on the demands of theGauls, to the afiembly of the people: where, ibprevalent was the influence of intcreft and wealth,
that







OCR Output








PREFACE. xxiii


;


him, he does it in the moft advantageous man­ner, as a youth, who had fcarcely attained tomanhood, refcuinghis father, who was woundedin a battle with Hannibal. "This," fays he*,"is the fame youth who is, hereafter, to enjoy"the renown of terminating this war, and to"receive the title of Africanus, on account of"his glorious victory over Hannibal and the"Carthaginians." He then, in a manner,avows his partiality; for he tells us, that Coeliusattributes the honour of faving the Gonful to aHave, by nation a Ligurian: "But I rather"with the account to be true which gives it to"his fon; and fo the fact is reprefented by*' moft authors, and generally believed."
That Scipio was a moft accomplifhed cha­racter, eminently diftinguifhed by his militarytalents, valour, coolnefs, patience under dif­ficulties, and moderation in victory, of moftgentle manners, and a moft generous temper,never has been, nor ever will be denied. But,if other writers knew the truth, and havefpoken it, he was not that model of abfoluteperfection which Livy paints him: and per­haps, had he been the cold and unimpafilonedftoic, which he defcribes him to have been, hehad deferved lefs praile than is undoubtedlydue to him, when confidered, as other authorsreprefent him, of a very different temperament.
That he generoufly reftored the beautiful cap­tive to her parents, and to her intended fpoufe,Livy and Polybius are agreed; but they differjfpjnewhat in the aceount of that affair. Poly-
* B. xxxi. 4<j.


bins







OCR Output








OF ROME. 115.


And the execution was the more remarkable on this BOOKaccount, that his office of conful, impofed on a fa- L **- jither the fevere duty of inflicting punifhment on his Y.R. ,4S.own Ions; and that he, who ought not to have been B. C. 507.prefent as a fpectator, was yet the very perfon whomfortune pitched on to exa£b the penalty of their of­fence. The youths, all of the firft diftinction, ftoocltied to ftakes, but the fons of the conful entirely en­gaged the eyes of all the fpectators, as if the otherswere perfons unknown; and people felt compaflion,not only for their punifhment, but even for thecrime by which they had brought it on themfelves:to think that "they could, during that year parti-"cularly, have been induced to entertain a defign"of betraying their country, juft delivered from ty-"ranny, their father its deliverer, the confulfhip,"which had commenced in the Junian family, the"Patricians, commons, whatever men and gods,"Rome held in higheft veneration, into the handsxc of one who was formerly a tyrannical king, now"an enraged exile." The confuls mounted theirthrone, and the lictors were fent to perform the exe­cution: after ftripping them naked, they beat themwith rods, and beheaded them; whilft, through thewhole procefs of the affair, the father, his looks,and his countenance, afforded an extraordinary fpec-tacle, the feelings of the father often forcing theirway through the character of the magiftrate enfor­cing the execution of the laws. After the criminalswere punifhed, in order to exhibit a ftriking exam­ple for the prevention of crimes, in their treatmentof the feveral parties, they gave, as a reward to thedifcoverer, a fum of money out of the treafury, hisfreedom, and the rights of a citizen. This man isfaid to be the firft who was made free by the Vin-dicta*. Some think ^that the term " Vindicta"
was


* The vindidla was a roJ, or y1and, with which the conful, in earlytimes, afterwards the city praetor, ftruck the flave prdentedtg b m Cos
1 I W..1....I..







OCR Output








O F R O M E. 363


execution, was the caufe of their being entirely dif- BOOKconcerted. To the confulfhip was deified, Titus: '_ _•;Quintius Cincinnatusa fixth time, a man not at all Y.R. 316.calculated to encourage the views of one who aimed B'c' *3<**at innovations: his colleague was Agrippa Meneni-us, furnamed Lanatus, Minucius too, was eitherre-eleccted prefident of the market, or was originallyappointed for an unlimited term, as long as occafionShould require; for there is nothing certain on thishead, only that his name, as prefident, was entered inthe linen books among the other magiftrates for bothyears. This Minucius tranfacting, in a public cha­racter, the fame kind of bufinefs, which Maelius hadundertaken in a private capacity, the houfes of both.were confequently frequented by the fame fort ofpeople; which circumftance, having led to a difco-very of the defigns of the latter, Minucius laid theinformation before the fenate: that " a collection"of arms was made in the dwelling of Maelius;"that he held afiemblies in his houfe; and that"there remained not a doubt of his having formed"a defign to poffefs himfelf of abfolute power: that"the time for the execution of his fcheme was not"yet fixed, but every other particular had been let-'c tled: that tribunes had been corrupted, by bribes,". to betray the public liberty; and that the leaders'' of the multitude had their feveral parts alfigned'c them. That he had deferred laying this matter'' before them, rather longer than was confiftent"with fafety, left he might offer any information'" which was ill-grounded, or uncertain." On hear­ing this, the principal patricians highly blamed theconfuls of the former year, for fuffering fuch. largefies,and fuch meetings of the commons, in a privatehoufe; and alfo, the new confuls for lying by untilthe prefident of the market reported to the fenate anaffair of fuch importance, which it was the duty of aconful both to difcover and to punifli. To thisQuintius replied, that " it was unfair to blame the
"confuls,







OCR Output








THEHISTORT


 


Of that, not a fod mould be affigned to any__ man until every one of the Rutulians fhould have re-Y.R. 313. ceived his mare: by thefe means the land returnedB. C. 439. to the Ardeans. The commiflioncrs appointed to con­duct the colony to Ardea, were Agrippa Menenius,Titus Cbelius Siculus, and Marcus ^Ebutius Elva;•who, in the execution of their very unpopular em­ployment, having given offence to the commons, byafligning to the allies that land which the Romanpeople had by their fentence pronounced to be theirown; and, not being much favoured even by theprincipal patricians, becaufe they had fhewn no de­ference to the influence of any of them, were by thetribunes cited before the people, to anfwer a chargeof mifconduct; but they evaded all vexatious at­tacks, by enrolling themfelves. as fettlers, and re­maining in that colony, which 'would ever bear tefti-mony to their juftice and integrity,
Y.R. 3^. XII. TRANQUILLITY continued at home and'*3 ' abroad during both this and the following year, inwhich Caius Furius Pacilus, .and Marcus PapiliusCraflus were confuls. The games vowed by the de­cemvirs in purfuance of a decree of the fenate, onoccafion of the feceflion of the commons from thepatricians, were this year performed. An occafjonof fedition was fought in vain by Petilius; who,though he was elected tribune of the commons, afecond time, merely out of people's reliance on theftrength of his declarations, that he would effec"fcthofe very purpofes, yet he was neither able to carrythe point, that the confuls fhould propofe to the fenatea diftribution of lands to be made to the commons;nor, when, after a great ftruggle, he had prevailedfo far as that the fenate mould be conlulted, whetherit was their pleafure that confuis mould be ele&ed, ortribunes, was he able to prevent an order for the elec~tion of confuls; and the tribune made himfelf ftillmore ridiculous to all, by threatening to hinder a levy


J6F







OCR Output








• OF ROME.. 421


the town: then he began a contention with his coun- BOOKtrymen, inftead of the ^iquans, and having pro- . '^claimed, during the aflault, that the plunder mould Y.R. 34T.be given to the foldiers, when he got pofieifion of B.C. 411.the town, he broke his word. This, I am inclinedto believe, was the caufe of the anger of the armyagainft him, rather than their finding lefs booty thanthe tribune had reprefented, in a new colony, and atown which had been facked a fhort time before.Their anger was farther inflamed on his return tothe city, whither he had been fummoned by his col­leagues, on account of feditions raifed by the ple­beian tribunes, by an exprefiion which he was heardto utter in an afiembly of the people, which fhewedgreat weaknefs, or rather a degree of infanity. OnSextius, the plebeian tribune, propofing an agrarianlaw, and at the fame time declaring that lie wouldalfo propofe the fending of a colony to Volae, be-caufe thofe men deferved to enjoy the city and landsof Volae, who had gained pofieffion of them by theirarms, he exclaimed, "Woe to my foldiers, at leaft,"if they are not quiet." Which words gave notgreater offence to the afiembly, than they did foonafter to the patricians, when they heard them j andthe plebeian tribune, a keen man, and not deftituteof eloquence, having found among his adverfariesthis haughty temper and ungoverned tongue, which,by provoking and teafing, he might drive into fuchexpreflions as would excite general indignation, notonly againft his particular perfon, but again!! thewhole body and their caufe, drew none of the col­lege of military tribunes into difputes, more fre­quently than Poftumius. But now, on fuch a bar-'barous and inhuman expreffion, he remarked, " Do"ye hear him, citizens! denouncing woe to foldiers"as he would to flaves? and yet this brute will be"judged by you more deferving of that high office"than thole who iend you into colonies, and enrich*' you with lands and cities; who provide a fettle-
E E 3 "menr.







OCR Output








188 THE, HISTO.RY


B oi o K enemy's line was confiderably weakened; far, con*. _^ fiding in the fuperiority of their numbers, they hadY.R. 174. drawn off a part, and fent them to attack the camp:it. C. 47*. tliefe met but little refinance in the aflault, but waft­ed time afterwards, being more intent on plunder,than on fighting; and, in the mean time, the RomanTriarii *, who had not been able to prevent theirbreaking in at firft, difpatched to the confuls an ac­count of their filiation, returned in a compact bodyto the Praetorium, and without waiting for aid, ofthemfelves renewed the combat. At the fame time,the conful Manlius having rode back to the camp,pofted troops at all the gates, and blocked up everypaflage by which the enemy could retreat. Thedefperate fituatinn in which the Etrurians then fawthemfelves, infpired them not only with boldnefs,but with fury; fo that, after they had made feveralfruitlefs efforts, attempting every place where theyfaw any profpect of gaining a paflage, one band oftheir young men made an attack on the conful him-felf, whom they diftinguifhed by his armour: his at­tendants covered him from the firft difcharge of theirweapons; but could not long withftand their force:the conful, receiving a mortal wound, fell, and hisattendants were entirely difperfed. This added newconfidence to the Etrurians, and fo difpirited theRomans, that they fled, in difmay, through all partsof the camp; and they would probably have beenutterly ruined, had not the lieutenant generals,haftily removing the conful's body, opened a paflagefor the enemy, through one of the gates: throughthis they rufhed out; and, as they were retreating inthe utmoft diforder, fell m with the other conful,•who was flufhed with fuccefs. In this fecond en­counter many were cut off", and the reft fled differ­ent ways. The victory was complete, but the joy,
• The Triarii were veteran foldiers, of approved valour: theyformed the thud line, hence ilicir name.


which







OCR Output








334 THE HISTORY


BOOK important exigencies: the fupreme command was,L _LITJ . with the confent of Agrippa, lodged in the hands ofY.R. 309. his colleague, who being thus raifed to a fuperiority,B.C. 443. made the politeft return for the other's cheerful con-defcenfion to act in a fubordinate capacity; makinghim a fharer in all his counfels and honours, andtreating him in every refpect as his equal, thoughunder his command. In the line of bajtle, Quintiuscommanded the right wing, Agrippa the left; thecare of the centre they entrufted to Spurius Poftu-mius Albus, lieutenant general; and gave the com­mand of the cavalry to another lieutenant general,Servius Sulpicius. The infantry, in the right wing,fought with extraordinary valour, and met with aftout refiftanqe from the Volfcians. Servius Sulpi­cius, with the cavalry, broke the centre of the ene­my's line, and when he might have returned to hisown fide, by the fame way, he thought it more ad-vifeable to make an attack on the rear of the enemy,before they could recover from the diforder intowhich their ranks had been thrown. By his chargeon their rear, the fnemy, being aflailed on bothfides, muft have been inftantly difperfed, had not thecavalry of the Volfcians and ^Equans, throwing them-felves in his way, given him employment, for a con-fiderable time, oppofing him with forces of the famekind with his own. On this, Sulpicius told his men,that there was no time to hefitate; and called outthat they were lurrounded, and cut off from theirfriends, if they did not unite their moft vigorous ef­forts, and rout the enemy's cavalry: nor was itenough to drive them off" the ground, without dif-abling them ; they muft kill both the horfes and theirriders, left any fhould return to the engagement andrenew the fight. The enemy, he faid, were notable to withftand them, to whom a compact body ofinfantry had been obliged to give way. His orderswere obeyed with alacrity. By one charge they rout­ed the whole body of cavalry, difmounted vaft num­bers,







OCR Output








T H E H I S T O R Y


BOOK walls, the town was filled with the enemy, and a fight^^1^ commenced in every quarter. After great flaughterY.R. 359. had been made, the ardour of the combatants atB.C. 393. length began to abate, and the dictator, proclaimingorders by the heralds, that no injury fhould be doneto the unarmed, put an end to the effufion ofblood. The townfmen then began to lay down theirarms and furrender, and the foldiers,with permifiionof the dictator, difperfed in fearch of booty. Whenthe fpoil was collected before his eyes, far exceedingboth in quantity and in the value of the effects, all hiscalculations and hopes, the dictator is faid to haveraifed his hands towards heaven, and prayed, "that"if any gods or men looked on his fuccefs and that"of the Roman people as exceffive, fuch jea-"loufy might be appeafed by fome calamity pecu-"liar to himfelf alone, rather than by the flighteft"detriment to the Roman people." It is recorded,that as he turned himfelf about, during this addrefsto the gods, he ftumbled and fell; and this was con-fidered afterwards, by fuch as judged of the matter bythe events which followed, to be an omen portendingCamillus's own condemnation, and the difafter ofthe city of Rome being taken, which happened afew years after. The lubduing of the enemy, andthe plundering of this very opulent city, employedthat whole day.
XXII. NEXT day the dictator fold the inhabitantsof free condition by auction: the money arifing fromthe fale was all that was applied to the ufe of thepublic, and even that was relented by the commons.As to what fpoil they brought home with them, theydid not think themfelves under any obligation, eitherto the general, who, with defign to procure theircountenance to his own parfimony, had referred tothe fenate, a bufinefs which properly belonged to hisown jurifdiction, or to the fenate either, but to theLicinian family, of which the fon had laid the affairbefore the fenate, and the father ,firft propofed the13 * popular







OCR Output








288 THE HISTORY


BOOK, pafied an order, that watches mould be held in the
.^-y-_, city; commanded all, who were of an age to bear
Y. R. 505. arms, to mount guard on the walls, and to form out-
B.c_447. p0fl.s before the gates; decreed a fupply of arms to
be carried to Tufculum; that the decemvirs mould
come down from the citadel of Tufculum, and keep
their troops encamped; that the other camp mould
be removed from Fidenae, into the country of the
Sabines, to the end that the enemy, feeling them-
felves attacked at home, might be deterred from any
defign of attacking the city.
XLIII. To the calamities, inflicted by the ene­my, the decemvirs added two moft flagitious decc's1
. one at home, and the other in the army. In thearmy, which acted againft the Sabines, a perfon,called Lucius Siccius, taking advantage of the ge-, neral averfion to the decemvirs, and having fre­quently, in private converfation with the commonfoldiers, made mention of a feceffion, and of elect­ing tribunes, they fent him on a party of obferva-
• tion, to choofe ground for a camp, and gave in-ftructions to the foldiers whom they fent to attendhim on the expedition, that they fhould fall uponhim in fome convenient place, and put him to death.He did not fall unrevenged. For, though fur-rounded on all fides, he ftood on his defence; and,being pofiefied of extraordinary perfonal ftrength,and of fpirit equal to his ftrength, he flew feveral ofthe aflaflins. The reft gave our, in the camp, thatthey had fallen into an ambufh, and that Siccius wasloft, after fighting with great bravery, and fome ofthe foldiers with him. At firft this ftory was be­lieved: but afterwards, a cohort, which went, withpermiffion of the decemvirs, to bury thole who hadfallen, obferving that none of the bodies there wereftripped j that Siccius, with his arms, lay in themiddle, while the faces of all the other bodies wereturned towards him; that none of the bodies be­longed







OCR Output








O fr R O M E. 399


"moft vigorous exertions, and after a violent ftrug- BOOK
"gle, the point had been gained, that military tri- , -,-_,•
*' bunes with confular power might be chofen from y.R. 331.
"among the commons. Men of approved merit, B.c.*«.
's both in the civil and military line, had ftood can-
"didares. During the firft years they were hooted'
"at, rejected, and ridiculed by the patricians: of*
"kte, they had defifted from expofing themfelves
"to infult. For his part, he could fee no reafon
"why the law itfe.lf mould not be repealed, which
"granted permifllon for that which was never to
"happen: for they would have lefs caufe to blufh
"at the injuftice of the law, than at their being
"pafied by on account of their own want of
"merit."
XXXVI. DISCOURSES of this fort being liftenedto with approbation, induced feveral to offer them-fclves as candidates for the" military tribunefhip, eacliprofefling intentions of introducing when in officefome meafure, or regulation, advantageous to thecommons. Hopes were hel'd forth of a diftributionof the public lands, of colonies to'be fettled, and ofmoney to be raifed, for paying the troops, by a taximpofed on the proprietors of.lands. The militarytribunes foon after laid hold of an opportunity, whenmoft people had retired from the city, liaving pre-v'ioufly given private notice to the fenators to attendon a certain day, to procure a decree of the fenate,in the abfence of the plebeian tribunes, that whereasit was reported, that the Volfcians had marched fromhome with intent to plunder the country of the Her-nicians, the military tribunes mould therefore go tothe fpot, and infpecct into the matter, and that an*afiembly mould be, held for the election of con-fuls. At their departure, they left Appius Claudius,fon of the decemvir, praefect of the city, a youngman of activity; and .who had, even from his cradle,imbibed a hatred towards the commons and their
tribunes.







OCR Output








xxiv PREFACE.


bius tells us"*, that a party of Roman youth, ha­ving taken captive a damfel of exquifue beauty,brought her to Scipio, whom they knew to bemuch attached to the fex; and he makes Scipiofay to them, that " a more acceptable gift could"not have been prefented to him,were he in a"private ftation: but that, in his fituation of"general, he could by iio means accept of it."Livy fupprefles entirely the circumftance of hisfavourite's amorous difpofition: and yet, whathe reprefents him as faying to Allucius, bearsfo ftrong a refemblance to his anfwer, recordedby Polybius, though he gives it a different turn,to accommodate it to his purpofe, that we can.rnot doubt his having had this paflage in his eye:*' If my thoughts were not totally employed"by the affairs of the public, and if I were at'' liberty to indulge in the pleafurable purfuits"adapted to my time of life f," &c.
That Scipio, with all his perfections, was notthat mirror of chaftity which Livy is defirousof reprefenting him, we learn, alfo, from ananecdote related by Valerius Maximus :f, whohighly praifes the amiable temper and patientforbearance of his wife ^Emilia," who," he tellsus, " knew of his attachment to a female flave,"and yet concealed the fact, that there might"be no ftain upon fo illuftrious a character."
Such are the principal facts alleged to proveour Hiftorian's neglect of veracity in his nar­ration: rigorous, and, it may be, invidiousfcrutiny has noted fome few more; but theyare of little importance: and, as it is not im-
• Lib. x. ••;• 8. xxzvi. 50. | Lib. vi. 7.
pro­







OCR Output








ERRATA in VOL. I.Page


65. line 15.
read fpeedilyread Vimintl
79. — 4.130. — 24.139. — 13.
dele andread the battleread fixread Coffin
267. 20.
439. — z».







OCR Output













OCR Output








O F R O M E. 431


number. Information was now received that the Vol- BOOKfcians and^ffiiquans, actuated by hopes which they con- . - _._fceived, from having been able to keep pofieflion of Y.R. 347.the citadel of Carventa, or by anger, for the lofs of B.C.+oj.the garrifon of Verrugo, had in conjunction com­menced hoftilities, with the utmoft force which theycould mufter, and that the Antians were the chiefpromoters of this meafure. That their ambafladorshad gone about among the ftates of both thofe na­tions, upbraiding their fpiritlefs conduct. That theyhad the year before lain hid behind walls, and fuf-fered the Romans to carry their depredationsthrough every part of their country, and the garrifonof Verrugo to be overpowered. That now, not on­ly armed troops, but colonies alfo, were fent intotheir territories; and that the Romans not only keptpofieffion of their property, and diftributed it amongthemfelves, but even made a prefent to the Hernici-ans of Terentinum, a diftrict of which they had beenftripped. People's minds being inflamed by thefcreprefentations, wherever they came great numbersof the young men were enlifted. Thus the youth ofall the feveral nations were drawn together toAntium, and there pitching their camp, they waitedfor the enemy. Thefe violent proceedings beingreported at Rome, and exaggerated beyond the truth,the fenate inftandy ordered a dictator to be nomi­nated, their ultimate refource in all perilous con­junctures. We are told that this meafure gave greatoffence to Julius and Cornelius, and was not accom-plifiied without a great deal of ill temper. Theprincipal patricians, after many fruitlefs complaintsagainft the military tribunes, for refufing to be di­rected by the fenate, at laft, went fo far, as to ap­peal to the tribunes of the commons, reprefenting,that compullbry meafures had been ufed by that bo­dy even to conluls in a fimilar cafe. The plebeiantribunes, overjoyed at this difienfion among the pa­tricians, made anfwer, that " there was no i'upport to
"be







OCR Output








OF ROME. 177


hymen, and, hoping to recover their eftcem by B O O Kanother donative, propofed an order that the money . ~^ _j.received for the Sicilian corn fhould be refunded to Y.R. 168.the people; but this the commons rejected with as B'c.484'much difdain, as if he were avowedly bartering forarbitrary power; fo ftrongly were they influencedby their inveterate fufpicions of his ambition* thatthey fpurned at all his prefents, as if they were in aftate of affluence; and no fooner did he go out ofoffice, than he was condemned and executedt as weare informed by undoubted authority. Some faythat it was his father who inflicted this punifhmenton him; that having, at home, held an inquiry intohis conduct; he fcourged him, and put him to death*and confecrated the allowance fettled on his fon*, toCeres; that out of this a ftatue was erected; with thisinfcription, " Given from the Caffian family." Ifind in ibme writers, and it is the more credible ac­count, that he was profecuted for treafon by thequaeftors Caeio Fabius and Lucius Valerius j thathe was condemned on a trial before the people, andhis houie razed by a public decree: it ftodd on thefpot which is now the area before the temple ofTellus. However, whether the trial was private orpublic, he was condemned in the confulate of Ser- g •£• 1*'•vius Cornelius and Quintus Fabius.
XLIL THE anger which the people had conceiv­ed againft Caffius, was not of long continuance.The alluring profpects, held out by the agrarianlaw, were fufficient, of themfelvesj now the propoferof it was removed out of the way, to make a livelyimpreffion on their minds; and their eagernefs, inpurfuit of them, was inflamed, by an act of unrea-ibnable parfimony in the patricians, who* when the
* By the Roman law, a father had full and abfolote power, even tolife and death, over his children, who were in a ftate of abfolute tll-very; even what property '.hey might acquire, belonged not to therti,but to their father.
.VOL. i. N Volfcians







OCR Output








* THE HISTORY


X


BOOK family claim as the founder of their name. Thisi Afcanius, wherefoever, and of whatfoever motherborn, certainly the fon of /Eneas, nnding the num­ber of inhabitants in Lavinium too great, left thatcity, then in a flourifhing and opulent ftate, confi-dering the circumftances of thofe times, to his mo­ther, or ftepmother, and built on the Alban mounta new one for himfclf, which, from its fituation beingftretched along the hill, was called Alba Longa *.| Between the building of Lavinium, and the tranf-planting the colony to Alba Longa, the interval wasonly about thirty years jlyet fo rapidly had this peo­ple increafed in power, efpecially after the defeat ofthe Etrurians, that, not even on the death of ./Eneas,nor afterwards, during the regency of a woman, andthe firft eflays of a youthful reign, did either Mezen-tius and the Etrurians, or any other of the border­ing nations, dare to attempt hoftilities againft them.| A peace was agreed upon, in which it was ftipulatedthat fhe river Albula, now called the Tiber, mouldbe the boundary between the Etrurians and Latines.I Afcanius's fon, called Sylvius, from his having byfome accident been born in the woods, fucceededhim in the kingdom. | He begat ^Eneas Sylvius,who afterwards begat Latinus Sylvius. jThis princeplanted feveral colonies, who have obtained thename of Ancient Latines. fThe furname of Sylviuswas henceforward given to all thofe who reigned atAlba, t Of Latinus was born Alba; of Alba, Atys;of Atys, Capysj ofCapys, Capetus; of Capetus, Ti-berinus; who, being drowned in endeavouring to crofsthe river Albula, gave to that river the name fo ce­lebrated among his poRerity. JAgrippa, fon of Ti-bcrinus, reigned next; after Agrippa, Romulus^Sylvius. receivtd the kingdom from his father^ andJbelrf|j Cruel: by lightning,'..^demifed it to Aventinus,fwho, being buried on that hill which is now a part ot"
• It was called Alba, from a white fow with a litter of thirty youngones, found there by .^Encas.
the







OCR Output








a5 f HE HISTORY


* O O.K eftablifhihg the feat of empire at Rome. By tillsacceffion the number of citizens was doubled; and^as fomfc compliment to the Sabines/ the united peo­ple were called Quirites, from the town of Cures;To perpetuate the remembrance of that battle, theplace where his horfe, emerging from die deep of thelake, firft brought Curtius to a fhallow, was called,the Curtian lake *. This happy re-eftablifhment ofpeace, after a war fo diftreffing, rendered the Sabinewomen ftill dearer both to their hufbands and pa­rents, and above all to Romulus himfelf, fo that*when he divided the people into thirty Curias f, he"gave thefe the names of the women. But as thenumber" of the women was undoubtedly greaterthan this, whether thofe who were to give theirnames to the Curias were felected on account oftheir age, or their own dignity, or that of their huf­bands, or by lot, we are not informed. At thefame time alfo, three centuries of knights were en-dolled; .the Ramnenfes, fo called from Romulus;the Tiuenfes, frpm [Titus Tatius; and the Luceres^the reafon of whofe name and origin is unknown.Thenceforward the two. kings reigned together, notonly with equal power, but with concord.
XIV. SEVERAL years after, fome relations ofking Tatius offered violence to the ambaffadors ofthe Laurentians; for which violation of the law ofnations, the latter demanded fatisfaclion: but Tatius


• This name it retained long after it was filled up, and became apart of th' Forum.
f He divided the city into three tribes: the Rarantnfej, fo calledfrom Romulus, l,eing his original followers; the Titienfts, fromTiiinTatius, compoled of the Sabines 5 and the Luceres, of thofc who had"afiembled in the Lucus, or fanctuary, or afterwards joined the Ro­mans. Each trilie lie divided into ten curias, or wards. Each cuiiahad its own prieft, called curio, and its own place of worlhip, where,on certain ftated days, lacrifices were offered to particular deities ; andthe people of the curia feaftfd together. The centuries of knightswere named alter the tribes out of which they were taken.


paid







OCR Output








452 THEHISTORY


 


B CvO K" is highly requifite in every kind of military fer-"vice, is moft particularly fo in carrying on fiegesof towns; becaufe thefe being generally, fromthe nature of their fituation, and the ftrength of"their works, impregnable by affault, time alone"overpowers and reduces them by means of hunger"and thirft, as it will certainly reduce Veii, unlefs"the tribunes of the commons fupply aid to the"enemy, and the Veientians find in Rome that"fupport, which they feek in vain in Etruria."Could any other event fo fully accord to the"wifhes of the Veientians, as that the city of Rome"fir ft, and then, by the fpreading of the contagion,"the camp, mould be filled with fedition ? But now,"among the enemy, fuch a tenjperate difpofition"prevails, that neither through difguft at the length"of the fiege, nor even at the eftablifhment of king-"ly government, has one change of meafures been"attempted; nor has the refufal of aid, from the"Etrurians, foured their temper; becaufe, if any"one there propofes feditious meafures, he will be"inftantly put to death; nor will any perfon be"fuffered to utter fuch things, as are uttered among"you without any fear of punifhment. Hedeferves"the baftinade who forfakes his colours, or quits"his poft: yet men are heard, openly in public af~cc fembly, recommending, not to one or two parti-"cular foldiers, but to whole armies, to leave their*' colours, and defert their camp. With fuch par-"tiality are ye accuftomed to liften to whatever a"plebeian tribune utters, although it manifeftly"tends to the ruin of your country, and the dlifiblu-"rion of the commonwealth; and fo captivated are"ye by the charms of that office, that, under fhelter"of it, ye fuffer every kind of wickednefs to lurk«' unnoticed. They have but one ftep farther to"take, to engage the foldiers in camp, in the fame"meafures which they urge here with fo much"clamour, to debauch the troops, and allow them
"no







OCR Output








O F R O M E. 389


.xontention between the advocates for peace, and3 O o Kthofe for war. The Romans enjoyed tranquillity on. _^.' __fall fides. The confuls having obtained information Y.R. 3Z5.from one of the tribunes, who betrayed the fecret,B'c'+17.that thofe officers intended to promote a law con­cerning the commutation of fines*, which would behighly acceptable to the people, they themfelvestook the lead in propofing it. The next confuls Y.R. 31s.were Lucius Sergius Fidenas, a fecond time, andB.c.416.Hoftus Lucretius Triciptinus, in whofe confulatenothing worth mention occurred. They were fuc- Y.R. 317.ceeded by Aulus Cornelius Cofius and Titus Quin-B'C.*1S'tius Pennus, a fecond time. The Veientians madeinroads on the Roman territories, and a report pre­vailing, that fome of the youth of Fidenas were con­cerned in thofe depredations, the cognizance of thatrnatterwas committed to Lucius Sergius, QuintiusSer-vilius, and Mamercus ^Emilius. Some of them, whocould not give fatisfactory reafons for their being ab-fent from Fidenx, at the time, were fent into banim-ment to Oftia. A number of new fettlers were add­ed to the colony, to whom were afligned the landsof thofe who had fallen in war. There was verygreat diftrefs that year, occafioned by drought; forbefides a want of rain, the earth deftitute of its natu­ral moifture, fcarce enabled the rivers to continuetheir courfe j in fome places, the want of water wasfuch, that the cattle died of thirft, in heaps, aboutthe fprings and rivulets, which had ceafed to flow;in others, they were cut off by the mange, and theirdiforders began to fprcad by infection to the humanfpecies. At firft they fell heavy on the hulbandmenand flaves, foon after the city was filled with them:
\ * The fines impofed in early times were certain numbers of fheep oro<" :i j afterwards it was ordered by law that thefe fine* might he ap.;'i ,11. il, anil the value paid in money. Another law fixed a certainrare at which the cattle fhould be eliimated, 100 afes for auox, 10 tora &ttf.
'c c 3 and







OCR Output








OF ROME. «i


'' Diana without having purified yourfelf? Why do B O O K*,' you not firft dip yourfelf in a running ftream?"The Tiber flows along in the bottom of that vale."The ftranger, ftruck with the fcruple, and anxious tohave every thing performed in due order, that theevent might anfwer to the prodigy, went down fromthe temple to the Tiber. In the mean time theRoman facrificed the heifer to Diana, a circum-ftance which gave great pleafure to the king, andto the whole ftate.
XLVI. SERVIUS, though long poflcfllon hadnow rendered his title to the crown indifputable,yet having heard that young Tarquinius fometimesthrew out infinuations, that he held the governmentwithout the order of the people, firft ingratiatedhimfelf with the commons, by making a generaldiftribution among them of the lands taken from theenemy, and then ventured to propofe the queftionto the people, whether they" chofe and ordered"that he mould be king?" Whereupon he was de­clared king, with greater unanimity than had everbefore appeared on any fimilar occafion. Nor didthe event lefien the hopes, which Tarquinius hadconceived, of being able to feat himfelf on thethrone: on the contrary, having obferved that theproceedings, relative to the lands for the commons,were highly difagreeable to the Patricians, he em­braced, the more eagerly, the opportunity which thisafforded him, of arraigning the condiict of Serviusbefore the Patricians, and of increafing his owninfluence in the fenate. For the young man was.naturally of a fiery temper, and" his reftlels fpirit wascontinually ftimulated at home by his wife Tullia:and even the palace at Rome was to exhibit afcene of tragical villainy; that, difgufted at kings,the people might become more ripe for the avertingof their liberty, and that a reign, founded in wicked-nefs, mould prove the laft. Whether this Lucius
VOL. i. c Tarqui-







OCR Output








•3t6 THE HISTORY


HOOK " berty, that no inftance of mifconduct will hence-. -^-^j" forth occur, which can require the interpolation ofV.R. 306. " the tribunitian power." This moderation of the!».€. 446. tribune firft diffipated the fears of the patricians; and,at the fame time, increaled their ill-will towards theconluls; for they had been fo entirely devoted tothe intereft of the commons, that even a plebeianmagiftrate had fhewn more readinefs to confult theliberty and .fafety of the patricians, than they, who•were themfelves patricians; and their enemies wereweary of inflicting punifhments on them, before theconfuls fhewed any intention of oppofing the vio­lence of their meafures; and many faid, that thefenate had betrayed a want of firmnefs, in givingtheir approbation to the laws which they propofed;in fact, there was not a doubt, but, in this troubleditate of the public affairs, they had yielded to thetimes.
LX. AFTER all bufinefs in the city was adjufled,and the rights of the commons Hrmly eftablifhed, theconfuls departed to their refpective provinces. Va­lerius prudently delayed engaging with the armies ofthe jiEquans and Volicjans, who had by this timeformed a junction in the diftricV. of Algidum: had heattempted to bring the matter to an immediate deci-fion, fuch was the temper of mind, both of the Ro­mans, and of their enemies, in confequence of themisfortunes which had attended the aufpjces of thedecemvirs, that, I know not whether the conteftwould not have coft him a heavy lofs. Pitching hiscamp at the diftance of a mile from the enemy, hekept his men quiet. The enemy filled the middlefpace, between the two camps, with their troops, inorder of battle, and gave feveral challenges to fight,to which no Roman returned an anfwer. Fatiguedat length with Handing, and waiting in vain for an en­gagement, the ^quans and Volfpians confideringthis as almoft equivalent to an acknowledgment of
the







OCR Output








i8<5 THE HISTORY


B o o K a man, on that day, either plebeian or patrician, whoe^yl.j did not difplay an uncommon degree of valour: theY.R. 174. Fabian name, and Fabian race, fhone forth with pe-$.C. 478. culiarluftre: they were determined to recover, inthat battle, the affection of the commons, which,during the many quarrels of the parties at home, hadbeen withdrawn from them. The line was formed,nor did their Veientian enemy or the Etrurian le­gions decline the combat.
XLVI. THESE expected, almoft as a matter ofcertainty, that the Romans would fhew no more wil-lingnefs to fight againft them, than they had againftthe ,Equans.: nay, confidering the high ferment oftheir paflions, and that, in the prefent cafe, the iflueof a battle was uncertain, they did not defpair pf ob­taining fome more important advantage. In thisthey were entirely difappointed, for in no formerwar did the Romans enter the field, inflamed withkeener animofity; fo highly were they exafperatedby the taunts of the enemy on one fide, and the de­lay of the confuls on the other. The Etrurians hadfcarcely time to form their ranks, before they foundthemfelves engaged in clofe fight, hand to hand wjthfwords, the moft defperate method of deciding 3battle, the javelins having in the firft hurry beenthrown at random, rather than aimed at the enemy,Among the foremoft, the Fabian family, particular­ly, attracted the notice of their countrymen, and en­couraged them by their example: as one ofthefe,Quintus Fabius, who had been conful two years be­fore, advanced before the reft againft a thick bodyof the Veientians, a Tufcan, who aflumed refolutionfrom a confidence in his ftrength, and fkill in arms,came up to him unobferved, while he was bufily en­gaged with a number of foes, and thruft him throughthe breaft with his fword; on the weapon's beingdrawn out of the wound, Fabius fell to the'ground.Both armies felt the fall of this one man, and the
Romans







OCR Output








322 THE HISTORY


B Oi? K galloped acrofs to the other wing; they carried with. _TI _j them an account of this fuccefs; and, at the fameY.R. 306, time, made a charge on the enemy, difheartened byB. c. 446. tne defeat of the ftrohger wing of their army. Nonedifplayed, in that battle, more confpicuous bravery.The conful's attention was every where employed.He commended the brave, and reproved the remifs.Thefe immediately on being rebuked, exerted them-felves like men of fpirit; fhame ftimulating them aspowerfully, as commendation had done the others.The mout being raifed anew, and all uniting theirefforts, they drove the enemy from their ground,and then the force of the Romans could no longerbe refifted. The Sabines were difperfed all overthe country, and left their camp a prey to the enemy.There the Romans recovered not the effects of theirallies, as was the cafe in Algidum, but their own,'which they had loft, in the devaftation of the coun­try. For this double victory obtained in two bat­tles, in different places, the fenate, fo unwilling werethey to gratify the confuls, decreed a fupplication,in their name, of one day only. The people, how-. ever, went in great numbers, on the fecond day alfb,to offer thankigivings, and this irregular, and popu­lar fupplication, was celebrated with rather greaterzeal than the other. The confuls by concert cameto the city within a day of each other, and called outthe fenate to the field of Mars; where, while theywere relating the fervices which they had performed,the principal fenators began to complain, that thefcnate was, purpolely, held in the midft of the fol-diers, to keep them in terror. The confuls therefore,to take away all grounds for fuch a charge, removedthe fenate into the Flaminian meadows, to a placewhere the temple of Apollo now ftands, called, evenat that time, the Circus of Apollo. Here, a vaftmajority of the fenators concurring in refufing a tri-«mph, Lucius Icilius? tribune of the commons, pro-pofed to the people, the ordering a triumph to the10 confuls,







OCR Output








OF ROME. 47*


tributcd to the foldiers. The iflue of the other wars, B OvO K
particularly that of Veii, ftill remained doubtful. . -r-_'
And now the Romans, defpairing of fuccefs through Y.R. 358.
human aid, began to look for fuccour towards the B.c.
fetes, and the gods, when the deputies arrived from
Delphi, bringing with them the decifion of the
oracle, which correfponded with the anfwer of the
captive prophet. "Roman, beware left the Alban
"water be confined in the lake; beware left thou
"fuffer it to flow into the fca in a ftream of its own.
"Thou fhalt form for it a paflage, and fcatter it
"over the fields; and, by difperfing it in a multi-
"tude of channels, confume it. Then prefs thou
'' boldly on the walls of the enemy; affured, that
"over the city which thou befiegeft through fo
"many years, conqueft is granted by thefe orders
"of the fates, which are now difclofed. The war
'* concluded, do thou, pofleffcd of victory, bring
'' ample offerings to my temples, and renewing the
'' religious rites of thy country, the obfervation of
"which has been neglected, perform them in the
'* ulual manner,"
XVII. THE captive prophet, upon this, beganto be held in very high efteem, and the militarytribunes, Cornelius and Poftumius, thenceforwardconfulted with him concerning the expiauon of theAlban prodigy, and the proper method of appeafingthe gods. It was at length difcovered what was thatneglect of ceremonies, and omiflion of cuftomaryrites, for which they were blamed by the gods. Itwas, in fact, nothing elfe than that the tmgiftrates,.their election being defective, had not, with due re­gularity, directed the Latine feftival *, and the an-
niverfary
.


* The Roman!, T.atin;i, and fome ft ucs of the Hernlcians andVolfci.ins, met annually on the Alban mount to celebrate this fef-tival, in commemoration of the treaty made with ihofe flute* by Tar*quin the Proud. It was attended by the deputiei of forty.feven flatet,*v!ijo, under the direfliuo of, the Roman conful, or other chief magif.'
H ii 4 tsite,







OCR Output








THE HISTt)RY


 


city, by the Sabine youths, on a fimilar occafion;I fhudder with apprehenfion, left tbme inconfi-derate and rafh deed may enfue; thus much IB.C. 489. " thought it my duty, both for our own fake, and"for ypurs, to mention beforehand to you, who are"confuk; for my own part, I intend to depart in-"ftantly, and return home, left, if I fhould be pre-"fent, my character might be ftained with the im-"putation of fome improper word or action." Af­ter this difcourfe he departed. The conful s pro-pofed the matter to the confide ration of the fenate,as fufpicion indeed, unfupported by proof, but yet.coming from a perfon whofe authoncy was of greatweight: the authority, then, rather than any reafonappearing in the cafe, as it often happens, deter­mined them to life precautions, even though theymight be fuperfluous; and a decree being paired,that the Volfcians fhould retire from the city, criers•were difpatched to every quarter, to order them allto remove before night: at firft, they were ftruckwith great terror, as they ran up and down to theirlodgings, to take away their effects: indignation af­terwards filled their minds, when they were begin­ning their journeyj they confidered themielves ftig-matifed as perfons infamous and polluted; drivenaway from the converfe of men and gods; frompublic games, on the day of a feftival.
XXXVIII. As they formed in their journey al-moft one continued train, Tullus, who had gone onbefore to the fountain of Ferentina, accofted thechief perfons among them as each arrived; and, byafldng queflions, and exprefling indignation, whilethey greedily liftened to expreffions which favouredtheir refentment, led them down, and by theirmeans, the reft of the multitude, to a plain that laynear the road, and there began to harangue them,as if at a general afiembly: " Although," faid he,"ye fhould foi'get all the injurious treatment which
"yC







OCR Output








THE HISTORY


BOOK Colline gate, and continued their march in a^_ 1. , through the middle of the city to the Aventine.Y.R. 305. There, in conjunction with the other army, theyB. C. 447. gave directions to the twenty tribunes of the foldiersto choofe two out of their number, who were to holdthe command in chief: they chofe Marcus Oppiusand Sextus Manilius. The fenate were alarmed for.the general fafety, but though they fat every day,they fpent more time in wrangling than in delibera­tion: the decemvirs were upbraided with the mur­der of Siccius, the luft of Appius, and the difgraceswhich they had incurred in war. It was refolved,that Valerius and Horatius mould go to the Aven­tine: but they refufed to go, on any other termsthan thole of the decemvirs refigning the badges ofthat office, their title to which had expired a yearbefore. The decemvirs, remonftrating againft theJeverity of degrading them to the common level,declared that they would not refign their authority,until the purpofe of their election mould be fulfilled,by the ratiffcation of the laws.
LIT. THE commons, on being informed by Mar­cus Duilius, who had been plebeian tribune, thatthe time was fpent in continual difputes, and nobufinefs done, removed from the Aventine to thefacred mount: for Duilius had aflured them, that"the fenate would never attend ferioufiy to the bufi-"nefs, until they faw the city deferted; that the"facred mount would remind them of the firmnefs"of the commons, and that they would then dif-"cover, that the re-eftablifhment of concord was"impracticable, without the reftoration of the tri-"bunitian office." Marching along the Nomentanroad, then called the Ficulr.ean, they encamped onthe facred mount, imitating the moderation of theirfathers, in refraining from every act of violence.The army was followed by the commons, not one,whofe age would permit him, refufing to go. Their


wives







OCR Output








358 T H E H I S T O R Y


B o o K 'c peace." The Volfcians, refolving to make triaj. ^' of the fmal! remains of hope, which they could placeY.R. 311. in their arms, as they were utterly deftitute of every^•c'«*°'other, came to an engagement; in which, befidesother difadvantages, the ground rendered it difficultfor them to fight, and ftill more fo to retreat.When, finding themfelves repuifed on all fides withmuch flaughter, from fighting they had recourfe tointreaties; and, having delivered up their general,and furrendered their arms, they were fent under theyoke, each with a fingle garment, loaded with igno­miny and fufterings; and, having afterwards halted^near the city of Tufculum, the inhabitants of that city,out of the inveterate hatred which they bore them,attacked them unprepared, and unarmed as theywere, and executed fevere vengeance on them; fcarceleaving a fufficient number to carry home the newsof their deftru&ion. The Roman general re-eftab-lifhed tranquillity in the affairs of Ardea, which hadbeen throwp into great confufion by the fedition, be­heading the principal authors of the difturbances, andconfifcating their effects to the public treafury of theArdeans. Thefe now confidered the injuftice of theformer fentence againft them, as fufficiently repairedby fuch an important aft of kindnefs: the fenate,however, were of opinion that fomething ftill re­mained to be done, to abolilh every monument ofthat inftance of the people's avarice. The confulreturned into the city in triumph, Cluilius the gene­ral of the Volfcians being led before his chariot, andthe fpoils borne before him, of which he had ftrippedthe enemy when he difarmed, and fent them underthe yoke. The other coniul Quintius had the fin-£iihr felicity of acquiring by his adminiftration in thecivil department, a fhare of glory equal to what hiscolleague had acquired by nis military atchieve­ments: for fo fteadily did he direct his endeavoursfor the prefervation of internal peace and harmony>difpenfing juftice tempered with moderation, equally
to







OCR Output








OF ROME. .-r.f


//"*'
the city of Rome., g$pe it his name. LCo him fuc- B O O
c£Ctti& Plrocas*1'whdrliad two fons, W umitor andAmulius. ToNumitor, as being the firftborn, he be­queathed the ancient kingdom of the Sylvian family;fcut force prevailed over both the will of their father,and the refpcct due to priority of birth. I Amuiiusdethroned his brother, Itook pofleflion of the king­dom, and adding crime to crime, put to death themale offspring of Numitor, and made his daughterRhea Sylvia a veftal, under the fpecious pretenceof doing her honour, but, in fadt, to deprive her ofall hope of iflue, the veftals being obliged to vowperpetual virginity*.
IV.JBuT the fates, I fuppofe, demanded thefounding of this great city, and the firft eftablifh-ment of an empire, which is now, in power, next tothe immortal gods. (The veftal being defloweredby force, brought forth twins, and declared that thefather of her doubtful offspring was Mars, eitherbecaufe fhe really thought fo, or becaufe fhe hopedto extenuate the guilt of her tranfgreflion by im­puting.it to the act of a deity. | But neither godsnor men fcreened her or her children from theking's cruelty: [the prieftefs was loaded with chains,and caft into prifon, and the children were orderedto be thrown into the ftrearn'of the river, jit hap­pened providentially that the Tiber overflowing ksbanks, formed itfelf into ftagnant pools in iiich a,manner, as that the regular channel of the riverwas every where inacceffible, and thofe, who carriedthe infants, fuppofed that they would be drowned inany water, however ftill. {Wherefore, as if therebyfulfilling the king's order, they expofed the boys inthe neareft pool, where now ftands the Ruminal fig-treex which, it is faid, was formerly called Romular./Thofe places were at that time wild defarts. j A ftory
* Koran account of the veftal virgins, fee Dr. Adams'* Roman An­tiquities, p. 314.
prevails







OCR Output








OF ROME. 303


wives and children attended their fteps, afking, in B o o Kmelancholy accents, to whofe care they were to be . I11! _,.left, in fuch a city, where neither chaftity nor li- Y.R. 305.berty was fafe? So general a defertion, beyondB.c. +«r-what was ever known, leaving every part of Romeempty, not a creature being feen in the Forum, ex­cept a few very old men, particularly when the fe-nators were called into their houfe, the Forum ap­pearing entirely forfaken, many others, befides Ho-ratius and Valerius, began now to exclaim, "Con-"fcript fathers! how long will ye delay? If the"decemvirs will not defift from their obftinacy,"will ye fuffer every thing to fink into ruin ami"deftruction? And ye, decemvirsr what is this"authority which ye fa pofitively refufe to part"with? Do ye intend to adminifter juftice to bare"walls and empty houfes? Are ye not afhamed,"that the number of your liclors mould exceed that"of all the other citizens in the Forum? What do"ye propofe to do, mould the enemy advance to>'' the ehy? What, if the commons, finding that"we are not moved by their feceflion, mould pre-".fently come in arms? Do ye choofe that your"command mould be terminated by the fall of the"city? The cafe ftands thus; either we muft lofc"the commons, or they muft have their tribunes."We would fooner part with our patrician rnagif-"trates, than they with the plebeian. That office,"when it was a thing unknown and untried, they"extorted from owr fathers; and it is much more*< improbable that, after having tafted the fweets at"*' it, they will put up with ks lofs, efpecially as we"do not exercife authority with fuch moderation,"as to prevent their ftanding in need of protection."Affailed by fuch arguments from every quarter, andoverpowered by the united opinions of all, the de­cemvirs declared, that fince it was judged neceflfary,they would'fubmit to the orders of the fenate. This*only they requefted, that they would afford them


8 pro-







OCR Output








OF ROME. 317


the victory in their favour, detached feveral parties BOOKto make depredations, fome againft the Hernicians,. n'others againft the Latines; leaving rather a guard to Y.R.the camp, than fuch a force as could contend with B.c.the enemy: which, as foon as the conful underftood,he retorted on them the menaces which they had ufedto him before, and drawing up his troops, advancedto provoke the enemy to battle: and when con-fidering what a great part of their force was abfent,they declined the fight, the Romans inftantly aflumedfrem courage, and looked upon thofe troops as al­ready vanquifhed, who, through fear, kept withintheir rampart. After ftanding the whole day in rea-dinefs for action, they retired at the approach ofnight. The Romans, on their part, full of confi­dence, employed the night in refrefhing themfelves.The enemy, very differently affected, difpatchedmefiengers in the utmoft hurry to every quarter, tocall in the plundering parties: fuch as were in theneareft places, returned with fpeed; thofe who hadgone to a greater diftance could not be found. Asfoon as day appeared, the Romans marched out oftheir camp, refolved to aflault the enemy's rampart,if they fhould refufe to fight; and, when a great partof the day had pafied, and no motion was made bythe enemy, the conful ordered the troops to advance.On the army beginning to move, it fired the indig­nation of the ./Equans and Volfcians, to think thatvictorious troops were to be defended by a rampart,rather than by valour and arms: wherefore, they alfbearneftly demanded the fignal for battle, in whichthey were gratified by their leaders. And now, halfof them had got out of the gates, and the reft fol­lowed in regular order, marching down each to hisown poft, when the Roman conful, before the ene­my's line could be completed, and ftrengthenedwith their whole force, advanced to the engage­ment; fell on them, before either the whole weredrawn out of the camp, or thofe who were, had com­pleted







OCR Output








OF ROME.


 


w felve"S over the face of the country. When gorged
"by food, and greedy draughts of wine, as foon as _ _ ^
"night comes on, they ftretch themfelves promifcu- Y.R. 3*5.
'' oufly, like brutes, near ftreams of water, without in- B'
"trenchment, and without either guards or advanced
"pofts; ufingat prefent, in confcquence of fuccefs,
"ftill lcG' caution than ufual. If it is your widi to de-
"fend your own walls, and not to fuflFer all this part
ct of the world to become a province of Gaul, take
"arms unanimoufly at the h'rft watch. Follow me,
cc to kill, not to fight. If I do not deliver them into
Ir your hands, overpowered with flcep, to be fiaugh-
<' tcred like cattle, I am content to meet the fame iflufi
"of my affairs at Ardea which I found at Rome."
XLV. EVERY one who heard him, whether par­tial ot impartial, had long been pofiefird with anopinion, that there was not any where in that age aman of equ^l. talents for war. The meeting thenbeing difmifled, they took forne refrediment, andwaited with impatience for the fignal being given.As foon as that was done, during the ftillnefs of thebeginning of the night, they attended Camillus atthe gates: they had not marched far from the city,'when they found the camp of the Gauls, as had beenforetold, unguarded and neglected on every fide,and, raifing a fbout, attacked it. There was no•fight any where, but flaughter every where: beingnaked, and relaxed with fleep, they were eafily cutto pieces. However, thofe who lay mod remote,being routed from their beds, and not knowing howor by whom the tumult was occafloned, were bytheir fears directed to flight, and fome of them evenmto the midf t of the enemy, before they perceivedtheir miftake. A great number, flying into the ter­ritory of Antium, were attacked on their ftragglingmarch by the inhabitants of that city, furroundcd andcut off. A like carnage was made of the Tufcansin the territory of Veii: for they were fo far from
L L 3 feeling







OCR Output








^36 THEH1STORY


BOOK fuftered, were recruiting their armies; that their%-.- .A _j chief dependance was upon Antium; tliat the peopleY.R. '9j. of that colony held meetings openly at Ecetra; thatB.C. 459. they WCTe t|ie flj.fl. movers of the war, and compofedthe greateft part of the forces. As foon as this in­telligence was communicated to the fenate, an orderwas palFed for levying troops, and the confuls weredirected to divide the management of the war be­tween them, fo that one fhould have the Volfcians,as his province, the other the ^Eqiuins. The tri­bunes exclaimed loudly to their faces, in the Forum,that " this Volfcian war was but a concerted farce;"that the Hernicians had been inftructed how to"aft their part in it; that now the Roman peo-"ple were not deprived of liberty by manly efforts,"but cheated out of it by cunning. That becaufe"it was incredible, that the Volfcians and /Equans,""who were almoft exterminated, could of them-"felves commence hoftilities, new enemies had"been fought for, and flanders thrown on a loyal"colony clofely connected with Rome; that the"war was proclaimed, indeed, againft the unoffend-"ing people of Antium, but waged againft the'' commons of Rome, whom they intended to lead"ont of the city, with precipitate hade, loaded with"arms, thus wreaking their vengeance on the tri-"bunes, by the expuliion and banifhment of the ci-"tizens. That by thefe means,.and let not people"think there was any other defie;n, all efforts in fa-"vour of the law would be effectually overpowered,"if they did not, before matters proceeded farther,"while they were yet at home, and retained the"garb of citizens, adopt fuch meafures, as would"prevent their being driven out of pofieffion of the"city, and obliged to fubmit to the yoke. If they"had fpirit, they fhould not want lupport; the tri-"bunes were all unanimous in their favour; there"was no danger, no realbn of apprehenfion from"abroad. The gods had taken care the year be-
"fore,







OCR Output








x PREFACE.


and therefore they pronounce them to be viola­tions of truth. That many of them were notfpoken by the perfons to whom they areafcribed, nor upon the occafions alleged, muftbe admitted: but they* do not, upon that ac­count, violate the truth of hiftory. Nobodycan fuppofe that our author ever meant to im-pofe upon his readers, and to make them be­lieve that what he has given us, as faid by thedifferent perfons whom he introduces, wasreally faid by them: the fuppofition is abfurd.He could only mean to vary his ftyle; and toenliven and embellim matter, which, if con­tinued in the even and unvaried tone of nar­ration, would be fometimes heavy and tedious;and this he often does in a very pleafmg man­ner, making thele fuppofed fpecches a vehiclefor conveying, and that in a very lively man­ner, the arguments for and againft a propofedmeafure; and he often brings into them a re­lation of facts, chiefly facts of remoter times, ina much more agreeable manner than he couldhave interwoven them into his narrative, whichfhould always be progreflive. Modern hifto-rians, it is true, have rejected this plan: butLivy is not therefore reprehenfible, becaufe hedoes not conform himfelf to their ideas ofhiftoric ftructure, but chofe rather to conformhimfelf to a cuftom which prevailed very ge­nerally before his time, and which fucceedingwriters, of great tafte and judgment, have ap­proved and adopted. The conduct of Livy,in this refpect, if necefiary, might be juftified bythe example of Herodotus,Xenophon, Polybius,
Salluft,







OCR Output








THE HISTORY


 


of the rites of their own country, or the intro­duction of foreign ones, irregularities might takeplace in the worfhip of the gods: the fame pontiff"was allo to determine all matters relative, not onlyto the invocation of the celeftial gods, but to funerealfolemnities, and the worfhip of the infernal deities,and when and how fuch prodigies as appeared eitherby lightning, or any other phaenomenon, mould beattended to and expiated. For the purpofe of ob­taining information of the fentiments of the deities,refpecting thefe matters, he dedicated an altar, onthe Aventine, to Jupiter Elicius*j and conlultedthe god, by auguries, concerning the prodigies thatwere to be expiated.
XXI. THE attention of the whole communitybeing diverted from violence and arms, to the con-fideringand ad j lift ing of thefe matters, their thoughtsfound employment enough to prevent idlenefs; andthen that reverence towards the gods, which im-preficd itfelf continually on their minds, while theythought of the deity of heaven interfering in theconcerns of mankind, filled their breafls with fuch adegree of piety, that good faith, and regard to theobligation of oaths, operated as powerfully on themind;, of the publick, as their dread of the laws andof punifLment. And while the people formed theirmanners after the example of the king, as the moftperfect model, the neighbouring ftates, who hadformei ly looked upon Rome, not as a city, but as acamp pitched in tlie midft of them, for the pur­pofe of diflurbing the general peace, were broughtto entertain fuch refpect for it, as to deem any oneguilty of impiety, v.ho fliould give trouble to a ftateentirely occupied in the v/orfhip of the gods. Therewas a grove, in the centre of which, from out of adark cave, flowed a rivulet, fed by a perpetual
* From clicerc, to folicit information«
fpring j







OCR Output








54 THEHISTORY


i
B o o K ed by the cords. From fuch a fhocking fpecT:acle the.v _ '_j eyes of all were turned away with horror. This wasthe firft, and the laft, inftance among the Romans,of any punifhmerit inflicted without regard to thelaws of humanity. In every other cafe, we mayjuftly boaft, that no nation in the world has mewnmore mildnefs in the infliction of punifhment.
Y. R. XXIX. DURING thefe proceedings, the cavalryB*7;, had been fent forward to Alba, to remove the mul-665.' titude to Rome. The legions were now led thither,to demolifh the city. As foon as they entered thegates, there enfued not a tumult, or panick, as isufual in cities taken by ftorm, where the gates beingburft open, or the walls levelled by the ram, or thecitadel being taken by force, the fhouts of the ene­my, and the troops running furioufly through thecity, throw all into confufion with fire and fword jBut gloomy filence, and dumb forrow, fo ftupifiedall the minds of the inhabitants, that, not confidering,in their diftraction, what they fhould leave behind, orwhat they fhould carry with them, but incapable offorming any plan, they fometimes ftood at theirdoors, making inquiries of each other, fometimeswandered through their own houfes, which they werenow to fee for the laft rime. But now, when thehorfemen, with fhouts, urged them to depart, andthe cram of the houfes, which the troops were de-molifhing in the outer parts of the city, aflailedtheir ears, and the duft, raifed in diftant places, hadfilled all parts, enveloping them as with a cloud;each of them haftily fnatching up whatever he could,and leaving behind his guardian deity, his houfeholdgods, and the houfe wherein he had been born andeducated, they began their departure, and foon filledthe roads with one continued troop of emigrants,the fight of each other continually renewing theirtears, through the mutual commiferation which it'excited in every breaft, and their ears being- availed


with







OCR Output








OF ROME. 137


confuls were, who could not be confided in, becaufe BOOKthey were of the Tarquinian faction, for that alfo is . J/' ^related, or who was the firft perfon created dictator, Y.R. 15,.we have no certain information. In the moft ancient B.c. 499.writers however, I find it afierted, that the firft dicta­tor created was Titus Lartius, and that SpuriusCaffius was appointed mafter of the horfe. Theychofe men of confglar dignity, as ordered by the lawenacted concerning the creating of a dictator. Forthis reafon, I am the more induced to believe, thatLartius, who was of confular dignity, rather thanManius Valerius, fon of Marcus, and grandfon ofVolefus, who had not yet been conful, was placedover the confuls, as their director and mafter; as,even if it had been thought proper, that the dictatorfhould be chofen out of that particular family, theywould much rather have elected the father, MarcusValerius, a man of approved merit, and of confulardignity. On this firft creation .of a dictator atRome, the populace, feeing the axes carried beforehim, were ftruck with fuch terror, as made themmore attentive to obedience of orders; for theycould not now, as under confuls who were equal inauthority, hope for protection, from one of them,againft the other; neither was there any appeal, norany other means, whatever, of impunity, but promptobedience. Even the Sabines were alarmed at theappointment of a dictator by the Romans, the morefo, becaufe they fuppofed that it was to act againftfhem that he had been appointed; they thereforefene ambafladors to treat of an accommodation;who, requefting of the dictator and fcnate, that theywould pardon the mifconduct of thoughtlefs youngmen, were anfwered, that pardon might be grantedto young men, but not to the old, who made it theirconftant practice to kindle one war after another.However, a negotiation was entered into for an ac­commodation, and it would have been concluded, if ,fhe Sabines had beep fatisfied to rejmburfe the cofts
expended







OCR Output








i8o THE HISTORY


BOOK felf: yet all thefe dangers which furrounded thcrfr>•._ _ •L __. inftead of reftraining the ill-humour of the commons',y.R. 173. only fcrved to augment it: they refumed the prac^B.C. 479. tice of refufing to enlift as foldiers, not indeed oftheir own accord; but Spurius Licinius, a plebeiantribune, thinking that this was the time to force theagrarian law on the patricians, when it would beimpofiible for them to make oppofition, had under­taken to obftrucr- the preparauons for war. How­ever, all the odium excited by this exertion of thetribunidan power recoiled on the anthor; nor did theconfuls nnite their efforts againft him with moreeager zeal, than did his own colleagues, by whofe af-iiftance the confuls completed the levy. Armieswere raifed for the two wars at the fame rime; thecommand of one was given to Fabius, to be ledagainft the A^quans; of the other to Furius, againftthe Veientians. In the expedition againft the lat­ter, nothing memorable was performed. Fabiusmet with a great deal more trouble from his coun­trymen, than from the enemy: that fingle man, byhis conduct, as conful, fupported the commonwealth,•which the troops, out of averfion to the conful, as faras lay in their power, treacheroufly betrayed to ruin:for, after mimberlefs other inftances of military fkill,which the conlul had difplayed, both in his prepara­tory meafures, and in his operations in the field,when he had made fuch a difpofition of his forces,'that,'by a charge of his cavalry alone, he put the ene­my to rout, the infantry refufed to purlue their brokentroops; nor could any motive, not to mention theexhortations of the general, whom they hated, noreven the immediate conlequence of infamy to them-felves, and difgrace to the public, nor the danger towhich they would be expofed, mould the enemy re-fume their courage, prevail on them to quicken theirpace, or even to ttand in order of battle, without do­ing any thing more:- without orders, they facedabout i and, with dejccted countenances, fo that one
would







OCR Output








PREFACE.


TITUS LFVIUS, the illuftrious Author ofthe Roman Hiftory, defcended from anoble family in Rome, and was born at Pata-vium, now called Padua, in Italy, in the 694thyear of Rome, fifty-eight years before the com­mencement of the Chriftian aera.
Like many other literary men, his life wa»contemplative, rather than adiive; very fewparticulars, therefore, concerning him, havecome down to us. He refided at Rome, for aconfiderable time, where he was much noticed,and highly honoured, by Auguftus; to whomhe was previoufly known, it is faid, by fomewritings which he had dedicated to him.Seneca, however, is fllent upon the fubject ofthis fuppofed dedication, though he mentionsthe work itfelf, which, he fays, confifted ofmoral and philofophical dialogues.
He appears to have conceived the project ofwriting his hiftory, immediately, upon hisfettling at Rome; or, perhaps, he came thitherfor the purpofe of collecting the neceflary ma­terials for that great work.
Auguftus appointed him preceptor to hisgrandion Claudius, afterwards emperor. Buthe feems not much to have attended to theadvantages which might have refulted from fo
A a advan­







OCR Output








BOOK" ployed to ftop his proceedings. Nor wotifd It^_I^'-f " have been proper to treat him as a citizen, for.Y.R. 316. " though born in a free ftate, under the dominion ofB.C.4j6. " the laws divine and human, in a city from which"he knew that kings had been expelled; and that"in the fame year the offspring of the king's fifter,"and the fons of the conful the deliverer of his coun-"try, on difcovery of their engaging in a plot for"re-admitting the kings into the city, were by their"father publicly beheaded; from which, Collatinus"Tarquinius, conful, was ordered, through the ge-"neral deteftation of the name, after refigning his"office, to retire into exile j in which Spurius Caf-"fius was, feveral years after, capitally punifhed, forf'e having formed a defign of afluming regal power >"in which, not long ago, the decemvirs on account"of their regal tyranny, had been punifhed with*' confifcations, exile, and death; in that very city"Spurius Mcdius had conceived hopes of pofiefling"himfelf of regal power. And who was this man?"Although no nobility, no honours, no merits, lay"open to any man the way to tyranny; yet ftill the"Claudii and Caffii, when they raifed their views to"an unlawful height, were elated by confulfhips, by"decemvirates, by honours conferred on themfelves"and their anceftors, and by the fplendor of their fa-"milies. But Spurius Maelius, to whom a plebeian tri-"bunefhip fhould have been an object rather ofwifh-"cs.than of hope, a wealthy corn-merchant, had con-"ceived hopes of purchafing the liberty of his coun-"try men, for two pounds of corn; and had fuppofed,"that a people victorious over all their neighbours,"could be inveigled into flavery by having food"thrown to them. So that a perfon, whofe eleva-"tion to the rank of fenator, the ftate could have"hardly digefted, they would patiently endure as"their king, pofieffing the enfigns and the authority"of Romulus their founder, who had defcended•"• from, and returned to the gods. This muft be8 "deemed







OCR Output








$to THE HISTORY


BOOK dignified with triumphal honours and confulfhips,
^-^L . openly declared, that " they would meet death along
Y.R. 365. " with them, and would not burthen the fcanty
B.C.387." ftores of the fighting men, with bodies incapable
"of carrying arms, and of protecting their country."
Such were the confolations addrefied to each other
by the aged who were deftined to death.
XL. THEIR exhortations were then turned to theband of young men, whom they efcorted to the Ca­pitol and citadel, commending to their valour andyouthful vigour the remaining fortune of their city,which, through the courfe of three hundred and fixtyyears, had ever been victorious in all its wars. Whenthofe who carried with them every hope and everyrefource, parted with the others, who had deter­mined not to furvive the capture and deftruction ofthe city, as the cafe itfelf and the view which it ex­hibited, were fufficient to call forth the tendereftfeelings of pity, being then joined with the lamen­tations of the women who ran up and down indiftraction, now following one party, then the other,afking their hufbands and their fons, to what fatethey would confign them? all together formed fuch a,picture of human woe as could admit of no aggra­vation. A great part, however, of the women fol­lowed their relations into the citadel, no one eitherhindering or inviting them; becaufe, though themeafure of lefiening the number of ufelefs perfons,in a fiege, would doubtlefs be an ufeful one, yet itwas a mtafure of extreme inhumanity. The reft ofthe multitude, confifting chiefly of plebeians, forwhom there was neither room en fo fmall a hill, nora pofl'ibility of lupport in fo great a fcarcity of corn,pouring out of the city in one continued train, re­paired to the Janiculum. From thence fome dif-perfed through the country, and others made theirway to the neighbouring cities, without any leader,.or any concert, each purfuing his own hopes and his
own







OCR Output








OF ROME. 71


alarmed; and that when fome of the fervants brought BOOKwater to extinguifh it, the queen prevented them;and, having quieted the uproar, forbad the boy to bedifturbed until he awoke of his own accord. In afhort time, on his awaking, the flame difappeared.Then Tanaquil, calling her hufband afide, to a pri­vate place, faid to him, " Do you fee this boy,"whom we educate in fuch an humble ftyle? Be"aflured that he will hereafter prove a light to"difpel a gloom which will lie heavy on our affairs,"and will be the fupport of our palace in diftrefs."Let us therefore, with every degree of attention"that we can beftow, nourifa this plant, which is,"hereafter, to become the greatelt ornament to"our family, and ourftate." From that time theytreated the boy as if he were their own child, andhad him inftructed in all thofe liberal arts, by whichthe mind is qualified to fupport high rank with dig­nity. That is eafily brought to pafs which is pleaf-ing to the gods. The youth proved to be of a dif-pofuion truly royal, ib that when Tarquinius cameto look for a fon-in-law, there was not one amongthe Roman youth who could be fet in competitionwith him, in any kind of merit j and to him Tarqui-nius betrothed his daughter. This extraordinaryhonour conferred on him, whatever might be thereafon for it, will not let us believe that he wasborn of a flave, and had himfelf been a Have in hischildhood: I am rather inclined to be of their opi­nion, who fay, that, when Corniculum was taken, theWife of Servius Tullius, the principal man in thatcity, being pregnant when her hufband was flain,and being known among the reft of the prifoners,and, on account of her high rank, exempted fromfervitude by the Roman queen, was delivered of afon at Rome, in the houie of Tarquinius Prifcus:that, in confequence of fuch kind treatment, an in­timacy grew between the ladies, and that the boyalfo being brought up in the houfe, from his infancy,. . F 4 vyas







OCR Output








O F R O M E.' Sj


'' the gift of a woman. Being thus defcended, and BOOK
11 thus created king, ever favouring the loweft clafs
"of people, to which he himfelf belonged, he had,
"through an antipathy to the honourable defcent
"of others, taken away the lands from the chief
'' men in the ftate, and diftributed them among the
"very meaneft. All the burthens which heretofore
"had been born in common, he had thrown on
"thofe of higheft rank. He had inftituted the
'' Cenfus, in order that the fortunes of the more
"wealthy might be the more confpicuoufly cxpofed
"t» envy, and might become a ready fund, out of
"which, he might, when he chofe, give bribes to the
« rnoft needy."
XLVIII. IN the midft of this harangue, Servius,having been alarmed by an account of the diftprb-ance, entered, and immediately, from the porch of thefenate-houfe, called out with a loud voice, "What"is the matter here, Tarquinius? How dare you"prefume, while I am alive, to convene the fenate,"or to fit on my throne?" To this the other,in a determined tone, replied, "That the feat"which he held was the feat of his own father;"that, as the king's fon, he was much better en-"titled to inherit the throne than a flave; and"that he had been fuffered long enough to infuk"his mafters with arbitrary infolencc." A cla­morous difpute immediately began between the par-tizans of each; the people ran together in croudsinto the fenate-houfe, and it became evidefu, thatthe pofieflion of the throne depended on the i.Tue ofthis conteft. On this, Tarquinius, compelled now,by neceflity, to proceed to the laft extremity, havinggreatly the advantage in point of age, and ftrength,caught Servius by the middle, and carrying him outof the lenate-houfe, threw him down from the topto the bottom of the ftairs, and then returned tokeep the ,[enators together. The king's officers
c and







OCR Output








2<J4 THE HISTORY


B OJ'? K ^"or ^erv'ce, ft>ou'ld drefs victuals for the foldiers who• __'^J lived near them, while they were preparing theirY.R. 196. arms, and procuring paiifades. Immediately, theB.t\4j6. yOu;ig n:en ran different ways to look for palifades;wherever each could find them fooneft, he rookthem ; none of them were hindered, and they all at­tended punctually according to the dictator's order.The troops being then formed in fuch order as was•not only proper for a march, but for an engagementalfo, if occafion fliould require it, the dictator fetoutat the head of the legions, and the mafter of the horfeat the head of his cavalry. In both bodies fuch ex­hortations were ufed, as the juncture required; that"they fhould quicken their pace; that there was a"neceflky for expedition, in order to reach the"enemy in the night; that the Roman conful and"his army were befieged j that this was the third"day of their being invefted; that no one could tell"what any one night or day might produce; that"the ifilie of the greateft affairs often depended on a ,"moment of time." The men too, to gratify theirleaders, called to each other, " flandard bearer, ad-"vance quicker; foldicrs, follow." At midnight,they arrived at Algidum, and, when they foundthemfclves near the enemy, halted.
XXVIII. THE dictator then, having ro'de about,and examined, as well as he could in the night,the fituation and form of the enemy's camp,commanded the tribunes of the foldiers to giveorders, that the b:iggage fhould be thrown toge­ther in one place; and then that the foldiers, withtheir arms and palifedes, fhould return into theranks: thefe orders were executed; and then, inthe fame order in which they had marched, hedrew the whole army in a long column round thecamp of the enemy, and ordered that on the fignalbeing given, they mould all raife a fhout, and thaton the fhout being raifed, every man fhould throwup a trench in front of his poft3 and fix his palifades.
As







OCR Output








OF ROME. 10^'


in refcuing it from oppreffion, was not greater than BOOKthat which he afterwards difplayed, in the character ,__^_i_/of its guardian. Firft of all, while the people were Y.R. 145.in raptures at their new acquifition of freedom, left B. c. s°7.they might afterwards be perverted by the impor­tunities or prefents of the princes, he bound themby an oath, that they would never fuffer any man toaflume the authority of king at Rome. Next, inorder that the fulnefs of their body might give thegreater weight to the fenate, he filled up the num­ber of the fenators, which had been diminifhed bythe king's murders, to the amount of three hundred,electing into that body the principal men of equef-trian rank; and hence the practice is faid to havetaken its rife, of fummoning to the fenate thofe whoare Fathers, and thofe who are Confcripti; for theycalled thofe who were elected into this new fenateConfcripti. This had a wonderful effedt towardsproducing concord in the ftate, and in attaching theaffection of the commons to the Patricians,
•
II. PEOPLE then turned their attention to mattersof religion; and becaufe fome public religious riteshad been ufually performed by the kings in. perfon,in order that there mould be no want of a king, inany particular, they appointed a king of the facri-fices. This office they made fubject to the jurif-diction of the pontiff, fearing left honour, beingjoined to the title, might in fome mape be injuriousto liberty, which was then the firft object of theirconcern: I know not whether they did not carryto excefs their great anxiety to raife bulwarks to it,on all fides, even in points of the moft trivial confe-quence; for the name of one of the confuls, thoughthere was no other caufe of diflike, became a fubjectof jealoufy to the people. It was alleged, that " the"Tarquinii had been too long accuftomed to the"pofieffion of fovereign power: Prifcus firft be-'' gan; next indeed reigned Servius Tullius; yet
"though







OCR Output








OF ROME.


XXIII. DURING thefe tranfactiona at Anrium, B o? Kthe ^Equans,'fending forward the main ftrength of, -^ _ftheir youth, furprized the citadel of Tufculum by Y.R. i9S.night; and, with the reft of their army, fat down, B.C.457...at a little diftance from the.walls of that town, forthe purpofe of dividing the force of their enemies.Intelligence of this being carried to Rome, and fromRome to the camp at Antium, the Romans were notlefs deeply affected, than if they had been told thatthe Capitol was taken. Their' obligations to theTufculans were fo recent, and the very fimilarity ofthe danger feemed to demand a requital, in kind, ofthe aid which they had received. Fabius, negledHngevery other bufinefs, having haftiiy conveyed thefpoils from the camp to Antium, and left a fmallgarrifbn there, haftened to Tufculum by forcedmarches; the foldiers were allowed .to carry nothingbut their arms, and what food they had readydreffed; the conful Cornelius fent fupplies of pro-vifion from Rome. The troops found employmentat Tufculum for feveral months; .with one half ofthe army, the conful befieged the camp of the^Equans; the other he gave to the Tufculans toeffe£t the recovery of the citadel. They nevercould have made their way into it by force; faminecompelled the enemy to give it up: when they werereduced to that extremity, the Tufculans fent themall under the yoke, unarmed and naked. As theywere attempting, by an ignominious (light, to maketheir efcape, the Roman conful overtook them atAlgidum, and put every man of them to the fword.After this fuccefs, he led back his army to a placecalled Columen, where he pitched his camp. Theother conful alfo, the city being no longer in danger,after the defeat of the enemy, marched out fromRome. Thus the two confuls entering the enemy'sterritories, on different fides, vied eagerly \vith eachother in making depredations, the one on the Vol-fcians, the other en the ./Equans. 1 find, in many
vor.. i. s writers,







OCR Output








Sao T H E H1 S T O R Y


BOOK Rome mould be confulted. So carefully did. v^ ^ regulate every proceeding by a regard to pro •Y.R. 565. priety, and, though in circumffonces nearly def-JJ.c. 387. perate, maintain the diftinctions of the feveral de­partments of government. It was neceffary to pafsthrough the enemy's guards, which could not be ef­fected without the utmoft danger. A fpirited youth,called Pontius Cominiiis, offered himfelf for the un­dertaking, and fupporting himfelf on pieces of cork,•was carried down the ftrcam of the Tiber to the city.From thence, where the diftanee from the bank wai.fhorteft, he made his way into the Capitol over a partof the rock which was very fteep and craggy, andtherefore neglected by the enemy's guards; and be •ing conducted to the magiftrates, delivered themcflage of the army. Then, having received adecree of the fenate, that Camillus fhould both berecalled from exile in an aftembly of the Curias, andinftantly nominated dictator by order of the people,and that the foldicrs fhould have the general whom they•wifhed, going out by the fame way, he proceeded•with his difpatches to Vcji, from whence deputieswere fent to Ardea to Camillus, who conducted himto Vcii: or elfe, the law was paffed by the Curians,and he was nominated dictator in his ablence; for Iam inclined to believe, that he did not let out fromArdea, until he found that the law was pafled, be-caufe he.could neither change his refidence withoutan order of the people, nor hold the privilege ofthe aufpices in the army, until he was nominateddictator.
XLVII. THUS they were employed at Vcii,whilft,in the meantime, the citadel and Capitol at Romewere in the utmoft danger. For the Gauls, havingeither perceived the track of a human foot, wherefhe meiTenger from Vcii had pafied; or, from theirpwn obfervation, remarked the eafy afcent at thtrock of Carm»;ntis, on a moon-light night, having


firit







OCR Output








O F R O M E.


 


mending war, in refpect of which he affumed tohimfelf a fuperiour degree of judgment, becaufehe was well acquainted with the refources of bothnations, and knew how utterly deteftable to his fub-jects the king's pride had become, which even hisown children could not endure. Whilft he thus,by degrees, worked up the minds of the Gabianchiefs to a renewal of the war, he ufed to go outhimfelf, with the boldeft of the youth, on expedi­tions, and plundering parties; and, 'as all his words,and actions, were framed to the purpofe of carryingon the deceit, their ill-grounded confidence in himincreafed, to fuch a degree, that at length he waschofen commander in chief of the army. In thiscapacity, the multitude, all the while, remaining ig­norant of his defign, he fought feveral flight engage­ments between Rome and Gabii, in which the peo­ple of the latter generally got the advantage: theGabians, from the higheft to the loweft, then beganto confider Sextus Tarquinius as a leader fent tothem by the favour of the gods. Among the fol-diers particularly, from his readinefs to expofe him­felf to danger and fatigue, and likewife from theliberal diftribution of the fpoil, he was fo highlybeloved, that Tarquinius the father was not more /abfolute at Rome, than the fon was at Gabii. rsFiricP""~ing himfelf, therefore, fecure of a fupport fufficientto carry him through any enterprize, he fent one ofhis attendants to his father at Rome, to inquire inwhat manner he would choofe that he fhould proceed,fince the gods had granted to him the entire difpofalof every thing at Gabii: to this mefienger, no an-fwer was given in words, I fuppofe, becaufe he didnot feem fit to be trufted. The king, feemingly em­ployed in deep deliberation, walked out into a gar­den adjoining the palace, followed by the mefien-ger, and walking there in filence, as we are told,ftruck off with his cane the heads of the ralleft• poppies. The mefienger, weary of repeating the
queftiou.







OCR Output








OF ROME. 287


by his office of decemvir and the example of his col- BOOKleagues, that he now chofe rather to be like Appius, .____!-,than like himfelf; to him was given in charge the Y.R. 305.war sgainft the Sabines; and, along with him, were B.U44/.fent his colleagues Manius Rabuleius and QijintusPfetilius, Marcus Cornelius was fent to the terri­tory of Algidum, with Lucius Minutius, Titus An-tonius, Gefo Duilius, and Marcus Sergius, and itwas determined that Spurius Appius fliould affiftAppius Claudius in the management of affairs in thecity, where they fhould have full authority, as if allthe decemvirs were prefent.
XLII. THE affairs of the public were conductedwith no better fuccefs in war, than at home. Inthis, the leaders were no farther to blame, than forhaving rendered themfelves o.li us to their country­men; in other refpects, the fault lay entirely in thefoldiery, who, rather than any enterprize mouldfucceed under the conduct and aufpices of the de­cemvirs, fuffcred themfelves to be overcome, to thedifgracc of both. The armies were routed, both'by the Sabines at Eretum, and by the ^quans, inthe country of Algidum. From liretum the troopsmade a retreat in the dead of the night, and fortifieda camp nearer to the city, on a high ground, be­tween Fidenae and Cruftumeria, and, being purfuedby the enemy, would not rifk a battle on equalground, but provided farther fcfcty by the nature ofthe place, and a rampart, not by valour and arms.In the country of Algidum greater dilgrace, andgreater lofs were Uiftained: even the camp was loft;and the foidiers, deprived of'all their uten.lls, be­took themfeives to Tulculiim, depending, for then^ceflaries of life, on the good faith and companionof their hofts, who, on tnis occafion, did not dif-appoint their expectations. Such terrifving accountswere brought to Rome, thr.t the fenate, droppingthe profecution of their hatred to the decemvirs,


paifed







OCR Output








,56 THE HISTORY


BOOK refts, things which ever did, and ever will, impede*L ^ the public councils, Appius prevailed, and was him-Y.R. 16o. felf very near being created diflator; which pro-B.c.49i. ceeding, beyond any other, would have highly dif-gufted the commons, at a very critical juncture,when the Voifcians, the JEquans, and the Sabineshappened to be all in arms at the fame time. Butthe confuls and the elder part of the fenate took carethat a command in itfdf .uncontrolable, fhould beintrufted to a perfon of a mild difpofhicn; and ac­cordingly they chofe for dictator Manius Valerius,ion of Volefus. Although the commons faw thatthe dictator was created in oppofition to them, yet,as by his brother's law, they enjoyed the privilege ofappeal, they dreaded nothing harih or overbearingfrom that family. Their hopes were farther encou­raged by an edict which the dictator publifhed, of theiame tenor 'in general with the edict of the confulServilius; but as they thought that they had now fe-curer grounds of confidence, both in the man himfelf,and in the power with which he was invefted, they•defifted from the conteft, and gave in their names.Ten legions were completed, a force greater thanhad ever been raifed before; ofthefe, three wereaffigned to each of the confuls, the other four werecommanded by the dictator. War could now beup longer deferred: the JEquans had invaded theterritories of the Latines; and thefe by their ambaf-fadors petitioned the fenate, that they would eitherfend troops to protect them, or permit them to takearms themfelves, to defend their frontiers: it wasjudged the lafer method to defend the Latines with­out their own afliftance, than to allow them to handlearms again: the conful Vetrifius was fent thither,and he put an end to the depredations. The ^quansretired from the plains, and provided for their fafetyon the tops of the mountains, relying more on theiituation than on their arms. The other confulwho marched againft the Voifcians, not choofing
that







OCR Output








OF ROME, 433


*c protefted againft: the fenate paffing a decree, he B O O K.<c would confider a vote of that body as fufficient '^"authority*." By which conduct, having, defervedly, Y.R. 3*7.obtained the praifes and favour of all, after he had B. Ct 4*5.nominated Publius Cornelius dictator, he was him-felf appointed by him mafter of the horfe, and af­forded an example to fuch as obferved his cafe, andthat of his colleagues, that honours and public fa­vour fometimes offer themfclves more readily tothofe who fhew no ambition for them. The warproduced no memorable event. In one" battle,and that gained without difficulty, the enemy were , •
vanquifhed at Antium. The victorious armylaid the lands of the Volfcians entirely wafte.Their fort, at the lake Fucinus, was taken by ftorm,and in it three thoufand men made prifoners; the reftof the Volfcians were driven into the towns, withoutmaking any attempt to defend the country. Thedictator having conducted the war in fuch a manneras.fhewed only that he was not negligent of fortune's'favours, returned to the city with a greater fhare offuc'cefs than of glory, and refigned his office. Themilitary tribunes, without making any mention of anelection of confuls, I fuppofe through pique for theappointment of a dictator, ifTued a proclamation forthe election of military tribunes. The perplexity ofthe patricians became now greater than ever, whenthey faw their caufe betrayed by men of their ownorder. In like manner as they had therefore donethe year before, by fctting up as candidates the moftunworthy of the plebeians, they created a difguftagainft all, even the deferving; and then, by engag­ing thofe patricians wh<> were moft eminently dif-tinguifhed by the fplendor of their character, and byjheir intereft, to Hand forth as candidates, they fe~
• Many circumftances might prevent the fenate's |,afling a decree)in fuch cales the opinion of the maimuy was recorded, and wat carted• .ustii., aufteritas.' It mfght U: referred to the people for con.Jirmation.
VOL. i. ft <ured







OCR Output








O F R O M E. 289


longed to the enemy, nor could a trace be found of B o o Ktheir having retreated from thence, they brought _'back the body, with an account that he was evi- Y.R. 305.dently flain by his own men. The camp was now 8.0.447.filled with indignation; and it was refolved, thatSiccius mould be carried directly to Rome, whichwould have been put in execution, had not the de­cemvirs, as fpeedily as poffible, buried him withmilitary honours, at the public expence. His fu­neral was attended with great grief of the foldieryiand a general belief of the blackeft guilt in the de­cemvirs.
XLIV. THERE followed, in the city, anotheratrocious proceeding, which took its rife from luft,and was not Id's tragical, in its confequences, thanthat which, through the injured chaftity and.violentdeath of Lucretia, had occafioned the expulfion ofthe Tarquinii from the throne and the city; that thegovernment of the decemvirs might not only end inthe. fame manner as that of the kings, but be loftthrough the fame caufe. Appius Claudius was in­flamed with a defire of overcorni:ig the chaftity of ayoung woman of plebeian rank: the father of thisyoung woman, Lucius Virginius, held an honourable •rank among the centurions, in the camp near Al-gidum, a man of exemplary good conduct, both asa foldier and a citizen, and by the fame principleswere the behaviour of his wife, and the education ofhis family regulated. He h'ad betrothed his daugh­ter to Lucius Icilius, who had been tribune, a manof fpirit, and of approved zeal in the caufe of thecommons. This maiden, in the bloom of youth,and of extraordinary beauty, Appius, burning withipaflion, had attempted to feduce by bribes and pro-mifes; but, finding every avenue to his hopes barredby modefly, he refolved to have recourfe to crueland arbitrary violence. He gave inftructions to Mar­cus Claudius, one of his dependents, that he fhould
VOL. i. u claim,







OCR Output








OF ROME. . 471


ofit, or the difpleafure of the fenators as being pro- B O ° Kfufely lavifh, he difpatched a letter to the fenate, ,_J_VL1_Jthat " through the favour of the immortal gods, hisv.lt. 359."own conduct, and the perfevering courage of the B.c."troops, Veii would immediately be in the power'' of the Roman people, and requefted their direc-"tions with regard to the fpoil." Two opinionsdivided the fenate j one was that of old Publius Li-cinius, who being the firft called upon by his fon,as we are told, propofed a refolution, that publicnotice fhould be given to the people by proclama­tion, that whofoever chofe to mare in the fpoilfhould go to the camp to Veii. The other that ofAppius Claudius, who cenfured fu'ch profufion asunprecedented, extravagant, partial, and productiveof ill confequences, if people fhould once conceivean opinion that it would be criminal to depofit in thetreafury, when exhaufted by wars, the money takenfrom the enemy: and he recommended it to them tomake that a fund for the payment of the foldier's wages,to the end that the commons might be eafed of part ofthe tax. For " every man's family," he faid, " would"feel its mare of fuch a bounty in equal proportion,,"and the hands of the idle city rabble, ever greedy." of rapine, would not then fnatch away the prizes,"due to men who had fhewed their bravery in war:•5 it being generally the cafe, that the man who is"moft ready, on every occafion, to undertake the"largeft fhare of toil and danger, is the leaft active"in plundering." Licinius, on the other hand, ar­gued, that in that cafe, the money would be an eter­nal caufe of jealoufy and ill-humour, would afford^grounds for invidious reprefentations to the com­mons, and, in confequence, for feditions, and theenacting of new laws. "It was therefore more to"be dcfired," he faid, " that the affe&ion of the."commons might be conciliated by a bounty of"that kind; that this refource fhould be afforded"them, after .they had been exhaufted and entirely
"drained,







OCR Output








THE


HISTORY OF ROME.


BOOK II.
•Brutus binds the people, by an oath, never to rfftore the iatgfygovernment; obliges Tarquinius Collatinus, on account tfhis relationjlip to the Tarquinii, to rcftgn the confuljbip, andretire from the city; putt to death his own fans, together•tvifhjbme other young men of rank, fora confpiracy in favourtftbe Tarquinii; foils in tattle againjl the Veientians andTaryuiiiiaas, together tvith his antagonift A runs, fan of Sa-pirbus. War .with Porfetia. Exploits of Horatius Coclet,Mut'atf Sdcuola, and Cloeiia. The Claudia* tribe formed,and the number of the tribes increafed to twenty-one. TkeLatinetf attempting to reflore Tarquinius, are defeated byAulus Poflumius, dictator. The commons, on account of thegreat nuntbert confined for debt, fecede to the facred mount;are appeafed, and brought tack, by the prudence of MeneniusAgnppa. Five tribunes of the commons created. Banijh-meat and fubfequtnt condufi of Caiuf Marcius Coriokaws.firft propvfal of an Agrarian laia. Spurius Cajjius, afpir-ing to regal power, put to death. Oppia, a veftal virgin,CQtmi&ed of ineefti turit'J alive. The Fabiau family under­take the retention .war, and are all cut off, except one boy.Wars with the Po/fcians, JEqiuins, and Veientians. Dif-fenftons between the Patricians and Plebeians.
\ TIT£VCEroRWARD I am to treat of the affairs,B o o K.
JLJL civil and military, of a free people, for fuch II.the Romans were now become; of annual magif- Y.R. 14s.tratcs, and the authority of the laws exalted above B. c. 507.that of men. What greatly enhanced the publicjoy, on having attained to this ftate of freedom, was,


10 the







OCR Output








OF ROME. 387


that quarter., One iingle man, Mefluis, fupported BOOKthe fortune of the enemy, while many wounds were t ™' ^deceived, and great Slaughter was made, on both V.R. ,14.fides. By this time the Roman generals them- B.c.+is.felves were not unhurt in the fight: one of them,Poftumius, retired from the field, having his fkullfractured by the ftroke of a ftone; but neither couldthe dictator be prevailed on, by a wound in hisfhoulder, nor Fabius, by having his thigh almoftpinned to his horfe, nor the conful by his arm beingcut off, to withdraw from this perilous conflict.
XXIX. MESSIUS, at the head of a band of thebraveft youths, charged the enemy with fuch impe-tuofity, that he forced his way through heaps offlaughtered foes to the camp of the Volfcians, whichwas ftill in their pofleffion, and the whole body ofthe army followed the fame route. The conful, pur-fuing their difordered troops to the very rampart,nflaulted the camp itfclf, and the dictator brought uphis forces with the fame purpofe on the other fide.There was no lefs bravery fhewn on both fides inthis aflault, than had been in the battle. We aretold that the conful even threw a ftandard within therampart, to make the foldiers pufh on with morebrifknefs, and that the firft irnpreffion was made inrecovering that ftandard. The dictator, on the otherCde, having levelled the rampart, had now carriedthe fight into the camp, on which the enemy everywhere began to throw down their arms, and fpr-render; and on giving up themfelves and their camp,they were all, except the members of their fenate,cxpofed to fale. Part of the fpoil was reftored tothe Latines and Hernicians, who claimed it as theirproperty ; the reft, the dictator fold by auction; and,having left the conful to command in the camp, aftermaking his entry into the city in triumph, he re-figned the dictatorfhip. Some hiftorians havethrown a gloom on the memory of this glorious dic-c c 2 tatorfhip;







OCR Output








ioo THE HISTORY


BOOK Brutus judged that the expreffion of Apollo had, another meaning, and, as if he had accidentally ftum-bled and fallen, he touched the earth with his lips,confidering that fhc was the common mother of allmankind. On their return from thence to Rome,they found vigorous preparations going on for a waragainft the Rutulians.
LVII. ARDEA was a city belonging to the Ru­tulians, .a nation, confidering the part of the worldand the age, remarkably opulent; and this very cir-cumftance gave occafion to the war; for the Romanking was earneftly defirous, both of procuring mo-ney for himfelf, his treafury being exhaufted by themagnificence of his public works, and alfo of recon­ciling, by mean's of the fpoils, the minds of his fub-jects, who were highly diflatisfied with his govern­ment: for, befides other inftances of his pride, theythought themfelves ill-treated, in being obliged bythe king to work for fuch a length of time, at theemployments of handicrafts, and labour fit for flaves.An attempt was made to take Ardea by ftorm, andthat not fucceeding, he adopted the plan, of diftref-iing the enemy by a blockade, and works erectedround them. In this fixed poft, as is generally thecafe when the operations of war are rather tediousthan vigorous, leave of abfence was readily granted,and to the principal officers, more readily than to thefbldiersj the young men of the royal family in par­ticular, frequently pafied their leifure time together,in feafting and entertainments: it happened thatwhile thefe were drinking together, at the quartersof Sextus Tarquinius, where Collatinus Tarquinius,the fon of Egerius, alfo fupped, mention was madeof their wives; each extolled his own to the tkies:on this a difpute arifing, Collatinus told them, that"there was no need of words; it could eafily be"known, in a few hours, how much his Lucretia"excelled the reft: we are young, and ftrong; let
"us







OCR Output













OCR Output








412 THE HISTORY


BOOK relations had been difappointed of the office by his^_ ^-, unfair conduct. But as an attack could not be madeY.R.335. on him, becaufe he was fecured, both by innocence,B.C. 4'7. and by the office which he held at the time, theyturned their refentment againft Caius Sempronius,uncle to Atratinus; and, aided by Carnuleius, one oftheir colleagues, entered a profecution againft himon account of the difgrace fuftained in the Volfcianwar. By the fame tribunes mention was frequentlyintroduced, in the fenate, of the diftribution of lands,which fcheme Caius Sempronius had always moftvigoroufly oppofed: for they forefaw, as it fell out,that' on the one hand, fhould he forfake that caufe,he would be lefs warmly defended by the patricians;and, on the other, if he fhould perfevere, at the timewhen his trial was approaching, he would give of­fence to the commons. He chofe to face the tor­rent of popular difpleafure, and rather to injure hisown caufe, than to be wanting to that of the public;and therefore, Handing firm in the fame opinjon, hedeclared, that " no fuch largefs mould be made,"which would only tend to aggrandize the three"tribunes; affirming, that the object of their pur-"fuits wa.s not to procure lands for the commons,"but ill-will againft him. That, for his own part,"he would undergo the ftorm with determined re-"folution; and, with regard to the fenate, it was"their duty, not to fet fo high a value on him, or on"any other citizen, as through tendernefs to an in-'1 dividual, to give room for an injury to the pub-"lie." When the day arrived, he pleaded his owncaufe, with the fame degree of intrepidity; and, not-withftanding the patricians tried every expedient "tofoften the commons, he was condemned in a fine offifteen thoufand afes*. The fame year Poftumia,a veftal virgin, was brought to trial for breach ofchaftity. She was free from the guilt, but took tou
* 48!. 8s. gd.


little







OCR Output








ii8 THE HISTORY


BOOK entangled together by the two fpears, they both fell
^- _**! _, lifelefs from their horfes. At the fame time, the reft
Y.K. 14.5. of the cavalry began to engage, and were fhortly af-
B. C. 507. ter joined by the infantry: a battle then enfued, in
which victory feemed alternately to incline to either
party, the advantage on both fides being neary equal.:
the right wings of both armies got the better, and
the left were worfted: the Veientians, acenftomed
to be vanquifhed by the Roman troops, were routed
and difperfed: the Tarquinians, a new enemy, not
only kept their ground, but even, on their fidex
made the Romans give way.
i
VII. Though fuch was the iflue of the battle, yetfo great terror took pofieflion of Tarquinius and theEtrurians, that, giving up the enterprife as imprac­ticable, both armies, the Veientian and the Tar-quinian, retired by night to their refpective coun­tries. To the accounts of this battle, writers haveadded miracles; that, during the filence of the fol­lowing night, a loud voice was uttered from the Ar-fian wood, which was believed to be the voice ofSylvanus, in thefe words: " The number of the"Etrurians who fell in the engagement was the"greater by one. The Romans have the victory.'*• The Romans certainly departed from the field asconquerors, the Etrurians as vanquifhed: for whenday appeared, and not one of the enemy was to befeen, the ccnful, Publius Valerius, collected thefpoils, and returned in triumph to Rome. He ce­lebrated the funeral of his colleague with the utmoftdegree of magnificence, which thofe times couldafford; but a much higher mark of honour to thedeceafed, was the grief exprelfed by the public, fin-gularly remarkable in this particular, that the ma­trons mourned for him as for a parent, during awhole year, in gratitude for his vigorous exertionsin avenging the caufe of violated chaftity. In a littletime, the conful who furvived, fo changeable are the


minds







OCR Output








HISTORY


BOOK tius Rutilus, Lucius Sergius Fidenas, and Sexttis ju-. _' , lius lulus. The fhews, to which they had come withY.R. 331. the concurrent approbation of their feveral ftates,B.C.4.11. were rendered more agreeable to the ftrangers by thecourtefy of their hofts. After the conclufion of thegames, the tribunes of the commbns began their fe-ditious harangues, upbraiding the multitude, that"they were fo benumbed with awe of thofe very"perfons, \vho were the objects of their hatred, as"to fit down liftlefs in a ftate of endlefs Qavery;"and not only wanted fpirit to afpire to the recove-"ry of their hopes of fharing in the confulfhip; but"even, in the election of military tribunes, which lay"open to both patricians and plebeians, they mewed"no regard to themfelves or their party. They"ought therefore to ceafe wondering, that no one"bufkd himfelf in the fervice of the commons:"people expended their labour and danger on ob-"jects from whence honour and emolument might. "be expected j and there was nothing which men'' would not undertake, if, for great attempts, great"rewards were propofed. But furely it could nei-"ther be required, nor expected, that any tribune"fhould rufh blindfold into difputes, the danger of"which was great, the £fpf£ nothing: in confe-"quence of which, he knew, with certainty, that the"pat*icians1 Pgainft whom his efforts were directed,"would perfecute him with inexpiable rancour; and"the commons, on whole fide he contended, would"never think themfelves the more obliged to him."By great honours, men's minds were elevated to"greatnefs: no plebeian would think meanly of"himfclf, when he ceafed to be condemned by"others. The experiment ought at length to be"made, on one, or another, whether there were any"plebeian capable of fuftaining a high dignity, or"whether it were next to a miracle, and a prodigy,"that there fhould exiit a man of plebeian extrac-"tion endowed with fortitude and induftry. By the
"moft







OCR Output








3'58 THEHISTORY


BOOK out cenfures in prefence of the people, at one rime. -r'_j on Minucius, at another on Servilius; and to cbm-Y.R. 316. plain of the unmerited death of Maelius. By fuchB.c.436. methods they accomplifhed their purpofe fo far as toprocure an order, that military tribunes fhould beelected inftead of confuls; not doubring, but in the.filling up of fix places, for fo many were then allow­ed to be elected, ibme plebeians, who fhould pro.'fefs a refolution to revenge the death of Maelius,•would be appointed among the reft. The commons,though kept in continual agitation during that year,by many and various commotions, elected not morethan three tribunes with confular power, and evenchofe among thefe Lucius Quintius the fon of Cin-cinnatus, whofe conduct in the dictatorfhip thofc.men wifhed to render odigus, and thence to gainoccafion of new difturbances: prior to Quintius, wasvoted in Mamercus .^Emilius, a man who ftood inthe firft rank of merit: in the third place, theyelected Lucius Icilius.
Y.R. 317. XVII. WHILE thefe were in office, Fidenae, aB.C.435. Roman colony, revolted to the Veientians, and theirking Lars Tolumnius. To their revolt a more hein­ous crime was added; for, in purfuance of an orderfrom Tolumnius, they put to death Caius Fulcinius,Cloelius Tullus, Spurius Ancius, and Lucius Rof-cius, Koman ambafladors, who came to inquire intothe reafons of this change of conduct. Some pal­liate the guilt of the king, alleging, that an ambi­guous expreffion of his, on a fuccefsful throw at dice,being mifapprehended by the Fidenatians, as an or­der for their execution, occafioned the death of theambaffadors: but this Teems an incredible tale; forit cannot be fuppofed that his thoughts would be fointently employed upon his game, as that he mouldbe regardlefs of a circumftance of fo much confe-quence, as the arrival of his new allies, the Fidena­tians, who were come to confult him upon the per­petration







OCR Output








OF ROME. 117


"which they themfelves had fuftained of old, for B ° O K
"their legions fo often flaughtered, and their lands ,
"taken from them." Thefe arguments had the Y.Rdefired effect on the Veientians, every one of whom B'C.earneftly, and with menaces, declared that theyought now at leaft, with a Roman at their head, toefface the memory of their difgraces, and reclaim,by arms, what they had loft. The people of Tar-quinii were moved by his name, and his relation totliemfelves: they thought it redounded to their ho­nour, that their countrymen fhould reign at Rome.Thus two armies of two ftates followed Tarquiniusto demand his reftoration, and profecute war againftthe Romans. When they advanced into the Ro­man territories, the confuls marched out to meet theenemy. Valerius led the infantry, in order of battle;Brutus, with the cavalry, marched at fome diftancebefore them, in order to procure intelligence. Inlike manner, the vanguard of the enemy was com-pofed of cavalry, under the command of Aruns Tar­quinius, the king's fon; the king himfclf followed•with the legions. Aruns, perceiving at a diftance,by the lictors, that a conful was there, and after­wards, on a nearer approach, plainly diftinguifhingBrutus by his face, became inflamed with rage, andcried out, " That is the man who has driven us as"exiles from our country j fee how he marches in"ftate, decorated with our enfigns: ye gods, aven-"gers of kings, afiift me!" He then fpurred onhis horfe, and drove furioufly againft the conful.Brutus perceived that the attack was meant for him;and, as it was, at that time, reckoned not improperfor generals rhemfeJves to engage in fight, he eagerlyoffered himfeif to the combat; and they advancedagainft each other with fuch furious animofity, nei­ther thinking of guarding his own perfon, but folelyintent on wounding his enemy, that, in the violenceof the conflict, each of them received his antagonift'sfpear in his body, through his buckler, and being
13 entangled







OCR Output








O F R O M E. 173


there propofe the fending of ambafladors to Cains BOOKMarcius. The fenate, finding that they could not .._ __irj _,depend on the fupport of the commons, took the Y.R. 166.matter into confideration, and fent deputies to Mar- B.c. *86tcius to treat of an accommodation: to thefe he re­plied, in harfh terms, that "if their lands were re-"ftored to the Volfcians, a treaty might then be"opened for an accommodation; but if they were"refolved to enjoy, at their cafe, what they had"plundered from their neighbours in war, he would"not forget either the in|uftice of his countrymen,"or the kindnefs of his hofts, but would take fuch"fteps as mould fhew the world, that his courage"was irritated by exile, not deprefied." The fameperfons being fent a fecond time, were refuted ad­mittance into the camp. It is related, that thepriefts afterwards, in their facred veftments, wentas fuppliants to the camp of the enemy, but had nomore influence on him than the ambafladors.
XL. THE matrons then afiembled in a body aboutVeturia the mother of Coriolanus, and Volumnia hiswife; whether this was a fcheme of government, orthe refult of the women's own fears, I cannot dif-cover. It is certain that they carried their point,and that Veturia, a woman far advanced in years,and Volumnia, leading two little fons whom fhe hadby Marcius, went to the camp of the enemy; fothat women, by tears and prayers, preferved thecity, which the men were not able to preferve by- arms. When they arrived at the camp, and Co­riolanus was informed that a great cavalcade of wo­men was approaching, he, who had not been moved,either by the majefty of the ftate, reprefented in itsambafladors, or by the awful addrefs made by theminifters of religion, both to his fight and his un-derftanding, at firft refolved to fhew himfelf ftillmore inflexible againft the tears of women: foonafter, one of his acquaintance knowing Veturia,
diftiu-







OCR Output








3o6 T H £ H I S T O R Y


BOOK" I myfelf no longer demur to refign the office of,__^J.__r" decemvir." A decree of the fcna.te was then made,Y.R. 305. that "the decemvirs fhould, without delay, refigi>B. c. 447. " tlieir oflice. That Quintos Furius chief pontiff"fhould hold an election of plebeian tribunes, and"that no one fhould fuffer, on account of the fece£."fion of the foldiers and commons." As foon asthefe decrees were finifhed, the fenate was difmified,and the decemvirs coming forth to the comitmm,,made a refignation of their office, to the extreme joyof all. News of this was carried to the commons.Whatever people there were remaining in the city,efcorted th« deputies. This cavalcade was met byanother crowd from the camp, exulting with joy;and they mutually congratulated each other, on there-eftablifhmcnt of liberty and concord in the ftate.The deputies acidreffed the affembly thus: "Be it"advantageous, fortunate, and happy to you, and"to the commonwealth. Return into your native"city, to your houfehold gods, your wives and chil-"dren: the fame moderation, with which ye have"behaved here, where, notwithftanding the great"confumption of neceflaries in fo large a multitude,"no man's field lias been injured, that carry with"you into the city. Go to the Aventine, from*' whence ye removed. In that aufpicious place,"where ye took the firft ftep towards liberty, ye fhalj"elect tribunes of the commons: the chief pontiff"will attend to prefide in the afiembly." Greatwere the applaufes given, and the cheerfulleft ap­probation was fhewn of every thing which was done.They then haftity raifed the ftandards; and, as theymarched towards Rome, vied with fuch as they metin expreffions of joy. They proceeded under arms,in filence, through the city to the Aventine. There,the chief pontiff holding an aflembly, they inftantlyelected tribunes of the commons; firft of all, LuciusVirginius; then Lucius Icilius, and Pubiius Nomito-rius, the uncle of Virginia, the firft advifers of the11 leceffiqn i







OCR Output








ie» THE HISTORY


BOOK mediate death threatening her: Tarquinius then ac-knowledged his p'aflion, intreated, mixed threatswith intreaties, and ufcd every argument likely tohave effect on a woman's mind: but finding her in­flexible, and not to be moved, even by the fear ofdeath, he added to that fear, the dread of difhonour,telling her, that after killing her, he would murdera flave, and lay him naked by her fide, that fhe mightbe faid to have been flain in bafe adultery. Thefhocking apprehenfidns, conveyed by this menace,overpowering her refolution in defending her chafti-ty, his luft became victorious; and Tarquinius de­parted, applauding hirnfelf for this triumph over alady's honour. But Lucretia, plunged by fuch adreadful difafter into the deepeft diftrefs of woe, dif-patched a mefiengcr to Rorge to her father, witherders to proceed to Ardea to her hufband, and todefire them to come to her, each with one faithfulfriend; to tell them, that there was a neceflity fortheir doing fo, and that fpeedily; that a dreadfulaffair had happened. Spurius Lucretius came withPublius Valerius, the fonof Volefus ; Collatinus withLucius Junius Brutus, in company with whom hehappened to be returning to Rome, when he was metby his wife's mel'enger. They found Lucretia fit­ting in her chamber, melancholy and dejected: on.the arrival of her friends, fhe burft into tears, andon her hufband's afking, " Is all well?" "Far." from it," laid fhe, " for how can it be well with"a woman who has loft her chaftily? Collatfnus,rc the irnprefnon of another man is in your bed:'" yet my perlbn only has been violated, my mind is'" guiltlefs, as rhy death will teftify. But give me"your right hands and pledge your honour, that the"adulterer fhall not efcape unpunifhed. H« is"Sextus Tarquinius, who, under the appearance of"a gutft, difguifing an eneijiy, obtained here, laft"night, by armed violence, a triumph deadly to'"me, and to himfclf alfo, if ye be men." They
all







OCR Output








2i8 THE HISTORY


BOO K ^commons: now, therefore, on his being a fecond1 -T--• time invefted with that office, thofe, who expectedY.R.i«7. the lands, conceived fanguine hopes of the lawB.C. 465; pafftng. The tribunes, fuppofing that an affair forwhich fuch ftruggles had often been made, in oppo-fition to both the confuls, might probably be ac-complifhed now, when one of thofe magiftrates wasan advocate for it, fet the bufinefs on foot; and theconful continued in the fame lentiments. Tlie pof-feflbrs of the lands, and moft of the patricians, com­plaining loudly that a perfon at the head of the ftateaimed to diftinguifh himfelf, by intrigues more be­coming tribunes, and courted popularity, by mak­ing donations out of other people's property, re­moved the odium of the whole tranfadlion from thetribunes to the conful. A defperate conteft wouldhave enfued, had not Fabius ftruck out an expedientto prevent it, by a plan difagreeable to neitherparty; which was, that, as a confiderable tract ofland had been taken from the Volfcians, in the pre­ceding year, under the conduct and aufpices of TitusQuintius, a colony mould be led off to Antium, atown at no great diftance, convenient in every re-ipect, and a lea-port; by thefe means, the com­mons might come in for lands, without any com­plaints from the prefent poffeflors, and harmonymight be preferved in the ftate. This propofitionwas approved of, and he had cotnmiffioners, calledtriumvirs, appointed to diftribute the lands; thefewere Titus Quintius, A. Virginia*, and Publius Fu-rius; and fuch as chofe to accept of thofe lands, wereordered to give in their names. The gratification oftheir wifhes, as is generally the cafe, inftantly begatdifguft; and fo few gave in their names, that, to fillup the colony, they were obliged to take in a numberof the Volfcians. The reft of the populace chofe ra­ther to profecute claims of land at Rome, than toreceive .immediate pofieffion of it elfewhere. The,/Equans fued to Quintus Fabius for peace, for he hadgone againft them with an army; yet they themfelves
broke







OCR Output








xviii PREFACE.


found a niche for him, as well as others of hisfamily, when he mentions the diftinguifhedvictory gained by Livius and Nero over Ha£.drubal*. He relates the affair itfelf in veryfplendid terms, and beftows the moft exaltedpraifes on the admirable conduct of thofe vic­torious generals. He who was thus rigidlytenacious, when private motives, friendfhip,or intereft might have fwayfid him, is, never-thelefs, accufed, from national vanity, of hav­ing written with partiality; and of havingfometimes exaggerated, and fometimes con­cealed, the truth.
It muft be acknowledged that, when thegrandeur of the Roman empire prefents itfelf.to his mind, he is not always fufficiently re-ferved in the terms which he ufes. Thus,fpeaking of Cincinnatusf, fo early as the 296thyear of Rome, he calls him "the fole hope of"the empire of Rome," at a time'whenwe knowthat this thus pompoufly announced empireextended not more than twenty miles beyondthe city. And again, not many years after ^!,•he introduces Canuleius boafting of its " eter­nal duration and immenfe magnitude §." Whenwe find him applying fuch magnificent terms tothe Roman ftate, then in its infancy, we muftfuppofe him to have forgot the period of whichhe was writing, and to have had prefent to hismind the fplendor and extent to which it 'hadattained at the time when he himfelf lived andwrote. He even puts the fame language into
• B. xxvii. 47, 8, 9. t B. Hi. 26.
t Y. R.JIO. § B. iv.4
the







OCR Output








O F R O M E. 425


which diverted men's thoughts from the Forum, and BOOKpolitical difputes, to their own houfes, and the care . _ '_jof their perlbnal fafety. It is believed, that the dif- Y.K. 343.order was lefs fatal, in its effects, than the fedition B.C.409.would have proved, the ftate being delivered, fromit, with the lofs of very few lives, though the fick-nels had been exceedingly general. This year of Y.R. 344.peftilence was fucceeded by one of fcarcity, owing B.c.4°9.to the neglect of agriculture, ufual in fuch cafes.Marcus Papirius Atratinus and Caius Nautius Rutiluswere confuls. Famine would now have producedmore difmal effects than the peftilence, had not afupply been procured to the market by difpatchingenvoys round all the nations bordering on the Tuf-can fea, and on the Tiber, to purchafe corn.. TheSamnites, who were then in pofieflion of Capua andCumae, in a haughty manner prohibited the envoysto trade there: they met with a different receptionfrom the tyrants of Sicily, who kindly affordedthem every affiftance. The largeft fupplies werebrought down by the Tiber, through the very activezeal of the Etrurians. In confequence of the fick-nefs, the confuls were at a lofs for men to tranfactthe bufinefs of the ftate, fo that, not finding morethan one fenator for each embaffy, they were obligedto join two knights to each of them. Except fromthe ficknefs and the fcarcity, there happened no­thing during thofe two years, either at home orabroad, to give them any trouble. But no foonerdid thofe caufes of uneafinefs difappe.ar, than all theevils which had hitherto fo frequently difturbed thequiet of the ftate, ftarted up together, inteftine dif-cord and foreign wars. s
LIII. IN the fucceeding confulate of Mamercus Y.R. 34J.ffimilius and Caius Valerius Potitus, the ^Squans B. C.407.made preparations for war; and the Volfcians, thoughthey took not arms by public authority, fuppliedthem with volunteers who ferved for pay. On the
report







OCR Output








OF ROME. 30?


feceffion; then Cains Sjcinius, a defcendant of that B O O Kman who is recorded as the firft tribune of the com- . -T-_frnons, elected on the facred mount; Marcus Duilius, Y.R. 305.who had diftinguifhed himfelf by his conduct in the B.c. *+7'tribunemip, before the creation of the decemvirs,and who, during the contefts with the decemvirs, hadnot failed to exert himfelf in fupport of the caufe ofthe commons. Then were elected, rather on ac­count of hopes entertained of their future condudt,than of their previous deferts, Marcus Titinius,Marcus Pomponius, Caius Apronius, PubliusVillius, and Catus Oppius. As foon as he enteredon the office of tribune, Lucius Icilius inftantly pro-pofed to the commons, and the commons ordered,that no perfon mould furFer on account of the fecef­fion from the decemvirs. Immediately after, Duiliuscarried a propofition for electing confuls, with pri­vilege of appeal. All this was tranfacted in an af-fembly of the commons in the Flaminian meadows,now called the Flaminian circus.
LV. AFTER this, under the direction of an inter- J.£. ?°5.rex, confuls were elected. Thefe were Lucius Va- ' '**'lerius and Marcus Horatius, who entered immedi- ,ately upon the exercife of their office. Their con-fulate was popular, and though unattended by anyactual ill-treatment of the patricians, yet incurredtheir difpleafure; for they imagined that every fecu-rity added to the liberty of the commons, was adiminution of their own power. Firft of all,as if it were a point in controverfy, whether the pa­tricians were bound by regulations, enacted in an a£.fembly of the commons, they pafied a law in an af-fembly of the centuries, " that whatever was ordered"by the commons collectively, fhould bind the whole"people." A law which gave the keeneft edge tofuch propofitions as might be introduced by thetribunes. Another law^ introduced by a conful, con­cerning the right of appeal, a fingular fecurity to li-
x 2 berty,







OCR Output








OF ROME. 409


"in command, he has rendered himfelf fo dear to B o o K
TV
"his foldiers." Nor was the dutiful attachment of ,_'the four tribunes more pleafing to the patricians and Y.R. 335..to the commons, than was the temper of Hortenfius, B.c. 4*9.complying fo readily with intreaties founded onjuftice. Fortune no longer indulged the /Equans,who had embraced the doubtful fuccefs of the Vol-fcians as their own.
XLIII. IN the year following, which had for con- Y.R. 334.fuls Numerius Fabius Vibulanus and Titus Quintius B.c.4."f.Capitolinus, fon of Capitolinus, nothing memorablewas performed againft them under the conduct ofFabius, to whom that province fell by lot. ThevEquans, on their juft fhewing their fpiritlefs army,were driven off the field in a fhameful flight, with­out affording the conful much honour, for which rea-fon he was refufed a triumph; however, as he hadeffaced the ignominy of the misfortune under Sem-pronius, he was permitted to enter the city in ova­tion. As the war was brought to a conclufion, withlefs difficulty than had been apprehended, fo the city,from a ftate of tranquillity, was unexpectedly in­volved in a fcene of turbulent difienfions betweenthe patricians and plebeians. This was the effect ofa plan for doubling the number of quaeftors: for theconfuls having propofed, that, in addition to the twocity-quaeftors, two others mould always attend theconfuls, to difcharge the bufinefs relative to the ar­my, and the meafure having been moft warmly ap- \proved by the patricians, the tribunes contended, inoppofition to the confuls, that half the number ofquaftors mould be taken from among the commons,for hitherto patricians only had been elected: againftwhich fcheme both confuls and patricians ftruggledat firft with their utrnoft power; and, having after­wards offered a concefiion, that according to thepractice in the election of tribunes with confularpower, the people fhould have equal freedom of
fuffragc







OCR Output








O F R O M E. 325


her of tribunes, only enacted, that tribunes mould BOOKbe left; and he recited the terms of the law, in ^___^i_^,which it is faid, "If I propofe ten tribunes,of the Y R. 306."commons, in cafe they mould on that day make a li.c.. **6."lefs number than ten tribunes, xhen the perfons"whom thefe fhall aflume as colleagues to them-"felves, fhall be legal tribunes of the commons,"with the fame privileges as thofe whom ye on that'e day made tribunes of the commons." Duilius,perfevering to the laft, and declaring the common­wealth could not have fifteen tribunes, after bafflingthe ambition of his colleagues, refigned his office,with high approbation both from the patricians andthe plebeians.
LXV. THE new tribunes of the commons mewed V.R. 307.in their election of colleagues, an inclination to gra- B. c.**s.tify the patricians. They chofe two, who were pa­tricians and even conlulars, Spurius Tarpeius andAulus Aterius. The confuls, then elecled, wereLargius Herminius and Titus Virginius Ccelimonta-nus, men not warmly attached to either party of pa­tricians or plebeians. They had a peaceful yearboth at home and abroad. Lucius Trebonius, tri­bune of the commons, a bitter enemy to the patri­cians, becaufe, as he faid, he had been impofed onby them, and betrayed in the affair of choofing col­leagues, carried a propofal that whoever took thevotes of the commons on the election of plebeiantribunes, fhould continue the proceedings until hefhould return ten plebeian tribunes. He fpent thewhole time of his office, in creating imeafinefs tothe patricians, from whence the furname of Afper(harm) was given him. Marcus Geganius Maceri- Y.R. 308.nus and Caius Julius, the next confuls chofen, pre- B.C. +**•vented the ill effects of fome combinations, formedby the tribunes, againft the young nobles j without. taking any harm fteps againft thofe magiftrates, and,


Y 3 at







OCR Output








OF ROME. 385


troops, but the dictator alfb. The conjuncture re- B O O Kquiring inftant exertion, the conful fhewed no defi- . L -,ciency either of fpirit or of judgment. One part of Y.R. 314..the troops reinforced the guards at the gates, the B. Ct 4i8<1other manned the rampart all round. In the othercamp where the dictator commanded, as there waslefs tumult, fo it was eafier to perceive what was ne-ceffary to be done : difpatching inftantly a reinforce­ment to the conful's camp, under the command ofSpuriusPoftumiusAlbus, lieutenant general, he him-felf, with a body of forces, making a fmall circuit,proceeded to a place quite retired from the hurry ofaction, from whence he propofed to make an unex­pected attack on the enemy's rear. To QuintusSulpicrus, lieutenant. general, he gave the charge ofthe camp, to Marcus Fabius, lieutenant-general,he afligned the cavalry, with orders that thofe troops,which it would be hardly poffible to manage, in theconfufion of an action by night, mould not ftir un­til day.light. Every meafure, which any other ge­neral, however fkilful and active, could at fuch ajuncture order and execute, he ordered and executedwith perfect regularity. But it was a fingular in-ftance of judgment and intrepidity, and intitled tomore than ordinary praife, that, hot content with de-fenfive plans, he difpatched Marcus Geganius, withfome chofen cohorts, to attack that camp of theenemy, from which, according to the intelligence ofhis fcouts, they had marched out the greater num­ber of troops. Falling upon men whofe wholeattention was engrofied by the danger of their friends,while they were free from any apprehenfion for them-felves, and had neglected pofting watches or ad­vanced guards, he made himielf mafter of the camp,fooner almoft than the enemy knew that it was at­tacked. A fignal being then given by fmoke, as hadbeen concerted, the dictator perceiving it, cried out,that the enemy's camp was taken, and ordered thenews to be conveyed to all the troops.
VOL.I. cc' XXVIII.







OCR Output








OF ROME. 311


*c popular rage were not fo great, as to deprive him B OjO K'c of all hope from the equity and companion of his *, -t '_,"countrymen. JJuf if he was led to prifon without Y.R. 306."being heard in his deferrce, he again called on the B. c.*46."tribunes of the commons, and warned them, not"to follow the example of thoie who were the ob-•" jects of their hatred. But fhould the tribunes ac-•" knowledge themfelves to have combined in the<c fame kind of confederacy, for abolifhing the right•" of calling for their protection, which they charged"the decemvirs with having formed, then, he faid,"he appealed to the people, and implored the be-•" nefit of the laws concerning appeals, pafied that*' very year at the inftance of the confuls and of the*' tribunes. For who was to appeal, if that privi-"lege was refufed to a perfon on whom no fentence"was pafied, and who had not been heard in his de-"fence? What plebeian or perfon in a low ftation"could expect to find protection in the laws, if Ap-*' pius Claudius found none? His cafe would afford'" a proof, whether, by the new laws, tyranny or li-"berty was eftablifhed; and whether appeals to the"tribunes, and people, againft the injuftice of ma-"giftrates, were effectually granted, or only held out** in fhew, .to amufe the people with empty words."
LVII. ViRGiNiu;S, on the other hand, affirmed,<hat Appius Claudius was the only perfon who wasnot entitled to any of the privileges of the laws, norof civil, nor even of human fociety: de fired peo­ple to " look at the tribunal, that fortrefs, where*' every kind of wickednefs had found impunity;"where that perpetual decemvir, venting his fury on"the goods, the perfons, and lives of the citizens,"threatening all with his rods and axes, fhewing an"utter contempt both of gods and raeo, encpm-"pafied with executioners, not lidors, changing at"length his purfuits from rapines and murders, to*' the gratifications of luft, had, before the eyes ofx 4 "the.







OCR Output








O F R O M E. 393


"fame; and the fame the arms which they wore. BOOK'' That he himfelf alfo was the fame dictator, Ma- . ™^_t"mercus ^milius, who formerly at Fidenee routed Y.R. 319."the armies of the Veientians and Fidenatians, when B.c.41j."they had the additional fupport of the Falifcians;"and his mafter of the horfe was the fame Aulus"Cornelius, who in a former war, when he ranked"as military tribune, flew Lars Tolumnius, the king"of thefe Veientians, in the fight of both armies,"and carried his fpolia opima to the temple of Ju-"piter Feretrius. He exhorted them therefore to"take arms, reflecting that on their fide were tri-"umphs, on their fide fpoils, on their lide victory;"on the fide of the enemy, the guilt of violating"the laws of nations by the murder of ambafiadors,"the maflacre of the Fidenatian colonifts in time of"peace, the infraction of truces, and a feventh un-"fuccefsful revolt: afluring them, he was fully con-"fident, that when they fhould have once encamped"within reach of the ,foe, the joy of thofe enemies,"fo deeply plunged in guilt, for the late difgrace of"the Roman army, would foon be at an end; and alfo"that a demonftration would be given to the Ro-"man people, how much better thefe perfons me-"rited of the commonwealth, who nominated him"dictator a third time, than thofe, who, out of ma-"lice, on account of his having fnatched arbitrary"power out of the hands of the cenfors, threw a"blot on his fecond fuccefsful dictatorfhip." Hav­ing afterwards offered up vows to the gods, he foonbegan his march, and pitched his camp fifteen hun­dred paces on this fide of FidenJE, having his rightcovered by mountains, and his left by the river Ti­ber. He ordered Titus Quintius Pennus, lieutenant-general, to take pofieffion of the mountains, and topoft himfelf, privately, on whatever eminence ftoodbehind the enemy's rear. Next day, when the Etru­rians had marched out to the field, full of confidencein confequence of their fucceis on the former day,
though







OCR Output








444 THE HISTORY


BOOK " even in that fevere feafon, which gives a refpite to. - ^L__." all wars either on land or Tea. Neither kings norY.K.351. " the confuls, overbearing as they were, before theB.C. 400. " inftitution of the tribunitian office; nor the ftern"government of a dictator; nor the arbitrary de-"cemvirs; ever enjoined fuch an inftance of.fervi-"tude, as this of unremitting military fervice. Yet"military tribunes aflumed tha't degree of kingly"power over the commons of Rome. What'* would have been the behaviour of thofe men, in"the office of conful or dictator, who have exhi-"bited a piclure of proconfular power in colours of"fuch harfhnefs and cruelty? But this was no worfe"than what the people deferved. Among eight"military tribunes, they did not give room to one"plebeian. Till of late, the patricians ufed to find"the utmoft. difficulty, in filling up three places;"but, now, they march in files, eight deep, to take"pofieffion of the pofts of government j and even"in fuch a crowd, no plebeian is found intermixed,"who, if he lerved no other purpofe, might remind"his colleagues, that the army was compofed aot of"flaves but of freemen; of citizens who ought to"be brought home, at leaft in winter, to their ha-"bitations, and the comfort of their own roofs, and"allowed, at fome time of the year, to vifit their"parents, children, and wives; to exercife the rights"of freemen, and to fhare in the election of ma-"giftrares." While they exclaimed in thefe, andluch like terms, they were not unequally matched inan opponent, Appius Claudius, who had been leftat home, by his colleagues, for the purpolc of re-prefling the turbulent fchemes of the tribunes; aman trained, from his youth, in contentions withthe plebeians; who, fome years before, had recom­mended, as has been mentioned, the difuniting thepower of the tribunes by the protefh of their col­leagues.
III. KN.-







OCR Output








OF ROME. 39


fpring; hither it was Numa's cuftom frequently to B O' OKrepair unattended, as he pretended, to meet the god- .___^'--fdels: he therefore dedicated it to the mufcs, theyhaving been, he alleged, of the councils of hisfpoufe Egeria. To Faith, under the flefignation ofSingle Faith, he inftituted an anniverfary fcftivaljin the celebration of which, he ordered the flamensto be carried in a covered chariot, drawn by twohorfes; and, while employed in the performance pfher worfhip, to have their hands covered, clofedown to the fingers, to fignify that Faith was to becarefully preferved, and that even its feat, in theright hand, was facred. Many other facrifices heinftituted, and confecrated the places where theywere to be performed, which the priefts call ar-genfes. But the greetef t of all his works was theeftablifhment of a pewnanent peace, which lie main­tained through the whole courfe of his reign, withno lefs care than he.employed in fecuring his ownauthority. Thus two kings in fuccefnon, by differ­ent methods, one by warlike, the other by peacefulinftitutions, contributed to the aggrandisement ofthe ftate. Romulus reigned thirty-fcven years,Nurna forty-three. The nation, by this time, be­came pofiefied not only of great ftrength, but hadalfo attained to a competent knowledge of the artsboth of war and of peace.
XXII. ON the death of Numa, an interregnum Y. H.again took place. After fome time, the people %*'c.elected to the throne Tullus Hoftilius, grandfon to 67^that Hoftilius who diftinguifhed himfelf in the battlewith the Sabines, at the foot of the citadel; and thefenate gave their approbation, He was not only ofa temper very different from th^t of the late king,but more warlike in his difpofuion than even Ro­mulus himfclf. His youth and vigour, and, at thefame time, the renown of his grandfather, ftimulated,his native courage. Thinking, therefore, that theD 4 ftrength







OCR Output








74 THE HISTORY


B o 0 K " cfom is yours, and not theirs, who, by the hands"of others, have perpetrated the bafeft of crimes."Call forth your beft exertions, and follow the." guidance of the gods, who formerly, by the divine"fire which they fpread around your head, gave"an evident indication that it would afterwards"be crowned with glory. Now let that heavenly"flame roufe you. Now awake to real glory. We,"though foreigners, have reigned before you."Confider your prefent fituation, not of what fami-"ly you are fprung. If the fuddennefs of this event"deprives you of the power of forming plans of"your own, then follow mine." When the cla­mour and violence of the populace could hardly bewithftood, Tanaquii addrefied them from the up­per part of the palace, through the windows facingthe new ftreet; for the king refided near the templeof Jupiter Stator. She defired them " not to be"difheartened:" told them, that " the king had"been ftunned by a fudden blow, that the weapon"had not funk deep into his body, that he had come"to himfelf again; that when the blood was wiped"off, the wound had been examined, and all appear-"ances were favourable j that fhe hoped he might"be able to fhew himfelf to them again in a few"days; and that, in the mean time, he commanded"the people to obey the orders of Servius Tullius:'' that he would adminifter juftice, and fupply the"king's place in other departments." Serviuscame forth in the robe of ftate, attended by the lie-tors, and feating himfelf on the king's throne, ad­judged fome caufes, and, concerning others, pre­tended that he would confult the king. Thus,though Tarquinius had already expired, his deathwas concealed for feveral days; while Servius, underthe appearance of fupplying the place of another,.ftrengthened his own intereft. Then, at length, thetruth being made publjc, and loud lamentationsraifed in the palace, Servius, fupported by a ftrong
guard,







OCR Output








O F R O M E. 327


their own fboulders: as if there exifted, in nature, a B O Operpetual neceffity, either of doing, or of fufferinginjury.


in.


LXVI. THE nextconfuls elected, Titus Quintius Y.R. 309.Capitolinus a fourth time, and Agrippa Furius, found, B.C. 443.at the commencement of their year, neither feditionat home, nor war abroad, but reafon fufficient toapprehend both. The difienfions of the citizenscould no longer be kept within bounds, both tri­bunes and commons being highly exafperated againftthe patricians, and every charge brought againft anyof the nobility conftantly embroiling the afiemblieswith new contefts. As foon as thefe were noifedabroad, the .ffiquans and Volfcians, as if they hadwaited for this fignal, immediately took up arms;being, at the fame time,-perfuaded by their leaders,who were eager for plunder, that the levy which hadbeen proclaimed the laft year had been found im­practicable, the commons refufing obedience j andthat, for that reafon, no army had been fent againftthem; that their military difcipline was fubvert-ed by licentioufnefs, and that Rome was no longerconfidered as their common country; that all therefentment and animofity, which they had entertain­ed againft foreigners, was now turned againft eachother, and that now there was a favourable opportu­nity of crufhing thofe wolves, while they were blind­ed by inteftine rage. Having therefore united theirforces, they laid wafte the country of Latium; where,none attempting to obftrucl them, and the promotersof the war highly exulting, they advanced to thevery walls of Rome, carrying on their ravages op-pofite to the Efquiline gate, infulting the city with aview of the devaftation of the country. Fromthence, they marched back without moleftation, inregular order, driving the prey before them to Cor-bio. And then Quintius the conful fummoned thepeople to an afiembly.
v.4 LXVII.







OCR Output








"O F R O M E;


higfieft and the loweft, that while the patri- BOOKcians approved of his ftricctnefs in the execution of •y___v^_Jhis office, the commons were highly fatisfied with his Y.R. j«.lenity. Even againft the fchemes of the tribunes, B. C.440.he carried more of his meafures, by means of therefpect univerfally paid to him, than by exertions ofauthority. Five confulfhips adminiftered with thefame tenour of conduct, and every part of his lifebeing fuited to the confular dignity, attracted to hisperfon almoft a greater degree of veneration, thanwas paid even to the high office which he bore.There was therefore no mention of military tribunesin this confulate.
XI. THERE were chofen, to fircceed them, Mar- Y.R 3,3.£us Fabius Vebulanus and Poftumius /Ebutius Cor- B.C.4jj.jiicen. Thefe confuls were emulous of the high re­nown, which they obferved their predeceflbrs hadattained, by their fervices at home and abroad; that•year having been rendered exceedingly remarkableamong all the neighbouring ftates, both friends and.enemies, by the very zealous fupport afforded to theArdeans in their extreme diftrefs; they exerted•themfelves then the more earneftly, with the view ofrrafing entirely from the minds of men the infamy.of the former lentence of the people; and fought toprocure a decree of the fenate, that, whereas thepeople of the Ardeans had by inteftine war been re­duced to an inconliderable number, therefore a co­lony mould be conducted thither, to ferve as a bar­rier againft the Volfcians. Thefe were the expref-fions made ufe of in the tables exhibited to public'.view, in order to conceal from the tribunes and com­mons the defign which they had formed of refcindingthe fentence. But they had agreed among them­felves, to enrol for the colony a much greater num­ber of Rutulians than of Romans; and then, that noother land mould be diftributed, but that which hadbeen fraudulently obtained by the infamous fentence;A A 4 and







OCR Output








^ THE HISTORY, &c.


BOOK caufe, before the city was taken, all the public ftores. -^L^ of corn had been conveyed thither j fo that the Ro-Y R. 351. mans would have grown weary of the attempt, andB. C.40I. ^etired, had not the fortrefs been betrayed to themby a flave. He gave admittance, through a placeof difficult accefs, to fome foldiers, who made them-felvts mafters of it; and while they were employed-in killing the guards, the reft of the multitude, lofingall courage at the fight of this unexpected danger,laid down their arms. After demolifhing both thecitadel and city of Artena, the legions were led back-from the country of the Volfcians, and the wholepower of Rome turned againft Veil. The traitorreceived as a reward, befides his liberty, the pro­perty of .two families, and was called Servius Ro-jnanus. Some are of opinion, that Artena belongedto the Veientians, not to the Volfcians: a miftakeoccafioned by there having been once a town of thatname, between Caere and Veii. But that town theRoman kings demolifhed; it was the property of theCaeritians, not of the Veientians; this other of thefame name, the defirution of which we have related,vas in the country of the Volfcians.







OCR Output








THE HISTORY


 


^iey relate, tnat Aulus Ppftumius bc-^ headed his fon, after a fuccefsful exploit, becaufe heY.R. 314. had left his poft without orders, tempted by a fa-£.C.41s. vourable opportunity of fighting to advantage.While we feel a reluctance againft giving credit tothis ftory, we are alfo at liberty to reject it, therebeing a variety of opinions on the fubject: and thereis this argument againft it, that fuch orders havebeen denominated Manlian, not Poftumian; whereasthe perfon who firft fet an example of fuch feveritywould have acquired the diftinguifhing title of cru­elty. Befides, the furname of Imperiofus has beenimpofed on Manlius, and Poftumius has not beendiftinguifhed by any difagreeable appellation. Theconful Caius Julius, in the abience of his colleague,without cafting lots for the employment, dedicatedthe temple of Apollo ; at which Quintius, being of­fended, on his return to the city, after difbanding thearmy, made a complaint to the fenate, but withoutany effect. To the great events of this year was add­ed a circumftance, which, at that time, did not ap­pear to have any relation to the interefts of Rome:the Carthaginians who were to become fuch formi­dable enemies, then for the firft time, on occafion offome inteftine broils among the Sicilians, tranfportedtroops into Sicily in aid of one of the parties.
Y.R. 315. XXX. IN the city, endeavours were ufed by the•'.• 417. ^1.^,^5 of the commons to procure an election ofmilitary tribunes with confular power, but they werenot able to effect it. Lucius Papirius Craflus andLucius Julius were made confuls. Ambaffadors fromthe ^Equans having requefted of the fenate that atreaty of peace might be concluded, it was requiredof them, that inftead of a treaty they fhould make a. furrender of themfelves. In the end they obtaineda truce for eight years. The affairs of the Volfcians,befide the lols fuftained at Algidum, were involvedin altercations and feditions by means of an obftinate
contention







OCR Output








3t8 t HE HISTORY


BOOK pleted their difpofition; and thus encountered an
. 1IIL unfteady multitude, who were hurrying ftom one
Y.R. 306. place to another, and throwing their eyes about on
B.C.446. themfelves and their friends, while he added to their
confufion by a mout, and a violent onfet. At firfty
the enemy gave ground, but afterwards collected
their fpirits, their leaders on every fide afking them
in reproach, if they intended to yield to vanquimed
enemies, and the fight was renewed.
LXI. ON the other fide, the Roman cohful de-fired his troops to reflect, that, " on that day, for"the firft time, they, as free men, fought for Romt,"as a free city; that they were to conquer for"themfelves, and not in order to become a prize to"the decemvirs; that they were not acting under"the orders of Appius, but of their conful Valerius,"defcended from the deliverers of the Roman peo-"ple, and, himfelf, one of their deliverers. He"bade them fhew, that in the former battles, the"lofs of victory had been owing to the leaders, not"to the foldiers. He told them, it would be fcan-"dalous to pofiefs more courage againft their coun-"trymen, than againft their enemies, and to be more"afraid of flavery, at home, than abroad; that Vir-"ginia had been the only perfon whofe chaftity was"in danger in time of peace; and Appius, their"countryman, the only one from whofe luft danger"was to be dreaded; but that, fhould the fortuneC' of war turn againft them, the children of every"one of them would be in danger, from fo many"thoufands of enemies. That he was unwilling, on"account of the omen, to mention fuch things, as"neither Jupiter, nor father Mars, would fuffer tc*"happen to a city built under fuch aufpices." Heput them in mind of the Aventine and facred mounts,and that " they ought to bring back dominion un-"impaired to that fpot, where a few months ago"they had obtained liberty^ to Ihew that the Roman
"foldiers







OCR Output








i-& THE HISTORY


B o^o K Volfcians and ^Equans were vanquifhed in that year,• -y-^j defrauded the troops of the booty: the whole of whatY.R..z69. was taken from the enemy, the conful Fabius fold,B.C.483. and lodged the produce of it in the treafury. Thename of Fabius was odious to the commons, on ac­count of the laft conful j yet the patricians had influ-K'c' 2vj' cnce enough to procure the election of Caefo Fabiusto the confulthip, with Lucius .flimilius. This far­ther exafpcrated the commons, who, by raifing afedition at home, encouraged foreign enemies toattack them: the war put a ftop to inteftinc difien-fions. The patricians and plebeians united, andunder the'conduct of /Emilius, with little lofs tothemfelves, overthrew in battle the Volfcians and.fliquans, who had revived hoftilities. On this oc-cation, the enemy loft greater numbers during theirretreat, than in the battle; for, after they werebroken, they were purfued by the cavalry to a greatdiftance. .In the fame year, on the ides of July, thetemple of Caftor was dedicated: it had been vowed,during the Latine war, by Poftumius the dictator,and his fon, being appointed duumvir for the pur-pofe, performed the dedication. This year alfothe minds of the people were tempted to new exer­tions, by the charms of the agrarian law. Thetribunes wilhed to enhance the popularity of theiroffice, by promoting that popular law. The patri­cians, convinced that the multitude were, of them-fctves, without any inftigation, too much inclined todefperate meafures, looked with horror on fuchlargefies, as incitements to acts of temerity; and theyfound in the confuls, leaders as active as they couldwifh, in oppofing thofe proceedings: their partyconlcquently prevailed; and that, not only for theprefent, but they were able to appoint as confuls for
B c *!' t'ie aPProacn'ng 7ear Marcus Fabius, brother to
'"""* '' Carfo, and Lucius Verus, who was ftill more odious
to the plebeians, on account of his having been the
profccutor of Spurius Caffius. In that year, there
. . was







OCR Output








 


University of Virginia Library
DG207 L5 B3 1797 V.1
ALD The history ot Rome.__


II ii II ill ii mi IJIIM imuii
UX DD1 132 Sit,







OCR Output








O F R O M E.


 


(C


of their running together, the crowd grew ftill, andfilence took place, he related every circumftance in _
order as it pafied. Then raifing his hands towards Y.R. 305.heaven, befought his fellow-foldiers " not to impute"to him the guilt which belonged to Appius Claudi-"us, nor to abhor him as the murderer of his child."Declaring, that the life of his daughter was dearerto him than his own, could fhe have lived withhonour and in liberty. When he faw her dragged'' as a flave to violation, he thought it better that"his child fhould be loft by death than by difho-"nour. Actuated by companion, he had fallen"under the appearance of cruelty: nor would he"have furvived his daughter, had he not looked to"the aid of his fellow-foldiers, with hopes of re-"venging her death: for they alfo had daughters,"fifters, wives; and the luft of Appius Claudius"was not extinguiftied by the death of his daughter,"but would be encouraged, by impunity, to rage"with lefs reftraint. They had now warning given"them, in the calamity of another, to guard them-"felves againft the like injury. As to what con-"cerned himfelf, his wife had been torn from him"by fate; his daughter, bccaufe fhe could not'c longer preferve her chaftity, had fallen by an un-"fortunate but honourable death. There was now'' in his houfe no object forAppius's luftj and from"any other kind of violence which he could offer'' he would defend his own perfon, with the fame"fpirit with which he had refcued that of hisdaugh-"ter. Let others take care of themfelves and of"their children." To thefe reprefentations, utteredby Virginius in a loud voice, the multitude replied,•with fhouts, that they would not be backward invindicating either his grief or their own liberty. Atthe fame time, the gown-men intermixed with thecrowd of foldiers, relating with forrow the fame cir-cumftances, and obferving.how much more fhock.r>ng they appeared to the fight than on hearing, ac­quainting







OCR Output








OF ROME. . 353


ct fenate had ever been fincerely difpoled to preventB 0 O KC' any injury being offered to them; and were not. __' j"lefs fo, now, to prevent the continuance of the Y.R. 3n."one, which had been done." On which the am- B'c. 4*1.bafladors declaring, that they would take the fenfe oftheir countrymen anew, before they formed any re-folution, they were difmified with exprefilons offriendfhip. The commonwealth being now withoutany curule magiftrate, the patricians affembled andcreated an interrex, and the interregnum was pro­longed for a great many days, by a contention whe­ther confuls or military tribunes mould be appointed.The interrex and the fenate warmly promoted theelection of confuls; the plebeian tribunes and thecommons, the election of military tribunes. Thepatricians at length prevailed, for the commons whohad no intention of conferring either the one officeor the other on any but patricians, defifted fromtheir fruitlefs oppofition: and befides, the leaders ofthe commons were better pleafed with an electionwhere they were not to appear as candidates, thanwith one where they would be pafied over as unwor­thy. The plebeian tribunes wifhed alfo to pafs as acompliment to the principal patricians, their declining , '.to prefs the difpute to a d«cifion. Titus QuintiusBarbatus, the interrex, elected confuls Lucius Papi-rius Mugilanus, and Lucius Sempronius Atratinus.In their confulate, the treaty with the Ardeans wasrenewed; and this ferves as a record to prove, thatthere were thofe confuls in that year, though theyare not to be found, either in the old annals, or inthe books of the magiftrates; I fuppofe that becaufein the beginning of the year, there were military tri­bunes, that therefore though thefe confuls were after­wards fubftituted in their room, yet the names of theconfuls were omitted, as if the others had continuedin office through the whole of the year. LiciniusMacer affirms, that they were found both in the Ar-dean treaty, and in the linen books in the temple ofVOL. i. A A Moneta.







OCR Output








OF R (XM £


troops entirely from the Roman territories, which BOOKis fkid to have incenfed the Volfcians fo highly . _'Jagatnft him, that he perifhed under the effects of Y R.their refentment, by what kind of death writers do B.not agree; in the account given by Fabius, the modancient writer by far, I find, that he lived even toold age; he mentions poutively, that, when he be­came far advanced in years, he ufed frequently toutter this remark, that " the evils of exile bore"much heavier on the aged." The men of Romewere not fparing in beftowing on the women the ho­nours which they had merited; fo diftant were themanners of that age from the practice of detractingfrom the merits of others: they even erected anddedicated a temple to Female Fortune, as a laftingmonument of their meritorious conduct. The Vol­fcians afterwards, in conjunction with the ^Equans,made another inroad into the Roman territories; butthe /Equans foon became diflatisfied at being com­manded by Attius Tullus; and in confequence ofthe difpute, whether the Volfcians or the ./Equansmould give a general to the combined army, a le-paration enfued, and foon after a furious battle.There the good fortune of the Roman peoplewafted the two armies of ics enemies, in a conteftno lefs bloody than obftinate. The confuls of the Y. R.i6r.next year were Titus Sicinius and Caius Aquillius. B.C.4ls.The Volfcians were allotted, as a province, to Si­cinius; the Hernicians, for they alfo were in arms,to Aquillius. The Hernicians were fubdued in thatyear. The operations againft the Volfcians endedwithout any advantage being gained on either fide.
XLI. THE next confuls elected were Spurius Gaf- Y. R. iss.fius and Proculus Virginius. A league was made B'C. *8*'with the Hernicians. Two-thirds of their landswere taken from them, one-half of which the confulCafiius intended to diftribute among the Latines, theother half among the commons. To this donation'• he







OCR Output








THE HISTORY


I
BOOK ance with the univerfal defire, ambafijadors went toi^-^l^j the camp to Camillus, and from thence, with permif-Y.R.36i. fion of Camillus, to Rome, to make a furrender ofJJ.C. 391. Falerii. On being introduced to the fenate, they arefaid to have fpoken in this manner: " Confcript fa-"thers! Overcome by you and your general, by a"victory of fuch a kind, as neither God nor man"can view with difpleafure, we furrender ourfelves"into your hands, in an expectation which redounds"in the higheft degree to the honour of the con-"queror, that we fhall live more happily under"your government, thr.n under our own laws. In"the illue of this war two falutary examples have'* been held out to mankind. Ye have preferred*c good faith in war, to prefent victory. We, chal-"lenged to emulation, in the obiervance of faith,"have voluntarily prefented you with conqueft.'' We are your fubjects: fend peribns to receive"our arms, hoftages, and our city, whofe gates they"will find open. Ye will never have reafon to com-*' plain of our fidelity, or we of your government."Camillus received the thanks both of the enemy andof his countrymen. The Falifcians were ordered tofurnifh that year's pay for the foldiers, that the Ro­man people might enjoy a refpite from the tax. Asfoon as peace was acceded to, the troops werebrought home to Rome.
XXVIII. CAMILLUS returning home, crowned•with honours of far greater value, than when whitehorfes had drawn him in triumph through the city,diftinguifhed by a conqueft acquired through themeans of juftice and good faith, the fenate did notconceal their fenfe of the refpectful attention due tohis concerns, but haftened the meafures for acquittinghim of his vow. Lucius Valerius, Lucius Sergius,?nd Aulus Manlius were fent ambafladors with oneihip of war, to carry the golden bowl to Delphi, asan offering to Apollo. Thefe falling in with fome7 Liparenfian.







OCR Output








THE HISTORY


B Oiv* K to8ethcr fO affected the enemy, that they withdrew. -r--f from the Roman territory to the other fide of theY.R. 318. Anio: and continuing to retreat, took pofieffion ofB. c. 4.34. (.fog hills between Fidena e and the Anio. Nor didthey defcend into the plains, until the legions of theFalifcians came to their aid: then, indeed, the campof the Etrurians was pitched under the walls of Fi-denac. The Roman dictator took his poft at a littlediftance from thence, at the conflux and on thebanks of the two rivers, drawing lines acrofs fromone to the other, where the length of ground be­tween them was not greater than he was able to for­tify. On the day following, he led out his forces,prepared for batde.
XVIII. AMONG the enemy there were variousopinions. The Falifcians, finding it very difagrec-able to carry on war at fuch a diftance from home,and being full of confidence in their own prowefs,were urgent for fighting. The Veientians and Fi-denatians forefaw greater advantages in protractingthe war. Tolumnius, although the advice of hiscountrymen was more agreeable to his own fenti-ments, yet, fearing left the Falifcians fliould growweary of a diftant war, gave notice that he wouldfight on the following day. The enemy having de­clined the fight, added to the confidence of the dic­tator and the Romans j and, on the day following,the foldiers openly threatening that they would af-fault .the camp and the city, if the enemy did notcome to an engagement, both armies marched forthinto the middle of a plain which lay between thetwo camps. The Veientians, being fuperior innumbers, fent a party round, behind the mountains,who were to attack the Roman camp, during theheat of the battle. The army of the three ftateswas drawn up in fuch a manner, that the Veientiansformed the right wing, the Falifcians the left, andthe Fidenatians the centre. The dictator charged.
o»







OCR Output








OF ROME. • , _ 105


ing, that " the citizens of Rome, the conquerors of8 O.O.K.'' all the neighbouring nations, were, from warriors,"reduced to labourers and ftone-cutters;" men­tioned the barbarous murder of king Servius Tulli-us, and his daughter driving in her abominable car­riage over the body of her father, and invoked thegods to avenge the caufe of parents. By defcantingon thefe and other, I fuppofe, more forcible topics,which the heinoufnefs of prefent injuries fuggefts atthe time, but which it is difficult for writers to re­peat, he inflamed the rage of the multitude to fuch adjgree, that they were eafily perfuaded to deprivethe king of his government, and to pafs an orderfor the banifhment of Lucius Tarquinius, his wife,and children. Brutus himfelf, having colle&ed andarmed fuch of thf young men as voluntarily gave intheir names, fet out for the camp at Ardea, in orderto excite the troops there to take part againft theking. The command, in the city, he left to Lucre­tius, who had fome time before been appointed bythe king to the office of Praefect of the city*.During this tumult Tullia fled from her houfe ., bothmen and women, whenever fhe pafied, imprecatingcuries on her head, and invoking the furies, theavengers of parents.
LX. NEWS of thefe proceedings having reachedthe camp, and the king, alarmed at fuch extraordi­nary events, having begun his march towards Rome,to fupprefs the commotions, Brutus, informed ofhis approach, turned into another road, in order toavoid a meeting, and very nearly at the fame time,by different roads, Brutus arrived at Ardea, and Tar­quinius at Rome. Tarquinius found the gates fhutagainft him, and an order of banifhment pronounced.
• The Przfect of the city was, in thefe times, an extraordinary rn.igiftrate, occafionally appointed to adminifter juftice, and tranfafl othernscdBry bufinefi, in the abfence of the king, or coni'uK.
The







OCR Output








OF ROME. 273


there could be no appeal from their decifions; yet B O O K
upon occafion of a dead body being found buried in . r-_j
the houfe of Publius Seftius, a man of patrician fa- Y.R. 303.mily, and produced in a public afiembly, in a cafe B.c.449.as clear as it was atrocious, Caius Julius, a decem­vir, commenced a criminal procefs againft Seftius,and appeared before the people as profecutor, in acaufc wherein he might legally have fat as judge;departing from his own right, that, while he tookaway from the power of the magiftracy, he mightadd, in proportion, to the liberty of the people.
XXXIV. WHILST the higheft and the loweftalike met from them this prompt execution of juf-tice, impartial, as if dictated by an oracle, they atthe fame time employed themfelves afiiduoufly inframing the laws; and at length, after people's ex- ,pectations had been raifed to the higheft pitch, theyexhibited for public infpeclion ten tables; and then,fummoning an afiembly of the people, after prayingthat " it might prove fortunate and advantageous,"and happy to the commonwealth, to themfelves,"and to their pofterity;" ordered them, " to go"and read the laws, which were exhibited j dc-"clared, that they had placed the rights of the"higheft and the loweft on the moft equal footing,"in as exact a manner as could be devifed by theu abilities often men; but that the underftandings"and judgments of a large number, might, per-"haps, ftrike out improvements: defired them to"examine rigoroufly each particular in their own"minds, canvafs it in converfation, and bring to av public difcufilon whatever deficiency or excefs"fhould appear in each article. They were re-"folved," they faid, "that the Roman people"fhould be bound only by fuch laws as the whole"community, with general confent, might appear,"not fo much to have ratified, when propofed, as'' to have propofed from themfelves." When, ac-VOL. i, T cording







OCR Output








t4« T H £ H I S T O R Y


BOOK had now nearly arrived to fuch a ftate, that even the. ^' . majefty of the confuls, it was feared, might be in-Y.R. 159. fufficient to reftrain the rage of the people; whenB.C.493. ^ fenators, beginning to doubt, whether theyfhould incur the greater danger, by abfenting them­felves, or by attending, came at length to the fe-nate j and when, after all this delay, a proper num­ber had alTembled, not only the fenators, but eventhe confuls themfelves, differed widely in opinion:Appius, a man of a violent temper, thought thatthe riot ought to be quelled by the weight of theconfular authority, and that when one or two weretaken into cuftody, the reft would be quiet: Servi-lius, a man more inclined to gentle remedies, wasof opinion, that, as the people's fpirits were alreadywound up to fuch a pitch of ill-humour, it would beboth the fafer and the cafier method, to bend, than tobreak them. To add to thefe perplexities, they werethreatened with greater danger from another quarter.
XXIV. SOME Latine horfemen arrived, in the ut-rnoft hafte, with the alarming intelligence, that theVolfcians, with an army in hoftile array, were com­ing to attack the city; which news, fo entirely op-pofite were the views of the different parties intowhich the ftate was fplit by difcord, affected thepatricians and the commons in a very different man­ner: the commons exulted with joy; faid the godswere coming to take vengeance for the tyranny ofthe patricians, and encouraged each other in the re-folution not to enrol themfelves; faying, " it was"better that all mould perifh together, than that'c they mould be the only victims j let the patricians".ferve as foldiers; let the patricians take arms, that"tho.fe who reap, the advantages of war, may alfo un-•" dergo the dangers of it." On the other hand, thefenate, dejected and confounded on finding them-'fclves thus encompaflcd by dangers, from their
country-







OCR Output








148 THE fc.lSTORY


BOOK troops, and none, during the Volfcian war, difplayed. J*l . a greater fhare of bravery and activity. The confuly.R. 159. led out his army againft the enemy, and pitched hisB.C.493. camp at a fmall diftance from theirs.
XXV. THE following night, the Volfcians, ex-•• jfccting great advantages from the difientions of theRomans, approached their camp, in hopes that,during the night, fome might defert, or betray theirpofts. They were perceived by the centinels, thetroops were called up, and, the fignal being given,they ran to arms; and by thefe means fruftrated theattempt of the Volfcians: the remainder of the nightwas dedicated to repofe by both parties. Next day,at the firft dawn, the Volfcians, having filled up thetrenches, aflaulted the rampart, and were proceed­ing to demolim the fortifications on every fide,when the conful, having delayed for fome time, inorder to try the temper of his men, though calledon from all fides, and particularly by the debtors, togive the fignal, at length, on finding their ardour fogreat, gave the fignal for fallying, and fent forth histroops, eager for the fight: at the firft onfet, theenemy were immediately routed, and their rear ha-raffed in their retreat, as far as the infantry were ableto purfue; and the cavalry, not fufiering them torecover from their confirmation, drove them all theWay to their camp: in a little time, the camp itfelfwas furrounded by the legions; and the Volfciansnot 'having courage enough left.to make a flandthere,. ic was taken and plundered. Next day, thelegions were led to Suefla Pometia, whither theenemy had retreated, and in a few days the townwas taken, and given up to the troops to be plun­dered.: by thefe means, the needy foldiers were inforrft meafure relieved. The conful, having ac­quired great glory, led back his victorious army toRome. As he was preparing for his departure,ambafiadors came to him from the Volfcians of6 Ecetra,







OCR Output








O F R O M E. 297


pofed it to the view of the people, deploring, the B o o K
villainy of Appius, the fatal beauty of the maiden, ( f t'__^j
and the neceffity which had urged the father. The y.R. joj.matrons who followed joined their exclamations : B. C. 4.47."Were thefe the confequences of rearing children?"were thefe the rewards of chaftity?" with othermournful reflections, fuch as are fuggefted by griefto women, and which, from the greater fenfibility oftheir tender minds, are always the moft affe&ing.The difcourfe of the men, and particularly of Icilius,turned entirely on their being deprived of the pro­tection of tribunes, and appeals to the people, andon the indignities thrown upon the public.
XLIX. THE paffions of the multitude wereftrongly excited, partly by the atrocioufnefs of thevillainy, partly By their hopes that the occafionmight be improved to the recovery of liberty. Ap­pius now ordered Icilius to be called before him jthen, on his refufing to attend, to be feized: at laft,when the beadles were not fuffered to come nearhim, he himfelf, with a band of young patricians,pufhing through the crowd, ordered him to be takeninto confinement. By this time, there had collectedround Icilius, not only the multitude, but perfonsfit to head that multitude, Lucius Valerius and Mar­cus Horatius, who, driving back his lictor, toldAppius, that " if he meant to proceed in a legal"v/ay, they would be fecurity for Icilius, againft"any charge which he, as a private citizen, mould"bring. If he fhould attempt to make ufe of force,"in that point too they would not be his inferiors."A furious fcuffle enfued. The decemvir's lictor at­tacked Valerius and Horatius. The fafces werebroken by the multitude. Appius then mountedthe tribunal, whither he was followed by Horatiusand Valerius. To them the aflfembly paid attention,but drowned the decemvir's voice with noife. Va­lerius now aflumed authority to order the lictors to
depart


 







OCR Output








O F R O M E. .1<Ji


/
of troops, at a time when, all their neighbours re- B o o K.maining in quiet, there was no occafion either for . ^'^•war, or for any preparation for it. This time of Y.R. 3is.tranquillity was fucceeded by a bufy year, wherein B.c. «7.Proculus Geganius Macerinus and Lucius MeneniusLanatus were confuls; a year remarkable for a vari­ety of dangers and difafters j for feditions, for fa­mine, and for the people having almoft bowed theirnecks to the yoke of arbitrary government, feducedby allurements of largefies. One calamity they wereexempt from, foreign war: had this aggravationbeen added to their condition, the aid of all the godscould fcarcely have preferved them. Their misfor­tunes began with a famine; whether owing to theleafon being unfavourable to the productions of theearth; or, the culture of the ground being neglected,while the people were captivated by the pleafures ofthe city, and the aflemblies; for both caufes are men­tioned. The patricians laid the blame on the idle-nefs of the commons: the tribunes fometimes on theevil defigns, fometimes on the negligence of theconfuls. At length the plebeians prevailed, the fe-nate giving no oppofition, that Lucius Minuciusmould be created prefident of the market, whoproved in the courfe of that employment, more fuc-cefsful in guarding the public liberty, than in the im­mediate bufmefs of his own department. Althoughin the end, he obtained both the honour of having re­lieved the fcarcity of provifions, and alfo the gratitudeof the public for that important fervice: finding noeffectual relief to the markets from feveral embaffieswhich he fcnt, by land and fea, to all the neighbour­ing nations, to no purpofe, except that fome corn wasbrought, in no great quantity, from Etruria, he hadrecourfe to the expedient of dealing out, in mares,the fcanty flock of provifions; and, at the fame time,compelled people to difcover their ftores of corn,and to fell whatever they had beyond a month's al­lowance; he robbed the flaves of half of their daily.portion







OCR Output








84 THE HISTORY


BOOK other fuch reproaches and incenuves, fhe fpurred on^^' ( the young man; nor could fhe herfelf, with any de­gree of patience, endure the reflection, that Tana-quil, a foreign woman, had by her fpirited exertionsacquired fuch confequence, as to be able to difpqfeof the kingdom twice fucceffively; firft, to her huf-band, and next, to her fon-in-law; while fhe, whowas fprung from royal blood, was to have no influ­ence in bellowing it, or taking it away. Tarquiniusrhurried on by the phrenzy infufed into him by thiswoman> went round among the Patricians, particu­larly thofe of the younger families, and folicrted theirintereft; put them in mind of his father's kindnefsto them, and demanded a requital of it; enticed theyoung men by preients; and endeavoured to increafeliis confequence on every oecafion, both by magni­ficent promifes on his part, and by heavy charges ofnaifconduct againft the king. At length, judgingthe feafon ripe for the accomplifhment of his pur-pofe, he rufhed fuddenly into the Forum, attendedby a band of armed men, and, while all were ftruckmotionlefs with terror, proceeded through it, andthen feati.ng himfelf in the king's throne in the fe-nate-houfe, ordered the fenators to be fummonedby a herald into the fenate-houfe, to attend theirkjng Tarquinius. They aiTembled inftantly, Ibmehaving been prepared before for the oecafion, othersdreading ill confequences to themfelves in cafe theydid not attend; for they were filled with amazementat the novelty and ftrangenefs of the proceeding,and thought the cafe of Servius utterly defperate.Then Tarquinius,. beginning his invectives with re-ftWHons on the king's immediate anceftors, repre-fcnted him as a " flave, the fon of a flave, who*"after the untimely death of his parent, without an"interregnum being appointed as ufual, without an"election being held, had taken pofieflion of the"throne, not in confequence of a vote of the peo-"pie, or of the approbation of the fenate, but as.
''. the







OCR Output








OF ROME. 261


him, carried hoftile depredations into the diftrict" of B O O KLavici; from thence into that of Tufculum; and then, x_ -T-'_'loaded with booty, pitched their camp at Algidum. Y.R. 196.To that camp came Quintus Fabius, Publius Vo- B.c.«6'lumnius, and Aulus Poftumius, ambafladors fromRome, to complain of injuries, and demand redrefs^in conformity to the treaty. The general of the/Equans bade them deliver to that oak whatevermelYage they had from the Roman fenate, while hefhould attend to other bufinefs: a very large oak-tree hung over the praetorium, and under its fhadeafforded a pleafant feat: to this, one of the ambaf-fadors, as he was going away, replied, " Let both"that confecrated oak, and all the gods in being,"bear witnefs, that the treaty has been broken by"you, and fo favour both our complaints at prefent,"and our arms hereafter, as we avenge the violated"rights of gods and men." On the return'of theambafladors to Rome, the fenate ordered one of theconfuls to lead an army to Algidum againft Gracchus;and gave to the other, as his province, the ravagingthe territories of the /Equans. The tribunes, ac­cording to their ufual cuftom, obftructed the levy,and might, perhaps, have effectually prevented it,but that a new and ludden alarm excited ftrongerapprehenfions of danger.
XXVI. A VERY large body of Sabines, fpreadinghoftile devaluations, advanced almoft to the walls ofthe city. The fields were defolated, and the cityltrr.ck with terror. The commons then cheerfullytook arms, while the tribunes in vain attempted todiffbade them. Two large armies were raifed.Nautius led one againft the Sabines, and, pitchinghis camp at Ereturn, by detaching fmall parties,efpecially on incurfions by night, he caufcd fuch de-folation in the country of the Sabines, that, comparedto it, the Roman territories feemed untouched byan enemy. Minucius neither met the fame fuc-
s 3 cefs,







OCR Output








O F R O M E. J4|


feizing the Vcrlfcians, they conduced them to Romr, BOOKand there delivered them to the confuls, with inform- ^^ "^ation, that the Volfcians and Hernicians were pre- Y.R. xjj.paring to make war on the Romans. The affair being B. C. 493.laid before the fenate, the conduct of the Latines wasfo acceptable to the fenators, that they reftored tothem fix thoufand of the prifoners; and made anorder, befides, that the new magiftrates mould pro­ceed in the bufinefs relative to an alliance, a point,which had been almoft abfolutely refuted them.The Latines then highly applauded themfelves forthe part which they had acted, and the friends ofpeaceful meafures were held in high eftimation: they(ent to the Capitol, a golden crown, as a prefent toJupiter, and, together with the ambafladors and theprefent, came a great multitude of attendants, con-fifting of the prifoners who had been fent back totheir friends: thefe proceeded to the feveral houfesof the perfons, with whom each of them had been infervitude, returned thanks for their generous beha­viour and treatment of them, during the time oftheir calamity, and formed mutual connections ofhofpitality. Never, at any former time, was theLatine nation more clofely united to the Roman go­vernment, by ties both of a public and private na­ture.
XXIII. BUT, befides being immediately threat­ened with a Volfcian war, the ftate itfelf was torn inpieces by inteftine animofities, between the Patri­cians and commons, on account principally of per-lons confined for debt *: thefe complained loudly,
* If a debtor did not difcharge his debt, within thirty days after itwas demanded, he was fummoned before the praetor, who gave himup into the hands of the creditor. He was kept in chains by him torfixty days . and then, on ihree fucceflive market daya, was broughtto the prztor's tribunal, where a crier proclaimed the debt, and,fcmetimes, wealthy perfons redeemed the poor, by difcharging theirdebts; but, if that did not happen, the creditor, after tha third mar.kel day, had a right to Jell him, or keep hn..i ;i flave in his own liuuft.This flavery was afterwards charged mto public imprilbnment.
that







OCR Output








(52 THEHI8TORY


B o o K of jf, when left without inhabitants; and this induced^^j the Romans to demolifh that city, that it might notalways ferve for a receptacle to the enemy. Atlength, the whole force of the Latine war was col­lected about Medullia, and the conteft was carriedon there with various fuccefs: for the city was notonly well defended by works, and fecured by aftrong garriTon, but the army of the Latines, havingpitched their camp in the open country, fought theRomans feveral times in clofe engagement. At laft,Ancus, making a vigorous effort with all his force,firft defeated them in the field, and then made him-felf mafter of the city, from whence he returned,with immenfe booty, to Rome. On this occafiontoo, many thoufands of the Latines, being admittedinto the number of citizens, had ground allotted tothem near the temple of Murcia, in order to unitethe Aventine to the Palatine hill. The Janiculumalfo was taken in, not for want of room, but to pre­vent its ferving, at any time, as a place of ftrengthto an enemy; and it was determined that this mouldbe joined to the city, not only by a wall, but like-wife for the convenience of paffage, by a woodenbridge, which was then firft built over the Tiber.The Quiritian trench alfo, no inconfiderable defenceto thofe parts, which, from their low fituation, arcof eafy accefs, is a work of king Ancus. In confe-quence of thefe vaft accefiions to the ftate, and thenumbers of people becoming fo very large, many,difregarding the diftinctions between right andwrong, committed various crimes, and efcaped dif-covery. In order to fupprefs by terror the boldnefswhich the vicious.aflumed from hence, and whichgained ground continually, a prifon was built in themiddle of the city, adjoining the Forum: and notonly the city, but the territory alfo and boundariesof the ftate were extended by this king. The Mae-lian fore ft was taken away from the Veientians, theRoman dominion extended as far as the fea, and the


city







OCR Output








3?8 THE HISTORY


80 ° K body .of Etruria, than it had been from two of its..-J.U-.
Y.R. 3*1.


ftatcs.


XXIV. THAT bufinefs ended more quietly thancould have been expected. For accounts were re­ceived, from fome itinerant traders, that the Veien-dans had met with a refufal of aid, and had been de-fired to profecute, with their own ftrength, a warin which they had engaged on their own feparateviews, and not to endeavour to bring in others topartake in their diftreffes, to whom they had im­parted no fhare of their profpects, when they werefavourable. The dictator, thus robbed of the har-veft of glory which he expected to have reaped inthe war, in order that his appointment; might not bealtogether without effect, conceived a defire of per­forming fome exploit in the civil line of bufinefs,which mould remain as a monument of his dictator-Ihip: he undertook, therefore, to limit the cenfor-fhip; either judging its powers exceflive, or difap-proving of their duration more than of their extent.In purfuance of this defign, having fummoned anafiembly of the people, he told them, that, " with"regard to foreign affairs, and the eftablifhing of"fecurity on every fide, the immortal gods had"taken the adminiftration on themfelves. That as"to what was fitting to be done within the walls, he"would zealoufly maintain the liberty of the Ro-"man people: now there was no method of guard -"ing it fo effectual, as the taking care that offices of"great power mould not be ot long continuance;"and that thofe, whofe jurifdiction could not be"limited, mould be limited in point of duration:"— that while other magiftracies were annual, the"cenformip.was of five years continuance; and it"was grievous to people to have the greater part of"their actions fubjected to the control of the fame'' perfons, for fuch a number of years: he would,"therefore, propofe a law, that the cenforfhip
"mould







OCR Output








66 THE HISTORY


# o o K" laws an(| Roman cuftoms, under fuch a mafter asv - t'-,-'" ought to be wifhed for, king Ancus himfelf:—"that in duty and obedience to the king, he had"vied with all men; in kindnefs towards others,"with the king himfelf." As thefe affertions wereno more than the truth, the people unanimoufly con-y. R. fented that he mould be elected king. And thisij«. was the reafon that this man, of extraordinary meritS6^c' in other refpects, retained, through the whole courfe. of his reign, the fame affectation of popularity whichhe had ufed in fuing for the crown. For the pur-pofe of ftrengthening his own authority, as well asof increafing the power of the commonwealth, headded an hundred to the number of the fenate, whoafterwards were entitled, "minorum gentium,"/. e. of the younger families, and neceflarily confti-tuted a party in favour of the king, by whofe kind­nefs they had been brought into the fenate. Hisfirft war was with the Latines, from whom he tookthe city Appiolae by ftorm; and having broughtfrom thence a greater quantity of booty than hadbeen expected, from a war of lo little confequence,he exhibited games, in a more expenfive, and. fplendid manner, than any of the former kings.On that occafion, the ground was firft marked outfor the Circus, which is now called " maximus,"(the principal,) in which certain divifions were letapart for the fenators, and knights, where eachwere to build feats for themfelves, which were calledFori (benches). They fat, during the exhibition,on feats fupported by pieces of timber, twelve feethigh from the ground: the games conGfted of horfe-races, and the performances of wreftlers, collectedmoftly from Etruria. From that time, thefe gamescontinued to be celebrated annually, being termedthe Roman, and, fometimes, the great games.By the fame king, lots for building were afljgnedto private perfons, round the Forum, where porti­coes and fhops were erected. • .
XXXVI, HE







OCR Output








98 T H E H I S T O R Y


BOOK and which muft have been more than fufficient forlaying the foundations even of the moft magnificentof our modern ftructures. Intent on finifhing thetemple, he lent for workmen from all parts of Etruria,and converted to that ufe, not only the public mo­ney, but the labour of the people; and althoughtiiis, which was ins itfelf no fmall hardfhip, was addedto the toils of military fervice, yet the people mur­mured the lefs, when they confidered that they wereemploying their hands in erecting temples for thegods. They were afterwards obliged to labour atother works, which, though they made lefs fhew1•were attended with greater difficulty; the erectingfeats in the Circus, and conducting under ground theprincipal fewer, the receptacle of all the filth of thecity; two works to which the magnificence of mo­dern times can fcarcely produce any thing equal.After the people had been fatigued by thefe labours,the king, confidering fo great a multitude as a bur­then to the city, where there was not employmentfor them, and wifhing at the fame time to extend thefrontiers of his dominions, by means of colonies,lent a number of colonilts to Signia and Circeii, toferve as barriers to the city, againft an enemy, bothby land and fea.
LVI. "WHILE he was thus employed, a dreadfulprodigy appeared to him ; a fnake, iliding out of awooden pillar, terrified the beholders, and madethem fly into the palace; and not only ftruck the. king himfelf with fudden terror, but filled hisbreaft with anxious apprehenfions: fo that, whereasin the cafe of public prodigies, the Etrurian footh-fayers only were applfed to, being thoroughlyfrightened at this domeftic apparition, as it were,he reiolved to lend to Delphi, the moft celebratedoracl e in the world; and judging it unfate to entruftthe anfwers of the oracle to any other perfon, he fenthis two fons into Greece, through lands unknown
at







OCR Output








. OF ROME. 161


the camp, is fiid to have related to them the follow- B O O King fable, delivered in antiquated language, and an .L_- r-_,uncouth ftile:—" At a time when the members of Y.R. 16o."the human body did not, as at prefent, all unite B.c.49i."in one plan, but each member had its own fcheme,"and its own language j the other parts were pro-"voked at feeing that the fruits of all their care, of"all their toil and fervice, were applied to the ufe of'"the belly; and that the belly meanwhile remain-"ed at its eafe, and did nothing but enjoy the plea-"fares provided for it: on this they confpired to-"gether, that the hand fhould not bring food to the"mouth, nor the mouth receive it if offered, nor"the teeth chew it: while they wifhed, by thefe"angry meafures, to fubdue the belly, through hun-"ger, the members themfelves, and the whole body,."were, together with it, reduced to the laft ftage of"decay: from thence it appeared that the office of"the belly itfelf was not confined to a flothful indo-^ lence, that it not only received nourifhment, but"fupplied it to the others, conveying to every partu of the body, that blood, on which depend our life"and vigour, by diftributing it equally through the"veins, after having brought it to perfection by di-"geftion of the food." Applying this to the pre­fent cafe, and mewing what fimilitude there was be­tween the difienfion of the members, and the refent..ment of the commons againft the patricians, hemade a confiderable impreffion on the people'sminds.
XXXIII. A NEGOCIATION was then opened fora reconciliation j and an accommodation was effecl:-ed, on the terms, that the plebeians mould havemagiftrates of their own, invefted with inviolableprivileges, who might have power to afford themprotection againft the confuls; and that it fhouldnot be lawful for any of the patricians to hold that.office. Accordingly,.there were two tribunes of the
VOL. i. M commons







OCR Output








474 f THE HISTORY


BOOK fo,^ " the reprefentation and image of him whomj,__vX-j " ye formerly made a military tribune, the firftY.R. 3<;8. " plebeian that was ever fo honoured. Him, form.'B.C.39*. " ed under my own difcipline, I prefent and dedi-"eate to the commonwealth, as a fubftitutc in my"ftead. And I befeech you, Romans, that the"honour which, of your own motion, ye offered"to me, ye will vouchfafe to grant to his petition,"and to my prayers, which I add in his behalf."This requeft of the father was complied'with, andV.n. 559. his fon Publius Licinius was declared military tribuneJi.C. 393. witn confular power, together with thole whom wementioned before. The military tribunes, Titiniusand Genucius, marched againft the Falifcians andCapenatians, and acting with more courage thanconduct, fell into an ambufn. Genucius atoned forhis rafhnefs by an honourable death, falling amongthe foremoft, in the front of the ftandards. Ti­tinius, after rallying his men, who had been throwninto the utmoft diforder, and leading them to a rifting ground, formed them again in order of battle;but did not venture to come down and meet theenemy. The difgrace was greater than the lofs, andhad like to have proved the caufe of grievous mis­fortunes, fo great was the alarm which It excited no.tonly at Rome, where it was highly exaggerat.ed by1.report, but allb in die camp at Veii. Here the fol-diers were, with difficulty, reftrained from flight, ona rumour having fpread through the camp, that thegenerals and the army had been cut to pieces; and:that the Capenatians and Falifcians, fiufhed withvictory, and all the youth of Etruria, were at nogreat difbance from their pofts. Accounts Hill moredreadful had gained credit at Rome: that the campat Veii was already attacked, that part of the en«Smv were already on their march to the city, pre-pared for an aflault. The men ran in crowds to thewalls, and the matrons, called out from their houfcs,by th'.' public diftraction, offered foppfications foe
protection,







OCR Output








THE HIS fOUY


 


I.v'thfe.year three hundred and ten from thefoundation 6f the city of Rome; for the firft time,military tribunes irt the room.of confute entered into;qffice." "tliefe Were Aulus Sempronius Atratinus,Lucius Acilius, and Titus Ga?eilius'; ami, during theirct>ntinuan'c& .in office,; concord prevailing at home,produced likewife peace abroad.' There are fomewriters,' who, without mentioning ifhfe prOpofal ofthe law, concerning the election of plebeian confuls,affirm, that on account of a war.breaking out withthe Veientians, in addition to thofe with the ^quansand Volfcians, and the revolt of the Ardearts, twoconfuls being unequal to the tafk of conducting fomany wars at once, three military tribunes were cre­ated, and invefted, both with the authority, and thebadges, of confuls. However, the eftablifhment ofthis office did not, at that time, remain on a perma­nent footing; for in the third month after their com­mencement they refigned their dignity, in purfu-ance of a decree of the augurs, alleging a defect intheir election, becaufe Caius Curtius, who had pre.fided on that occafion, had not performed the requi-fite ceremonies in pitching on the ground for histenr. Ambafladors came from Rome to Ardea,complaining of the injuftice done to them, and atdie fame time profeffing an intention of remaining inamity, and adhering to the treaty, provided that, by"the rcftoration of their lands, that injuftice were rc-drefled. The fenate anfwered, that " they could"not refcind the fentence of the people, were there"no other reafon than the prelervation of concord"between the orders in the ftate; but, befides, fuch"a meafare was not juftified either by law or pre-"cedent. If the Ardeans would be content to wait,''' until they could find a feaibnable conjuncture, and"leave it entirely to the fenate to find a remedy for"the injury offered them, they fhould have reafon"afterwards to rejoice for having moderated their"refentment, and ihould be convinced that the .
"fenate







OCR Output








THE HISTORY


 


K" t'1'8' ^or w^at' un^e^s for reminding them there-r _ by that we are members of the fame communityY.R. 310. " with themfelves; and that, though we poffefs notB.C. 441. 't the fame degree Of power, we are yet inhabitants"of the fame country. By the one, we require the"liberty of intermarrying with them, a liberty ufu-"ally granted to people of the neighbouring ftates"and to foreigners: for we have granted, even to•' vanquifhed enemies, the right of citizenmip,whick"is of more importance than that of intermarriage.•'; By *he other, we offer no innovation, we only"reclaim, and enforce, a right inherent in the peo-"ple; that the Roman people fhould commit the"high offices of the ftate to fuch perfons as they"think proper. And what is there in this, that can"juftify their difturbing heaven and earth? Their"treatment of me juft now, in the fenate, very lit-"tle fhort of perfoftal violence? Their open decla-"rations that they will have recourfe to force?"And their threatening to infult an office which is"facred and inviolable? If the Roman people are"allowed to give their fuffrages with freedom,'' and to intruft the confulfhip to fuch perfons as"they think proper; and if a plebeian, how wor-"thy foever of the higheft ftation, is not precluded"from every hope of attaining that ftation, can the"city no longer fubfift? Muft the downfall of the"empire enfue ? And does the queftion, whether a"plebeian may be eleded conful, carry the fame"import, as if a perfon fpoke of a flave, or the iflueV of a flave, for the confulfhip? Do ye not feel in'' what a defpicable light ye are held? Were it in"their power, they would hinder you from fharing." even the light of the fun. . That ye breathe, that"yc enjoy the faculty of fpeech, that ye wear the"human fhape, are fubjects of mortification to'' them. But then, they tell you, that, truly, it is'' contrary to the rules of religion that a plebeian** fhoiild be made qonful. For heaven's fake, though'"we







OCR Output








OF ROME.


 


t' the gold, they turned difmay, and flight,w flaughter.
Y.R. 365.
LIT. " WHEN yereflect on thefe ftrong inftances B.C.387."of the powerful effects produced on the affairs of"men by their cither honouring or neglecting the"Deity, do ye not perceive, Romans, what an act of"impiety we are about to perpetrate; even in the"very moment of emerging from the wreck and ruin"which followed our former mifconduct? We arc"in pofieffion of a city built under the direction of"aufpices and auguries, in which there is not a fpot"but is full of gods and religious rites. The days"of the anniverfary facrifices are not more pre-"cifely ftated, than are the places where they are"to be performed. All thefe gods, both public"and private, do ye intend, Romans, to forfake?"What fimilitude does your conduct bear to that,"which lately, during the fiege, was beheld, with"no lefs admiration, by the enemy, than by your-u felves, in that excellent youth Caius Fabius, whenc' he went down from the citadel through the midft"of Gallic weapons, and performed on the Quiri-"nal hill the anniverfary rites pertaining to the Fa-"bian family? Is it your opinion that the religious"performances of particular families fliould not be'' intermitted, though war obftruct, bi;t that the"public rites and the Roman gods fhould be for-"faken even in time of peace; and that the pontiffs"and flamens fhould be more negligent of the public"rites of religion, than a private perfon was of his"family rites? Some perhaps may fay, we will'' perform thefe at Veii, or will fend our priefts"hither from thence to perform them: neither of"thefe can be done without an infringement of the"eftablifhed forms. Even in the cafe of the feaft of"Jupiter, not to enumerate all the feveral gods,"and all the different kinds of facred rites, can*' the ceremonies of the Lectifternium be performedVOL. i. MM "in







OCR Output








340 THE HISTORY


BOOK hints which were, at firft, occafionally fuggefted by._. .^' . the tribunes, that liberty ought to be granted ofY.R. 310. choofing one of the confuls from among the com-B.c.44i. monS, Were afterwards improved, to fuch a degree,that the other nine tribunes propofed a law, that thepeople fhould have power of electing confuls, eitherfrom among the commons, or the patricians, as theymould think fit. The patricians were of opinion,that if this took place, the fupreme authority wouldnot only be fhared with the very lowcft ranks, butentirely removed out of the hands of the nobility intothofe of the plebeians. With great joy thereforethey received intelligence, that the people of Ardtfa,in refentment of the injustice of the fentence whichhad deprived them of the land, had revolted; thatthe Veientians were laying wafte the Roman fron­tiers, and that the Volfcians and .SDquans exprefiedgreat difcontent on account of the fortifying of Ver-rugo, preferring even a war, which promifed notfuccefs, to an ignominious peace. Thefe tidingsbeing brought, with exaggerations, the fenate, inorder to filence the intrigues of ,the tribunes duringthe buftle of fo many wars, ordered a levy to beheld, and preparations for war and action to be madewith the utmoft diligence, even with more difpatch,if poflible, than had been ufed in the confulate ofTitus Quintius. On which Caius Canuleius de­clared aloud in the fenate, that" it was vain for the"confuls to think of diverting the attention of the"commons, from the new laws, by holding out"objects of terror to their view j and that, while"he was alive, they fhould never hold a levy, until"the people had firft ratified the laws propofed by"him and his colleagues," and then he inftantlycalled an affembly.
II. WHILST the confuls were employed in roufingthe indignation of the fenate againft the tribune, thetribune was as bufy in exciting the people againft the
confuls.







OCR Output








THE HIS TORY


 


i? K" Take mea^ures w'tn your colleague, that he may_^_. " adjourn this bufinefs without farther proceedings,Y.R. 191. " until the arrival of the confuls; ye will not herebyB.C. 46°. " leflen your rights, but ye will lefien the odium"which fuch proceedings muft excite. Even the"^Equans and Volfcians, when the confuls were"carried off laft year by the ficknefs, refrained from"adding to our afflictions, by a cruel and implaca-"ble profecution of a war." The tribunes accord­ingly made application to Terentillus, and the bufi-nefs being fufpended, in appearance, but, in reality,fupprefled,the confuls were immediately called home.
X. LUCRETIUS returned with a very great quan­tity of fpoil, and glory much greater. And to theglory which he had acquired, he added on his arrival,by expofing all the fpoii in the field of Mars, in orderthat every one fhould have an opportunity, duringthree days, to recognize and carry home his ownproperty. The remainder, the owners of which didnot appear, was fold. All men agreed in opinion,that a triumph was due to the conful; but the confi-deration of that matter was poftponed, becaule thetribune had renewed his attempts to carry his law;and this was deemed by the conful an affair.of moreimportance. The bufinefs was canvafied during fe-veral days, both in the fenate, and the afiembly ofthe people: at length, the tribune yielded to theweight of the conful's authority, and defifted. Thenwas paid to the conful and his army, the honourwhich they fo juftly merited. He triumphed overthe Volfcians and ^Equans, his own legions attend­ing him in the proceffion. To the other conful, wasgranted the honour o*f entering the city in ovation*,
• The ovation was an Inferior kind of triumph, in which the vic­torious general entered the city, crowned with myrtle, not with Inn.Ye!; and tnftead of bullocks, as in the triumph, facrificed a flieep,mii; hence the name.
unattended







OCR Output








OF ROME.


ing by the nobles, and complained that the caufe of B o o Kthe public was deferred, and betrayed by him. At ^__^"jlength, fome who had been at the tribune's door, Y.R. 18t.brought an account, that he was found dead in his B. £.471,houfe. As foon as this report had fpread throughthe afiembly, they every one feparated differentways, juft as an army difperfes on the fall of itsleader. The tribunes, particularly, were feizedwith the greateft terror, warned by the death of theircolleague, how very little fecurity the devoting lawsafforded them. The patricians, on the other fide,exulted with too little moderation: and fo far werethey from feeling any compunction for the crime,that even thofe, who were clear of the guilt, wifhedto be confidered as the perpetrators of the deed ; andthey declared openly, that the tribunitian powermuft be fubdued by feverity.
LV. SOON after this victory had been obtained,by means which furnifhed a precedent of the worfttendency, a proclamation was ifiued for a levy of fol-diers; and the tribunes being awed into fubmiflion,the confuls accomplifhed the bufinefs without any in­terruption. The commons, on this, were highly en­raged, more on account of the acquiefcence of thetribunes, than of the execution of the orders of theconfuls; they declared, that " there was an end of"their liberty; that they were reduced again to"their old condition, for the tribunitian power"had expired with, and was buried in the grave of"Genucius. Other means muft be devifed and"pracctifed, to put a ftop to the tyranny of the pa-.'' tricians. There remained now only one method"to be purfued; which was, that the commons,"fince they were deftitute of every other protection,"fliould undertake their own defence. The retinue*' of the confuls confifted of twenty-four lictors, and.'' even thefe were plebeians; no force could bef more contemptible, or lefs capable of refiftance,


"if







OCR Output








OF ROME. 377


hope of protection from the people, an appeal to B o o Kthem having been prohibited, they had, by agree- ..._iment, alfo prohibited themfelves from interfering Y R.with each other's decrees; whereas the former de- B.c.cemvirs had allowed their decrees to be amended byan appeal to a colleague, and had referred to thedecifion of the people, feveral matters which mightfecm to belong to their own jurifdiction. For fometime the danger feemed to threaten equally all ranksof men, but began, by degrees, to be directed entire­ly againft the commons. They avoided giving of­fence to the patricians, while they treated people of.the lower ranks with arbitrary cruelty. Intorefthaving ufurped in their breafts the place of juftice,they on every occafion regarded the perfon, not thecaufe. Their decifions they adjufted privately athome, and afterwards pronounced them in the Fo­rum. If a perfon appealed from any of them, toone of his colleagues, the treatment he met fromthe one to whom he appealed, was always fuch asmade him repent his not having abided by the fen-tence of the former. An opinion had alfo goneabroad, though without known authority, that theyhad confpired in this fcheme of iniquity, not merelyfor the prefent year, but that a clandeftine leaguehad been ftruck among them, and ratified by an.oath, that they would not call an afiembly for elec- ,tions, but perpetuating the decemvirate, keep alafting hold of the power which they had now intheir hands.
XXXVII. THE plebeians now began to watchthe countenances of the patricians; and though theyhad been accuftomed to dread .being enflaved bythem, and, influenced by that dread, had broughtthe commonwealth into its prefent fituationj yetthey now anxioufly looked to them for fome ray ofhope, which might guide them to liberty. Thep rincipal patricians, while they hated the decemvirs,
j 3 bore







OCR Output








"O F R O M E. 243


bufinefs in the Forum, and allowed even the tri- BOOK
T TT
bunes themfelves to hold meetings for any other ^^J^^^jpurpofes without interruption; fhewing no kind of Y.R. i9Vrudenefs to any, either in public or private; except B.C.419.when the bufinefs of the law began to be agitated.On other occafions, the behaviour of the young pa­tricians was popular, and the tribunes not only exe­cuted the reft of their bufinefs without difturbance,but were even re-elected for the following year with­out one offenfive expreffion, much lefs any violencebeing ufed. By thus foothing and managing thecommons, they rendered them, by degrees, moretractable, and by thefe methods the palfing of thelaw was evaded during that whole year.
XV. THE fucceeding confuls, Caius Claudius, Y.R.ig*.fon of Appius, and Publius Valerius, received theB.c'*s8.commonwealth in a ftate of great tranquillity. Thenew year had brought no change in affairs. Thethoughts of every member of the ftate were occu­pied, either in wifhes for the pafiing of the law, or inapprehenfions of being obliged to fubmit to it. Themore the younger patricians endeavoured to infinu-ate themfelves into the favour of the commons, themore earneftly did the tribunes ftrive to counteractthem; exciting, by injurious fuggeftions, fufpicionsto their prejudice, in the minds of the populace;averting that there was a confpiracy formed; thatCaefo was at Rome; that plans had been concertedfor putting the tribunes to death, and maflacringthe commons: that the elder patricians had engagedthe younger to abolifh the office of tribune out of thecommonwealth, and to reduce the ftate to the fameform, which had fubfifted, before the feceffion to thefacred mount. While fears were entertained of anattack from the Volfcians and .ffiquans, which hadnow become a ftated matter, and occurred regularlyalmoft every year, a new danger, which had neverbeen thought of, made its appearance nearer home.R a A num-







OCR Output








T H E H I S T O R V


 


Powcr Of tne confulfhip or dictato rfhip, withftoodby his fingle efforts the attacks of the tribunes, andthe whole popular ftorm. In confequence of hisexertions, the tribunes were often driven out of theForum, and the commons routed and difperfed.Such of them as came in his way, went off ftrip-ped, and otherwife feverely handled; fo that every onefaw, that if he were allowed to proceed in this man­ner, it would be impoflible to carry the law. Atthis juncture, when the other tribunes were almoftreduced to defpair, Aulus Virginius, one of theircollege, inftituted a criminal profecution on a capi­tal charge, againft Caefo. But, by this proceeding,he rather irritated, than reprefied his impetuoustemper: he thence became the more vehement inhis oppofition to the law, perfecuted the commons,and harafied the tribunes, in a manner, with openhoftilities. The profecutor fuffered the accufed torun headlong to ruin, and to draw down on himfelf"fuch a degree of public difpleafure, as would fervefor fuel to inflame the charges which he had broughtagainft him, and in the mean time frequently intro­duced the law, not fo much in hope of carrying itthrough, as with defign to provoke the rafhnefs ofCaefo. Many inconfiderate expreflions and actions,which often pafied on thefe occafions among theyoung men, were all, through the general prejudiceagainft him, imputed to Caefo's violent tempenThe law however was ftill oppofed, and Aulus Vir­ginius frequently obferved to the people, " Do ye"not perceive, Romans, that it is impoflible for"you to have, at the fame time, Caefo among the"number of your citizens, and this law which ye"wifh for? Though why do I fpeak of this law?"Your liberty is endangered by him: he furpafies,"in tyrannical pride, all the Tarquinii together:"wait until he is made conful or dictator, whom ye"npw behold, in a private ftation, exerting all the"prerogatives of royalty." He was fupported in5 thefe







OCR Output








0 F R O M E. , •


tountrymen, on one fide, and from the enemy, onB Othe other, bcfought the conful Servilius, whofe tem- . -Tper was adapted to conciliate the regard of the peo- Y.R.ple, that he would find means to extricate the com- Bi£"monwealth from the dreadful apprehenfions withwhich it was befet: whereupon the conful, difmiff-ing the fenate, went forth to the afiembly of the peo­ple; there he aflured them, that the fenators werefolicitous that care mould be taken of the intereft ofthe commons; but that their " fears for the fafety of"the commonwealth, in general, had interrupted"their deliberations, concerning that part of the"ftate, which, though it muft be allowed to be the"largeft, was ftill but a part; nor could they, while"the enemy was juft at the gates, allow any bufi-"nefs to take place of the neceflary provifions for"the war; nor, even if they were allowed a little"refpite, would it be either for the honour of the"commons, to have refufed to take arms in defence"of their country, unlefs on condition of firft re-"ceiving hire for it; nor could it fail of injuring"the reputation of the fenators themfelves, if they"mould appear to have now applied their attention"to the good of their countrymen, through fear,"rather than afterwards through inclination." Hegave proof of his fincerity in this difcourfe, by anedicct, whereby he ordained, that " no perfon mould"hold any Roman citizen in bonds or confinement,"fo as to prevent his giving in his name to the"confuls; that no perfon mould take pofieflion, or"make fale, of the goods of a foldier, while upon"fervice; nor detain in cuftody either his children"or grandchildren." On the publication of thisedict, fuch debtors under arreft, as were prefent, in-ftantly gave in their names, and crowds of others,in every part of the city, rufliing out of their con­finement, when the creditors had no longer a rightto detain them, ran together to the Forum, to takethe military oath: thele:compofed a Jarge body of
t a troops,







OCR Output








5*6 THE Hi STORY


B o o K " hofpitality fhould be formed by public authority^-TL.-' " with the people of Caere, becaufe they had af-y.R. 365. " forded a reception to the facred utenfils, and toB. c. 387. K t|ie priefts of the Roman people; and that to the'c kindnefs of that people it was owing, that the"worfhip of the immortal gods had not been in-"termitted; that Capitoline games fhould be ex-"" hibited in honour of Jupiter, fupremely good and"great, for having, in time of danger, protected"his own manfion, and the citadel of the Roman"people; and that a certain number, for the due"performance thereof, fhould be incorporated by"the dictator, out of thole who refided in the Ca-"pitot and citadel." Mention was alfo intro­duced of expiating the voice which had been heardby night, giving notice of the calamity before theGallic war, and which had been neglected; andan order was made that a temple fhould be erectedto Aius Locutius, in the new ftreet. The gold,•which had been refcued from the Gauls, and alfo•what had been, during the hurry of the alarm, car­ried from the other temples into the recefs of Jupi­ter's temple, was all together judged to be facred,and ordered to be depofited under the throne of Ju­piter, becaufe people' could not recollect to whattemples it ought to be returned. The ftate had,before this, manifefted a high regard to religion, inaccepting a contribution of gold from the matrons,when the public fund was found inefficient to makeup the.fum ftipulated to be paid to the Gauls, rather'than meddle with the facred gold. To the matronspublic thanks were given, and alfo the privilege ofhaving funeral orations delivered in honour of themon their death, as the men had. When he hadfinifhed fuch bufinefs as refpected the gods, andfuch as could be determined by the authority of the.fenate, as thej tribunes never ceafed teafing thecommons in their harangues to abandon the ruins,and remove to Veii, a city ready for their reception;


being







OCR Output








OF ROME. 417


camp had been taken and plundered, the di&ator BOOKgiving up the fpoil to the foldiers, the horfemen, who , '_,had purfued the enemy in their flight from the camp, Y R. 337.returned with intelligence, that after their defeat all B.c. **s'the Lavicanians, and a great part of the ^Equans,had retreated to Lavici; on which the army wasnext day conducted thither, and the town being in­vefted on every fide, was taken by ftorm and plun­dered. The dictator, having led home his victoriousarmy to Rome, refigned his office, on the eighth ,day after his appointment j and the fenate, feizingthe opportunity, before the tribunes of the commonsfhould raife feditions about lands, by introducing apropofal for a diftribution of the territory of Lavici,voted, in full affembly, that a colony mould be con-ducted to Lavici. One thoufand five hundred co-lonifts, fent from the city, received each two acres.During two years after the taking of Lavici, in the Y.R. 338.firft of which Agrippa Menenius Lanatus, Lucius B.C.4H.Servilius Structus, Publius Lucretius Tricipitinus,all thefe a fecond time, and Spurius Rutilus Crafluswere military tribunes with confular power; and inthe following, Aulus Sempronius Atratinus a third Y.R. 339.time, and Marcus Papirius Mugillanus and Spurius B.c.4'3'Nautius Rutilus both a fecond time. There wastranquillity with refpecT: to affairs abroad, but at homedifienfions occafioned by agrarian laws.
t %
XLVIII? THE incendiaries of the populace-werethe Spurii, tribunes of the commons, Maecilius afourth time, and Maetilius a third, both elected intheir abfence. A very violent conteft between thepatricians and plebeians was now expected on thefubject of the agrarian laws; for thefe tribunes hadpublicly propofed a law, that the lands, taken fromtheir enemies, fhould be diftributed in fuch a man­ner, that every man might have a fhare: had thispropofal pafied into a law, the property of a greatpart of the nobles would have been confifcated; for
VOL. r. £ E fcarcely







OCR Output








16 THE HISTORY


B o o K a dignity to which his own deftiny was conducing
him.
VIII. AFTER paying due worfhip to the gods, hefummoned tlie multitude to an afiembly; and,knowing that they could never be brought to incor­porate as one people, by any other means, than byhaving their conduct directed by certain rules, hegave them a body of laws* j and judging, that if headded to the dignity of his own appearance, by af-luming the enfigns of fovereignty, it would help toprocure refpect to thofe laws, among a rude unin­formed people, he adopted a more majeftic ftyle ofappearance, both with regard to his other appoint­ments, and particularly in being attended by twelvelicctors. Some think that he was led to fix on thatnumber by the number of birds in the augury, thathad portended the kingdom to him: I am rather in­clined to be of their opinion, who fuppofe that allthe officers attendant on magiftrates, and, among tthe reft, thefe, were borrowed from their neighboursthe Etrurians, from whom the curule chair, and thegown edged with purple, were taken; their numberalfo being the fame, feems to me to confirm this opi­nion: the Etrurians ufed that number, becaufe theirking being elected by the fuffrages of twelve ftates,each ftate gave him one lictor. Meanwhile the cityincreafed in buildings, which were carried on fromone place to another, to an extent proportioned ra­ther to the number of inhabitants they hoped for infuture, than to what they had at the time f. Then,that the fize of the city might not be without ufe, inorder to augment his numbers, he had recourfe toan old idea among founders of cities, who, whenthey had collected about them a multitude of meanand obfcure people, ufed to feign, that inhabitants
• Without doubt, he framed the government, and the laws, nearly OKthe model of thole eitablifhed at Alba,f About jooo tuot, and 300 hoifemen.
for







OCR Output








Sofi THE HISTORY


B o o K fle&ion, in proportion as pafTion gave place to rca*.-_/- j fon, they became more and more averfe from in-Y.R. 183. flammatory meafures; in fo much, that they re-B. C. 469. turnecl thanks to Quintius, for having, by his exer­tions, put a ftop to the quarrel. Appius they re-quefted to " be fatisfied with fuch a degree of de-w ference to the confular authority, as was compati-"ble with concord between the feveral parts of the"ftate j for, whilft the tribune and confuls violently"drew all power, each to their own fide, there was"none left in the other members of the community."The objecl: of the difpute was not the fafety of the"commonwealth, but who mould have the difpofal"of it, mangled and torn as it was." On the otherhand, Appius appealed to gods and men, that " the"ftate was betrayed and deferted, through coward-"ice; that the conful was not wanting to fupport"the fenate, but the fenate to fupport the conful;"and that they were fubmitting to more grievous"laws, than thofe which were impofed at the facred"mount." Yielding, however, to the unanimousjudgment of the fenate, he defifted, and the law wascarried through without farther oppofition.
LVIII. THEN, for the firft time, were the tri­bunes elected in an afiembly of the people, votingby tribes. Pifo relates alfo, that there were threeadded to their number, having before been but two.He even names the tribunes, Caius Sicinius, Lu­cius Numitorius, Marcus Duilius, Spurius Icilius,Lucius Mecilius. During the diflenfion& at Rome,war commenced with the ^iquans and Volfcians,who had committed depredations on the Romanlands, with defign, that if the commons mouldagain think proper to fecede, they might find a re­fuge among them: when the differences in the citywere afterwards compoled, they removed their campto a greater diftance: Appius Claudius was fentagainft the Volfcians, die JEquaiis fell to Quintius
as







OCR Output








OF ROME.


 


gave orders that the troops mould be in readinefs to B O ° Kmarch next day; and, at the firft dawn, gave, by ^.^found of trumpet, the fignal for fetting out. When Y.R.the troops had fcarcely got clear of the camp, andwhile they were juft forming in order of march, theVolfcians, as if they had been fummoned by thefame fignal, made an attack on their rear; and, thealarm fpreading from thence to the van, caufed fuch.confternation, as threw both the battalions and ranksinto confufion, fo that neither could orders be heard,nor a line formed: no one now thought of anything but flight; and in fuch precipitation did theymake their way through fcattered bodies and arms,that the enemy ceafed to purfue, fooner than theRomans to fly. In vain did the conful follow hismen, calling on them to halt; but, when he had atlength collected them together, after their hafty dif-perfion, he encamped in a peaceful part of the coun­try; and there, having fummoned an afiembly, afteruttering fevere and juft reproaches againft the army,as betrayers of military difcipline, and deferters fromtheir ftandards, afking each where were their ftand-ards? where were their arms? he beat with rods,and beheaded, the foldiers who had thrown awaytheir arms, the ftandard-bearers who had loft theirftandards, and alfo fuch of the centurions, and of theprivates entitled to double allowance, as had quittedtheir ranks; of the reft of the multitude every tenthman was drawn by lot and punifhed.
LX. IN a very different manner were mattersconduced in the country of the Jiquans. Therefeemed a mutual conteft carried on between theconful and his troops, who mould exceed the otherIn civility and good offices. Quintius was naturallyof a milder difpofition, and befides, the ill confe-quenccs attending the harfh feverity of his colleague,made him feel the greater fatisfaction in indulginghis own temper. The ^Equans, not daring to meet,
VOL. I. I' ill'







OCR Output








6 F R O M E. 475


protection in all the temples, befeeching the gods B OvO Kto repel deftruction from the Roman walls, from the . -„'-_rhonfes of the city, and the temples, and to turn back Y.R. 359.fiich terrors on Veii, if the facred rites had been rer B'c.35i.newed, and the prodigies expiated in due manner.
XIX. THE games and the Latine feftival hadnow been performed a.new, the water from theAlban lake * difcharged on the fields, and the fatesdemanded the ruin of Veii. Accordingly a general,felected by the fates, both for the deftruction of thatcity, and the prefervation of his native counuy,Marcus Furius Camillus, was nominated dictator,and he appointed Publius Cornelius Scipio his mat­ter of the horfe. The change of the commanderat once produced a change in every particular: menfelt themfcives infpired with different hopes and dif­ferent fpirits: even the fortune of the city feemedto have undergone a change. He firft of all put inforce the rules of military difcipline againft fuch ashad fled from Veii, on the alarm excited there, andtook effectual care that the enemy fhould not be theprincipal object of the foldicr's fear?. Then having,by proclamation, appointed a certain day for hold­ing a levy of troops, he made, in the meantime,a hafty excurfion in perfon to Veii, in order to con­firm the courage of the foldiers. From thence he•returned to Rome to enlift the new army, and not aman declined the fervice. Young men came evenfrom foreign ftates, Latines and Hernicians, offer­ing their fervice in the war: to whom the dictatorreturned thanks in the fenate. And now, havingcompleted all neceflary preparations for the cam­paign, he vowed, in purfuance of a decree of thefenate, that he would, an the capture of Veii, ce-
• The rem.iins of the fewer, a ftupemlous work, by which the wa­ter was difiharged, Hill I'ubfift, at (lie bottom of the hill on which,1 ivis Caftel (tiair.l. 1:'... •, the elegant cuuntry retirement of the pope.
leb,rat.c







OCR Output








r66 THEHISTORY


BOOK felves from the tribunirian power, and every other^_ u' j reftraint impofed on them againft their will,
Y.R. i«j:
8.0.489. XXXV. THE method propofed, both appearedto the fenate to be too harm, and incenfed the com­mons to fuch a degree, that they were very nearhaving recourfe to arms. They complained, that,"as if they were enemies, attempts were made to."deftroy them by famine: that they were de-« frauded of food and fuftenance; that the foreign"corn, the only fupport which, unexpectedly, for->"tune had given them, was to be fnatched out of"their mouths, unlefs the tribunes were furrcn-"dered up in bonds to Caius Marcius; unlefs he<c were gratified by the perfonal fufferings of the"Roman commons: a new kind of executioner"had come forward againft them, who gave them*' no alternative but death or flavery." They wouldhave proceeded to violence againft him as he cameout of the fenate-houle, had not the tribunes veryopportunely fummoned him to a trial. This fup-prefied their rage, when every one faw himfelf ajudge, and empowered to decide on the life anddeath of his foe. At h'rft, Marcius heard the threatsof the tribunes with fcorn: " The authority given"to their office," he faid, "extended only to the"affording protection, not to the inflicting of pu-"nifhment. That they were tribunes of the com-"mons, not of the patricians." But the wholebody of the commons had taken up the caufe, withfuch implacable animofity, that the patricians wereunder the neceflity of devoting one victim to punifh-ment, for the general fafety. They ftruggled how­ever, notwithftanding the weight of the publichatred which they had to contend with, and not on­ly each particular member, but the whole collectivei ^ body exerted their utmoft efforts; and firft theytried, whether by porting their clients in feveral
places,







OCR Output








2j* THE HIS TORY


BOOK writers, that the people of Antium revoked this. _^ _. year, that Lucius Cornelius, conful, conduced theY.R. 195. war againft them, and took their city. I cannotB.C.457. venture to affirm this as certain, becaufc in the
earlier writers there is no mention of fuch a tranf-
action.
XXIV. No fooner was this war brought to aconclufion, than a tribunitian war at home alarmedthe fenate. The tribunes exclaimed, that " the de-"taining the troops abroad was a mere artifice, cal-"culated to fruftrate the proceedings refpecting the"law. But that they were determined, neverthe-"lefs, to go through with the bufinefs which they"had undertaken." However, Publius Lucretius,praefect of the city, managed matters fo, that theproceedings of the tribunes were poftponed until thearrival of the confuls. There arole alfo a newcaufeof commotion: Aulus Cornelius and Quintus Ser-vilius, quaeftors, commenced a profecution againftMarcus Volfcius, for having manifeftly given falfcevidence againft Caefo: for a difcovery had beenmade, fupported by many proofs, both that the bro­ther of Volfcius, from the time when he was firfttaken ill, had not only never appeared in public, butthat he never rofe from his fick bed, where he diedof a lingering diforder, which lafted many months;and alfo, that, at the time when the witnefs hadcharged the fact to have been committed, Caefo hadnot been feen at Rome. Thofe who had ferved inthe army with him alfo affirmed that he, at thattime, regularly attended in his poft along with them,without having once obtained leave of abfence.Many in private ftations challenged Volfcius, intheir own frames, to abide the decifion of the judge *,
content
* As the prxtors could not attend the trfal of every caufe, they al­ways had a lift of pufons properly qualified, called ' judiees kltai,'out oi \vhofe number, Us occafion required, they delegated judges toact in their ftead. Thefe felcft judges were chofcn in an afiembly of
the







OCR Output








OF ROME. 469


tion of a private portent, enticed the prophet to a B O O Kconference. And when they had proceeded free . "_ ,from any apprehenfions, being both without arms, Y.R. 357.to a confiderable diftance from their parties, the B.C.39S.young Roman, having the fuperiority in ftrength,leized the feeble old man in the view of all, and infpite of the buftle made by the Etrurians, carried himoff to his own party. Being conducted to the ge­neral, he was lent by him to Rome to the fenate;and, on their inquiring the meaning of the informa­tion which he had given concerning the Alban lake,he anfwered, that " certainly the gods had been in-"cenfed againft the Veientian nation, on that day"when they prompted him to difclofe the decree of"the fates, which doomed his native country to de-"ftraction. What, therefore, he had then delivered"under the influence of divine infp.ration, he could"not now recall, fo as to render it unlaid; and"perhaps the guilt of impiety might be contracted•" in as high a degree, by concealing what it was the"will of the gods fhould be publiihed, as by pub-"lifhing what ought to be concealed. Thus, there-"fore, it was denounced in the books of the fates,"and the Etrurian doctrine, that whenfoever the"Alban water fhould rife to an unufual height, if"the Romans fhould then difcharge it in a proper"manner, victory would be granted them over the•" Veientians; but until that fhould be done, the"gods would never abandon the walls of Veii."He then gave directions with refpecl: to the propermethod of draining it; but the fenate, deeming hisauthority of but little weight,, and not to be entirelyrelied on in a cafe of fuch importance, determinedto wait for the deputies, and the anfwer of the Py­thian oracle.
XVI. BEFORE the commiffioners returned from'Y R. 3<8.Delphi, or the method of expiating the Alban pro- B.c'395.digy was difcovered, the new military tribunes withH H 3 confular







OCR Output








THE HISTORY


 


difmay. Their camp was taken, and fhe fpoil_- given up by Camillus to the quaeftors, to the greatY.R. 361. diflatisfaction of the foldiers: but fuch was the influ-B. C. 391. ence of his ftrictnefs in difcipline, that the fame pro­priety of condudt which excited their refentment,raifed alfo their admiration. The town was then in-vefted, the approaches carried on, fometimes occa-fional attacks of the townfmen on the Roman pofts*and trifling fkirmifhes enfued; thus time was fpentwithout either party gaining a profpect of fuccefs, andas the befieged were more plentifully fupplied thanthe befiegers, with corn and all other neceflaries,from magazines which they had formed fome timebefore, to judge from appearances, the affair wouldhave been as laborious and as tedious as that at Veii,had not fortune, together with an inftance of me­ritorious conduct, which in refpect of military mat­ters he had already fufficiently difplayed, procured tothe Roman commander a fpeedy victory.
XXVII. IT was the cuftom among the Falifciansto employ the fame perfon as mafter and private tutorto their children; and, as it continues to be the prac­tice to this day in Greece, feveral were intrufted atthe fame time to the care of one man. The teacherwho was fuppofed to pofiefs the greateft fhare ofknowledge, had of courfe the inftruction of the chil­dren of the firft rank: this man, having made it acuftom in time of peace, to carry the boys out of thecity for the fake of exercife and play, and having ne­ver difcontinued the practice fince the war began,now drew them away from the gate, fometimes infhorter, fometimes in longer excurfions, and whenhe found an opportunity, advancing farther thanufual, by introducing a variety of plays and conver-fations, he led them on between the advanced guardsof the enemy, and then through the Roman carnp,into his tent to Camillus; and there, to this atrociousact, added a fpeech ftill more atrocious; that ". he
"had







OCR Output








ii4 THE HISTORY


3 o o K though, by their behaviour, they had deferved to be^JIJl^, treated as enemies, yet regard to the law of nations
V R. 145. prevailed.B. C. 507.
V. WITH refpect to the effects of the princes,which they had before ordered to be reftored, thebufinefs was now laid before the fenate, for re-con-fideration; and they, actuated entirely by refent-ment, decreed, that they mould not be reftored, butconverted to the ufe of the ftate. They were, there­fore, given up to the commons as plunder, with theintent, that thefe, after fueh an act of violenceagainft the princes, as the plundering of their effedts,might for ever lofe all hope of reconciliation withthem. The land of the Tarquinii, which lay be­tween the city and the Tiber, being confecrated toMars, has, from that time, been called the Field ofMars. It happened, that there was then on thatground a crop of corna ripe for the fickle, and, be-caufe it would be an impiety to make ufe of thisproduce of the field, a great number of men werefent in at once, who, having cut it down1 carried itin bafkets, and threw it, grain and ft'raw together,into the Tiber, whofe waters were low at that time,,as is generally the cafe in the middle of fummer.The heaps of corn then being frequently ftopped foea while in the fhallows, and having contracted a co­vering of mud, funk, and remained fixed, and bjrthefe means, with the afflux of other materials which,the ftream is apt to carry down, an ifland * was gra­dually formed. I fi,ppofe that mounds were after­wards added, and affiftance given by art,, to raifc thefurface to its prefent height, and give k fufficientfirmnefs to fupport temples and porticoes. Afterthe people had made plunder of the effects, of thevprinces, the traitors were condemned and executed.
* Between the Janiculum anj ilic city. It was afterwards calledthe Holy Ifland, from the number of templet built upon it.
And







OCR Output








*, O ? \ R O M E. 345


"VK are nbC admitted to infpecl: the records *, or B O O K'' the annals f of the pontiffs, are we ignorant of the . -T"things which even every foreigner knows? That Y.R.'' the confuls were fubftituted in the place of the'' kings ; and confequently have no kind of privilege"or dignity which was not pofieffed before by the*' kings? Do ye fuppofe that we never heard it•' mentioned, that Numa Pompilius, not only no"patrician, but not even a citizen of Rome, was in-'• vited hither from the country of the Sabines and'' made king at Rome, by the order of the people,"with the approbation of the fenate? That after-"wards Lucius Tarquinius, of a race which, fo far"from being Roman,was not even Italian, the fon of"Demaratus a Corinthian, having come hither a"ftranger from Tarquinii, was made king, though"the fons of Ancus were alive ? That after him Ser-'' vius Tullius, the fon of a captive woman of Cor-.'' niculum, his father not known, and his mother•' in fervitude, obtained the crown, through his'' abilities and merit? Need I fpeak of Titus Tatius,•' the Sabine, whom Romulus himfelf, the founder"of this city, admitted into partnerfhip in the'' throne ? The confequence was, while no objection"was made to any family, in which confpicuous"merit appeared, the Roman empire continuallyM increafed. It well becomes you to mew difguft,'' now, at a plebeian conful; though our anceftors"difdained not to call foreigners to the throne, nor,*' even after the cxpulfion of the kings, ever fhut the"gates of the' city againft foreign merit. It is well"known, that, fince the expulfion of the kings, we"admitted the Claudian family from among the*' Sabines, not only into the number of citizens, but1 • •


* The records, in which the names of the roagiftratei, in fucceflion,and the moft memor,blc events were recorded.
•f. TheannaU were a compendious regiftry of events, as they occur*red, made by the pontiffs, who likewife hail the care of the records,and L..pt both card'.illy fhut up iiom the inlpedion of the plebeians.


"even







OCR Output








Q F R O M E. 225


Meanwhile, ft the camp, the conful Furius, after B O® Khaving endured the fiege for fome time, without • -w - _frnaking any effort, burft forth, from the Decuman V.R. 190.gate *, on the enemy, when they leaf t expedited him j B. c.*5l1and though he might have purfued their flying troopswith advantage, yet, fearing left an attack might bemade on the camp from the oppofite fide, he halted.Another Furius, who was a lieutenant-general, andbrother to the conful, haftily pufhed forward too far;and fo eagerly intent was he on the purfuit, that heneither perceived his own party retreating, nor theenemy intercepting him behind: being thus fhut outfrom affiftance, and having often in vain eflayed,by every kind of effort, to open himfelf a pafifage tothe camp, he fell, fighting with great bravery. Theconful on the other hand, hearing that his brother .was furrounded, turned back on the enemy, andwhile, forgetting all caution, he rufhed too precipi­tately into the thick of the fight, he received a wound,and was, not without difficulty, carried off by his at­tendants: this both damped the courage of his ownmen, and rendered the enemy more daring; and fohighly were the latter elated by the death of the lieu­tenant-general, and the conful's being wounded,that no force could afterwards w;th(tand them, fo asto prevent their driving the Romans back to theircamp, and compelling them to fubmit again to aiiege, with ftrength and hopes both confiderablydiminifhed; they were even in danger of utter de-ftruction, had not Titus Quintius with foreign forces,the troops fupplied by the Latines and Hernicians,<ome to their relief: he attacked the vEquans ontheir rear, whilir, their attention was employed onthe Roman camp, and they were infultingly exhibit­ing to view the head of the lieutenant-general; and
• The Decuman gate was in the rear of the encampment. For ithe order and dilpofinon ol a Roman camp, lee Adams's Komun A:i.tiquitiet.
VOL. i. Q. a fally







OCR Output








OF ROME.


As to the relations which have been handed down ofevents prior to the founding of the city, or to thofctranfactions that gave occafion to its being founded,and which bear the femblance rather of poetic fic­tions, than of authentic records of hiftory—thefe, Ihave no intention either to maintain or refute. An­tiquity is always indulged with the privilege of ren­dering the origin of cities more venerable, by inter­mixing divine with human agency: and if any nationmay claim the privilege of being allowed to confiderits original as facred, and to attribute it to the opera­tions of the Gods, furely the Roman people, whorank fo high in military fame, may well expect, that,while they choofe to reprefent Mars as their ownparent, and that of their founder, the other nationsof the world may acquiefce in this, with the famedeference with which they acknowledge their fove-reignty. But what degree of attention or credit maybe given to thefe and fuch-like matters I mall notconfider as very material. To the following con-fiderations, I wifh every one ferioufly and earneftlyto apply his thoughts; by what kind of men, andby what fort of conduct, in peace and war, the em­pire has been both acquired and extended: then, asdifcipline gradually declined, let him follow in histhoughts the ftructure of antient morals, at firft, asit were, leaning afide, then finking farther and far­ther, then beginning to fall precipitate, until he ar­rives at the prefent times, when our vices have at­tained to fuch a height of enormity, that we can nolonger endure either the burden of them, or thefharpnefs of the remedies neceffary to correct them.This is the great advantage to be derived from theftudy of hiftory; indeed the only one which caamake it anfwer any profitable and falutary purpofe:for, being abundantly furnifhed with clear and dif-tinct examples of every kind of conduct, we mayfeledt for ourfelves, and for the ftate to which we be.­long, fuch as are worthy of imitation; and, c'are-
B a fully







OCR Output








.' O F R 0 M E. 375


ple, were found' entitled to as little credit as the pro- B o o Kmoter of them. But they found greater caufe for. -r--tanxiety, in the increafing violence of the peftilence, Y.R. 319.attended with other alarming occurrences and pro-B.c'**3.digies; particularly in the accounts which were re­ceived, of many houfes in the country being throwndown by frequent earthquakes. A general fuppli-cation to the gods was therefore performed by thepeople, who repeated it in form after the decemvirs*.The diforder increafing during the following year, Y. R. jio.in which Caius Julius, a fecond time, and LuciusB. c. 43*'Virginius were confuls, occafioned fuch dreadful ap-prehenfions of total defolation, both in the city and *the country, that not only an entire ftop was put topredatory excurfions from the Roman territories, butevery thought of offenfive operations laid afide, bothby patricians and commons. The Fidenatians, whohad at firft fhut themfelves up within their towns orforts, or among the mountains, now ventured tocome down into the lands of the Romans, and com­mit depredations. Then the army of the Veien-tians being called to their aid, (for the Falifcianscould not be prevailed on, either by the calamities ofthe Romans, or the intreaties of their allies, to re­new hoftilities,) the two nations crofled the Anio,and difplayed their enfigns at a little diftance fromthe Colline gate. This occafioned great confterna-tion, as well in the city as in the country. The con-ful Julius drew up the troops on the rampart and thewalls, whilft Virginius held a confultation of the fe-nate in the temple of Quirinus. Here it was re-folved to create dictator Quintus Servilius, to whomfome gave the furname of Prifcus, others that ofStructus. Virginius delayed no longer than till hehad conferred with his colleague, and having, ob-
• In the performance of fuch rites, the flighted miftake of a wordor fyllable was deemed highly inaulpicious; to prevent which, theregular form of words was pronounced by a pricft, and repeated afterhim by the peifons cfficiating.
B B 4 tained







OCR Output








424 THE HISTORY


 


K " to forfeiture, was inftantly enforced, and that with_ fuch full effect." This would have been a moftY.R.J4Z. feafonable time, after the punifhment of the mutiny,B.C.410. to have foothed their minds with fuch a healing mea-fure as the diftribution of the lands of Vote; as itwould have diminifhed their eagernefs in the purfuitof an agrarian law, which tended to expel the pa-, tricians from the public lands, the pofieflion of whichthey had unjuftly acquired. But as matters weremanaged, the ill-treatment fhewn them, in this veryinftance, was an additional fource of vexation, asthe nobility not only perfifted with obftinacy to re­tain pofielTion of thofe public lands, which they heldby force, but even refufed to diftribute to the com­mons tfye vacant lands lately taken from the enemy,which would, like the reft, in a fhort time becomethe prey of a few. This year, the legions wereled out by the conful Furius againft the Volfcians,who were ravaging the country of the Hernicians;and not finding the enemy there, they proceeded toand took Fererutnum, whither a great multitude ofthe Volfcians had retreated. The quantity of thefpojl was lefs than they had expected, becaufe theVolfcians, feeing fmall hopes of holding out, hadcarried off their effects by night, and abandoned thetown; which, being left almoft without an inhabit­ant, fell next day into the hands of the enemy. Thelands were given to the Hernicians.
y.R. 345. LII. THAT year, through the moderation of theB. c. 409. tribunes, pafied in domeftic quiet; but the fucceed-ing" one, wherein Quintus Fabius Ambuftus andCaius Furius Pacilus were confuls, was ufhered inwith the turbulent operations of Lucius Icilius aplebeian tribune. Whilft, in the very beginning ofthe year, he was employed in exciting fedition bythe publication of agrarian laws, as if that were atalk incumbent on his name and family, a peftilencebroke out, more alarming, however, than deadly,


which







OCR Output








OF ROME. ,


preferred the indulgence of their own licentiouf- BOOKnefs, to the eftablifhment of the general liberty. •_-,- -i
XXXVIII. THE ides of May came. The of- Y.R. 30?.fices of the ftate not having been filled up by elec- B.t-. **7'tion, men, invefted with no public character, madetheir appearance as decemvirs, retaining ftill thefame fpirit to enforce their authority, and the fameemblems of dignity, to fupport the fplendor of theiroffice. This"appeared arbitrary government beyonddifpute, and men deplored the lofs of liberty as irre­coverable. No one champion ftood forth in itscaufe, nor was there a profpect of any fuch appear­ing: and they not only funk into defpondence, butbegan to be defpifed by the neighbouring nations,who thought it would reflect fhame on themfelves,if a ftate which had forfeited its own liberty, mouldbe allowed to retain its dominion over others. TheSabines with a numerous army made an irruptioninto.the Roman territories; and, having fpread de-vaftation through a great part of the country, andcollected, without lofs, a greae booty qf men andcattle, they recalled their troops from the variousparts in which they were difperfed, and pitched theircamp at Eretum, grounding their hopes on the dif-fenfions at Rome, which they trufted would preventthe raifing of troops. Befides the couriers that ar­rived, the country people, flying into the city, caufeda general alarm. The decemvirs held a confuta­tion on the meafures neceflary to be taken; and,while they were left dettitute of fupport on every'fide, being equally detefted by the patricians and thecommons, another circumftance occurred which ag­gravated their fears, by prefenting an additionaldanger to their view: the /Equans on the oppofitefide had encamped in the diitrict of Algidum, andambalTadors, who came from Tulculum to requeitafiiftance, brought accounts, that their lands wt re ra­vaged by detachments from thence. The ucccjivirs
T . were







OCR Output








O F R O M E. 191


after fhould wear off. And befides, it was evident BOOKthat the Sabines, ever hoftile, and all Etruria, would . _^-,foon be in motion. But the Veientians kept the Y.R. i7S.Romans in continual uneafinefs, by frequent intults, B.c.*77.rather than by any enrerprife which threatened dan­ger, and this was fuch a bufinefs as would neitherallow them to neglect it, at any time, nor to turntheir attention to other matters. While affairs werein this ftate, the Fabian family addrefied the fenate jthe conful, in the name of the whole, fpeaking in thismanner: " Confcript fathers, ye know that the Vei-"entian war requires rather a conftant, than a ftrong"force, on the frontiers: let your care be directed"to other wars: commit to the Fabii that againft"the Veientians: we pledge ourfelves, that the"majefty of the Roman name fhall be fafe on that"fide: that war, as our own, as the particular pro-"vince of our family, we propofe to wage at ourC' own private expence. The ftate fhall not be"troubled either for men or money to fupport it."The warmcft thanks were given to them, and theconful coming out of the fenate, returned to hishoufe, accompanied by the Fabii in a body, whoJiad ftood in the porch of the fenate-houfc, waitingthe fenate's determination. They received ordersto attend next day, in arms, at the conful's gate, andthen retired to their refpective homes.
XLIX. THE report of this fpread immediatelyover the whole city, and all extolled the Fabii withthe moft exalted encomiums; that " a fingle family"had undertaken to fuftain the burthen of the ftate;"that the Veientian war was become a private con-"cern, a private quarrel. If there were two other"families of equal ftrength in the city, one of them"might claim the Volfcians for their mare, the other"the .ffiquans; thus all the neighbouring ftates"might be fubdued, and the Roman people, in the"mean time, enjoy perfect tranquillity." Next day
the







OCR Output








OF ROME,


took arms; the friends of each putting them in mind,that " the gods of their country, their country it-"felf, the whole of their countrymen, whether at"home, or in the army, refted on their prowefs"the decifion of their fate." Naturally bold andcouragemis, and highly animated befides by fuchexhortations, they advanced into the midft bctweer>the two armies. The two armies fat down beforetheir refpective camps, free from all apprehenfionsof immediate danger to themfelves, out not fromdeep anxiety; no lefs than fovereign power being atftake, and depending on the bravery and fuccefs offo fmall a number. With all the eagernefs thereforeof anxious lufpenfe, they fixed their attention on anexhibition, which was far indeed from being a matterof mere amufement. The fignal being given, thethree youths, who had been drawn up on each fide,as in battle array, their breafts animated with themagnanimous fpirits of whole armies, rufhed for­ward to the fight, intent on mutual Slaughter, utter­ly thoughtlefs of their own perfonal peril, and re­flecting, that, on the event of the conteft, dependedthe future fate and fortune of their refpeclive coun­tries. On the firft onfet, as foon as the clafh of theirarms, and the glittering of their fwords, were perceiv­ed, the fpecrators fhuddered with excefs of horror;and their hopes being, as yet, equally balanced, theirvoice was lupprefied, and even their breath wasfufpended. Afterwards, in the progrefs of the com­bat, during which, not only the activity of the youngmen's limbs, and the rapid motions of their arms,offenfive and defenfive, but wounds alfo, and bloodwere exhibited to view, the three Albans werewounded, and two of the Romans fell lifelefs, oneover the other. On their fall, the Alban army fetup a fhout of joy; while the Roman legions were.in a ftate of the moft painful anxiety, alinoft bereftof hope, and reduced to a ftate or" defpair, by thefituation of their champion, who was nuw furround-
cd


 







OCR Output








154 v THE HISTORY


B o o K out: " Confcript fathers, left ye fhould hereafter. '." fay that ye were not forewarned, know, that adan-Y.R. 160." gerous fedition is ready to break out. We de-B, C.4ji." mand that thofe who are the moft forward to cen-"fure us for inactivity, may afiift us by their pre-"fence, while we hold the levy. We will proceed"in the bufinefs in fuch a manner as fhall be ap-"proved by the moft ftrenuous advocates for vigo-"rous meafures, fince fuch is your pleafure." Theythen went back to the tribunal, and ordered, pur-pofely, one of thofe, who were within view, to becited: finding that he ftood mute, and that a num­ber of people had formed in a circle round him, toprevent any force being ufed againft him, the con-fuls fent a lictor to him, who being driven back,thofe of the fenators who attended the confuls, ex­claiming againft the infolence of fuch behaviour,flew down from the tribunal to affift the lictor:the populace then, quitting the lictor, to whom theyhad offered no other violence than that of hinderinghim from making the feifure, directed their forceagainft the fenators; but the confuls interpofingquickly, put an end to the fcuffle, in which, as nei­ther ftones nor weapons had been ufed, there wasmore clamour and rage than mifchief. The fenate,called together in a tumultuous manner, proceededin a manner ftill more tumultuous; thofe who hadbeen beaten demanding an inquiry into the affair;the moft violent of them endeavouring to carry theirpoint by clamour and noife, rather than by vote: atlength, when their rage had fomewhat fubfided, theconfuls, reproaching them with being equally difor-derly in the fenate-houfe as in the Forum, began tocolled the votes, in order. There were three differ­ent opinions; Publius Virginius thought that " the"cafe did not extend to the whole body of the com-"mons, and that thofe only were to be confidered,"who, relying on the promifes of the conful Publi-"us Servilius, had feryed in the Volfcian, Auruncian,
'c. and







OCR Output








270 T H E H I S T O R Y


BOOK thoufand afes *, Veturius fifteen thoufatld f. The. _._^J_' fufferings of the former confuls did not lefien theY.R. 300. activity of their fucceflbrs: they faid, they were ableB. c. 4Si. to fupport a fentence of condemnation, but bothcommons and tribunes together were not able tocarry their law. The tribunes now defifting fromfarther pro fecudon of the law, with regard to which,in the length of time fince its publication, people'sardour had cooled, applied to the fenate in amicableterms, requefting that they would at length " put an"end to the contentions; and, fsnce it was difagree-"able to them, that laws fnould be propofed by"plebeians, would permit lawgivers to be chofen"in common, out of the plebeians, and out of"the patricians, who fhould propofe fuch laws"as would be advantageous to both parties,"and tend to eftablifh liberty on an equal foot-"ing." This propofal the fenate did not difap-prove of, but declared, that no one, except a patri­cian, fhould have the propounding of laws. As .theyagreed with regard to the laws themfelves, and onlydiffered about the perfon to propofe them, ambafla-dors were lent to Athens, Spurius Poftumius Albus,Aulus Manlius and Servius Sulpicius Camerinus,whowere ordered to procure a copy of the famous lawsof Solon, and to make themfelves acquainted withthe inftitutions, cuftoms, and laws of the other ftatesof Greece.
XXXII. THIS year parted undifturbed by any fo-
V.R.jot. reign Wars. And the year following, in which Pub-
'lius Curiatius and Sextus Quintilius were confuls, was
Hill more quiet: the tribunes obferving uninter­
rupted filence, which was owing, at firit, to their
waiting for the arrival of the ambaffadors who had
gone to Athens, for copies of the laws of that ftatc;


and,







OCR Output








3o8 THEHISTORY


BOOK berty, which had been fubverted by the power._ ---• granted to the decemvirs, they not only revived, buty.R. 3o6. guarded for the time to come,by enacting a new law:B.C.446. " That no perfon fhould ever elect any magiftrate,"from whom there fhould not be a right of appeal;"and that if any mould clect fuch, then it mould be"lawful and right to put fuch perfon to dead),"and the killing of him mould not be accounted a"capital offence." And when they had providedfufficient barriers for the commons, by the right ofappeal on one fide, and the aid of the tribunes onthe other, they renewed to the tribunes themfclvesthe privilege of being deemed facred and inviolable,a matter which now had been almoft forgotten, re­viving for the purpole certain ceremonies which hadbeen long difufed. And they not only renderedthem inviolable, by this religious inftitution, but bya law, enacting, that " whoever mould offer injury to"the tribunes of the commons, the aediles, or the"judges, his perfon mould be devoted to Jupiter,"and his property confifcated at the temple of Ceres»"Liber and Libera." Lawyers deny, that, by thislaw, any one is rendered facred and inviolable; butjay, that the perfon who offers injury to any of thofe,is deemed to be devoted. Accordingly an aedile isfometimes feized, and put in confinement by fupe-rior magiftrates; which, though it is not a legal pro­ceeding, as offering injury to a perfon exempted bythis law, is yet a proof j that an a:dile is not deemed, facred and inviolable. The tribunes, they allege, be­came facred and inviolable, in conlequence of the oldoath taken by the commons, when they firft createdthat ofTice. Some expofitors have fuppofed, that, bythis lloratian law, the fame exemptions were ex­tended to the confuls alfo, the confuls being termedjudges; and to the prattors, as being elected, underthe fame aufpices, with the confuls. But that ekpo-fition is refuted by this argument, that in thofe times,it was not the cuftom, as it has been fmce, to call
aeon-







OCR Output








ii<S THE HISTORY


BOOK was taken from him, 'his name having been Vindi-. _"'. . cilis: after him, it obtained, as a rule, that who-Y R. 1*i;. ever was made free in that manner, fhould be con-u.e. 507. Udered as admitted a citizen.
VI. TARQUINIUS, on being informed of thefetranfactions, became inflamed, not only with grieffor the difappointment of fuch promifing hopes, butwith hatred and refentment; and, finding every pafsfhut againft fecret plots, determined to have recourfeto open war; and, to that end, went round all thecities of Etruria, in the character of a fuppliant, ad-drtffing himfelf particularly to the people of Veiiand Tarquinii, intreating them, "not to fuffer him,"who was fprung from themfelves, and of the fame"blood; who was lately pofiefied of fo great a"kingdom, now exiled and in want, to perifh be-"fore their eyes, together with the young men his"fons. Others had been invited from foreign"countries to Rome, to fill the throne; but he,"when in poiTeffion of the government, and while"he was employing his arms in extending the li-"mits of the Roman empire, was expelled by a"villanous confpiracy of men who were moft"clofely connected with him; who, becaufe no one"of their number was qualified to hold the reins of"government, had forcibly fhared the feveral parts"of it among them, and had given up his property"to be plundered by the populace, to the intent"that all might be equally guilty. He only wifhed"to be reftored to his own country and crown, and"tb be avenged on his ungrateful fubjects. He"befought them to fupport and aflift him, and, at"the fame time, to take revenge for the injuries


enfranchifement, tlie owner having previoufly given him a flight blow,ami let him go out of his hands. The prxtor then gave the rod to alidlor, who hkewife ftruck the (x.rfon manumitted. He was then re-gifteied as a freeman, and affumed the cap, the fymbol of liberty, with,much ceremony, in the temple of Feronia.


"which







OCR Output








OF ROME.


on his arrival (hould enter the city in triumph, with- BOOKout changing his order of march. The generals of .J?",the enemy were led before his chariot, the miJitary Y.R. Z96.enfigns carried before him, and his army followed, B.c. «*-laden with fpoil. It is faid that tables were laid outwith provifions before every houfe, and that thetroops, partaking of the entertainment, finging thetriumphal hymn, and throwing out their cuftomaryjefts, followed the chariot like revellers at a feaft.The fame day, the freedom of the ftate was, withuniverfal approbation, conferred on Lucius Mami-lius of Tufcdum. The dictator would have imme­diately refigned his office, but was induced to holdit fome time longer on account of the affembly forthe trial of Volfcius, the falfe witnefs. Their dreadof the dictator prevented the tribunes from obftruct-ing it, and Volfcius being condemned, departed intoexile at Lanuvium. Quintius on the fixteenth dayrefigned the dictatorfhip, which he had received for'the term of fixth months. About the fame 'time,the conful Nautius fought, with great fuccefs, againftthe Sabines at Eretum. This additional blow theSabines fuffered befides the devaftation of their coun­try. Fabius Quintus was fent to Algidum in theroom of Minucius. Toward the end of the year,the tribunes began to agitate the affair of the law;but as two armies were then abroad, the patricianscarried the point, that no bufinefs fhould be pro-pofed to the people. The commons prevailed fofar as to appoint the fame tribunes the fifth time.It was reported that wolves had been feen in the Ca­pitol, and were driven away by dogs j and, on ac­count of that prodigy, the Capitol was purified: fuchwere the tranfactions of that year.
XXX. QUINTUS Minucius and Caius Horatius Y.R. '97.Pulvillus fucceeded to the confulfhip. In the be- B.C. 4ii.ginning of this year, while the public quiet was un-ciifturbed by any foreign enemy, the fame tribunes
and







OCR Output








454 T H E H I S T O R Y


B o o K on horfes provided at their own expencc. On whichL-T'- _. the fenate returning them thanks,in the moft honour-Y.R. 351. able terms, and the report of this proceeding havingB.C. 400. fpread through the Forum, and all parts of the city,there immediately enfued a general concourfe of thecommons to the fenate.houfe, where they declared,that " they were now the infantry of that army; and"that, though it was not their turn to ferve, yet"they freely engaged their fervice to the common-"wealth, whether it fhould be thought proper to lead"them to Veil, or to any other place. If they fhould"be led to Veii," they affirmed " that they would"never return from thence, until that city fhould be"taken from the enemy." The fenate now fcarcefet any bounds to the torrent of joy which flowed inupon them; for they did not, as in the cafe of thehorfemen, pafs an order for thanks to be conveyed bythe magiftrates, neither were the people called intothe fenate-houfe to receive an anfwer j nor did thefenators confine themfclves within their houfe; but,from, the eminence adjoining, every one of them ea­gerly, with voice and hands, teftified the public joy,to the multitude who ftood below in the afiembly;declared, that, by fuch unanimity, the city of Romewas rendered happy, invincible, and everlafting jpraifed the horfemen, praifed the commons; blefiedeven the day, as a day of happinefs, and acknowledg­ed that the courtefy and kindnefs of the patricianswere now outdone, while through excefs of joy, tearsflowed in abundance, both from the patricians andcommons; until the fenators, being called back in­to their houfe, paffed a decree, that " the military'' tribunes, fummoning an afiembly, fhould give"thanks to the infantry, and to the horfemen, and"fhould affure them, that the fenate would keep in<c remembrance the dutiful affection which they had'c fluwn towards their country ; and had come to a"refolution that everyone of thofe who had, out offc turn, voluntarily undertaken the fervice, fhould
"enjoy







OCR Output








OF ROME. 351


tolinus, declared themfelves averfe to the fhedding B O O K.of blood, and offering violence to thofe officers, . _w-_fwhom, by the treaty concluded with the commons, Y.R. 3.o.they had acknowledged as facred and inviolable. B'c.+**'The refult of thefe consultations was, that they fhouldallow military tribunes, with confular power, to beelected out of the patricians and plebeians withoutdiftinction; and that, with refpect to the election ofconfuls, no change mould be made; and with this.the tribunes were fatisfied, and the commons alfo.An afiembly was now proclaimed for the election ofthree tribunes with confular power; and, as foon asthis. proclamation was ifllied, immediately every one,who had, either by word or deed, been a promoterof the fedition, particularly thofe who had held theoffice of tribune, began to folicit votes, and to buftlethrough the. Forum as candidates; fo that the patri­cians were deterred, at firft, by defpair of attainingthat dignity, while the minds of the commons werein fuch a ferment; and, afterwards, by the indigna­tion which they felt at the thoughts of holding theoffice in conjunction with fuch colleagues. At laft,however, overcome by the preffing inftances of theleading patricians, fome of them declared themfelvescandidates, left they might feem to have voluntarilyfurrendered the adminiftration of public affairs. Theiflue of that election afforded a proof, that men's fen-timents during the heat of a conteft for liberty and,dignity, are very different from thofe which theyfeel, after the conteft has been ended, and when thejudgment is unbiafied. For the people, fatisfiedwith the admiffion of the right of the plebeians toftand candidates, elected every one of the tribunesfrom among the patricians. Never was there found,even in a fingle individual, fuch moderation, difin-.tereftednefs, and elevation of mind, as was dif.played on that occafion by the whole body of thepeople.
VII. IN







OCR Output








19 3 ±JiE HI STORY


BOOK already made fome progrefs, fhould, as fpeedily aS.. ^r^_. poffible, be ripened into a perfect union between theY.R. 175. plebeians and patricians. In the beginning of thefc.C. 477. ycar therefore he propofed, that " before any tri-"bune fhould ftand forth to prefs the agrarian"law, the fenate Ihould feize the opportunity, and"take to themfelves the merit of conferring that fa-"vour: that they fhould diftribute among the com-*' mons, in as equal proportion as pofiible, the lands"taken from their enemies: for it was but juft that"they fhould enjoy them, by whofe blood and fweae"they had been acquired." The fenate rejectedthe propofal with dildain; fome of them even com­plained, that the talents of Czfo, formerly fo brilli­ant, were, through a furfeit of glory, become heavyand languid. No difputes enfued between the fac­tions in the city. The Latines were haraffed by in-Curfions of the .fliquans; Caefo being fent thither,•with an army, retaliated on the ,Equans, by ravag­ing their territories. They retired into the towns,and kept themfelves within the walls j confequently,there was no battle of any importance. But, fromthe arms of the Veientians, a feverer blow was re­ceived, through the rafhnefs of the other conful j andthe army would have been utterly deftroyed, had notCaefo Fabius arrived feafonabiy to its fupport. Fromthat time there was neither peace, nor war, with theVeientians. Their proceedings were more like thofecf a banditti, than any thing elfe* On the approachof the Roman legions, they retreated into the town*and when they underftood that the legions werewithdrawn, they made incurfions into the Country;fhifting alternately, from war, to quiet, and fromquiet, to war. For this reafon, that bufinefs couldneither be entirely neglected, nor brought to a con-clufion. There was realbn alfo to apprehend otherwars, two of which were juft ready to break out, withthe ./Equans and Volfcians, who only kept them­felves quiet, until the frcfh fmart of their late dif-
after







OCR Output








O F R O M E.


own plans, thofe of the public being deplored as B O O Kdefperate. In the mean time, the Flamen Quirina- . -w-_jilis, and the Veftal virgins, laying afide all concern v.R. 365.for their own affairs, and consulting together which B. c. J8'.of the facred things they fhould carry with them,and which they fhould leave behind, for they hadnot ftrength fufficient to carry them all, and whatplace they could beft depend on, for preferving themin fafe cuftody, judged it the moft eligible methodto inclofe them in cafks, and to bury them underground, in the chapel next to the dwelling-houfe ofthe Flamen Quirinalis, where at prefent it is reckonedprofane even to fpit. The reft they carried, diftrr-buting the burthens among themfelves, along theroad which leads over the Sublician bridge, to theJaniculum. On the afcent of that hill, Lucius Al-binius a Roman plebeian, obferving them, as he wasconveying in a waggon his wife and children, amongthe other crowd of thofe who being unfit for warwere retiring from the city, and retaining, even inhis prefent calamitous ftate, a regard to the dif-tinction between things' divine and human, hethought it would betray a want of the refpecT: dueto religion, if the public priefts of the Roman peo­ple were to go on foot, and thus to carry the facredthings, whilft he and his family were feen mountedin a carriage; ordering his wife and children then toalight, he put the virgins and the facred things intothe waggon, and conveyed them to Caere, whitherthe priefts had determined to go.
XLI. MEANWHILE at Rome, when every difpb-fition for the defence of the citadel had been com­pleted, as far as was pofiible in fuch a conjuncture,the crowd of the aged withdrew to their houfes, andthere, with a firmnefs of mind not to be fhaken bythe approach of death, waited the coming of theenemy: fuch of them as had held curule offices,choofing to die in that garb which difplayed the em­blems of their former fortune, of their honours, or
of







OCR Output








THE HISTORY


BOOK reduced by the peftilence, the anfwer which they re-"
^_JT-y_ . ceived, demonftrated a great dejection of fpirits:
Y.R. 19i. that" the Hernicians themfelves, with the affiftanceB.C. 461. " of the Latines, muft provide for their own fafety."That the city of Rome, through the fudden anger"of the gods, was depopulated by ficknefs. If they"fhould find any refpite from that calamity, they"would, as they had done the year before, and on"all occafions, give affiftance to their allies." Thusthe ambaflfadors departed, carrying home more for-rcwful intelligence even than what they had brought;as they now found themfelves obliged, with theirown fingle ftrength, to fupport a war, to which theyhad hardly been equal, even when aflifled. by thepower of Rome. The enemy remained not long inthe country of the Heroicians, but proceeded thence,with hoftile intentions, into the Roman territory;which, without the injuries of war, was now becomea defert; and, without meeting there one humanbeing even unarmed, finding every place throughwhich they pafled deftitute, not only of troops, butof the culture of the hufbandman, they came as far asthe third ftone on the Gabian road. By this time JEbu-rius the Roman conful was dead, and his colleagueServilius fo ill, that there was very little hope of hisrecovery; moft of the leading men were feized bythe diftemper, as were the greater part of the patri­cians, and almoft every one of military age; fo thatthey wanted ftrength, not only to form the expedi­tions which were requifite, in a conjuncture fo alarm­ing, but even to mount the guards, where no exer­tion was neceflary. The duty of the watches wasperformed by fuch of the fenators in perfon, as bytheir age and ftrength were qualified for it; the careof pofting, and vifiting, thefe, was intrufted to theplebeian ^Ediles; on them devolved the whole ad-miniftration of affairs, and the dignity of the con-fular authority.
VII. THE







OCR Output








416 T H E H I S T O R Y


BOOK report of hoftilities having been committed by them,t__^J_i. for they had now marched out into the territories ofY.R. 345. the Latines and Hernicians, Valerius the confulB.C. 407. began to enlift troops, whilft Marcus Maenius a plebe­ian tribune, who was pufhing forward an agarian law,obftructed the levies; and as the people were fecureof the fupport of the tribune, no one, who did notchoofe it, took the military oath, when on a fudden,news arrived that the citadel of Carventa had beenftized by the enemy. The difgrace incurred by thisevent, while it ferved the fenate as a ground of fe-vere reproaches againft Maenius, afforded at thefeme time to the other tribunes, who had been al­ready pre-engaged to proteft againft the agrarianlaw, a more juftifiable pretext for acting in oppo-fition to their colleague. Wherefore, after the bu-finefs had been protracted to a great length, bywrangling difputes, the confuls appealing to godsand men that whatever lofies or difgrace had alreadybeen, or was likely to be fuffered, from the enemy,'the blame of all was to be imputed to Mae-nius, who hindered the levies; Maenius, on theother hand, exclaiming, that if the unjuft occupierswould refign the pofieflion of the public lands, hewould give no delay to the levies; the ninetribunes interpofed, by a decree, and put an endto the conteft, proclaiming as the determinationof their college, that " they would, for the pur-.*' pofc of enforcing the levy, in oppofition to the*' proteft of their colleague, fupport Caius Vale-"rius in inflicting fines and other penalties on fuch"as fhould refufe to enlift." Armed with this de­cree the conful ordered a few, who appealed to thetribune, to be taken into cuftody; at which, thereft, being terrified, took the military oath. Thetroops were led to the citadel of Carventa, andthough mutual diflike prevailed between them andthe coniul, yet, as foon as they arrived at the fpot,
they







OCR Output








OF ROME. 391


the commons fhewed a fuperiority, for they carried B O O K.the point that confuls mould not be elected for the'next year.
XXXI. FOUR military tribunes, with confular Y.R.power, were eleccted, Titus Quintius Pennus from ''the confulfhip, Caius Furius, Marcus Poftnmius,and Aulus Cornelius Coflus. Of thefe, Coffus heldthe command in the city. The other three, after£nlifting forces, marched to Veii, and there exhibitedan inftance of the pernicious effects on military ope­rations refulting from a divided command: whileeach maintained an opinion different from the reft,and endeavoured to enforce his own plans, they gavean opportunity to the enemy to take them at advan­tage. Accordingly, the Veientians feizing a criticalmoment made an attack on their troops, who knewnot bow to act, one of their generals ordering thefignal for retreat to be given, another the charge tobe founded. They were thrown into confufion con-fequently, and turned their backs, but found fafety intheir camp, which was nigh at hand: their difgracetherefore was greater than their lofs. The citizens,unaccuftomed to defeats, were ieized with difmal ap-prehenfions, execrated the tribunes, and called aloud >for a dictator; in him alone, they faid, the ftate couldplace any hopes. Here again a religious fcrupleinterfered, left there mould be an impropriety in a'dictator being nominated by any other than a con-ful: but the augurs being confulted, removed thatdoubt. Aulus Cornelius nominated MamercusJEmilius dictator, and was himfelf nominated by himmafter of the horfe. So little effect had the dilgraceinflicted by the cenfors, when the ftate once came toftand in need of a perfon of real merit, towards .pre­venting it from feeking a fupreme director of its af-fairs in a houfe undefervedly cenfured. The Ve­ientians, puffed up by their fuccefs, fent ambafladorsround. all the ftat.es of Etruria, boafting, that theyc c 4 had.







OCR Output








THE HISTORY


B c o K anc] not only men's bodies were afflicted by the con-^_ ._,T- _. tagion, but fuperftitions of various kinds, and moftlyY K. in. of foreign growth, took pofieflion alfo of theirU. C. 415. minds; while thofe who converted to their own gainthe weaknefs of minds enflaved by fuperftition,through their pretences to the art of divination, intro­duced into people's families new modes of worfhip,until, at length, the principal men of the ftatc weretouched with fhame for the difhonour brought onthe public, feeing in every ftreet and chapel foreignand unaccuftomed ce remonies of expiation practifed,for obtaining the favour of the gods. A charge wasthen given to the aecliles, to fee that no other godsfhoukl be worshipped, than thofe acknowledged bythe Romans; nor they, in any other modes thanthofe eftablifhed by the cuftom of the country. Theprofccution of their refentment againft the Veien-tians, was deferred to the enfuing year, whereiny.R. 31!!. Caius Servilius Ahala and Lucius Papirius Mugilla-B. c. 414. nus werc confuls: even then, an immediate decla­ration of war and the march of the army were pre­vented by fuperftition. It was deemed neceflarythat the heralds fhould firft be fent to demand refti-tution. There had been open war, and battlesfought, with the Veientians, not long before, at No-mentum and Fidenae, fince which not a peace, but atruce, had been concluded, the term of which hadnot yet expired, and they, before its expiration, hadrenewed holulities. Neverthclefs, the heralds werefent, and when, after taking the cuftomary oath, theydemanded reftitution, no attention was paid to them.Then arofe a difpute whether the war mould be de­clared, by order of the people, or whether a decreeof the fenate were fufficient. The tribunes bythreatening openly, that they would hinder any levyof foidicrs, carried the point that the confuls fhouldtake the fenfe of the people concerning the war. Allthe centuries voted for it. In another particular too
the







OCR Output








OF ROME. 141


Iccond of the fo'diers who mould enter the enemy's 6 o o Kcamp; and fo great was the ardour of the Romans, ^-J*l^_jthat they never remitted the impetuofity of the Y.R. *;;.charge, by which they had broken the enemy's B.C. *97.line, until they made themfelves mafters of thecamp. Such was the engagement at the lake Re-gillus. The dictator and mafter of the horfe, ontheir return to the city, were honoured with atriumph.
XXI. DURING the three enfuing years, there wasneither war, nor yet a fecurity of peace. The con- ^.j*'*'8.fuls were, Qmntus Clcelius and Titus Lartius: then ' '**6'Aulus Sempronius and Marcus Minutius, in whofe £.l\. 157.conluiate the temple of Saturn was dedicated, and " .49S"the feftival called Saturnalia inftituted. After them,Aulus Poftumius and Titus Virginius were made Y.R. 1s«rconfuls. 1 find it afierted by fome writers, that the B'C'49*"battle at the lake Regillus was not fought until thisyear, and that Aulus Poftumius, becaufe the fidelityof his colleague was doubtful, abdicated the conful-fhip, and was then made dictator: fuch perplexingmiftakes, with regard to dates, occur from the ma-giftrates being ranged in different order, by differentwriters, that it is impofiible, at this diftance of time,when not only the facts, but the authors who relatethem, are involved in the obfcurity of antiquity, totrace out a regular feries of the conluls as they fuc-ceeded each other, or of the tranfa.flions as they oc­curred in each particular year. Appius Claudius Y.R. 1j9.and Publius Servilius were next appointed to the B.c.49i.confulfhip. This year was rendered remarkable bythe news of Tarquinius's death; he died at Cumce,whither, on the reduction of the power of the La-tines, he had retired for refuge, to the tyrant Arif-todemus: by this news, both the Patricians and thecommons were highly elated; but the former fuf-fcred their exultation on the occafion to carry themto unwarrantable lengths; and the latter, v/ho, until
that







OCR Output








OF HOME. 283


"were thofe men?" he afked. "Were they of the BOOK
"popular party? In what bufinefs did they ever ...—- ,
"look for the concurrence of the people? Were Y.U. 105.
"they of that of the nobility? who, during almoft 8.C.447,
"a whole year, never held a meeting of the fenate;
"and, now, hold it in fuch a manner, that people
"are not allowed to fpeak of the ftate of the com-
"monwealrh. Let them not rely too much on the
"timidity of others; for men feel more fenfibly the
C' weight of prefent fufFerings, than of fuch as exift
"only in apprehenfion."
XL. WHILE Horatius was exclaiming in thismanner, and the decemvirs knew not how, either togratify their anger, or to pafs over the provocation,nor could judge hpw the bufinefs would end, CaiusClaudius, uncle to Appius the decemvir, addrefiedhim in a fpeech, fraught with intreaties rather thanreproaches j befought him by the fhade of his ownbrother, the other's father, " to pay more regard"to the rights of that civil fociety in which he was"born, than to a confederacy, formed, with his col-'< leagues, on the moft flagitious principles. This"he requefted, more earneftly on his account, than"even on that of the commonwealth; for the com-"monwealth would, doubtlefs, be abundantly able -"to afiert its own rights, in fpite of any refiftancc"which they could make; but, that, as great con-"tefts generally excited great animofities, he could"not, without horror, think of what might be the"confequence," Although the decemvirs had re-fufed liberty to fpeak on any fubject, but the buiinefitwhich they had propoled, yet fuch was their refpectfor Claudius, that they did not interrupt him; heproceeded therefore in his difcourfe, which he con­cluded, with moving a refolution, that no decreeof the fenate fhould be pafied. This was confider-ed, by every one, as importing, that in the judgmentpf Claudius they were but private citizens, and
many







OCR Output








202 THE HISTORY


B o o K" jf people had but the fpirit to defpife them; buti _!*L_. " every one magnified thofe matters, and made themV.R. 181. " objects of terror to himfelf." While they thusM.C'47i. fpurred on each other with fuch difcourfes asthefe, it happened that a lidlor was fent by the con-ful to a plebeian of the name of Volero Publilrus,who had infifted, that, having been a centurion, hecould not be compelled to enlift as a common fol-dier. Volero appealed to the tribunes; but none ofthem fupporting him, the confuls ordered the man tabe ftripped, and the rods to be got ready: " I ap-"peal to the people," faid Volero, c1 fince the"tribunes choofe rather that a Roman citizen"fhould be beaten with rods before their eyes,"than themfelves fhould be murdered in their beds"by your faction." The more vehemently he ex­claimed, the more violently did the lictor proceedin tearing off his clothes, and ftripping him. ThenVolero, who was a man of great bodily ftrength,and aided alfo by thofe who took part with him,drove away the lictor, and retired into the thickeftpart of the crowd, where he heard the loudeft ex-preflions of indignation, at the treatment which hereceived; at the fame time crying aloud," I appeal,"and implore the protection of the commons."Support me, citizens; fupport me, fellow ibldiers."/ You have nothing to expect from the tribunes,"who themfelves ftand in need of your fupport."The people, inflamed with paflion, prepared them­felves as for a battle: and there was every appear­ance of the conteft proceeding to fuch extremity, as,that no regard whatever would be paid, either topublic or private rights. The confuis, having un­dertaken to face this violent ftorm, quickly experi­enced that dignity, unfupported by ttrength, is notexempt from danger. Their lictors were abufed,the fafces broken, and themfelves forced to take re­fuge in the fenate-houfe, uncertain how far Volerowould puth his victory. In fame time after, the tu -
mule







OCR Output








OF R O M E.


 


miration both of his countrymen and the enemy.There was a facrifice always folemnized by the Fa­bian family at ftated times, on the Quirinal hill; to Y.R.'365.perform which, Caius Fabius Dorfo having comeB.c.387'down from the Capitol, d re fied in the form calledthe Gabine cincture, and carrying in his hands thefacred utenfils requifite f<>r the ceremony, pafied outthrough the midftof the enemy's pofts, without be­ing moved in the leaf t by any of' their calls orthreats; made his way to the Quirinal hill, and afterduly performing there the Ibleinn rites, returned bythe fame way, preferving the fame firmnefs in hiscountenance and gait, confident of the protection ofthe gods, whofe worfhip, even the fear of death hadnot power to make him negletft, and came back to.his friends in the Capitol, while the Gauls wereeither held motionlefs with aftonifhment at his amaz­ing confidence, or moved by confiderations of reli­gion, of which. that nation is by no means regard-lefs. Meanwhile, thofe at Veii found not only theircourage, but their. ftrength alfo increafing daily.And as not only fuch of the Romans repaired thither,who, in conlcquence either of the defeat in the field,or of the difafter of the city being taken, had beendifperfed in various parts, but volunteers alfo flowedin from Latium, with a view to fhare in the fpoil, itnow feemed high time to attempt the recovery oftheir native city, and refcue it out of the hands ofthe enemy. But this ftrong body wanted a head:the fpot where they ftood reminded them of Ca-millus, a great number of the foldiers having foughtwith fuccefs under his banners and aufpices. Be­tides, ^Caedicius declared, that he would not takeany part which might afford occafion to any, eithergod or man, to take away, his corrjuiand from him;but rather, mindful of his own. rank, would himfelfinfift on the appointment: of a general. With uni-verfal confent it was refolved, that Camillus ftiouldbe invited from Ardea j but that firft the fenate ati, L 4 Rome







OCR Output








O F R O M E. 8?


This circumftance alfo ftill farther, enhanced his BOOKfame, that, together with him, perifhed all regularand legal government. Mild and moderate as. hisadminiftration was, yet, becaufe the government waslodged in the hands of a fingle perfon, fome au­thors tell us, he intended to have refigned it, had notthe wickednefs of his family broken off the.defignswhich he meditated, for eftabliming the liberty ofhis country.
XLIX. THUS began the reign of Lucius Tar- Y. R.'quinius, who, from his fubfequent behaviour, got the g1^furname of the proud; for this unworthy fon-in-law s'j1.'prohibited the burial of his father-in-law, allegingthat Romulus likewife had remained unburied.The principal fenators, whom he fufpe&ed of fa­vouring the intereft of Servius, he put to death;and foon becoming apprehenfive, that the prece­dent of acquiring the crown by wicked means,might be adopted, from his own practice, againfthimfclf, he kept an armed band about him, for thefecurity of his perfon; for he had no kind of titleto the crown, but that of force, holding it neitherby the order of the people, nor with the approba­tion of the fenate. And befides this, as he couldplace no reliance on the affection of his fubjects,he was obliged to raife, in their fears, a fence to hisauthority; In order to diffufe thefe the more ex-tenfively, he took entirely into his own hands, thecognizance of capital offences, which he determi­ned without confulting with any perfon whatever;by which means he could put to death, banim, orimpofe fines, not only on thofe whom he fufpectedor difliked, but on perfons, with refpecl: to whornjhe could have no other view, than that of plunder.Having, by thefe means, diminifhed the numberof the fenate, againft whom his proceedings werechiefly levelled, he determined not to fill up the va­cancies j hoping that the fmallnefs of their number
o would.







OCR Output








10 T H E H I S TO R Y


B 00 K prevails that the retiring flood having left on dry, ground the trough, hitherto floating, in which theyhad been expofed, a thirfty flre-wolf from the neigh­bouring mountains directed her courfe to the cries ofthe children, and, ttooping, prefented her dugs tothe infants, fhewing fo much gentlenefs, that thekeeper of the king's herds found her licking theboys with her tongue J arid that this fhepherd, whofcname was Fauftulus,| carried them home to his wifeLaurentia to be nurfed.lS'ome there are who think thatthis Laurentia, from her having been a proftitute, was,by the fhepherds, called Lupa j and to this circum-ftancethey afcribe the origin of this fabulous miracle.fThus born, and thus educated, as foon as yearsfupplied them with ftrength, th«y led not an inactivelife at the ftables, or among the cattle, but traverfedthe neighbouring forefts in hunting. / Hence acquir­ing vigour both of body and mind, they foon begannot only to withftand the wild beafts, but to attackrobbers loaded with booty. The fpoil thus acquir­ed they divided with the fhepherds; and, in companywith thefe, the number of their young aflbciates con­tinually increafing, they carried on both their feriousbufinefs, and their fports.
V. DT is faid that, even at that early period, thefports of the Lupercal *, which we ftill celebrate,were pracctifed on the Palatine hill, and that this wascalled Palatium, from Pallanteum. a city of Arcadia,and afterwards the Palatine hill; end that Evander,who was of that tribe of Arcadians, and had beenmany years before in pofieffion of this part of thecountry, had inftituted there this folemnity broughtfrom Arcadia, in which young men were to runabout naked, in fport and wantonnefs, in honour ofLycean Pan, whom the Romans afterwards calledInuus. /While they were intent on the performance
• See Adams, p. ju.
Of







OCR Output








O F R O M E. 275


vtfted with, the office: he afperfed the characters of B o o Kthe candidates of high rank, and extolled the moft . -r- ^tinfignificant, and the loweft: furrounded by the Y.R. 303.Icilii and Duilii', who had been tribunes, he buftled B.c. 44?•about the Forum, and through their means recom­mended himfelf to the commons; until even his col-leagues, who, to that time, had been entirely attachedto him, looked on him with amazement, wondering ,what his intentions could be. They were convinced,that there was no fincerity in his profeflions; thatfuch affability, in one of fuch a haughty mind, couldnot be without fome interefted views; that his low­ering himfelf to the common level, in this extraordi­nary manner, and mixing on an equal footing withthe private citizens, did not look like hafte to quitthe office, but rather like feeking for means to becontinued in it: not daring, however, openly to op-pofe his wifhes, they endeavoured to baffle his ef­forts., by a feeming defire to gratify him; and agreedamong themfelves to appoint him, as the youngeftof their body, to the office of prefiding at the elec­tion. This was an artifice, to prevent his returninghimfelf, which no one had ever done, except in the %
cafe of tribunes of the people; and, even there, itwas deemed a moft pernicious precedent. How­ever, he declared, that, with the good favour of for­tune, he would prefide at the election; and he laidhold of the intended obftruction to his defign, as thelucky means of effecting its accomplifhment; andhaving, by means of a coalition which he formed,foiled the pretenfions of the two Quiptii, Capitolinusand Cincinnati^; of his own uncle Cains Claudius,a moft.fteady fupporter of the caufe of the nobility;and of other citizens of the fame high rank, he raifedto the decemvirate perfons of very inferior condi­tion in life; and, among the firft, himfelf: an adthighly difapproved of by. all men of good minds,r.v ..and which no one had believed that he would dareto be guilty of. Together with him were electedT 2 Marcus







OCR Output








464 THEHISTORT


BOOK tax to be paid, and confequently no remittances were,^_ -T'-_J made to the generals for the payment of the troops,Y.K. 35+. and the foldiers clamoroufly demanded their pay,B.C.398. there was the greateft danger that the contagion offedition might fpread from the city, and the campallb be involved in confufion. Though the com­mons were ib much incenfed againft the patricians,and the plebeian tribunes afierted, that now the time* was come for cftablifhing liberty, and transferringthe fupreme dignity from fuch as Sergius and Vir-ginius, to men of plebeian rank, men of fortitude andinduftry, yet they proceeded no farther in gratifica­tion of their paffion, than the election of one ple-y.T;. ;;'. K.ian, Publius Licinius Calvus, to the office of mi-''" 3j';'' Jitary tribune with confular power, for the purpofeof eftablifhing their right by a precedent. Theothers elected were patricians, Publius Maenius,Lucius Titinius, Publius Maelius, Lucius FuriusMedullinus, and Lucius Publilius Volfcus. Thecommons themfelves were furprifed at their havingcarried fuch an important point, no lefs than theman himfelf who had been elected, a perfon who hadno poft of honour before, although afenatorof longHanding, and now far advanced in years. Nor doesit fufficiently appear why he was chofen, in preferencetoothers, to tafte the firft fweets of this new dignity.Some are of opinion, that he was elected to fo higha ftation by the influence of his brother Cneius Cor­nelius, who had been military tribune the precedingyear, and had given triple pay to the cavalry.Others, that it was owing to a feafonable difcourfe,made by himfelf, recommending harmony betweenthe orders of the ftate, which was equally accepta­ble to the patricians and plebeians. The plebeiantribunes, filled with exultation by this victory in theelection, remitted their oppofition with refpect to thetax, which was the principal obftruction to the pub­lic bufinefs. It was then paid in without murmur­ing, and lent to the army.
XIII. IN







OCR Output








THE HISTORY


 


^ withdrew from Regillu'm to Rome, ac-I companied by a numerous body of adherents*. ThefeY.R. 150. were admitted to the. rights of citizens, and had landB1C. 501. afflgned them beyond the Anio. They have been call­ed the old Claudian Tribe, to diftinguifh them fromthe new members, who, coming from the fame partof the country, were afterwards added to that tribe.Appius was elected into the fenate, and loon acquireda reputation among the moft eminent. The confuls,in profecution of the war, marched their army intothe Sabine territories; and, after reducing the pow­er of the enemy, by wafting their lands, and after­wards in battle, to fuch a degree, that there was noroom to apprehend a renewal of hoftilities in thatquarter, for a long time to come, returned in tri-Y.R. 151. umph to Rome. In the enfuing year, when Agrippaipl'Menenius and Publius Poflumius were confuls, diedPublius Valerius, a man univerfally allowed to haveexcelled all others, in fuperior talents both for warand peace, full of glory, but in fuch flender circum-ftances, that he left not fufficient to defray the chargesof his funeral, He was buried at the expence of thepublic, and the matrons went into mourning for him,as they had done for Brutus. During the fame year,two of the Latine colonies, Pometia and Cora, re­volted to the Auruncians, and war was undertakenagainft that people; a very numerous army, withwhich they boldly attempted to oppofe the confuls,who were entering their borders, was entirely routed,and the Auruncians compelled to make their laftHand at Pometia: nor was the carnage lefs after thebattle was over, than during its continuance; therewere greater numbers flain than taken, and thofe whowere made prifoners, were in general put to death;nay, in the violence of their rage, which ought to beconfined to foes jn arms, the enemy fpared not eventhe hoftages, three hundred of whom had been for­


* Nut left than five thoufam! families accompanied him.
mcrly







OCR Output








O F R O M E. 393


mult fubfiding, they afiembled the fenate, and com- BOOKplained to them of the ill-treatment which they had .^*-_ifuffered, of the violence of the commons, and the Y.R. *8i.audacious behaviour of Volero: and, where, though B.c. V1*many harm methods of proceeding were propofed,the opinion of the elder members prevailed j whorecommended to the fenate, not to let their con-duet be as ftrongly marked, by paflionate refent-ment, as that of the commons was by inconfiderateviolence.
LVI. THE commons, intereftingthemfelves warm­ly in favour of Volero, chofe him at the next elec­tion tribune for the year: the confuls being Lucius Y.R. iSi.Pinarius and Publius Furius. And now, contrary to B'C. 4'70'the expectation of all men, who luppoied that hewould give a loofe to the reins ot the tribunitianpower, in haraffing the confuls of the precedingyear; poftponing his own refentment to the publicintereft, without uttering even a word to offend theconfuls, he propofed a law to the people, that ple­beian magiftrates mould be elected in affemblieswhere the votes were given by tribes. This, thoughcovered under an appearance which, at firft view,mewed no evil tendency, was confidered as a matterof no trivial confequence; as it would entirely de­prive the patricians of the power of electing fuchtribunes as they liked, by means of the votes oftheir dependents. To prevent this propofition,which was highly pleafing to the commons, frompafling into a law, the patricians ftrained every nerve;and though neither the influence of the confuls, norof the principal patricians, could prevail on any oneof the college of tribunes to proteft againft it,that being the only power that could effectually ftifleitj yet, as it was in itfelf an affair of great weight,and required long and laborious exertions, the obfta-cles thrown in its way were fufficient to delay it untilthe following year. The commons re-eledted Vo­lero







OCR Output








37* THE HISTORY


BOOK fingling him out for an antagonift, rufhed againft. _^J . him. Having unhorfed him with a ftroke, and.y.R. 318. preffing him down with his fpear, he inftantly fprungB.C. 434. down himfelf on the ground; where, as the king at­tempted to rife, he ftruck him back with the bofs ofhis fiiield, and with repeated thrufts of his fpearpinned him to the earth. He then ftripped off thefpoils from the lifelefs body, and having cut off thehead, and carrying it about on the point of his fpear,as a trophy of the victory, he put the enemy to rout,through the difmay which ftruck them on the deathof their king. Their body of cavalry likewife, whichalone had kept the victory in fufpenfe, was defeatedwith die reft. The dictator purfued clofe on theflying legions, and drove them to their camp withgreat flaughter. The greater number of the Fidena--tjans, through their knowledge of the country, madetheir efcape into the mountains. Coflus, havingcrofied the Tiber, with the cavalry, brought to thecity an immenfe booty from the lands of the Veien-tians. During this battle, there was another fight atthe Roman camp, againft the party which Tolum-nius, as was mentioned above, had lent againft it:Fabius yibulanus, manning the rampart all round,ftood at firft on the defenfivej then, when the ene­my were earneftly engaged againft the rampart, fally-ing out with the veterans, from the principal gate onthe right, he made a fudden attack on them, whichftruck fuch terror, that though the flaughter was lefs,they being fewer in number, yet the rout was notlefs diforderly than that of their grand army.
XX* CROWNED with fuccefs in every quarter, thedictator, in purfuance of a decree of the ienate andan order of the people, returned into the city in tri­umph. By far the moft diftinguifhed object in this.procefiion was Coflus, carrying the fpolia opima(grand fpoils) of the king whom he had (lain, whilethe foldiers chanted their uncouth verfes, extolling


him







OCR Output








18 THE HISTORY


BOOK" both that the gods favoured the founding of Rome,"and that the people would not be deficient in merit!"Wherefore, as men, they ought to fhew no reluc^"tance to mix their blood and race with men." In,no one place were his ambaffadors favourably heard;fuch contempt of them did people entertain, and, atthe fame time, fuch apprehehfions of danger tothemfelves and their pofterity, from fo great apower growing up in the midft of them. By thegreater part, they were difmifled with the queftion,"whether they had opened an afylum for womerj"alfo, for that would be the only way to procure"fuitable matches for them?" This was highly re-•Tented by the Roman youth, infomuch that the bufi-nefs appeared evidently to point towards violence.7Romulus, in order to afford them a convenient timeand place for a defign of that fort, diffcmbling hisdifpleafure, prepared, with that intent, to celebrateiblemn games in honour of the equeftrian Neptune*,to which he gave the name of Conlualia. j' He thenordered the intended celebration to be proclaimedamong the neighbouring nations, and the peopleexerted themfelves in making the rhoft magnificentpreparations that their knowlege and abilities al­lowed, in order to engage attention and raife ex­pectation. *} Great numbers of'people aflembled, in­duced, in forne meafure, by a denre of feeing thehew city, efpecially thofe whofe countries lay neareft,the Caninenfians, Cruftuminians, and Antemna-tians, efpecially the whole multitude of the Sabinescame with their wives and children. / They werehofpitably invited to the different hoiifes; and when
they viewed the fituation, and the fortifications, and'
• • , , •*
* So called, from his having produced the firft lioife from the earthby a ftroke of liis trident. Romulus called hiili Cotifut,' The god ofcuunfel, as having fuggeHfd the fcheme of feizing tlie women. Thepaincs, which he calltd Conlualia, were afterwards t:i(ned the Ro­man, or the p..'tat games, and were after celebrattd at Rome; theyIjfied, at firlt, one dny, then two, three, and, at length, nine days. j
the,







OCR Output








THE HISTORY


 


hoftilities, and filled the prifon with the principal
_ citizens; fhew an equal degree of valour, and
Y.R. 509. " march out through the Efquiline gate; or, if yeB.C. 443. 't nave not courage for that, view from the walls"your lands defolated with fire and fword, the plun-"der carried off, and the burning houfes fmoking"all around. But ye will fay, it is the public intercft"that fuffers by thefe means, by the country being"wafted with fire, the city befieged, and the enemy"enjoying the honour of the war. Be it fo; but I"will afk, in what fituation are your private affairs?"Soon will every one of you hear from the coun-"try accounts of his own lofies: and what means"have ye, at home, of procuring a compenfation"for them? Will the tribunes bring back and re-"ftore what ye have loft? Talk, and words, they"will load you with, until ye are tired, and accufa-"tions againft the principal citizens, and laws heaped"upon laws, and public afiemblies: but, from thefc"aflemblies, never did one of you return home with"an increafe of fubftance or fortune. Let me fee"one of you, who ever carried home aught to his"wife and children, except hatreds, quarrels, ani-"mofities, public and private; from the ill effects"of which ye have always been fcreened, not by"your own merit and innocence, but by the protec-•' rion of others. But, I will affirm, that, when ye"ufed to make your campaigns, under the command'' of us confuls, not of your tribunes, in the camp,"not in the Forum; when your fhout ufed to ftrike"terror into the enemy in the field, not into the"Roman nobles in an affembly; after enriching"yourfelves with plunder, taking poffeflion of the"enemy's lands, and acquiring a plentiful ftock of"wealth and of glory, both to the public and to"yourfelves; then ye returned home in triumph to"your families; now, ye fuffer the enemy to depart'' laden with your property. Continue immoveably"tied to your afiemblies, and live in the Forum.


"Still







OCR Output








9* THE HISTORY


B o o K" becaufe all the Latines, deriving their origin from'' Alba, were comprehended in that treaty, by which,'under Tullus, the whole Alban nation, together"with their colonies, were fubjeccted to the domi-"nion of the Romans. However, for the fake of"the general advantage of all parties, he rather"wifhed, that that treaty mould be renewed, and"that the Latines fhould, as partners, enjoy the"good fortune of the Roman people, rather than"live always under the apprehenfion or endurance'' of the demolition of their cities, and the devafta-"tion of their lands, to which they had, during the• " reign of Ancus, firft, and afterwards, in that ofjf.A^j' hts.fajther, been continually expofed."—He foundno difficulty in perfuading the Latines, though in thattreaty the advantage lay on the fide of the Romans:....--they faw, however, that the chiefs of the Latine na­tion, .in their behaviour and fentiments, concurredwith the king; and Turnus was a recent inftance ofthe danger to be apprehended, .by any one whofhould attempt oppofition, .^The treaty was there­fore renewed, and orders were given to the young, „^ men of the Latines, that they ihould on a certainday, according to the treaty, attend in a body underarms, at the grove of Ferentina. And when, inobedience to the edict of the Roman king, they hadaffembled there, from all the feveral ftates, in orderthat they fhould not have a general of their own, nora feparate command, or their own colours, he mixedthe Romans and Latines together in companies,by dividing every company into two parts, and then,forming two of thefe divifions, one of each nation,into one company, and having by this means doubledthe number of the companies, he appointed cen­turions to command them.
•
LIII. INIQJJITOUS as he was, in his conduct asking, his behaviour, at the head of an army, wasnot equally reprehenfible: in that capacity, indeed,
he







OCR Output








O F R O M E. , 463


XII. INSTIGATED by fuch difcourfes, the com- BOOKmons condemned the accufed in a fine of ten thou- t -!_-/fand afes in weight*; while Sergius in vain alleged Y.R. 35+.that the mifcarriage was to be imputed to fortune, B.c. J9*'and the common chance of war; and Virginius madeearneft fupplications that they would not render him •more unfortunate at home, than he had been in thefield. The current of popular refentment, havingbeen thus turned againft them, almoft obliterated theremembrance of the afliimption of tribunes, and thefraudulent infraction of the Trebonian law. The vic­torious tribunes, in order that the commons mightreap an immediate advantage from the trial, pub-limed a propofal of an agrarian law, and forbade thetax to be paid, fince pay was required for fuch anumber of armies, and the fuccefs of their arms, inany of the wars, had been no more than fufficed tokeep their hopes in fufpenfe. For, at Veii, thecamp, which had been loft, was recovered, andftrengthened with forts and a garrifon. Here Mar­cus ^Emilius and Caefo Fabius, military tribunes,commanded. Marcus Furius in the territory of the ,Falifcians, and Cneius Cornelius in that of the Ca-penatians, meeting with none of the enemy out oftheir towns, drove off the fpoil and ravaged thecountry, burning all the houfes and the fruits of theearth. The towns they neither afikulted nor be-fieged. But in the country of the Volfcians, afterthe lands had been wafted, Anxur was aflaulted with­out effect: being feated on a lofty eminence, andforce being found ineffectual, it was determined tofurround it with a rampart and trench. This pro­vince of the Volfcians had fallen to Valerius Potitus.While the bufinefs of the campaign was in this ftate,a fedition burft out at home, with more formidableviolence than appeared in the operations againft theenemy. And, as the tribunes would not Jiiffer the
• j1l. 58. iod.


tax







OCR Output








THEHISTORY


B oo K in the field, a general and army fo cordially united,^lJL_j fuffered them to carry their depredations throughY.R. 483. every part of the country; and in no former warB.C.*69. was a greater abundance of booty carried off fromthence, all which was diftributed among the foldiers.Their behaviour was alfo rewarded with praifes, inwhich the minds of foldiers find as much delight asin gain. The troops returned from thence in bettertemper towards their general, and, on the general'saccount, towards the patricians alfo; declaring, thatthe fenate had given to them a parent, to the otherarmy a mafter. This year, during which they ex­perienced a variety of fortune in their military ope­rations, and furious difienfions both at home andabroad, was particularly diftinguimed by the affem-blies of the people voting by tribes, a matter whichderived its feeming importance rather from the ho­nour of the victory obtained by one party over theother, than from any real advantage accruing fromit. For the mare of power, which was either gainedby the commons, or taken from the patricians, wastrifling, in proportion to the great degree of dignityof which the afiemblies themfelves were deprived,by the exclufion of the patricians.
y.R. 184. LXI. THE following year, the confnlate of Lu-B. c. 468. ciu3 Valerius and Tiberius /F.milius, was difturbedby more violent commotions, both in confequenceof the ftruggles between the different orders of theftate, concerning the agrarian law, and alfo of thetrial of Appius Claudius; who, having taken a moftactive part, in oppofition to the law, and fupportcdthe caufe of thole who were in pofiefiion of the pub­lic lands, as if he were a third conful, and thoughtit his duty, had a criminal profecution inftitutedagainft him, by Marcus Duilius and Caius Sicinius.Never hitherto had a perfon, fo odious to the com­mons, been brought to trial before the people, over-. whelmed as he was with hatred, on his father's ac­
count.







OCR Output








268 THEHISTORY


B o o fc and the fame law occafioned feditions at home; and. '_, thefe would have proceeded to ftill greater lengths,V.R. i?7. fo highly were people's pafilons inflamed, but that, asB.C.455. if it had been concerted for the purpofe, news wasbrought, that by an attack of the ,fcquans, in thenight, the garrifon at Corbio was cut off. The con-fuls called the fenate together, and were ordered tomake a hafty levy of troops, and lead them to Al-gidum. The conteft about the law was now laidafide, and a new ftruggle began about the levy; inwhich the confular authority was in danger of beingoverpowered, by the force of the tribunitian privi­leges, when their fears were more effectually rouledby another alarm, of the Sabine army having comedown into the Roman territories to plunder, andthence advanced to the city. This ftruck fuch ter­ror, that the tribunes fuffered the troops to be en-lifted, yet not without a ftipulation, that fmce theyhad been baffled for five years, and their office, asit ftood, was but a fmall protection to the commons,there mould for the future be ten tribunes of the peo­ple appointed: neceflity extorted this concefiion fromthe fenate. They only made one exception; that thepeople fhould nor, hereafter, re-elect the fame tri­bunes. An afiembly was inftantly held for theejection of the tribunes, left, if the war was onceended, they might be difappointed in that, as inother matters. In the thirty-fixth year, from the firftcreation of the tribunes of the people, the numberten were tle&ed, two out of each of the clalTes; andit was eftablifhed as a rule, that they fhould fromthenceforth be elected in the fame manner. Thelevy being then made, Minucius marched againft theSabines, but did not come up with them. Horatius,after the .ffiquans had put the garrifon of Corbio'to the fword, and had alfo taken Ortona, broughtthem to an engagement in the diftrict of A'.gidum,killed a great number, and drove them not only out* of that dillric~t, but from Corbio and Ortona. Corbio
he







OCR Output








O F R O M E.


 


an antagonift to the tribunes, to check their corrupt Bprofufion. Together with Camillus were electedmilitary tribunes with confular power, Lucius Furius Y.R.Medullinus a fixth time, Caius ^Emilius, LuciusValerius Poplicola, Spurius Poftumius and PubliusCornelius a fecond time. In the beginning of theyear, the plebeian tribunes declined proceeding inthe bufinefs, until Marcus Furius Camillus fhouldfet out againft the Falifcians; for he had been ap­pointed to the command in that war. In confe-quence of this delay, the ardour of the purfuit wascooled, and Camillus, whom they had chiefly dread­ed as an opponent, found an increafe of glory in thecountry of the Falifcians: for the enemy at firft con­fining themfelves within their walls, which appearedto be the fafeft plan, by ravaging the country andburning the houies, he compelled them to comeforth from the city. But ftill their fears preventedthem from advancing to any confiderable length.At the diftance of about a mile from the city, theypitched their camp, for the fecurity of which theyconfided entirely in the difficulty of the approaches,all the roads on every fide being rough and craggy,in fome parts narrow, in others fteep: but Camillus,following the directions of a prifoner taken in thecountry, who acted as his guide, decamped in thelatter end of the night, and, at'break of day, fhewedhimfclf on ground much higher than theirs. TheRomans were formed into three divifions, each ofwhich, in turn, worked on the fortifications of thecamp, while the reft of the troops ftood in reaclinefsfor battle. The enemy then making an attempt to• interrupt his works, he routed and put them to flight;and with fuch confternation were the Falifcians.ftruck, that in the precipitancy of their flight, theypafied by their own camp, which lay nearer in theirway, and pufhed forward to the city. Great num­bers were flain and wounded before they reached thegates, through which they rufhed in great confufioni i 4 an4







OCR Output








OF ROME. 19?


LIT. TOGETHER with peace, plenty returned to B OrO Kthe city, corn being brought from Campania,; and u-yl^jevery one, as foon as he was freed from the dread of Y.R. 1?«.impending famine, producing the ftores which he '"•47+.had concealed. In this flate of plenty and cafe, thepeople began again to grow licentious, and not find­ing abroad any caufe of complaint, fought for it, asufual, at home. The tribunes put the minds of thecommons in a ferment, adminiftering to them theirufual poifon, the agrarian law; roufed their refent-ment againft the patricians, who oppofed it; and,not only, againft that body in general, but againftparticular members of it. Quintus Confidius, andTitus Genucius, the propofers of the agrarian law,lodged an accufation againft Titus Menenius: thecharge brought againft him was, the lofs of the fortof Cremera, when he, the confi.il, was encamped ina fixed poft at no great diftance. Him they crufh-ed, although the patricians ftruggled for him with nolefs zeal, than they had fhewn for Coriolanus, andthough his father Agrippa's title to the favour of thepublic was not yet forgotten. The tribunes wentno farther than to impofe a fine, though they hadcarried on the profecution as for a capital offence.On his being found guilty, they fixed his fine at twothoufand afes *. This proved fatal to him; we aretold that he could not bear the ignominy, and anguifliof mind, which it occafioned, and that this threwhim into a diforder which put an end to his life.Another was foon after brought to trial, Spurius Ser-vilius, againft whom, as foon as he went out of theconfulftiip, in the beginning of the year in which Y.R. 179.Cains Nautius and Publius Valerius were confiils, a B.C'*7J'profecution was commenced by two tribunes, Lu­cius Caedicius and Titus Statius: he did not, likeMenenius, meet the attacks of the tribunes withfupplications from himfclf and the patricians, but
•si.
o 3 with







OCR Output








OF ROME. 461


"the diftance of the feat of war; fuch as lamented BOOK"the lofs fuftained at Veil; fuch as had their houfes . -/c' in mourning for the lofs of children; brethren, Y n."kinfmen, and relations; all thefe had now, by"their means, both the right and the power affbrd-"ed them, of avenging the public and private ca-"lamities on the two perfons who were the guilty"caufes of them. For to Sergius and Virginius"were owing," they afierted, " the caufes of all"their misfortunes. And that was not more fully"evinced by the charge of the profecutor, than by"the acknowledgment of the defendants; who, be-"ing equally confcious of guilt, each imputed it to"the other; Virginius charging Sergius with cow-"ardice; Sergius, Virginius with treachery. The'' abfurdity of whofe conduct was fo incredible, that'c there was a much higher degree of probability that."the whole affair was tranfacted by concert, and"according to a wicked defign of the whole body"of patricians; who, for the purpofe of protracting"the war., firft gave the Veientians an opportunity"to burn the works, and now, had delivered up an"army to the fword of the enemy, and furrendered"a Roman camp to the Falifcians. The manage -"ment of all affairs was directed to one end, that"the young men mould grow old before Veil; and"that the tribunes mould be thereby deprived of"the power of taking the fenfe of the people, either"concerning the lands, or any other advantages of"the commons; of having their plans fupported by".a numerous attendance of citizens, or of making"head againft the confpiracy of the patricians."That the caufe of the defendants had been already"prejudged by the fenate, by the Roman people,"and by their own colleagues. For, by a decree"of the fenate, they had been removed from the"adminiftration of government j and, refufing to"refign their office, had been conftrained to fub-"mit, by their colleagues, who threatened them


"wi:h







OCR Output








O F R O M E. 75


 


guard, with the approbation of the fenate, took pof- B o. p Kfefllon of the kingdom, being the firft who attained .the fovereignty without the orders of the people.The fons of Ancus, as foon as they found that theinftruments of their villainy were feized, and under-ftood that the king was alive, and that the intereftof Servius was fo ftrong, had gone into exile toSuefla Pometia.
XLII. AND now Servius laboured to confirmhis authority, not only by fchemes of a public, butby others of a private nature. And left the fons ofTarquinius mould entertain the fame fentiments ofrefentment againft him, which had animated thefons of Ancus againft Tarquinius, he joined his twodaughters in marriage to the young princes, the Tar-quinii, Lucius and Aruns. But by no human de­vices could he break through the unalterable decreesof fate, or prevent envy of the fovereign powerfrom raifing difcord and animofity, even amongthofe of his own family. Very leafonably for pre-ferving ftability to the prefent eftablifhment, warwas undertaken againft the Veientians, the trucewith them having expired, and againft the otherEtrOrians. In that war, both the valour and thegood fortune of Tullius were very confpicuous.And, after vanquifhing a powerful army of the ene­my, he returned to Rome, no longer confideringhis authority as precarious, whether it were to de­pend on the difpofition of the Patricians towardshimfelf, or on that of the commons. He then en­tered on an improvement in civil polity of the ut-moft importance, intending, that, as Numa had beenthe founder of fuch inftiturions as related to the wor-fhip of the gods, fo pofterity fhould celebrate Servi­us, as the author of every diftin&ion between themembers of the ftate; and of that fubordination ofranks, by means of which, the limits between thefeveral degrees of dignity and fortune are exactly
afcertained.







OCR Output








O F R O M E.


the better able to.oppofe fitch formidable 'enemies, B OjO Kgave to both the nations under his government thename of Latines, that all fhould not only be govern­ed by the fame laws, but have one common name.From thenceforth the Aborigines yielded not to theTrojans in zeal ,and fidelity towards their king./Eneas. This difpofition of the two nations, whocoalefced daily with greater cordiality, infpired himwith fo great confidence, that, notwithftanding Etru-ria was pofiefied of fo great power, that it had filled•with the fame of its prowefs not only the land, butthe fea alfo, through the whole length of Italy, fromthe Alps to' the Sicilian Streight; and although hemight have remained within his fortifications, fecurefrom any attack of the enemy, yet he led out histroops to the field. The battle that followed was,with refpect to the Latines, their fecond, with refpectto ./Eneas, the laft of his mortal acts. He, by what­ever appellation the laws of gods and men requirehim to be called, is depofited on the bank or theriver Numtcus. They gave him the tide of JupiterIndiges *.
III. Hfs fon Afcanius was not yet of an age ripefor government; neverthelefs his title to the fove-reignty remained unimpeached, until he arrived atmaturity. During this interval, under the regencyof a woman, fo great was the capacity of Lavinia,the Latine ftate, and the united fubjects of his fatherand grandfather, continued firm in their allegianceto the young prince. I am not without fome doubts(for who can affirm with certainty in a matter of fuchantiquity ?) whether this Was the fame Afcanius men­tioned above, or one older than him, born of Creu-fa, wife to .ffineas, before the deftruction of Troy,and! who accompanied his father in his flight fromthence; whom, being alfo called Julius, the Julian
• Indigeg 1* the term applied to deified heroes, otbemife calledgods terreftriil.
> 4 family







OCR Output








432 T H E H I S T O R Y


BOOK" bc expected from perfons who were not accounted
^^^1^" in the number of citizens, or even of the human
Y R. 347. " race. If at any time the pofts of honour fhould
B.C. 405. " ceafe to be confined to one party, and the people
"fhould be admitted to a mare in the adminiftration
"of government, they would then exert their en-
"deavours to prevent the decrees of the fenate being
"invalidated by any arrogance of magiftrates. Un-
"til then, the patricians, who were under no reftraint
"of reverence to the laws and magiftrates, might
"by themfelves manage the tribunitian office along
"with the reft."
LVII. THIS contention, at a moft unfeafonabletime, when they had on their hands a war of fuchimportance, occupied every one's thoughts; until atlength, after Julius and Cornelius had for a longtime defcanted, by turns, on the injuftice done themin matching out of their hands the honourable em­ployment intrufted to them by the people, whenthey were furliciently qualified to conduct the war,Servilius Ahala, one of the military tribunes, faid,that " he had kept filence fo long, not becaufe he"was in doubt what part he ought to take j for what"good citizen would confider his own emolument,"as diftinct from that of the public ? but becaufe he"wifhed, that his colleagues would, of their own"accord, yield to the authority of the fenate, rather"than let fupplications be made to the college of"tribunes, for fupport againft them. That not-"withftanding what had pafied, if the fituation of"affairs would allow it, he would ftill give them'' time to recede from an opinion, too obftinately'1 maintained. But as the exigencies of war would"not wait on the counfels of men, he would prefer"the intereft of the commonwealth, to the regard"of his colleagues; and if the fenate continued in*c the fame fentiments, he would, on the following"night, nominate a dictator; and, if any perfon9 "protefted







OCR Output








6 F R O M £


 


It is faid, that while they ftood gazing on them asltarues, onrof them, Marcus Papirius, provoked the _
anger of a Gaul, by ftriking him on the head with Y.R. 365.his ivory fceptre, while he was ftroaking his beard, B. c.which at that time was univerfally worn long; thatthe flaughter began with him, and that the reft wereflain in their feats. After the nobles were put todeath, no living creature was fpared. The houfeswere plundered, and, as foon as they were emptied,fat on fire.
XLII. HOWEVER, whether it was, that theywere not all poffefied with a defire of reducing thecity to ruins, or whether the defign had beenadopted by the chiefs of the Gauls, that fome firesffiould be prefcnted to the view of the befieged,for the purpofe of terrifying them, to try if theycould be compelled to furrender, through affectionto their own dwellings, and that at the fame time allthe houfes fhould not be burned down, becaufewhatever remained of the city, they could hold asa pledge, by means of which they might work uponthe minds of the enemy, the fire did not, during thefirft day, fpread either extenfively, or in all parts in-difcriminately, as ufual in a captured city. TheRomans, beholding, from the citadel, the city filledwith the enemy, who ran up and down through everyftreet, fome new fcene of horror arifing to theirview in every different quarter, were neither able topreferve their prefence of mind, or even to rerainthe command of their eyes and ears. To whateverfide the fhouts of the enemy, the cries of womenand children, the.'noife of the flames, and the crafhof falling houfes, called their attention, thither,deeply fhocked at .every incident, they turned theirfaces, their eyes, their thoughts, as if placed thereby fortune, to be fpectators of the fall of their coun­try; and left, not for the purpofe of protecting anything belonging to th'em, but merely their own per-
V'OL. i. t i. tons,







OCR Output








O F R O M E. 33


and the appointing of magiftrates j though the cffi- BOOKcacy of it has been quite taken away: at prefent,before the people begin to vote, the fenate pre-vioufly declare their approbation of the proceedingsof the afiembly, and that, even before they are yetrefolved upon. The Interrex, then, having calledan afiembly, faid, " Romans! be the event prof-"perous, fortunate, and happy; elect a king: the"fathers have thought proper to decree that it"fhould be fo. If ye choofe a perfon worthy to be•* efteemed a fit fucceflbr to Romulus, the fathers"will join their approbation." This proceedingwas fo pleafing to the people, that, left they mightappear to be outdone in gencrofity, they voted, andordered, nothing more than that the fenate moulddetermine, by their decree, who fhould be king ofRome.
XVIII. THERE was at that time a perfon namedNuma Pompilius *, who was univerfally' celebratedfor juftice and piety: he lived at Cures, in the coun­try of the Sabines; and was as eminently fkilled, asany one in that age could be, in all laws human anddivine: he was fuppofed to have been inftructed byPythagoras of Samos; for which fuppofitton there isno other foundation, than its not being known, fromwhat other quarter he derived his knowledge: cer­tain it is, that more than an hundred years after thisperiod, in the reign of Servius Tullius, Pythagorasafiembled the youtli of the remoter parts of Italy,about Metapontum, Heracla, and Croton, and hadthem inftructed under his own diredlion. Fromplaces fo remote, even if he had lived in rk°,rir" ofNuma, how could fuch a character of him n^vereached the Sabines, as fhould have infpired themwith the defire of receiving his infractions? In what
* He was the Con of a SaVtne nobleman, and had been mirrict) to adaughter of king I'atius, but was now a


vot. i. D common







OCR Output








OF ROME. . 381


purfued the hopes of attaining higher dignity, during 3 OO Kthis interval of tranquillity abroad, called the people . '_jtogether in the houfes of the tribunes, and there Y.R. 313.concerted their plans in fecret. They complained B'Ct419'that "they were treated with fuch contempt by the"commons, that, notwithftanding military tribunes"with confular power had been elected for fo many , .• T •."years, no plebeian had ever yet been allowed to"attain that honour. Their anceftors, they faid,"had fhewn great forefight in providing that the"plebeian magiftracies fhould not lie open to any"patrician, otherwife they would have had patri-"cians tribunes of the commons; fo defpicable are"we even in the eyes of our own party, and not lefs"contemned by the commons than by the patricians"themfelves." Others took off the blame fromthe commons, and threw it on the patricians: " It"was through their arts and intrigues," they faid,"that the accefs to honours was barred againft the"plebeians. If the commons were allowed time to"breathe from their intreaties mixed with menaces,"they would come to an election with a due regard"to the intereft of their own party, and as they had"already fecured protection to themfelves, would"aflume alfo the adminiftration of the government."It was refolved, that, for the purpofe of abolifhingthe practice of thofe intrigues, the tribunes mouldpropofe a law, that no perfon mould be allowed, onapplying for an office, to add any white to his gar­ment *. This may appear at prefent a trivial mat­ter, fcarcely fit to be ferioufly mentioned, yet it thenkindled a very hot contention between the patriciansand plebeians. The tribunes, however, got the bet­ter, and carried the law; and as it was evident that
• Tu rub it with chalk, in order to incrtafr its whitenefo, and ren­der themlcliTs more conspicuous. It was the practice ot thofe whofolicited any public office, thus to make their garments more white,'Candida..'.: ,' hence they were called ' tancl:'l.i:i,' candidates, a word'dill in ufe.
the







OCR Output








<Sa THEHISTORY


BovO K had been expiated, that the anfwers of the prophets. -,'--• and the relponfes of the Pythian oracle were knownY.R. 359. to all, and that they had ufed the moft effectual meansB. C. 393. which human wifdom could fuggeft, for infuringfuccefs, in giving the command to Marcus Furius,the greateft general of the age; yet, as they had forfo many years experienced fuch a variety of fortunein that war, and had fuftained fo many lofies, theirjoy was as unbounded as if they had entertained nohopes of that event. And before the fenate pafiedany decree to the purpofe, every temple was filledwith the Roman matrons returning thanks to thegods. The fenate ordered fupplicatibns, for thefpace of four days, a longer term than had ever beenappointed in the cafe of any former war. The dicta­tor alfo on his arrival was more numeroufly attendedthan any general had ever been before; all rankspouring out to meet him, and the honours, conferredon him in his triumph, far furpafied the compliments• ufually paid on fuch occafions. He himfelf was themoft confpicuous object of all, riding through thecity in a chariot drawn by white horfes, which wasdeemed unbecoming, not to fay, a member of acommonwealth, but a human being; people deem­ing it an affront to religion, that the dictator fhouldemulate the equipage of Jupiter and Apollo; andon account, chiefly, of that fingle circumftance, his.triumph was more fplendid than pleafing. He thencontracted for the building of a temple to imperialJuno on the Aventine, and dedicated that of motherMatuta: after performing thefe fervices to the gods,and to mankind, he laid down his office of dictator.The offering to be made to Apollo came then un­der confide ration, and Camillus declaring that he hadvowed the tenth part of the fpoil to that ufe, and thepontiffs having given their opinion that the peopleought to difcharge that vow, it was found difficultto ftrike out a proper mode of ordering the peopleto refund the fpoil, in order that the due proportion


might







OCR Output








THE HISTORY


B o o K of their merit, put on the moft fplendid robes worn,t. -/-_' when they draw the chariots of the gods in procef-Y.K. 365. fion, or ride in triumph; and, in this drefs, featedB.C.387. themfelves in their ivory chairs at the fronts of theirhoufes. Some fay that they devoted themfelves forthe fafety of their country and their fellow-citizens;and that they fung a hymn upon the occafion, Mar­cus Fabius, the chief pontiff, dictating the form ofwords to them. On the fide of the Gauls, as the keen-nefs of their rage, excited by the fight, had abatedduring the night; and, as they had neither met .anydangerous oppofition in the field, nor were now tak­ing the city by ftorm or force j they marched nextday, without any anger or any heat of pafiion, intothe city, through the Colline gate, which ftoodopen, and advanced to the Forum, cafting roundtheir eyes on the temples of the gods, and on thecitadel, the only fpot which retained the appearanceof war. From thence, leaving a fmall guard toprevent any attack from the citadel or Capitol, whilethey were fcattered about, they difperfed in queft ofplunder. Not meeting a human being in the flreets,part of them rufhed in a body to the houfes thatflood neareft j part fought the moft diftant, as ex­pecting to find them untouched and abounding withfpoil. Afterwards, being frightened from thence,by the very folitude, and fearing left fome fccret de-fign of the enemy might be put in execution againftthem, while they were thus difperfed, they formedthemfelves into bodies, and returned again to theForum, and places adjoining /to it; where findingthe houfes of the plebeians fhut up, and the palacesof the nobles ftanding open, they fhewed rathergreater backwardnefs to attack thefe that were open,than fuch as were fhut. With fuch a degree of ve­neration did they behold men fitting in the porchesof the houfes, who, befide their ornaments and ap­parel, more fplendid than became mortals, bore theneareft refemblance to gods, in the majefty difplayedin their looks, and the gravity of their countenances.


I?







OCR Output








a6z THE HISTORY


BOOK cefS, nor fbowed the fame ability in the conduct of. ', his bufinefs: for, having encamped at a little dif-Y.R. 196. tance from the enemy, without having felt anyB.C. 456. confiderable lofs, he kept his men, through fear,confined within the trenches: when the enemy per­ceived this, they aflumed new boldnefs from theother's fears, and made an aflault on the camp bynight; but rinding, that, by open force, they werenot likely to fucceed, they began, next day, to in-clofe it by lines of circumvallation: before this workcould be completed, and the pafies thereby entirelyfhut up, five horfemen were difpatched, who, mak­ing their way between the enemy's pofts, broughtintelligence to Rome, that the conful and his armywere befieged. Nothing could have happened founexpected, or fo contrary to people's hopes; andthe fright and confirmation, in confequence of it,were not Iefs than if the enemy were laying fiege tothe city, inftead of the camp. They fent for theconful Nautius, and not fuppofing him capable ofaffording them fufncient protection, refolved that adictator fhould be appointed to extricate them fromthis diftrefs, and Lucius Quintius Cincinnatus wasaccordingly appointed, with unanimous approbation.Here, they may receive inftruction, who defpifeevery qualification which man can poflcfs, in com-parifon with riches; and who think, that high ho­nours and diftinguifhed merit muft neceflarily beconfined to thoie who enjoy an abundant affluenceof wealth. Lucius Quintius, the fole hope of thepeople, and of the empire of Rome, cultivated afarm of four acres, on the other fide of the Tiber,now called the Quintian meadows, oppofite to thevery fpot where the dock-yard rknds. There, hewas found by the deputies, either leaning on a Hake,in a ditch which he was making, or ploughing; infome work of hufbandry he was certainly employed.After mutual falutations, and wifhes " that it might"be happy both to him and the commonwealth,"
he







OCR Output








THE HIST OH*


 


fhe levy was made by the dictator, yet as the foldiers_had fworn obedience to the confuls, they were ftillY.R. 16o. bound by that oath, under the pretext of hoftilities£. C. 491. being renewed by the ^quans, they ordered the le­gions to be led out of the city: which ftep fervedonly to haften the breaking out of the fedition. It isfaid, that the plebeians, at firft, entertained thoughtsof putting the confuls to death, in order that theymight be thereby difcharged from the oath; but be­ing afterwards informed, that no religious obligationcould be diffolved by an adt of wickednefs, by theadvice of a perfon called Sicinus., they retired, with­out waiting for orders from the confuls, to the facredmount, beyond the river Anio, about three milesfrom the city. This account is more generally cre­dited, than that given by Pifo, who fays, the fe»ceflion was made to the Aventine. In this place*without any commander, .having fortified their campwith a rampart and trench, they remained quiet forfeveral days, taking nothing from any body but necef-fary fubfiftence, neither receiving nor giving offence.Great was the confirmation in the city; all was fear­ful fufpenfe and mutual apprehenfion: the plebei­ans, who were left behind by their brethren, dreadedthe violence of the patricians; the patricians dread­ed the plebeians who ftaid in the city, not knowingwhether they ought to wifh for their ftay, or for theirdeparture: but " how long could it be fuppofed"that the multitude which had leceded, would re-"main inactive? And what would be the confe-"quence, if, in the mean time, a foreign war mould'' break out? No glimpfe of hope could they fee"left, except in concord between the citizens,'c which muft be re-eftablifhed in the ftate on any'' terms, whether fair or unfair." They determined,therefore, to fend, as ambaffador to the plebeians,Menenius Agrippa, a man of eloquence, and ac­ceptable to the commons, becaufe he had been ori­ginally one of their body. He, being admitted into
the







OCR Output








O F R O M E. 347


"for compiling laws, we ourfelves have, within BOOK"the laft ten years, both, created, and abolifhed. l__^'J«'• Who is not convinced that in a city, founded for Y.R. 3,o."eternal duration, and growing up to an immenfe B.c. 441.*' magnitude, many new offices, both civil and reli-"gious, many new rights, both of families and indi-"viduals, muft neceflarily be inftituted. This very'' rule prohibiting the intermarriage of patricians'c and plebeians, was it not enacted by the decem-'c virs, within thefe few years, with the utmoft in-tc juftice towards the plebeians, on a principle highly'' detrimental to the public? Can there be any in-"fult greater or more flagrant, than that one half of"the ftate, as if it were contaminated, mould betc held unworthy of intermarrying with the other?C' What elfe is this than, within the fame walls, to"fuffer all the evils of ruftication or of exile? They"are anxious to prevent our being united to them,•c by any affinity or confanguinity j to prevent our"blood from being mingled with theirs. What! If'c this would be a ftain on that nobility of yours,"which the greater number.of you, the progeny of"Albans and Sabines, pofiefs not, in right of birth"or of blood, but of cooptation into the body of'c the patricians; having been clected, either by the"kings, or after their expulfion, by order of the"people, could ye not preferve its purity by regu-'' lations among yourfelves? By neither taking ple-"beian wives, nor fuffering your daughters and"fifters to marry out of the patrician line ? No ple-"beian will offer violence to a patrician maiden j"fuch outrageous luft. is to be found only among pa-"tricians. None of them would compel any man'' againft his will to enter into a marriage contracl:."But it is the prohibition of it by a law, the inter-"marriage of patricians and plebeians being inter-"dicted; this is what'the commons muft confider as"an infult. For why do ye not procure a law to be'' pafled, that the rich fhall not intermarry with the
"poor?







OCR Output








PREFACE. iv


vulgar rumours, thofe " deceptions of the eyes'' and ears," which yet he has thought it his dutyto record. And, in truth, it feems as if thepeople themfelves, at leaft the more enlightenedof them, were equally inclined, if eftablifhedcuftom would have allowed, to difregard them:"They grew weary," we are told, " not only"of the thing itfelf, but of the religious rites en-"joined in confequence; for neither could the"fenate be convened, nor the bufinefs of the""public be tranfacted, the confuls were fo con-"ftantlyemployed infacrifices and.expiations*."And, accordingly, with a view to diminifh thereports of thefe miracles, and the troublefemeceremonies confequent thereupon, the confuls,•by direction of the fenate, publifhed an edict,that when " on any day public worfhip fhould"be ordered, in confequence of the report of an'' earthquake, no perfon ihould report another"earthquake on that day f." Indeed, how verylittle faith the fenate really had in omens, pro­digies, and aufpices, we may learn from a re­markable order, made by them, upon receivingfrom a conful the report of the appearance ofunfavourable omens, in no lefs than three vic­tims fucceffively facrificed: "they orderedhim," fays the Hiftorian, " to continue facri-"ficing the larger victims, until the omens"fhould prove favourable ^."
It may be afked, if Livy himfelf, the fenate,and very many, perhaps the greater number,of the people, difbelieved thefe omens and pro­digies, why relate them? He anfwers the quef-
* B. xx)rfr,55, f Ibid. J B. xli. 15.
TOL. i. a tion







OCR Output








Jill PREFACE.


times, the fubftance of fpeeches in the Britiftiparliament, and other aflemblies, has often beenaccurately collected, and carefully preferved;and we may, therefore, reafonably fuppofe thatfpeeches in the Roman fenate, upon fubjectsin which the whole community were deeplyinterefted, would be heard with equal attention,and preferved with equal care.
A charge, of a very heavy nature, has beenbrought againft our Author, which, were it wellfounded, would utterly difqualify him fromwriting a credible hiftory. He is accufed offuperftitious credulity. That he was of a fe-rious and religious turn of mind, is fufficientlyapparent from many paflages in his Hiftory, inwhich he feverely reprehends the licendoufnefsand profligacy of the times he lived in, and ap­plauds the fimplicity of conduct, and fanctityof manners, of ancient times, when "that dif-"regard of the gods, which prevails in the pre-'' fent age, had not taken place; nor did every"one, by his own interpretations, accommodate"oaths and the laws to his particular views, but"rather adapted his practice to them*." Again,fpeaking of Spurius Papirius, he defcribes himas a " youth, born in an age when that fort of"learning which inculcates contempt of the gods"was yet unknown^." Numberlefs paflages,to this effect, might be cited; fuffice it, how­ever, to obferve, that he omits no opportunityof applauding good and pious actions, and ofreprehending, with ftrong indignation, the pro­fane, the impious, and the immoral.
* B. iii. 46. f B. x. 40.
But,







OCR Output








T H


HISTORY OF ROME.


BOOK III.
Diffenftons about the agrarian laws. The Capitol feized byexiles and Jlaves. ^uintius Cincinnatus called from thecultivation of hit farm, to conduEl a war again/} tht&quans; vauquijbes them, and males them fafs under thtyoke. The number of the tribunes of the people augmentedto ten. Ten magiftrates, called decemvirs, invcfted .withthe authority of the confuls, and of all other magijlrates,are appointed for the purpofe of digefling and publijhing abody of laws. Thefe, having promulgated a code of laws,contaii'cd in ten tables, obtain a continuation of their autho­rity for another year, during which, they add two more tothe former ten tables. They refufe to reftgn their office, andretain it a third year. At firjt, they acJ equitably andjujlly; afterwards, arbitrarily and tyrannically. At lengththe commons, provoked by a bafe attempt of one of them,Appiiis Claudius, to violate the chajiity of a daughter ofVirginius, feize upon the Aventine mount, and compel themto reftgn. Appius and Oppius, two of the mojl obnoxioustare threwn into prifon, where they put an end to their ownlives; the reft are ttanijhed. War with the Sabines, Vol-fcians, and JEquans. Unjuji dettrmination of the Romanpeople, who being chofen arbitrators in an affair between thepeople of Ardea and Aricia, concerning fame difputed lands,adjudge them to themjelves.
I, QOON after the taking of Antium, Titus JEmi- BOOK
O lius and Quintus Fabius were elected confuls. . "^This Quintus was the fingle one of the Fabii who y.R. ,87.remained alive when the family were cut off at the B.C.4.65.Cremera. ./Emilius had before, in his former con-fulate, recommended the beftowing lands on the
com mans:







OCR Output













OCR Output








JS4 THE HISTORY


BOOK Moneta. Tranquillity prevailed, not only at home,L_^_L_. but abroad, notwithftanding fo many alarms given,by the neighbouring ftates.
Y.R. 311. VIII. WHETHER this year had tribunes only, or'confuls fubftituted in their room, the fucceeding yearundoubtedly had confuls, Marcus Geganius Macert-nus a fecond time, and Titus Quintals Capitolinus afifth time, being invefted with that honour. Thisfame year produced the firft inftitution of the cenfor-fbip, an office which fprung from an ineonfiderableorigin, but grew up afterwards to fuch a height ofimportance, that it became pofieffed of the entireregulation of the morals and difcipline of the Ro­man people. The fenate, the centuries of theknights, and the diftribution of honour and ignomi­ny, were all under the fupreme jurifdiction of thefemagiftrates. The difcrimination of public from pri .vate property in lands or houfes, and the entire re­venue bf the Roman people, were finally adjufted bytheir fovereign decifion. What gave rife to the in­ftitution was, that as the people had not, for manyyears paft, undergone a furvey, the cenfus couldneither be longer deferred, nor could the confuls findIcifure to perform it, while they were threatened withwar by fo many different ftates. An obfcrvationwas made in the fenate, that a bufinefs, fo laborious,and ill-fuited to the office of conful, would requireofficers to be appointed for that particular purpofe,to whole management fhould be committed the bufi­nefs of the public fecretaries, the fuperintendanceand cuftody of the records, and the adjuftment ofthe form of proceeding in the cenfus. This propo-fal, though deemed of little confequence, yet, as ittended to increafe the number of patrician magiftratesin the commonwealth, the fenate, on their part, re­ceived with great pleafure; forefeeing alfo, I fup-pofe, what really happened, that the influence ofthofe who fhould be raifed to that poft, wpuld derive
additional







OCR Output








THE


HISTORY OF ROME.


BOOK IV. .
law, permitting the intermarriage of patricians with ple­beians, carried, after a violent Jtrugg/e and jlrong oppo/t-tion on the part of the patricians. Military tribunes, withconfular power, created, Cenfon created. The lands•which were taken from the people of Ardea, by an unjttftdetermination of the Roman people, rejlored. Spurius Ma-tins, aiming at regal power, Jlain by Caius Servilius Ahala.Cornelius CoJJas, having killed Tolumnitts, king of theVelentians, offers the fecond opima fpolia. The duration ofthe cenforjhlp limited to a year and half. Fidintt reduced,and a colony fettled there. The colontjls murdered by theFid f nations, who are re-conquered by Mamercus JEmilius,diftator. A confpiracy of Jlaves fitpprejfed. Poftumius, amilitary tribune, Jlain by the army, exafperated by hitcruelties. Pay jirjt given to the foldiers out of the publictreafury. Military operations againft thi Vol/dons, Fidena-and Falijcians.


I. /-|-VHE next who fuccecded in the confulfhip BOOK
JL were Marcus Genucius and Caius Curtius, w.whofe year was difturbed by commotions, both at Y.R.%IO.home and abroad. For, in the beginning of it, B.C. 44*.Caius Canuleius, a tribune of the people, propofeda law, for allowing the intermarriage of patriciansand plebeians, which the former confidered as tend­ing to contaminate their blood, and to confound allthe privileges of noble birth; and, befides this, fome
z 2 hints







OCR Output








PREFACE.


But, to be religious is one thing, to be fu-perftitious is another. He has, certainly, re­corded many and monftrous prodigies; toenumerate which would be both tedious anddifgHfting. As, however, they were not merelythe fubjecT: of popular tales and vulgar con-verfation, but the objects of public attention,'noticed always by the magiftrates, and oftenby the fenate, whom we frequently find order­ing expiations of them, it was his duty, as anhiftorian, to relate them, fince they thus madea part of the public tranfactions of the times.And this he does, with particular caution; ap­parently anxious left he fhould be fuppofed tobelieve in fuch abfurdities, and protefting, as itwere, againft the imputation of fuperftition.Thus, upon an occafion where he relates more,and more extraordinary, prodigies, than in anyother part of his Hiftory, he introduces his ac­count of them by faying, " Numerous pro-"digies were reported to have happened this"year; and the more they were credited by"fimple and fuperftidous people, the more fuch"ftories multiplied *." He generally introducesthe mention of them, with a referve as to hisown belief of them: "Many prodigies were"reported f." '* It was believed that crows had"not only torn with their beaks fome gold in the"Capitol, but had even eaten it:}:." And again,"Fires from heaven, breaking out in various'' places, had, as was.faid," &c. § Nor is heat all fcrupulous in declaring thefe numerous
• B. xx'iv. 10. f B. xxvii. 4.
I B. :.....x. 2, •. B. jxxix, zz.


prodi-







OCR Output








26o THE HIS TORY


BOOK the tenth from the founding of the city. The num-
._-T- -' ber of citizens rated, was one hundred and thirty-
Y.R. 195. two thoufand four hundred and nine. The coniuls
B.C.457. acquired great glory this year, both at home and
in war: for they eftablifhed peace abroad, and, at
home, though the ftate enjoyed not perfect concord,
• yet the diffenfions wefe Icis violent than at other
times.
Y.R. 196. XXV. Lucius Minucius and Cains Nautius, whoB. c. 456. wtrc next elected confuls, found on their hands thetwo caufes in dilpute, which lay over from the laftyear. The confuls ;,bfrrudr.ed the palh;ig of the law,and the tribunes the trial of Volfcius, with equal de­grees of activity. But the new quaeftors were pof-feficd of greater power and influence. Togetherwith Marcus Valerius, fon of Manius Valerius,grandfon of Volefus, Titus Quintius Capitolinus, ,who had been thrice conful, was qusjftor. AlthoughCa:ib could not be thereby reftorcd to the Quintianfamily, and, in him, the moft valuable of its youngmen, to the ftate, yet with an animofity dictated byjuftice and duty, he profecuted the falle witnefs, bywhofe means an innocent perlbn had been deprivedof the liberty of making his defence. The tribunes,and particularly Virginius, endeavouring to procurethe puffing of their law, the confuls were allowed thefpace of two months to examine it, on condition,that when they mould have informed the people ofthe dangerous defigns which were concealed underthe propofitions which it contained, they would thenallow them to give their votes on it. This refpite ofproceedings being acceded to, rendered mattersquiet in the city. But the /Equans did not allowthem long to enjoy reft; for, violating the leaguewhich had been made the preceding year with the •Romans, they conferred the chief command onGracchus Clcelius, a man at that time of by far thegreateft confequence among them; and, headed by
. . him, .







OCR Output








366 THEHISTORY


BOOK the dictator on one fide, and the conful on the other,^ J1: ^. to be content with the victory without their entireY.K.S96. deftruction, and to permit them to retire withoutB.C. «8. arms. By the conful they were referred to the dicta­tor, and he, highly incenfed againft them, addedignominy to their defeat. He ordered their generalGracchus Clcelius, and the other leaders, to bebrought to him in chains, and the town of Corbiotobe evacuated; then told them, that " he wanted not"the blood of the ^Equans; that they were at liberty"to depart; but he would fend them under the yoke,"as an acknowledgment, at length extorted, that their"nation was conquered and fubdued." The yoke isformed of three fpears, two being fixed upright inthe ground, and the other tied acrofs between theupper ends of them. Under fuch a yoke as this thedictator fent the ^Equans.
v
\ XXIX. HAVING pofTelTed himfelf of the enemy'scamp, which was filled with plenty of all kinds, forhe had fent them away naked, he diftributed the en­tire fpoil among his own troops; reprimanding theconfular army and the conful himfelf, he laid to them,"Soldiers, ye fhall fhare no part of the fpoil of that"enemy, to whom ye were near becoming a prey"yourfelves. And as to you, Lucius Minucius,"until you begin to mew a fpirit becoming a conful,"you fhall command thofe legions, with the rank of"lieutenant general only." Accordingly Minu­cius refigned the confulfhip, and, in obedience to or­ders, remained with the army. But fo well werepeople then difpofed to obey, without repining, thecommands of fuperiors, that this army, regardingmore the benefit which he had conferred, than thedifgrace which he had inflicted on them, not onlyvoted a golden crown of a pound weight to the dic­tator, but at his departure falnted him as their patron.At Rome, the fenate, being convened by QuintusFabius, prasfect of the city, ordered that Quintius
on







OCR Output








484 THEHISTORY


BOOK acres and feven-twelfths to each man. This dona-._J_yl,__, tion now began to be looked on with fcorn, becaufeY.R. 360. they confidered the offer as intended to pacify them,B. C. 391. on the difappointment of higher expectations: for"why," faid they, " fhould the commons be fent"into exile among the Volfcians, when the beauti-"ful city of Veii lay within view, and the territory"belonging to it, more fertile and more extenfivc"than the territory of Rome?" The city too, theyextolled as preferable even to the city of Rome,both in point of fituation, and the magnificerrce ofits edifices and inclofures, both public and private.Nay, they went fo far as to propofe the fcheme whichafter the taking of Rome by the Gauls was moregenerally adopted, of removing to Veii. But theirplan now was, that half of the commons, and halfof the fenate fhould fix their habitations at Veii; andthus two cities compofing one commonwealth mightbe inhabited by the Roman people. The noblesoppofed thefe meafures with fuch warmth, as to de­clare, that they would fooner die in the fight of theRoman people, than any of thofe matters mould beput to the vote: for, " when one city at prefent"fupplied fuch abundance of diffenfions, what would'' be the cafe with two? Was it poflTible that any"one could prefer a vanquifhed, to a victorious city,"and let Veii, after being captured, enjoy a greater"degree of profperity than ever it had in its moft"flourifhing days? In fhort, they might be forfaken"in their native country by their fellow-citizens,"but no force fhould ever compel them to forfake"their native country and fellow-citizens, and to"follow Titus Sicinius, (for he was the plebeian"tribune who had brought forward the propofition,)"as a founder to Veii, abandoning the divine Ro-'' mulus, the fon of a god, the parent and founder"of the city of Rome." And thefe difputes pro­ceeded to a fhameful height: for the patricians haddrawn over half of the plebeian tribunes to their fen-time nts j







OCR Output








OF ROME.


 


engagement: they thought they might continue theirinfults with perfect lafety; that the foldhrs would notbe intrufted with arms; that the bufinefs would end Y.R.in a defperate mutiny; and that the final period of B.<''47**the Roman empire was arrived. Buoyed up withthefe hopes, their parties prefied forward to the very.gates, heaped reproaches on the troops, and hardlyrefrained from aflauUing the camp: but now, theRomans could no longer endure fuch infults; fromevery quarter of the camp, they ran haftily to theconfuls, and did not, as before, propofe their de­mand, regularly, through the principal centurions,but every one of them joined in one general cla­mour. The affair was now ripe; yet ftill the con-fuls fhewed a backwardnefs: at length beginning,from the uproar continually increafing, to dread amutiny, Fabius, with the confent of his colleague,having caufed filence by found of trumpet, faid,f' Cneius Manlius, that thofe men are able to con-'•i quer, I know; but they themfelves have given"me realbn to doubt, whether it is their wifh: for"which realbn I am refolved and determined not to"give the fignal, unlefs they fwear that they will"return from the battle with victory. Soldiers*' have once deceived a Roman conful in the field,'' but they will never deceive the gods." There•was a centurion, called Marcus Flavoleius, who wasamong the foremoft in demanding battle; he criedout, " Marcus Fabius, I will return victorious fromfc the field;" and, at the fame time, imprecated onhimfelf the anger of father Jupiter, of Mars Gradivus,and the other gods, if he did not perform his pro-mife: after him the whole army feverally took thefame oath. As foon as they had fworn, the fignalwas given j inftantly they took arms, and marchedout to battle, full of rage and of confidence: theyeach of them bade the Etrurians now throw out theirreproaches; now let the enemy, who was fo alert inwords, cQrne in the way of their arms; there was not
a man.







OCR Output








O F R O M E. 307


•were given up to be plundered. Next day the die- BOOKtator affigned by lot one captive to each horfcman L-r-_fand centurion, and two to fuch as had diftinguifhed Y.R. •519.themfelves by extraordinary behaviour, and fold the B. c. **'•reft by aucHon: then he led back to Rome his vic­torious army, enriched with abundance of fpoil; andordering the mafter of the horfe to refign his office,he immediately refigned his own, on the fixteenthday of his holding it; giving up the government ina ftate of tranquillity, which he had received in aftate of war and of danger. Some annals have re­ported, that there was alfo a naval engagement withthe Veientians, at Fidenae, a fact equally impractica-ble and incredible; the river, even at prefent, beingnot broad enough for the purpofe, and at that time,as we learn from old writers, confiderably narrower.This we can no otherwife account for, than by fup-pofing, that they magnified the importance of afcuffle which took place, perhaps, between a fewmips, in difputing the paffage of the river, andthereon grounded thofe empty pretenfions to a na­val vicctory.
XXXV. THE enfuing year had military tribunes, Y.R. j?o.with confular power,. rAiilus Sempronius Atratinus, B.c.4iz'Lucius Quintals Cinclririatus, Lucius Furius Medul-linus, and Lucius Horatius Barbatus. A truce, fortwenty years, was granted to the Veientians; andone for three years to the y^Equans, although thefe hadpetitioned for a longer term. At home, there wasno difturbance from feditions. The year following,though not diftinguifhed either by war abroad, orfedition at home, was rendered remarkable by the ce­lebration of the games, which had been vowed onoccafion of the war, through the fplendid manner inwhich they were exhibited by the military tribunes,and alfo through the extraordinary concourfe of theneighbouring people. The tribunes, with confular Y.R. J1T.power, were Appius Claudius Craffus, Spurius Nau- B. c. +IU


tius







OCR Output








4<Jo T H E H I S T O R Y


BOOK 5ng at leaft the authority of the Trebonian law, by
, .J-_. the aiTumption of Caius Lacerius and Marcus Acu-
Y.R. 3'A. tius as plebeian tribunes; and this was effected, cvi-B. c. 398. dently, by the influence of the patricians.
XL IT fo happened, that this year Caius Tre-bonius was a plebeian tribune: and he confideredit as a duty incumbent on his name and family, topatronize the Trebonian law. He therefore com­plained loudly, that " a. meafure which had beenat-"tempted by fome patricians, and in which they"were baffled at their firft fetting out, had been"violently carried by the military tribunes:—that'•' the Trebonian law had been fubverted, and ple-"beian tribunes elected, not in conformity to the"fuffragc of the people, but to the mandate of the"patricians. And the matter was brought to this"iffue, that people muft be content to fee the office"of plebeian tribune filled either by patricians or by"the dependants of patricians :—that all the advan-"tages of the devoting laws were wrefted from"rhem, and the tribunitian power forcibly trans-"ferred to other hands." And he infifted, that"this muft have been effected, either by fomc"fraudulent artifices of the patricians, or by the"villainy and treachery of his colleagues." Thepublic being inflamed with an high degree of refent-ment, not only againft the patricians, but the tri­bunes of the people alfo; as well thofe who had beenelected, as thofe who had elected them; three ofthat body, Publius Curatius, Marcus Metilius, andMarcus Minucius, greatly alarmed for their own in-terefts, made an attack on Sergius and Virginius,military tribunes of the former year, and, by a pro-fecutiori which they commenced, turned off uponthem the anger of the commons, and the refentmentof the public. They defired people to " take no*"tice, that fuch as felt themfelves aggrieved by the"levy, by the tax, by long fervice in the army, and
"the







OCR Output








OF ROME. 77


die "fame, and thefe 'regulated by the fame diftinc- B o o Ktions of age. Nor was any difference made in theirarms, only the greaves were taken from them. Inthe fourth clafs the fortune was twenty-five thoufandales *. The fame number of Centuries were form­ed; their arms were different: they were allowednone but a fpear and a buckler. The fifth clafs waslarger; it contained thirty Centuries: thefe carriedflings, and Hones, which they were to throw. A-mong thde, the cxtraordinaries, trumpeters, andfifers, were diltributed into three Centuries. Thisclafs was rated at eleven thoufand afesf. Thereft of the populace were comprehended under aneftimate lower than this, and of them was formedone Century, exempted from military fervice. Thefoot forces being thus diftinguifhed and armed, heenrolled twelve Centuries of horfemen, from amongthe principal pcrlbns of the ftate. He formed like-wife fix other Centuries, out of the three inftitutedby Romulus, preferving ftill the original names un­der which they had been incorporated. Ten thou­iand afes J were given thele out of the public funds,to purchafe horfes; and certain widows were appoint­ed, who were to pay them annually two thoufandafes§ each, towards the maintenance of their horfes.In all thele inftances, the burthen was taken off fromthe poor, and laid on the rich. To make the latterfome amends, additional honours were conferred onthem. For henceforth fuffrages were given, notaccording to the mode eftablifhed by Romulus, andretained by the other kings, man by man promifcu-oufly, with equal weight, and equal privileges; butdegrees of precedency were eftablifhed in fuch amanner, that, while no man appeared to be excludedfrom giving his fuffrage, ftill the whole power waslodged in the chiefs of the ftate: for the knights


* Sol. 14!. yd. f 55'. 10'. S'l.
J 31!. j s. loU. $ 61, js. ad.


were







OCR Output








i84 THE HISTORY


BOOK " inaction, among men who had arms in their. -^-j_j " hands:" throwing out, befides, many reproaches,'Y.R.174. fome true, and fome falfe, on the novelty of theirB.C. 478. origin, and of their race. Such invectives, thoughuttered with great vociferation, clofe to the veryrampart and the gates, gave the confuls no mannerof uneafinefs: but the minds of the uninformedmultitude were ftrongly agitated, at one time by in­dignation, at another by fhame, and diverted fromreflecting on dorneftic quarrels: they could not bearthe thoughts of fuffering the enemy to infult t.hemunrevenged, neither could they wifh fuccefs either tothe confuls, or the patricians: thus there was a.ftruggle in their breafts, between their animofityagainft foreigners, and that which inflamed themagainft their countrymen: the former at length pre­vailed, in confequence of the haughty and infolentfeoffs of the enemy: they afiembled in crowds atthe Praetorium *, demanding the fight, and requir­ing the fignal to be given. The confuls held a con-fultation together, as if deliberating on the demand,and conferred for a confiderable time: they wifhedto fight; but it was neceflary to reftrain and concealthat wifh, in order, by oppofition and delay, to addto the alacrity which had now fprung up in the mindsof the troops: they returned for anlwer, that " the"meafure was premature: it was not yet a proper'' time for fighting. That they muft keep within'' the camp." They then iffued orders, that " all"mould refrain from fighting; declaring, that if any"one fhould engage without orders, they would"punifh him as an enemy." After the troops werethus difmifled, their ardour for fighting increafed,in proportion to the averfion, which they fuppoled,in the confuls: befides, the enemy approached withmuch greater boldnefs, as foon as it became knownthe confuls had determined not to come to an,
• The general's quarter*,
engage*







OCR Output








OF ROME. i f<*5


that, even after it had abated, they could not entirely BOOKrid their minds of the terror which it had occafioned. . -w'-_tBefides, the Romans not only augmented the num- Y.R. 16*.bers of their colony at Velitrae, but fent a new colo- B.t.49|>'ny into the mountains of Norba, to ferve as a bar­rier in the Pomptine territory. In the fucceedingconfulate of Marcus Minucius, and Aulus Semproni- Y.R. 161.us, a great quantity of corn was brought from Sicily, B. c'+*9.and it was debated in the fenate, at what price itfhould be given to the commons: many were ofopinion, that now was the time to humble the com­mons, and to recover thofe rights, which, by the fe-'ceffion and violence, had been extorted from thepatricians; Marcius Coriolanus particularly, anavowed enemy of the power of the tribunes, faid,"If they wifh to have provifions at the ufual price,"let them reftore to the patricians their former"rights: why am I obliged, after .being fent under"the yoke, after being ranfomed, as it were, from"robbers, to behold plebeian magiftrates, to behold"Sicinius invefted with power and authority? Shall"I fubmit to fuch indignities longer than neceffity"compels me? Shall I, who could not endure"Tarquinius on the throne, endure Sicinius? Let"him now fecede, let him call away the commons:"the road is open to the facred mount, and to other"hills: let them carry off the corn from our lands,"as they did two years ago: let them make the beft"of the prefent ftate of the market, which they"have occafioned by their own madnefs. I affirm"with confidence, that when they are brought to"reafon by their prefent Jufferings, they will them-"felves become tillers of the lands, rather than take"arms and fecede, to prevent their being tilled/'Whether fuch a meafure were expedient, is not noweafy to fay; but, in my opinion, it was very prac­ticable for the patricians, by infifting on terms forlowering the price of provifions, to have freed them-M 3 felves







OCR Output








3« THE HISTORY


BOOK treaties and alliances, fecured the friendfhip of all his.neighbours, and thereby removed all apprehenfio»of danger from abroad, left the difpofitions of thepeople, which had hitherto been retrained by fearof their enemies, and by military difciplinc, fhould,.in time of tranquillity, grow licentious, he made ithis firft aim to inlpire them with fear of the gods, aprinciple of the grcateft efficacy with the multitude*in that rude and ignorant age. And as this did notfcem Likely to make much irnprefTion on their minds,.without the aid of fome pretended miracle, he madethem believe that he had nightly meetings with thegoddefs Egeria; and that, by her direction, he in-ftituted the facred rites, moft acceptable to the gods,,and appointed proper pricfts for each of the deities.His n'rft undertaking was to divide the year intotwelve months, according to the courfe of the moon:and becaufe the moon does not make up the numberof thirty days in each month, and conlequently thereare fome days wanted to fill up the complete year,formed by the revolution of the fun, he managed infuch a manner, by inferting intercalany months, thatevery twenty-fouith year, the fpace of all the inter­mediate, years being completed, the days coincidedwith the fame polition of the fun from whence theyhad iet out. lie allb appointed days of bufinels,and days of celTation therefrom, forefeeing how expe­dient it would be in future, that there fhould betimes wherein no bufinefs could be brought beforethe people.
XX. HE next turned his thoughts to the appoint­ment of prides, though he performed in perion thegreatc ft part of the facred rites, efpecially thofewhich now belong to the office of the Hamen of Ju­piter*; judging, that in fuch a warlike ftate, th«
greater


* For a full arcount of the duty and office of the different fiamens,fee Or. Adams's Roman Annuities. Alio for thufe of the vcftal vii..







OCR Output








76 .THE HISTORY


£ o o K afcertained. For he inftituted the Cenfus, an ordi-L -T'--. nance of the moft falutary confequence, in an empirethat was to rife to fuch a pitch of greatnefs j ac-Y. R. cording to which the feveral fervices requifite in3*?C. war and peace were to be difcharged, not by every555. perfon indifcriminatcly, as formerly, but accordingto the proportion of their feveral properties. Hethen, according to the Cenfus, formed the plan ofthe Clafies, and Centuries, and the arrangementwhich fubfifts at prefent, calculated to prelerve re­gularity, and propriety, in all tranfactions either ofpeace or war,
XLIII. OF thofe who pofiefied a hundred thou-fand afes *, or more, he formed eighty Centuries,forty elder, and the fame number of younger f.The collective body of thefe was denominated thefirft clafs. The bufinefs of the elder was to guardthe city; that of the younger, to carry on warabroad. T]ie arms which they were ordered to pro­vide, were a helmet, mield, greaves, coat of mail,all of brafs, thefe for the defence of the body.Their weapons of offence were a fpear and a fword.TO this clafs were added two Centuries of artificers,who were to ferve without arms. The fervice al­lotted to them was to attend the machines in war.The fortune fixed for the fccond clafs, was from ahundred down to feventy-five thoufandafes J . Ofthefe, elder and younger, were formed twenty Cen­turies. The arms which they were ordered to pro­vide were, a buckler, inftead of a fhield, and all thereft, except the coat of mail, the fame with theformer. The fortune of the third clafs he fixed atfifty thoufand afes § . The number of Centuries was
• 311!. i8s. 4d. according to Dr. Arbuthnot's calculation,f The elder, confifted of thofe who had attained to forty.fix year^of age; the younger, from feventeen to forty.fix.3$. 91!. § i6il. 95. id.
the







OCR Output








47® THE HISTORY


B QVO K confular power came into office. Thefe were Lu-. -/r,__t cius Julius lulus, and Lucius Furius Medullinus aY,R. 158. fourth time, Lucius Sergius Fidenas, Aulus Poftu-B. C. 394. mius Regillenfis, Publius Cornelius Maluginenfis,and Aulus Manlius. This year there ftarted up anew enemy, the Tarquinians; who, feeing the Ro­mans embroiled in fo many wars at once, againftthe Volfcians at Anxur, where the garrifon was be-fieged, at Lavici againft the ./Equans, who were bc-fieging the colony there j and alfo againft the Veien-tians and the Falifcians, and the Capenatians, and theiraffairs within their walls not lefs embarrafied by dif-fenfions, and thinking this a favourable ieafon toattack them with effect, fent their light-armed co­horts to make depredations on the Roman terri­tories, concluding that the Romans would eitherfufifer that affront to pafs unrevenged, rather thanburthen themfelves with an additional war, or if theyrefented it, would fend out an army neither numer­ous nor ftrong. The Romans felt greater indigna­tion at the Affront, than concern for the lofs fuftain-cd by the inroads of the Tarquinians. They, there­fore, undertook the bufinefs without either much,preparation or long delay. Aulus Poftumius andLucius Julius having collected a body of troops, notby a regular levy, for in that they were preventedby the tribunes of the commons, but moftly volun­teers, whom by perfualions they had prevailed on tofollow them, directed their march by crofs roadsthrough the territory of Caere, and came upon theTarquinians unawares, as they were returning fromtheir depredations, heavily laden with fpoil: theyflew great numbers of their men, got pofieffion ofall their baggage; and, having retaken the fpoilsof their lands, returned to Rome. The fpace oftwo days was allowed to the owners to reclaim theirproperty; on the third, what remained unclaimed,the greateft part of which had been the enemy's ownproperty, was fold by auction, and the produce dif-
tributed;







OCR Output













OCR Output








O F R O M E.


LI. WHEN the deputies were difmified, Virginius BOOKreminded the foldiers, " how much they had been .__^_L_^f"embarraffed juft now in a.cafe of no extraordinary Y.R. 305."difficulty, in confequence of their being a multi- B. c. *4"•"tude without a head; and that the an Twer given,"though not inexpedient, was the refult rather ofc' an accidental concurrence, than of a concerted"plan: he recommended to them, therefore, to"clect ten perfons, who mould prefide in the di-"rection of their affairs, and, in the ftyle of mili-"tary dignity, be called tribunes of the foldiers."This honour being offered, in the firft place, to him-felf, he faid, " Refcrve, to a juncture more happy,"both to you and me, fuch expreflions of your"good opinion of me. It is neither poffible for'' me, while my daughter is unrevenged, to reapC' fatisfadion from any honour, nor is it expedient"for you, in the prefent difordered ftate of the"commonwealth, to have thofe at your head who"are moft obnoxious to party malice. If I can be"of any fervice, my remaining in a private capa-'' city will in no degree prevent it." They accord­ingly elected ten military tribunes. Nor was thearmy in the country of the Sabines inactive. Therealfo, at the inftance of Icilius and Numitorius, a fe-cefiion from the decemvirs was made; men's mindsbeing no lefs ftrongly agitated by having the mur­der of Siccius recalled to their memory, than by therecent account of the barbarous attempt againft thechaftity of Virginia. When Icilius heard that tri­bunes of the foldiers had been elected on the Aven-tine, fearing left the affembly of election in the citymight follow the lead of the military afiembly, andelect the fame perfons tribunes of the commons,being well verfed in popular intrigues, and aiminghimfelf at that office, he took care that, before theyproceeded to the city, the fame number with equalpowers mould be electcd by the party with him.They entered the city in military array through the
Collinc







OCR Output








£ao. THE ( HISTORY


B OvO K tne tracks of country which ftretchfrom each fide.oft_,.-J-_.i the mountain, to the {wo feas, having founded twelveY.R. 364. cities on each fide, firft on the hither fide towards theB. C. 388. }ower fea, and afterwards fending to the other fide ofthe Apennines as many colonies as there were capitalcities in them other country; and thefe acquired pof-feffion of the whole region beyond the Po, all the wayto the Alps, except the corner of the Venetians whodwell round the extreme point of the Adriatic. TheAlpine nations alfo, without doubt, derived theirorigin from them, particularly the Rhetians, whowere rendered favage merely by their fituation, fbas to retain no mark of their original, except the ac­cent of their language, and not even that withoutcorruption.
XXXIV. CONCERNING the paffage of the Gaulsinto Italy, what we have learned is this: when Tar-quinius Prifcus reigned at Rome, the fupreme go­vernment of the Celts, who compofed one third partof Gaul, lay in the hands of the Biturigians: thefegave a king to the Celtic nation, Ambigatus, aman very eminently diftinguifhed by his own merit,and by the extraordinary degree of profperity whichattended him, both in his own private concerns, andin thofe of the public; for under his governmentGaul was fo fruitful, and fo numeroufly peopled,that it feemed fcarcely practicable to retain fuch anenormous multitude under the direction of govern­ment. Being far advanced in years, and wifbing toexonerate his realm of a crowd with which it wasoverburthened, he declared his intention offendingaway his fifter's fons, Bellovefus and Sigovefus, twofpirited young men, to whatever fettlements the godsfhould point out by their auguries; and that theyihould carry with them any number of men, whichthey themfelves fhould choofe; fo that no nationwhich lay in their way fiioukl be able to obftructtheir courfe. Sigoveius was then directed by the
oracle







OCR Output








OF ROM&


*c We have pafled an order for the £redhing of a B ° O K
tc temple to Aius Locutius, in the new ftreet, out . -t'._f
"of regard to the heavenly voice which was heard Y:R. 36$.
"there. To our other folemnities we have added B'c.3*7'
"Capitoline games, and have, by direction of the
*' fenate, founded a new college for the perfof niince
'' thereof. Where was there occafion for any of
"thefe inftitutions, if we were to abandon the eity
*' at the fame time with the Gauls; if it was againft
'' our will that we refided in the Capitol, for fo
"many months as the fiege continued; if it was
"through a motive of fear that we fuffered our-
"felves to be held confined there by the enemy?
"Hitherto we have fpoken of the facred rites and
"the temples, what are we now to fay of the
'' priefts? Does it not occur to you, what a de-
'' gree of impiety is to be committed with refpect
"to them? For the veftals have but that one re-
"fidence, from which nothing ever difturbed them,
"except the capture of the.city. And it isdeemed
"impious if the Flamen Dialis remain one night
"out of the city. Do ye intend to make thefe
"Veientian priefts inftead of Roman? And, O
"Vefta, mall thy veftals forfake thee? And fhall
"the Flamen, by foreign refidence, draw every
"night on himfelfj and the commonwealth, fo great
"a load of guilt? What fhall we fay of other
"kinds of bufinefs which we tranfact under aufpices,
"and almoft all within the Pomcerium? To what
"oblivion, or to what neglect, are we to confign
"them? The afiemblies of the Curias, which
"have the regulation of military affairs; the afTcm-
"blies of the centuries, in which ye elciffc confuls
"and military tribunes; where can they be held
"under aufpices, except in the accuftomed place?
'c Shall we transfer thefe to Veii? Or fhall vhe
"people, in order to hold their affemblies, crowd
"together here, with- fo great inconvenience, into
". a city dc.ferted by gods and men?
M M 2 LIII. "BUT







OCR Output








4<Sd THE HISTORY


/'
BOOK cury, and Neptune, for the fpace of eight days. Thtf. -r'-__. fame folemn rites were performed by private pcrfons.Y.R. 356. We are told, that the doors were thrown open inB.C. 396. every part of the city; that every thing was expofedin public to be ufed in common; that pafiengers,whether known or unknown, wereuniverfally invitedto lodgings; and even that people at variance, re­fraining from animofity and ill language, converfcdtogether with complaifance and kindnefs. Duringthofe days too, fuch as were in confinement were fctat liberty; and afterwards, people were deterred,by a religious fcruple, from confining thofe pcrfonsto whom the gods had brought fuch deliverance.Meanwhile dangers multiplied at Veii, to whichpoint the operations of three different wars wereconcentred; for the Capenatians and Falifcianscoming up unexpectedly to the relief of the town,the troops were obliged, in the fame manner as for­merly, to make head againft three different armies,on different fides, through the whole extent of theirworks. What contributed to their fafety beyondevery thing elfe, was the recollection of the fentencepalTed on Sergius and Virginius: fo that a reinforce­ment was quickly led round from the principal camp,where the delay had been made in the former cafe,and thefe fell upon the rear of the Capenatians, whiletheir front was engaged againft the rampart of theRomans. The fight no fooner began here, than it.ftruck terror into the Falifcians alfo, and a feaibnable'fally, made from the camp while they were thusdif-ordered, obliged them to turn their backs. Thevictors then, purfuing them in their retreat, made•vaft flaughter among them j and, in a thort timeafter, a party, which had been employed in ravag-•ing the territory of Capena, accidentally meetingthem, as they fled in confufion, entirely cut off thofewho had furvived the fight. Great numbers of theVeientians alfo, in rheir retreat to the city, wereflain before the. g..ites; for, dreading left the Ro­mans







OCR Output








332 THE HISTORY


B o o K " ftcad Of thefe new modes of adting, to refumc
i_ - .A.J" thofe practifed by your fathers, and formerly by
Y.R. 309. " yourfelves, I am content to undergo any punifh-
*• C. 443. c' ment, if I do not within a few days, rout and dif-
"perfe thofe ravagers of our country, drive them
'' out of their camp, and transfer from our gates
'c and walls, to their own cities, the whole terror
"of the war, which at prefent fills you with con^.
"fternation."
LXIX. SCARCELY ever was the fpeech of a po­pular tribune more acceptable to the commons, thanwas this of a conful remarkable for ftrictnefs. Eventhe young men who were accuftomed to confider arefufal to enlift, in fuch times of danger, as theirmof t effectual weapon againft the patricians, beganto turn their thoughts towards war and arms. Atthe fame time the inhabitants flying from the coun­try, and feveral, who had been robbed there, andwounded, relating facts, ftill more fhocking thanwhat appeared to view, filled the city entirely with adefire of vengeance. When the fenate afiembled,all men turned their eyes on Quintius, regardinghim as the only champion for the majefty of Rome;and the principal fenators declared, that " his dif-"courfe had been worthy of the confular command,"worthy of his former adminiftration in fo many"confulfhips, worthy of his whole life, which had"been filled up with honours, often enjoyed, and"oftener merited. That other confuls either flat-"tered the commons, fo far as to betray the dignity"of the fenate, or through the harfhnefs of their"mealures, in fupport of the rights of their order,"exafperated the populace, by their attempts to re-"duce them; but that Titus Quintius, beyond all"others, had delivered fentiments fuitable, at once,"to the dignity of the fenate, to the harmony which"ought to fubfift between the feveral orders, a^d to"the juncture of the times: and they entreated him
"and







OCR Output








THEH1STORY


BOOK which themfelves were expofed ; and, at length, car-^_ - -_j r'ed their point, that the fenate fhould pafs a decreeY.R. 346. for the election of military tribunes. This howeverB.C. 406. was accompanied with an exprefs ftipulation, that no, perfon fhould be admitted as a candidate who was in
that year a plebeian tribune; and that no plebeiantribune fhould be re-cholen for the year following:the fenate, in this, pointing undoubtedly at the Icilii,whom they accufed of aiming at the confular tribune-fliip, as a reward for their feditious condudt in theplebeian. After this, the levy and other preparationsfor war, went forward, with the general concurrenceof all ranks. The diverfity of the accounts givenby writers renders it uncertain, whether both confulsinarched to the citadel of Carventa, or whether oneremained at home to hold the elections; but thofefacts, in which they do not difagree, we may receiveas certain; that, after having carried on the attackfor a long time, without effect, the army retiredfrom the citadel of Carventa; that, by the fame ar­my, Verrugo, in the country of the Volfcians, wasretaken, great devaftation made, and immenfe bootycaptured, in the territories both of the ./Equans andVolfcians.
Y.R. 347. LVI. AT Rome, as the commons gained the vic-B.C. 405. tory, fo far as to procure the kind of election whichthey preferred, fo, in the iflue of the election, thepatricians were victorious: for, contrary to the ex­pectation of all, three patricians were chofen mili­tary tribunes with confular power; Caius Juliuslulus, Publius Cornelius Coffus, and Caius Servi-lius Ahala. It is faid that an artifice was practifedby the patricians on the occafion, and the Iciliicharged them with it at the time; that'by inter­mixing a number of unworthy candidates, with thedeferving, they turned away the people's thoughtsfrom the plebeian candidates, through the difguftexcited by the remarkable mcanneft of fome of the
number.







OCR Output








THE HISTORY


B o o K on the latter of whom they repofed by far the. _*- . greater part of their hopes j nor did he difappointY.R. 163. their expectations, but gave a convincing proof thatB. c. 4*9.the Roman commonwealth was more indebted forits power to its generals, than to its troops. March­ing to Circeii, he firft expelled the Roman colon-ifts from thence, and delivered the city, after re-ftoring it to freedom, into the hands of the Vol-fcians: turning thence acrofs the country towardsthe Latine road, he deprived the Romans of theirlate acquifitions, Satricum, Longula, Polufca, andCorioli. He then retook Lavinium, and afterwardstook Corbio, Vitellia, Trebia, Lavici, and Pedum,one after another. From Pedum, laftly, he led hisforces towards the city, and pitching his camp at theCluilian trenches, five miles from the city, fent fromthence parties to ravage the lands of the Romans jappointing perfons among the plunderers, to takecare that the lands of the patricians fhould be leftunmolefted; either becaufe his anger was levelledprincipally againft the pkbeians, or with the de-fign of caufing thereby a difienfion between the pa­tricians and commons; which would have been theconfequence, fo powerfully did the tribunes, bytheir inveclives againft the patricians, excite therefentment of the commons, which was but tooviolent before, but that, however full their mindswere of mutual diftruft and rancour, their dread ofa foreign enemy, the ftrongeft tie of concord, obligedthem to unite: in one point only they difagreed; thefenate and confuls placing their hopes entirely inY. R.166. arms, the commons preferring all other meafures toB. €.486. wan gy tjiis time, Spurius Nautius and Sextus
Furius were confuls. While they were employedin reviewing the legions, and pofting troops on thewalls, and in other places, where it was thoughtproper to fix guards, and watches, a vaft multitudeof people afiembling, and infifting on peace, terrifiedthem, at firft, by their feditious clamours, and, atlength, compelled them to afiemble the fenate, and
there







OCR Output








THE HISTORY


B o^o K to the refl. l:e fhewed little concern. But his paflion,i^^^y in a little time, being converted into admiration, heY.R. 146. fpoke of her exploit as fuperior to thofe of CodesB. C, jo6. and jv[ucius. anc| declared, that, as, in cafe thehoftage fhould not be given up, he would confiderthe treaty as broken off; fo, iffhe fhould be furren-dered, he would fend her back to her friends in fafe-ty. Both parties behaved with honour; the Ro­mans, on their fide, returned the pledge of peace,agreeably to the treaty, and with the Etrurian kingmerit found, not fecurity only, but honours. Afterbeftowing high compliments on the lady, he toldher, that he made her a prefent of half of the hof-tages, with full liberty to choofe fuch as fhe liked.When they were all drawn out before her, fhe is faidto have chofen the very young boys, which was notonly confonant to maiden delicacy, but, in the uni-verfal opinion of the hoftages themfelves, highly rea-fonable, that thofe who were of fuch an age as wasmoft liable to injury, fhould, in preference, be deli­vered out of the hands of enemies. Peace beingthus re.eftablifhed, the Romans rewarded this in-ftance of intrepidity, fo uncommon in the female fex,with a mark of honour as uncommon: and an equef-trian ftatue, erected at the h/ad of the facred ftreet,where the lady was reprefented fitting on an horfe.
XIV. VERY inconfiftent with this peaceful man­ner, in which the Etrurian king retired from thecity, is the practice handed down from early times,and continued, among other cuftomary ufages, evenin our own days, of proclaiming at public fales, thatthey are felling the goods of king Porfena: which,cuftom muft neceflarily either have taken its riferoriginally, during the war, and have been continuedafter in time of peace; or, it muft be derived froma milder fource, than feems to be imported by theexpreffion, which intimates as if the goods for falewere taken from an enemy. Of the fcveral accounts6 which







OCR Output








no THE HISTORY


B O O K" though that interruption occurred, Tarquinius._ ' ." Superbus never loft fight of the crown, fo as toY.R. 145." confider it the right of another; but, by violentB.c. 507. t' and flagitious means, reclaimed it, as the inherit-"ance of his family. Now, that Superbus had"been expelled, the government was in the hands"of Collatinus; the Tarquinii knew not how to"live in a private ftation; the very name itielf was'' difpleafing, and dangerous to liberty." Thefedifcourfes were, at firft, gradually circulated throughevery part of the city, for the purpofe of trying thedifpofition of the people. After the fufpicions ofthe commons had, by thefe fuggeftions, been fuffi-ciently excited, Brutus called them together: whenthey were affembled, after firft reciting the oathwhich the people had taken, that " they would ne-"ver fuffer a king at Rome, or any thing elfe that"might be dangerous to liberty;" he told them,that "they muft fupport this refolution with their"utmoft power; and that no circumftance, of any"tendency that way, ought to be overlooked: that"from his regard to the perfon alluded to, he men-"tioned the matter unwillingly; nor would he have"mentioned it at all, did not his afte&ion for the"commonwealth outweigh all other confiderations."The Roman people did not think that they had"recovered entire liberty: the regal family, the re-"gal name remained, not only in the city, but in"the government: this was a circumftance, not"merely unpropitious, but dangerous, to liberty."Do you, Lucius Tarquinius, of your own accord,"remove from us this apprehenfion: we remem-"ber, we acknowledge that you expelled the"princes: complete your kindnefs: carry hence"their name. Your countrymen, on my recom-"mendation, will not only give you up your pro-"perty, but if you have occafion for more, will"make liberal additions to it. Depart in friend-"fhip. Deliver the ftate from this, it may be
"ground­







OCR Output








THE HISTORY


B o o K his former poft. The confnls then made a junctionk__vj__l of their forces. The Volfcians and .ffiquans alfoY.R.ig?. united their fhattered troops. On which enfued theB. 0.460. third battle in the courfe of that campaign. The
fame fortune directed the victory, the enemy being
routed and their camp taken.
IX. THUS did the courfe of affairs at RomeYeturninto its former channel, and fuccefies in war imme­diately excited commotions in the city. Caius Te-rentillus Arfa was tribune of the people that year.He, taking advantage of the abfence of the confuls,as an opportunity favourable to tribunitian intrigues,entertained the commons for feveral days with rail­ings againft the arrogance of the patricians; butlevelled his invectives, chiefly, againft the confulargovernment, as pofiefling an exorbitant degree ofpower, and intolerable in a free ftate: "in name"only," he faid, " it was lefs odious than regal go-"vernment; while, in facb, it was rather more op-"preffive: as, inftead of one tyrant, two had been"fet over them, invefted with immoderate and un-"limited power; who, while they themfelves were*c privileged and uncontrouled, directed every terror"of the laws, and every kind of feverity againft the't commons. Now, in order to prevent their con-•" tinning for ever to pofiefs this arbitrary authority,'' he would propofe a law, that five commiffioners11 be appointed to compofe a fet of laws for the re-"•gulation of the confular government. Whatever"fhare of authority the people fhould think proper"to intruft in the hands of the confuls, that they"fhould enjoy; but they fhould not hold their own•" will and arbitrary determinations, as law." When.this law was publifhed, the patricians were rilled with•dread, left, in the abfence of the ccnfuls, the yoke•might be impofed on them: the ienate was called•together by the praefect of the city Quintus Fabius,
who







OCR Output








. ROME. .


Hjert. The Gauls, alarmed at this unexpected event, B O Q ^took up' arms, arjd with more rage than, conduct._1-vl_ .rufhed upon the Romans. Fortune had now chang- Y.R. 36$.ed fides; and both divine favour and human wif- B.c:»*?rdom aided the Roman caufe. At the firft onfet,therefore, the Gauls were put to the rout, with OPgreater difficulty than theyhad met, when they gaine4the victory at the Allia. They were afterwards defeat*ed, under the conduct and aufpices of the fame Ca-millus, in a more regular engagement at the eighthftone on the Gabine road, where they rallied aftertheir flight. Here the (laughter was immenfe; theircamp was taken, and not even a fingle perfon left tocarry the news of the defeat. The dictator, havingthus recovered his country from the enemy, returnedto the city in triumph, and among the rough jokeswhich the foldjers throw out on fuch occafions, re­ceived the appellauons of a Romulus, and the fatherof his country, and a fecond founder of the city,praifes not unmerited. His country thus faved byarms, he evidently faved a fecond time in peace,when he hindered the people to remove to Veii,a fcheme prefled by the tribunes with greater ear-neftnefs after the burning of the city, and whichthe commons, of themfelves, were then more in­clined to purfue; and for that reafon he did not re-fign the dictatorfhip immediately after his triumph*being entreated by the fenate not to leave the com­monwealth in that uncertain ftate.
L. THE firft bufinefs which he laid before the"'1 fenate was that which refpected the immortal gods jfor he was remarkably attentive to all matters inwhich reljgion was concerned. He procured a de-tree of fenate, that "all the temples having been inA' pofieffion of the enemy Jhould be reftored, their*'• bounds traced, and expiation made for them, and"that the form of expiation lhould be fought in"the books by the duumvirs. That a league ofi' "hofpitality







OCR Output








44<5 THEHISTORT


BOOK" them either of kindnefs or unkindnefs, ye, in Iflcev__- -__r " mariner, interdict the patricians from all intercourfeY.R. 351." with the commons; left by our civility and gene-B. c.4i»>. " rofity we mould challenge the regard of the com-"mons, and they become obedient and willing to"be directed by us. Would it not much better"become you, if ye had any of the fentiments, I"fay not, of fellow citizens, but of human beings,"rather to favour, and, as far as is in your power,"to cherifh this kindnefs of the patricians, and the"tractable difpofition of the commons? Were"fuch harmony once eftablifhed, on a permanent"footing, who is there that would not venture to"engage, that this empire would foon arrive at a"height cf grandeur far beyond all the neighbour-"ing ftates.
IV. "I SHALL hereafter explain to you, not only"the expediency, but the necefllty, of the plan"adopted by my colleagues, of not drawing off"the troops from Veii, until the bufinefs fhall be"completed. At prefent I choofe to confine my"obfervations to the ftate of the foldiery: and if"what I fhall fay on that head were to be fpoken,"not only before you, but alfo in the camp, I am"perfuaded, that it would appear reafonable, to"the judgment of the army themfelves. Indeed,"if my own underftanding were incapable of fug-"gefting any arguments on the fubject, I might be"well content with thole which have been thrown"out in the difcourfes of our adverfaries. They"lately infifted, that pay ought not to be given to"the foldiers, bccaufe it had never been given"before. Upon what grounds, therefore, can"they now be difpleafed, if perfons who have re-"ceived an addition of profit, beyond what was"ufual, are enjoined to perform fome additional"labour proportioned thereto? In no cafe, is la-'' hour to be procured without emolument, nor
"emolument,







OCR Output








j86 T H E H I S T O R Y


 


on Valerius infifting that he would not be filenced by_ a private citizen, ordered a lictor to advance to him:
Y.R. 305. Valerius, from the door of the fenate-houfe, implored. <•:. 447. the protection of the citizens; Lucius Corneliusembracing Appius, through concern for an objecctdifferent from what he pretended, put a flop to theconteft, and procured Valerius permifTion to faywhat he chofe: this producing nothing beyondwords, in favour of liberty, the decemvirs carriedtheir point; and even the confulars and elder patri­cians, from inveterate hatred to the tribunitian of­fice, which they fuppofed the commons longed for,with much more eagernefs, than for the confulargovernment, would have been rather better pleafcd,that the decemvirs themfelves fhculd, at fome futuretime, voluntarily refign their office, than that, throughmeans of the indignation of the public agair.ft them,the commons fhould rife again to confequence jhoping that if, by gentle management, the govern­ment fhould be brought back to confuls, without theturbulent interpofition of the populace, .they mighteither by the intervention of wars, or by tne mode­ration of the confuls in the exercife of their authority,bring the commons to forget their tribunes. Noobjection being made by the patricians, a levy wasproclaimed, and the young men, there beuig noappeal from the prefent government, anfwered totheir names. When the legions were filled up, thedecemvirs fettled among themfelves, who mould goout with the troops, and who command the feveralarmies. The leading men among the decemvirswere Quintus Fabius and Appius Claudius. It wasevident that the re would be a greater war at homethan abroad. The violence of Appius was thoughtbetter calculated for fupprefiing commotions in thecity, and the difpofuion of Fabius was confidered asrather inconftant in good purfuits, than ftrermous inbad; for this man, hitherto highly diftinguifhcd bothin civil and military conduct, was fo entirely changed
by







OCR Output








TH£ HISTORY


 


and it was commonly believed, that it had bee n builtby a general contribution from the feveral ftates ofAfia: Servius, in converfation with the chief menof the Latines, with whom he had taken pains toform connections of hofpitality and friendfhip, bothin his public and private capacity, ufed frequently,in the ftrongeft terms, to recommend concord artda focial union between their feveral gods; and byoften repeating the fame fentimen's, prevailed fo farat laft, that the Latine ftates agreed to build, inconjunction with the Roman people, a temple toDiana at Rome. This was an acknowledgmentthat Rome was the fovereign head of both nations,a point which had been fo often difputed in arms.But though the Latines, finding all their efforts inwar ineffectual, fcemed now to have thrown afideall concern with regard to that matter, yet ampngthe Sabines one particular perfon did not neglect anopportunity, which feemed to be thrown in his wayby fortune, of recovering independence, by the exe­cution of a fcheme which he planned himfelf. It is re­lated, that a certain head of a family, among the Sa-bines, had a heifer calf of wonderful fize and beautyproduced by one of his cows: her horns, which re­mained for many ages fixed in the porch of the templeof Diana, were a monument of this wonder. Thematter was confidered in the light of a prodigy, asit defcrved, and the ibothfayers declared, that fove-reignty would refide in that ftate whofe fubject mouldfacrifice this heifer to Diana; and this prediction hadreached the ears of the prieft who had the charge ofDiana's temple. The Sabine, as foon as he had fixedon a proper day for the facrifice, drove the heifer toRome, brought her to the te,tiple of Diana, andplaced her before the altar: the prieft, lufpectingthe truth, from the fize of the victim, of which hehad heard fo much, and remembering the predic­tion, addrefles the Sabine thus; " Stranger, what"are you preparing to do? To perform facrifice to


"Diana







OCR Output








O F R O M E. 219


broke it, by a fudden incurfion into the Latine tcr- BOOK
in.ntones. t __ _f
• II. IN the year following, Quintus Servilius, who Y.R. 1««.was conful with Spurius Poftumius, being fent againft B'c. *6*'the yEquans, fixed his camp in the Latine territory,in a poft which he intended to retain. Here thetroops were compelled, by a ficknefs which feizedthem, to remain inactive within their lines; bywhich means the war was protracted to the thirdyear, in which Quintus Fabius and Titus Quintius Y.R. 189.were confuls. As Fabius, in confequence of his B. £.463.former fuccefles there, had granted peace to the,Equans, that province was now affigned him byparticular defignation: he fet out with confident ex­pectations, that the fplendor of his name would befufficient to induce the ./Equans to put an end tohoftilities, and fent ambaffadors to the general meet­ing of that nation, with orders to tell them, that"Quintus Fabius, conful, gave them notice, that,"as he had brought peace to Rome from the"/Equans, fo now he brought war to the /Equans"from, Rome; having armed for war the fame"hand which he had formerly given to them as a"pledge of peace; which of the parties had, by"perjury and perfidy, given occafion to this rup-"rure, the gods were now witnefies, and would"foon prove avengers of the crime: yet, notwith-"ftanding this, he was ftill more defirous, that the"^Equans mould, of their own accord, repent of"their mifconduct, than fuffer the evils of war: if"they repented, they fhould find fafety in that"clemency which they had already experienced; if"they chofe to perfift in a conduct which involved"them in the guilt of perjury, they muft expect, in"the progrefs of the war, to find the relentment of"the gods even greater than that of their enemies."So far were thefe declarations from producing anyeffect on them, that the ambafladors narrowly efcaped


ill-







OCR Output








OF ROME. 227.


tion was iflued for a folemn feftival, to be obferved B O O Kfor three days, during which all the temples were . -r-_ifilled with crowds, both of men and women, fuppli- Y.R. 19o.eating the favour of the gods. The cohorts of the B.c. 461<Latines and Hernicians were then difmificd by thefenate to their refpective homes, with thanks fortheir fpirited behaviour. During the campaign, athoufand men, who came from Antium after the bat-'tle, too late to be of any fcrvice, were fent off in amanner little lefs than ignominious.
VI. THE elections were then held, and Lucius Y.R. '9i./Ebutius and Publius Servilius being chofen confuls, B.C. *6l%entered on their office, on the calends of Auguft,which was at that time confidered as the beginningof the year with refpecct to them. This was a feafonof great diftrefs j for, during this year, a peftilentialdiforder fpread itfelf, not only through the city, butover the country, affecting both men and cattle withequal malignity; the violence of the diforder wasencreafed by admitting into the city the cattle, andthe inhabitants of the country, who fled thither forfhcker from the enemy's ravages: fuch a confufedcollection of animals of every different kind, fuffb-cated the citizens by the unufual fte"nch, while thecountry people, crowded together in narrow apart­ments, fuffered no lefs from the heat, the want ofreft, and their attendance on each other; befides,even contadl ferved to propagate the infection.While they could fcarcely fupport the weight of thecala/nities under which they laboured, ambafladorsfrom the Hernicians fuddenly arrived with intelli­gence, that the ./Equans and Volfcians in conjunction,had pitched their camp in their territory, and fromthence were ravaging the country with very nume­rous forces. Befides the proof, which the thinnefs ofthe fenate afforded to the observation of the allies,of the low ftate to which the commonwealth was
reduced







OCR Output








40 THE HISTORY


BOOK ftrength of the ftate was growing languid, throughn_-J-^. inactivity, he fought on all fides for an opportunityof ftirring up a war. It happened that fome Romanand Alban peafants committed mutual depredationson each other's lands: at this time, C. Cluilius heldthe government of Alba. Ambafladors were fentfrom both fides, at nearly the fame time, to demandreftitution. Tullus gave orders to his, that theyfhould attend to nothing elfe, until they executedtheir commiflion: he well knew that the Albanwould give a refufal, and then war might be pro­claimed, without incurring the charge of impirty.The Albans proceeded with lefs difpatch; beingcourteoufly and liberally entertained by Tullus in hispalace, they cheerfully enjoyed the pjeafures of theking's table. Meanwhile, the Romans had madethe firft demand of reftitution, and, on the Alban'srefufal, had declared war to commence on the thir­tieth day after, and returned to Tullus with an ac­count of their proceedings. He then gave the am-bafladors an opportunity of propofins; the bufinefsof their embafly; they, entirely ignorant of wh:i?had parted, fpent fome time, at firft, in making apo­logies; that " it was very difagreeable to them tu"fay any thing that would not be pleafing to Tul-"lus, but that they were compelled by their in-"ftruclions: they came to demand reftitution, and"if that were not granted, had orders to declare"war." To this Tullus anfwered: '.' Tell your"king, that the king of Rome appeals to the"gods, to judge which of the two ftates firft dii-"mifled, with a refufal, the atnt>afliidors of the'c other demanding reftitution; that, upon that'' llate, tliey may inflict all the calamities of this


y. R. XXIII. THIS anfwer the Albans carried home,8'• and both parties made the moft vigorous prepara-ts7.' tions for a war, which might almoft be called a civil


war


>







OCR Output








io8 THE HISTORY


B o o K. the haughty infolence of the late king: for the,_-*'- __, former kings governed in fuch a manner, that all ofY.R. 145. them, in fucceffion, might defervedly be reckonedB.C. s°7. as founders, of the feveral parts, at leaft, of the city,which they added to it, to accommodate the addi­tional numbers of inhabitants, whom they themfelvesintroduced. Nor can it be doubted, that the fameBrutus, who juftly merited fo great glory, for havingexpelled that haughty king, would have hurt thepublic intereft moft materially, had he, through anover-hafty zeal for liberty, wrefted the governmentfrom any one of the former princes. For what mufthave been the confequence, if that rabble of fhep-herds and vagabonds, fugitives from their own coun­tries, having, under the fanction of an inviolableafylum, obtained liberty, or at leaft impunity; and,uncontrolled by dread of kingly power, had oncebeen fet in commotion by tribunitian ftorms, andhad, in a city where they were ftrangers, engaged incontefts with the Patricians, before the pledges ofwives and children, and an affection for the foil it-felf, which in length of time is acquired from habit,had united their minds in focial concord? Theftate, as yet but> a tender fhoot, had been torn inpieces by difcord; whereas the tranquil moderationof the government cherifhed it, and, by due nourifh-ment, brought it forward to luch a ftate, that, itspowers being ripened, it was capable of producingthe glorious fruit of liberty. The origin of libertyis to be dated from that period, rather on account ofthe confular government being limited to'one year,than of any diminution made of the authority whichhad been pofiefled by the kings. The firft conlulsenjoyed all their privileges, and all their enfigns ofauthority; in this refpect, only, care was taken, notto double the objects of terror by giving the fafcesto both the confuls. Brutus, with the content of hiscolleague, was firft honoured with the fafces, and thezeal which he had fhewn as the champion of liberty


in







OCR Output








248 THEHISTORY


BOOK" conteft was not between the patricians and plebeians,
,_ -J-^i" but whether the patricians and plebeians together,
Y.R. 194." the fortreis of the city, the temples of the gods, and
B.C. 458. ti the guardian deities of the ftate, and of private fa-
"milies, fhould all be given up into the hands of the
"enemy." While thefe meafures were employed in
the Forum to appeafe the difienfions, the confuls had
gone to vifit the gates and walls, left the Sabines or
Veientians might make any hoftile attempt.
XVIII. THE fame night, mefiengers arrived atTufculum, with accounts of the citadel being taken,the Capitol feized, and of the other difturbanceswhich had taken place in the city. Lucius Mamilius•was at that time dictator at TufcalurtK He inftantlyafiembled the fenate, and introducing the mefiengers^•warmly recommended, that "they fhould not wait'' until ambafladors fhould arrive from Rome to re*"queft affiftance; that the danger itfelf and diftrefs"of their allies, the gods, who witnefied their al-"liance, and the faith of treaties, demanded it. That"the gods would never afford them fo good an op-"portunity, of engaging the gratitude of fo pow-"erful a ftate, and fo near a neighbour." It wasimmediately refolved, that affiftance fhould be fent»the youth were inrolled, and armed. Coming toRome at the firft light, they were, at a diftance, takenfor enemies j people imagined that they werethe .fllquans or the Volfcians, who were coming:but this groundlefs alarm being removed, they werereceived into the city, and marched down in a bodyto the Forum, where Publius Valerius, having lefthis colleague, to fecure the gates, was employed, at• the time, in drawing up the people in order of battle.They had been prevailed on by the confidence whichthey placed in his promifes, when he aflured them,that, "as foon as the Capitol fhould be recovered,." and peace reftored in the city, if they would fuffer"themfclves to be convinced of the dangerous de­


"figns







OCR Output








 


 







OCR Output








PREFACE.


to the corruption of mankind, that many didnot, and that many could pretend they did not,difcern them, till it was too late to refift them?I own, fays a noble Author *, I fhould be gladto exchange what we have of this Hiftory, forwhat we have not. ,'
Much as our Hiftorian was admired, andhighly as he was refpe&ed, yet he was notwithout his detractors. He was charged withPatavinity in his writings. The firft perfonwho brought this charge againft him, feems tohave been Afinius Pollio, a polite and elegantwriter, and a diftinguiihed ornament of theage of Auguftusf.
• In what this Pativinity confided, no ancientauthor having defined it, it is not now eafy tofay; and, accordingly, it is a matter which hasbeen much difputed. Some will have it thatit was a political term, and that it fignified anattachment to the Pompeian party: others con­tend that it meant a hatred to the Gauls; thatit was fymbolical of ibme blameable particu­larity, they know not what. The more pro­bable opinion, however, feems, from the termitfelf, to be, that it fignified fome provincialpeculiarity of dialed. Ancient Italy, like mo­dern Italy, had its differences, not of idiommerely, but of language, in every differentprovince. In proportion as their language va­ries, at this day, from the purity of the Tufcandialect, they become almoft unintelligible toeach other: with difficulty can a Venetian anda Neopolitan co'nverfe together; that is, the
* Bolingbroke. f QuintU. Inftit. i. 5. viil. i.
people:







OCR Output








O F R O M E. 429


fuls, which was not yet laid open to both. On the8 O <? Kother hand, the Icilii infifted that military tribunes._J.^~_,fhould be elected, and fome fhare in the pofts of ho- Y.k. 3'.6.nour at length imparted to the commons. B. L.. +°6*
LV. THE confuls had no bufinefs on their hands,by an oppofuion to which, they could extort a com­pliance with their wi/hes: when at a moment fur-prifingly feafonable for their purpofe, news wasbrought that the Volfdans and .fliquans hadmarched beyond their own frontiers, to ravage thelands of the Latines and Hernicians. To opposewhom, when the confuls began to levy troops, thetribunes exerted themfelves ftrenuoufly to hinderthem; affirming that this was an advantageous op­portunity, prefented by fortune to them and to thecommons. There were three of them, all menof the moft active talents, and of a family of diftinc-tion among the plebeians. Two of thefe chofe eacha conful, whofe motions he was to watch with unre­mitting afliduity; the third had the charge afUgnedhim, of fometimes rcftraining, fometimes fpiriting upthe commons by his harangues. Thus neither couldthe conluls accomplifh the levy, nor the tribunes theelection which they wifhed. After fome time, for­tune inclining to the fide of the commons, exprefiesarrived that the ^Equans had attacked the citadel ofCarventa, while the folciers of the garrifon weredraggling abroad in fearch of plunder, and had putto death the few who were left to guard it; that fe-veral were flain, as they were haftily returning to thecitadel, and others while they were difperfed throughthe country. This incident, while it prejudiced theftate, added force to the project of the tribunes.For, though aflailed by every argument to inducethem to defift, at leaft in the prefent fituation of af­fairs, from obftructing the bufinefs of the war, they.would not give way either to the ftorm which threat­ened the public, or to the torrent of difplealure to which







OCR Output








O F R O M E, 445


III. ENDOWED by nature with good abilities, and BOOKpofiefied alfo of experience, from long practice, he ._ "_._^fpoke on this ocafion in the following manner: "If Y.R. 351."it ever was a matter of doubt, citizens, whether B.C, 400."the motives which led the plebeian tribunes to fo-"ment fedition, on every occafion, regarded your"interefts, or their own, I am confident that, in the"courfe of this year, every fuch doubt muft have"vanifhed; and while I rejoice at your being at"length undeceived in refpect of a miftake of long"continuance, I cannot, at the fame time, refrain"from congratulating you, and, on your account,"the commonwealth, that the delufion has been re-"moved by a train of profperous events, rather than"by any other means. Is there a perfon living, who"is not convinced that the plebeian tribunes were"never fo highly difpleafed and provoked, by any"inftance of the ill treatment felt by you, if any fuch"ever really exifted, as by the generofity of the pa-"tricians toward the commons, in eftablifbing pay"for the army ? What other event do ye think they"either dreaded then, with fo much anxiety; or"with, .fo ardently, at prefent to obviate, as an"union between the orders, which in their opinion"would prove the fubverfion of the tribunitian"power? Thus, in fact, as labourers in the fieldf' of iniquity^ they are at a lofs for employment; and"even vvifh, that there may be always fome difeafed"part in the commonwealth, for the cure of which"they may be employed by you. For whether,"tribunes, are ye at prefent defending the com-"inons, or making an attack on them? Whether"are ye adverfaries of the foldiery, or patrons of"their caufe. Unlefs, perhaps, ye fay thus, what-." ever the patricians do, we disapprove, whether"it be favourable or prejudicial to the coin-f' mons; and, juft as mafters forbid their flaves to"have any dealings with thofe belonging to others,•*' and think proper to cut off the commerce between
"them







OCR Output








OF ROME. 333


'' and his colleague, to exert thernfelves in behalf5 o o K."of the commonwealth. The tribunes they in- ._ "l^"treated, to unite cordially with the confuls in re- Y.R. 309."pelling the enemy from the walls of the city, and8'.'' to bring the commons to fubmit, at this perilous"juncture, to the direction of the fenate. Theirc' common country, they told them, at that crifis,"when the lands were laid wafte, and the city be-"fieged, called on them as tribunes, and implored"their protection." With univerfal approbation, alevy of troops was decreed and held. The confulsgave public notice in afiembly, that " they had not"time now to confider excufes, but that all the"young men muft attend next day at the firft light,"in the field of Mars: that, when the war mould"be brought to a conclufion, they would appoint a"time for confidering excufes, and he whofe excufe"was difapproved of,fhould be treated as a deferter."All the young men attended on the following day.The cohorts chofe each its own centurions, and twofenators were appointed to command each cohort.We are told, that all thefe meafures were executedwith fuch expedition, that the ftandards brought outfrom the treafury on that fame day by the quaeftors,and carried down to the field of Mars, began tomove from thence at the fourth hour; and that this-new-raifed army, with a few cohorts of veterans,who followed as volunteers, halted at the tenth flone.The following day brought them within view of theenemy, and they pitched their camp clofe to theirs,near Corbio. On the third day, both fides beinghurried on by violent pafiions; the Romans by de-fire of revenge, and the others by confcioufnefs ofguilt, and defpair of pardon, after fo many rebel­lions, they came to an engagement without delay.
LXX. IN the Roman army, although the twoconfuls were invefted with equal powers, yet theyadopted a meafure exceedingly advantageous in all
important.







OCR Output








OF ROME. 63


city of Oftia built at the mouth of the Tiber, near BOOKwhich, falt-pits were formed; and in confequence of > -' ^the glorious fucceft obtained in war, the temple ofJupiter Feretrius was enlarged.
XXXIV. DURING the reign of Ancus, a perfon Y. R.named Lucumo, of an enterprizing fpirit, and pof- 1";fefied of great wealth, came and fettled at Rome, ^'led principally by ambition, and hopes of attaininghigher honours than he could expect at Tarquinii,where alfo he was confidered as an alien. He wasthe fon of Demaratusa Corinthian, who, having lefthis native country, in confequence of fome inteftinecommotions, happened to fix his refidence at Tar­quinii, and marrying there, had two fons. Theirnames were Lucumo and Aruns. Lucumo furvivedhis father, and inherited all his property. Arunsdied before the father, leaving a wife pregnant.The father did not long furvive his fon, and as, notknowing that his daughter-in-law was with child, hedied, without taking any notice of a grandfon in hiswill, the boy, who was born after his grandfather'sdeceafe, not being entitled to any fhare of his pro­perty, was called, from the poverty of his fituation,Egerius. Lucumo, on the other hand, inheritingthe entire property, was, by his riches, infpiredwith high notions; and thefe were elevated to a ftillhigher pitch by his marriage with Tanaquil, a wo­man of the higheft diftinction, who could not en­dure, with patience, that the rank of the man, whom(he had married, mould remain inferior to that ofthe family which gave her birth. As the Etrurianslooked with contempt on Lucumo, the defcendantof a foreign exile, fhe could not fupport the indig­nity, but, difregarding her natural attachment to hercoup try, in companion with the pleafure of feeingher hufband raifed to an honourable rank, formedthe defign of removing from Tarquinii. Rome ap­peared beft fuited to her purpofe. In a new ftate,
where







OCR Output








OT R O M E. 305


"tainment of a fecurity for liberty, not for un- B O O K
"bounded licence to violate the rights of others., JL ^
"But the dictates of your refentment, we muft ra- Y.R. 305.
"ther pardon than indulge: for, through your detef- B.c. **?•
"tation of cruelty, ye are preciptating yourfelves
"into the very vice which ye abhor; and before ye
"can well be faid to be free yourfelves, ye wifh to
"act the tyrant over your adverfaries. Is our ftate
"never to enjoy reft from punifhments, either in-
"flicted by the patricians on the Roman commons,
"or by the commons on the patricians? Ye ftand io
"need of a fhield, rather than of a fword. It is
"abundantly fufficient to humble a man fo far as that
"he mall live on an equal footing with the reft of
u his countrymen, neither offering nor enduring in-
"jury. Befides, fhould ye ever choofe to render
't yourfelves objects of terror, when ye fhall have re-
"covered your magiftrates, and your laws, and fhall
"have the power, in your hands, of deciding on our
"lives and fortunes, then, ye will determine accord-
t' ing to the merit of each cafe; at prefent it is fuf-
"ficient to require the reftoration of liberty."
LIV. HAVING, with univerfal confent, receivedpermiffion to act as they thought proper, the depu­ties aflured the commons, that they would fpeedilybring back a final fettlement of the bufinefs; and, re­turning, reported to the fenate the meflage from thecommons. On which the other decemvirs, findingthat, beyond their hopes, no mention was made ofany punimment on them, made no objection to anything. Appius, ftern in his nature, confcious that hewas the object of particular deteftation, and mea-luring the rancour of others towards him, by his owntowards them, faid, "I am not blind to the fate"which hangs over me. I fee that violent proceed-"ings againft us are deferred until our arms are
O O
"furrendered into the hands of our adverfaries.
"Blood muft be offered to the rage of the populace.
VOL. i.. x "I my­







OCR Output








THE HISTORY


B o 0 K a fally being made from the camp at the fame time,.. - T ' _f on a fignal given by him at fome diftance, a greatY.R. 190. number of the enemy were furrounded and cut off.8.0.461. of the .fliquans who were employed in the Romanterritories the number flain was lefs, but their defeatand difperfion were more complete; being dividedinto feparate parties, and bufied in collecting plun­der, they were attacked by Poftumius in feveral dif­ferent places, where he had pofted troops in conve­nient fituations; when, not knowing what courfe totake, and, purfuing their flight in great diforder, theyfell in with Quintius, who, after his victory, was re­turning home with the wounded conful. Then didthe confular army, exerting themfelves in battlewith extraordinary alacrity, take full vengeance forthe conful's wound, and for the lofs of the lieutenant-general and the cohorts. Many heavy lofies werefuftairred on both fides, in the courfe of that cam­paign: but it is difficult, at this diftance of time, toaffign with any degree of certainty, the precife num­ber of thofe who were engaged, and of thofc whofell; yet Valerius Antias undertakes to eftimatethem, affirming that, of the Romans, there fell inthe country of the Hernicians five thoufand threehundred j that, of the plundering parties of the./Equans, who fpread themfelves over the Romanterritories in fearch of fpoil, two thoufand four hun­dred were flain by the conful Aulus Poftumius; thatthe other body of them, who, while they were carry­ing off the fpoil, fell in with Quintius, efcaped notwithout a much greater lofs, there being flain ofthefe, four thoufand; and going with nicety into theexact number, he adds two hundred and thirty.After this, the troops returned home to Rome, andthe order for ceflation of civil bufinefs was difcharg-ed. The fky appeared as on fire in many- places,"'and other portents, either occurred to people's fight,or were formed by terror in their imaginations. Toavert the evils, which thefe foreboded, a proclama­


tion







OCR Output








OF ROME. S3*


difperfed his enemy. While Lucretius lay encamped BOOKamongtheI Iernicians,aparty ofplunderers,unobferved . _^_' _,by him^marchH o^er the Prarfeftine mountains, and Y.R. 191.from thence defcended into the plains. Thefe laid P.^1 *6*'wafte all the country about Praenefte, and Gabii, andfrom the latter turned their courfe towards the highgrounds of Tufculum. Even the city of Rome wasvery much alarmed, more fo by the unexpectednefsof the affair, tfian that they wanted ftrength todefend themfelves. Quintus Fabius had the com­mand in the city. He armed the young men, poftedguards, and foon put every thing into a ftate of fafetyand tranquillity. The enemy therefore, not daringto approach the city, but haftily carrying off what­ever they could find in the adjacent places, fet out ontheir return, making a long circuit, and while theircaution relaxed, in proportion as they removed toa greater diftance from the city of ftieir enemy, theyfell in with the conful I ucretius, who, having pro-^cured intelligence of all their motions, lay in theirway with his troops drawn up, and impatient for thecombat. The latter therefore, with premeditatedrefolution, attacked the others, who were terrifiedand thrown into diforder by this fudden appearanceof danger, and though confiderably fewer in number,eafily routed their great body and put them to flight;and, having driven them into deep vallies, fromwhich it was difficult to efcape, furrounded them.On this occafion the Volfcian race was almoft ut­terly extinguifhed. I find in fome hiftories, that therefell, in the field, and the purfuit, thirteen thoufand,four hundred and feventy j that one thoufandtwo hundred and fifty were made prifoners; and thactwenty feven military ftandards were brought homefrom thence. However, though, in thole accounts,the numbers may be fomewhat exaggerated, theflaughter certainly was very great. The victorious'conful, poflefied of an immcnfe booty, returned to


q.4 hU







OCR Output








THE HISTORY


BOOK Etrurians furrounded, and attacked both in front and. iy. . rear, and clofe prefied by two armies in two differ-Y.R. 319. ent battles, and having no room for flight, eitherB. C.41j. back to the camp, or to the mountains, where theway was blocked up by the new enemy, and thehorfes, freed from the bridles, having fpread them-felves with their riders over every different part, thegreateft number of the Veientians fled precipitatelyto the Tiber. Thofe of the Fidenatians, who fur-vived, made toward the city of Fidenae. The for­mer, flying in confirmation, fell into the midft offoes, and met deftruction. They were cut to pieceson the banks of the river, fome were forced into thewater, and fwallowed in the eddies; even fuch aswere expert at fwimming, were weighed down byfatigue, by their wounds, and the fright: out of agreat number, few reached the oppofite bank. Theother body proceeded, through their camp, to thecity, whither a brifk and unremitted purfuit inftantlybrought up the Romans alfo, particularly Quintius,and thofe who had juft now come down with himfrom the mountains, thefe being the frefheft for ac­tion, as having come up towards the end of the en­gage ment.
XXXIV. THESE entering the gate together withthe enemy, made their way to the top of the walls,and from thence gave a fignal to their friends of thetown being taken. On feeing which, the dictator,who had himfelf by this time entered the defertedcamp of the enemy, encouraging his men, who wereeager to difperfe themfelves in karch of plunder,with hopes of greater booty in the city, led them onto the gate j and, being admitted within the walls,'proceeded to the citadel, whither he faw the crowdsof fugitives hurrying. Nor was lefs flaughter madein the city, than in the field; until, throwing downtheir arms, and begging only their lives, the enemyfurrendcred to the dictator: both the city and camp
were







OCR Output








PREFACE. xix


the mouths of foreigners, and of enemies: hemakes Hannibal call Rome "the capital of the'' world*," at a time whenthe Romans had noteven the whole of Italy in fubjecYion, and nopofleffions whatever out of Italy, except a partof Sicily and Sardinia. In the fame vain­glorious boafting ftrain he tells us f, that theRomans " were never worfted by the enemy's"cavalry, never by their infantry, never in open"fight, never on equal ground." He feems herenot to have recolledted, what he afterwards ac­knowledges :f, that, in the firft battle with Han­nibal, "it manifeftly appeared that the Car-"thaginian was fuperior in cavalry; and, confe-"quently,' that open plains, fuch as thofe be-"tween the Po and the Alps, were unfavourable"to the Romans." Although he thus aflerts, inunqualified terms, that the Romans were neverworfted in the open field, yet he gives veryjuft and candid accounts, not only of this bat­tle with Hannibal, but of another alfo againftthe fame commander, and of that of the Allia,againft the Gauls, in every one of which theRomans were completely overthrown.
•But thefe, it is probable, mould rather beconfidered as inadvertencies than falfehoods;and, however inclined we may be to overlookor excufe them, we fhall not, perhaps, find it foeafy to juftify fome other omiflions, or changes,which he has made in his narrative, refpedtingfafts which, if fairly and fully related, woulddo no honour to his country; or would tend, infome degree, to tarnifh the luftre of thofe cele-
'B. zxi. 30. f B. ix. 19. t B. xxi. 47.
a 3 brated







OCR Output








176 t'HE HIST OR?


B o o K he propofcd to add a confiderable tract of land,^-y__, which he alleged was the property of the public,Y.R. 168. though poffcfied by private perfons; many of the*.C. 484. patricians, who were themfelves in pofieflion of theland, were hereby alarmed for the fafety of theirproperty, and befides, that body in general wasfeized with anxiety for the fafety of the public; ob-ferving that the conful, by thefe donatives, wasforming an influence dangerous to liberty. Thiswas the firft propofal of the agrarian law, which,from that time to the prefent age, has never beenagitated, without the moft violent commotions inthe flate. The other conful oppofed the donations;and in this, he was liipported by the patricians, nordid all the commons join the oppofite party: atfirft, they began to defpife a gift, which was notconfined to themfelves, but extended to the allies,in common with the citizens: then they were ac-cuftomed to hear the conful Virginius in the aflem-blies frequently, as it were* prophefying, that " the"donatives of his colleagues were full of infectious"poifon; that thofe lands would bring flavery on"luch as mould receive them; that he was paving"the way to arbitrary power; for why mould the"allies and the Latine nation be thus included?"What was the intent of reftoring a third part of"the lands, taken in war, to the Hernicians, who"fb lately were enemies, only that thefe nations"might let Caffius at their head as a leader, inftead"of Coriolanus." Whoever argued and proteftedagainft the agrarian law,' was now fure of popularity;and1 from that time, both the confuls vied with eachother in humouring the commons. Virginius de­clared, that he would allow the lands to be affigned,provided they were not afligned to any other thanCitizens of Rome. Caflius, finding that, by his pur-fuit of popularity among the allies, which he hadbetrayed in the propofed diftribution of the lands, •he had lowered himfelf in the eftimation of his coun-
• try men,







OCR Output








. .OF ROME. 251


"nouncing himfelf an enemy, gave out public or- BOOK"ders, in a manner, that ye mould take arms. The"other, denying that there were enemies to be op- Y.R. 194.."pofed, took.the arms outof your hands,andexpofed B. ^. *$*•"you defencelefs to your flaves and exiles. And"did ye, notwithftanding, (I wifh to fpeak without"offence to Caius Claudius or the decafed Publius"Valerius) lead your troops to an attack on the Ca-"pitoline hill, before ye had expelled thefe enemies"from the Forum? It is fcandalous in the fight of"gods and men, that when an enemy was in the ci-"tadel, in the Capitol, and a leader of exiles and"flaves, profaning every thing facred, took up his"habitation in the fhrine of Jupiter fuprcmely good"and great, arms were taken up at Tufculum fooner"than at Rome. It was doubtful, whether Lucius"Mamilius, a Tufculan general, or Publius Valerius"and Caius Claudius, confuls, fhould have the ho-"nour of recovering the Roman citadel. And we"who, heretofore, would not fuffer the Latines to"touch arms, not even in their own defence, when"they had the enemy within their territories, fhould"have been taken and deftroyed, had not thefe La-"tines, of their own accord, taken arms. Is this,"tribunes, affording protection to the commons, to"expofe them unarmed to be flaughtered by the"enemy? Surely, if any, even the loweft perfon"among thefe commons of yours, whom from being"a part ye have broken off, as it were, from the"body of the people, and made a country of your'" own, and a republic peculiar to yourfclves; iff any one of thefe fhould inform you that his houfe>' was furrounded by an armed band of flaves, yc"would think that ye ought to go to his afliftance."And was the fupremely good and great Jupiter,"when hemmed round by the arms of exiles and"flaves,unworthy of any human aid ? Yet thefe men"expect to be held facred and inviolable, who ef-"teem not the gods themfelves as either facred or
"inviolable.







OCR Output








THE HISTORY


S O O K the" chieftain of the Gauls, and a thoufand poundsL -_, weight of gold * was fixed as the ranfom of thatY. R. 365. people, who were afterwards to be rulers of the». C. j??. world. To a tranfaction fo very humiliating in it-felf, infult was added. Falfe weights were broughtby the Gauls, and on the tribune objecting to them,the infolent Gaul threw in his fword in addition tothe weights, and Was heard to utter an expreffion in­tolerable to Roman ears, " wo to the vanquifhed."1
XLIX. BUT both gods and men ftood forth to pre­vent the Romans living under the difgrace of beingranfomed. For, very fortunately, before the abo­minable payment was completed, the whole quan­tity of gold being not yet weighed in c.onfequenceof the altercation, the dictator came up to the fpot,ordered the gold to be carried away from thence,and the Gauls to clear the place. And when theymade oppofition, and infifted on the agreement, heaffirmed that fuch an agreement could have no vali­dity, being made after he had been created dictator,without his order, by a magiftrate of fubordinate au­thority j and he gave notice to the Gauls to prepare.for battle. His own men he ordered to throw theirbaggage in a heap, to get ready their arms, and torecover their country with fteel, not with gold; hav­ing before their eyes the temples of the gods, theirwives and children, the fue of their native city,disfigured with /ubbifh through the calamities ofwar, and every obje<£t which they were bound by theftrongeft duties to defend, to recover, and to re­venge. He then drew up his forces for battle, asthe nature of the ground would allow, on the fite ofthe half demolifhed city, which was in itfelf naturallyuneven, and made every previous arrangement andpreparation, which could be fuggefted by knowledgein war, to fecure all advantages in favour of his own
f 45,000!.
men.







OCR Output








38<5 THE HISTORY


B Q o K XXVIII. Bv this time day appeared, and every,____V _, thing lay open to view. Fabius had already charg-Y.R. 31+. ed with the cavalry, and the conful had fallicd fromU.0.418. tlie camp on the enemy, who were now much dif-concerted, when the dictator on another fide, havingattacked their referve and fecond line, threw his vic­torious troops, both horfe and foot, in the way of alltheir efforts, as they turned themfelves about to thediffonant fhouts, and the various fudden aflaults. Be­ing thus hemmed in on every fide, they would, to aman, have undergone the punifhment due to theirinfraction of the peace, had not Vectius Meffius, aVolfcian, a man more renowned for his deeds thanhisdefcent, upbraiding his men as they were formingthemfelves in a circle, called out with a loud voice,"Do ye intend to offer yourfelves to the weapons"of the enemy here, where ye can neither make"defence ncr obtain revenge? To what purpofe"then have ye arms in your hands ? Or why did ye"undertake an offenfiye war, ever turbulent in peace"and daftardly in arms? What hopes do ye propofe"in flanding here? Do ye expect that fome god wilt"protect you, and carry you off from hence ? With'" the (word the way muft be opened. Come on, ye'" who wifh to fee your houfes and your parents,"your wives and children, follow me, wherever ye•" fee me lead the way. There is neither wall nor1t rampart, nothing to obftruct you, but men in"arms, with which ye are as well furnifhed as they."Equal in bravery, ye are fuperior to them in"point of neccfiity, the ultimate and moft forcible"of weapons." No fooner had he uttered thefe.words, than he put them in execution, and the reftralling the mout anew, and following him, made aviolent pufh on that part where Poftumius Albushad drawn up his forces in their way, and made the'conqueror give ground, until the dictator came up,juft as his men were on the point of retreating.Thus the whole weight of the battle was turned to


 


8 that







OCR Output








164 THE HISTORY


JB o o K charge of the commons, by a contribution of a.__rL_. fextans* from each perfon.
v.R.i6a, XXXIV. THE eonfds Who fucceeded were Ti-B. C.490. ^j Geg;n:us and Publius Minucius. During thisyear, whc n the quiet of the ftate was undifturbed byforeign vars, and the diflfenfions at home had beenhealed, a more grievous calamity of another naturefell upon it: at firft a fcarcity of provifions, occa-fioned by the lands lying unfilled during the fecef-fion of the commons* and afterwards, a famine, notlefs fevere than what is fek in a befieged city; andwhich would have increafed to fuch a degree that theflaves, without doubt,'and allb many of the com­mons, muft have perimed, had not the confuls takenrheafures to remedy it, by fending to all quarters tobuy up corn; not only into Etruria on the coaft tothe right of Oftia, and through the Volfcians, alongthe coaft on the left as far as Cumae, but even toSicily; for the hatred, entertained againft them bytheir neighbours, compelled them thus to look foraid to diftant countries. After a quantity of cornhad been purchafed at Cumae, the mips were de­tained by the tyrant Ariftodemus, as the property ofthe Tarquinii, whofe heir he was. Among the Vol­fcians, and in the Pomptine diftrict, it could noteven be purchafed, the perfons employed in thatbufinefs being in danger of their lives from the vio­lence of the inhabitants. From Etruria, fome corn.was conveyed by the Tiber, by which the peoplewere fupported. At this unfeafonable time, whilethus diftreffed by the fcarcity, they were in dangerof heing farther haraffed by war, had not a moft.deltructive peftilence attacked the Volfcians, whenthey were juft ready to commence hoftilities. Bythis dreadful calamity the enemy were fo difpirited,
* About one half.penny each.
that,







OCR Output








OF ROME.


hians mould Force in along with them, they clofed B OvO Kthe gates, and fhut out the hindmoit of their own ._-r'--.inen. Thefe were the tranfactions of that year. Y.R. 35*.
BiC. 3»6.
XIV. AND now approached the election of mi­litary tribunes, which engrofied almoft a greaterfhare of the attention of the patricians^ than eventhe bufinefs of the war: for they faw that the fbve-reign power was not only fhared with the commons,but almoft entirely loft to thcrhfelves. Theytherefore, by concert, engaged men of the moft il-juftrious characters to ftand candidates, fuch as theybelieved people would be afhamed to pafs by; theothers} neverthelefs, put in practice every expedient^as if they had all been candidates) and endeavouredto draw to their fide, not only men, but the gods,reprefenting the election held two years before in alight offenfive to religion: that " in the former of"thofe years, a winter came on with intolerable fe-il verity, fuch as bore every appearance of a pro-"digy fent from the gods. In the following; no"longer portents but events enfued; a peftilence"fell on both country and city, manifeftly difplay-"ing the wrath of the gods; whom, as was difco-'* vered in the bociks of the fates, it was neceflary to"appeafe, in order to avert that plague. It ap-*' peared to the gods as an affront, that, in an election"held under their aufpiees; .honours mould be pro-"ftituted, and the diftinctions of birth confounded."The people being deeply ftruck, both by the highdignity of the candidates, and allb by a fenfe of re­ligion, chofe all the military tribunes with confularpower from among the patricians, the greater partof them men who had been moft highly diftinguifhedby public honours; Lucius Valerius Potitus a fifth Y.R. 357.time, Marcus Valerius Maximus, Marcus Furius B.C. 2yi.Camillas a third time^ Lucius Furius Medullinus athird time, Quihtus Servilius Fidenas a fecond time,Qnintus Sulpicios Camerinus a fecond time. DuringH H 2 their







OCR Output








OF ROME.


 


greater height in the camp. On no one point didtheir fentiments agree, each contended ftrenuoufly __for his own opinion; endeavoured to have his own Y.R. ;?7.plans and his own commands only put in execution; B.C.fhewed a contempt of the other; and met with the likecontempt in return: until at length, on the remon-ftrances of the lieutenant-generals, they came to acompromife, that they fhould enjoy the fupremecommand alternately, xeach for a day. When thefeproceedings were reported at Rome, Quintus Servi-lius, whofe wifdom was matured, by uge and expe­rience, is faid to have prayed to the immortal gods,that the difcord of the tribunes might not prove moredetrimental to the commonwealth than it had done ar.Veii; and to have urged his fon earneftly to enlift fol-diers and prepare arms, as if he forefaw, with certain­ty, fome impending misfortune. Nor was he a falfeprophet: for under the conduct of Lucius Sergius,whofe day of command it was, the troops were fud-denly attacked by the /Equans, in difadvantageousground, adjoining the enemy's camp; into whichthey had been decoyed by vain hopes of mafteringthe camp; the enemy, counterfeiting fear, havingretreated to their rampart. They were driven, ingreat diforder, down a declivity in the rear, and,while they tumbled one on another rather than fled,vaft numbers were overpowered and flain. Withdifficulty they defended the camp for that day, and.on the following, the enemy having invefted it onfeveral fides, they abandoned it in fhameful flight,through the oppofite gate. The generals, lieute^.nant-generals, and fuch part of the body of the armyas followed the colours, took the route to Tufculum:the reft, difperfing up and down, made their way toRome, by many different roads, bringing exagge­rated accounts of the difafter which had happened.This unfortunate affair caufed the lefs confternation,becaufe it was not unexpected, and becaufe therewas a reinforcement of troops already prepared by
the







OCR Output








96 THEHISTORY


BOOK queftion and waiting for an anfwer, returned to Ga-bii without having accomplifhed his bufinefs, as hethought; told what he himfelfhadfaid,and what he hadfeen ; that the king, either through anger or diflike,or the pride natural to his difpofition, had not uttereda word. Sextus readily comprehending his father'smeaning, and what conduct he recommended bythofe filent intimations, cut off all the principal men ofthe ftate; fome by profecutions before the people;others, who being generally odious, could be at­tacked with greater fafety, he put to death of hisown authority :Jmany were executed openly; feve-_ mlt whom accufations would appear lefs plau-fible, were privately__rjiurd&Fed-rforne who chofe tofly were not prevented, others were forced intobanifhment; and the effects of the abfentees, as wellas of thofe who had fuffered death, were diftributedin largeffes among the peopJer-by thefe means, allfenfe of the public calamity was fo entirely drownedin the fweets of bribery, plunder, and private pro­fit, that, at length, the Gabian ftate, ftripped of itscounfellors, and fupporters, was delivered over,without a ftruggle, into the hands of the Romanking.
LV. TARQJJINIU\ Ufaving thus acquired pofief-fion of Gabii, concluded a peace with the nation ofthe .ffiquans, renewed the treaty with the Etrurians,and then turned his thoughts to the internal bufinefsof the city: among which, the object of his prin­cipal concern was to leave the temple of Jupiter onthe Tarpeian mount a monument of his reign, andof his name, to teftify, that of two Tarquinii bothof whom reigned, the father had vowed, and the foncompleted it. And in order that the ground mightbe clear from the interference of any of the othergods, arid become the entire property of Jupiter, andof the temple to be erected thereon, he determinedto cancel the inauguration.of the temples and chapels,4 feveral







OCR Output








OF ROME, 51*


firft fent forward a perfon unarmed to make trial BOOK!of the way, handing their arms to thofe before them; t 1 ^when any difficulty occurred, fupporting and fup- Y.R. 365.ported in turns, and drawing each other up accord- B. c. IS7'ing as the ground required;, they climbed to thefummit in fiich filence, that they not only efcapedthe notice of the guards, but did not even alarm thedogs, animals particularly watchful with regard toany noife at night. They were not unperceivedhowever by fome geefe, which being facred to Junothe people fpared, even in the prefent great fcarcity"of food, which circumftance proved their preferva-rion. For by the cackling of thefe creatures, andthe clapping of their wings, Marcus Manlius wasroufed from fleep, a man of diftinguimed characterin war, who had been confi.il the third year before,and matching up his arms, and at the fame time call­ing the reft to arms, he haftened to the fpot. Where,.while the reft ran about in confufion, he by aftrokcwith the bofs of his fhield tumbled down a Gaulwho had already got footing on the fummit j andthis man's weight, as he fell, throwing down thofewho were next, he flew feveral others, who, in theirconfirmation, threw away their arms, and caughthold with their hands of the rocks, to which theyclung. By this time others had affembled at theplace, who by throwing javelins and ftones beatdown the enemy, fo that the whole band, unable tokeep their footing, were hurled down the precipice;in promifcuous ruin. The alarm then fubfiding, th£remainder of the night was given to repofe, fuch 39could be enjoyed after fuch perturbation of mind,when the danger, though pan:, kept up the agitationof people's minds. As foon as day appeared, thefoldiers, being fummoned, by found of trumpet, to.attend the tribunes in afiembly, when due recom-pence was to be made both to merit and demerit,Manlius was firft of all commended for the bravery'which he had difplayed, and was prefented with gifts,
not







OCR Output








38z THE HISTORY


B o o K the commons, in their prefcnt ftate of ill-humour,^-^A_f would give their fupport to perfons of their owny.R. 313. party, in order to put this out of their power, a de-B.c. 419. cree of the fenate was pafled, that the election fhouldbe held for confuls.
V.R. 314. XXVI. THE reafon afljgned was, intelligenceB.C.418. received from the Latines and Hernicians of the./Equans and Volfcians having fuddenly commencedhoftilities. Titus Quintius Cincinnatus, who hadaHb the lurname of Pennus, fon of Lucius, and CaiusJulius Mento were made confuls. Nor were theykept in fufpenfe with refpect to the danger appre­hended from their enemies. The ^Equans and Vol­fcians having held a levy of troops under their de­voting law, which is their moft powerful inftrumentfor forcing men into the fervice, marched a nume­rous body of forces from each nation to Algidum,where they met, and formed feparate camps; thegenerals taking extraordinary pains, beyond whathad ever been practifed before, in fortifying theirpofts, and exercifing their men; which rendered theaccounts brought to Rome ftill more alarming. Thefenate refolved that a dictator fhouki be appointed,becaufe though thefe were nations often vanquifhed,yet, in the prefent revival of hoftilities, they hadexerted more vigorous efforts than they had everdone before; and no fmall number of the Romanyouth had been cut off by the ficknefs. Above all,they were alarmed by the perverfenefs of the confuls,the difagreement between themfelves, and the op-pofition which they gave each other in every mea-fure. Some writers lay, that thefe confuls were de­feated in a battle at Algidum, and that that was thereafon for appointing a di&ator. Thus much iscertain, that though they differed in every thing elfe,they perfectly agreed in the one point, that of op-pofing the will of the fenate, and refufing to name adictator, until Quintus Servilius Prifcus, a man who
had







OCR Output








OF ROME. 329


"due limits to our authority, nor ye to your liberty; B O O K


while ye wifh to get rid of patrician, we of ple-


_ T _
"beian magiftrates, they have aflumed unufual cou- Y.R. 309."rage. In the name of the gods, what would ye B.C.44i."have? Ye wifhed for tribunes of the commons;"for the fake of concord, we granted them to you."Ye longed for decemvirs; we allowed themto^be"created. Ye grew weary of decemvirs; we com-"pelled them to refign the office. Your refentment?' againft them continuing, even after they were di-"vefted of their public character, we fuffered men"of the moft diftinguifhed families and ftations to"die, and go into exile. Ye wifhed again to create'l tribunes of the commons; ye created them. Al-'* though we faw manifeft injuftice to the patricians,"in electing men of your order, to the confulfhip j"yet have we beheld that patrician magiftracy, along« with the reft, conceded to the commons. The tri-"bunes power of protecting the privilege of appeal*' to the people; the acts of the commons rendered"binding on the patricians; our own rights fubvert-'t ed, under the pretext of equalizing the laws; all"this we have endured, and ftill endure. Where*' then will be the end of our difienfions? Shall we'•' ever be" allowed to have an united city and one"common country? We, the party vanquifhed, fit"down in quiet, with greater compofure, than ye"who have gained the victory. Do ye think it"enough, that to us, ye are objects of terror?•" Againft us, the Aventine is taken; againft us, the'' facred mount is feized. But when the Efquiline is"almoft taken by the enemy, no one appears in its"defence. The Volfcian foe fcales your rampart,"and not a man drives him back. Againft us ye*' exert your courage, againft us ye readily take"arms."
LXVIII. "Now then that ye have blockaded the'' fenate-houfe, rendered the Forum the feat of
"hoftilities,







OCR Output








384 THE HISTORY


BOOK names. The Hernicians and Latines alfo were or-i__r^_' dered to fend a fupply of forces, and they both ex-y. R. 314. erted themfelves with zeal, in obedience to theB. c.4i*. dictator's orders.
s
XXVII. ALL thefe meafures were executed withthe utmoft difpatch, and the conful Caius Juliusbeing left to guard the city, and Lucius Juliusmafter of the horfe to anfwer the fudden exigenciesof the war, that there fhould be no delay with refpeclto any thing which might be wanted in the camp,the dictator, repeating the form after the chief pon­tiff Aulus Cornelius, vowed to celebrate the greacgames on the occafion of this fudden war. Then,dividing his troops with the conful Quintals, he be­gan his march from the city, and quickly came upwith the enemy. Having obferved that thefe hadformed two camps at a little diftance from eachother, they in like manner encamped feparately atthe diftance of about a mile from the enemy, thedictator towards Tufculum, and the.conful towardsLanuvium. Thus there were four armies, and fomany fortified pofts, having in the middle betweenthem a plain of fufficient extent not only for thefkirmifhes of fmall parties, but even for drawingup the entire armies, on both fides, in battle array.From the time when the camps were pitched in theneighbourhood of each other, there was continualfkirmifhing without inrermiffion, the dictator readilyallowing his men to compare ftrength, and from ex­periencing the ifiiie of thefe combats gradually toform a confident expectation of future victory in ageneral engagement. The enemy therefore findingno hopes left of fucceeding in a regular engagement,made an attack by night on the camp of the conful,hazarding on the chance of the uncertain iflue, thefinal decifion of the difpute. Their fhout, whichthey fct up on a fudden, roufed from fleep, noronly the conful's watch guards, and afterwards all his
troops,







OCR Output








O F R O M E. 493


followed by a letter from Poftumius decked B <M> Kwith laurel *, that victory had fallen to the Roman . -T-jpeople, that the army of the ^Equans was de- Y.R. jfii.ftroyed. B.c.j91-
XXIX. As no determination had yet been made,with refpect to the plans introduced by the plebeiantribunes, the commons on the one hand, laboured tocontinue in office fuch of them as had promoted thepafiing of the law, and the patricians on the other,to procure the re-election of thofe who had proteft-cd againft it. But the commons had the fuperiorinfluence in the election of their own magiftratcs:for which difappointment the patricians revengedthemfelves by pafilng a decree of fenate, that con-fuls, magiftrates ever odious to the commons, mouldbe elected. Thus, after an interval of fifteen years, Y.R. 3<±,confuls were again appointed, Lucius Lucretius Fla- Y.R.vus, and Servius Sulpicius Camerinus. In the be­ginning of this year, while the plebeian tribunes,uniting their efforts, preffed the pafllng of their lawwith great confidence, becaufe there was not any oftheir body who would proteft againft it, and the con­fuls for that very reafon were no lefs active in op-pofing it, the whole attention of the public beingtaken up with this bufincfs, the ^Equans made them­felves mafters of Vitellia, a Roman colony in theirterritory. The greateft part of the colonifts efcapedwith fafety to Rome; for the town being betrayed tothe enemy in the night, there was nothing to hindertheir flight from the contrary fide of the.city. Thatprovince fell to the lot of the conful Lucius Lucretius.He marched thither with an army, defeated the ene­my in the field, and returned to Rome, where he wasto encounter a conteft of much greater difficulty.A profecution had been commenced againft Aulus
• It was the cuftom, when the Roman generals fent intelligence of• viftory, to wrap their Utteis up in laurel.
VirginiuSj







OCR Output








THE HISTORf


 


back to the old gate of the Palatium. Rorrtuhfthimfelf being forced along by the flying crowd,raifed his hands toward heaven, and faid, " O Ju-"piter! by the direction of thy aufpices, I, here"on the Palatine hill, laid the firft fbrnidatifon of"my city. The Sabines are already in pofie/TIorr"of our citadel, which they purchased by fraud;"from thence they now make their way hither, In"arms, and have pafied the mkldle of the valley*•* but do thou, O father of gods and men! from'' hence at leaft repel the enemy: remove difmay"from the minds of the Romans, and ftop their"fhameful flight. I vow a temple here to thee, Ju-"piter Stator*, as a teftimony to pofterity of the"city being preferved by thy immediate aid."Having prayed thus, as if he had perceived that hisprayers were heard, he called out, "Here, Ro-"mans, Jupiter, fupremely good and great, orders"you to halt, and renew the fight." The Ro­mans, as if they had heard a voice from heaven,halted, and Romulns himfelf flew forward to thefront. On the fide.of the Sabines, Mettius Curtiushad run down firft from the citadel; had drivenback the Romans, in diforder, through. the wholefpace at prcfrnt occupied by the Forum, and wasnow at no great diftance from the gate of the Pala­tium, crying aloud, "We have conquered thefc•' traitors to hoipitality, thefe cowards in war."'They now feel that it is one thing to ravifh vLr-"gins, and another, far different, to fight with•' men." While he was vaunting in this manner,Romulus attacked him with a band of the moft cou­rageous of the youths. Mettius happened at thaktime to fight on horfebark, and on that account"was the more eafily repulfed: he foon gave way,and was purfued by the Romans: the reft of theRoman troops alib, animated by the Ipirited
/
* From ftar*, to halt,
bravery







OCR Output








404 THEHISTORY


 


O^ ^e*r P"vate connexions. The conful Fab'iHS,the city being alarmed for its own fafety, held troopspofted before the gates, when the horfemen, beingfeen at a (jiftance, occafioned, at firlt, fome degree offright, while it was not known who they were: but,this being prefently difcovered, people's fears wereconverted into fuch tranfports of joy, that every partof the city was filled with fhoming; every one con­gratulating each other, on the return of the horfe­men, fafe and victorious: then were feen, pouringout in crowds into the ftreets from their houfes,which a litfle before had been filled with lamenta­tion and mourning, for their friends fuppofed loft,their mothers and wives; fo diftracled with excefs ofjoy, as to forget the common forms of decency,running forth to meet the band, each rufhing wildlyto her own, and fcarce retaining, in the extravaganceof their rejoicings, their faculties either of mind orbody. The tribunes of the commons, who had com­menced a profecution againft Marcus Poftumius andTitus Quintius, for having occafioned the lofs of thebattle at Veii, thought, that the recent difpleafure ofthe people towards the conful Sempronius, affordeda fit opportunity for reviving the anger of the pub­lic againft them: having therefore convened thepeople, they exclaimed loudly, that the common­wealth had been betrayed by its commanders at Veii;and afterwards, in confequence of their efcaping withimpunity, the army was betrayed by the conful inthe country of the Volfcians, the cavalry, men ofdiftinguifhed bravery, given up to flaughter, and thecamp Ihamefully delcrted. Then Caius Junius, oneof the tribunes, ordered Tempanius the horfernan tobe called, and in their prefence addrefled him thus:"Sextus Tempanius, 1 demand of you, whether it"is your opinion that the conful Caius Sempronius"cither engaged the enemy at a proper feaibn, or"ftrengthened his line with a refcrve, ordifcharged'fl any duty of a good cojilul: andwhcther you.your-
'' felf,







OCR Output








OF ROME.


that he mould make him heir of the kingdom. Fortliefe reafons, they formed a plot againft the kinghimfelf; for the execution of which, two of the moftundaunted of the fhepherds were chofen, who, arm­ed with the iron tools of hufbandmen, which theywere ufed to carry, pretended a quarrel in the porchof the palace, and attracted, by their outrageousbehaviour, the attention of all the king's attendants:then both appealing to the king, and their clamourhaving reached the palace, they were called in, andbrought before him. At firft they both bawledaloud, and each furioufly abufed the other, until,being rebuked by a Hctor, and ordered to fpeak intheir turns, they defifted from railing. Then, asthey had concerted, one began to explain the affair jand while the king, attentive to him, was turnedquite to that fide, the other, raifing up his ax,ftruck it into his head, and leaving the weapon inthe wound, they both rufhed out of the houfe,


 


XLI. WHILST the perfons prefent raifed upquinius, who fcarce retained any figns of life, thelictors feized the aflafllns, who were endeavouringto efcape. An uproar immediately enfued, and thepeople ran together in crowds, furprifed, and eagerto be informed of what had happened. Tanaquil,during this tumult, turned out every perfon fromthe palace, and ordered the doors to be fhut, andat the fame time appeared to be very bufy in pro­curing fuch things as were neceflary for the dreffingof the wound, as if there were realbn to hope; nordid fhe neglect to provide other means of fafety, incafe her hopes mould fail. Sending inftantly forSeryius, and fhewing him her hufband juft expiring,me laid hold of his right hand, befought him thathe would not fuffer the death of his father.in-law<o pafs unrevenged, nor his mother-in-law to beexpofed to the infults of their enemies. "Ser-"vius," faid me, " if you act as a man, the king-
"dom







OCR Output








O F R O M E. 23


The Roman citadel was commanded by Spurius BOOKTarpeius. His maiden daughter, who had acci- . _'dentally gone without the fortifications to bringwater for the facred rites, was bribed by Tatius withgold to admit fome of his troops into the citadel.As foon as they gained admittance they put her todeath; by throwing their armour in a heap upon her,either becaufe they wifhed that the citadel fhouldrather appear to have been taken by ftorm, or for thefake of eftablifhing a precedent that faith was not tobe kept with a traitor. The ftory is told in anothermanner; that, as the Sabines generally carried ontheir left arms bracelets of great weight, and worerings fet with precious ftones, which made a greatfhew, fhe bargained for what they wore on theirleft arms; accordingly, inftead of the prefents ofgold which fhe expected, they threw their fhieldsUpon her. Others fay, that, in purfuance of theiragreement to deliver up what was on their leftarms, fhe exprefsly demanded their fhields; andthis feeming to be done with a treacherous intent,(lie was put to death with the very reward which fherequired.
XII. THE Sabines however kept pofieflion ofthe citadel; but though, on the day following, theRoman army, in order of battle, filled the wholeplain between the Palatine and Capitoline hills, yetthey did not come down to the level ground; untilthe Romans, ftimulated by rage and eagernefs torecover the citadel, advanced to an aflault. Theforemoft champions of the two parties, who animat­ed the troops to the fight, were Mettius Curtius onthe fide of the Sabines, and Hoftus Hoftilius onthat of the Romans. The latter, in the front of thearmy, by his fpirit and intrepidity, enabled theRomans to fupport the fight, in fpite of the difad-vantage of the ground; but, on his falling, theRoman troops quickly gave way, and were drivenc 4 back







OCR Output








THE HISTORY


BOOK annals, inftead of Virginius, I find Vopifcus Julius,•^r-^L^t conful. During this year, whoever were the confuls,v.R. 18i. Furiusand Manlius being fummoned to a trial beforeB.C.471. tne people, went about in the garb of fuppliants, ad-drefiTing not only the commons, but the younger pa­tricians. The latter they advifed and cautioned to"keep at a diftance from public employments, and"the adminiftration of affairs, and to look on the"confular fafces, the prxtexta, and curule chair, as"nothing elfe than the decorations of a funeral;'' for thofe fplendid badges, like the fillets of vic-"tims, were placed on men who were doomed to'' death. But, if there were fuch charms in the con.r"fulfhip, let them, once for all, be convinced, that"the confulfhip was crufhed, and held in captivity"by the tribunitian power; that a conful, like a"tribune's bailiff, muft act in every thing according"to his commands, and be obedient even to his"nod. If he fhould exert himfelf, if he mould fhew'' any refpect to the patricians, if he mould fuppofe'* that there was any other part in the ftate, but the*c commons alone, let him place before his eyes the"banifhment of Caius Marcius, and the condemna-*c tion and death of Menenius." By fuch difcourfesthe patricians were fired with indignation, and fromthat time they no longer held their confultationspublicly, but in private, and fuffered but few to beprivy to them: and here, however they might differin other points, in this they were unanimous, thatthe accufed fhould be refcued from danger, by anymeans poffible, whether right or wrong; and thetnoti violent method propofrd, was the moft accept­able. Nor were they at a lofs for an actor to per­petrate any, the moft atrocious deed: on the day oftrial therefore, when the people, ftanding in theForum, in eager expectation, firft began to wonderthat the tribune did not come down; then begin­ning, from his delay, to fufpect fomething amifs,they fuppofed that he had b.een terrified from attend­


ing







OCR Output








8a THE HISTORY


BOOK Tarquinius was the fon or grandfon of TarquiniusI. Prifcus, is not clear; following, however, the autho­rity of the greater number, I have chofen to callhim his Ion. He had a brother Aruns Tarquinius,a youth of a mild difpofition: to thefe two, as hasalready been mentioned, were married the twoTullias, the king's daughters, who were alfo ofwidely different tempers. It happened, luckily, thatthe two violent difpofitions were not united in wed­lock, owing, I prefume, to the good fortune of theKoman people, that the reign of Servius beinglengthened, the manners of the people might be fullyformed. The haughty Tullia was highly chagrined, atfinding in her hufband no principle either of ambi­tion, or enterprize ; fhe turned, therefore, her wholeregard towards the other Tarquinius; him me ad­mired, him fhe called a man, and a true defcendantof the royal blood; her fifter fhe defpifed, who,having got a man for her hufband, fhewed nothingof that fpirit of enterprize which became a woman.Similarity of difpofition quickly produced an inti­macy between them, as is generally the cafe; evil isfittef t to confort with its like. But it was the wo­man who fet on foot the fcene of univerfal confufionwhich followed. In the many private converfations•which fhe ufed to hold with her fifter's hufband, fherefrained not from throwing out the moft violent re­proaches againft her own, to his brother, and againither fifter, to that fifter's hufband; affirming, that"it were better that both he and lhe were un-•" married, than to be fo unfuitably matched; that,"through the ftupidity of others, they were con-"demned to a life of inactivity. If the gods had"granted her fuch a hufband, as fhe deferved,"quickly would be feen in her own houfe, that"crown which was now upon her father's head."She loon infpired the young man with notions as def-perate as her own. Aiuns Tarquinius, and theyounger Tullia, dying almoft immediately after,
and







OCR Output








THE HISTORY


 


refpect to quaeftors, and finding that_ this had no effect, they entirely laid afide the defignI., of augmenting the number of quaeftors. No foonerB.C.+'*. was it dropped by them, than it was taken up by thetribunes, and feveral other feditious fchemes werecontinually ftarting up, and among the reft, one foran agrarian law. While the fenate was defirous, onaccount of thefe commotions, that confuls mould beelected rather than tribunes, and no decree of thefenate could be pafied, on account of the protefts ofthe tribunes, the government came from confuls toan interregnum: nor was even that accomplifhedwithout a violent ftrugglc', the tribunes obftructingthe meeting of the patricians. After the greaterpart ot the enfuing year had been wafted in conten­tions between the new tribunes, and the feveral inter-regcs, the tribunes fometimes hindering the patriciansfrom affembling to declare an interrcx; at others,protefting againft the interrex paffing a decree of thefenate for the election of conluls; at laft, Lucius Pa-pirius Mugillanus, being declared interrcx, feverelyreproved both the fenate and the plebeian tribunes,affirming, that "the commonwealth, after being"forfaken and abandoned by men, and preferved"by the care and providence of the gods, fubfifted"merely by means of the Veientian truce, and the"dilatorinefs of the ,Equans: from whicli quarter,"fhould an alarm of danger be heard, did they thinkrt it right, that the commonwealth, deftitute of a pa-"trician magiftrate, fhould be expofed to a furprize?"That it neither fhould have an army, nor a gene-"ral to enlift one? Did they think an inteftine war"the proper means to repel a foreign one? Should"both take place at the fame time, the power of"" the gods would fcarce be able to prefervc the Ro-"man ftate from ruin. It were much fitter that"both parties mould remit fomewhat of their ftricct"rights; and, by a mutual compromife of their"pretenfions, unite the whole in concord, the fenate
"permitting







OCR Output








PLEASE RETURN TOALDERMAN LIBRARY


DUE


7_


~f


O


 


DUE







OCR Output








THEHISTORY


BOOK" .with a dictator; and the Roman people had elected^_ __' ," tribunes, who were to aflume the government, notY.R. 354." on the ufual day, the ides of December, but in-B. C. 598. " ftantly, on the calends of Oilober; becaufe the"continuance of thofe men in office was incompati-"ble with the fafety of the commonwealth. Yet,'c after all this, thofe men, pre-condemned, and"overwhelmed by fo many decifions againft them,"prefented themfelves to trial before the people,"and imagined that they were difcharged, and had"undergone fufficient punifhment, becaufe they had"been reduced to the rank- of private citizens, two"months fooner than ordinary; never confidering,. • " that this was only taking out of their hands the"power of doing farther mifchief, not inflicting pu-'"nimment; their colleagues, who were manifeftly'c clear of all mare of the blame, being deprived'of"authority as well as themfelves.They requefted that"the citizens of Rome would refume the fame fen-"timents, which they had felt when the difaftrous"event was recent, when they beheld the army"flying in confternation, covered with wounds, and"filled with difmay j pouring into the gates, ac-"cufing, not fortune, nor any of the gods, but"thefe their commanders. They were confident,"that there was not a man prefent in the afiembly"who did not, on that day, utter execrations and"curfes againft the perfons, the families, and for-"tunes of Lucius Virginius and Marcus Sergius."And it would be the higheft inconfiftency if they"did not now, when it was not only lawful but"their duty, exert their own power againft thofe,"on whom each of them had imprecated the ven-"geance of the gods. The gods themfelves never"laid their hands on the guilty, it was enough if"they armed the injured with power to take ven-"geance."
XII. IN-







OCR Output








5i<S THE HISTORY


 


SOCK the Gauls was approaching, and that the people cfArdea in confternation were met in counfeF on theOn which, as if moved by divine infpira-tion, he advanced into the midft of their afiembly,having hitherto been accuftomed to abfent hirnfelffrom fuch sheetings, and faid, " People of Ardea,'' my friends of old, of late my fellow-citizens alfo,"a relation encouraged by your kindnefg, and;"formed by my fortune; let not any of you imagine,'' that my coming hither is owing to my having for-'c gotten my fituation; but the prefent cafe, andthe"common danger, render it neceflary that every"one fhould contribute to the public every kindNl of affifbnce in his power. And when fhall J re-"pay fo great obligations as I owe you, if I am now"remifs? On .what occafion can I ever be fervice-"able to you, if not in war? By my knowledge in"that line, I fuppwted a character in my native"country, and having never been overcome by an"enemy in war, I was banifhed in time of peace"by my ungrateful countrymen. To you, men of"Ardea, fortune has prtfented an opportunity of"making a recompence for all the valuable favours"which the Roman people have formerly conferred"on you. How great thefe have been, ye your-"felves remember j nor need I, who know you to"be grateful, remind you of them. At the fame time"you may acquire, for this your city, a high degree*1 of military renown, by actingagainft the common'' enemy. The nation, which is now approaching,"in a diforderly march, is one to whom nature ha£"given minds and bodies of greater fize than"ftrength: for which reafon, they bring to every con-"ttft more of terror, than of real vigour. The dif-"after of Rome may ferve as a proof of this; tliey"took the city, when every avenue lay open; but full'c a fmall band in the citadel and Capitol are able to'c withftand them. Already tired of the. flow pro-"ceedings of the fiege, they retire and fpread them-
"felvc$







OCR Output








OF ROME. xai


his confulate was not fignalized by any important BOOKtranfacSHon. The temple of Jupiter in the Capitol . 1 _,had not yet been .dedicated; the confuls Valerius and Y. 14.145.Horatius caft lots which fhould perform the dedica- B. c. S°T'rion, and it fell to Horatius. Publicola fet out toconduct the war againft the Veientians. The friendsof Valerius fhewed more difplealure,than theocc'afionmerited, at the dedication of a temple fo celebratedbeing given to Horatius. Having endeavoured, byevery means, to prevent its taking place, and all theirattempts having failed of fuccefs, when the confulhad already laid his hand on the door-poft, and wasemployed in offering prayers to the gods, they haftilyaddrefied him with the fhocking intelligence, that hisfon was dead, and infifted that his family being thusdefiled, he could not dedicate the temple. Whetherhe doubted the truth of the intelligence, or whetherit was owing to great firmnefs of mind, we are not in­formed with certainty, nor is it eafy to conjecture;but he was no farther diverted from the bulinefs hewas engaged in, by that information, than juft to giveorders that the body fhould be buried; and, ftillholding the poft, he finifhed his prayer, and dedicatedthe temple. Such were the tranfactions at home andabroad, which occurred during the ftrft year after thecxpulfion of the royat family. The next confuls ap- y. R^Z.p'ointed were, Publius Valerius, a fecond time, and B. c. j16.Titus Lucretius.
IX. MEANWHILE, the Tarquinii had carried theircomplaints to Lars Porfena, king of Clufium j andthere, mixing admonitions with intreaties, they atone time befought him that he would not fufferthem, who derived their origin from Etruria, andwere of the fame blood and name, to fpend theirlives in poverty and exile; then warned him " not"to let this new practice of dethroning kings pro-"ceed without chaftifement; reminding him, that"liberty had in itfelf diffident fweets to allure others
"to







OCR Output








THE HIS TORY


 


tne urmOft defer-
T encc, began to feel themfclves expofed to infultsY.R.Z5-). from the nobility. During the fame year, the co-B.C. 49$. lony of Signia, which Tarquinius had founded in hisreign, was re eftabliflhed, by filling up its numberof colonifb. The tribes of Rome were increafedto the number of twenty-one. The temple of Mer­cury was dedicated on the ides of May.
XXII. DURING thefe proceedings againft the La-tines, it could not be faid there was either war orpeace with the nation of the Volfcians: for, on theone hand, thefe had got troops in readinefs, whichthey would have fent to the afiiftance of the Latines,if the Roman dictator had not been fo quick in hismeafures; and, on the other, the Roman had ufedthis expedition, in order that he might not be ob­liged to contend againft the united forces of the La-tines and Volfcians: in refentment of this behaviour,the confuls led the legions into the Volfcian terri­tory: the Volfcians, who had no apprehenfions ofpunifhment, for a defign which had not been put inexecution, were confounded at this unexpected pro­ceeding, infomuch that, laying afide all thoughtsof oppofition, they gave three hundred hoftages, thechildren of the principal perfons at Cora and Pome-tiaj in con fequence whereof, the legions were with­drawn from thence, without having come to an en­gagement: however, in a fhort time after, the Vol­fcians being delivered from their fears, refumedtheir former difpofition, renewed fecretly their pre­parations for war, and prevailed on the Herniciansto join them: they alfo fent ambaffadors throughevery part of Latium, to ftir up that people to arms;but the Latines were fo deeply affected by their re­cent difafter, at the lake Regillus, and fo highly dif-pleafed and incenfed at any perfons attempting toperfuade them to engage in a war, that they evenwent fo far as to offer violence to the ambaffadors:
(chins'







OCR Output








O F R O M E, 491


Liparenfian pirates, not far from the Sicilian ftreight, BOOKwere taken and carried to Liparae. It was the cuf- . __-torn of this ftate, to make a general divifion of all Y.R.booty acquired, as if piracy were the public act of B.c.the government. It happened that the office of chiefmagiftrate was filled by one Timafuheus, a man morelike the Romans than his own countrymen, who, be­ing touched himfelf with reverence for the characterof ambafladors, for the offering, for the god to whomit was fent, and the caufe for which it was prefented,impreffed the multitude likewife, who almoft in allcafes refemble their ruler, with proper fentiments ofreligion on the occafion; and, after entertaining theambafladors at the public expence, convoyed themwith fome of his own fhips to Delphi, and fromthence conducted them in fafety to Rome. By de­cree of fenate a league of hofpitality was formed withhim, and prefents were made him by order of theftate. During this year, the war with the Jiquanswas attended with advantages pretty equal on bothfides; fo that it was a matter of doubt, both atRome, and even among the troops themfelves,whether they were victorious or vanquimed. TheRoman commanders were Caius vEmilius and Spu-rius Poftumius, two of the military tribunes. Atfirft they acted in conjunction, but after having de­feated the enemy in the field, they came to a deter­mination that ^Emilius, with a fufficient force, mouldkeep pofieflion of Verrugo, and that Poftumius'mould lay wafte the country. In performance ofthis, the latter, fince the late fuccefs, thinking leftcaution requifite, and marching in an unguardedmanner, was attacked by the .fl£quans, who threwhis troops into confufion, and drove them to the nexthills. The panic fpread from thence even to Ver­rugo, to the other part of the army pofted there.Poftumius having withdrawn his men to a place offafety, called them to an afiembly, where he upbraid­ed them with their fright, and with having fled from,
th.e







OCR Output








PREFACE. ix


people: for the well educated in every coun­try learn to fpeak and write the dialed: of themetropolis; although, if brought up in theirown provinces, however nearly their languagemay approach the purity of that of the capital,yet it will ever retain fome tindture of pro­vinciality.
If this fuppofition of the meaning of theword Patavinity be right, the fact, upon fuchauthority as that of Pollio, muft be admitted;although in what, precifely, it confuted,it is not,at prefent, perhaps, poflible to determine. Muchhas been written upon the fubject, which, inreality, feems now to be an idle inquiry; and,as a difiertation upon this matter could affordneither inftru&ion nor entertainment to the'mere Englifh reader, for whofe ufe the fol­lowing Tranflation is principally intended, wefhall difmifs the fubjeft with obferving, thatwhat Quintilian has not told us, no modernScholar will ever have penetration enough todifcover: and we may be alto allowed to fup-pbfe that, whatever thefe peculiarities may havebeen, as that great Critic has not thought themworth pointing out, they cannot have beeneither very numerous, or of very material con-fequence.
, Nor will, perhaps, another objection, madeby modern crities, be deemed of much greaterweight. They diflike, it feems, the plan of hisHiftory, and they found that diflike, chiefly, onthe fpeeches which he fo frequently introduces,which, they contend, it is not probable couldhave been fpcken upon the oacafions alleged j
and







OCR Output








OF ROME. 295


tears, affected them more deeply than any words B o o Kcould do. Appius, whofe mind was hardened againft .- .T..'-fall fuch occurrences, violent madnefs, rather than ¥.^..305.love, having perverted his underftanding, afcended B. c. 447'the tribunal; and when the claimant had juft begunto urge, that, " through partiality, he had refuted*' yefterday to pronounce judgment in the caufe;"Appius, without allowing him to proceed in ftatingfris claim, or giving Virginius an opportunity of an-fwering, delivered his fentence. The dif'courfe withwhich he introduced his decree fome antient writershave fet down, perhaps with truth; but as I no'where find any one that feems likely to have beenoifed on occafion of fuch an iniquitous decifion, Ithink it beft to reprefent the plain fadTr, of whichthere is no doubt: he decreed, that fhe mould beheld in bondage until the final decifion. At firft,all were ftruck motionlefs with aftonifhment and fur-prife at fuch an atrocious proceeding. Silence thenprevailed for forne time: afterwards, when MarcusClaudius went to ferze the maiden, where fhe ftoodin the midft of the matrons, and was oppofed by thewomen with lamentable cries of grief, Virginius, ,
ftretching forth his hands in a menacing attitudetowards Appius, faid, "Appius, I betrothed myf' daughter to Icilius, not to thee; and I have edu-"cated her for a wife, not for a harlot. Do you'' intend that men mall indulge their luft promifcu-"oufly like cattle and wild beads? Whether thefe•" men here will endure fuch things I know noti but"thofe who carry arms, I hope, never will." Theclaimant of the maiden being forced back, by thecrowd of women and advocates who ftood roundfilence was commanded by the crier.


XLVIII. THE decemvir, whofe mind was warpedby his ungovernable luft, declared, that " not only"from the abufive language of Icilius yefterday,"and the violence of Virginius, of which the.whole
u 4 "Roman







OCR Output








5<j<S T H E H I S T O R Y


B o o K to Rome they were going, while the fpace covered^^Xl^. by their men and horles was immenfe, the troopsY.R. 365. fpreading widely on every fide. But report out-B'C, 387. ftripped them; and meflengers alfo from the Clu-fian, and from feveral other ftates, one after ano­ther, and the quicknefs of the enemy's proceedings,caufed the utmoft confirmation among the Romans,, whofe army, compofed, in a manner, of tumultuarytroops, with all the hafte which they could make,fcarce advanced fo far before they met them at theeleventh ftone, where the river Allia, running downfrom the Cruftuminian mountains in a very deepchannel, joins the Tiber, a little way below theroad. Already every place, in front, and on eachfide, was occupied by numerous bodies of the ene­my; and, as that nation has a natural turn for ag­gravating terrour by confufion, by their harm mu-fic and difcordant clamours, they filled the air witha horrible din. •
XXXVIII. THERE the military tribunes, with­out having previoufly formed a camp, without theprecaution of raifing a rampart which might fecurea retreat, regardlefs of duty to the gods, to faynothing of that to man, without taking aufpices,without offering a facrifice, drew up their line,which they extended on towards the flanks, left theyfhould be furrounded by the numerous forces of theenemy. Still they could not fhew an equal front,and at the fame time thinned their line in fuch a.manner, as weakened the centre, and left it fcarcefufficient to fill up the line without a breach.There was a fmall eminence on the right, whichthey determined to occupy with a body of referve;which meafure, as it gave the firft caufe to theirdifmay and defertion of the field, fo it proved theonly means of fafety in their flight. Brennus thechieftain of the Gauls, thinking, that as his enemieswere few, in number, their fkill was what he had7 chiefly







OCR Output








296 THE HISTORY


? op K" Roman people were witnefies, but alfo from ccr-t_j-r_-," tain proofs, he had learned that, during the wholeY.R. 305." night, cabals had been held, for the purpofe ofB. C. 447. i' ftirring up fedition. Wherefore, being aware of*c the difputes likely to enfue, he had come down"with a band of men in arms, not with a defign of'c injuring any perfon who fhould demean himfelf,'' but of quietly punifhing, in a manner fuited to the"ffiajefty of government, fuch as fhould prefume to"difturb the tranquillity of the ftate. It will, there-'' fore, (faid he,) be your better way to remain quiet."Go, lictor, remove the crowd, and make way"for the owner to feize his tlave." When, burtt-ing with paflion, he had thundered out thefe words,the multitude of themfelves voluntarily feparated,'and the maiden ftood forfaken, a prey to injuftice.Virginius then, feeing no profpect of afliftance fromany quarter, faid, "Appius, I entreat you, firft,"to make allowance for a father's grief, if I have-f made ufe of too harfh expreflions towards you;"and next, to allow me here, in the prefence of"the maiden, to inquire of her nurfe the truth of"this affair j that, if I have been falfely called her"father, I may depart hence with the more refigna-"tion." Permiffion being granted, he drew thejnaiden and her nurfe afide, to the fheds near thetemple of Cloacina, now called the new fheds, andthere, fnatching a knife from a butcher, plunged itinto his daughter's breaft, with thefe words: " Inf this manner, my child, the only one in my power,"do I fecure your liberty." Then looking backon Appius, " With this blood, Appius," faid he,'' I devote thee and thine head to perdition." Ap­pius, alarmed by the cry raifed at fuch a horriddeed, ordered Virginius to be feized. But he,clearing a paffage with the weapon wherever he went,• and protected alfo by a multitude of young men whoefcorted him, made his way to the gate. Iciliusand Numitorius raifed up the lifclcls body, and ex-
6 poledf







OCR Output








O F R O M E. 4P3


the conful; and the legions, on the other, prefied on B o o KTempanius and the horfemen, who, after many fruit- , - ' __,lefs attempts to break through to their friends., took Y.R. 331.pofieflion of an eminence,and there, forming a circle, B. c. *10'defended themfelves, not without taking vengeanceon the affailants. Nor was the fight ended whennight came on. The conful kept the enemy em­ployed, never relaxing his efforts as long as any light'remained. The darknefs at length feparated them,leaving the victory undecided: and fuch a pantckfeized both camps, from the uncertainty in whichthey were with refpect to the iflue, that both armies,as if they had been vanquifhed, retreated into theneareft mountains, leaving behind their wounded,and a great part of their baggage. The eminence,however, was kept befieged until after midnight;when, intelligence being brought thither to the be-fiegers, that their camp was deferted, they, fuppofingthat their friends had been defeated, fled alfo, eachwherever his fears carried him in the dark. Tem­panius, apprehending an ambufh, kept his men quietuntil day-light appeared; and then, going out himfelfwith a fmall party, to make obfervations, anddifcovering on enquiry, from the wounded men ofthe enemy, that the camp of the Volfcians was aban­doned, he called down his men from the eminencewith great joy, and made his way into the Roman,camp: here, finding every place wafte and deferted,and in the fame difgraceful ftate in which he hadfeen the poft of the enemy, before the difcovery oftheir miftake fhould bring back the Volfcians, hetook with him as 'many of the wounded as he could;and, not knowing what route the conful had taken,proceeded by the fhorteft roads to the city.
XL. NEWS had already arrived there of the lofs ofthe battle, and of the camp being abandoned; andgreat lamentations had been made, for the horfemenjbove all, the public grief being not inferior to that
D D 2 9f







OCR Output








392 T H E H I S T O R Y


BOOK had in one battle defeated three Roman generals;• -^ . and though they could not thereby prevail on theY.R. 319. general confederacy to embark publicly in theirB.C. 413. caufe, yet they procured from all parts a number ofvolunteers allured by the hopes of plunder. The Fi-denatians were the only ftate which refolved to renewhoftilities; and, as if there were fome kind of impietyin commencing war, otherwife, than with fome atro­cious deed, ftaining their arms now with the bloodof the new colonifts, as they had formerly done withthat of the ambafladors, they joined themfelves to theVeientians. The leaders of the two nations thenconfulted together, whether they fhould choofe Veii,or Fidenae, for the feat of the war: Fidenae appear­ed the more convenient. The Veientians thereforecroffing the Tiber, removed the war to Fidenfe. AtRome the alarm was exceffive: the troops were re­called from Veii, very much difpirited by their de­feat, and encamped before the Colline gate: otherswere armed and pofted on the walls. Bufinefs wasftopped in the courts of juftice, the fhops were fhutup, and every thing bore the appearance of a camp,rather than of a city.
XXXII. THE dictator then,fending criers throughthe ftreets, called the alarmed people to an affembly,and rebuked them fharply " for fuffering their cou-"rage to depend fo entirely on every trifling inci-"dent in the courfe of fortune, as that on meeting'"with an inconfiderable lofs, and that not owing to"the bravery of the enemy, or to want of courage"in the Roman army, but to a difagreement be-"tween their commanders, they mould be feJ2ed"with dread of their enemies of Veii, whom they"had fix times vanquifhed, and of Fidenae, a town"as often taken as attacked. He reminded them,"that both the Romans and the enemies were the"fame that they had been for fo many centuries paft;"their courage the fame; their ftrength of body the
"fame;







OCR Output








PREFACE. fii


of fix centuries; but fo many, fo various, andfo interefting were the events, which he hadbefore him for felettion, in the latter period ofthe Republic, that it took him above dou­ble that number to relate the occurrences oflittle more than an hundred and twenty years.From the admirable manner in which he haswritten the former part of his Hiftory, we mayJudge of what muft have been the merit of thislatter part,whichfails us,unfortunately, at a moftremarkable period, when rational curiofity israifed to the higheft pitch. Nor can we doubtthe excellence of its execution, when we con-fider how much better, and how much morecopious his materials muft have been; for, be-fides what he could draw from his own per-fonal knowledge, having lived among, andconverfed familiarly with, the moft coniider-able men in the empire, who were themfelvesprincipal actors in the important tranfactionswhich he relates, he had accefs to the beft pof-fible written materials; to the memoirs of Sylla,Casfar, Labienus, Pollio, Auguftus, and manyothers which were then extant. What wouldwe not give for the picture, fmifhed by fo ablea hand, from the fketches of fuch mafters?What delight would it not afford us, to fee the•whole progrefs of a free Government from li­berty to fervitude? the whole feries of caufesand effects, apparent and real, public and pri­vate? thofe which all men faw, and all goodmen oppofed and lamented, at the time; andthofe which were fo difguifed to the prejudices,to the partialities, of a divided people, and even
*, to







OCR Output








OF ROME. 53;


*' to you in war. And this being the cafe, in the B o o K"name of folly, where can be the wifdom in people . _-\ _,'' who have experienced fuch a lot, making trial of Y.R. 365,ct a change, when, though your valour might ac- B.C. 31^.<* company you in your removal to another place,£t the fortune of this fpot certainly could not be"transferred? Here is the Capitol, where a"human head being formerly found, it was fore-"told that in that fpot fhould be the capital of the"world, and the feat of fovereign empire. Here,"when the Capitol was to be cleared by the rites(' of augury, Juventas and Terminus, to the exceed-t' ing great joy of our fathers, fuffered not them-f felves to be moved. Here is the fire of Vefta,*' here the Ancilia, fent down from heaven, here"all the gods, and they propitious to your ftay."Camillus is faid to have affected them much, bothby other parts of his difcourfe, and particularly bythat which related to religious matters. But theaffair remained in fufpenfe, until an accidental ex-preflion, fcafonably uttered, determined it. For ioa ihort time after this, the fenate fitting on this bu-nefs in the Curia Hoftilia, it happened that fomecohorts, returning from relieving the guards, pafiedthrough the Forum in their march, when a centurionjn the Comitium called out, "Standard-bearer, fix"your ftandard, It is bef t for us to ftay here." Onhearing which exprefiion, the fenate coming forthfrom the Curia, called out with one voice, that." they embraced the omen;" and the furroundingcrowd of commons joined their approbation. Thepropofed law being then rejected, they fet about re­building the city in all parts at once. Tiles werefuppljed at the public expence, and liberty grantedto hew ftones and fell timber, wherever each perfonchofe, fecurity being taken for their completingthe buildings within the year. Their hafte took£way all attention to the regulation of the courfe ofthe ftreey; for fctting aljde all regard to diftinction
of







OCR Output








. VU."


S36 THE HISTORY, &c.
BOOK of property, they built on any fpot which they found
^_ ^-^' vacant. And that is the reafon that the old fewers,
'Y.R. 365. which at firft were conducted under the public
£.Co*7' ftreets, now, in many places, pafs under private
houfes, and that the form of the city appears as if
force, and not order, had directed the diftribution of
the lots.


5ND OF THE FIRST VOLUME.







OCR Output








OF ROME. 247


"a caufe, to have run to the Capitol, to have re- B ?rio K"ftored to liberty and peace that moft auguft refi- i -T'"dence of the fupremely good and great Jupiter? Y.R."O father Romulus, grant to thine offspring that B.C."fpirit of thine, by which thou formerly reco-""veredft the citadel from thefe fame Sabines, when"they had got pofiefiion of it by means of gold."Diredb them to purfue the fame path, in which"thou ledft the way, and which thine army follow-"ed. Lo, I as conful, will be the firft to follow"thee and thy footfteps, as far as a mortal can follow•" a divinity." The conclufion of his fpeech was,that" he now took up arms, and fummoned every"citizen of Rome to arms. If any one mould at.'' tempt to prevent the execution of this order, he"would never," he faid, "confider the extent of"the conl'ular authority, nor of the tribunitian"power, nor the devoting laws; but, be he who he"might, or where he might, whether in the Capitol,"or in the Forum, he would treat him as an enemy."Let the tribunes give orders for arming againft"Publius Valerius the conful, fince they had for-"bidden it againft Appius Herdonius, and he"would not hefitate to ufe the fame treatment to"tribunes, which the founder of his family had the"fpirit to fhew to kings." Every one expected theutmoft degree of violence, and that the enemywould be gratified with the fight of a civil waramong the Romans. Yet neither could the lawbe carried, nor the conful march to the Capitol;night coming on, put a ftop to the contefts; for thetribunes, dreading the armed attendants of the con-fuls, retired as it grew dark. And as foon as .thefomentcrs of fedition had withdrawn, the patricianswent about among the commons, and introducingthemfelves into their circles of converfation, threwout difcourfes adapted to the juncture, advifed themto " confider well into what hazards they were bring-'t ing the commonwealth i" telling them, that "theR 4 '' contelt







OCR Output








132 THE HISTORY


B o o K for thej city: they had ground allotted to them forbuilding houfes, which was afterwards called theTufcan ftreet.


B°cf 1*T ^^' ^Hi next con^s elected were Publius Lu-*"' s°s' cretius, and Publius Valerius Publicola a third time.During this year, ambafladors came from Porfenarfor the laft time, about reftoring Tarquinius to thethrone. The anfwer given to them was, that the fe-nate would fend ambaffadors to the king; and ac­cordingly, without delay, a deputation, confifting ofthe perfons of the higheft dignity among the fenators,was fent with orders to acquaint him, that " it was"not becaufe their anfwer might not have been"given in thefe few words, that the kings would"not be admitted, that they had chofen to fend a"felect number of their body to him, rather than"to give the anfwer to his ambafladors at Rome;"but in order that an end might be put for ever"to all mention of that bufinefs; and that the inter-"courfe of mutual kindnefs, at prefent liibfifting"between them, might not be difturbed by the un-"eafinefs which muft arife to both parties, if he"were to requeft what would be deftructive of the"liberty of the Roman people; and the Romans,"unlefs they chofe to comply at the expence of"their own ruin, muft give a refufal to a pcrfon, to"whom they wtfuld wifh to refufe nothing: that the"Roman people were not under regal government,"but in a ftate of freedom, and were fully deter-"mined to open their gates to declared enemies,"rather than to kings: that this was the fixed re-"folution of every one of them j that the liberty of"the city, and the city itlelf, fhould liave the fame"period of exiftence; and, therefore, to intreatx' him, that, if he wifhed the fafety of Rome, he'' would allow it to continue in the enjoyment of"liberty." The king, convinced of the impropri­ety of interfering any farther, replied, " Sinep this


i' is







OCR Output








THEHISTORY


ROOK who wifted the fafety of the commonwealth, fhould. \-_r leap down from their horfes, and, his order beingY.R. jj1. obeyed by the horfemen of every troop, as if it hadB-C. 410. been delivered by the conful, he faid, " unlefs this"cohort, by the power of its arms, can ftop the pro-"grefs of the enemy, there is an end of the empire."Follow my fpear, as your ftandard: fhew, both to"Romans and Volfcians, that as no horfemen are"equal to you when ye are mounted, fo no footmen"are equal to you when ye difmount." This ex­hortation being received with a fhout of applaufe, headvanced, holding his fpear aloft: wherever they di­rected their march, they forced their way in fpite ofoppofition; and, advancing their targets, pufhed onto the place where they faw the diftrefs of their friendsthe greateft. The fight was reftored in every partas far as their onfef reached; and there was no doubt,that if it had been poffible for fb fmall a number tohave managed the whole bufinefs of the field, theenemy would have turned their backs.
XXXIX. FINDING that nothing could withftandthem any where, the Volfcian commander gave di­rections, that an opening fhould be made for thefe tar-geteers, this ftrange cohort of enemies, until the vio­lence of their charge fhould carry them fo far, thatthey might be fhut out from their friends: whichbeing executed, the horfemen on their part were in­tercepted, in fuch a manner, that it was impoffiblefor them to force a paffage back through the way bywhich they had come, the enemy having collectedtheir thickeft numbers in the place through whichthey had made their way. The conful and Roman. legions on the other fide, not feeing, any where, thatbody which juft now had afforded protection to thewhole army, left fo many men, of fuch confummatevalour, fhould be furrounded and overpowered by theenemy, refolved at all hazards to pufli forward. TheVoffcians. forming two fronts, withftood, on one fide,
the







OCR Output








OF ROME.


thefe invectives by great numbers, who complained B O <*of being perfonally abufed by Caefo, and impor. . .% -tuned the tribune to go through with the profccu . Y.R. 19,.tion. *.
XII. THE day of trial now approached, and itwas manifeft that the people in general had conceiv­ed an opinion, that the exiftence of their liberty de­pended upon the condemnation of Caefo. Then atlength he was compelled, though not without indig­nation, to folicit the favour of each: he was follow­ed by his relations, who were the principal perfonsin the ftate. Titus Quintius Capitolinus, who hadbeen thrice conful, after recounting many honoura­ble atchievements of his own, and of his family,affirmed, that " there never had appeared, either in"the Quintian family, or in the Roman ftatc, any"perfon poffefled of luch a capacity, and who ex-"hibited fo early, fuch difplays of valour. That he"ferved his firft campaign under him, and had of-'t ten in his fight fought with the enemy." Spuri-us Furius declared, that " he had, by order of'' Quintius Capitolinus, come to his relief, when in"a dangerous fituation; and that there was no one."perfon to whom he thought the public fo much"indebted for the reftoration of their affairs to a"ftate of fafety." Lucius Lucretius, conful thepreceding year, in the full fplendour of frefh glorr,attributed to Caefo a lhare of his own merits; enu­merated the battles he had been in; related extraor­dinary inftances of his good behaviour, both on ex^peditions, and in the field of battle; advifed andwarned them, rather " to preferve among them-"felves, than to drive into a foreign ftate, a youth"of fuch extraordinary merit, endowed with every"accomplifhment, which nature and fortune could"beftow, and who would prove a vaft acceftion to*' the intereft of any ftate, of which he fhould be-'' come a member, That the only parts in his cha-
"racter







OCR Output








THE HISTORY


BOOK w'ith loud clamours, implored the protection,,___^I__, time, of the confuls, at another of the fenate; yetY.R. 194. they could not prevail on the conful to recede fromB.C.45*. his refolution, until the tribunes promifed that theywould be directed by the fenate. The conful thenlaid before the fenate the demand of the tribunes andcommons, and it was decreed, that " the tribunes"fhould not introduce the law during that year;"and that, on the other hand, the confuls fhould"not lead out the troops from the city. For the"time to come, it was the judgment of the fenate,"that re.electing the fame magiftrates, and re-ap-"pointing the fame tribunes, was injurious to the"intereft of the commonwealth." The confulsconformed to the decifions of the fenate; but thetribunes, notwithftanding the remonftrances of theconliils, were re-appointed. The fenate likewife,not to yield to the commons in any particular, ontheir fide, wifhed to re-elect Lucius Quintius conful.On no occafion during the whole year, did the con­ful exert himfelf with more warmth. "Can I won-"der," faid he, " confcript fathers, if your autho-"rity is lightly regarded among the commons? ye"yourfelves deprive it of its weight. For inftance,"becaufe the commons have broken through a de*"cree of the fenate, with refpect to the re.election""of magiftrates, ye wifh to break through it alfo,"left ye fhould fall fhort of the populace in heady"raflinefs; as if fuperiority of power in the ftate"confifted in fuperior degrees of inconftancy and"irregularity; for it is, certainly, an inftance of"greater inconftancy and irregularity, for us to"counteract our own decrees and refolutions, than"thofe of others. Go on, confcript fathers, to"imitate the inconfiderate multitude j and ye, who"ought to fhew an example to the reft, rather fol-"low the fteps of others in a wrong courfe, than"guide them by your example into the right one."But let me not imitate the tribunes, nor fuffer
"myfelf







OCR Output








PREFACE. *


"than by his fidelity, was fo lavim in his praife"of Pompey, that Auguftus called him the Pom-"peian: and yet his friendfhip for him was un-"alterable." The younger Pliny informs us *,that '' a certain inhabitant of the city of Cadiz"was fo ftruck with the illuftrious character of"Livy, that he travelled to Rome on purpofe"to fee that great genius; and, as foon as he"had fatisfied his curiofity, returned home."
Of the hundred and forty-two books, ofwhich the hiftory of Rome originally confifteoythirty-five only have come down to us. Thecontents of the whole, the hundred and thirty-feventh and eighth excepted, have been pre-ferved; compiled, as fome, without any goodreafon, have fuppofed, by Livy himfelf; whileothers, with equal improbability, have affertedthem to be the work of Lucius Florus, an au­thor of a portion of Roman hiftory. Whoevermay have been the compiler, a fact as ufelefs,as it is now impoffible, to afcertain, they arehighly curious; and although they contain but afaint outline, yet they ferve to convey fome ideaof the original, and greatly excite regret at thelofs of fo large a portion of this valuable work.
The parts of this hiftory which we now pof-fefs, are, the firft decade: for it appears, fromhis having prefixed feparate prefatory introduc­tions to each portion, that the author had di­vided his work into diftin£t parts, confutingeach of ten books. The firft decade commenceswith the foundation of the city of Rome, and ra­pidly runs over the affairs of four hundred and• Ep. II. 3.
A 3 fixty







OCR Output








t S E H IS T O ft t;.;


 


OOK natives. The allies arriving on the day"appoirrttd>the conful encamped outfide the Capuan gate j and,after purifying the army, marched from thence to. Antium, and fat down at a fmall diftance from thecity, and the poft occupied by the enemy j wherethe Volfcians, not daring to rifk an engagement,bccaufe the troops from the ./Equans had not yetarrived, endeavoured to fcreen themfelves withintrenches, fo that they might not be compelled tofight. Fabius, next day, forming his troops, notin one body, compofed of his couasrymen and theallies intermixed, but in three feparate bodies, con­fifting of the three feveral nations, furrounded therampart of the enemy; he himfclf was in the centre,with the Roman legions: he ordered all to look forthe fignals from thence, in order that the allies andhe might begin the action at the fame time, and alforetire together, if he mould found a retreat: in therear of each divifion, he alfo placed their own ca­valry. Having thus furrounded the camp, he af-faulted it in three different places, and preffing themvigoroufly on every fide, beat down the Volfciansfrom the rampart, who were unable to withftand hisforce: then advancing within the fortifications, hedrove them before him, in confufion and difmay,towards one fide, and at length compelled them toabandon the camp. After which, the cavalry, whocould not eafily have pafied over the rampart, andhad hitherto ftood as fpectators of the fight, comingup with them, as they fled in diibrder, in the openplain, and making great havoc of their difmayedtroops, enjoyed a fhare in the honour of the victory.The number of flain, both within the camp and onthe outfide of the fortifications, was great, but thefpoil was much greater in proportion j for the ene­my were fcarcely able to carry off their arms, and.their army had been entirely deftroycd, if the wood*had not covered them in their flight.
A XXIII. DURINO







OCR Output








4og THE HISTORY


BOOK year. His four colleagues, in the fight of the Ro~i T- .^-P man people, befought him not to involve in vexa-Y.R.jiv tion an unoffending general, in whofe cafe nothingp. 0.4.19, but fortune could be blamed: Hortenfius took of­fence at this, thinking it meant a trial of his perfc-yerance; and that the accufed depended not on thejntreaties of the tribunes, which were thrown outonly for the f'ike of appearance, but on their protec­tion. Turning firft therefore to him, he afked,"Where were the haughty airs of the patrician?'' Where was the fpirit upheld in confidence by con-'' Jtious innocence, that a man of confular dignity<' took fhelter under the fhade of tribunes?" Thento his colleagues; " As to you, what is your inten-'' tion, in cafe I perfift in the profecution? Do ye"mean to rob the people of their jurifdiction, and't to overturn the power of the tribunes?" To thisthey replied; " that with refpect both to Semproni-"us, and to all others, the Roman people pofiefied"fupreme authority j neither was it in their power,te nor in their wifhes, to obftruct the jurifdiction of"the people; but if their prayers in behalf of their"general, who was to them as a parent, fhould have"no effect, they were determined to change their(' apparel along with him." Hortenfius then de­clared, " the commons of Rome fhall not fee their"tribunes in the garb of culprits: I have nothing"farther to fay to Sempronius, fince, by his conduct
•was capital, by tribe* if flneable, the pcrfon accufrd was fum.noned bytJie ctier, and if he Hid not appear, was p'milhed a,t the ple.ifure of theprofecutor. If lie appeared, the accuU r moiiuied the roftrum, and be­gan his charge, which he carried on through that and two other days,allowing an interval of one day between each. On rhe third day heD)»de a recapitulation of the charge, and mentioned the punifhment/prcified in the law for fuch an offence. I his was exprtfled in writing,and exhibited to public view during three market-days. 'I his pro­ceeding was termed ' rogatio' in refpeci ol the people, and ' irrogatio'in refpeft of the accnfed. On the day after the third market-day, thejKeufcr iinifhi'il the iiufmrfs of the profeciition, and concluded withgiving noijre of the day on which ilie aflembly ihould meet to paftjudgment. The accnfed was tlien at liberty to make bit defence, ei-jbtr by biinfelf, or by advocates.


"in







OCR Output








[ 441


THE


HISTORY OF ROME,


BOOK V.
On occf/ion of the Jiege of Ven, winter huts erecJed for t&etroops i on account of .which, being a new plan, tht tribunesof the people endeavour to excite difeontent, complaining thatno repofe is given to the foldiers, even in winter. The ca­valry for thejirft time, ferve on horfes of their own, Vetitafter aftege often years, taken by Furius Camillus, diclator.In the character of military tribunes, he laysftege to Falifeiifends back the children of the enemy, who were betrayed intohis hands; being charged with criminal condvcl, goes intoexile. Tht Senonian Gauls lay fiege to Cttt/ium. Romanantbaffadors, fent to mediate peace, take part with the Clu-
. Jtans ; provoked at which, the Gauls march direclly againftRome, and, after routing the Romans at the Allia, take pof-ftffion of the .whole city, except the Capitol. Having fcaledthe Capitol in the night, they are difcovered by the cackling ofgeefet and repiilfed, principally, by the exertions of MarcusManlius. The Romans, compelled by famine, agree to ran-few themfelves. While they are .weighing the gold, Camillusarrives with an army, beats off the Gauls, and deflroys theirarmy. He prevents the dejign of moving to Veii,


I. "DEACE now fabfifted in all other quarters; but BOOK
A the Romans and Veientians were ftill in arms, v.and difplayed fuch violent rancour and animofity as !rrrv. "*made it evident that utter deftruction would be the B.C. +00.fate of the party vanquifhed. The election of ma-giftrates in the two ftates was conducted in very dif­
ferent







OCR Output








OF ROME. 237.


"fore, that they might now ftand up with lafety in B O O K'"defence of their liberty." Such was the language t-_^_J.
of the tribunes. Y.K. 19.,.
B. c. 4.59.
XI. BUT, on the other fide, the confuls, fixingtheir chairs within view of them, began to proceedin the levy; thither the tribunes haftened, and drewthe afiembly with them. A few were cited by wayof experiment, and immediately outrages commenc­ed. Whenever a lirtor, by the conful's command,laid hold of any perfon, a tribune ordered him to befet at liberty. Nor did either party confine them-felves within the limits of that authority, to whichtheir office entitled them j every ftep taken was tobe fupported by force and ftrength of hands. Thefame line of conduct, which the tribunes had obferv-ed, in obftructing the levy, was followed by theconfuls, in their oppofition to the law, which wasbrought forward, on every day whereon an afiemblycould be held. The riot was begun by the patriciansrefufing to withdraw, after the tribunes had orderedthe people to proceed to the place of voting. Theelder citizens hardly ever attended the proceedingson this affair, becaufo they were not to be regulatedby prudence, but abandoned to the direction of rafh-nefs and violence; and the confuls generally keptout of the way, left, in fuch general confufion, theyfhould expoie their dignity to infult. There wasa young man called Cjcib Quintius, full of prefump-tion, on account both of the nobility of his defcent,and his peribnal fize and ftrength; to thefe qualifica­tions beftowed by the gods, he had added many war­like accomplifhments, and a confiderable degree ofeloquence in the Forum, infomuch that no perfon inthe ftate was deemed to poffefs greater abilities, ei­ther for acting or fpeaking: this man having placedhimfelf in the midft of the body of the patricians,confpicuous in ftature above the reft, and as if hecarried in his eloquence and perfonal ftrength, every
power







OCR Output








O F R O M E. 48$


*' had delivered Falerii into the hands of the Ro- B O O K"mans, by putting into their power thofe boys, i -^1 ."whofe parents were there at the head of affairs." Y.R. 361.On hearing which, Camillas told him, " Neither B.c.«l-"the people, nor the commander, to whom thou haft"come, thou wretch, with thy villainous offer, is;
"like unto thyfelf. Between us and the Falifcians"there fubfifts not that kind of fociety which is"formed by human compact, but that which nature"having implanted in both, does, and ever will"fubfift. War has its laws, as well as peace j and"we have leafned in waging it, to be as obfervant"of thofc laws, as we are brave. We carry arms,"not againft perfons of that age, who, even in the"ftorming of towns, are exempted from injury, but"againft men who have arms in their hands, as well"as we, and who without being either injured or"provoked by us, made an attack on a Roman camp"at Veii. Thofe thou haft conquered as far as in"thee lay, by an act of unexampled villainy. I"fhall conquer them as I conquered Veii, by Ro-"man methods, by valour, by labour, and by arms."Then, ordering him to be ftripped naked, and hishands to be tied behind his back, he delivered himto the boys to be conducted back to Falerii, and gavethem rods with which they mould fcourge the trai­tor, and drive him into the city. Such a fpectaclefirft attracting a concourfe of the people, and thefenate being afterwards fummoned by the magiftrateson the extraordinary cafe, fo great an alteration washereby effected in their fentiments, that they, who aftiort time before were fo outrageous in their hatredand anger, that they would almoft have chofen thecataftrophe of the Veientians, rather than the peaceobtained by the Capenatians, thefe fame perfons now,through every rank in the ftate, univerfally called outfor peace. The faith of the Romans, and the juftice.of their general, were extolled by every mouth in,the Forum, and in the fenate-houfe: and in compli-'
ancc







OCR Output








THE HISTORY


 


K war on Account of a peftilence, and a fcarcity of thtf- _ fruits of the earth; fo that feveral annals, as if theyY.R. 318. had no other tranfactions but thofe of mourning toB.C. 43*. relate, mention nothing more than the names of theconfuls. Coflus, indeed, is mentioned as militarytribune, with confular power, in the third year be­fore his confulate; and in the fame year as mafter ofthe horfe, in which poft he fought another remark­able battle with cavalry. In refpect to this there is .room for conjecture: but in my judgment, un­grounded furmifes may be applied to the fupport ofany opinion whatfoever; whereas the perfon con­cerned in the fight, on placing the recent fpoils in thefacred repofitory, having in a manner before his eyesJupiter, to whom they were contecrated, and Ro­mulus, as witnefies, who, in cafe of falfifying theinfcription, were not to be treated with contempt,entitled himfelf Aulus Cornelius Coflus, conful.
YR. jig. XXI. DURING the next year, wherein MarcusB.C.433. Cornelius Maluginenfis and Lucius Papirius Crafiuswere confuls, armies were led into the territories ofthe Veientians and of the Falifcians, numbers ofmen and cattle were carried oft" as fpoil, but theenemy did not fhew themfelves, nor give any op­portunity of fighting. However, no attempt wasmade on their towns, the people at Rome being at­tacked by a peftilential diforder. Endeavours werealfo ufed at home to excite difturbances, but with­out effect, by Spurius Marlins a plebeian tribune,who, imagining that, by the popularity of his name, ,he fhould be able to raifc fome commotion, hadcommenced a profecution againft Minucius; andalfo propofcd a law for confifcating the effects ofServilius Ahala, alleging that Maelius had been in-fidioufly crufiied under falfe charges by Minucius;and objecting to Servilius his having put to death acitizen who was under no legal fentence. Thefecharges, however, when canyafied before the peo­ple,







OCR Output








OF ROME. 449


ct thy tribunes have, all on a fudden, grown fo care- B O O K"ful, after having attempted to wreft their pay out i—yl—j"of their hands? How do they ftand? They have Y.R. 351."formed a rampart and a trench, both works ofB. C. *°°'"immenfe labour, through fo great an extent of"ground: they have erected forts, at firft only a"few, afterwards a great number, when the army"was augmented; and they have raifed defences,"not only on the fide next to the city, but alfo op-"pofite Etruria, againft any fuccours which fhoulct"arrive from thence. Why need I mention towers,"covered approaches, and the like; together with"all the various machines ufed in attacking towns?"Now, that fuch a quantity of labour has been ex-"pended, and that they have juft come to the finifh-"ing of the work, do ye think it would be prudent"to abandon all thefe preparations, that, the next"fummer, they may be obliged to undergo again thet' fame courfe of toil and labour in forming theie"a-new? How much lefs difficulty would it coft, to"fupport the works already formed, to prefs forward"and perfevere, and thus get rid of the trouble?." For there is no doubt that the bufinefs will be foon"accomplimed, if it is pufhed forward by an uni-"form courfe of exertions; and, if we do not our-'' felves defer the attainment of our own hopes, by"thus interrupting and fufpending our proceedings."What I have faid, regards only the labour, and"the lofs of time. But let me afk farther, can we"difregard the danger which we incur by procrafU-"nation; while we fee fo frequent meetings held by"the Etrurians on the fubject offending aid to Veii?"As matters ftand, at prefent, they are difpleafed"and angry with that people; declare that they will"not fend them aid; and, for any concern which"they take in the affair, we are at liberty to take"Veii. But who can promife that if we fufpend"our operations, they will be in the fame temper"hereafter? For, if you allow any relaxation, moreVOL..i. GO '" refpectable,







OCR Output








4,4 THE HISTORY


BOOK, continuance, orders were given to the Tufculans tot ^v' . watch attentively, left any new commotion fhouldY.R, 337. arife at Lavici. The military tribunes, with con-B. 0.415. fular power, of the next year, Lucius Sergius Fi-denas, Marcus Papiriu$ Mugillanus, Caius Serviliusfon of Prifcus, who, in his dictatorfhip, had takenFidenae, were, foon after the commencement oftheir office, attended by an embafiy from Tufculum,the purport of which was, that the Lavicanians hadtaken arms, and after having, in conjunction withthe JEquans, ravaged the territory of Tufculum,had pitched their camp at Algidum. War was thenproclaimed againft the Lavicanians. The fenatehaving decreed that two of the tribunes fhould goout to command the army, and that the other fhouldmanage affairs at Rome, there fprung up on a fud-den a warm difpute among the tribunes, each repre-fenting himfelf as the fitteft perfon to command inthe war, and fcorning the bufinefs of the city, as dif-agreeable and inglorious. The fenate, beholdingwith furprize this indecent contention between thecolleagues, Quintus Servilius faid, " Since ye pay"no deference either to this auguft body, or to the"commonwealth, parental authority fhall put an"end to your unfeemly altercation. My fon, with-"out putting it to the lots, fhall hold the command"in the city. I wifla thofe, who are fo ambitious"of being employed in the war, may act with"greater prudence and harmony in their conduct"of it, than they mew in their prefent competi-"tion."
XLVI. IT was refolved, that the levy fhould notbe made out of the whole body of the people indif-criminately: ten tribes were drawn by lot, and outof thefe the tribunes enlifted the younger men, andled them to the field. The contentions which beganbetween them in the city, were, through the fameeager ambition for command, inflamed to a much
greater







OCR Output








OF ROME. in


"groundlefs, apprehenfion; but the opinion is B O o K"deeply rooted in their minds, that, only with the ._-^_ _t"race of the Tarquinii, will kingly power depart Y.R. 145."hence." AftoniGiment at this extraordinary and B'c. i0?-unexpected affair, at firft, deprived the conful of allpower of fpeech; and when he afterwards began tofpeak, the principal men of the ftate gathered roundhim, and with earneft importunity urged the famerequeft. Others affeccted him lefs j but when Spu-rius Lucretius, his fuperior in age, and dignity ofcharacter, and his father-in-law befides, began totry every method of perfuafion, ufing, by turns, ar­guments and intreaties, that he would fuffer himfelf ,to be overcome by the general fenfe of his country­men, the conful, fearing left hereafter, when hefhould have returned to a private ftation, the famemeafures might be ufed againft him, with the addi­tion perhaps of confiscation of his property, and othermarks of ignominy, refigned the office of conful,and, removing all his effe&s to Lavinium, with­drew from the territories of the ftate. Brutus, inpurfuance of a decree of the fenate, propofed to thepeople, that all who were of the Tarquinian familymould be banifhed; and in an afiembly of the Cen­turies, he elected for his colleague, Publius Vale­rius, who had been his afliftant in expelling theroyal family.
III. No perfon now doubted but war would beimmediately. commenced by the Tarquinii: thatevent, however, did not take place fo loon as was ex-pedted. But, what they entertained no apprehenfionof, liberty was very near being loft, by fecret machi­nations and treachery. There were, among the Ro­man youth, feveral young men of no inconfiderablefamilies, who, during the reign of the king, hadindulged their pleafures too freely; and being of thefame age, and conftant companions of the youngerTarquinii, had been accuftomed to live in a princely
ftyle:







OCR Output








O F R O M E. 285


". lity reftored to the ftate: that Appius ClaudiusB oo K"fhould confider himfelf as having now received ,^_^_^j"fufficient notice, that he muft be ready to give an Y.R. 305."account of the proceedings of the allembly, in B' (~' *+?•."which he, in quality of decemvir, had prefided,"and in which the decemvirs were elected, whe-." ther they were appointed for one year, or until"the laws, then wanting, fhould be ratified. It"was alfo his' opinion, that, for the prefent, every"other bufinefs, except the war, fhould be laid"afide ; and that, if they imagined, that the reports"concerning it were propagated without founda-"tion, and that not only the couriers, but the Tuf-"culan ambafladors had conveyed falfe intelligence,"then that fcouts mould be difpatched to procure"more certain information; but that, if they gave"credit to the couriers, and the ambafladors, then"troops fhould be levied without delay, and the"decemvirs fhould lead armies to whatever places"each fhould think proper j and that no other"bufinei's fhould take place, before this was dif-"pofed of."
XLI. THIS refolution was carried, on a divifion,by means of the young patricians. Valerius andHoratius then, with greater vehemence, renewedtheir efforts, and loudly demanded permiflion tofpeak on the ftate of the commonwealth, declaring,that " if by a faction they were prevented in the"fenate, they would fpeak before the people; for"private men had no right to hinder them, either"in the fenate houfe, or in a general afiembly, nor"would they give way to thofe men's imaginary"fafces." Appius then, thinking the juncture focritical, that either their authority muft be overpow-cd, or the violence of thole men muft be refifledwith an equal degree of boldnefs, called out, that"whoever uttered a fentence, except on the bufi-"nefc prppofed, fhould have caufe to repent;" and,


ii on







OCR Output








S34 THE HISTORY


B o O K" fove for our country extend no farther thanL *•_ ," furface, and the timber of the houfes? I aflureY.R. 365. " you, for I will confefs it to you, that during theB.C. 387. " time Of my abfence, which I am lefs willing to"recollect, as the effecT: of ill treatment from youy'c than of my own hard fortune, as often as my. <' country came into my mind, every one of thefe"circumftances occurred to me; the hills, and the"plains, the Tiber, the face of the country to"which my eyes had been accuftomed, and this"fky, under which I had been born and educated;"and it is my wifh, Romans, that thefe may now"engage you, by the ties of affection, to remain1 "in your own eftablimed fettlements, rather thanc' hereafter prove the caufe of your pining away in'' anxious regret, after ye fhall have left them."Not without good reafon did gods and men felect"this fpot for the building of the city, where arctf moft healthful hills, a commodious river, whofc'' ftream brings down the produce of the interior"countries, and opens a paflage for foreign com-"merce; the fea, fo near as to anfwer every pur-"pofe of convenience, yet at fuch a diftance as not"toexpofe 4t to danger from the fleets of foreign-'c ers; and in the centre of the regions of Italy, a"fituation fingularly adapted by its nature to pro-"mote the increafe of a city. Of this the very'' fize of fo new a city is a demonftration. Ro-"mans, this prefent year is the three hundred and"fixty-fifth of the city; during fo long a time"have ye been engaged in war, in the midft of na-"tions of the oldeft landing: yet, not to mentiou"fingle cities, neither the /Equans in conjunction"with the Volfcians, who pofiefs fo many and fo"ftrong towns, nor the whole body of Etruria,"pofiejjed of fuch extenfive power by land and fea,"and occupying the whole breadth of Italy, from"one fea to the other, have Ihewn themfelves equal
** to







OCR Output













OCR Output








O F R O M E. 3<5s


fon, a"nd was informed by Servilius, that he rhuft BOOKftand a trial, and acquit himfelf of a charge made ,L_rJXl_^againft him in the fenate by Minucius; he then drew V.R. 3t6,back into the band of his aflbciates; and, at firft, B.C. 41*.cautioufly looking round, attempted to fkulk away;and when, at length, a ferjeant by order of the mafterof the horfe laid hold on him, he was refcued by theby-ftanders, and betook himfelf to flight; imploringthe protection of the commons of Rome; affirmingthat he was perfecuted by a confpiracy of the patri­cians againft him, for having aded with kindnefs to­ward the commons j and befeeching them to aflifthim in this extremity of danger, and not to fufferhim to be murdered before their eyes. Whilft heexclaimed in this manner, Ahala Servilius overtookhim, and flew him, and belmeared with the bloodwhich flowed from his wounds, and furrounded by aband of young patricians, carried back an accountto the dictator, that Maelius on being fummoned toattend him, had driven back the ferjeant, and en­deavoured to excite the multitude to violence, forWhich he had received condign punifhment. "• I"applaud," faid the dictator, " your meritorious"conduct; Caius Servilius, you have preferved the"commonwealth."
XV. HE then ordered the multitude, who, notknowing what judgment to form of the deed, werein violent agitation, to be called to an afiembly; therehe publicly declared, that " Maelius had been legally"put to death, even fuppofing him to have been in-"nocent of the crime of afpiring at regal power,"for having refufed to attend the dictator, when"fummoned by the mafter of the horfe. That he"had taken his feat, in order to have examined into"the charge; and that, when the trial fhould have"been finifhed, Maelius would have met fuch treat-"ment as his caufe merited: but when he attempted"by force to elude a legal decifion, force was em-
"ployed







OCR Output








4«l THfcttfSfORY


 


K " ment for yOur Old a§e J wno fight, to the laft, in_ " defence of your interefts againft fuch cruel andY.R. 341. " haughty adverfaries. Begin then to wonder whyB.C.411. " fo few undertake your caufe. What would theyCc have to expect at your hands? pofts of honour?"Thefe ye choofe to confer on your adverfaries,"rather than on the champions of the Roman peo-"ple. Ye murmured juft now on hearing that"man's words. What does that avail? If ye had"an opportunity, this moment, of giving your'' votes, ye would prefer this man who denouncesc' woe to you, before thofe who wifh to procure"eftablifhments for you, of lands, habitations, and
(t property."'-'
L. THE words of Pcftumius being conveyed tothe foldiers, excited in the camp a much higher de­gree of indignation. "Should a fraudulent embez-"zler of the fpoils," they fakl,: " denounce alfo woe"to the foldiers?" A general and open avowal oftheir refentment enfuing, the quaeftor, Publius Sex-trus, fuppofing that the mutiny might be quafhed, bythe fame violence which had given rife to it, fent alictor to one of the moft clamorous of the foldiers,on which a tumult and a fcuffie arofe, in which hereceived a blow of a ftone, which obliged him towithdraw from the crowd; the perfon who hadbounded him adding, with a fneer, that "die"quaeftor had got what the general had threatened to"the foldiers." Poftumius being lent for, on ac­count of this tumult, exafperated ftill farther the ge­neral ill-humour, by the feverity of "his inquiries andcruelty of his punifhmtnts. At laft, while he gavea loofe to his rage without any reftraint, a crowdbeing drawn together, by the cries of fome whomhe had ordered to be put to death under a hurdle,he ran down himfelf from the tribunal, like a mad­man, againft thofe who interrupted the execution.There the crowd being provoked by the lictors
clearing







OCR Output








O F R O M E. 79


bear arms. To accommodate fo great a multitude, BOOKit was found neceffary to enlarge the city in propor­tion '• he added to it, therefore, two hills, the Quiri-nal, and Vinimal, and immediately adjoining thelatter extended the limits of the Elquiliae, and therefixed his own refidence, in order to bring the placeinto repute. He furrounded the city vviih a ram­part, trenches, and a wall, and thus extended thePomcerium. Thofe who confider merely the ety­mology of the word, explain Pomcerium, as denotinga fpace on the outfide of the wall, Poftmcerium:but it is rather a fpace on each fide of the wall,which the Etrurians, formerly, on the founding ofcities, confecrated with the ceremonies ufed by au­gurs, in the direction, wherein they intended thewall fhould run, of a certain breadth on both fidesof itt jvith the intention, that, on the infide, no build­ings mould be erected clofe to the walls, thoughnow they are, in many places, joined to them ; andalfo, that, on the outfide, a certain fpace of groundftiould lie open and unoccupied. 1 This fpace, whichit was unlawful either to inhabit, or to till, theRomans called Pomcerium, not becaufe it was onthe outfide of the wall, any more than becaufe thewall was on the outfide of it: and always, on occa-fion of an addition being made to the city, as far asthey intended that the walls mould advance out­ward, fo far thefe facred limits were extended.
XLV. HAVING increafed the power of the ftateby this enlargement of the city, and made every in­ternal regulation that. appeared beft adapted to theexigencies both of war and peace, the king, whowifhed that the acquifition of power mould not al­ways depend on the mere force of arms, laid a.fcheme for extending his dominion, by the wifdomof his counfels, and railing, at the fame, time, a con-• fpicuous ornament to the city. The temple of Dia­na atEphefus was at that time univerfally celebrated,. • 10 and







OCR Output








496 THEHISTORY


BOOR the people were imprefied with an opinion that re-._-^' _' ligion was concerned in the cafe, and the tribes, by aY.R. 361. majority of one, rejected the law. The patriciansJB. C. 390. were f0 highly gratified by this fucccfs, that next day,the confuls holding a meeting for the purpofe, a de­cree of fenate was pafied, that a diftribution fhouldbe made to the commons of the Veientian lands, inthe proportion of feven acres to each, and that thisdiftribution mould be extended not only to the fa­thers of families, but to every perfon in their houfcsof free condition, that they might have fatisfaction inrearing children with the hope of fuch an eftablifh-ment.
Y.R. 36j. XXXI. THIS generofity had fuch a conciliatory• • 38?. effect on tne minds of the commons, that no oppo-fhion was made to the election of confuls. LuciusValerius Potitus and Marcus Manlius, afterwardsfurnamed Capitolinus, were appointed to that office.In their confulate were celebrated the great games•which Marcus Furius when dictator had vowed, onoccafion of the war with the Veientians. In thisyear alfo, the temple of imperial Juno, vowed bythe fame dictator, during the fame war, was dedi­cated, and it is mentioned that the matrons difplayedan extraordinary degree of zeal in their attendanceon the dedication. In the campaign againft the./Equans, the feat whereof was at Algidum, nothingmemorable occurred; the enemy fcarcely waiting forthe engagement to begin, before they betook them-felves to flight. To Valerius, becaufe he continuedthe purfuit and flaughter with greater earneftnefs, atriumph was decreed j to Manlius an ovation. Thisyear there fprung up a new enemy, the Volfinfans,againft whom no army could be fent on account of afamine and peftilence which raged in the Romanterritories, in confequence of extraordinary droughtand heat. On thefe circumftances the Volfiniansprefumed with fuch confidence, that, forming a junc­


tion







OCR Output








OF ROME.


 


Jation round the enemy's walls. An account of thisbeing conveyed to Rome, Marcus Geganjus, conful,inftantly fee out with an army, chofe ground, for his Y.R.camp, at the diftance of three miles from the enemy; B. c. 44°'and, as the day was now far fpent, ordered his mento refrefh themfelves: then, at the fourth watch,he put his troops in motion: they- were foon fet towork, and made fuch expedition, that at fun-rifethe Volfcians faw themfelves inclofed by the Ro­mans, with ftronger works, than thofe with whichthey had furrounded the city. The conful had alfo,on one fide, drawn a line acrofs, to the wall of Ar-dca, to open a communication with his friends in thecity.
X. THE general of the Volfcians, who had hi­therto maintained his troops, not out of magazinesprovided for the purpofe, but by corn, brought indaily from the plunder of the country, finding him-felf cut off at once from every refource, by beingfliut up within the enemy's lines, requefted a confer­ence with the conful, and told him, that" if the in-"tention of the Romans in coming thither was to"raife the fiege, he was willing to withdraw the"troops of the Volfcians from the place." To thisthe conful anfwered, that " it was the part of the'.' vanquifhed to receive terms, not to dictate them;'( apd that the Volfcians (hould not have the making"of thejr own terms, for their departure, as they'C had for phejr coming to attack the allies of the"Roman people." lie infifted, that " they fhould"deliver up their general into his hands, lay"down their arms, and acknowledging themfelves"vanquifhed, fubmit po his farther orders;" de­claring, that " if thefe terms were not complied"with, whether they rerqained there, or retired, he"would proceed againft them as a determined ene-"my j and would be better pleafed to carry home a'( victory over the Yolfcians, $han an infidjous ^A A 3 '' peace."







OCR Output













OCR Output








f4 THE HISTORY


BOOK dulged himfelf in meat and wine, he was overpow- <cred by fleep; whereupon a fhepherd, who dweltin the neighbourhood, named Cacus, of greatftrength and fiercenefs, being ftruck with the beau­ty of the cattle, wifhed to make prey of fome ofthem; hut confidering, that if he fhould drive theherd before him into his cave, their tracks woulddirect the owner's fearch, he dragged the cattlebackward by the tails into the cave, picking outthole that were the moft remarkable for their beau­ty. Hercules awaking at the dawn of day, took aview of his herd, and miffing fome of his number,went directly to the next cave, examining whetherthe tracks led thither j and when he obferved thatthey all pointed outward, and yet did not lead toany other quarter, perplexed, and not knowinghow to proceed, he began to drive forward his herdfrom that unlucky place. Some of the cows, asthey were driven off, miffing thofe that were leftbehind, began, as was natural, to low after them,and the found being returned from the cave, bythofe that were fhut up in it, brought Herculesback. Cacus, endeavouring by force to preventhis approach to the cave, and invoking in vain theaffiftance of the fhepherds, received a blow of hi$club which put an end to his life. At that time,Evander, a native of Peloponnefus, who had re­moved hither, governed that part of the country,rather through an influence acquired by his merit,than any power of fovereignty vefted in him. He'was highly revered oh account of his having intro­duced the wonderful knowledge of letters, a matterquite new to thefe men, who were ignorant of allthe arts; and ftill more fo, on account of the fup-pofed divinity of his mother Carmenta, whoje pro­phetic powers had been an object of admiration tothofe nations, before the arrival of the Sibyl in Ita­ly, f Evander then, being alarmed by the concourfeof trie fhepherds, haftened to the fpot, where they
were







OCR Output








O F R O M E. ft


hibn, a vote pafied for war. It was a cuftomary BOOK
pra&ice for the heralds to carry a fpear pointed with
fteel, or burnt at the point and dipped in blood, to
the frontiers, and there, in the prefence of at leaft
three grown-up perfons, to fay, " For as much as
"the ftates of the antient Latines, and the antient
"Latine people, have acted againft arhi behaved
"unjuftly towards the Roman people the Qmrites,
"for as much as the Roman people the Quirites
"have ordered that there mould be war with the
"antient Latines, and the fenateof the Roman peo-
"ple the Quirites have given their opinion, con-
"fented, and voted that war mould be made with
"the antient Latines; therefore I, and the Roman
"people, do declare and make war againft the
"ftates of the antient Latines, and the antient La-
"tine people:" and faying this, he threw the fpear
within their boundaries. In this manner was fatif-
faction demanded from the Latines, at that time, and
war declared; fucceeding generations adopted the
fame method.
XXXIII. ANGUS, having committed the care ofreligious affairs to the ffamens and other priefts, af-fembled a new army, fet out to the war, and tookPolitorium, a city of the Latines, by ftorm. Then,purfuing the practice of former kings, who had aug­mented the power of the Roman ftate, by receivingenemies into the number of their citizens, he re­moved the whole multitude to Rome; and, as theoriginal Romans entirely occupied the ground roundthe Palatium, the Sabines the Capitol with the cita­del, and the Albans the Caelian Mount, the Averi-tine was afligned to this body of new citizens; andin a little time after, on the reduction of Tellena;and Ficana, an additional number of inhabitantswere fettled in the fame place. Politorium wasfoon after attacked, a feconJ time, by the Romanforces, the antient Latines having taken poffeflion
of







OCR Output








s82 T H E H I S T O R Y


B o o K no lefs boldnefs, calling them " ten Tarquinii, and. -^-^ " putting them in mind, that the Valerii and HoratiiY.R. 305." were among the fortmoft in effecting the expulfionB.C.447. tt of t|ie kings. Nor was it the title merely, which'' had then given people fo much offence; for ic"was one which was properly applied to Jupiter,-" one which had been applied to Romulus, the"founder of the city, and to the princes his fuc-"ccffors; and which was ftill retained in the reli-"gious inftitutions, and even confidered as material"to the performance of the facred rites. It was the"haughtinefs, the violence of the king, which then"filled them with abhorrence; and if thefe were not"to be borne, in a perfon who was, at the time, a"king, and the fon of a king, who would bear them"in fo many private citizens? Let them take care,"left by forbidding men to Jpeak with freedom, in"the fenate-houfe, they might oblige them to utter'' their fentiments in another place. Nor did he fee <"how he, in his private capacity, had lefs right to"call the people to an aflembly, than they, to con-"vene the fenate. Let them try, whenever they"chofe, how much more forcibly a fenfe of injuries'f would operate in vindication of liberty, than am-'c bition in retaining illegal authority. They had"propofed the Sabine war as the bufinefs to be"confidcred: as if the Roman people had any"more important war on their hands, than againft"thofe, who, having been created for the purpofe"of framing laws, had left no law remaining in the"ftate; who had abolifhed elections; abolifhed an-"nual magiftrates; abolifhed the regular changing"of the chief magiftrate, the only means of prc-"ferving the balance of liberty; who, ftanding in"the rank of private citizens, kept poffeffipn of the"fafces, and of regal fovereignty. After the expul-"fion of the kings, there were patrician magiftrates;"afterwards, on the feceffion of the commons, ple-"beian magiftrates were created. Of which party
"were







OCR Output








T H E H I S T O R Y


BOOK» fclves of fpirit. But I confider it as impious to1_ _ y_•_ , " ac t in oppofition to the authority of the fenate;Y.K. 353." wherefore on the one hand, I define that ye mayB. C. 399. " defift from fceking in our difputes for an oppor-"tunity of doing mifchief; and on the other hand,"either my colleagues fhall act according to the"will of the fenate, or if they perfift any farther in"oppofition, I will inftantly nominate a dictator,"who will compel them to retire from office."This difcourfe being received with univerfal appro­bation, and the fenators rejoicing that another powerhad been thought of, which, by its fuperior authority,might reduce the magiftrates to order, without theterrors of the tribunitian office, thofe magiftratesyielded to the univerfal defire of the public, and heldan election of military tribunes, who were to enterinto office on the calends of October: and beforethat day, they diverted themfelves of the ma-giftracy.
Y.R. 354. X. THIS military tribunate with confular power,''39 'of Lucius Valerius Potitus a fourth time, MarcusFurius Camillus a fecond, Manius ^milius Mamer-cinus a third, Cneius Cornelius Coflus a fecond, Caz-fo Fabius Ambuftus and Lucius Julius lulus, wasoccupied by a multiplicity of bufinefs both civil andmilitary: for the operations of war were to be car­ried on in many different places at once, at Veii,and at Capena j atFalerii, and among the Volfciansfor the recovery of Anxur from the enemy. Thenat Rome, there was great uneafinefs, occafioned bythe levying of troops, and at the fame time by thepaying in of the tax. There was alfo a ftruggleabout the appointment of the plebeian tribunes; andbefides, the trials of two of thofe, who had latelybeen invefted with confular power, excited no triflingdifturbance. The military tribunes applied them­felves, firft of all, to the raifing of troops, and notonly the younger men were enlUied, but the elder
citizens,







OCR Output








OF R O M E. 29


being prepared for, and determmed on, a decifive ROOKaction, erofled over the Tiber. The Veientians,hearing that he was forming a camp, and that he in­tended to advance to their city, tnarched out tomeet him; for they chofe rather to engage in theopen field, than to remain fhut up, and fight fromthe walls and houfes. There, by dint of ftrength,unafiifted by any ftratagem, the Roman king, throughthe mere force of his veteran troops, obtained thevictory, and purfued the routed enemy to theirwalls. The city was fo ftrong, and fo well fecuredboth by works and by its fituation, that he did notchoofe to attempt it, but led home his troops; and,in his way, ravaged the enemy's country for thefake of revenge rather than of booty. Thefe de-yaftations having diftrefied the Veientians no lefsthan the lofs of the battle, they fent deputies toRome to fue for peace, A part of their lands wastaken from them, and a truce granted for an.hun­dred years. Thefe were the principal tranfactionsin peace and war, during the reign of Romulus;and none of them was unfuitable to the belief of hisdivine origin, or to the rank of a divinity, whichafter his death he wap fuppofed to have obtained.The fame may be faid of the fpirit which he mewed,in recovering the kingdom for his grandfather, aswell as of his wife conduct in founding the city, andeftablifhing its power, by the arts both of war andpeace; for, by the ftrength which it acquired under hismanagement, it became fo refpectable, that, duringforty years after, it enjoyed profound peace andfecurity. He ftood, however, much higher in thefavour of the people than he did in that of thefenate; and was yet more beloved by his army,He eftablifhed a body-guard of three hundred men,whom he called Celeres *; and thefe he kept con-
ftantly


* Or, the Swift, ifwe fuppofc them to derive their name from the4. v,::, word, cdeft Tfei1 rauft be allowed to be the ntoft probable ori­


gin







OCR Output








THEHISTORT


B OvO K tne omcn which the place preferred, and founded.._-T_-J there a city which they called Mediolanum.
Y.R.364.
B. C. 388. XXXV. IN fome time after, another body, com-pofed of the Cenomanians, under the conduct ofElitovius, following the tracks of the former, madetheir way over the Alps, through the fame foreft,Bellovefus favouring their march, and fettled them-felves where the cities Brixia and Verona now ftand,places then pofiefied by the Libuans. After thefe,came the Salluvians, who fixed their abode near theancient canton of the Ligurians, called Laevi, whoinhabited the banks of the Ticinus. The next whocame over were the Boians and Lingonians, throughthe Penine pafs, who, finding all the fpace betweenthe Alps and the Po already occupied, paffed overthe Po on rafts, and drove out of the country, notonly the Etrurians, but the Umbrians alfo. Theyconfined themfelves however within the Apennines.After them the Senonians, the lateft of thefe emi­grants, pofiefied themfelves of the track whichreaches from the river Utens to the JECis. Thislatter people, I find, it was, who came to Clufium,and from thence to Rome. But whether alone, oraf-fifted by all the nations of Cifalpine Gauls, is notknown with certainty. The Clufians, on obfervingthe great multitude, the appearance of the mendifferent from any which they had feen before, andthe kind of arms which they carried, were terrifiedat the approach of this ftrange enemy; and havingheard that the legions of the Etrurians had been oftendefeated by them, on both fides of the Po, althoughthey had no claim on the Romans, either in rightof alliance or friendfhip, except that they had notprotected their relations the Veientians in oppofitionto the Roman people, yet they fent ambafFadors to.Rome, to folicit aid from the fenate; which requeftfor aid was not complied with. The three Fabii,fons of Ambuftus, were fen: ambafiadors to mediate


with







OCR Output








OF ROME.1 265


As foon as thefe orders were communicated and the B O O Kfignal given, the foldiers performed what they were . -r--fcommanded: the fhout refounded on every fide of Y.R. 196.the enemy, and reaching beyond their camp, was B'c. 456.heard in that of the conful, exciting terror in theone, and the greateft joy in the other. The Ro­mans obferving to each other with exultation, thatthis was the fbout of their countrymen, and thataffiftance was at hand, took courage, and from theirwatch-guards and outpofts threatened the enemy.The conful declared, that " they ought not to lofe"time, for that fhout was a fignal, not only, that"their friends were arrived, but that they had entered*' upon action; and they might take it for granted,'' that the camp of the enemy was by this time at-"tacked on the outfide." He therefore ordered hismen to take arms, and follow him; thefe fallingon the enemy before it was light, gave notice bya fhout to the dictator's legions, that on their fidealfo the action was begun. The TEquans were now.preparing meafures to hinder themfelves from beingfurrounded with works; when being attacked by theenemy within, they were obliged, left a paffagemight be forced through the midft of their camp,to turn their attention from thofe employed in theworks, to the others on the infide,who alTailed themwith arms, and thus left the former at leifure, throughthe remainder of the night, to finifh the works, andthe fight with the conful continued until day appear­ed. At the break of day, they were entirely en-compafied by the dictator's works, and while theywere hardly able to fupport the fight againft one ar­my, their trenches were affaulted by Quintius'stroops, who inftantly, on completing their work, hadreturned to their arms. Thus they found themfelvesobliged to encounter a new enemy, and the formernever flackened the vigour of their attack. Beingfo clofcly preffed bv danger op every fide, inftead offighting, they had recourfe to entreaties, befeeching
the







OCR Output








OF ROME. 349


*' nace the commons? Will you menace their tri- Book
"bune? As if ye had not already experienced, on . -^'_f
"two feveral occafions, how little fuch menaces Y.R. 310.
"avail againft the united fenfe of the commons. B.'c. **1•
", I fuppofe it was out of regard to our interefts,
*l that ye did not proceed to force; or was the
"avoiding of extremities owing to this, that the .
'e party which pofiefied the greater mare of ftrengthj
'' pofiefled alfo a greater degree of moderation?
'' Nor, Romans, will there now be occafion for
"force. Thofe men will on every occafion make
"trial of your fpirit: your ftrength they will never
"try. Wherefore, confuls, to thofe wars, whether
"real or fictitious, the commons are ready to at-
"tend you, provided that by reftoring the right of
"intermarriage, ye at length unite the ftate into one
"body; provided they are allowed to coalefce, to
"be united and intermixed with you by the con-
"nections of private relationfhip; provided hopes
"are allowed, and the accefs to honours laid open,
"to men of induftry and fpirit; provided they are
"allowed to Hand on the footing of partners and af-
"fociates in the commonwealth; and, what is the
"natural refult of equal freedom, in the rotation of
"annual magiftracies, to obey and to command in
"turn. If any fiiall obftruft thefe meafures, ha-
'' rangue about wars, and multiply them by reports;
"not a man will give in his name; not a man
"will take arms; not a man will fight for
"haughty mafters, by whom he is excluded as
"an alien, both from the participation of public
"honours, and the private connections of mar-
"riage."j
VI. THE confuls too came out into the aflcmbly,and, after a long feries of harangues on the fubject,an altercation arifing, and the tribune afking, " for"what reafon was it improper that a plebeian mould"be made conful?" one of them anlwered, though
perhaps







OCR Output








3r7<S T H E H I S T O R Y


? O O K tained his confcnt, named the dictator that night.• .-w' _, He appointed Pcftumius CEbutius Elva his matterY. R. 310. of the horfe.
B.C. 43 *.
XXII. THE dictator ifltied an order that all fhouldappear, at the firft light, outfide the Colline gate.Every one, whofe ftrength enabled him to carryarms, attended accordingly. The enfigns werebrought out of the treafury, and carried to the dic­tator. In the meantime, the enemy withdrew to thehigher grounds: thither the dictator followed, andcoming to a general engagement near Nomentum,» defeated the Etrurian legions, drove them fromthence into the city of Fidenae, and inclofed themwith lines of circurnvallation. But neither could thecity be taken by ftorm, by reafon of its high fitiia-tjon apd the ftrength of its works, nor could a block­ade turn to any effecl:, becaufe they had fuch abund­ant ftores of corn lajd up in their magazines, as werenot merely fufficient for necefiary confumption, buteven afforded a plenty, The dictator, therefore,having no hopes either of taking it by alFault, or ofreducing it to a furrender, and being thoroughly ac­quainted with a place fo near home, refolved tocarry a mine into the citadel, on the oppofite fide ofthe city j which, being the beft fecured by its naturalftrength, was the leaft attended to. He hiinfclf car­ried on his approaches to the .walls, in the parts moftdiftant from this; and, having formed his troopsinto four divifions, who were to relieve each otherfiicce.filvely in the action, by continuing the fightnight and day, without intermiffion, he fo engagedthe attention of the enemy, that they never per­ceived the work which was carrying on, until, awaybcino dug from the camp through the mountain, apaffage was opened up into the citadel, and the Etru­rians, whofc thoughts were diverted from their realdanger by fiilfe alarms, difcovered, from the (houtsof the enemy over their heads, that their city was
uLen.







OCR Output








i4o THE HISTORY


BOOK enemy, and renewed the fight; the dilator's cohorti-,^-i_i then, for the firft time, engaged in battle; andxwithY.R. 155. frefh ftrength and fpirits, falling on the exiles, whoJJ.C. 497. were exhaufted with fatigue, made great flaughter ofthem; on this occafion another combat between twogeneral officers took place; the Latine general, onfeeing the cohort of exiles almoft furrounded bythe Roman dictator, ordered feveral companies fromthe referve to follow him inftantly to the front;Titus Herminius, a lieutenant general, obfervingthefe as they marched up, and, among them, know­ing Mamilius, who was diftinguifhed by his drefsand arms, encountered the enemy's general withforce, fo much fuperior to what had been fhewna little before, by the mafter of the horfe, that withone blow he flew Mamilius, driving the fpear throughhis fide; and, having himfelf received a wound froma javelin, while he was ftripping the armour fromhis adverfary's body, he was carried off" victoriousto the camp, and expired during the firft dreflingof his wound. The djctator then flew to the ca­valry, entreating them, as the infantry were now fa­tigued, to difmount from their horfes, and fupportthe engagement: they obeyed his orders, leapeddown from their hories, flew forward to the van,and covering themfelves with their targets, took• poft as the front line: this inftantly revived the cou­rage of the infantry, when they faw the young menof the firft diftinction foregoing every advantage intheir manner of fighting, and taking an equal fhareof the danger; by thefe means, the Latines were atlength overpowered, their troops were beaten fromtheir ground, and began to retreat: the horfes werethen brought up to the cavalry, in order that theymight purfue the enemy, and the line of infantryfollowed. At this juncture, the dictator, omittingno means of engaging the aid both of gods andmen, is faid to have vowed a temple to Caftor; andto have proclaimed rewards to the firft, and to the
fccond.







OCR Output








O F R O M E. 1-7


that his time fhould be wafted in like manner, ufed BOOKevery means, particularly by ravaging the country, t L^in order to provoke the enemy to approach nearer, Y.R. 1&1.and to hazard an engagement. They were drawn B. c. +9*1up in order of battle in a plain between the twocamps, each party before their own rampart: theVolfcians had considerably the advantage in point ofnumbers; they therefore advanced to the fight, in acarelefs manner, as if they defpifed their enemy: theRoman conful did not fuffer his troops to move, norto return the fhout, but ordered them to ftand ftill,with their javelins fixed in the ground, and as foon asthe enemy fhould come within reach, then to exertat once their utmoft efforts, and decide the affairwith their fwords. The Volfcians, fatigued withrunning and fhouting, rufhed upon the Romans,whom they believed to be benumbed with fear; butwhen they perceived a vigorous effort made againftthem, and the fwords glittering before their eyes,ftruck with confternation, juft as if they had falleninto, an ambufcade, they turned their backs: nor hadthey ftrength left to enable them to make theirefcape, having exhaufted it by advancing to the bat­tle in full fpeed: the Romans, on the other hand,having ftood quiet during the firft part of the en­gagement, had their vigour frefh, and eafily over­taking the wearied fugitives, took their camp byaflault, and purfuing them, as they fled from thenceto Velitra;, the victors and the vanquifhed compof-ing, as it were, but one body, rufhed into the city to­gether i there people of every kind were put to theIword, without diftin6tion, and there was more bloodfpilt than even in the fight: a fmall number whothrew down their arms and furrendered, had quartergranted them.


XXXI. WHILE thefe things paffed in the countryof the Volfcians, the Sabines, who were by far themof t formidable enemy, were routed, put to flight,
and







OCR Output








5o8 THE HISTORY


BOOK tain, all took the way to Rome, and without even»_.^1^ (hutting the gates of the city, continued their flight
Y.R. 365. into the citadel.B, c.js7.
XXXIX. ON the other hand, the attainment, al-moft miraculous, of fuch a fpeedy victory, aftonifhedthe Gauls. At firft, they ftood motionlefs throughapprehenfion for their own fafety, fcarcely knowingwhat had happened; then, they dreaded fome ftra-tagem; at length, they collected the fpoils of theflain, and piled the arms in heaps, according to theirpractice. And now, feeing no fign of an enemy anywhere, they at laft began to march forward, and alittle before fun-fet arrived near the city of Rome,where receiving intelligence by fome horfemen whohad advanced before, that the gates were open with­out any troops pofted to defend them, nor any fol-diers on the walls, this fecond miracle, not lefs un­accountable than the former, induced them to halt:and, apprehending danger from the darknefs of thenight, and their ignorance of the fituation of thecity, they took poft between Rome and the Anio,fending fcouts about the walls, and the feveral gates,to difcover what plans the enemy would purfue inthis defperate ftate of their affairs. The Romanfoldiers, both the living and the flain, were all la­mented as loft; the greater part of them havinggone from the field of battle to Veii, and no onefuppofing that any furvived, except thofe who hadcome home to Rome. So that the city was almoftentirely filled with lamentations. Then on the ar­rival of intelligence, that the enemy were at hand,the apprehenfions excited by the public danger fliftedall private forrow; foon after, the barbarians pa-troling about the walls in troops, they heard theiryells and the diflbnant clangour of their martial in-itruments. During the whole interval, between thisand the next morning, their minds were held in themoft anxious fulpenfe, every moment expecting an
affault







OCR Output








O F R O M £.


he would have equalled his predecefibrs, had nothis degeneracy, in other particulars, detracted fromthe merit which, in that line, he pofiefFed. Hebegan the war againft the Volfcians, which laftedfor more than two hundred years after his death, andtook Suefla Pometia from them by ftorm; from thefale of the plunder of which place, having amafiedfilver and gold to the value of forty talents *, heconceived a defign of erecting a temple to Jupiter,of fuch grandeur as fhould be worthy of the kingof gods and men, worthy of the Roman empire, andof the dignity of the place itfelf: for the building ofthis temple, heJJel apart the money which arole fromthe fpoils^Jrle was foon after engaged in a war,{which gave him employment longer than he ex­pected, during which, having in vain attempted, byftorm, to make himfelf mafter of Gabii, a town inhis neighbourhood, and feeing no reafon to hope forfuccefs from a blockade, after he had been repulfedfrom the walls, he at length refolved to purlue theattack, not in a method becoming a Roman, but byfraud and ftratagem. Accordingly, whilft he pretend­ed to have laid alide all thoughts of proceeding inthe war, and to have his attention entirely engagedin laying the foundation of the temple, and the con-ftruction of other works in the city, his fon Sextus,the youngeft of three, purfuant to a plan concerted^fled as a defcrter to Gabii, making grievous com*plaints of his father's intolerable feverity towardshim, faying, that " he now made his own family"feel the effects of his pride, which hitherto had"fallen only on ftrangers, and was uneafy at feeing"a number even of his own children about him, to"that he intended to caufe the fame defolation in"his own houfe, which he had already caufed in"the fcnate-houfe, and not to fuffer any of his off-"Jpring, or auy heir of the kingdom, to remain r
• 77Sol.
"that


 







OCR Output








O F R O M E. f f


of thefe fports, the time of their celebration being * O O Kgenerally known, the robbers, enraged at the lofs ^of their booty, attacked them by furprife, havingplaced themfelves in ambufh. Romulus miking avigorous defence, extricated himfelf; but they tookRemus prifoner, delivered him up to king AmuliuS,and had the aflurance to accufe them. both of crimi­nal mifbehaviour. |The principal charge madeagainft them was, that they had made violent inroadson the lands of Numitor, and, with a band of youthswhich they had collei5ted, plundered the country ina hoftile manner. I In confequence of this, Remuswas given up to Numitor to be punifhed. / Fromthe very beginning, Fauftulus had entertained hopes,that the children, whom he educated, would proveto be defcended of the royal Hood; for he knewthat the infants had been expofed by order of theking, and that the time, when he had taken them up,corresponded exactly with that event; but he hadrefolved to avoid any hafty difcovery, unlefs fomefavourable conjuncture or neceffity mould require it.JThe neceffity happened firft ;I wherefore, conftrained'by his apprehenfions, he difclofed the affair to Ro­mulus. (It happened alfo that Numitor, while hehad Remus in his cuftody, heard that the brotherswere twins; and when he combined with this cir-cumftance their age, and their turn of mind, whichgave no indication of a iervile condition, he wasftruck with the idea of their being his grandchil­dren; and, all his inquiries leading to the fameconclufion, he was upon the point of acknowledgingRemus. |In confequence, a plot againft the kingwas concerted between all the parties. /Romulus,not going at the head of a band of youths, for hewas not equal to an open attempt, but ordering thelhepherds to come at a certain hour, by differentroads, to the palace, forced his way to the king,and was fupported by Remus, with another party,
procured







OCR Output








272 , THE HISTORY


BOOK practice of intrufting the confular power and title to^III'_, two perfons. The decemvirs created were, AppiusY.R. so?. Claudius, Tims Genucius, Publius Seftius, LuciusB.C.449. Veturius, Cains Julius, Aulus Manlius, Servius Sul-picius, Publius Curiatius, Titus Romilius, and Spu-rius Poftumius. Claudius and Genucius, being con-fuls elect for that year, this honour was conferred onthem as a compeniation for the other; and on Seftius,one of the confuls of the former year, becaufe hehad propofed this bufinefs to the iirnate, againft thewill of his colleague. Next to thefe, were confi-d.cred the three who had gone ambafladors to Athens,that the honour might fcrve as a recompence for fucha diflant embafly/ and, at the fame time, it was fup-pofed, that they, having acquired a knowledge of thelaws of foreign countries, would be ufeful in digeft-ing the new propofed regulations. The others filledup the number. It is faid, that in choofing thefe laft,they pitched upon perfons far advanced in years,with intent, that there mould be the lefs warmth inany oppofition which they might give to the deter­minations of the others. The direction of the wholebufinefs of government was lodged in the hands ofAppius Claudius, through the favour of the com­mons; for he had alTumed a demeanor fo entirelynew, that from a harm and fevere profccutor of thecommons, he became, on a fudden, a zealous pro­moter of their interefts, and an eager candidate for >popular applaufe. Each of them adminiftered jufticeto the people one day in ten; on that day, thetwelve fafces attended the one who prefided in thecourt of juftice j his. nine colleagues were attendedeach by one beadle; and, while perfect harmony fub-fifted amongthemfelves,althoughfuch union betweengovernors is fometimes found prejudicial to the go­verned, they obferved the ftricteft equity towardsothers. It will be fufficient to produce a fingle fpe-cimen of their conduct, as a proof of their mode­ration; though, by the terms of their appointment,
there







OCR Output








THEHISTORY


 


BOOK that he had quitted the country, and gone into exile;
,• neverthelefs, Virginius prefiding in the afiembly, hiscolleagues, on being appealed to, difmifi'ed the meet-
. ing, and the money was exacted from his father withfuch feverity, that all his property being fold, heJived for a long time in an obfcure cottage beyondthe Tiber, as if banifhed from his country. Thistrial, and the proceedings about the law, gave fullemployment to the ftate. There was no difturbancefrom foreign enemies.
XIV. WHILE the tribunes, flumed with thisfuccefs, imagined, from the difmay into whichthe patricians had been thrown by the exile of Caefo,that the patting of the law was almoft certain; andthe elder patricians, for their part, had in fact relin-quifhed the adminiftration of affairs, the youngerpart of them, efpecially thofe who were Caefo'sfriends, inftead of fuffering their fpirits to droop,aflumed a higher degree of vehemence in their rageagainft the commons. But in one particular theyimproved their plan exceedingly, tempering the vio­lence of their exertions with a degree of moderation.The firft time, after Caefo's banishment, that the lawbegan to be agitated, having prepared themfclvesfor the occafion, and formed in a body with a greatbund of their dependents, as foon as the tribunes af­forded them a pretext, by ordering them to retire,they attacked them furioufly, and all exerted them-felves with activity fo equal, that no one of themcarried home a greater fhare than another, either ofhonour, or of ill-will; the commons complained,that a thoufand Caefbs had ftarted up in the room ofone. During the intermediate days, in which thetribunes brought forward no proceedings refpectingthe law, nothing could be more mild and peaceablethan thefe lame perfons; they faluted the plebeianskmdly; entered into converfation with them; in­vited them to their houles; took care of their
bufinels







OCR Output








xx PREFACE.


brated characters which he holds up to our ad­miration.
Polybius is allowed to be an author of con-fummate judgment, indefatigable induftry, andftrict veracity. Livy himfelf admits that he isentitled to entire credit. He takes extraordi­nary pains to inveftigate the caufes of the fe-cond Punic war, and to determine which of thetwo nations had incurred the guilt of breach oftreaty. He difcufles th,e matter at confiderablelength*; ftating accurately, and carefully ex­amining, the facts and arguments urged onboth fides; and, at length, brings the matter tothis iflue, that, if the war is to be conlidered astaking its rile from the Heftruction of Sagun-tum, the Carthaginians were in the wrong;but by no means fo, if the matter be taken upfomewhat higher, and the taking of Sardiniaby the Romans, and the impofmg a tributeupon that ifland, be included in the account:for that, then, the Carthaginians did no morethan take occafion to avenge an injury donethem.
Now, how ftands the account of this affair,according to Livyf? From this difquifition ofPolybius, he carefully felects, and ftronglyftates, every thing which tends to favour thecaufe of the Romans; but pafles over in filenceevery fact, and every argument, urged by theGreek hiftorian in favour of the Carthaginians;and thps he makes the worfe appear the bettercaufe.
\


* Lib. x. .j. B. xxi. 19.


it







OCR Output








OF ROME. 309


a con fill, judge, but praetor. Thefe were the laws B O O Kpropofed by the confuls. A regulation was alib . ^- .made by the fame confuls, that the decrees of the Y. R. 306.lenate mould be depofited with the pleiSeian fediles, B.c.4*6'in the temple of Ceres; they had hitherto been fre­quently fupprefied and altered at the pleafure of theconfuls. Marcus Duilius, plebeian tribune, after­wards propofed to the commons, and the commonsenacted, that" whoever fliould caufe the commons"10 be left without tribunes, or any magiftrate"to be elected from whom there was no appeal,"fhould be punifhed with ftripes and beheaded."All theic tranfadftions, though highly difagreeable tothe patricians, pafied without oppofition from them,becaufe no feverity was yet aimed at any particularperfon,
LVI. THE tribunitian office and the liberty ofthe commons being thus fixed on a folid foundation,the tribunes, judging it now feafonable and fafe to at­tack individuals, fingled out Virginius as the firftprofecutor, and Appius defendant. Virginius, hav­ing preferred a charge againft Appius, and thelatter coming to the Forum, attended by a crowd ofyoung patricians, the fight of him and his attendantsinftantly recalled to every rnind his fhocking abufesof authority. Virginius then faid, '' long fpeeches"are only of ufe in cafes of a doubtful nature. I'' fhall therefore neither wafts time, in defcanting"before you on the guilt of this man, from whole"cruelty ye have refcued yourfelves by force of'' arms; nor will I fuffer him to add to his other'c crimes, that of impudence, in exculpating himfelf.". Wherefore, Appius Claudius, I remit to you, all"the impious and flagitious deeds, which. during't two years paft you have dared to commit in con-"ftant fucceflion. With refpect to one charge,*' unlefs you name a judge, and engage to acquit'' yourfclf of having, contrary to the Jaws, fentenced
x 3 "a free







OCR Output








O F R O M fe* 101


"us mount our horfes, and infpedt in perfon the be- BOOK"haviour of our wives: that muft be the moft un- I."exceptionable proof which meets our eyes, on the"unexpected arrival of the hufband." They wereheated with wine: "Agreed," was the word; at fullfpeed they fly to Rome. Having arrived there atthe firft dufk of the evening, they proceeded thenceto Collatia, where they found Lucretia, not like theking's daughters-in-law, whom they had feen fpend­ing their time in luxurious entertainments amongthofe of their own Tank, but bufily employed withher wool, though at that late hour, and fitting in themiddle of the houfe, with her maids at work aroundher: the honour of fuperiority among the ladiesmentioned in the difpute, was acknowledged to be­long to Lucretia. Her hufband, on his arrival, andthe Tarquinii, were 'kindly received; and the huf-band, exulting in his victory, gave the royal youthsa friendly invitation. There, Sextus Tarquinius,'inftigated by brutal luft, formed a defign of violat­ing Lucretia's chaftity by force, both her beauty andher approved modefty ferving as incentives: afterthis youthful frolic of the night, they returned tothe camp.
LVIII. A FEW days after, Sextus Tarquinius,without the knowledge of Collatinus, went to Col­latia, with only a fingle attendant: he was kindlyreceived by the family, who fufpected not his de­fign, and, after fupper, conducted to the chamberwhere guefts were lodged. Then, burning with de-firc, as foon as he thought that every thing was fafe,and the family all afleep, he came with his fwor4drawn to Lucretia, where fhe lay afleep, and, hold­ing her down, with his left hand prefied on .herbreaft, faid, " Lucretia, be filent: I am Sextus"Tarquinius, my Avord is in my hand, if you utter"a word, you die." Terrified at being thus difturb-ed from fleep, me faw no afliftance near, and im-u 3 mediate







OCR Output








43o THE HISTORY


BOOK lus, augurs; Servius Sulpicius, principal curio ; and,,___.r!Ll_ii among perfons of inferior note, the virulence of theY.R. 191. diforder fpread its ravages wide. The fenate, un-£.0.461. ab}e to difcoyer a profpect of relief in any humanmeans, directed tne people to vows and to the dei­ties :. all were ordered to go, with their wives andchildren, to offer fupplications, and implore the fa­vour of the gods; and the people being thus calledout by public authority, to perform what each manwas ftrongly urged to by his own private cala­mities, they quickly filled all the places of worfhip.In every temple, the proftrate matrons fweeping theground with their hair, implored a remiffion of thedifpleafure of heaven, and deliverance from thepeftilence.
VIII. FROM that time, whether it was owing tothe gods having become propitious, or to the moreunhealthy fcafon of the year being now paft, tholewho had got through the diforder began to find theirhealth confirmed gradually. And now, people's at­tention being turned to the bufinefs of the public,after feveral interregna had expired, Publius Valeri­us Publicola, on the third day after he had entered onthe office of interrex, had confuls elected, Lucius Lu-Y.R.spi. cretins Tricipitinus and Titus Veturius, or Vetufius,.••<.• 460. Geminus. Thefe aflumed their office on the third ofthe ides of Auguft, at which time the ftate had re­covered its ftrength fo far, as to be able not only torepel an attack, but to act offenfively on occafion.Wherefore, on the Hernicians fending information,fhat the enemy had made an irruption into theirfrontiers, they cheerfully promifed to affift them.Two confular armies were raifed. Veturius was fentfo carry on an offenfive war againft the Volfcians.Tricipitinus being appointed to protect the territoriesof the allies from the iricurfions of the enemy, pro­ceeded no farther than the country of the Hernici­ans. Veturius, in the firft engagement, routed and
difperfrd







OCR Output








OF ROM*!. i8a


"obedience to fuperiors: during the laft war, in B O O K
"the very field, in the Heat of battle, the troops ,_^L^
"confpired to make a voluntary furrender of viAo- Y.R. 17*.
"ry to the vanquifhed vEquans; deferted their B.c. *?8'
"ftandards, forfook their general in the field; and,
"in defpite of orders, retreated to their camp.
"Without doubt, if people would make the proper
"exertions, Rome might be fubdued by means of
"its own forces: nothing more was neceflary, than
"to make a declaration, and a fhew' of war. The
"fates and the gods would of themfelves accomplifh
"the reft." Such profpects as thefe had allured
the Etrurians to arm, notwithftanding all the vicifli-
tudes of fuccefs and defeat, which they had already
experienced.
XLV. THE Roman confuls themfelves had noother dread than of the power, and the arms, of theirown countrymen: when they reflected on the very vdangerous tendency of their mifbehaviour, in the laftwar, they were deterred from bringing themfelvesinto a fituation, where they would have two armiesto fear, at the fame time: to avoid therefore beingexpofed to this double danger, they kept the troopsconfined within the camp, in hopes that delay, andtime itfelf, might perhaps fbften their refentment,and bring them back to a right way of thinking,This encouraged their enemies the Veientians andEtrurians, to act with greater precipitation: at firft,they endeavoured to provoke the foe to fight, byriding up to the camp, and offering challenges; and,at length, finding that this had no effect, by revilingboth the confuls themfelves, and the army; tellingthem, that "the pretence of difienfions amorig"themfelves, was an artifice contrived to cover't their cowardice; that the confuls were more dif-"fident of the courage of their troops, than of their"difpofuion to obey orders: that was a ftrange kindI' of fedition, which mewed itfcrf in filence, and. jj 4 '' inaction,







OCR Output








THE HISTORY


 


mode he was to worfhip the gods, being inT_c' himfelf a heterogeneous compofition, halfpatrici-y.R. 310." an and half plebeian? And, not content with theB. c. 44.1. '< confufion which this would create in every affair,."divine and human, thofe incendiaries of the po-"pulace were now preparing to invade the conful-"lhip itfelf. At firft they had ventured no farther'' than to found people's fentiments in converiation,"on a plan of one of the confuls being elected from•' among the commons; now, they publicly pro-"pofed a law, that the people might appoint con-"fuls, either from among the patricians, or from"among the plebeians, as they mould think fit; and"there could be no doubt that they would appoint"from among the commons the moft feditious that." could be found. The Canuleii and Icilii therefore'c would be confuls. But might Jupiter fupremely"good and great forbid, that the imperial majefty"of the fovereign power fhould fink fo low as that,'t and for their parts, they would rather die a thou-'c fand deaths, than fuffer fuch difgracc to be incur-'' red. They were confident, that could their an-"ceftors have forefeen, that, in confequence of their"unlimited conceffions, the commons, inftead of." coming to better temper towards them, would"become more intractable; and, as faftas they ob-"tained their demands, advancing others more un-"reafonable and exorbitant, they would have ftrug-"gled at firft with any difficulties whatever, rather"than have allowed fuch terms to be impofed on'' them. Becaufe a conceffion was, at that time,'' made to them with refpect to tribunes, it was for•' that reafon made a fecond time. This would be'•' the cafe for ever. Tribunes of the commons,"and a fenate, could not fubfift together, in the"fame ftate: either the office of the former,"or the order of the latter, muft be abolifhed, and"it was better late than never, to endeavour to put'• a ftop to their prefumption and temerity. Muft
"they







OCR Output








xvi PREFACE.


lion himfelf; " I am well aware," he fay*," that,"through the fame difregard to religion, which'l has led men into the prefent prevailing opi-"nion, of the gods never giving portents of any"future events, no prodigies arc now either re-"ported to government, or recorded in hifto-'' ries. But, for my part, while I am writing"the tranfa&ions of ancient times, my fen-"timents, I know not how, become antique;"and I feel a kind of religious awe, which"*' compels me to. confider that events, which*' the men of thofe times, renowned for wifdom,"judged deferving of the attention of govern-'' ment, and of public expiation, muft certainly'' be worthy of a place in my Hiftory*." And,in truth, it muft be allowed, that an accountof the religious ceremonies, and the fuper-ftitious obfervances, of different nations at dif­ferent peripds, forms not the leaft curious chap­ter in the hiftory of the human mind.
A ftill heavier charge hath been broughtagainft our Author; indeed the heavieft thatcan be alleged againft an hiftorian; namely,the violation of the firft great law of hiftory;which is, not to dare to aflert any thing falfe,and not to fupprefs any truthf. He who couldnot be warped by views of private intereft,has yet been fuppofed, from an excels of zealfor the honour and glory of his country, infome inftances, to have gone beyond the truth,in others to have fuppreflcd it.
It has been already mentioned how highlyhe was efteemed by Auguftus, and that he had
• 8. xlii, 13. f Cic. de Oral.


even







OCR Output








TH£ HISTORY


BOOK lero to the tribunefhip; and the patricians, judging^J/l . that tliis bufinefs would not end without the feverefty. R.*8j. ftruggle, procured the confulfhip for Appius Clau-H.C. 469. dius, fon of Appius, who both hated, and was hatedby the commons, in confequence of the contentionsbetween them and his father. Thus Quintius wasgiven him for colleague. The law was the firftbufinefs agitated in the beginning of the year; andthough Volero was the inventor of the plan, yetLaetorius his colleague, as he joined in it later, fowas he the more eager in promoting it: his renownin war infpired him with confidence, for there wasno one of that age poffefied of more pcrfonal prow-efs. Volero contented himfelf with arguing in fa­vour of the law, and avoided all abufe againft theconfuls; but Laetorius began with fevere invectivesagainft Appius and his family, charging them withhaving always fhewn a difpofition in the higheft de­gree overbearing and cruel towards the commons:afierting, that the patricians had elected him not fora conful, but an executioner, to torment and torturethe plebeians: being however a rough foldier, un-fkilled in the art of ipeaking, he was at a lofs forexpreffions fuited to the unreftrained freedom andboldnels of his thoughts; and finding himlelf unableto proceed in his difcourfe, he faid, " Citizens, fincc"I cannot fpeak with the fame readinefs with which."I can perform what I have fpoken, I requeft your'c attendance to-morrow. Fither I will lofe my life,"here in your prefence, or I will carrv the law."Next day the tribunes took pofieflion of the tem­ple; and the confuls and nobles placed themfelvesamong the crowd, in. order to oppofe the law : Lae..torius ordered all perfons to retire, except thofe who•were to vote; but the younger nobility kept theirplaces, and paid no regard to the officer; on which,Laetorius ordered fom£ of them to be taken intocuftody. The conful Appius infifted, that " a tri-*' bune had no authority over any but the plebei-
<c ansj







OCR Output








OF ROME.


merly put into their hands. During this year alfo B O O Kthere was a triumph at Rome. •, ^' _f
Y.R. 15i.
XVII. THE fucceeding confuls, Opiter Virginius B. C. s°°.and Spurius Caffius, attacked Pometia,at firft by ftorm,afterwards by regular approaches*. The Auruncians,actuated rather by implacable hatred, than by anyhope of fuccefs, and without waiting for a favourableopportunity, refolved to make an attack on them;and, fallying out, greater numbers of them armedwith fire, than with fwords, they filled every place with(laughter and conflagration; and, befides burning themachines, and killing and wounding great numbersof their enemies, were very near killing one of theconfuls, which of them, writers do not inform us,who was grievoufly wounded, and thrown from hishorfe. The troops, thus foiled in their enterprize,returned to Rome, leaving the conful, whofe reco­very was doubtful, together with a great number of*wounded. After a fhort interval, juft fufficient forthe curing of their wounds, and recruiting the army,
* Orig. V"t, JtinJe vir.eis, aliifyai eperitut. The great difficultyof IT.!;:!!.in,:n confifti in the impuflibility of finding con'efpondingterms. The modern art of war differs, fo entirely, from the ancient,owing to the various improvements that have been introduced into thatiltiti uctue fcicnce, during a period or more than two thoufaml year*,and principally to the invention of gunpowder, that the ancient modesof attack and defence, as well ai the various military machines, arepot only now dilufecl, but even no equivalent terms can, in any ofthe modern languages, be found for them. Thus, in the above paf.Cage, wherein the tranflator has taken the liberty, rather of defcribingthe operation, than tranfhting the original, the word miua occurs:this, as Vegetius informs us, was a machine conftructed of timbers,ftrongly framed together, mounted on wheeU and coveied with hurdles,over which was put a quantity of earth; the aflailants, thus protectedagainlt the miflile weapons of the enemy, moved forward th* machine;and, under cover of it, endeavoured to beat down, or undermine, thewalls. The tranflator here begs leave, once for all, to obfervt, thathe will often take the liberty, he has done in this place, of droppingterms, which cannot be translated; and which, if left untranflated inthe text, could convey no idea whatever to the Englifh reader ; endea.vouring however, he hopes not unfuccefsfiilly, by a (hurt defcription, orilight circumlocution, to make his author's meaning fufficiently in­telligible.
K. 4 • they







OCR Output








OF ROME. 533.


"choice to dwell in this city, captured by them, BOOK
"and forfaken by you? What would you think, if, t _' j
"not the Gauls, but your old enemies the ,Equans Y.R. 365.
"or Volfcians, mould form the defign of removing B. c. 3*7.
"to Rome? Would ye be willing that they fhould
"become the Romans, and ye the Veientians? Or
"would ye choofe that this fhould be a defert in
"your pofieffion, rather than a city in that of the
"enemy? Any thing more impious I really can-
"not conceive. Is it out of averfion to the trouble
"of rebuilding, that ye are ready to incur fuch guile
•'' and fuch difgrace? Suppofing that there could
"not, in the whole city, be erected a better or
"more ample ftructure than that cottage of our
"founder, were it not more defirable to dwell in
"cottages, after the manner of fhepherds and ruf-
"ties, in the midft of your facred places and tu-
"telar deities, than to have the commonwealth go
"into exile? Our forefathers, a collection of
'' ftrangers and fhepherds, when there was nothing
"in thefe places but woods and marmes, built a
"new city in a very fhort time. Do we, though
"we have the Capitol and citadel fafe, and the
"temples of the gods ftanding, think it too trouble-
"fome to rebuild one that has been burned? And
"what each particular man would have done, if his
"houfe had been deftroyed by fire, do the whole
"body of us refufe to do the fame, in the cafe of ^
"general conflagration?
LIV. "LET me afk you, if, through fome ill de-"fign or accident, a fire mould break out at Veii,"and the flames being fpread by the wind, as might"be the cafe, mould confume a great part of tlie •"city: muft \ve feek Fidenae, or Gab'ii, or fome"other city, for us to remove t6 ?'; Has 6'or native"foil fo flight a hold of bur affections; and this*c earth, wh'ich we caH our mother? Of does our


"love.







OCR Output








OF ROME. is


for their cities fprung out of the earth. He opened B O O Ka fanctuary, in the place where the indofure now is,on the road down from the Capitol, called The Pafsof* the Two Groves. Hither fled, from the neigh­bouring ftates, crowds of alt forts, without diftinc.-tion, whether freemen or flaves, led by a fondnefsfor novelty; and this was the firft thing that gavefolid ftrength to the growing greatnefs of the city. .Having reafon now to be pretty well fatisfied withhis ftrength, he next made provifion that this ftrength.fhould be regulated by wifdom; and for that pur-pofe, he created an hundred fenators *, either be-caufe that number was fufficient, or becaufe there.were no more than an hundred citizens who couldprove their defcent from refpecctable fathers. Theywere certainly ftyled Fathers from their honourableoffice, and their defendants Patricians.
IX. THE Roman ftate had now attained fuch *degree of power, that it was a match in arms for anyof the neighbouring nations; but, by reafon of theScarcity of women, its greatnefs was not likely to}aft longer than one age of man, as they had neitherhopes of offspring among themfelves, nor had yetcontracted any intermarriages with their neighbours,Romulus, therefore, by advice of the fenate, lentambafladors round to all the adjoining ftates, fo-Jiciting their alliance, and permiflion for his newfubjects to marry among them: he intimated tothem, that " cities, like every thing elfe, rife from"low beginnings; that, in time, thofe which are"fupported by their own merit, and the favour of"the gods, procure to themfelves great power^"and a great name; and that he had full aflurance


* This expreflion muft be under flood in a qualified fenfe, in thefame manner as when a magidi ire, prefiding at an election, is faitl toel'£l fuch and fuch perfons. Romulus nominated one fenator; eachtribe, and each curia, clioi'e three; and thus the number was madeup.
VOL. I. C"







OCR Output








ii THE HISTORY


BOOK procured from the houfe of Numitor. / Thus they, put the king to death.
•• VI. IN the beginning of the tumult, Numitor,calling out that the city was aflaulted by an enemy,and the palace attacked, had drawn away rhe Albanyouth to the citadel, on pretence of fecuring it byan armed garrifon; and, in a little time, feeing theyoung men, after perpetrating the murder, comingtowards him, with exprefiions of joy, he inftantlycalled the people to an afiembly, laid before themthe iniquitous behaviour of his brother towards him-felfj the birth of his grandchildren, how they werebegotten, how educated, how difcoveredj then in­formed them of the death of the ufurper, and that hehad himfclf encouraged the defign. JLThe youths atthe fame time advancing with their followers,through the midft of the afiembly, faluted theirgrandfather as king; on which the multitude tefti-fying their afient, by univerlal acclamations, ratifiedto him the royal title and authority. >When Numi­tor was thus reinftated in the fovereignty at Alba,Romulus and Remus were feized with a defire ofbuilding a city in the place where they had been ex-pofed and educated. ^TThere were great numbers ofAlbans and Latines, who could be fpared for thepurpofe, and thefe were joined by a multitude offhepherds; fo that, all together, they formed fuch anumerous body, as gave grounds to hope that Albaand Lavinium would be but fmall, in comparifonwith the city, which they were about to build.TThefe views were interrupted by an evil, hereditaryin their family, ambition for rule. Hence arofe afhameful conteft; though they had in the beginningrefted their difpute on this amicable footing, that, asthey were twins, and, confequently, no title to prece­dence could be derived from priority of birth, thegods, who were guardians of the place, fhould choofe
by







OCR Output








THE HISTORY


BOOK depart from one who was but a private citizen j and•t-^w- . then Appius, bereft of courage, and dreading forY.R. 105. his life, covered his head, and, unobferved by hisB. c.447. adverfaries, made his efcape into a houfe near theForum. Spurius Oppius rufhing Into the Forumfrom the other fide, in order to affift his colleague,Jaw their authority overpowered by force. Afterrevolving feveral expedients, confufed by lifteningto a multitude of advifers on every fide, he at laftcommanded the fenate to be fummoned. This ftepcalmed the minds of the multitude, by giving themhopes, that as the condudt of the decemvirs teemeddifpleafing to the greater part of the patricians, theirgovernment would be abolimed through the meansof the fenate. The fenate gave their opinion, thatthe commons mould not be farther exafperated; and,that, above all things, care fhould be taken to pre­vent commotions being excited in the camp on theArrival of Virginius.
L. ACCORDINGLY fome of the younger patricianswere fent to the camp, which, at that time, was onmount Vecilius, to caution the decemvirs to ufetheir utmoft efforts for preventing a mutiny amongthe foldiers. Here, Virginius excited greater com­motions than he had left in the city: for, befides thenotice which he attracted, by coming attended bya band of near four hundred men; who, incenfed atthe fcandalous injuftice done him, had accompaniedhim from the city; the unmeathed weapon, and him-felf being b'efrneared with blood, engaged the atten~tion of the whole camp. And the gowns * beingobferved in many different parts of the camp", madethe number of people from the city appear muchlarger than it was. Being afked the reafon of allthis, grief for a long time prevented him from ut­tering a word. At length, when, after the hurry
• The citizens' drefs, different frcm that of the military.
Of







OCR Output








m THE HISTORY


BOOK" to follow the example, unlefs kings would (hew'_.-T'. . " the.fame degree of vigour, in fupport of kinglyY.R. 146. " power, which the people exerted to wreft it fromB. C. jc&. " them: the higheft ranks would be reduced to a"level with the loweft: there would be no digni-"ty, no pre-eminence among the feveral members"of fociety: there would foon be an end of regal"power, an inftitution which among gods and men"was held in the higheft degree of eftimation."Porfena5 confidering it as highly conducive to thehonour of Etruria, that there fhould be a king atRome, and alfo that that king fhould be of Etruri­an race, led an army to Rome, determined to fup­port his pretenfions by force of arms. Never on• any former occafion were the fenate ftruck withfuch terror, fo powerful was the ftate of Clufiumat that time, and fo great the name of Porfena: norwere they in dread of their enemies only, but alfo oftheir own countrymen; left the Roman populace,overcome by their fears, might admit the kings intothe city, and, for the fake of peace, fubmit to flavery.The fenate, therefore, at this feafon practifed manyconciliatory meafures toward the commons: theirfirft care was applied to the markets, and peoplewere fent, fome to the Volfcians, others to Cumae,to purchafe corn; the privilege alfo of felling falt,becaufe the price had been raifed to an extravagantheight, was taken out of the hands of private peribns,and placed entirely under the management of go­vernment; the commons were alfo exempted fromport duties, and taxes; that the public expencesmight fall upon the rich, who were equal to the bur­then, the poor paying tax fufficient if they educatedtheir children. This indulgent care fhewn by thefenate, preferved fuch harmony in the ftate, evenduring the people's fevere fufferings afterwards, fromfiege, and famine, that the name of king was notmore abhorred by the higheft, than by the loweft;nor did any fingle perfon, in after times, ever ac­


quire







OCR Output








THE. HISTORY


 


begged of them to foften their refentmen.t,and to befiow their affections on thofe men onwhom chance had bcftowed their perfons. I^It;"often happened, he faid, that to harm treatment"mutual regard had fucceeded, and they fhould find"that their hufbands would behave the better on"this very account; that every one of them would"exert himfelf, not merely in performing his duty"as a hufband, but to make up to them for the lofs"of their parents and of their cQuntry."}:?To thefeperfuafions was added the foothing behaviour of theirhufbands, who urged, in extenuation of the violencethey had been tempted to commit, the excefs ofpaffion, and the force of love; arguments, than,which there can be none more powerful to affuagethe irritation of the female mind.
X. THE women, who had been forcibly carriecloff", fbon became reconciled to their fituation; buttheir parents, ftill more than at firft, endeavouredto roufe their feveral ftates to revenge, employingboth complaints and tears, and wearing the drefs ofmourners. Nor did they confine their demands ofvengeance within the limits of their own ftates, butmade joint applications from all quarters to Titus.Tatius, king of the Sabines, the embaffies being ad-clreffed to him as the perfon of the higheft renown,in all thofe parts. The ftates which were the prin­cipal fufferers by the outrage, were the Caeninen-fians, the Cruftuminians, and the Antemnatians,.To them, the proceedings of Tatius and the Sabinenation appeared too dilatory; wherefore thefe threeftates, uniiing in a confederacy, prepared for im-_ mediate war. Nor did even the Cruftuminians and,Antemnatians exert activity enough for the impa­tient rage of the Ca:ninenfians. This ftate, there­fore, by itfelf, made an irruption into the Roman,territories; but while they carried on their ravagesin a disorderly manner, Romulus met than with,


his







OCR Output








PREFACE.


prodigies to derive theirorigin from fuperftitiousweaknefs: thus, "So apt is fuperftitious weak-"nefs to introduce the deities into the moft"trivial occurrences*." "The mention of one'' prodigy was, as ufual, followed by reports of*' others f." "From this caufe arofe abundance*' of fuperftitious notions; and the minds of the"people became difpofed both to believe and to"propagate accounts of prodigies, of which a*c very great number were reported|." "The"confuls expiated feveral prodigies which had'c been reported §." "Several deceptions of the"eyes and ears were credited ||." One is almofttempted to think, that thofe who charge ourAuthor with credulity, had never read him;otherwife, how could they overlook fuch paf-fages as thefe, and efpecially the following, inwhich he feems aware that fuch a charge mightbe brought againft him, and labours to obviatejt? "In proportion as the war was protracted'' to a greater length, and fuccefles and difap-"pointments produced various alterations, not*' only in the fituations, but in the fentiments** of men, fuperftitious obfervances, and thefe*' moftly introduced from abroad, gained fuch'' ground among the people in general, that it*' feemed as if either mankind, or the deities,*( had undergone fome fudden changed."
From the paiTages here adduced, and verymany others to the fame purport might bequoted, it may be confidently pronounced,that our Author was not the dupe of thofe
» B. xxvii.ij. f Ib. 37. } B. xxix. i',
§ B. xxiv. 44. i| ibid. «i £. \,\v. i.


vulgar







OCR Output








45o T H E H I S T O R Y


 


BOO K " refpedable, and more frequent, embafiies will be"difpatched; and the very circumftance which"now difgufts the Etrurians, the eftablifhment of aking at Veii, may, in the interim, be done away,"either by the joint determination of the feveral"members of the ftate, for the fake of recovering"the friendfhip of Etruria, or by a voluntary adt of"the king himfelf, who may be unwilling to conti-"nue ort the throne, when he finds it an obftruction"to the welfare of his countrymen. See now how"many confequences, and how detrimental, attend"that method of proceeding; the lofs of works"formed with fo great labour; the confequent de-"vacation of our frontiers j and, inftead of the Vei-"cntians, the v/hole nation of Etruria united againft"us. Thefe, tribunes, are your plans, much indeed"of the fume kind, as if, in the cafe of a fick perfon,"who by fubmitting to a regimen with refolution,"might quickly recover his health, one fhould"render his diforder tedious, and perhaps incurable,"for the fake of the prefent pleafure which eating"and drinking would afford him.
VI. " I INSIST, that, though it were of no con-"fequence, with refpect to the prefent war, yet it is"certainly of the utrnoft importance to military"difcipline, that our foldiers be accuftomed, not"only to enjoy the fn.its of victory, but, fliould the"bufinefs prove tedious, to endure the irkfomenefs"of delay; to wait the ifTue of their hopes, though"tardy; and, if the fummer did not finifh the war,"to try what the winter might produce; and not,"like fummer birds, to look about for hiding-places"and fhclter, the moment autumn arrived. Con-"fider, I befeech you, how the pleafure of hunting"and eagernefs in the chace hurry men through"woods and mountains, in the midft of froft and"fnow; and, ftiall we not beftow on the neceflary"exigencies of war, the fame degree of patience,4' "which







OCR Output








THE HISTORY


 


t'ie YOling woman as his flave, and notrait to any demand which fhould be made, of her"Y.R. 305. being.left at liberty until thedecifion of the fuit, think-B. c. 447. ing tfat the abfence of the damfel's father left the. fltteft opportunity for the injury which he meditated.As the young woman came into the Forum, for thefchools of learning were held there in fheds, thisminifler of the decemvir's luft laid his hand on her,and affirming that " fhe was a flave, and born of a"woman who was his flave," ordered her to followhim; threatening, if fhe refufed, to drag her awayby force. While the girl ftood motionlefs throughfright and aftonifhment, a crowd was collected bythe cries of her nurfe, who implored the protection.of the citizens. The popular names of her fatherVirginius, and her fpoufe Icilius, were heard onevery fide. Their acquaintances were engaged infavour of the maiden, by their regard for them; andthe multitude in general, by the heinoufnefs of the• proceeding. She was now fecured from force, whenthe claimant faid, "there was no occafion for raifing"a mob, he was proceeding by law, not by force,"and fummoned the maiden to a court of juftice. Shebeing advifed, by thofe who appeared in her favouryto follow him, they arrived at the tribunal of Ap-pius. The claimant rehearfed the concerted farce,,before the judge, who was well acquainted with it>.having been himlelf the contriver of the plot; allegedthat " the girl was born in his houfe, and had beea."clandeftinely removed from thence to the houfe"of Virginius, who pretended to be her father ;.'* that of this he had fufficient evidence,, and would"prove it even to the latisfaction of Virgin'ius"himff If, the principat fufterer in the cafe; and it"was reafonable," he added,. " that in the mean-"time, the lervant fhould remain in the cufhody of"her inafter." The advocates for the young wo­man pleading, that Virginius was abfent on bufinefsof the ftate, and would attend in two days time,. if


.1 he







OCR Output








•i. .-O F R O ME. ... 523


from the heat and fuffbcation, that they died in B O o Knumbers,'diforders fpreading as among a herd of ,'cattle. And now growing weary of the trouble of Y.R. 36S.burying each feparatdy, they gathered the bodies in B.c. 387.heaps pramifcuoufly,and burned them, and this ren­dered the place remarkable by the name of the Gal­lic piles. A truce was now made with the Romans,and conferences held with permiflion of the com­manders. ^In which, when the Gauls frequentlymade mention of the famine to which the others werereduced, and thence inferred the neceffity of theirliu.rendering, it is faid, that in order to remove thisopinion, bread was thrown from the Capitol in feve-ral places into the advanced pofts of the Gauls. Butnow the famine could neither be difi'embled nor en­dured any "longer. Wherefore, whilft the dilator•was employed in perfon in levying forces at Ardea,in fending his mafter of the horle Lucius Valeriusto bring up the troops from Vcii, and in makingfuch preparations and arrangements as would enablehim to attack the enemy on equal terms, the garri-fon of the Capitol, worn down with the fatigue ofguards and watches, though they had ftood fu-perior to all human evils, yet famine being onewhich nature would not allow to be overcome, look­ing out day after day for the appearance of fomeaffiftance from the dictator, at laft, not only provi-fions, but hope now failing, their arms in the courfeof relieving the guards almoft weighing down theirfeeble bodies, infifted that either a furrender fhouldbe made, or the enemy bought off, on fuch termsas could be obtained: for the Gauls had given plainintimations, that, for a fmall compenfation, theymight be induced to relinquifh the fiege. The fe-nate then met, and the military tribunes were corp-miffioned to conclude a capitulation. The bufinefswas afterwards tranfacted in a conference betweenQuintus Sulpicius a military tribune, and Brennus
the







OCR Output








68 THE HISTORY


B o^o K r|ty. This is certain, that the refpect paid toauguries, and the office of augurs, rofe fo high,that, from that time forth, no bufinefs either of waror peace was undertaken without confulting thebirds: meetings of the people, embodying of ar­mies, the moft important concerns of the ftate, werepoftponed when the birds did not allow them.Nor did Tarquinius then make any change in thenumber of the centuries of the knights, but doubledthe number in each, fo that there were one thoufandeight hundred men in the three centuries. The ad­ditional men were only diftinguifhed by the appella­tion of the younger, prefixed to the original namesof their centuries; and thefe at prefent, for theyhave been fince doubled, are called the Six Cen­turies.
XXXVII. HAVING augmented this part of hisarmy, he came to a fecond engagement with theSabines. And here, befides that the Roman armyhad an addition of ftrength, a ftratagem alfo wasmade ufe of, which eluded the vigilance of the enemy.A number of men were fent to throw a great quan­tity of timber, which lay on the bank of the Anio,into the river, after fetting it on fire; and the windbeing favourable, the blazing timber, moft of whichwas placed on rafts, being driven againft the piers,where it ftuck faft, burned down the bridge. Thisevent not only ftruck terror into the Sabines duringthe fight, but prevented their retreating when theybetook themfelves to flight, fo that great numberswho had efcaped the enemy, perifhed in the river.And their arms being known at the city, as theyfloated in the Tiber, gave certain alFurance of thevictory, fooner almoft than any mefienger could ar­rive. In that battle the cavalry gained extraordinaryhonour. We are told, that being pofted on bothwings, when the line of their infantry which formedthe centre was obliged to give ground, they madefo furious a charge on the flanks of the enemy, that
they







OCR Output








45 T H E H I S T O R Y


B o o K cd by the three Curiatii. It happened that he wasunhurt; fo that, though, fingly, he was by no meansa match for them, all together, yet was he confidentof fucceis, againft each of them, feparately. In ordertherefore to avoid their joint attack, he betookhimfelf to flight, judging that they would purfuewith fuch different degrees of fpeed, as their woundswould allow. He had now fled to fome diftancefrom the place where they had fought, when, look­ing back, he perceived that there were large inter­vals between the purluers, and that one was at nogreat diftance from him: againft him he turnedback, with great fury, and while the Alban armycalled out to the Curiatii to fuccour their brother,Horatius, having in the mean rime flain his anta-gonift, proceeded victorious to attack the fecond.The Romans then cheered their champion withIhouts of applaufe, fuch as naturally burft forth onoccafions of unexpected joy: on his part, he delay­ed not to put an end to the combat; for, before thethird, who was at no great diftance, could come upto the relief of his brother, he difpatched the fecondCuriatius. And, now, they were brought to an equa­lity, in point of number, only one on each fidefurviving, but were far from an equality either inhopes or in ftfength; the one, unhurt, and fiufhedwith two victories, advanced, with confidence, to thethird conteft; the other, enfeebled by a wound,fatigued with running, and difpirited, befides, by thefete of his brethren, already flain, met the victori­ous enemy. What followed, could not be called afight; the Roman, exulting, cried out, "Two of"you have I offered to the fhades of my brothers,"the third I will offer to the caufe in which we are"engaged, that the Roman may rule over the Al-"ban:" and, whilft the other could fcarcely fup-port the weight of his armour, he plunged hisfword downward into his throat; then, as he layproftrate, he defpoiled him of his arms. .The Ro­mans







OCR Output








TrtE HISTORY


 


future. Aulus Virginius and Spurius Servilius werenext elected confuls. After the lofs fuftained in thelaft battle, the Veientians avoided coming again toB.C.474. an engagement. They employed themfelves incommitting depredations, and fending out partiesfrom the Janiculum, which ferved them as a for-trefs; fcoured every part of the Roman territories,fo that neither the cattle, nor the hufbandmen, couldany where remain in fafety. At laf t they were en­trapped by the fame ftratagem, by which they hadcircumvented the Fabii: purfuing fome cattle, whichhad been purpofcly thrown in their way, as a temp­tation, they fell into an ambufcade. In proportionas their numbers were greater, fo was the flaughter.The violent rage, which this overthrow excited,gave caufe and beginning to one much greater: for,having crofied the Tiber by night, they made an af-fault on the camp of the conful Servilius; and, be­ing repulfed with great lofs, with difficulty effecteda retreat to the Janiculum. The conful immediate­ly palTed the Tiber from his fide, and fortified acamp at the foot of the Janiculum. Next day, asfoon as light appeared, partly led by the confidence,infpired by his fuccefs in the fight of the day before,but chiefly becaufe the fcarcity of corn made it ex­pedient to adopt even dangerous meafures, providedthey were expeditious, he rafhly marched up histroops, againft the fteep of the Janiculum, to thecamp of the. enemy: there he met with a repulfe,more fhameful than that which he had given themthe preceding ttay; and both he, and his army, owedtheir prefervation from deftruction to the timely in­tervention of his colleague. The Etrurians, now in-clofed between the two armies, to one or other otwhich their rear was by turns expofed,were entirelycut off. Thus, through a fortunate act of temerity,the Veientians were effectually overpowered, and thewar brought to a conclufion.
LI I. To-







OCR Output








0 F R O M E.


at the river Cremera, which they judged to be a pro- BOOKper fituation for fecuring a poft by fortifications. , J"'Lucius vEmilius and Caius Servilius were foon after y.R. 1,(5.elected confuls. And as long as the operations of B.C. 476.the war were confined to predatory expeditions, theFabii were not only fufficiently able to defend theirpoft, but by their excurfions, along the commonboundaries, they both effectually fecured their ownfrontiers, and fpread danger and devaftation in thofeof the enemy, through the whole tract, as far as theEtrurian territories join the Roman. Their mutualdepredations were foon after difcontinued, though butfor a fhort time, for the Veientians having collecteda reinforcement from Etruria, laid fiege to the poftat the Cremera; and the Roman legions, led thitherby the conful Lacius .ffimilius, fought a clofe en­gagement with the Etrurians in the field, in which,however, the Veientians had fcarcely time to formtheir troops; for in the midft of the hurry, whilethey were taking their pofts under their feveral ban­ners, and placing bodies of referve, a brigade of Ro­man cavalry charged them fuddenly on the flank,in fuch manner as to put it out of their power eitherto make a regular onfet, or even to Hand theirground: being thus compelled to retreat to the RedRocks, where they had their camp, they humblyfued for peace: yet after it had been granted, theyrenounced it, before the Roman guard was with­drawn from the Cremera; fuch was their natural in-conftancy.
L. THE conteft, then again, lay between theFabii and the Veientian ftate, unfupported by anyadditional forces on either fide. There pafied be­tween them not only incurfions into each other'sterritories, and fudden attacks on the parties employ­ed in thofe incurfions, but feveral pitched battles, inthe open field; in which a fingle family of the Ro­man people often obtained victory over a ftate, ac
VOL. i. o thac







OCR Output








THE HISTORY


 


deed; but his recent merit outweighed its guilt ihe was, however, inftantly carried before the king,to be tried. The king, unwilling to take on him-felf a decifion of fuch a melancholy nature, and fodifagreeable to the multitude, or the inflicting ofthe punifhment confequent on the decifion, lum-moned an afiembly of the people, and then faid,"'I appoint two commiffioners to pafs judgment on"Horatius for murder, according to the law."The law was of dreadful import; "Let two com •"miflioners pafs judgment for murder; if the ac-"cufed appeal from the commiffioners, let the ap-f' peal be tried; if their fentence be confirmed,"cover his head, hang him by a rope on the gal-"lows, let him be fcourged either within the Po-"maerium or without the Pomaerium." The twocommifiloners, appointed conformably to this law,were of opinion, that, according to that law, theywere not authorifed to acquit him, however fmallhis guilt might be; and, after they had found himguilty, one of them pronounced judgment in thefewords: "Publius Horatius, I fentence thee to"punifhment as a murderer; go, Lictor, bind his"hands." The I.ictor had come up to him, andwas fixing the cord, when Horatius, by the adviceof Tullus, who wifhed to give the mildeft interpre­tation to the law, faid, "I appeal:" fo the trial, onthe appeal, came before the commons. During thistrial, people's feelings were very deeply affected,cfpecially by the behaviour of Publius Horatius thefather, who declared that, " in his judgment, his"daughter was defervedly put to death; had it not"been fo, he would, by his own authority as a fa-"ther, have inflicted punifhment on his fon." Hethen befought them that " they would not leave"him childlefs, whom they had beheld, but a few"hours ago, furrounded by children of uncommon."merit." Uttering thefe words, the old man em­braced the youth, and pointing to the fpoils of the
Cunatiij







OCR Output








720 THE HISTORY


$ oo K ill-treatment, and an army was fent to Algidumt J.'1^ . againft the Romans. When the news of thefe tranf-Y.R. 189. actions was brought to Rome, the indignity of theB. C'.463. aftair, rather than the danger, called out the otherconful from the city, and the two confular armies ad­vanced to the enemy in order of battle, prepared foran immediate engagement. But this happeningpretty late in the day, a perfon called out from oneof the enemy's pofts, "Romans, this is making an"oftentatious parade, not waging war: ye draw up"your forces for battle, when night is at hand. We"require a greater length of day-light to decide the"conteft which is to come on: return into the field"to-morrow at fun-rife; ye fhall have an oppor-"tunity of fighting, doubt it not." The foldierswere led back into camp until the next day, highlyirritated by thofe expreffions, and thinking the ap­proaching night too long, which was to occafion adelay to the combat: the intervening time theyemployed in refrefhing themfelves with food andfleep. Next morning, as foon as it was light, theRoman army were the firft, by a confiderable time,to take their poft in the field. At length, the/Equans alfo came forward. The battle was foughtwith great fury on both fides, for the Romans wereitimulated both by anger and hatred, and the ./Equans,confcious that the dangers to which they were ex-pofed were the confequence of their own crimes,and defpairing of ever being treated with confidencein future, felt a necefiity of trying the moft deiperateexertions. However, they were net able to with-ftand the Roman troops. They were driven fromthe field, and retreated to their own territories;where the outrageous multitude, not at all the moredifpofed to peace, cenfured their leaders for havinghazarded fuccefs in a pitched battle in the field; amanner of fighting in which the Romans pofiefiedfuperior frill. The Equans, they faid, were betterfitted for predatory expeditions; and there was bet­ter







OCR Output








4$>« THEHISTORY


BOOK territories, until the Volfinians, becoming weary oft_X'..,_. tne war, had a truce for twenty years granted them,Y.R. 364. on condition that they fhould make reftitution to theB.C. j«8. Roman people, and furnifh the pay of the army forthat year. During this year, Marcus Caedicius, aplebeian, gave information to the tribunes, that"in the new ftreet, where the chapel now ftands,"above the temple of Vefta, he had heard in the dead"of the night, a voice louder than that of a man,"ordering notice to be given to the magiftrates,"that the Gauls were approaching." This intelli­gence, on account of the mean condition of the au­thor, as frequently happens, was disregarded; andalfo,becaufe that nation, lying at a great diftance,wastherefore very little known. And they not onlyflighted the warnings of the gods, at this crifis ofimpending fate, but the only human aid which couldhave availed them, Marcus Furius, they drove awayto a diftance from the city: for, having been citedby Apuleius, a plebeian tribune, to anfwer a chargeconcerning the plunder of Veii, and having about thefame time fuffered the lofs of a fon, who had almoftarrived at the years of manhood, he called togetherto his houfe the members of his tribe and depend­ents, who compofed a great part of the commons,and afked their fentiments on the occafion; whenbeing told, in anfwer, that they would make up by acontribution whatever fine he fhould be condemnedto pay, but to effecT: his acquittal was out of theirpower, he went into exile, after praying to the im­mortal gods, that if he was undeferving of fuch inju­rious treatment, they would fpeedily give that un­grateful ftate. reafon to regret his abfence. On hisnot appearing, he was fined fifteen thoufand afesin weight*.
XXXIII. HAVING thus driven away the citizen,whofc prefence, if in any cafe we can pronounce
• 48!. SE. Ed.


with







OCR Output








56 THE HISTORY


if o o K Sabines, that prior to this, fome of their peoplehad fled into the Afylum, and were detained atRome. Thefe were the reafons afilgned for thewar. The Sabines, reflecting that a great part oftheir original ftrength had been fixed at Rome byTatius, and that the Roman power had been allblately increafed, by the accefiion of the people ofAlba, took care, on their part, to look round forforeign aid. Etruria lay in their neighbourhood,and the ftate of the Etrurians neareft to them wasthat of the Veientians. From among thefe theyprocured a number of volunteers, who were in­duced to take part againft the Romans, principallyby the refentment which they ftill retained onaccount of their former quarrels. Several alfo ofthe populace, who were indigent and unprovidedof a fettlement, were allured by pay. From thegovernment they received no afiiftance, and theVeientians, for it was lefs furprifing in others, ad­hered to the terms of the truce ftipulated with Ro­mulus. Vigorous preparations being made on bothfides, and it being evident, that, whichever partyfhould firft commence hoftilities, would have con.fiderably the advantage, Tullus feized the oppor­tunity of making an jncurfion into the lands of theSabines. A furious battle enfued at the woodCalled Malitiofa, in which the Romans obtainedthe vicctory; and, for this, they were indebted notonly to the firm ftrength of their infantry, butchiefly to the cavalry, which had been lately aug­mented. For, by a fudden charge of this body,the ranks of the Sabines were thrown into fuclidiforder, that they were neither able to continuethe fight, nor to make good their retreat^ withoutgreat flaughter,


XXXI. AFTg!?. the defeat of the Sabines, thegovernment of Tullus, and the Roman ftate ingeneral, pbffcffed a large degree of pow.er and of
fame.







OCR Output








PREFACE. f


It has been urged, in defence of Livy, that,in his twentieth book, he gave the account ofthe .affair of Sardinia; and that, if that bookhad not been loft, it might, from thence, haveappeared that the conduct of the Romans, inthat tranfa&ion, was perfectly juftifiable; andthat, coniequently, what he has fupprefled, ofPolybius's argument, he has omitted, not fomucb,to favour the caufe of his own countrymen, asbecaufe he knew the allegations therein to betalfe. It muft, howver, be obferved, that Poly-bius was neither a Roman, nor a Carthaginian}that he has always been held to be an hiftorianof the higheft credit, and the ftricteft impartia­lity; that he lived nearer the times he writes ofthan Livy, and was a moft diligent inquirerinto the truth of the facts which he relates inhis hiftory; that he was, by no means, un­friendly to the Romans, but the contrary, tak­ing all opportunities to fpeak of them with thehigheft praife.
It is not meant here to detract from the meri{of Livy, as an hiftorian, by the mention offuch particulars as thefe. It may be aflumedas a maxim, that no hiftorian of his owncountry can be, ftrictly fpeaking, impar­tial: he may intend to be fo; but the mindwill be under an involuntary bias, influencedby fome fecret inclination, of which he himfclfmay be unconfcious: he may believe what,he aflerts, and yet it may not be true.
Another inftance of his partiality to hiscountrymen may be found in his account of
a 4 the







OCR Output








OF ROME. 411


"permitting military tribunes to be appointed in- B O O K
"ftead of confuls, and the tribunes of the "corn- t ^L_,
"mons ceafing to proteft againft the four quaeftors Y.R. 334."being chofen out of the patricians and plebeians,in- B.c. *'8'"difcriminately, by the free fuffrages of the people."
XLIV. THE eledion of tribunes was firft held, Y.R. m,.and there were elected tribunes, with confular power, B. c'+1'.Lucius Quintius Cincinnatus a third time, Lu­cius Furius Medullinus a fecond time, MarcusManlius and Aulus Sempronius Atratinus, all patri­cians. The laft-named tribune prefided at the elec­tion of quaeftors, when there appeared among feveralother plebeian candidates, a fon of Antiftius, a ple­beian tribune, and a brother of Sextus Pompilius,another of the plebeian tribunes: but neither theirpower nor intereft were able to prevent the peoplefrom choofing rather to raife thofe to the rank ofnobility, whofe fathers and grandfathers they hadfeen in the confulfhip. This enraged all the tri­bunes tomadnefs, efpecially Pompilius and Antiftius,who were incenfed at the difappointment of their re­lations. "What could be the meaning of this," theyfaid, " that neither their fervices, nor the injurious"behaviour of the patricians, nor even the pleafure"of exercifing a newly acquired right, though a"power was now granted which had hitherto been"refufed, had been fufficient to procure, for any one"plebeian, the office of military tribune, or even"that of quaeftor? The prayers of a father in be-'' half Of his fon, thofe of one brother in behalf of"another, thofe of perfons invefted with the tri-"buneftVip of the commons, that facred and invio-"lable power created for the protection of liberty,"had all proved ineffectual. There muft certair.iy"have been fome fraudulent practices in the cafe,"and Aulus Sempronius muft have ufed more arti-"fice in the election than was confiftent with ho-."nour.;" and they complained loudly, that their
relations







OCR Output








OF ROME.


by each of them in particular, and alfo by the whole B O O Kfenate, they prevailed on fix to promife their pro- . -^-^lefts. Accordingly, on the day following, when the Y.K. 339.fenate was confulted, as had been preconcerted, con- B.C. *IJ'?erning the fedition which Maecilius and Maetiliuswere exciting, by the propofal of a largefs of moftpernicious tendency, the fpeeches of the principalpatricians, ran all in the fame ftrain, each declaringthat, for his part, " he could neither devife any fa-'* tisfactory mode of proceeding, nor could he fee a?' remedy any where, unlefs it were found in the"protection of the tribunes. To that office the"commonwealth, embarrafied with' difficulties, int' like manner as a private perfon in diftrefs, had"now recourfe for aid: and that it would be highlyt' honourable to themfelves, and to their office, if"they fhewed that the tribunefhip poffefied not"greater power to harafs the fenate, and excite"difcord between the orders in the ftate, than to"oppofe ill.defigning colleagues." The voices ofthe whole fenate were then heard together, appealsto the tribunes coming from every corner of thehoufe; and, in fome time, filence being made, thofewho had been prepared through the influence of theprincipal nobility gave notice, "that the propofal of a"law, publifhed by their colleagues, which, in the"judgmentof the fenate, tended to the diflblution oft' the commonwealth, they would oppofe with their"protefts." The thanks of the fenate were given totrie proteftors: but the authors of the propofal, hav­ing called an afiembly of the people, abufed theircolleagues as traitors to the interefts of the commons,and flaves to the confulars; and, after, uttering othertitter invectiyes againft them, dropped the profecu-tion of their fcheme.
XLIX. THE two perpetual enemies of the Rp- Y.tt. 340.mans would have given them employment during H.c.+i1.the following y^^r, in which Publius Cornelius Cpf-
£ £ 2 fuS,







OCR Output








xxvi PREFACE.


ing fads, in fome inftances, or even of fup-prefling them ia others, yet will his geniusand talents, as an hiftorian, ever be refpe£ted.He cannot be denied the merit of having fur-nifhed us with a perfect model of hiftoricalcompofition, in the pureft and moft elegantftyle; more remarkable for perfpicuity of nar­ration, and neatnefs of expreflion, than fordepth of reafoning, or pomp of di&ion. Al­though he ieldom digrefles, and but rarely in­dulges in moral obfervations or philoibphicalreflections, yet, he never lofes fight of whathe himfelf lays down in his Preface as thegreat objedtof hiftory: the furnifhing"clearand"diftindt examples of every line of conduct;"that we may fele£t for ourfelves, and for*' the ftate to which we belong, fuch as are"worthy of imitation; and carefully noting"fuch, as, being difhonorable in their prin-"ciples, are equally fo in their effeds, learn"to avoid them."


ALL that the prefent writer feels it neceflaryto fay, upon delivering to the public a newTranflation of fo efteemed a work as Livy'sHiftory, is, that it has been the employment,and amufement, of many years fpent in a verylaborious, but not unufeful, occupation: andthat, if he be not deceived by felf-love, andthe partiality of a few friends, who have takenthe trouble of looking into it, it will be foundnot altogether unworthy of public accept*ance.
The







OCR Output








i74 THEHISTORf


BOOK- diftinguifhed above the reft by an extraordinary de.t. -*1_• gree of fadnefs, as fhe ftood between her daughter-Y.R. 166. in-law, and grandchildren, faid to him, " unlefs myU.u. 486. " eyes deceive me, your mother with your wife and"children are coming." Coriolanus, in a tranfportof amazement, and almoft diftracted, fpringing fromhis feat to embrace his mother as fhe advanced, thewoman, inftead of intreaties, addrefled him with angryreproofs: " Let me know," faid me, "before I re- •"ceive your embrace, whether I am come to an"enemy, or to a fonj whether I am in your campK a prifoner, or a mother. Was it for this, that'e my long and unhappy old age has been Iengthen-•' ed out, that I might behold you an exile, and af-"terwards an enemy; could you lay wafte this landj•' which gave you birth and education? whatever"degree of anger, whatever thiruSof vengeance,"might have occupied your mind, on your march;"did you not, on entering its borders, feel your"paflion lubfide? When you came within fight of"Rome, did it not recur to you,—within thofe walls"are my houfe and guardian gods, my mother, my"wife, my children? Had I never been a mother,"then Rome would not have been now befieged:"had I not a fon, I might have died free, and left"my country free; but, for my part, there is no"fuffering to which I can be expofed, that will not"reflect more difhonour on you, than mifery on"me; and be my lot as wretched as it may, I am." not to endure it long; let thefe claim your rc-"gard, who, if you peruft, can have no other prof-"peet, but either untimely death, or lafting fla-"very." His wife and children then embracedhim; and the whole crowd of women, utteringbitter lamentations, and deploring their own andtheir country's fate, at length got the better of hisobftinacy: fo that, after embracing and difmiffinghis family, he removed his camp to a greater dif-lance from the city: foon after, he drew off the
troops







OCR Output








O F R O M E. 281


among the commons; of the fenators, there was BOOKhardly one in the Forum, very few in the city. . -T-_fDifgufted with the times, they had retired to their Y.R. 3o5.country feats; and, being deprived of their fhare in B.c.4*7-the adminiftration of the public bufinefs, attendedfolely to their private affairs; thinking, that, by re­moving to a diftance from the meeting and converleof their tyrannic mafters, they had got fo far out ofthe reach of ill treatment. On their not meetingaccording to fummons, apparitors were difpatchedto all their houfes, to levy the penalties, and at thefame time to difcover whether their non-attendancewas owing to defign; and thefe brought back an ac­count that the members of the fenate were in the _country. This gave lefs pain to the decemvirs, thanif they had heard that they were in town, and refufedto obey their commands. They then gave orders,that every one of them fhould be fummoned, andproclaimed a meeting of the fenate, on the day fol­lowing, when the members affembled, in muchgreater numbers than they themfelves had hoped.This raifed a fufpicion in the minds of the com­mons, that the fenators had deferted the caufe of li­berty, fince they had paid obedience, as to a legalfummons, to the order of men whofe office had ex­pired, and who, "except fo far as force prevailed,were nothing more than private citizens. i
XXXIX. BUT, by all accounts, they fhewedmore obedience in coming to the houfe, than fervi-lity in delivering their opinions. It is related, thatafter Appius Claudius had propofed the bufinefs tobe confidered, before the opinions were demandedin order, Lucius Valerius Potitus occafioned a greatferment, by infifting on being allowed to fpeak onthe ftate of the commonwealth; and, when the de­cemvirs endeavoured to prevent him, declaring, thathe would go out and apply to the commons: andthat Marcus Horatius Barbatus entered the lifts, with
no







OCR Output








THE HISTORY


 


"nation r" Having received the king's order, hefeid, "O king, I demand vervain from thee:"the king anfwered, " Take it pure." The heraldbrought clean ftalks of that herb from the citadel.He afterwards afked the king in thefe words;"Doft thou, O king, conftitute me the royal dele-"gate of the Roman people, the Quirites; in-"eluding, in my privileges, my attendants and"implements." The king replied, " Be it with-"out detriment to me, and to the Roman people,"the Quirites, I do conftitute thee." The heraldwas Marcus Valerius, and he made Spurius FufiusPater Patratus, by touching his head and hair withthe vervain. The Pater Patratus is made '' ad"jusjurandum patrandum," tliat is, to ratify theleague; and this he does in a great many words,which being exprefied in a long fet form, I may beexcufed from repeating. Then, after reciting theconditions, he faid, " Hear thotf, O Jupiter! hear"thou, Pater Patratus of the Alban nation: heap,"ye people of Alba: as thofe conditions, from ftrft"to laft, have been recited openly from thofe tab-"lets, or that wax, without fraud or deceit, in fuch'' fenfe as they are moft clearly underftood here this"day, from thofe conditions the Roman people"will not firft depart: if they mall, at any time, firft"depart from them, under authority of the ftate,"through any fraud or deceit, do thou, O Jupiter,"on that day, ftrike the Roman people in like man-"ner as I fhall here, this day, ftrike this fwine; and"ftrike them, thou, with greater fe verity, in pro-"portion as thy power and ability are greater."So faying, he ftruck down the fwine with a flintftone. The Albans likewife, by their dictator andrhcir priefts, repeated their form of ratification ar.dtheir oath.
XXV. THE league being concliuled, the threebrothers, on each lid", purfuint to the agreement


took







OCR Output








OF ROME. i8£


•which it occafioned, was greatly damped, by theB O O Kdeath of two fuch illuftrious perfons: for which rea- _j_^l^J.fon the conful, when the fenate were proceeding to Y.R. 174.vote him a triumph, told them, that " if the army Bi c.+"s''c could triumph without their general, he would"readily conlent to it, on accouht of their extraor-f' dinary good behaviour in that war: but as to him-"felf, while his own family was overwhelmed with"grief, for the death of his brother Quintus Fabius,"and the commonwealth bewailed the lofs of a pa-•'' rent, as it were, in that of one of its confuls, he"would not accept of the laurel, blafted both byf' public and private mourning." A triumph re-fufed on fuch grounds, redounded more to his ho­nour, than if he had actually enjoyed it: fo true it is>that fame prudently declined, often returns with dou­ble lultre. He then celebrated the two funerals ofhis colleague, and his brother, one after the other,and took upon himfelf the office of pronouncing thepanegyric of both; in the performance of which, heattributed to them, the merit of his own perform­ances, in fuch a manner, as me wed him to be entitledto the greateft mare of any. Not lofing fight of thedefign whicli he had conceived at the beginning ofhis confulate, of recovering the affection of the com­mons, he diftributed the wounded foldiers amongthe patricians, to be taken care of, until they werecured. The greateft number were given to theFabii, and by no others were they treated with moreattention. Henceforward the Fabii grew high in .the favour of the people, and that without practifingany management unfalutary to the ftate.
XLVIII. WITH the fame view, Caefo Fabius, Y.R.x7j.whofe election to the confulfhip, with Titus Virgini- ' "47?"us, was owing as much to the favourable fupport ofthe commons, as to that of the patricians, would en­ter on no bufinefs, either of wars or levies, or anyother matter, until the hopes of concord, which had
already







OCR Output








OF ft O ME. 13


by auguries *, which of the two fhould give a name BOOKto the new city, and enjoy the govanment of it,when built. Romulus chofe the Palatine, Remusthe Aventine mount, as their confecrated ftands towait the auguriesj We are told that the firft omen ap­peared to Remus, confifting of fix vultures; and that,after this had been proclaimed, twice that numberfhewed themfelves to Romulus; on which each wasfaluted king by his own followers; the former claim­ing the kingdom, on the ground of the priority oftime j the latter, on that of the number of the birds.On their meeting, an altercation enfued, then blows jand their pafiions being inflamed by the difpute, theaffair proceeded at laft to extremity, and murderwas the confequence: Remus fell by a blow receiv­ed in the tumult. There is another account moregenerally received, that Remus, in derifion of hisbrother, leaped over the new wall, and that Romu­lus, enraged thereat, fle:.v him, uttering at the famerime this imprecation, " So perifh every other that"fhall hereafter leap over my wall." By thefe means YEARRomulus came into the fole pofiefiion of the govern- BEFOREment, and the city, when built, was called after thename of its founder. The firft buildings, which heraifed, were on the Palatine hill, where he himfelfhad been brought up. To the other deities he per­formed worfhip, according to the mode of the Albansjbut, to Hercules, according to that of the Greeks, asinftituted by Evander.
VII. IT is recorded that Hercules, after havingflain Geryon, drove away his cattle, which were fur-prifingly beautiful; and that, being fatigued withtravelling, he lay down, near the river Tiber, in agrafly place, to which he had fwum over, drivingthe herd before him, in order to refrefh the cattlewith reft and the rich pafture. There, having in-
• For an account of augurt, suffices, Sec. fee A Jams, p. 196.
dulged







OCR Output








«4 THE HISTORY


B ?irO K anc^ attacked fO vigoroufty, that there was rtb poffi-, -T-.-f bility even of fending a meffenger from thence toY.R. 190. Rome. The Hernicians brought an account bothB.C. 46*. Of the defeat, and of the conful, and the army beingbefieged, which ftruck the fenate with fuch difmay,that, by a decree, in that form, which has been al­ways deemed to be appropriated to cafes of extremeexigency, the other conful Poftumius was chargedto " take care, that the commonwealth fhould re-"ceive no detriment." It was judged moft expedUcnt, that the conful himfelf fhould remain at Rome,in order to enlift all who were able to bear arms;and that Titus Quintius fhould be fent as proconfulto the relief of the camp, with an army compofedof the allies; to complete the number of which, theLatines, Hernicians, and the colony at Antium,were ordered to fupply Quintius with fubitary fol-diers; this was the appellation then given to auxili­aries called out on a fudden emergency.
V. FOR fome time there was a great variety ofmovements, and many attempts made, both on onefide and on the other; for the enemy, relying ontheir fuperiority in number, endeavoured to weakenthe force of the Romans, by obliging them to divideit into many parts, in hopes that it would prove in-fufficient to withftand them on every different quar­ter. At the fame time that the fiege of the camp•was carried on, a part of their forces was fent to ra­vage the lands of the Romans, and attempt the cityitfelf, if a favourable occafion fhould offer. LuciuaValerius was left to guard the city, and the confulPoftumius was fent to protect the frontiers from theenemy's incurfions. No degree of vigilance andactivity was left unemployed in any particular:watches were ftationed in the city, out-pofts beforethe gates, and guards along the walls j and, as wasneceflary in a time of fuch general confufion, a ceffa-tion of civil bufmefs was oblerved for feveral days.
Mean­







OCR Output








416 THE HISTORY


B o o K the military tribune, to which, in this diforder oft ^'^ their affairs, they could look for fecurity. By hisY.R. 337. orders alfo, after the confufion in the city had beenB.C.415. quieted, by means of the inferior magiftrates, fcoutswere inftantly difpatched for intelligence, whobrought accounts, that the generals and the armywere at Tufculum, and that the enemy had not re­moved their camp. But what chiefly contributed toraife people's fpirits was, that in purfuance of a de­cree of the fenate, Quintus Servilius Prifcus wasnominated dictator, a man whofe extenfive judg­ment in affairs of the public, the ftate had expe­rienced, as well on many former occafions as in theiflue of that campaign; he alone having, before themisfortune happened, exprefled apprehenfions ofdanger from the difputes of the tribunes. He ap­pointed for his mafter of the horfe the tribune bywhom he had been nominated dictator, his own fon,according to fome accounts; but other writers men­tion Servilius Ahala as mafter of the horfe that year.Then, putting himfelf at the head of the new-raifcdtroops, and fending orders to thofe at Tufculum tojoin him, he marched againft the enemy, and chofcground for his camp within two miles of theirs.
XLVII. THE negligence and the vanity infpiredby fuccefs, which were formerly manifefted in theRoman commanders, had now transferred them-felves to the ^Equans. Accordingly, in the firft en­gagement, which immediately enfued, the dictator,after difordering the enemy's van by a charge of thecavalry, having ordered the battalions of the legionsto advance with fpeed, and having flain one of hisftandard-bearers, who mewed fome backwardnefs,fuch ardour for the fight was difplayed by his men,that the ^Equans could not fupport the mock of theironfet. Vanquifhed in the field, they fled precipitatelyto their camp, the taking of which coft even lefstime and trouble than the battle had done. After the
camp







OCR Output








S(? THEHISTORT


BOOK and attendants fled immediately. He himfelf, beingL defperately hurt, with his royal retinue, who wereterrified almoft to death, attempted to retire to hishoufe, and had arrived at the head of the Cyprianftreet, when he was flain by fome, who had beenfent thither for that purpofe, by Tarquinius, andhad overtaken him in his flight. It is believed,other inftances of her wickednefs rendering it cre­dible, that this was done by the advice of Tullia.It is certain, for there is fufficient proof of the fact,that fhe drove into the Forum in her chariot; and,without being abafhed at fuch a multitude of men,called out her hufband from the fenate.houfe, andwas the firft who faluted him king. She was thenordered by him, to withdraw from fuch a tumult;and when, in her return home, fhe arrived at thehead of the Cyprian ftreet, where the enclofure ofDiana lately ftood, as the chariot turned to theright towards the Virbian hill, in order to drive upto the Efquilian mount, the perfon who drove thehorfes, ftruck with horror, ftopped and drew inthe reins, and fhewed his miftrefs the murderedServius lying on the ground. The barbarity ofher behaviour on this occafion, is reprefented as in­human and fhocking; and the place bears teftimo-ny to it, being thence called the wicked ftreet,where Tullia, divefted of all feeling, agitated bythe Furies, the avengers of her fifter and hufband,is laid to have driven her chariot over her father'scorpfe, and to have carried on her bloody vehicle,part of the body and the blood of her father, withwhich flie herfelf was alfo fprinkled and ftained, tothe houfehold gods of her and her hufband's family,through whofe refentment followed, fhortly after, atrain of events fuited to the iniquitous commence­ment of this reign. Servius Tullius reigned forty-four years, during which his conduct was fuch, thateven a good and moderate fuccefibr would havefound it difficult to lupport a competition with him.


This







OCR Output








O P R 0 M E. aoj


*c an&; for he was not a magiftrate of the people at B O O K"large, but of the commons; that even he himfelf . -/_ -'"could not, conformably to ancient ufage, of his Y.R. 18.,."own authority, compel people to withdraw, the B. c. *'91"words in ufe being, If ye think proper, Romans*"retire," It was eafy for him to difconcert Laeto-rius in arguing, even thus contemptuoufly, about hisauthority; the tribune therefore, inflamed with an­ger, lent one of his officers to the conful,. and theconful fent a lictor to the tribune, calling out that hewas but a private perfon without command and with­out magiftracy; nor would the tribune have efcapedill-treatment, had not the whole afiembly joined,with great warmth, in taking his part againft theconful, and at the fame time, the alarm having fpreadamong the populace, brought a great concourfefrom all parts of the city to the Forum. Appius,notwithftanding, inflexibly withftood the violence ofthe ftorm; and the difpute muft have terminated inblood; had not Quintius the other conful, giving itin charge to the confulars to take away his colleaguefrom the Forum by force, if they could not do "it.other wife,- now foothed the enraged plebeians withintreaties, then begged of the tribunes to difmifs theafiembly, to "give time for their anger to cool,"telling them, that " delay would not diminifh aught"of their power, but would afford them the advan-."tage of uniting prudence with that power j that"the patricians would ftill be under the direction"of the people, and the conful under that of the"patricians."
LVII. WITH great difficulty, the commons werepacified by Quintius; and with much greater, wasthe other conlul quieted by the patricians; and the.afiembly of the people being at length difmified, the.confuls convened the fenate. There, fear and an­ger, prevailing by turns, produced for fome time avariety of opinions; but having gained time for re-s3 . flection,







OCR Output








THE HISTORY


K pronounced on him after his death with as favour-able an attention as they had fhewn to the chargesY.R. 184. brought againft him when alive, and, in va'ft num-B. c. 468. bers, attentle{} nis funeral.


 


LXII. DURING this year, the conful Valeriusmarched with an army againft the ^iquans; and,finding it impracticable to entice them to an engage­ment, made an afiault on their camp. A defperatcftorm of thunder and hail falling, obliged him to de-fift, and people's furprize was increaied, when, astoon as the fignal for retreat had been given, theweather became again perfectly calm and clear; fothat they were deterred by a religious fcruple fromagain attacking a camp which had been defended byan evident interpofition of fome divinity, and ventedall their fury in devaluations on the enemy's lands.The other conful ,Emilius conducted the war in thecountry of the Sabines, and there alfo, the enemykeeping within their walls, the lands were laid wafte;at length, by the burning, not only of the countryhoufes, but of the villages, which in that populouscountry were very numerous, the Sabines were pro­voked to give battle, to the troops employed in thedepredations; and, being obliged to retreat withouthaving gained any advantage, removed their camp,next day, to a place of greater fafety. This ap­peared to the conful a fufficient reafon to confiderthe enemy as vanquifhed, and to ceafe any fartheroperations; he accordingly withdrew his troops,without having made any progrefs in the war.
V.R. 185. LXIII. WHILE thefe wars ftill raged abroad, and"4 7' party divifions at home, Titus Numicius Prifcusand Aulus Virginlus were elected confuls. Therewas every reafon to believe that the commons wouldnot endure any farther delay with refpect to the agra­rian law, and every degree of violence was ready tobreak out, when it was difcovered, by the fmoke
from







OCR Output








OF ROME.


citizens alfo were compelled to give in their names, BOOKto ferve as a garrifon to the city. Now, in propor- L-^L__,tion as the number of foldiers was augmented, fo Y.R. 3S^much the more money became neceflary for their B. C. ss«.pay, and this was made up by a tax, which was veryunwillingly paid by thofe who remained at home,becaufe, as the guard of the city lay upon them, theymuft alfo perform military duty, and give up theirlabour to the public. Thefe circumftances, grievousin themfelves, were fet forth in more provoking co­lours, in the feditious harangues of the plebeian tri­bunes, who infifted, that " the eftablifhment of pay"to the foldiers was intended for the purpofe of"ruining one half of the commons, by the fatigues"of war, and the other half, by a tax. That one"war had now been protracted to the fifth year; and"was conducted, without fuccefs, defignedly, in or-'r der that it might afford them the longer employ-"ment. Befides, armies had been enlifted at one"levy for four different wars, and even boys and old'' men dragged from their homes. That no dif-"tinction was now made between fummer and win.?"ter, left any refpite fhould be allowed to the"wretched commons; who, now, as the finiming*c ftroke, had been made fubjedr. to a tax; fo that"when they mould return, with their bodies wafted"through toils, wounds, and even age, and find"every thing at home in diforder, from the long"abfence of the owners, they mould be obliged, out"of their ruined property, to refund, in a manifold"proportion, to the ftate, the money which they had"received as pay, as if it had been taken up at ufuri-"ous intereft." Between the levy, and the tax, andmen's thoughts being occupied by more importantconcerns, the number of plebeian tribunes could notbe filled up on the day of election. A violent effortwas afterwards made to have patricians aflfumed intothe vacant places, and that being found impracticable,another plan was adopted, for the purpofe of weaken-
• ing







OCR Output








OF ROME. ,55


"houfes, and affemblies, fome meetings being held BOOK"on the Efquiline mount, othtrs on the Aventine. . "'_"That they had no doubt, but one man, for that Y.R. 160."was fomething more than every conful was, one B.C.49*,"fuch as Appius Claudius, would have difperfed"thofe meetings in a moment's time." The con­fute, on receiving this rebuke, aflced the fenate,what then they would have them do? for they were ,refolved, they faid, to act with all the activity andvigour which the fenate mould think proper. A de­cree then pafied, that they mould enforce the levieswith the utmoft ftrictnefs; for the commons weregrown infolent through want of employment. Dif-mifTmg the fenate, the confuls mounted the tribunal,and cited the younger citizens by their name. Noman anfwering to his name, the multitude whichftood round, like a general afiembly, declared, that'' the commons could be no longer deceived; that"not a fingle foldier mould be raifed, until the pub-'c lie engagements were fulfilled. That every man'' muft have his liberty reftored, before arms were"put into his hands, that the people might be con-"vinced they were to fight for their country and"fellow-citizens, not for their mafters." The con­fuls faw clearly enough what the fenate expectedfrom them; but of thofe who fpoke with the greateftvehemence within the walls of the fenate-houfe, notone was prefent to mare the odium of the proceed­ing; and every thing threatened a defperate conteftwith the commons; they refolved therefore, beforethey fhould proceed to extremities, to confult thefenate again: the confequence of which was, that allthe younger fenators rufhed up haftily to the featsof the confuls, defiring them to abdicate the conful-Jhip, and lay down a command which they wantedfpirit to fupport,
XXIX. HAVING made fufficient trial of the dif-pofitions of both fides, the confuls at length fpoke -
out:







OCR Output








324 THE HISTORY


BOOK" Valcrii and Horatii for confuls, who would poft-t.» A".! __." pone their own intereft to the liberty of the com-Y.R. 306. " mons." By a concurrence of circumftances, for-B.c. 446. tunate at the juncture, the office of prefiding at theelection fell mof t luckily to the lot of Marcus Duili-us, a man of prudence, and who clearly perceivedwhat a heavy load of public difpleafure they wouldprobably have to fuftain, if they fhould be continuedin office. He declared, that he would admit no votefor any of the former tribunes; while his colleaguesftrenuoufly infifted, that he fhould leave the tribes atliberty to vote as they thought proper; or elfe,fhould give up his turn of prefiding ro his colleagues,who would hold the election, according to the laws,rather than according to the pleafure of the patri-•cians. Duilius, on finding a conteft thus forced up­on him, called the con fills to his feat, and afkedthem what was their intention with refpect to theelection of confuls? To which they anfwered, thatthey intended to appoint new confuls. Having thusgained popular fupporters of his unpopular meafure,he advanced together with them into the afiembly.The confuls being there produced before the peo­ple, and afked, in what manner they would act, mouldthe Roman people, out of gratitude for having, bytheir means, recovered their liberty, and for their me­ritorious and fuccefsful fervices in war, appoint thema fecond time to the confulfhip, declared the famerefolution as before. On which, after many eulogi-ums paid to the confuls, for perfevering in a' line ofconduct quite different from that of the decemvirs,he proceeded to the election j and when five tribunesof the commons were elected, the other candidatesnot being able to make up the reqaifite number oftribes, on account of the eagernefs with which thenine tribunes openly pufhed for the office, he dif-mified the afiembly, and did not calt one afterwardsfor an election. He faid, that he had fulfilled thelaw; which, without any where fpecifying the num­ber







OCR Output








9 THE HISTORY


BOOK fhey might build a town ; being ftruck with admira­tion of that renowned people and their chief, and oftheir fpirit, prepared alike for war or peace, he gavehim his right hand, and by that pledge aflTured himof his future friendfhip.; A league was then ftruckbetween the leaders, and mutual falutations pafiedbetween the armies. Latinus entertained JEncas inhis palace ,;and there, in the prefence of his houfeholdgods, added a domeftic alliance to their public one,giving him his daughter in marriage. This eventfully confirmed the hopes of the Trojans, that here,at laft, they were to find an end of their wanderings,in a fixed and permanent fettlement. They built atown, which JEnezs called Lavinium, from the nameof his wife. |In a fhort time after, his new confortbore him a fon, who was named by his parentsAfcanius.
II. THE Aborigines, in conjunction with theTrojans, foon found themfelves engaged in a war.Turnus, king of the Rutulians, to whom Laviniahad been affianced before the arrival of ^Eneas, en­raged at feeing a ftranger preferred to him, declaredwar againft both .ffineas and Latinus. A battle thatenfued gave neither army reafon to rejoice. TheRutulians were defeated, and the victorious Abori­gines and Trojans loft their leader Latinus. Where­upon Turnus and the Rutulians, diffident of theirftrcngth, had recourfe to the flourifhing ftate of theEtrurians, and their king Mezentius, who held hiscourt at Caere, at that rime an opulent city. Hehad been, from the beginning, not at all pleafed atthe foundation of the new city; and now began tothink that the Trojan power was increafing to a de­gree inconfiftent with the fafety of the neighbouringftates; and therefore, without reluctance, concludedan alliance, and joined his forces with thofe of theRutulians. JEne&s, with the view of conciliatingthe affection of the Aborigines, that he might be
the







OCR Output








36z THEHISTORY


* *ivO K Port'on Of f°Od; inflicted cenfures on the dealers
'_,_T.l._, in corn, and expofed them to the rage of the people;
Y.R. 315. and this ftrict fcrutiny ferved rather to make known
B.c.437. t^e greatnefs of the fcarcity, than to remedy it.
So that many of the commons abandoning them-
felves to defpair, rather than drag on their lives irt
torment, covered their heads, and threw themfelves
into the Tiber.
XIII. WHILE things were in this fituation, Spuri-us Maelius, a man of equeftrian rank, and poflcflVdof extraordinary wealth, for thofe times, engaged ina plan, which though ufcful for the preftnt, was per­nicious in its tendency; and was in fact fuggefted bydefigns ftill more pernicious: for having by means ofhis connexions and dependents bought in a quantityof corn from Etruria, (which very proceeding, Ifuppofe, obftructed the endeavours of the magiftratesto lower the price of provifions,) he began the prac­tice of beftowing largefies of corn; and, havinggained the hearts of the commons by this munifi­cence, became now the object of general attention;afluming thence a degree of conlequence, beyondwhat belonged to a private citizen, wherever hewent, he drew them after him in crowds; and they,by the favour which they exprefied towards him,.encouraged him to hope for the confulfhip, with acertain profpect of fuccefs. As men's defires arenever fatiated, while fortune gives room to hope formore, he began to aim at higher and lefs juftifiableobjects. And fince, even the confulmip muft be ob­tained by violent efforts, in oppofition to the incli­nations of the patricians, he directed his views to re­gal power; that, he thought, was the only prize wor­thy the grandeur of his views, and, of a conteft, at­tended with fuch difficulties as would coft infinitelabour to furmount. The election of confuls drew. nigh; and the circumftance of its coming on beforehis fchcmes were fufficiently digefted, and ripe for
execution,







OCR Output








O F R O M E. 259


 


content to fubmit to the penalty, if they fliould failBin proof. And as he did not dare to ftand the trial, ^all thefe circumftances concurring together, made Y.R. 195.people entertain no more doubt of the condemnation B.c'«7.of VoHcius, than they had of Caefo's, after Volfciushad given his teftimony. The bufinefs, however,was put a ftop to by the tribunes, who declared, thatthey would not fuffcr the quaeftors to hold an afiem-bly on the bufinefs of the profecution, until one wasfirft held on that of the law; and thus both affairswere deferred to the arrival of the confuls. Whenthefe entered the city in triumph, with their victo­rious army, filence being obferved with refpect tothe law, people from thence imagined that the tri­bunes were ttruck with fear; but they, dire&ingtheir views to the tribunefhip, for the fourth time,it being now the latter end of the year, had changedthe direction of their efforts, from the promoting ofthe law, to canvaffing for the election. And al­though the confuls ftruggled againft the continuingof that office in the fame hands, with no lefs earneft-nefs than if the act had been propofed for the purpofeof lefiening their own dignity, yet the tribunes gotthe better in the conteft. The fame year, on theirpetition, peace was granted to the ^Equans. Thefurvey which had been begun in the former year,was now finifhed, and the luftrum clofed, which was •
the tribes, five out of each tribe; and the prxtor, according to theimportance or the difficulty of the caufe in difputc, appointed one ormore of them to try it. This office was, at firft, confined to the fe-nalors; but was, afterward*, transferred to the knights; and was, atdifferent times, held fometimes, by one of thtfe bodies, fometimes bytin: other, and fometimes, in cummon between them both. The ufualmethod of proceeding was this; the plaintiff either named the judge,before whom he rummoned the defendant to appear, which was termed'ferre judicem;' or he left the nomination to the defendant, ' ut ju-• dicemdiceret,'and when they had agreed on the judge, 'quum judicem'conveniflet,' they prefented a joint petition to the prretor, prayingthat he would appoint, ' ut daret," that pcrlbn to try the caufc; and,at the fame uiia, they bound themfelvet to pay a certain fum of mo­ney, the plaintiff, ' ni ita effet,' if he fhouid not eftablilh hit charge jthe defendant, if he fhould not acquit himfelf.
s a the







OCR Output








OF ROME.


additional authority and dignity on the office Itfelf. B O OAnd, on the other fide, the tribunes, looking on the i 1employment rather as neceflary, which was the cafe Y.R. 31at the time, than as attended with any extraordinary B.c. **luftre, did not choofe to oppofe it, left they fhouldfeem, through perverfenefs, to carry on their oppo-fition even in trifles. The leading men in the ftate/hewing a diflike of the office, the people by theirfuffrages conferred the employment of performingthe cenfus on Papirius and Sempronius, the perfonswhofe confulate is doubted, in order to.recompenccthem, by that office, for having enjoyed the conful-fhip only for a part of the ufual period. From thebufinefs of their office they were called Cenfors.
IX. DURING thefe tranfactions at Rome, ambaf-fadors came from Ardea, imploring, in regard of thealliance fubfifting between them from the earliefttimes, and of the treaty lately renewed, relief fortheir city, now on the brink of ruin. For the peacewith Rome, which they had, by the foundef t policy,preferved, they were prevented from enjoying by in-leftine war, the caufe and origin of which is faid tohave arifen from a.ftruggle between factions, whichhave proved, and will ever continue to prove, a moredeadly caufe of downfall to moft ftates, than either i
foreign wars, or famine, or peftilence, or any other ofthofe evils, which men are apt to confider as the fe-vereft of public calamities, and the effects of the di­vine vengeance. Two ydung men courted a maidenof a plebeian family, highly diftinguifaed for beauty:one of them on a level with the maid, in point ofbirth, and favoured by her guardians, who were them-felves of the fame rank; the other of noble birth,captivated merely by her beauty. The pretenfionsof the latter were fupported by the intereft of thenobles, which proved the means of introducing partydifputes into the damfel's family; for the nobleman'swifhes were feconded by her mother, who was am-A A 2 bilious







OCR Output








494 THEHISTORY


o <
V.


BOOK Virginius, and Quintus Pomponius, plebeian tribunes


of the two preceding years, whom the fenate wasY.R. 361. bound in honour to defend with the joint exertionsB. C. 390. of all the patricians: for no one laid any other charge
againft them, with refpecl either to their conduct inlife, or their behaViour in office, than that, to grati­fy the patricians, they had protefted againft the lawpropofed by the tribunes. However, the refentmentof the commons overpowered the influence of thefenate, and by a fentence, of moft pernicious example,thofe men, convicted of no crime, were condemnedto pay a fine of ten thoufand afes in weight *. Thishighly incenfed the patricians: Camillus openly re­proached the commons with violating the duty whichthey owed to their own order, telling them, that"while they thus vented their fpleen on their own'' magiftrates, they did not perceive that by their'c iniquitous fentence againft the tribunes they had"abolifhedthe privilege ofprotefting, and by taking"away that privilege, had overturned the tribunitian"power. For they were much miftaken if they'' imagined, that the patricians would endure the un-"bridled licentioufnefs of that office. If tribunitian"violence could not be repelled by tribunitian aid,"the patricians would find out a weapon of fome"other kind. He cenfured the confuls alfo, for"filently fuffering thofe tribunes, who had complied"with the directions of the fenate, to be difappoint-t' ed in their reliance on the faith of the public."By fuch difcourfes, uttered in public, he exafperatedpeople daily more and more againft him.
XXX. As to the fenate, he never ceafed urgingthem to a vigorous oppofition to the pafilng of thelaw j exhorting them, that, " when the day arrived"on which it was to be put to the vote, they fbould"go down to the Forum with no other fentiments
* jtl. st. iod.
C' than







OCR Output








O f R O M E. 249


"figrjs that lurked under the law propofed by the BOOK"tribunes, mindful of his anceftors, mindful of his , _I_^"furname, by which, attention to promote the inte- Y.R."reft of the people was handed down to him, as an Bi t<.•c inheritance from his anceftors, he would give no"obftruction to the afiernbly of the people." Ledby him, notwithftanding that the tribunes in vaincried out loudly againft it, they directed their marchup the fteep of the Capitol. They were joined bythe troops of Tufculum; and citizens and allies viedwith each other, for the glory of recovering the ci­tadel; each leader encouraging his own men. The-,enemy, on this, were greatly terrified, having no reli­ance on any thing but the ftrength of the place;and while they were thus difconcerted, the Romansand allies pufhed forward to the aflault. They hadalready broken into the porch of the temple, whenPublius Valerius leading on the attack, was flain, atthe head of his men. Publius Volumnius, formerlyconful, faw him fall, and charging thofe about himto cover the body, Turned forward to take the placeand the office of the conful. The ardour and ea-gernefs of the foldiers were fuch, as hindered theirperceiving fo great a lofs, and they gained thevictory, before they knew that they were fightingwithout their leader. Many of the exiles defiled thetemple with their blood, many were taken alive;Herdonius was flain. Thus was the Capitol reco­vered. Punifhments were inflicted on the prifoners,fuitable to their feveral conditions either of freemenor flaves. Thanks were given to the Tufcuhns.The Capitol was cleanfed and purified. It is iaid,that the plebeians threw into the conful's houfe a<|uadrans each, that his funeral might be folemnizedwith the greater fplendour.
XIX. PEACE being re.eftablimed, the tribunesearneftly preffed the fenate to fulfil the promife ofPublius Valerius, and prefied Claudius to acquit the
fhade







OCR Output








THE HISTORY


 


XXVII. THE peace with Alba was not oflongcontinuance. The diflatisfaction of the multitude,on account of the power and fortune of the ftatchaving been hazarded on three champions, pervert­ed the unfteady mind of the dictator; and as hisdefigns, though honourable, had not been crownedwith fuccefs, he endeavoured, by others of a differ­ent kind, to recover the efteem of his countrymen.With this view, therefore, as formerly, in time of war,he had fought peace, fo now, when peace was efta-blifhed, he as ardently wifhed for' war: but, perceiv­ing that his own ftate pofiefied more courage thanftrength, he perfuaded other nations to make war,openly, by order of their governments, referving tohis own people, the part of effecting their purpofes,by treachery, under the mafk of allies. The Fide-natians, a Roman colony, being aflured of the con­currence of the Veientians, and receiving from theAlbans a pofitive engagement to defert to their fide,were prevailed on to take arms and declare war.Fidenae having thus openly revolted, Tullus, afterfummoning Mettius and his army from Alba, march­ed againft the enemy, and pafling the Anio, pitchedhis camp at the conflux of the rivers. Between thatplace, and Fidenae, the Veientians had crofied theTiber, and, in the line of battle, they compofed theright wing near the river, the Fidenatians being poft-ed on the left towards the mountains. Tullus drewup his own men facing the Veientians, and poftedthe Albans oppofite to the troops of the Fidenati­ans. The Alban had not more refolution than fide­lity, fo that, not daring either to keep his ground,or openly to defert, he filed off flowly toward themountains. When he thought he had proceeded toa fufficient diftance, he ordered the whole line tohalt, and being ftill irrefolute, in order to wafte time,he employed himfelf in forming the ranks: hisfcheme was to join his forces to whichever of theparties fortune fhould favour with vidlory. At firft,
the







OCR Output








THEHISTORY


BOOK with extraordinary fiicccfs; for on the road, through. -*-_f which he knew they were to come, he attackedY.R. a8?. them, while they were heavy kden with booty, whichB.C.463. fo embarrafied their motions, as to render themunfit for action, and took fevere revenge for thedevaluations which they had committed. His planfucceeded fo effectually, that few made their efcape,and the whole of the booty was recovered. On thisthe conful Quintius returned to the city, and put anend to the ceflation of bufinefs, when it had conti­nued four days. The general furvey was then held,and the luftrum was clofed by Quintius *: the num­ber of citizens rated in the furvey, was one hundredand twenty.four thoufand, two hundred and fourteen,befides the orphans of both lexes. Nothing memo­rable pafled afterwards in the country of the ^Equans:they took fhcker in their towns, abandoning theireffects to fire and devaftation. The conful, afterhaving repeatedly carried hoftilities and depreda­tions through every part of the enemy's country,returned to Rome, with great glory, and abundanceof fpoil.
Y.R. 190. IV. THE next confuls were Aulus PoftumiusB.C.46*. Albus and Spurius Furius Fufus. The Furii, fomewriters have called Fufii: this I mention as a cau­tion, left any fhould think there was a difference inthe perfons, when it is only in the names. Therewas no doubt entertained, but that one of the confuls•would march an army againft the Jliquans; thefe
* The luftrum was a period of five yean, at the expiration ofwhich a general review of the people was held, and their number, ftateand cireuinftances enquired into. The fenate alfo was reviewed byone of the cenfors: and if any one, by his behaviour, had renderedhimfelf unworthy of a place in that body, or had funk his fortune be­low the requifite qualification, his name was pafted over by the cenfor,in reading the roll of fenators; and, thus, he was held to be excludedfrom the fenate. When the bufinefs was done, the cenfor, to whofelot it fell, an'iidit luflrua, clofed the lultrum, by offering a Jblemn fa-crifice in the Campus Martius.
c therefore







OCR Output








O F R O M E. 37


greater number of kings would refcmble Romulus, BOOKrather than Numa, and would go abroad themfelves.to war; therefore, left the facred rites, the per­formance of which pertained to the office of theIking, mould be neglected, he created a flamen ofJove, who was to attend conftantly on the duties ofthat priefthood, and decorated him with a fplendid<lrefs, and a royal curule chair. He created like-wife two other flamens; one of Mars, the other ofQuirinus. He alfo felected virgins for the ferviceof Vefta, an order of priefthood derived from Alba,and therefore related, in fome fort, to the family ofthe founder of the city. For thefe he fixed a fti-pend, to be paid out of the public treafury, thatthey might, without interruption, attend to the bufi-iiefs of the temple; and by enjoining virginity, andother religious cbferyances, gave them a fanctity of.character thatattract.ed.veneration. He elected alfotwelve priefts, called falii, for Mars Gradiyus; andgave them, as an ornament of diftinftion, a floweredtunic, and, over the tunic, a brazen covering for thebreath He ordered rhefe to carry the celeftial ar­mour, called Ancilia, and to go in proceffionthrough rhe city, finging hymns, with leaping andlolemn dancing. He then chofe, out of the fenators,a pontiff, named Numa Marcius, fon of Marcus,and gave him a written and fealed copy of the infti-tutions refpecting all the facred rites, together withdirections with what victims, on what days, in whattemples, each mould be performed; and out ofwhat funds thp expencesofthem mould be defrayed.He alfo fubjected all other religious performances,whether public or private, to the determination ofthe pontiff; in order that there mould be a certainperfon to whom the people might, on every occa-fion, refort for directions, left, through their ne-


gins, and the falii, mentioned in this chapter, fee the fame learnedwork, which may bs conddered as a perpetual commentary upon theRoman hiftoriaiu, in general, and Liry, in particular.







OCR Output








THEHISTORY


BOOK" feftly difplayed at this time in favour of the Ro-^_ - L_ . " man affairs, that I fhould think all difpofition to>yjL 365. " be negligent in paying due honour to the gods ef-U.C. 3*7. « fectually removed from the minds of men. For,'' take a review of the tranfacctions of thefe latter"years, in order, whether profperous or adverfe,"and ye will find that in every inftance profperity"conmintly attended obedience to the gods, and"adverfity the neglect of them. To begin with the"war of Veil: for what a number of years, and'' with what an immennty of labour, was it carried"on? Yet it could not be brought to a conclu-"fion, until, in obedience to the admonition of the"gods, the water was difcharge<l from the Alban"lake: what! did this unparalleled train of mif-"fortunes, which ruined our city, commence until"the voice feut from heaven, concerning the ap-"proach of the Gauls, had been treated with ne-"glect; until the laws of nations had been violated"by our ambaffadors; and until we, with the fame"difregard .to the gods, pafied over that crime"w.hich we were bound to punifh? Vanquifhed,"therefore, made captives, and ranfomed, we have"fuffered fuch punifhments at the hands of gods"and men, as render us a warning to the whole"world. After this, our misfortunes .again re-•' minded us of our duty to the gods. We fled for"refuge to the gods into the Capitol, to the manfion"of Jupiter, fupremely good and great. The fa-"cred utenfils, amidft the ruin of our own pro-"perries, we partly Concealed in the earth, partly"conveyed out of the enemy's fight, to the neigh-"bouring cities. Abandoned by gods and men,"yet we did not intermit the worfhip of the gods*"The confequence was, they reftored us to our*c country, to victory, and to our former renown in'' war, which we had forfeited; and, on the heads'' of the enemy, who, blinded by avarice, broke"the faith, of a treaty in reipect to the weight of
"the







OCR Output








22 THEHISTORT


BOOK been only two inftances of the grand fpoils being otr*tained; fo rare was the attainment of that highhonour.
XI. WHILE the Romans were there employed inthis manner, the army of the Antemnatians, takingadvantage of the opportunity which the country be­ing left without troops afforded them, made an hof-tile incurfion into the Roman territories; whereupona Roman legion*, haftily led out againft them, fur-pvife them, while they firaggled through the coun­try. They were routed therefore at the firft onletand fhout, and their town was taken. J While Ro­mulus exulted in this lecond victory, his confort,Herfilia, teafed by the intreaties of the ravifhed wo­men, earneftly petitioned him that he would fhewfavour to their parents, and admit them into thenumber ot his citizens, a meafurt which could notfail of forming an union fatisfactory to all parties.Thisrcqudl was eafily obtained. He then marchedagainft the Crulhiminians, who were carrying onhoftiiities: with thefe he had ftill leis trouble, be-caufe they had been difpirited by the defeats of theirallies. Colonies were lent to both places, butgreater numbers were found willing to give in theirnames for Cruftuminum, on account of the fertilityof the foil. There were frequent migrations alfofrom thole countries to Rome, chiefly of the parentsY. R. and relations of the ravifhed women. The laft war,on.this occafion, was begun by the Sabines; and itwas by far the moft formidable, for none of theiroperatiens were directed by rage or pafllon, nor didthey dilclofe their intentions until they began to act'.Tliey employed ftratagem too, in aid of prudence.
i
* So en!led from Icgf re, to choofV, lo felrfl. Thelfgion cortfflcJ,at this tune, of 3000 toot and 500 hoilc. The nuinl,ei afterwariltwas gcreially 4000 fuot ami 300 horle; and lomelitnts angmentcd to6000 toot and 400 hoilc. It was divided into ic cohuili, 30 com­paines, and. 60 ccmuiit'.
The







OCR Output








O F R O M E. 527


being attended by the whole body of the fenate, he BOOKmounted the tribunal, and fpoke to this effect. . _^ _j
Y.R. 365.
LI. "ROMANS, fo ftrong is my averfion to hold- B.c. 387'"ing contentions with the tribunes of the people,"that, while I refided at Ardea, I had no other con-"folation in my melancholy exile than that I was at"a diftance from fuch contefts; and alfo, on ac-"count of thofe difputes, I was fully determined"never to return, even though ye fhould recall me"by a decree of fenate and order of the people."Nor was it any change of my fentiments, which"had power to prevail on me now to return, but"the fituation of your affairs. For the point in"queftion was, not whether I mould refide in my"native country, but whether that country itfelf"mould remain in its own eftablifhed feat? And"on the prefent occafion moft willingly would I"remain filent, and decline taking any part, did"not this ftruggle alfo affect the elTential interefts"of my country j to be wanting to which, as long"as life remains, were bafe in others, in Camillus"infamous. For to what purpofe have we at-"tempted its recovery? Why have we refcued it"out of the hands of the enemy who befieged it?"If, after it has been recovered, we voluntarily de-"fert it; and if, notwithftanding that the Capitol"and citadel ftill continued to be held and inhabitedct by the gods and the natives of Rome, even when"the Gauls were victorious, and in pofieffionof the • ."whole city; yet now that the Romans are viiftori-." ous, and the city has been recovered; that Ca-"pitol and citadel fhould be deferted along with"the reft, and our profperity become the caufc of"greater defolation to this city, than our adverfity"was? In truth, if we had no religious inftimtions"which were founded together with the city, and"regularly handed down from one generation to -."another; yet the divine power has been fo mani-
"feftly







OCR Output








O F R O M E. 473


"any of their young men chofe to go to that war, BOOK"they would not hinder them." The arrival of ,__Tl_jthefe was announced at Rome, as of a formidable Y.R. 358.number of enemies; and, through the apprehenfions B. cwhich this excited for the public fafety, the violenceof their inteftine quarrels of courfe began to fub*fide.
XVIII. WITHOUT caufing any difpleafure to thepatricians, the prerogative tribe *, at the elecction,chofe for military tribune Publius Licinius Calvus,although he had not declared himfelf a candidate; thishonour was done him, becaufe in his former admini-ftration he had approved himfeif a man of modera­tion; but he was now far declined in extreme oldage. It was obferved, that thofe who had been hiscolleagues, in that year, were re-elected in order;Lucius Titinius, Publius Maenius, Publius Maelius,Cneius Genutius and Lucius Atilius. Before tiiefewere proclaimed to the tribes, who were to vote in theordinary courfe, Publius Licinius Calvus, with per-miffion of the interrex, fpoke to this effect: "I con-"fider it, Romans, as an omen of concord, a thing'c efientially requifite to the ftate, at the prefent"juncture, that, from the remembrance of our for-"mer adminiftration, ye are defirous of re.electing"the fame colleagues, improved by experience."As to me, ye no longer fee me, the fame, but the"fhadow and the name of Publius Licinius. The"powers of my body are decayed, my fenfes of"fight and hearing are grown dull, my memory"faulters, and the vigour of my mind is blunted,"Behold here a youth," purfued he, holding his
• The prerogative tribe was that to which the lot fell to vote firft,at the election of magiftrates. Anciently, the cepturies were called togive their votes according to the order eftablifhed among them by Ser-viiu Tullius, firlt, the ' eqiiites,' then the centuries of the firft clad,tec. It was afterwarcit (at what time is not known) determined byJpt ' fortitio' in what order they fhoukl vote.
fon,







OCR Output








4* THE HISTORY


o o K arifing from it, led out his troops into the field,. the, Albans likewife marched out to meet him. Whenboth parties were drawn up in order of battle, theleaders, attended by a few of the principal officers,advanced into the middle fps.cc, where the Albanbegan thus: "I urukrftood, from our king Clu-*' ilius, that, on our part, injuries fuftained, and a re-"fufal of fatisfadlon, when demanded, were the'" caufes of the prelent war j and I doubt not that"you, Tullus, allege, op your part, the lame grounds"of quarrel: but if, inftead of plaufible profcffions,«' I may be allowed to declare the truth, it is a third'•" for dominion' that ftimulates two nations, con-"nected by their fituation, and by confanguinity,"to take up arms againft each other. Nor do I"examine whether the meafures purfued are juf-"tifiable or not; the determination of that point'' was the bufinefs of him who commenced the war;"for my parr, it was for the purpofe of carrying it"on, that the Albans conftituted me their leader."Of this, however, Tulius, I wifh to svarn you;"what a formidable power the Etrurians pofiefs,"both in our neighbourhood and more efpecially in"yours, you, as being nearer to them, know bet-"ter than we. On land, they are very powerful; on"the fea, exceedingly fo. Now confider, that,"when you fhall give the fignal for battle, they"will enjoy the fight of thefe two armies engaged'' as they would a fhow, and will not fail to attack"both the victor and the van'quilhed together,"when they fee them fatigued, and their ftrength"exhaufted. Wherefore, fince we are not content"with the certain enjoyment of liberty, but are go-"ing to hazard an uncertain caft for dominion or"fhvery, let us, in the name of the gods, purfue'' fome method, whereby, without great lofs, with-"out much blood of either nation, it may be de-"cided which fhall have dominion over the other."This propofal was not unpleafmg to Tullus, though,both from his natural difpofuion, and from confidence


13 of







OCR Output








i9 T H E H I S T O R Y


BOOK and offering battle, in an irregular and infultingmart.'ner, he drew the enemy out of the town, which wasthe point that he aimed at. The cavalry, acting inthis manner, anfwered allb another purpofe, as itafforded a more fpecious pretext for the retreat,which he was to counterfeit; and when the foot toobegan to retire, while the horfe feemed irrefolute,whether to fight or fly, the enemy rufhirrg fudden-ly out of the gates in crouds, eager to purfue andprefs on the Roman army in its retreat, were drawnto the place of the ambufcade; and then the Ro­mans, rifing fuddenly, attacked their line in flank;at the fame time, the enfigns of thofe who had beenleft to guard the camp, advancing from thence,added to their fears. Difmayed at fuch a numberof dangers, the Fidenatians turned their backs, be­fore Romulus, and the horfemen with him, dould wellturn their horfes about to purfue them. T'hus' they,who had lately purfued an enemy, who only pre­tended to fly, now fied themfclves in earneft, withmuch greater hafte, back to the city: but theycould not get clear of the enemy; the Romansfticking clofe to their rear, broke in along withthem, as if in one body, before the gates could befhut againft them.
XV. THE contagion of the Fidenatian war in­fected the Veientisns j who, led by the relationfhipfubfifting between them and the Fidenatians, forthefe alfo were Etrurians, and urged on befide bythe confideration of vicinity of fituation, in cafe theRoman arms were to be turned againft all theirneighbours, made an excurfion into the Roman ter­ritories, in the manner of a predatory, rather thanof a regular, war; and thus, without encamping orwaiting the approach of the enemy's army, they re­turned to Veii, carrying home the fpoil colkcted inthe country. On the other fide, the Roman com­mander, not finding the enemy in the country, and


oung







OCR Output








THE HISTORY, Sec.


 


a matter in difputc, whereon they were to decide__ as judges. Elpecially when, as the cafe ftood,Y.K, 309. " although it were allowable for a judge to fhew re-B.c. 44.3. tt gard to nis own emolument, yet the utmoft ad-"vantage that could accrue from the feizure of the"lands, would by no means counterbalance the lofs"which they muft fuftain in the alienation of the'" affections of the allies, by fuch an act of injuftice:"for the lofs of reputation and the efteem of man-"kind are of importance beyond what can be efti-"mated. Muft the deputies carry home this ac-"count? Muft this be made known to the world?*' Muft the allies, muft the enemy hear this? What"grief would it give to the former, what joy to the"latter! Did they imagine, that the neighbouring"ftates would impute this proceeding to Scaptius,"an old bablcr in the afiemblies? This indeed"would fcrve, inftead of a ftatue, to dignify the"Scaptian name; but the Roman people would in-'' cur the imputation of corrupt chicanery and frau-"dulent ufurpation of the claims of others. For"what judge, in a caufe between private perfons,"ever acted in this manner, adjudging to himfelf-" the property in difpute? Surely, even Scaptius"himfelf, dead as he was to all fenfe of fhame,"would not act in fuch a manner." Thus theconfuls, thus the fenators exclajmed; but covet-ouihefs, and Scaptius, the inftigator of that covet-oufnefs, had greater influence. The tribes be­ing called, gave their judgment: that the land inqueftion was the property of the Roman people. Itis not denied, that it might with juftice have been fodetermined, had the matter been tried before otherjudges: but, as the affair was circumftanced, the in­famy of the fentence was in no degree lefiened bythe equity of their title; nor did it appear to theAricians and Ardeans themfelves in more fcandalousand provoking colours than it did to the Roman fe-nate. The remainder of the year pafied without anycommotion either at home or abroad.







OCR Output








THE HISTORY


 


5n any other place than the Capitol. What dial!_ I fay of the eternal fire of Vefta; and of theY.R. 365. " ftatue, that pledge of empire, which iskept underB.C. 387." the fafeguard of her temple? What, O Mars"Gradivus, and thou, father Quirinus, ofthyAn-"cilia *? Is it right that thofe facred things, coeval"with the city, nay fome of them more ancient"than the origin of the city itfelf, fbould all be'c abandoned to profanation? Now, obferve the"difference between us and our anceftors. They'' handed down to us certain facred rites to be per-'' formed on the Alban, and on the Lavinian mounts."Was it then deemed offenfive to the gods, that"facred rites fbould be brought to us to Rome,''• from cities of our enemies; and fhall we, with-"out impiety, remove them from hence to an"enemy's city, to Veii? Recollect, I befeech you,"how often facred rites" are performed anew, becauffc"fome particular ceremony of our country has been"omitted through negligence or accident. In a'' late inftanee, what other matter, after the prodigy"of the Alban lake, proved a remedy for the dif-"trefies brought on the commonwealth by the"war of Veii, but the repetition of the facred rites,"and the renewal of the aufpices? But befides, as'' if zealoufiy attached to our old religious inftitu-** tions, vie have both tranfported foreign deities"to Rome, and have inftituted new ones. It was'' but the other day that imperial Juno was removed(t hither from Veii; and with what a crowded at-1' tendance was the day of her dedication on the'' Aventine celebrated? And how was it diftin-1c guifhedby the extraordinary zeal of the matrons?
* Ancile, 9 ftielJ, fupjwftd to l,e of the goJ Mar?, faid to havefallen from heaven in the reign pf Niima. It was repolited in thefanftuary, apd kelit with giea't care by tfce pricfts of Mars, calledSalii. Being ccntidered ,ns a I'ymbol ot the perpetual duration of thermpne, to jut.vent ,is being ttulen, eleveii cilhci* weie marie, exactlyrcieinbling it, and luiil upwitli it.
"We







OCR Output








".•OF ROME. • 163


lively courage, who was afterwards furnamed Corlo- BOOKlanus: the Roman army, while engaged in the fiege . *-.'-_fof Corioli, applying their whole attention to the gar- Y.R. a6i.rifon, which they kept fhut up in the town, without B.c. +91•any fear of an attack from without, were affaulted ona fudden, by the Volfcian legions, who had marchedthither from Antium, and at the fame time the ene­my fallied out from the town: Marcius happened tobe then on guard, and being fupported by a chofenbody of men, he not only repelled the attack of theparty who had fallied out of the town, but broke infurioufly through the open gate; and, putting all tothe fword, in that part of the city, laid hold of the .firft fire which he found, and threw it on the houfesadjoining the wall; on which the fhouts of the towns­men mingling with the cries of the women and chil­dren, occafioned by the firft fright, ferved both to addcourage to the Romans, and to difpirit the VolfcianS;as they perceived that the town was taken whichthey had come to relieve. By this means the Vol-fcians of Antium were defeated, and the town of Co­rioli taken; and fo entirely did the glory of Mareiuseclipfe the fame of the conful, that, were it not thatthe treaty with the Latines, being engraved on abrazen pillar, remained to teftify that it was ratifiedby Spurius Caffius alone, the other conful beingabfent, it would not have been remembered thatPoftumus Cominius conduced the war againft theVolfcians. This year died Menenius Agrippa, aman through the whole courfe of his life equallybeloved by the patricians and the plebeians; and,after the feceffion, ft'tll more endeared to the latter.This man, who, in the character of mediator and um­pire, had re-eftablifhed concord among his country­men, the ambaffador of the fenate to the plebeians,the perfon who brought back the Roman commonsto the city, was not pofiefled of property fufficientfor the expence of a funeral. He was buried at thet'__. M 2, charge







OCR Output








THE HISTORY


BOOK ftand at the Colline gate, until the enemy fhouldJLV^ . pafs by, and then to take poft in their rear; fo as toY.R. 146. cut off their retreat to the river: the other conful,B.C. jo«. Titus Lucretius, with fome companies of foot,marched out of the Naevian gate; Valerius himfelfled down his chofen cohorts from the Coelian mount,and thefe were the firft who were obferved by theenemy. Herminius, as foon as he found that thealarm was taken, rumed out from his arnbuth, totake his fhare in the fray, and while the Etrurianswere bufied in forming an oppofition to Valerius,fell upon their rear: the fhout was returned, bothfrom the right and from the left; from the Collinegate on one hand, and the Naevian on the other.The plunderers being thus furrounded, deftitute offtrength to make head againft their adverfaries, andJhut out from all poflibility of a retreat, were cut topieces. After this the Etrurians confined their ra­vages to narrower limits.
XII. THE fiege continued notwithftanding, andprovifions becoming exceedingly fcarce and dear,Porfena entertained hopes, that, by remaining quietin his prefent pofition, he fhould become mafter ofthe city; when Caius Mucius, a noble youth, filledwith indignation on reflecting that the Roman peo­ple, while they were in bondage under their kings,were never in any war befieged by any enemy, andthat the fame people, now in a ftate of freedom,were held befieged, by thofe very Etrurians, whofearmies they had often routed, refolved therefore, byfome great and daring effort, to remove fuch re­proach. At firft he defigned to make his way intothe enemy's camp, without communicating his in­tention; but afterwards, dreading, left, if he fhouldgo without the order of the confuls, and the know­ledge of any, he might be apprehended by the Ro­man guards, and brought back as a deferter, an• imputation for which the prefcnt circumftances of
the







OCR Output








OF ROME. 753


t
*' arms, at the lake Regillus." The tribunes then BOOKbegan to cavil, and alleged, that " the people were , -r- •"abfolved of that obligation, becaufe Quintius was Y.R. 194."in a private ftation, at the time when the oath B.c. 45*•"was taken." But that difregard of the gods,which prevails in the prefent age, had not thentaken place; nor did every one, by his own inter­pretations, accommodate oaths, and the laws, to hisparticular views, but rather adapted his practice tothem. The tribunes, therefore, nnding no hope offucceeding in their oppofition, on that ground, en­deavoured to delay the marching of the troops; andin this they were the more earneft, becaufe a reporthad fpread, that orders had been given for the au­gurs alfo to attend at the lake Regillus, and that aplace mould be coniecrated by augury, in which thepeople might tranfact buQnefs with the benefit ofaufpices, in order that any meafures enacted at Romethrough means of the violence of the tribunes, mightbe repealed in an affembly held there. Eve.ry one,it was faid, would vote there, juft as the confulschofe; for at any greater diftance from the city, thanthat of a mile, there was no appeal: and even mouldthe tribunes come thither, they would, among th«crowd of the other citizens, be fubject to the con-fular authority. This alarmed them. But what dif.turbed their minds with the ftrongeft apprehenfionswas, that Quintius ufed frequently to (ay, jhat " he"would not hold an election of confuls: that the'c diftemper of the ftate was not fuch as could be"ftopped by the ufual remedies: that the common-"wealth ftood in need of a dictator, in order that"any perfon who mould ftir one ftep towards raifing"disturbances in the Hate, might feel, that the"power of that magiftrate was above an appeal."
XXI. THE fenate was fitting in the Capitol; thi­ther came the tribunes, attended by the commons,(who were full of perplexity and fear: the populace,


with







OCR Output








448 THEHISTORY


B OvO K" fOrce Of a^ £'ie Greeks. At what a diftance fromi_ T' L^i " their homes! What tracts of land and fea lyingY.R. 351." between! Yet, we grumble at the fatigue of aB.C.400. " flege Qf one year's continuance, within lefs than
"twenty miles of us, alinoft within fight of our city;"becaufe, 1 fuppole, the occafion of the war is"trifling, and the ground of our quarrel not fuffi-"cient in juftice to ftimulate us to perfevere. This"is the feventh time that they have rebelled. Du-ct ring peace, they never were faithful to their en-"gagements. They have laid wafte our territories"a thoufand times. They have compelled the Fi-'c denatians to revolt from us; have murdered our'' colonifts in that diftrict; and have been the infti-"gators of the impious murder of our ambafladors,"in violation of the laws of nations: they have en-"deavoured to ftir up all Etruria againft usj and, at"this day, are bufy in the fame attempt: and fcarce-"ly did they refrain from offering violence to ouru ambaffadors who demanded fatisfaction. Againft"fuch people, ought war to be waged in a rcmifs"and dilatory manner?
V. " IF fuch juft caufes of refentment have no"weight with us, I befeech you have thefe confide-*' rations none? The city has been inclofed with"immenfe works, by which the enemy are confined"within their walls. They have not tilled their"lands; and what were tilled before, have been laid"wafte; in the courfe of the war. If we withdraw our"army, who can doubt that not only through defire"of revenge, but even through the neccifity im-'" pofed on them of plundering the property of"others, fince they have loft their own, they will€c make an invafion on our territories? By fuch"conduct therefore, we mould not defer the war,"but open it a paflage into our own frontiers. Whac"fhall we fay, as to the circumftances immediately"affecting the foldiers, of whofe interefts your wor-
"thy







OCR Output








350 THE HISTORY


 


BOOK perhaps with truth, yet unluckily, with regard to1V' the prefent difpute, "Becaufe no plebeian had thepower of talcing the aufpices; and, for that rea-"Ion the decemvirs had prohibited intermarriage,"left, from the uncertainty of men's defcent, the"aufpices might be vitiated." This, above all,kindled the indignation of the commons into a flame,when they heard it affirmed that they were not qua­lified to take aufpices, as if they were objects of theaverfion of the immortal gods. Nor did the conteftceafe, the commons being headed by a tribune ofundaunted refolution, and they themfelves vyingwith him in fteadinefs of perfeverance, until the fe-nate were at length overpowered, and gave theirconfent to the pafling of the law concerning inter­marriage; judging, that the tribunes might moftprobably be thereby induced, either to lay afide in-tirely, or to defer until the end of the war, the ftrug-gle for plebeian confuls; and that, in the mean time,the commons, fatisfied with having obtained theright of intermarriage, would be ready to enlift.On the other hand, the high degree of credit whichCanuleius had attained, by his victory over the fc-nate, and the favour of the commons, proved aftrong incentive to the other tribunes to exert theirutmoft^ efforts, in fupportof the law, which they hadpropofedj and whilft the accounts of the enemy'sproceedings grew every day more alarming, theyobftructed the enlifting of troops. The confuls,finding, that, by the continual protefts of the tri­bunes, every proceeding of the fenate was renderedabortive, held confultations at their houfes with theprincipal patricians. Here they faw their dilemma:they muft be vanquifhed, either by their enemies, orby their countrymen. The only confulars who wereprefent at their deliberations were Valerius and Ho.ratius. Caius Claudius gave his opinion, that theconfuls mould proceed againft the tribunes by forceof arms. The Quintii, both Cincinnatus and CapU4 tolinus,







OCR Output








420 THE HISTORY


 


BOOK fuS, Caius Valerius Potitus, Quintus Quintius Cirt-cinnatus, and Numerius Fabius Vibulanus were mi-litary tribunes with confular power, had not the re-ligious fcruples of their leaders deferred the militaryoperations of the Veientians, in confequence of theirlands having fuffered feverely, principally in the de-ftruction of their country-feats, by an inundation ofthe Tiber. At the fame time, the /Equans, by thelofs which they had fuftained three years before,were deterred from affording aid to the Volani, oneof the ftates of their kindred. Thefe had made in­roads on the contiguous dittrict of Lavici, and com­mitted hoftilities on the new colony: in which un-juft proceeding they had hoped to have been fup-ported by the concurrence of all the ^Equans; but,being forfaken by their confederates, without per­forming any action worth mentioning, they wereftripped, in one flight battle and a fiege, both oftheir lands and their city. An attempt made byLucius Sextius, plebeian tribune, to get a law pafiedthat a colony fhould be lent to Vote, in like man­ner as to Lavici, was crufhed by the protefts of hiscolleagues; who declared openly that they wouldnot furTer any order of the commons to be pafied,Y.R. 3.41. unlefs it were approved by the fenate. Next yearB.t.'. 4". the ,^quans, having recovered Volae, and fent acolony thither, ftrengthened the town with addi­tional fortifications, the military tribunes with con­fular power, at Rome, being Cneius Cornelius Cof-fus, Lucius Valerius Potitus, Quintus Fabius Vi­bulanus a fecond time, and Marcus PoftumiusRegillenfis. The conduft of the war with the./Equans was intrufted to the laft-mentioned, a manof a depraved mind; which, however, did not ap­pear fo much in his management of the war, as inhis behaviour after gaining fuccefs. For having,with great activity, levied an army and marched toVolae, after breaking the fpirits of the ^quans inflight engagements, he at length .forced his.way into
the







OCR Output








PREFACE. xi


Salluft, Tacitus, and others, whofe hiftoriesabound with ipeechcs. Thefe fpeeches fre­quently give a more perfect idea of the cha­racter of the fuppofed fpeaker, than could eafilyhave been done by mere defcription; and itmuft be acknowledged,' that the facts whichthey fometimes contain,and the arguments theyurge, would, if thrown into formal narrative,and, as they muft often be, or they could notbe introduced, into epifodes and digreffions,lofe much of their animation and force, andwith them, much of their grace and beauty.
When we confider the ufe thus made'of them,we (hall not perhaps feel inclined to give themup, although obliged to confider many of themas mere fictions; contrived, however,with muchingenuity, and for the laudable purpofe of con­veying ufeful refledlions and falutary admoni­tions. But though it be admitted, that manyof them are fictitious, yet it may be contendedthat they are not all fo. Many of thofe de­livered in the fenate, in popular aflemblies, inConventions of ambaflkdors, and other the likeoccafions, are moft probably genuine; and, ifthey are fo, they furnifh us with very curiousfpecimens of ancient eloquence. Many publicfpeakers among the Romans were in the habit.of publifhing their fpeeches upon particularoccafions; and others, delivered upon import­ant occurrences, would, doubtlefs, be noteddown, and circulated, by. thofe who werecurious about, and probably interefted in, thepccafions of them. We know that, in our own
times,







OCR Output








/ rtvtje^


OF ROME. / 89


 


private difcourfe. "Could any injjfance be given BOOK"of greater pride, than his trifli/g thus with the"whole nation of the Latines? &.fter their chiefs"had been brought together by his fummons, at fo"great a diftance from home, the very perfon who"called the meeting did not attend. :Hc~was cer-"tainly making trial of their patience, intending, if"they fubmitted to the yoke, to^cruJh.lJie.m, when ^ ^^"they could not refift. .For who did not fee"plainly, that he was aiming at fovereignty over"the Latines? and if his own countrymen had"reafon to be pleafed at their having entrufted"him with that power j or if, in reality, it had"been entrufted to him, and not forcibly icized on"through parricide, then the Latines ought alfo to"entruft him with it; nay, not even in that cafe,"becaufe he was' a foreigner. '15tTf^'- if''his own"countrymen repined at his government, cxpofed"as they were to murders, banifhment, and confif-"cations without end, what better profpect could"the Latines entertain ?'^f they liftened to him, they'"would depart each to his own home, and would"pay no more regard to the day of aflfembly, than"was fhewn by the perfon who appointed it."WVhilft this man, who was in his own difpofition fe-ditious and turbulent, and had by thefc means ac­quired fome degree of power at home, was ha- J. , ^ranguing in thefe terms, and others of the fame pup".*^ .fport, Tarquinius came into the afiembly. <This punan end to his difcourfe. ".Every one turned awayfrom him to falute Tarquinius, .who, being advifedby his friends to make an apology for having comeat that time of the day, when filence was made, toldthem, that "he had been chofcn arbiter between a"father and fon, and had been detained, by the"pains which he was obliged to take to bring about"a reconciliation between them; and that, as that"bufinefs had confumed the day, he would, on the"following day, lay before them what he had to
"pro-







OCR Output








THE HISTORY


BOCK their tribunate, nothing very memorable was donr
._.!,_, at Veil: the forces were wholly employed in wafting
Y.R. 357. the country: two commanders of confummate abi-
».c. 395. iit|es did nothing more than carry off vaft quantities
of f'poil, Potitus from Falerii, and Camillus from
Capena, leaving nothing undeftroyed that could be
injured either by fword or fire.
XV. IN the meantime, many prodigies were re­ported to have happened, the greater part of whichmet with little credit, and were difregarded; partly,becaufe the accounts refted on the teftimony of fingleperfons; and partly, becaufe, while they were atwar with the Etrurians, they could not procure aruf-pices to perform the expiations. One of them at­tracted univerfal attention; the lake in the Albanforeft fwelled to an unufual height, without any rainor other caufe, which could account for the fact•without a miracle. Commiflloners were lent to the. oracle at Delphi, to inquire what the gods portendedby this prodigy; but an interpreter of the will ofthe fates was thrown in their way nearer home: acertain aged Vcientian, who, rmidft the feoffs thrownout by the Roman and Etrurian foldiers, from thefuit-pofts and guards, pronounced, in the manner ofone delivering a prophefy, that " the Roman would'•" never be mafter of Veii, until the water were dif-"charged from the Alban lake." This, at firft,was difrtgarded, as thrown out at random; after­wards it became the fubject of converfation: atkngth one of the Roman foldiers on guard afked a,townfman on the neareft poft, as from the long con­tinuance of the war they had come into the practkeof converting with each other, who that perfon was,•who threw out thofe ambiguous expreflions concern­ing the Alban lake; and, on hearing that he was anarufpex, the man, 'whofe mind was not without atindture of religion, pretending that he wifhed toconfult him, if he could fpare time, on the expia­


tion







OCR Output








OF ROME. 181


would think they had been vanquifhed, retired to &O _°their camp, execrating, at one time, the general, at .'another, the exertions of the cavalry. Nor did the Y.Rgeneral lay himfelf out to find any remedy for fuch a B.c.peftilent example, fhewing by one inftance amongmany, that men ofthe moft tranfcendent abilities arcmore apt to be deficient in the art of governing theirown countrymen, than in that of conquering an ene­my. The conful returned to Rome, having reapedlittle frefh glory from the war, but having irritatedand exafperated, to a high degree, the hatred ofthefokliers againft him. The patricians, notwithftand-ing, had influence enough to continue the confulfhipin the Fabian family: they elected Marcus Fabius Y.R. -74..to that office, and Cneius Manlius was appointed his B. c.478.colleague,
XLIV. THIS year alfb produced a tribune hardy •enough to make another attempt at carrying the agra­rian law. This was Titus Pontificius, who purlucd thefame method, as if it had fucceeded, with Spurius Li-cinius, and for fome time obftructcd the levy: thepatricians being hereby again perplexed, AppiusClaud. us afierted, that " the plan adopted lait year"had effectually fubdued the tribunitian power, for"the prefent, by the very act, and, to all future"times, by the example, which it had elUblifhed .t"fince it was difcovered, how that power might be"deprived of efficacy, through the very means fup-"plied by its own ftrength; for there would, at all"times, be one among them, defirous of procuring"to himfelf a fuperiority over his colleague, and, at"the fame time, the favour of the better part of the"community, by promoting the good of the pub-"lie: they would even find more than one tribune,'c if more were neceflary, ready to fupport the con-"fuls, though one would be fufficient againft all the"reft: only let the confuls, and principal fena;ors,"exert themfclves, to fecurc in the intereft of the


N 3







OCR Output








OF ROME.


 


About the third watch, therefore, they came to at-tack the camp. Quintius, after appeafing the tu- _
mult which the fudden alarm had excited, ordering Y.R. 186.the foldiers to ftay quiet in their tents, led out a2cohort of Hernicians to form an advanced guard,mounted the trumpeters, and other inftrumental per­formers, on horfes, and ordered them to found theirinftruments before the rampart, and keep the ene­my in fufpenfe, until day.light. During the re­mainder of the night, every thing was fo quiet inthe camp, that the Romans were not even preventedfrom fleeping. The Volfcians, on the other hand,expecting every inftant an attack from the enemy,were kept in a ftate of earneft attention, by the ap­pearance of armed infantry, whom they believed tobe Romans, and alfo to be more numerous, and bythe buftle and neighing of the horfes, which beingunder the management of riders with whom they ,were unacquainted, and having their ears continuallyteazed with the found of the inftruments, were inconftant agitation.
LXV. WHEN day appeared, the Romans, march­ing into the field in full vigour, after being tho­roughly refrefhed with fleep, at the firft onfet, over­powered the Volfcians, fatigued with Handing, andwant of reft. However, the enemy might be faidto retire, rather than to be routed; for fome hills,which lay behind them, afforded a fafe retreat to allthe troops that were ftajioned to the rear of the firftline, whofe ranks were ftill unbroken. On comingto this place, where the advantage of the ground wasagainft him, the conful ordered his men to halt: itwas with great difficulty that they could be re-,ftrained; they called out, and infifted on being al­lowed to purfue the advantage which they hadgained: the horfemen, collected round the general,were ftill more ungovernable, loudly declaring thatthey .would advance before the front line. While
P 4 the







OCR Output








276 T»£ HISTORY


BOOK Marcus Cornelius Maluginenfis, Marcus Sergius,. -^-, Lucius Minucius, Quintus Fabius Vibulanus, Quin-Y.R. 303. tus Paetilius,Titus Antonius Merenda, Casfo Duilius,B.C. 449. Spurius Oppius Cornicen, and Manius Rabuleius.
XXXVI. Now the mafit, which Appias had af-fumed, fell off, and he began to live according to hisnatural difpofition; and to form his new colleaguesearly to his own plan of proceeding, before theyfhould enter on the adminiftration of their office.They held daily cabals, remote from witnefies;wherein, being furnifhed with plans of tyranny, di-gefted among themfelves, without the knowledge ofany, they no longer difiembled their arrogance; be­came difficult of accefs, morofe to fuch as addreffedY.R. 304. them, and continued this behaviour until the ides ofB. c. 448. May. The ides of May were then the ufual timefor entering on office. At the very beginning thenof their magiftracy, they diftinguifhed the firft dayof their adminiftration by an exhibition which excitedthe greateft alarm: for whereas the former decem­virs had obferved a rule, that only one fhould havethe fafces, and that this emblem of royalty fhould goin rotation through them all, to each in his turn, theyunexpectedly made their appearance, attended eachby twelve fafces. One hundred and twenty lictorsfilled the Forum, and carried axes bound up withthe fafces. The decemvirs alleging that, as, by theterms of their appointment, there lay no appeal fromthem, there could be no reafon why the axe fhould betaken away. They difplayed an appearance of tenkings, and thus multiplied terrors, not only amongthe loweft clafs, but among the principal patricians;every one being perfuaded, that they wanted only apretext to begin the work of death, fo that fhouldanyone, either in the fenate, or in a meeting of thepeople, utter an expreffion favourable to liberty, therods and axes would inftantly be got ready, to ftriketerror into the reft. For, bcfides that there was no.hope







OCR Output








294 THE HISTORY


BOOK the fame time filling his eyes, " I am thankful for
i -TA__f" yOur goodnefs; to-morrow I will ufe your aflrft-
•Y.R. 305. " ance; at prefent, I have fureties enough." Vir-
B.C. 447. ginia Was then admitted to bail on the fecurity of her
relations. Appius, after remaining there for a fhort
time, left he fhould feem to have fat merely for the
fake of that bufinefs, and finding that no one applied
to him, people's anxiety about that particular affair
hindering them to attend to others, retired to his
houfe, and wrote to his colleagues to the camp not
to give leave of abfence to Virginius, and even to
keep him in confinement. This wicked fcheme, as
it deferved, was too late to fucceed, for Virginius,
having already got leave of abfence, had fet out at
the firft watch; fo that the letter about detaining
him, which was delivered in the morning, produced.
no effect.
XLVII. IN the city, the whole multitude of the•citizens were afiembled in the Forum at the firftlight, full of anxious expectation; Virginius, cladin mourning, and accompanied by a vaft number ofadvocates, led his daughter into the Forum, habitedin weeds, denoting her diftrefs, and attended bya number of matrons.' There he began to foliciteach man's favour; and not only requefted their aid,as a boon granted to his prayers, but demanded itas his dvie, reminding them, that " he ftood daily in"the field of battle, in defence of their wives and"children; nor was there any man who had given"mere proof of valour and intrepidity in a6Hon than't he had done. Yet what did this avail, if, while," the city was feeure from danger, their children-" were expofed to calamities as grievous as could"be dreaded, if it were taken by an enemy?" With•fuch difcourfes, uttered in a manner as if he wereaddrefling a public afiembly, he applied to each ofthe people. Icilius addrefied them with like argu­ments; and the female attendants^ by thsir filent
tears,







OCR Output








O F R O M E. 235


unattended by the troops. In the following year, BOOKthe law of Te.rentillus, fupported by the coneyr.. l J1^ _,rence of the whole college of tribunes, again af- Y.R. 193.failed the confuls. Thefe were Publius Volumnius B.C. 459.and Servius Sulpicius. In that year, the iky ap­peared on fire, and a violent earthquake happened.That an ox fpoke, an incident to which in the laftyear credit had been refufed, was now believed.Among other prodigies, a mower of flefh fell,which, as was reported, was in a great meafure in­tercepted in its fall, by a vaft number of birds flyingabout the place, and what efcaped them, lay fcatter-ed on the ground for feveral days, without beingchanged in fmell. The books * were confulted bythe Duumviri prefiding over facred rites, and it waspredicted that dangers impended from a concourfeof foreigners; that an attack was to be made on thehigher parts of the city, and lives loft in confe-quence; among other things, warning was given,that all feditious practices mould be avoided. Thisthe tribunes cried out againft, as a forgery, contrivedfor the purpofe of hindering the puffing of their law;and matters were tending to a defperate conteft;when, lo! that things might revolve in the fame »circle every year, the Hernicians brought an ac­count, that the Volfcians and ./Equans, notwith-ftanding the diminution of ftrength which they had
* Thefe were the famous fibylline books, purchafed, it wa' faid, byTarquinius Superbus, hum an old wumxn whom nobody knew, andwho was never afterwards Teen again. Thefe hooks, which were fup.pofed to contain prophetic information of the fate and fortune of theRoman itate, were carefully repofited in a flone elicit, in a vault underthe Capitol, and two officers chofen from the order of patricians, calledduunviri facroru*i, appointed to take care of ihem. The number of thefewas afterwards increafed to tea, half of whom were plebeians; thento fifteen, upon which occafion they were called Quindeccmviri; whichname they retamed when afterwards augmented to fixty. Upon occa.lior.s of extreme danger, of pcftilence, or the appearance of any extra­ordinary prodigies, thefe officers were ordered by the fenate to confult,or to pretend to confult, the books, and they reported what expia­tions, and othtr rites were ncctiTary to avert the impending evil.
fuffered,







OCR Output








OF ROME. 491


toe got notice, and that it was unreafonable that a B oO Kfuit concerning his child .fhould proceed in his ab- . ^' _ffence, demanded that Appius fhould adjourn all pro- Y.R. 305.ceedings in the caufe, until the father's arrival; that, B. c. ++7.in conformity to the law which he himfelf had framed,he fhould leave her in the meantime, in the enjoy­ment of her liberty; and not fuffer a young womanof ripe age to encounter the hazard of her reputation,before the cafe of her freedom was determined.
XLV. APPIUS prefaced his decree with obferv-ing, that " the very law, which Virginius's friends"' held out as the foundation of their demand, was a"proof how much he was inclined to favour liberty:*c however, that law could afford no firm fecurity to'' liberty, if it were not invariable in the tenor of its"operation,without regard either to caufes or perfons.'' In the cafe of thofe who, from fervitude, claimed<c a right to freedom, the privilege mentioned was"' allowed, becaufe any citizen can adt in their be-"half j but in the cafe of her, who was in the handsc' of her father, there was no other perfon to whom*c the owner mould yield the cuftody of her. It"was, therefore, his determination, that the father*c fhould be fent for; that, in the meantime, the"claimant fhould fuffer no lofs of his right, but"fhould take the maiden into his cuftody, and give"fecurity for her appearance, on the arrival of the"perfon who was alleged to be her father." Whilftall murmured againft the injuftice of this decree, butnot one had courage to oppofe it, Publius Numi-torius, the maiden's uncle, and Icilius, her betrothedfpoufe, arrived at the fpot. The crowd havingreadily made way for them, becaufe the multitudewere of opinion, that, if any thing could ftop theproceedings of Appius, it would be the interferenceof Icilius, the lictor called out, that " fentehce was"pa/Ted;" and, on Icilius making loud remon-ftrances, ordered him to retire. Even a cool tem-
v 2 per







OCR Output








4 THE HISTORY


fully n6ting fuch, as, being diftionourable in theirprinciples, are equally fo in their effedts, learn toavoid them. Now, either partiality to the fubjectof my intended work mifleads me, or there neverwas any ftate either greater, or of purer morals, orricher .in good examples; nor was there ever anycity into which avarice and luxury made their en­trance fo late, or where poverty and frugality werefo highly and fo long held in honour; men con-tradting their defires in proportion to the narrownefsof their circumftances. Of late years, indeed,opulence has introduced a greedinefs for gain, andthe boundlefs variety of difiblute pleafures has• created, in many, a paflion for ruining themfelves,and all around them, in courfes of intemperance anddebauchery. But let us, in the firft ftage at leaft offo great an undertaking, avoid gloomy reflections,which, when perhaps unavoidable, will not, eventhen, be agreeable. If it were cuftomary with us,as it is with pcets, we would more willingly beginwith good omens, and vows, and prayers to thegods and goddefies, that they would propitiouflygrant fuccefs to our endeavours, in the prolecutionof fo arduous a tafk.
BOOK I. IT has been handed down to us, as a certain*• fadi, that the Greeks, when they had taken Troy,treated the Trojans with the utmoft feverity; withthe exception, however, of two of them, .'(Eneasand Antenor, towards whom they excrcifed none ofthe rights of conqueft. This lenity they owed,partly, to ap old connection of hofpitality, and,partly, to their having been, all along, inclined topeace, and to the reftoration of Helen. Thefechiefs experienced afterwards great varieties offortune. Antenor, being joined by a multitude ofthe Henetians, who had been driven out of Paph-lagonia in a civil war, and having loft their kingPylasmenes at Troy, were at a lois both for a fettle -
menC







OCR Output








THE HISTORY


BOOK" the pardon of one individual, rather than througfi.J^Vj " hatred towards one, reject the prayers of a multi-Y.R. joe." tude: declaring, that he himfelf, in his prefentV.c. 4*6." conduct, was actuated, merely, by a regard to the"race and to the name : for he had not renewed any"friendly intercourfe with the perfon for whofe*c wretched fituation he wifhed to find a remedy;"that, by fortitude, liberty had been recovered;"and by clemency, harmony might be eftablifhed•' among the feveral orders of the ftatc." Hebrought feveral to incline to his fide, rather in con-fideration of his own laudable attachment to his fa­mily, than of the merits of his caufe, whofe intcrcfthe efpoufed. On the other hand, Virginius be-fought them, " rather to beftow their companion on'' him and his daughter; and not to liften to the*' prayers of the Claudian family, who feemed to*' think they had a natural right to tyrannize over"the commons; but to thofe of the near relations"of Virginia, their three tribunes; who, having"been elected for the protection of the commons,"now, in their own caufe, implored from the com-'' mons favour and protection." The tears of thelatter feemed better entitled to pity. WhereforeAppius, precluded from all hope, voluntarily put anend to hrs life, before the day arrived to which thetrial had been adjourned. Immediately after, Pub-lius Numitorius arraigned Spurius Oppius^ whoftood next in the way of the public indignation, ashaving been prefent in the city when the unjuft fen-tence was pronounced by his colleague. However,an act of injuftice, committed by himfelf, drew onOppius greater weight of public refentment, thanhis not having prevented the other. A witnefs wasproduced, who reckoned up twenry-feven campaigns,which he had ferved in the army : during which fer-vice he proved that he had been eight times parti­cularly diftinguifhed by honourable rewards j theferewards he produced, to the view of the people;
and







OCR Output








O P R O M E. 59


hopes that the king would conform himfelf to the BOOKmanners and inftitutions of his grandfather. In con-fequence of which, the Latines, with whom a treatyhad been concluded in the reign of Tullus, aflTumednew courage, and made an incurfion into the Ro­man territories; and, when the Romans demandedfatisfa&ion, returned a haughty anfwer, imaginingthe Roman king fo averfe to action, that he wouldfpend his reign among the chapels and altars. Thegenius of Ancus was of a middle kind, betweenNuma's and that of Romulus, partaking of both;and he was fenfible, not only that peace had beenmore neceflary in the reign of his grandfather, to apeople who were but lately incorporated and ftilluncivilized, but alfo, that the tranquillity, whichhad obtained at that time, could not now be pre-ferved, without a tame fubmiffion to injuries; thatthey were making trial of his patience, and havingtried, would .come to defpife it; in fhort, that thetimes required a king like Tullus, rather than onelike Numa. However, being defirous, that, as Nu-ma had inftituted the religious rites to be obfervedin time of peace, fothe ceremonies, to be obfervedin war, fhould have himfelf for their founder, andthat wars mould not only be waged, but be pro­claimed likewife, according to a certain eftablifhedmode, he borrowed from the antient race of the./Equicolae, that form of demanding fatisfactionwhich is ftill ufed by the heralds. The ambaflador,when he comes to the frontiers of the ftate, fromwhom fatisfaction is demanded, having his head co­vered with a fillet of wool, fays, "O Jupiter,"hear me! hear, ye frontiers," of whatever ftatethey belong to, naming it, " let juftice hear; I am"a public mefienger of the Roman people. I"come, an ambaflador duly authorized, accordingw to the forms of juftice and religion; let my words"therefore meet with credir." He then repeats hisdemands, and afterwards appeals to Jupiter: " If I
"demand







OCR Output








PREFACE.


probable, fo it is not unfair to fuppofe, that thewant of more cotemporary hiftorians may haveinduced thofe, who were alfo predifpofed, tobelieve that to be falfe, which fuller informationmight perhaps have proved to be true. Whymay we not believe that he had better oppor­tunities of knowing the truth than the Greekhiftorian? He admits Polybius to be an au­thor of credit, and yet he differs from him with­out fcruple: he cannot, then, furely, be thoughtto mean more than that he was a writer of in­tegrity, who compiled his hiftory with fidelity,according to the beft information he was ableto obtain: that he did not wilfully falfify anyfa£t, rather than that every fa£t he relates isftrictly and abfolutely true. He acknowledgeshim for his mafter, but does not conceive him-felf bound to fwear to his words.
Befides, it is but doing juftice to our Authorto obferve, that if, in fome few, and thofe notvery material inftances, he may have deviatedfrom the truth, if he has done fo, it is neverwith an ill-defign: if he palliates a fault, orfupprefles a fact, it is not fo much for the pur.tpofe of leffening the reputation, or tarnifhingthe glory of others, whether nations or indivi­duals, as to aggrandize the chara&er of hisown nation. He allows himfelf in a practicewhich fome of his countrymen have, fince histime, carried to a much greater, as well as amore blameable extent, and which has receivedthe name of pious fraud.
But, whatever may be the cafe, whether ourAuthor muft lie under the reproach of foften­


ins







OCR Output








THE HISTORY


o o K tncr quickly, in aftonifhment, as may be fuppofed, ata deed fo atrocious, and unheard-of. Every oneexclaimed with vehemence againft the villany andviolence of the prince: they were deeply affected bythe grief of her father, and alfo by the difcourfe ofBrutus, who rebuked their tears, and ineffectualcomplaints, and advifed them, as became men, asbecame Romans, to take up arms againft thofe whohad dared to treat them as enemies. The moft fpi-rited among the youth offered themfelves with theirarms, and the reft followed their example. Onwhich, leaving half their number at the gates to de­fend Collatia, and fixing guards to prevent any in­telligence of the commotion being carried to theprinces, the reft, in arms, with Brutus at their head,marched to Rome. , When they arrived there, thefight of fuch an armed multitude fpread terror andconfufion wherever they came: but, in a little time,when people obferved the principal men of the ftatemarching at their head, they concluded, that what­ever the matter was, there muft be good reafon forit. Nor did the heinoufnefs of the affair raife lefeviolent emotions in the minds of the people at Rome,than it had,at Collatia: fo that, from all parts of thecity, they hurried into the Forum ; where, as foon asthe party arrived, a crier fummoned the people toattend the Tribune of the Celeres, which office hap­pened at that time to be held by Brutus. He theremade a fpeech, very little confonant to that low de­gree of fenfibility and capacity, which, until that dayhe had counterfeited; recounting the violence andluft of Sextus Tarqinnius, the mocking violation ofLucretia's chaftity, and her lamentable death; the, misfortune of Tricipitinus, in being left childlefs,who muft feel the caufe of his daughter's death as agreater injury and cruelty, than her death itfelf: tothefe reprelentations he added the pride of the kinghimfelf, the miferies and toils of the commons, bu­ried under ground to cleanfe finks and fewers, fay­


ing,







OCR Output








O F R O M E. 15


were afTembled in a tumultuous manher about the B O O £ftranger, whom they accufed as undeniably guilty of,murder; and when he was informed of the fact, andof the caufe of it, obferving the perfon and mien ofthe hero, filled with more dignity and majefty thanbelonged to a human being, he inquired who hewas; and being told his name, that of his father andhis country, he addreffed him in thefe words:"Hail, Hercules, fon of Jove! my mother, the in-"fallible interpreter of the gods, foretold to me"that you were deftined to increafe the number of"the celeftials, and that an altar would be dedicated"to you in this place, which a nation, hereafter"the moft powerful in the world, fhould diftinguifh"by the name of The Greateft *, and would offer"thereon facrifices to your honour." Hercules,giving his right hand, replied, that " he embraced"the omen, and would fulfil the decree of the fates,"by building and dedicating an altar in the place."There, then, for the firft time, was performed afacrifice to Hercules, of a chofen heifer taken out ofthe herd; and the Pojitii and Pinarii, the moft dif-tinguifhed families in, the neighbourhood at the time,were invited to afTift in the ceremonies, and fharethe entertainment. It happened, by ibme accident,that the Potitii attending in time, and the entrailshaving been fervcd up to them, the Pinarii came infor the reft of the feaft, after the entrails were eaten;hence it continued a rule, as long as the Pinarian fa­mily exifted, that they fhould not eat of the entrails.The Potitii, inftrutfted by Evander, were directorsof that foJemnity for many ages, until the folemnoffice of the family was delegated to public fervants,on which the whoJe race of the Potitii became ex-t'uicT:. Thefe wcr,c the only foreign rites that Ro­mulus then adopted, fhewing thereby, from the be­ginning, a refpect for immortality obtained by merit,'
* Ara Maxima: it flood in the cattle market, where it remained inthe time of Auguftus.
4 a dignity







OCR Output








#50 THEHISTORY


BOOK from thence came to a general engagement, which,
. __^ __, without farther conteft, put an end to the war.
Y.R. 1J9.
B.C.49J. XXVII. WHEN the Auruncians were defeated,the Romans, having vanquifhed fo many differentenemies, within the fpace of a few days, expectedthe fulfilment of the promifes made them by theconfuls, and confirmed by the engagements of thefenate j but Appius, inftigated both by his own na­tural haughtinefs, and a defire to undermine the cre­dit of his colleague, ifiued his decrees on fuits betweendebtor and creditor, with the utmoft pofilble feveri-ty j in confequence of which, both thofe who had,' formerly been in confinement, were delivered up to
their creditors, and others alfo were taken into cuf-tody. When this happened to be the cafe of any ofthe foldiers, he appealed to the other confulj acrowd gathered about Servilius, reminded him of hispromifes, upbraided him with their fervices in war,and the fears which they had received; infifted thathe fhould lay the affair before the fenate; and that,as conful, he mould fupport his countrymen, as ge­neral, his foldiers. The conful was affected by theferemonftrances; but circumftances obliged him todecline interfering, not only his colleague, but the•whole faction of the nobles, having gone fo violentlyinto oppofite meafures: by thus acting a middlepart, he neither avoided the hatred of the commons,nor procured the efteem of the patricians. Thelatter, confidering him as deftitute of the firmnefsbecoming his office, and as too fond of popular ap-plaufe, while the former looked upon him as a de­ceiver; and it fhortly appeared that he was becomeno lefs odious, than Appius. A conteft happenedbetween the confuls, tyhich of them fhould dedicatethe temple of Mercury: the fenate refufed to decidethe matter, and referred it to the people, pafling avote that to whichever of them the dedication fhouldbe granted by the people, the &me fhould prefide


over







OCR Output








O F R O M E. 293


"by nature, and breathing, at that inftant, the fpirit 9 O O &"of the tribunefhip, he was feeking an occafion of • -^L^j"fedition: he would not, however, for that day, Y.R. 305."give him matter to work on: but, in order to B."convince him at once that this indulgence was,"granted, not to his petulance, but to the abfent"Virginius, to the name of father, and to liberty,"he would not on that day decide the caufe, nor"interpofe any decree, he would even requeft of"Marcus Claudius to depart fomewhat from his"right, and fuffer the maiden to be bailed until the"next day. But if, on the next day, the father did"not attend, he now gave notice to Icilius, and to"perfons like Icilius, that, as its founder, he would"not fail to fupport his own law; nor, as decemvir,"to fhew a proper degree of refolution: nor mould"call together the lictors of his colleagues, to check"the efforts of the fomenters of fedition, he would"be content with his own lictors." The executionof his iniquitous defign being thus deferred, the ad­vocates of the girl having retired by themfelves, re-folved, firft of all, that the brother of Icilius andthe fon of Numitorius, active young men, fhould fetoff from thence directly to the gate, and with allpoffible hafte, call home Virginius from the camp,acquainting him that " the fafety of the maiden de-"pended on his being prefent in time next day, to<c protect her from injury." They fet out the in­ftant they received their directions, and with all theipeed their horfes could make, carried the accountto her father. IR the meantime, the claimant of themaiden urged Icilius to profefs himfelf a defendantin the caufe, and to produce fureties; and Icilius,who delayed on purpofe, in order that the mefien-gers difpatched to the camp might gain the longertime for their journey, telling him that he was pre­paring to do fo, the whole multitude on this held uptheir hands, and every one fhewed himfelf ready tobe furety for Icilius. To them he replied^ tears at
u 3 " th?







OCR Output








O F R O M E. 503


with the Gauls, in the name of the fenate and peo- B O O Kple of Rome; who recommended to them not to ._-^_jattack the allies and friends of the Roman people, Y.R. 364.from whom they had received no injury, andB. Ct J88.whom the Romans would be obliged to fup-port even by force of arms, if matters went fofar j but who, at the fame time, would be betterpleafed, that hoftile proceedings mould be avoidedif pofiible, and that their acquaintance with theGauls, a nation to whom they were as yet ftrangers,fhould commence in an amicable rather than in anhoftile manner.
XXXVI. THIS was an embafiy mild in its im­port, but intrufted to men of tempers too ferocious,more refembling Gauls than Romans. Thefe, hav­ing explained their commiffion in an alTembly of theGauls, received for anfvver, that although this wasthe firft time that they had heard the name of theRomans, yet they fuppofed that they were men ofbravery, whofe afliftance the Chilians had imploredin a conjuncture fo perilous; and in confideration oftheir having chofen to interfere between their alliesand them, in the way of negotiation, rather than thatof arms, they would make no objection to the amica­ble terms which they propofed, provided that theClufians, who poffeiTed a greater portion of landthan they turned to ufe, would give up a part of itto the Gauls who wanted land: on no other termswas peace fo be obtained: that they wifhed to re­ceive an anfwer in prefence of the Romans, and ifthe land were refufed them, would alfo decide thematter by arms in the prefence of the fame Romans,that they might inform their countrymen, how farthe Gauls excelled the reft of mankind in bravery.The Romans alking, by what right they could de­mand land from the pofleflbrs, and in cafe of refu-fal threaten war ; and what concern the Gauls had inJitruria? the others fiercely replied, that they carriedK K 4 their







OCR Output








O F R O M E. 373


him as equal to Romulus. With the ufual form of B O O Kdedication he prefented and hung up the fpoils in the . _T_L •temple of Jupiter Fcretrius, near the fpoils dedi- Y.R. 318.cated by Romulus, which were the firft denominated B.Ct +J41opima, and the only ones then exifting. He drewoff the people's attention from the chariot of the dic­tator to himfelf, and enjoyed almoft folely the ho­nour of that day's folemnity. The dictator, by or­der of the people, depofited in the Capitol, as anoffering to Jupiter, a golden crown of a poundweight, at the expence of the public. Followingall the authors who have written before me, I havereprefented Aulus Cornelius Coffus as a military tri­bune, when he carried the fecond fpolia opima intothe temple of Jupiter Feretrius: but, befides thatthofe fpoils only are properly deemed opima, whichone general has taken from another, and we knowno general but the perfon under whofe aufpices thewar is carried on, the infcription itfelf, wriften on thefpoils, proves againft them and me, that Coffus wasconful when he took them. Having once heardAuguftus Caefar, the founder or reftorer of all ourtemples, on entering the temple of Jupiter Feretrius,which from a ruin he had rebuilt, aver, that he him­felf had read this infcribed on the linen breaftplate,I thought it would be next to facrilege, to rob Col-fus of fuch a teftimony refperting his fpoils, as thatof Caefar, to whom the temple itfelf owed its being.Whether the miflake is chargeable on both the veryantient annals and the books of the magiftrates, writ­ten on linen and depofued in the temple of Moneta,and continually cited as authority by Licinius Ma-ccr, which have Aulus Cornelius Coflus, conful,with Titus Quintius Penius in the ninth year afterthis, every one may form his own judgment. For,that fo celebrated a battle could not be transferredto that year, there is this farther proof; that, forthree years before and after the conlulmip of AulusCornelius, there was an almoft entire ccffation from
B B 3 war







OCR Output








O F R O M E. 3.21


alacrity, he aflured them, that, " with the good fa- B O O K"vour of fortune, he would comply with their de- • -^' _j"fire, and \vould next day lead them to the field." Y.R. 306.The remainder of that day was fpent in putting B.c.4*6.their arms in order. On the following, as foon asthe Sabines perceived that the Romans were formingtheir line of battle, they alfo marched out, havingfor a long time ardently wifhed for an opportunityof fighting. The battle was fuch as might be ex­pected, between armies both of whom were afluredof their own courage; the one animated by a longand uninterrupted career of glory, the other latelyelevated by unufual fuccefs. The Sabines added totheir ftrength the advantage of a ftratagem; for, af­ter forming a line equal to that of the enemy, theykept two thoufand men in referve, who were tomake a pufh during the heat of the engagement on.the left wing of the Romans. When thefe, by at­tacking their flank, were likely to overpower thatwing, which was thus, in a manner, furrounded, thecavalry of two legions, amounting to about fix hun­dred, leaped from their horfes, and ruming forwardto the front of their party, who were giving way,ftopped the progrefs of the enemy, and at the fametime roufed the courage of the infantry, both bytaking an equal fhare of the danger, and by excitingtheir emulation; for they reflected, that it would beiliameful that the horfe mould incur double danger,by difcharging both their own duty and that of others;and that the foot fhould not be equal to the horfe,even when they were difmounted.
I
LXIIL THEY prefied forward therefore to thefight, which on their part had been fufpended, andendeavoured to recover the ground which they hadloft. In a moment the fight was not only reftored toan equality, but that wing of the Sabines compelledto give way. The hcrfemcn then, covered betweenthe ranks of the foot, retired to their horfes, and
vot. i. Y galloped







OCR Output








OF ROME. 343


*' they with impunity, after they have, by Cowing B O O K
"difcord, encouraged the neighbouring nations •_-r--,
"to attack us, prevent the ftate afterwards from Y.R. 310.
"arming and defending itfelf againft the at-8.4"**1'
"tack which they have brought on it? and,
"when they had done every thing, but fend
"an invitation to the enemy, prevent troops from
'' being enlifted to oppofe that enemy? But Ca-
•' nuleius has had the audacity to declare openly
*• in the fenate, that he would hinder the mak-
"ing of the levy, unlefs the fenate, atknow-
"ledging in a manner his fuperiority, allowed his
'' laws to be enacted. What elfe was this, than to
"threaten that he would betray his country; that he
'' would fuffer it to be attacked, and to fall into the
'' enemy's hands? What courage muft that decla-
"ration afford, not to the Roman commons, but
'' to the Volfcians, to the ^Equans, and Veientians?
'' Might not thefe hope, that, under the guidance of
"Canuleius, they would be able to fcale the Capi-
"tol and the citadel, if the tribunes, while they
"ftripped the patricians of their privileges and their'
"dignity, robbed them alfo of their courage. The
'' confuls, they told them, were ready to act as their
"leaders, firft againft the wicked practices of their
"countrymen; and afterwards, againft the arms of
"their enemies."
III. AT the very time, while fuch arguments asthefe were urged in the fenate, Canuleius was em­ployed in declaiming in favour of his laws, and againftthe confuls, in the following manner: " Roman ci-'' tizens! in many former inftances I have feen"enough to convince me in what degree of con-*' tempt the patricians hold you, how unworthy'' they efteem you to live in the fame city, within'' the fame walls with them. But this is now more"clearly than ever demonftrated by their outrageous*' opposition to thofe proportions of ours. And24 "this,







OCR Output








28o THE HISTORY


BOOK were fo thoroughly frightened, on finding the cityt _^_' _, furrounded by two enemies at once, that they deter-Y. R. 3oj. mined to have recourle to the advice of the fenate;B. c. 447. accordingly they ordered the fenators to be fuminon-ed to a meeting, though they well knew what aftorm of public refentment threatened to break up­on themfelves; that all men would heap, on theirheads, the blame of the devaftations of the country,and of all the dangers by which they were encom-paffed; and that, on thefe grounds, attempts would- be made to deprive them of their office, it they didnot firmly unite in the fupport of their caufe; and,by enforcing their authority with feverity, on a few,' of the moft intractable tempers, reprefs the forward-
nefs of others. When the voice of the crier washeard in the Forum, fmnmoning the fenators to at­tend the decemvirs in the fenate-houfe, it excitedthe wonder of the people, no lefs than if it were amatter entirely new; " .what could have happened"now," the people faid, " that thofe who had, for"a long time paft, laid afide the cuftom of confult-"ing the fenate, mould now revive a practice fo"long difuled? They might thank the war, and"their enemies, for any thing being done that was"cuftomary in a free ftate." 'They looked about, the Forum for fenators, and could hardly any wheredifcover one: they then turned their eyes to thefenate houfe, and the folitude which appeared roundthe decemvirs, who, on their part, attributed thenon attendance of the fenators to the general detefta-tion of their government; while the commons founda reafon for it, in the want of authority in privateperfons to convene the fenate, and obferved, thacnow a head was formed for thofe who wifhed for therecovery of liberty, if the commons would let theirendeavours accompany thofe of the fenate; and if,as the fathers, when fummoned, refufed to alterablein fenate, the commons mould in like manner refufeto enlift, Sugh were the general topics of difcourfe
among







OCR Output








OF ROME.


paid more regard to the intereft and importunitiesof his relations, and thereby drew upon himfelf thepunifhment due to them. For he was flain after­wards at Lavinium, in a tumult raifed on his goingthither to an anniverfary facrifice. It is faid, thatRomulus fhewed lefs refentment of this proceedingthan became him, either becaufe there had been nofincere cordiality between them, while aflbciated inthe government, or becaufe he thought that theother deferved the death which he met. He avoid­ed therefore entering into a war on the occafion jbut to make fome atonement for the ill-treatmentof the ambafladors, and the murder of the king, theleague between the cities of Rome and Laviniumwas renewed. Thus, beyond their expectations,the Romans enjoyed peace on that fide; but a warbroke out from another quarter, much nearer home,and almoft at their gates. The Fidenatians, look­ing with jealoufy on the great increafe of power in aneighbour, fo very near them,. determined to makewar on them early, before they mould arrive at thatdegree of ftrength which it was evident they wouldin time acquire, and lent a body of young men inarms, who laid wafte the whole tract betweenFiderras and the city. Then, turning to the lefthand, becaufe the Tiber confined them on theright, and continuing their depredations, they threwthe country people into the utmpft confirmation,and the fudden alarm fpreading from the countryinto the city, made known what had happened.Romulus inftantly led out his forces, for a war fonear home admitted no delay, and pitched his campat the diftance of a. mile from Fidenae. Leavingthere a fmall guard, and marching out with all thereft of his troops, he ordered a party to lie in am-bufh, in a place of concealment, among bumes thatgrew there in abundance; then advancing with theother more numerous body of infantry, and allthe cavalry, by riding up almoft to the gates,
And


 







OCR Output








UX 001 132 Sib


 


 


•







OCR Output








5» VTHE HISTORY


""


BOOK" propofe." \iven this, we are told, was not fuf-fered by Turnus to pafs without notice; for he ob-fcrved, that "there could be no controverfy fhorterthan one between a father and fon, which mightbe difpatched in a few words; if the fon did not"fubmit to his father, he fhould take the ill confe-"quences."
LI. UTTERING thefe reflections againft the Ro­man king, the Arician withdrew from the afiembly;Tarquinius, who was more incenfed at his beha­viour than he appeared to be, began immediately to'^,, . contrive fchemes for the deftruction of Turnus, in
order to ftrike the fame terror into the Latines, byhe had deprefled the fpirits of his fubjects at


 


li om e r**A nd as he could not, of his own mere au-j[ ^ j>'•." thority,' openly put him to death, he effected, by a
falfe accufation, the ruin of an innocent man. Bymeans of fome Aricians, of the oppofite faction, hebribed a fervant of Turnus, to fuffer a large quantity»v« of fwords to be privately conveyed into his lodging:C!***11'" .j.»r'.this part of his fchcme being completed, during thecourfe of that lame night, Tarquinius, a little beforeday, called together about him the chiefs of the La-tines, as if he had been alarmed by fome extraor­dinary occurrence, and told them, that " his delay"yefterday, as if it were the effect of the particular"care of the gods, had been the means of preferv-/ •'? mfa+J? ".ing him and them from deftruction :— trhat he had-""rr received information, that a plan had been laid by"Turnus, to murder him and the Latine chiefs, in.,.__ >".•.• «c order that he might enjoy alone the government-. " of *he Latinesj — that he intended to have fallenJv^s>''.>'**' "upon them yefterday, in the afiembly, but the'' bufinefs was deferred, becaufe the perfon who"called the alfembly, and who was his principal ob-^../i; ." ject, .was not. there .i_j;h is was the reafon of all
that abufe thrown on him for being abfent; be-'caufe, by that abfence, he had fruftrated his de-
"fign: —







OCR Output








 







OCR Output








THE HISTORY


BOOK Quintus Servilius were appointed to the confulfhip\. _ 1 . Thefe experienced a year fimilar to the preceding;Y.R. *ss. the beginning of it, filled with civil broils, whichB.C.466. were afterwards repretfed by tKe breaking out offoreign wars. The Sabines, marching acrofs theplains of Cruftuminum, with great rapidity, carriedfire and fword through all the country on the banksof the Anio; and though afterwards, when they hadadvanced almoft to the Colline gate, and the wallsof the city, they met with a repulfe, yet they car­ried off a vaft booty both of men and cattle. Theconful Servilius marched in purfuit of them, withdefign to bring them to an engagement: but, notbeing able to overtake their main body, in thechampaign country, he fprcad devaluation to fuchan extent, as to leave nothing unmolefted any where,and returned with a quantity of fpoil, exceeding, bymany degrees, what the enemy had carried off. Inthe campaign againft the Volfcians alfo, the arms ofthe ftate were remarkably fuccefsful, through thecondudt, both of the general and of the foldiers:firft, they fought a pitched battle, on equal ground,with great lofs of blood on both fides; and the Ro­mans, whofe fmall number made them feel the lofsmore fenfibly, would have quitted the field, had notthe conful, by a happy feint, re-animated the troops,calling out, that the enemy were flying on the otherwing: they then returned to the charge, and theopinion that victory was on their fide, was the meansof their obtaining it in reality. The conful fearing,left if he preffed the enemy too far, he might havethe battle to fight over again, gave the fignal forretreat. After this, an interval of fome few dayspalTed, during which both parties repofed, as if theyhad tacitly agreed to a fufpenfion of arms; and, inthe mean time, vaft multitudes from every ftate ofthe Volfcians and ./Equans flocked into their camp,not doubting but that the Romans, when informedof their numbers, would make their retreat by nighr.
About







OCR Output








O F R O M E. 509


aflault to be made on the city. At the enemy's firft B O O Kapproach, they iuppofed that they would begin the , '_ _,.affault, as foon as they fhould arrive at the city, Y.R. 365.imagining that they would have remained at tneB'c.J87.Allia, if this were not their intention. Then, aboutfun-fet, they fuppoled it would begin before night,becaufe there was not much of the day remaining;then that the defign was put off until night, in orderto ftrike the greater terror. At laft, the approach oflight funk them in difmay, and the evil itfelf whichthey dreaded, clofed this fcene of unremitted ap-prehenfion, the enemy marching into the gates inhoftile array. During that night however, and alfothe following day, the ftate preferved a character,very different from that which fuch a daftardly flightat the Allia had indicated: for there being no roomto hope, that the city could pofiibly be defend­ed by the fmall number of troops remaining, a re-folution was taken, that the young men who were fitto bear arms, and the abler part of the fenate, withtheir wives and children, mould go up into thecitadel and the Capitol; and having collectedftores of arms and corn, mould, in that ftrong poft,maintain the defence of the gods, of the inhabit­ants, and of the name of Rome. That the Fla-men Quirinalis, and the veftal prieftefles, fhouldcarry away, far from flaughter and conflagration,all that appertained to the gods of the ftate;and that their worfhip mould not be intermitted,until there mould be no one left to perform it. "If."the citadel, and the Capitol, the manfion of the"gods; if the fenate, the fource of public cown-"lei; if the youth of military age, fhould fur-"vive the ruin which impended over the city, they"deemed the lofs of the aged light, as of a crowd"left behind in the city, with a certain profpect of'' perifhing." And that fuch of this multitude asconfifted of plebeians, might bear their doom withthe greater refignation, the aged nobles, formerly.
dignified







OCR Output








O F R O M E. 495


"than fuch as became men who knew they were to B o o K"contend for their religion and liberty; for the , -X_/"temples of their gods, and the foil that gave them Y.R. 361."birth. As to his own particular part, if it were B.c. 39°."allowable for him, during a conteft wherein the"intereft of his country lay at ftake, to confider the"aggrandizement of his own character, it would"even redound to the increafe of his fame, that a"city which he had taken mould be filled with in-"habitants, that he fhould every day enjoy that"monument of his own glory, and have before his"eyes a city which he himfelf had carried in his"triumph, and that all men, at every ftep they took,"fhould meet with teftimonies of his renown4"But, in his opinion, it would be an impious pro-"ceeding, if a city forfaken and abandoned by the"immortal gods were to be inhabited ; .if the Ro-"man people were to refide in a captivated foil, and"to exchange a victorious for a vanquifhed coun-"try." Stimulated by fuch arguments, uttered bythe firft man in the ftate, the patricians, both old andyoung, when the law was to be debated, came in abody to the Forum, and difperfing themfelvesthrough the tribes, each endeavoured to influencethe members of his own tribe; befeeching them,with tears, " not to abandon the country, in defence ."of which themfelves, and their fathers, had fought"with the greateft bravery and the greateft fuccefs,"pointing at the fame time to the Capitol, the tem-"ple of Vefta, and the other temples of the gods"which ftood within view; that they would not"drive the Roman people, as exiles and outcafts,"away from their native foil and their guardian dei-"ties, into an hoftile city, and bring matters to fuch"a conclufion, that it would be better if Veii had"never been taken, left Rome fhould be aban-"doned." As they made 'ufe of no violence, butof entreaties only, and among thefe entreaties madefrequenc mention of the gods, the greateft part of
the







OCR Output








O F R O M E. 313


t)» Valerius. On their proclaiming a levy of troops BOOKfor thofe wars, fo highly were they regarded by the _commons, that not only the younger men, but even Y.R.a great number of thofe who had ferved out the legal B.C.time, attended, moftly as volunteers, to give in theirnames. Thus the ftrength of the army was increafedbeyond what was ufual, not only in refpect of num­ber, but alfo of the kind of foldiers that compofedjt: a confiderable proportion pf whom were veterans.Before they marched out of the city, they engravedon brafs,and fixed up, in public view,the laws of thedecemvirs, which are called the " Twelve Tables:"fbme writers, however, fay, phat this bufinefs was per- •formed by the aediles, in purfuance of orders fromthe tribunes,
LVIII. CAIUS Claudius, uncle to Appius, deteft-ing the iniquitous proceedings of the decemvirs, and,above all, difgufted at the arrogant conduct of hisnephew, had retired to Regillum, the country of hisanceftors. Alarmed at the danger which nowthreatened him, whofe vices he had fled to avoid thejjght of, old as he was, he returned, in hopes of de­precating [he impending mifchief: he appeared inthe Forum, clad in a mourning habit, and furround-ed by his relations and dependents; he implored thefavour and protection of every individual citizen hemet with, and befought them " not to throw fuch a"ftain upon the Claudian family, as to fhew that"they thought them defervingof imprifonment andf chains; reprefented to them, that a perfon, whofe"image would be revered among pofterity, as dif-"tinguifhed by the higheft honours, the framer of"their laws, the founder of the Roman jurifpru-"dence, lay in fetters among common thieves and"robbers. He begged that they would for a while"fufpend refentment, and employ their thoughts inff candid examination and cool reflection; and grantf to the intercefllon of fuch a number of Claudii,
"the







OCR Output








O F Jl O M E, 187


Romans were in confequenee of it beginning to give BOOK
ground, when Marcus Fabius the conful leaped . _ '_ _j
over the body where it lay, and oppofing his buckler Y.R. 1-4.
to the enemy, called out, " Soldiers, is this what ye B.
't fwore, that ye would return to the camp, in flight?
't Are ye fo much more afraid of the moft daftardly
"enemy, than of Jupiter and Mars, by whom ye
f1 fwore: but for my part, though bound by no
"oath, I will either return victorious, or die here,
"fighting befide thee, Quintus Fabius," On this,
Caefo Fabius, conful of the former year, laid to the
conful, " Brother, do you expect by words to pre-
"vail on them to fight? The gods by whom they
"have fworn will prevail on rhein. Let us, as be-
"comes our noble birth, as is worthy of the Fabian
"name, animate the men by deeds of valour, ra-
"ther than by exhortations." The two Fabii then
rufhed forward to the front with their prefented
Jpears, and drew the whole line along with them.
XLVII. By thefe means, the battle was renewedon that fide; nor, in the other wing, was CneiusManlius, the conful, lefs ftrenuous in his effortsagainft the enemy. Here too a like courfe of eventstook place: for as, in the other wing, the foldiersfollowed Quintus Fabius with alacrity, fo did theyhere follow" the conful Manlius, while he prefied,and almoft routed the enemy: and when he wascompelled by a fevere wound, to retire from thefight, fuppofing him flain, they began to fhrink;and would have given way entirely, had not the otherconful, riding up to the place, at full fpeed, withfome troops of horfe, revived their drooping cou­rage; calling out, that his colleague was alive, andthat he was come to their fupport, having defeatedthe enemy in the other wing: Manlius allb fhewedhimfelf, in order to encourage them to return to thefight. The fight of the two confuls rekindled theCourage of the foldiers, and by this time too, the
11 enemy's







OCR Output








OF ROME. 241


f nraged, that they could hardly be reftrained from BOOKfalling on Caefo, and putting him to death. Virgi- ^- .!_,nius ordered his perfon to be feized, and carried to Y.R. 193.prifon r the patricians oppofed force to force. Titus B.c. **'•Quintius exclaimed, that " a perfon formally ac-"cufed of a capital crime, whofe trial \vas fhortly"to come on, ought not, before trial, and without"fentence parTed, to fuffer violence'." The tribunedeclared, that " he had no intention of inflicting"punifhment on him, before condemnation, but"that he would keep him in cuftody, until the day"of trial, that the Roman people might have it in"their power to punifh the perfon who had been\c guilty of murder." The other tribunes being ap­pealed to, refolved on a middle courfe, and therebyavoided every impeachment of their right to giveprotection: they forbade his being put in confine­ment, and declared it as their determination, thatthe accufed mould give bail for his appearance, andthat a fum of money mould be fecured to the peo­ple, in cafe of his failing to appear. The fum inwhich it was reafonable that the fureties mould bebound, came then to be difcuffed; it was referred tothe determination of the fenate; and, until the fena-lors fhould corne to a refolution, the accufed was de­tained in the public aflembly. It was determinedthat he fhould find fureties, and that each furetyfhould be bound to the amount of three thoufandafes *: the number of fureties to be furnifhed wasleft to the decifion of the tribunes; they fixed itat ten, and on ;that number of fureties beinggiven, the profaSutor confented that the accufedfhould be admitted to bail. He was the firft whogave bail, in this manner, where the penalty was to beapplied to the ufe of the public. Being difmiffedfrom the Forum, he went the night following intoexile among the Etrurians. On the day appointedfor his trial, although it was pleaded in his favour,
• 9]. 1js. td.
VOL, i, R that







OCR Output








7». THEHISTORV


B OjOK Rome*. Soon after this, he made war on theancient Latines, during which there happened noge&eral engagement. By leading about his armyto the feveral to\yns, he reduced the whole Latinera.ce to fubjection. Corniculum, old Ficulnea, Ca-meria, Cruftumerium, Ameriola, Medullia, Nomen-tum, allthefe towns, which either ^belonged to theancient Latines, or had revolted to them, were taken,and foon after peace was re-eftablifhed. He thenapplied himfelf to works of peace, with a degree offpirit, which even exceeded the efforts that he hadmade in war: fo that the people enjoyed not morereft at home, than they had during the campaigns: ,for he fet about furrounding with a wall of ftone,thofe parts of the city which he had not already for­tified; which work had been interrupted, at thebeginning, by the war of the Sabines. And thelower parts of the city about the Forum, and theother hollows that lay between the hills, from whenceit was difficult to discharge the water, by reafon oftheir fituation, he drained, by means of fewersdrawn on a Hope down to the Tiber. He alfomarked out, and laid the foundations for inclofing,a court round the temple of Jupiter, in the Capitol,which he had vowed during the Sabine war, hismind already prefaging the future magnificence ofthe place.
XXXIX. ABOUT that time a prodigy was feenin the palace, wonderful, both in the appearance, andin the event. They relate, that, whilft a boy, whofename was Servius Tullius, lay afleep, his head blazedwith fire, in the fight of many people; that, by theloud cries of aftonifhment, occafioned by luch amiraculous appearance, the king and queen were
* This is the firft inftance of a regular triumph mentioned in theRo,nan Hiflory; the invention of which ceremony is, by Ibme,alciibed to Tarquinius. For a full account of tne Roman triumph,fee Di. Adams.
alarmed .,







OCR Output








THE


HISTORY OF ROME.


BOOK I.
The arrival of JEneas in Italy, and his atchievements there;the reign of Afcanius in Alba, and of the other Sy/vianKings, his fuccejjbrs. Birth of Romulus and Remus. Ro~mulus builds Rome; forms the fenatu; divides the peopleinto curias. Hit "wars. He offers the fpolia opima to'Jupiter Feretrius; is deified. Nttma P,inpilius inftitutesthe rites of religious worjhip; builds a temple to janus;rules in peace, and is fucceeded by Tulliis Hojlilius. His•war <with the Albans; combat of the Horatii and Curiatii.The Albans removed to Rome. Tullus killed ty lightuing.Ancus Martini conquers the Latints, and incorporates them•with the Romans; enlarges the city, and the bounds cf hisdominions. Lucumo arrives at Rome; ajjiimes the name ofTarquinius; and, on the death of Ancus, gains pojfiflion ofthe throne; defeats the Latines and Sabines; builds a wallround the city, and makes the common feivcrs; is Jlain tythe fans ofAncus, and is fucccedid by Serviiis Tullius. Heinftitutes the cenfus; divides the people into claQ'es and cen­turies; extends the potnxrium; is murdered by Lucius Tarqui­nius, after.wards fur named Superbus. Hefeizes the throne ,•wages war with the Volfcians, and, with their fpails,builds a temple to Jupiter in the capital; in confequence ofbis fon Sextus having forcibly violated the chaflity of Lucre*tia, be is dethroned and banijlied. Confuls elecled,
PREFACE.
WHETHER, in tracing the feries of the RomanHiftory, from the foundation of the city,I fhall employ my time to good purpofe, is aqueftion which I cannot pofitively determine; nor,VOL.I. B if







OCR Output








336 THE HISTORY


B o o K the confuls fued for a triumph, or that it was beftow-t^11 - . ed on them by the fenate : neither is there any reafonY. R. 309. affigned why they either did not wifh, or might notB. C.443. hope, to obtain that honour. It might probably be,as far as I can conjecture at this diftance of time,that as a triumph had been refufed by the fenate tothe confuls Valerius and Horatius, who befideshaving vanquifhed the Volfcians and ./Equans, hadacquired the glory of fubduing the Sabines, the con­fuls were afhamed to demand a triumph, for fervices•which amounted only to the half of theirs; left, evenif they mould obtain it, there might be room to ima­gine, that the compliment was paid to the perfons,rather than to their deferts.
LXXI. THIS honourable victory obtained overtheir enemies, the people difgraced at home, by afcandalous decifion of a difpute concerning the boun­daries of their allies. The people of Aricia, andthofe of Ardea, had often difputed in arms the rightt of property to a certain diftrict of land, and, weariedby many lofles on both fides, referred the affair tothe arbitration of the Roman people. Both partiesattended to fupport their claims, and an afiembly ofthe people was held, by the magiftrates, at their re-queft; here the matter was debated, with great ve­hemence; and, after the witneffes had been pro­duced, when the tribes ought to have been called,and the people proceed to give their fuffrages, therearofe one Publius Scaptius, a plebeian, a very oldman, who faid, " Confuls, if I may be permitted to"fpeak on a matter which concerns the intereft of"the commonwealth, I will not fuffer the people"to proceed in a miftake, with refpect to this• " caufe." The confuls faying, that he was notworthy of attention, and mould not be heard, he ex­claimed, that the caufe of the public was betrayed;and on their ordering him to be removed, called onthe tribunes for protection. The tribunes, as in
almoft







OCR Output








400 THEHISTOR Y


BOOK tribunes. The plebeian tribunes had no room for,___ "_., contention, either with thofe who had procured thedecree of the fenate, during their abfence ; nor withAppius, as the bufinefs was already concluded.
Y.R. 331. XXXVII. THE confuls elected were Caius Sem-'4*°' pronius Atratinus, and Quintus Fabius Vibulanus.An event, which is related to have happened in thisyear, though in a foreign country, deferves to be re­corded. Vulturnum, a city of the Etrurians, nowCapua, was feized by the Samnites, and called Capua,from Capys their leader, or, which is more probable,from its champaign grounds. The manner in whichthey made themfelves mafters of it was this: theyhad, fome time before, when the Etrurians had beengreatly harafied in war, been admitted to a fhare ofthis city and its lands; thefe new fettlers, afterwards,taking the opportunity of a feftival, attacked andmaflacred, in the night, the old inhabitants, heavywith fleep and food. After this tranfaction, the con­fuls, whom we have mentioned, entered on office onthe ides of December: by this time, not only thofeemployed on that bufinefs, had reported, that theVolfcians were ready to commence hoftilities j butalfo ambafiadors from the Latines, and Hernicians,had brought information, that" never at any former"time had the Volfcians exerted more diligence"and care, either in the choice of commanders, or"the enlifting of troops: that it was a common ex-"preffion among them, that they muf t either lay"afide for ever all thoughts of war and arms, and'' fubmit to the yoke, or they muft prove themfelves"not inferior to their competitors for empire, either'• in courage, perfeverance, or military difcipline."The intelligence was not without foundation: yetthe fenate were not affected by tt, as might have beenexpected j and Caius Sempronius, to whom that pro­vince fell by lot, acted with careleflhefs and negli­gence in every particular, relying on fortune, as if k
were







OCR Output








THE HISTORY


BOOK" inviolable. But it feems, contaminated as ye aret^-^J_ . " with rhe guilt of your offences againft gods andY.R. 194." men, ye give out that ye will carry through yourB. C.458. 't jaw, before the end of this year. It would then,"indeed, be an unfortunate day to the ftate, on"which I was created conful, much more fo, than"that on which the conful Valerius perifhed, if ye"fhould carry it. Now, firft of all," faid he, " Ro-"mans, my colleague and I intend to march the"legions againft the Volfcians and ^Equans. I know<c not by what fatality we find the gods more propi-"tious, while we are employed in war than during"peace. How great the danger from thofe nations"would have been if they had known that the Ca-"pitol was in the pofieffion of exiles, it is better"that we fhould conjedure from the paft, than feel"from experience."'
XX. THE conful's difcourfe had a confiderable"effect on the commons: the patricians recoveringtheir fpirits, looked on the commonwealth as re-Itored to its proper ftate. The other conful, fhew-ing more fpirit in promoting than in forming a de-fign, readily allowed his colleague to take the lead,in the preparatory proceedings on fo weighty an af­fair; but in the execution of the plan, claimed tohimfclf a fhare of the confular duties. The tribunesthen mocking the conful's declarations as imprac­ticable, proceeded to afk, " by what means the con-"fuls would be enabled to lead out an army, when"no one would fuffer them to make a levy?" Tothis Quintius replied, " We have no occafion for a"levy, becaufe when Publius Valerius gave arms"to the commons, for the recovery of the Capitol,"they all took an oath to him, that they would af-"femble on an order from the conful, and would"not depart without his permiffion. We therefore"publifh our orders, that every one of you who"have taken the oath, attend to-morrow, under
"arms,







OCR Output








O F R O M E, 323


confuls. Many flood forth to argue againft this B O O Kproceeding; particular!/ Caius Claudius exclaimed, ._-^^that " it was over the patricians, not over the ene- Y.R. 306."my, that the confuls wifhed to triumph; and, B.c. 4*6'"that they fought it as a return for their private"kindnefs to a tribune, not as an honour due to"valour. That a triumph was a matter which had"never, hitherto, been directed by the people j but"the judgment on the merit, and the difpofal of it,"had always been in the fenate. That even the"kings had not in this refpect derogated from the"majefty of that order, the principal one in the"ftate. He charged the tribunes, not to occupy"every department, fo entirely, with their own"authority, as to leave no room for the deliberation"of the public; and afierted, that by no other means"could the ftate be free, or the laws equalized, than'' by each order maintaining its own rights, and its"own dignity." Though many arguments wereufed to the fame purpofe by the other elder fena-tors, yet every one of the tribes approved of the pro-pofition. This was the firft inftance of a triumphcelebrated by order of the people, without the appro­bation of the fenate.
LXIV. THIS victory of the tribunes and com­mons was very near terminating in a wanton irregu­larity of pernicious tendency, a confpiracy beingformed among the tribunes to procure the re-electionof the fame perfons to that office; and, in order thattheir own ambition might be the lefs confpicuous, tore.clect the fame confuls. They alleged, as a pre­text, a combination of the patricians to fap the foun­dation of the rights of the commons, by the affrontswhich they threw upon the confuls. "What would be"the confequence," they faid, " if, before the laws"were firmly eftablimed, confuls mould, with the"power of their factions, make an attack on the"new tribunes? For they could .not always havey 2 "Valcrii







OCR Output








Ot ROME. 67


XXXVI. HB intended alfo to have furrounded B o o K.the city with a ftone wall; but a war with the Sa- 1-._^_bines interrupted his defigns. And fo fuddenly didthis break out, that the enemy pafied the Anio, be­fore the Roman troops could march out to me'etthem, and flop their progrefs. This produced agreat alarm at Rome, and, in the firft engagement,the victory remained undecided, after great'flaugh­ter on both fides. The enemy afterwards havingretired to their camp, and allowed the Romans timeto prepare for the war anew, Tarquinius, obfervingthat the principal defect of his army was the wantof cavalry, refolved to add other centuries to theRamnenfes, Titienfes, and Luceres, inftituted byRomulus, and to leave them diftinguifhed by hisown name. As Romulus, when he firft formed thisinftitution, had made ufe of augury, Accius Naevius,a celebrated augur at that time, infifted that no alte­ration or addition could be made to it, without thefanction of the birds. The king was highly dif-pleafed at this, and, in ridicule of the art, faid, as weare told, " Come, you diviner, difcover, by your"augury, whether what I am now thinking of can be"accomplifhed." The other having tried the matteraccording to the rules of augury, and declared that itcould be accomplifhed, " Well," faid he, " what I"was thinking of was, whether you could cut a"whetftone in two with a razor. Take thefe, then,"and perform what your birds portend to be prac-C' ticable." On which, as the ftory goes, he, with­out any difficulty, cut the whetftone. There was aftatue of Accius, with a fillet on his head, in theplace where the transaction happened, in the Comi-tium* or place of afiembly, juft on the fteps, at theleft-hand fide of the fenate-houfe. It is alfo faid,that the whetftone was fixed in the fame place, thereto remain, as a monument of this miracle, to pofte-
• The Comitium was a part of the Roman Forum, where, in earlytimes, afierabtiet of tht people were h'ld, <nd th; aflemblies of theCuriae always.
f a rity.







OCR Output








PREFACE. xxvii


The Tranflator had intended a much morecopious commentary, than that which now ac­companies this work; and, in that view, hehad prepared feveral diflertations upon themanners and cuftoms of the Romans; theirfenate; their laws; their religious rites; theirarts of war, navigation, and commerce, &c.But he acknowledges, with much pleafure',that he has fmce found his labour, upon thofcfubjedrs, rendered unneceflary by the publica­tion of Dr. Adams Roman Antiquities; a workfo excellent in its kind, that whoever has theinftruction of youth committed to his care, "*•
will do them injuftice, if he omits to recom­mend it to their perufal. The notes, therefore,which are added, and which the Tranflator nowthinks it his duty to make as few, and as fhortas poflible, are fuch only as were deemed moreimmediately neceflary to render fome paffagesintelligible to the mere Englifh reader.
It hath been an ufual practice, in Prefaces toworks of this kind, for the Authors of them toload the labours of their predeceffors withabufe: a pradice, of which the prefent Tranf-iu tor acknowledges he neither fees the neceflity,nor the utility. For, mould he fucceed in dif-paraging the works of others, in the humble;
walk of tranflation; mould he be able to provetheir works ever fo wretchedly executed, itwill by no means follow from thence, that hisis better. That he thinks it is, is clear fromhis prefuming to publifh it. But, as the publichas an undoubted right to judge for itfelf, andwill moft afluredly exercife that right, the fuc-cefs of every work, of whatever kind, muftultimately depend upon its own merit.
To







OCR Output








xxii PREFACE.


the murder of Brachyllas *, who, he tells us,was made Boeotarch, or chief magiftrate of theBoeotians, " for no other reafon, than becaufe•" he had been commander of the Boeotians lerv-"ing in the army of Philip; paffing by Zeuxip-"pus, Pififtratus, and the others who had prc*"moted the alliance with Rome." That thefemen, offended at prefent, and alarmed aboutfuture confequences, refolved to take off Bra­chyllas, and accordingly procured fix affaflins,who put him to death. In thefe, and othercircumftances, our Author perfectly agrees withPolybius, whofe account or this whole affair hefeems to have almoft literally copied; with theomiflion however, out of tendernefs for thecharacter of Quintius, of a very material cii>cumftance; which is, that the project of mur­dering Brachyllas was firft opened in a con­ference between Zeuxis, Prfiftratus, and Quin­tius, who told them, that he would not, himfelf,do any thing to promote it; but that, if theywere difpofed to the execution of fuch a plan,he would do nothing to obftrudt it; and headds, that he directed them to confer upon thematter with Alexamenes, the ^Etolian, who wasthe perfon, he fays, that procured the aflaflins.
Another, and a very remarkable inftance ofpartiality to the character of his countrymen,we have in his celebrated account of ScipioAfricanus; who feems, above all others men­tioned in his Hiftory, to have engagedhis fondeft, and, as he himfelf admits, hispartial attention: for when he firft introduces
» B. .\xxiii. 17, 8.


7 him,







OCR Output








34 THEHISTORY


B o o K common language could they have communicated?L._^'- . or with what fafety could a fingle man have madehis way thither, through fo many nations differing intheir language and manners? I therefore rather be­lieve, that his mind was, by nature, furnifhed withvirtuou:; difpofitions, and that the inftructions whichhe received were, notfo much, in foreign learning, asin the coarie and fevere difcipline of the Sabines,than whom no race of men were lefs corrupted byrefinements. On hearing the name of Numa Pom-pilius, although the Roman fathers faw that the ba­lance of power would incline to .the Sabines, if theking were chofen from among them, yet, no oneprefumingto prefer himfelf, or any other of his ownparty, or, in fhort, any one of the fathers, or ci­tizens, to him, they all, to a man, concurred invoting that the kingdom fhould be conferred onY. R. Numa Pompilius. When he arrived, in conlc-B39c. quence of their invitation, he ordered, that, as Ro-7.13. mulus, on the founding of the city, had obtained the.. fpvereign power by an augury, fo the gods fhouldbe confulted, in like manner, concerning himfelf.Accordingly, being conducted into the citadel by anaugur, to which profefEon was annexed, for everafter, by public authority, the honour of perform­ing that folemn office, he fat down on a ftone withhis face turned towards the South: the augur tookhis feat at his left hand, with his head covered, hold­ing in his right hand a crooked wand free from knots,•which they called lituus; then, taking a view to­wards the city, and the adjacent country, after offer­ing prayers to the gods, he marked out the regionsof the f ky from Haft to Weft; the parts toward theSooth, he called the right, thofe toward the North,the left; and, in front of him, he marked, in hismind, a boundary at the greateft diftance that hiseye could reach. Then, ihifting the lituus into hisleft hand, and laying his right on Numa's head, hegrayed in this manner: " Father Jupiter, if it is thy


"will







OCR Output








72 THE HISTORY


BOOK was highly beloved and refpected; and that the cu>cumftance of his mother having fallen into the ene­my's hands, on the taking of her native city, gaverife to the opinion of his being barn of a (lave.
XL. ABOUT the thirty-eighth year of the reign,of Tarquinius, Servius Tullius ftood in the higheftdegree of eftimation, not only with the king, butwith the fenate and the commons. At this time, thetwo tons of Ancus, although they had before thisalways confidered it as the higheft indignity, thatthey mould be expelled from the throne of theirfather, by the perfidy of their guardian, and thatthe fovereignty of Rome mould be enjoyed by aftranger, whofe family, fo far from being natives ofthe city, were not even natives of Italy, yet nowfelt their indignation rife to a higher pitch of vio­lence, at the probability that the crown was not torevert to them even after Tarquinius, but was tocontinue to fink one ftep after another, until it fellon the head of a flave: fo that, within the fpace ofa little more than an hundred years, from the time'when Romulus, defcended from, a deity, and himfelfa deity, had, during his abode on earth, held the.government, a flave, the fon of a (lave, fhould nowget poficifion of it. They looked on it as a difgraceto the Roman name in general, and particularly totheir own houfe, if, while there was male iflue of kingAncus furviving, the government of Rome fhouldbe proftituted not only to ftrangers, but to flaves.They determined, therefore, to prevent this dif-honour, by the fword. But refentment for the in­jury which they had fuffered, ftimulated them ftrong-ly to attack Tarquinius himfelf, rather than Servius;and 'alib the conrideration that the king, if he furTvived, would be able to take levcrer vengeance forthe murder than a private perfon could; and tjhat,befides, were Servius put to death, whatever otherfon-in-law he might choofe, it might be expected
that







OCR Output








418 THE HISTORY


BOOK the three plebeians, Quintus Silius, Publius,-^^_. TElius, and Publius Pupius were preferred beforeY.R. 346 Jyoung men of the moft illuftrious families. ThatB. C.406* the people exerted this freedom, in giving their fuf-frages,' was owing, I find, to the Icilii, out of whichfamily, the moft hoftile of any to the patricians, threewere appointed tribunes for that year; who, afterflattering the people with the profpectof a multitudeof various and great defigns to be archieved, andthereby exciting their moft ardent wifhes, affirmedthat they would not ftir a ftep, unlefs the peoplewould, at leaft in the election of qusftors, the onlyone which the fenate had left open to both patrici­ans and plebeians, fhew a proper degree of fpiritfor the accomplifhtnent of what they wifhed for folong, and what the laws had put in their power.The commons, therefore, confidered this as an im­portant victory, and eftimated the quaeftorfhip in itsprefent ftate, not acccording to the intrinfic value ofthe office itfelf, but as it appeared to lay open to newmen an accefs to the conlulfhip and the honours of atriumph. On the other hand, the patricians ex-pitied great indignation, at the profpect of thepofts of honour not being fhared with others, but loftto themfclves, affirming, that " if things were to re-"main in that ftate, it would be folly to educate"children, who, being excluded from the ftation of"their anceftors, andxfceing others in pofieflion of"their rightful honours, would be left without com-"mand or power in the ftations of Salii or Flamens,"with no other employment than that of offering"facrifices for the people." The minds of bothparties being highly irritatcd, while the commonsaflumed new courage, and had alfo acquired threeleaders of the popular caufea of moft diftinguifhedreputation, the fenate, feeing that every electionwherein the commons had liberty of choofing out ofboth parties, would prove in the iflue like that ofthe quaeftors, were earneft for the election of con­







OCR Output








/ OF ROME. gr


 


fign:—that he had no doubt but, if the intellt- BOOKgence was true, he would, early next morning,when the afiembly met, come thjtherjin arms,attended by an armed force. \ He was told","number of fwords had been carried to't his houfc'whether that were falfe or not, might'' be llTftilliily knuwiijand he requefted that they - ^('' would go with him directty to Turnus." ^TEey ~ ^faw fome grounds of fufpicion, in the violent temperof Turnus; his difcourfe yefterday, and the delay ofTarquinius; and it feemed not impofiible that themaflacre might have been deferred on that account.They went, therefore, with minds inclined to be.'lieve the report, but at the fame time determined,unlefs the fwords were difcovered, to confider all thereft as groundlefs. When they came to the fpot,.i.t guards were placed round Turnus, who was roufed. -/ from fleep; and the fervants, who, out of affectionto their mafter, prepared to ufe force, being fecured,the fwords, which had been concealed, were drawnout from every part of the lodging, and then theaffair appeared manifeft. Turnus was thrown intochains, and a great tumult enfuing, an afiembly ofthe Latines was immediately fummoned. Thereron the fwords being placed in the midft of them, tofuch a pitch of fury was their rage inflamed, that, notallowing him to make a defence, and ufing an ex­traordinary method of execution, they threw himdown into the refervoir of the water of Ferentina,where a hurdle being placed over him, and a heapof Hones raifed on that, herwas drowned.
r-^> *W*i>A£^ -•.•ftk*":-.^
LJI. TAROJTINIUS, having then re-affembled theLatines, and highly commended them, for havinginflicted on Turnus, as one convicted of parricide,the punifhment which he had merited by his attemptto overturn the government, fpoke to this purpofe:'?' That he might, without doubt, take upon himfelff' to act, in virtue of a right long fince eftablifhed,
"becaufc







OCR Output








OF ROME. 271


>
and, afterwards, to two heavy calamities which fell BOOKon them at once, famine and peftilence, making^. _^J -,dreadful havock among both men and cattle. The Y.R. 301.country was defolated, the city exhaufted, by a con- B. c.+il.tinual fuccefilon of deaths. Many illuftrious houfeswere in mourning: Servilius Cornelius Flamen Qui-rinalis died, and Caius Horatius Pulvillus augur,in whofe room the augurs elected Caius Veturius,with the greater fatisfaction, becaufe he had beencondemned by the commons. The conful Quinti-lius died, and four tribunes of the people. Such amultiplicity of loffes made it a melancholy year, butthere was no difturbance from any enemy. The Y. R. 3«'.next confuls were Caius Menenius and Publius Sef- 'C' 45°"tins Capitolinus. Neither during this year was thereany foreign war: at home, however, fome commo­tions arofe. The ambafladors had now returnedwith the Athenian laws, and the tribunes thereforeprefied, more earneftly, that the bufinefs of com­piling the laws might at laft be begun. It was re-iblved, that ten magiftrates, to be called decemvirs,fhoukl be created, from whom no appeal mould lie,and that there mould be no pther magiftrates duringthat year. It was difputed for fome time, whetherplebeians mould be admitted among them. At laft,that point was given up to the patricians, providedthat the Icilian law concerning the Aventine, andothers, called the devoting laws, mould not be re­pealed.
XXXIII. IN the three hundredand firft year, fromthe building of Rome, the form of the governmentunderwent a fecond change; the fupreme powerbeing transferred from confuls to decemvirs, as it hadformerly been from kings to confuls. This new formwas lefs remarkable, becaufe it was not of long dura­tion; for the happy beginnings of that government ter­minated in extravagant licentioufnefs, which haftenedits difibludon j and recourfe was had to the former
8 . practice







OCR Output








i6S THE HISTORY


B o o K XXXVI. IT happened that preparations were±^~^j then making at Rome for a repetition of the greatY.R. 163. games. The reafon of repeating them was this:B. C. 489. on tne morning Of the day when the games were tohave been celebrated, before the fhews began, fomemafter of a family, after lafhing a flave loaded with aneck-yoke, had driven him acrofs the middle of thecircus; the games afterwards began, as if this affairi had no relation to religion. Some mort time after,Titus Atinius, a plebeian, had a dream; he imaginedJupiter to have laid to him, that " the dancer, who"performed before the games, had been difpleafing"to him, and unlefs thofe games were repeated,"and that in a magnificent manner, the city would"be in danger; and ordered him to go and tell this"to the confuls." Although the man's mind wasunder the influence of a confiderable degree of fuper-ftition, yet the awe which he felt of the high dignityof the magiftrates, and his own apprehenfions left hefhould be treated by them, and the public, as an ob-iedt of ridicule, overcame that dread: this delay cofthim dear; for, within a few days he loft his fon:and, left the caufe of that fudden difafter mould bedoubtful, while he was overwhelmed with grief forhis lols, the fame phantom appeared to him in hisfleep, and feemed to afk him," whether he had got-"ten a fufficient reward for his contempt of the"deity?" telling him that " a ftill greater yet;"awaited him, unlefs he went immediately, and de-lt livered the meflage to the confuls." This madea deeper impreffion on his mind, and yet he ftill he-fitated and delayed, until at length he was attacked.by a grievous diforder, a ftroke of the palfy: then,at laft, he fubmitted to the admonitions of the divinedifpleafure: and, wearied out by his paft fufferings,and the apprehenfion of others which threatenedhim, he called a council of his intimate friends ; and,after he had acquainted them with the feveral things


which,







OCR Output








6 F & O M & ;£


Curiatii, which were hung up in the place where BOOKnow ftands the Horatian column; " O my fellow-"citizens," he exclaimed, "can you bear to be-"hold him laden with chains, and condemned to"ignominy, ftripes, and torture, whom, but juft"now, you law covered with the ornaments of"victory, marching in triumph! a fight fo horrid,"that fcarcely could the eyes of the Albans them-"felves endure it. Go, Licctor, bind the arms,'c which, but now, wielded thofe weapons which"acquired dominion to the Roman people: cover"the head of that man, to Whom your city owes"its liberty: hang him upon the gallows: fcOurge"him, within the Pomcerium; but do it betweert"thofe pillars, to which are fufpended the trophies"of his victory: fcourge him, without the Pomce-rc rium, but do it between the tombs of the Curiatii."For to what place can ye lead this youth, where"the monuments of his glory would not redeem"him from the ignominy of fuch a punimment?"The people could not withftand eitlier the tears ofthe father, or the intrepid fpirit of the youth him-felf, which no kind of danger could appal, and ra­ther out of admiration of his bravery, than regard tothe juftice of his caufe, they palTed a fentence of ac­quittal. Wherefore, that fome expiation might bemade for the act of manifeft murder, the father wasordered to make atonement for his fon at the publiccxpence. After performing expiatory facrifices,which continued afterwards to be celebrated by theHoratian family, he laid a beam acrofs the ftreet,and, covering the young man's head, made him,pafs, as it were, under the yoke. The beam re­mains to this day, being conftantly kept in repairat the expence of the public, and is called the lifter'sbeam. A tomb of fquared ftone was raifcd forHoratia, on the fpot where fhe fell.
\oi. i. a XXVII. THE







OCR Output








2B4 T H E H I'S T O R Y


BOOK many of the confulars exprefied their approbation.i_ _^_j Another meafure was propofed, more harfh in ap-Y.R. 305. pearance, but much lefs efficacious; it was, to orderB.C.447. the patricians to afiemble and appoint an interrex:for the patting of any refolution, would be an ac­knowledgment that the perfons, who convened thefenate, were invefted with fome offices whereas themember,who recommended that no refolution mouldpafs, meant thereby to declare them private citizens.When the caufe of the decemvirs was thus finkinginto ruin, Lucius Cornelius Maluginenfis, brother toMarcus Cornelius the decemvir, having been pur-pofely refcrved from among the confulars to clofcthe debate, under the pretence of anxiety about thewar, fupported his brother and his colleagues: "He"wondered," he faid, " by what fatality it hap-"pened, that thofe, who had been themfelves can-"didates for the decemvirate, were the perfons"who, either as fecondaries, or principals, waged"this attack on the decemvirs j and why they"fhould, now, at this particular time, when the"enemy were juft at the gates, take fuch pains to"fow clifTenfion among the citizens; whereas during"fo many months, wherein the attention of the ftate"had been difengaged, no one ever made it a mat-"ter of difpute, whether thofe, who held the admi-"niftration of the government, were legal ma-'' giftrates, or not; unlefs it were becaufe they"fuppofed, that, in a ftate of confufion, their con-"dudt would not be fo eafily feen through. How-'' ever, it was highly improper in any one to attempt"to prejudge a caufe of that magnitude, while men's"minds were occupied by more urgent concerns:"it was his opinion, that the plea urged by Valeri-"us and Horatius, that the office of decemvirs had"expired on the ides of May, mould be taken into", confederation, and difcufled by the fenate, when"the wars with which they were then threatened*' fhould be brought to a conclufion, and tranquil-
« lity







OCR Output








30 THE HISTORY


 


B o o K ftantly about I)is perfon, in time of peace as wellas war,
XVI. SUCH were his atchievements in hls mortalftate; after which, as he was holding an afiembly inthe plain, on the borders of the lake of Capra, forthe purpofe of reviewing his army, a fudden ftormarofe, accompanied with violent thunder and light­ning; the king was enveloped in a thick cloud,•which hid him from the eyes of the aflembly, andwas never more feen upon earth. The Romanyouth were at length eafed of their apprehenfions,by the return of calm and ferene weather, after fucha turbulent day; but when they faw the royal featempty, though they readily believed the fepators,who had ftood neareft to him, that he had beencarried up on high by the ftorm, yet they wereftruck with tbch dread at being thus left in a mannerfatherlefs, that, for fome time^ they remained inmournful filence. At laft, fome few letting theexample, the whole multitude falnted Romulus as"a deity, the fon of a deity; the king and parent"of the city of Rome;" and implored his favour,with prayers, that he would be pleafed always"propitioufly to watch over the fafcty of his own."offspring." Some, I believe, even at that time,harboured filent fufpicions that the king had beentorn in pieces by the hands of the fenators. Such areport was fpread abroad, but it was little credited,both on account of the high admiration entertained ofthe man, and becaufe the prefent confternation caufrdthe other account to be more generally received.It is farther mentioned, that a contrivance of oneparticular man procured additional credit to this re-prefcntation of the matter; for Proculus Julius, a
g!n of the appellation, although it muft be admitted to be, by nqmeans, certain, that they were not fo called, as fome allege, fromt.hc name of their captain, Celer; while others contend that they w'refo culled fiom the Greek woitl x.i*.\,, which lignifies a hoilan.i i.
perfon







OCR Output








OF ROME. 377


taken. In this year the cenfors, Caius Furlus Pa- BOOKcilus and Marcus Geganius Macerinus, pronouncedthat the undertakers had fulfilled their contract for Y.R.finiming the court-houfe *, in the field of Mars, andthe furvcy of the people was performed there for thefirft time.
XXIII. I FIND, in Licinius Macer, the fame con- Y.R. 3zt.fuls re-elected for the following year. Valerius An- B.C.4.31.tins and Quintus Tubero mention Marcus Manliusand Quintus Sulpicius as confuls of that year. Yet,in fupport of reprefentations fo widely different, bothTubero and Macer cite the linen books as their au­thority. Neither of them difallows it being recordedby antient writers, that there were military tribunesin that year. Licinius is of opinion, that the linenbooks ought to be implicitly followed. Tuberocannot determine pofitively on either fide. But thisis a point, which, among others, involved in ob- *fcurity by length of time, muft be left undetermined.The capture of Fidenas fpread a great alarm inEtruria; for not the Veienuans only, were terrifiedwith apprehenfions of fimilar ruin, but the Falfciansalfo, confcious of having commenced the war at firft,in conjunction with them, although they had notjoined them in the renewing of hoftilities. Thofetwo ftates, therefore, having fent ambafladors roundall the twelve ftates, and procured an order for ageneral meeting of all the ftates of Etruria at thetemple of Voltumna, the fenate, apprehenfive of apowerful attack from that quarter, ordered Mamer-cus ./Emilius to be a fecond time appointed dictator.He appointed Aulus Poftumius Tubertus mafter ofthe horfe, and made more powerful preparations forthe campaign than had been made for the laft, inproportion as the danger was greater from the whole


* Villa pubHca. It was deftined to public iiles, fueh as holdingthe ' cenfus' or Ajryey of the peo^lr, the reception of ambafiadors, &c.
body







OCR Output








f«l THE HISTORY


BOOK commons created, Caius Licinius, and Lucius AN,_J_T1._. binius; and thefe created three colleagues to them-Y. R. 260. felves, among whom was Sicinius, the advifer of theB. c.491. feceflion; but who the other two were, is notagreed: fome fay, that there were only two tribunescreated on the facred mount, and that the devotingY.R. 161. law * was palTed there. During the feceffion of theB. c. 491. comrnons, Spurius Caflius and Poftumus Cominiusentered on the confulfhip. In their confulatc thetreaty with the Latines was concluded; for the pur-pofe of ratifying this, one of the confuls remainedat Rome, and the other, being lent with an armyagainft the Volfcians, defeated and put to flight theVolfcians of Antiumj and, having driven them intothe town of Longula, purfued the blow, and made,himfeif mafter of the town. He afterwards tookPolufca, another town belonging to the fame people;then with all his force attacked Corioli. There wasthen in the camp, among others of the young nobi­lity, Caius Marcius, a youth of quick judgment and
• Which declared, that any perfon who ftould violale the perfon orpiivileges of a plebeian tribune, ihould b' devoted to Cerei, with hisproperty; and any one might put him to death with imponity. Thefetribune*, at their firft inftitution, could not properly be called rnagif-tratcs, having no particular tribunal, nor any jurifdiilion over theirfellow citizens. Drcflfed like private men, and attended only by oneofficer, or beadle, called Viator, they fat on a bench without the fenate,into which they were not admitted, except when the confuls requiredtlieir attendance, to gire their opinion on fome affair which concernedthe inten it of the plebeian3. Their fule function was to protect t!ieplebeians, by irrterpofing in cafe of any grievance or rmpofition at­tempted by their lupeiiors, and their power extended no farther thanone mile round the city. Yet they afterwards found means, under va­rious pretence1, and by iilmcft imperceptible degrees, to draw to them>fciviis, and to the commons, the larger fhare or the power of govern­ment; introducing a great degiee of democracy into the polity of theit.nr, which, fmce the expulfion of the kings, had been a kind of ari.tfociacy. They were not allowed' to be able in from the city one wholeday, except during the Latine fcftivaU, and were obliged to keep theirdoors open, night and day, to admit complainants. At the fametime, were efefted two other plebeian officers, called aftiftants to thetribunes; Imi being afterwards charged with the care of the publicbuildings, anil the cognfzance of a like nature, which had before be-iongtd to the confuls, they got the title ^Edilcs; (ab sdibus curan-•!:s,} from infpc&mg the public edifices,
, lively







OCR Output








ir PREFACE.


advantageous a connexion, and to have occu­pied himfclf, entirely, in the compofition of hishiftory; parts of which, as they were finiflied,he read to Auguftus and Mecaenas.
Diftracled with the tumult, and difgufted, itmay be, with the intrigues and cabals of Rome,he fought retirement and tranquillity in thebeautiful country, and delightful climate, ofNaples. Here, enjoying uninterrupted literaryeafe and quiet, he continued his labour, andrinifhed his work, comprifing, in an hundredand forty-two books, the hiftory of Rome,from the foundation of that city to the deathof Drufus, containing a period of feven hun­dred and forty-three years, ending nine yearsbefore the birth of our Saviour. Having com­pleted this great work, he returned to fpend theremainder of his days in his native country,where he died, A. D. 17, at the age of feventy-five years.
What family he left behind him, is notknown. Quintilian, however, mentions thathe had a fon, for whofe inftruction he drew upfome excellent obfervations on rhetoric; andthere is alfo reafon to fuppofe that he had adaughter, married to Lucius Magius, an orator,who is advantageoufly fpoken of by Seneca.
How highly his works were eftemed, andhimfelf perfonally honoured and refpe&ed,may be gathered from the manner in which heis mentioned by many ancient authors. Tacitustells us*, that " T. Livius, that admirable hifto-"rian, not more diitinguifhed by his eloquence
* Anna', ir. 34.
"than







OCR Output








O F R O M E. 335


bers, and killed, with their javelins, both the men BOOKand horfes. They met no more obftruction from . -^ _jthe cavalry. And now falling on the line of infantry, Y.R. 309.they difpatched an account of their fuccefs to the con- B. c. *+l.fuls, before whom the enemy's line was beginning togive ground. The news gave frefh fpirit to the Ro­mans, to purfue their advantage j while it difmayedthe ^quans, who were already wavering: victorybegan to declare againft them, firft, in the centre,where the charge of the cavalry had difordered theirranks: their left wing next began to give ground tothe conful Quintius: the greateft ftruggle was madeby their right: there, Agrippa, full of the ardour in-fpired by youth and vigour, when he faw every partof the line more fuccelsful than his own, fnatchedibme of the enfigns from the ftandard-bearers, andcarried them forward himfelf: fome of them, he eventhrew into the thick of the enemy; and the dread ofthe difgrace to which this might expofe them, fo ani­mated the foldiers, that they rufhed on againft theenemy. This rendered the victory equally decifivcin every quarter. At this juncture, a meflage wasbrought to him from Quintius, that he had defeatedthe enemy, and was ready to attack their camp; butdid not choofe to break intd it, until he fhould under-ftand that the battle was over on the left wing alfo;and defiring, that if he had completed the difcomhvture of the enemy, he would march up his troops tojoin him, that the whole army might all together takepofieffion of the booty. Agrippa, now victorious,met his victorious colleague with mutual congratu­lations; and, in conjunction with him, advanced tothe enemy's camp; where, meeting very few to op-pofe them, and thefe being inftantly routed, theyforced their way through the fortifications withoutdifficulty; and the troops having here acquired animmenfe booty, befides recovering their own effectswhich had been loft in the plundering of the coun­try, were then led home. I do not find, either that
the







OCR Output








OF ROME. 171


S* ye formerly received from the Roman people, BOOK"the calamities of the Volfcian race, and every . '__j"other matter of the kind, with what degree ofY.R.i6j.•f' patience do ye bear this infult thrown on you to- B.C.4*9.'' day, when they commenced their games by ex-"hibiting us to public ignominy? Did ye not per-*c ceive, that they performed a triumph over you"this day? That, as ye were retiring, ye ferved'' as a fpectack to all their citizens, to foreigners,'c to fo many of the neighbouring nations? That"your wives and your children were led captives't before the eyes of thq public? What do ye lup-"pofe were the fentiments of thofe who heard"the words of the crier, of thofe who beheld"you departing, or of thofe who met this dif-"graceful cavalcade? What elfe but that we"muft be fame polluted wretches, whofe prefencc"at the fhows would contaminate the games, and'c render an expiation neceflary; and that therefore"we were driven away from the manfions of a peo-"ple of fuch purity of character, from their meet-"ing and converfe? And befides, does it not ftrike"you, that we mould not now be alive, if we hadf' not haftened our departure? if indeed it ought to"be called a departure, and not a flight. And do*c ye not confider as enemies the inhabitants of that"city, wherein, had ye delayed for one day, ye'' muft, every one of you, have perifhed? It was a'' declaration of war againft you; for which, thofef who made it will fufFer feverely, if ye have the"fpirit of men." Their anger, which was hot be­fore, was, by this difcourfe, kindled to a flame, inwhich temper they feparated to their feveral homes,and each taking pains to roufe thofe of his own ftateto vengeance, they foon effected a general revolt offhe whole Volfcian nation.
XXXIX. THE commanders appointed for thiswar, by the unanimous choice of all the ftates, wereAttius Tullus and Caius Marcius the Roman exile j


ii on







OCR Output








3A. THE HISTORY


B O o K diverfity in their views, yet all concurred in wifhingi^-r-.__. for a king, for they had not yet rafted the fweets ofliberty. The fenate now began to fear, left as, the fen1timents of many of the neighbouring ftates were veryunfriendly towards them, feme foreign power mightattack them, while the ftate was cieftitute of a go­vernment, and the army deftitute of a commander.Every one therefore was defirous that there fhouldbe fome head, but no one party could be brought tothink of giving way to another. In this difficulty,the fenators fhared the government among them-felves; forming, out of their number, which con-Cfted of an hundred, ten decades, with one prefi-dent in each, who were to have the direction ofpublic affairs. Each ten governed jointly; the pre-fident alone had the Li&ors and other badges offbvereignty. The time of each holding the go.,vernment was limited to five days, and the admi-niftration went to them all in rotation. In thismanner a year paffed without a king; and that in-Y. R. terval, from this circumftance, was called an Inter­file. regnum; which term is ftill applied to fimilar714. interruptions of the regular government. By thistime, the commons began to murmur, alleging thapflavery was multiplied on them; that they had anhundred mafters fet over them inftead of one; and itbecame evident that they would no longer be i^itisfi-£d without a king, or without one chofen by them-• felves. The fenators, perceiving that fuch fchemeswere in agitation, judged it prudent to make a volun­tary offer of what they could not much longer retain:yet while they gratified the people in furrenderingto them the fovereign power, they took care not togive up a larger fhare of privilege than they ftillkept in their own hands; for they pafft'd a decree,that, when the people fhould elec t a king, thatelection fhould be valid, provided the iVnate ap­proved their choice. And, to this day, the fameright is claimed with refpect to the enacting of laws,


and







OCR Output








O F R O M E. 99.


at that time, and feas ftill more unknown. Titus B QrQ Kand Aruns fct out, and, as a companion, was fentwith them, Lucius Junius Brutus, fon to Tar-quinia, the king's fifter, a young man of a capa­city widely different from the aflumed appearancewhich he had put on. Having heard,that the prin­cipal men in the ftate, and, among the reft, his'brother, had been put to death by his uncle, he re-folved that the king mould find nothing in his ca­pacity, which he need dread, nor in his fortune, whichhe need covet; and he determined to find fecurity incontempt, fmce, in juftice, there was no protection.He took care, therefore, to fafhion his behaviour tothe refemblance of foolifhnefs, and fubmitted him-felf and his fortune to the king's rapacity. Nor didhe fhew any diflike to the furnamc of Brutus, con­tent that, under the cover of that appellation, thegenius, which was to be the deliverer of the Romanpeople, fhould tie concealed, and wait the properfeafon for exertion. He was, at this timt^ carriedto Delphi by the Tarquinii, rather as a fubject: ofJport, than as a companion; and is faid to havebrought as an offering to Apollo, a golden wand in-clofed in a ftaff of cornel-wood, hollowed for thepurpofe, an emblem figurative of the ftate of hisown capacity. When they arrived there, and exe­cuted their father's commiflion, the young men felta wifh to enquire, to which of them the kingdom ofRome was to come; and we are told, that thefewords were uttered from the bottom of the cave,"Young men, which ever of you mall firft kifs"your mother, he fliall pofiefs the fovereign power"at Rome." The Tarquinii ordered that thismatter fliould be kept fecret, with the utrnoft care;that Sextus, who had been left behind at Rome,might remain ignorant of the anfwer, and entitled tono chance for the kingdom. They themfelves hadrecourfe to lots, to determine which of them mouldiirft kifs their mother, on their return to RomeH 2 Brutus


 







OCR Output








O F R O M E. 485


timents j fo that no other circumftance obliged the BOOKcommons to refrain from violence, but that after a ^_-v!_._fclamour had been fet up as the prelude to a riot, the Y.R. 360.principal members of the fenate, throwing themfelves B.Ci 391'foremeft in the way of the crowd, defired that theymight be the perfons attacked, ftruck, and put todeath: and the populace not only abftained from'offering violence to their age, their dignity, andhonourable characters, but refpect for them re-ftrained their rage even from any fuch attempts onothers.
XXV. CAMILLUS on every occafion, and in everyplace, publicly afierted, that " there was nothing"furprizing in all thefe commotions; that the ftate"was actually gone mad j for though it was bound"by avow, yet it beftowed more concern on every"other kind of bufinefs, than on acquitting itfelf of"the obligation. He would lay nothing of the con-"tribution of an alms in reality, rather than of a"tenth. However, as each man had bound himfelf"in his private capacity, the public was fet free."But his confcience would not fuJter him to be filent"on another head, that the tenth of that part only"of the fpoil was fet apart, which confiiied of move-'"able effects, and no mention was made of the city,"or of the lands, which as well as the reft were"comprehended in the vow." The fenate, findingit difficult to form a determination on this point, re­ferred it to the pontiffs in conjunction with Camillusjand that body gave their opinion, that whatfoeverhad been the property of the Veientians before thelittering of the vow, and after the vow was made,came into the power of the Roman people; of thatthe tenth part was facred to Apollo. Thus the cityand the land were brought into the eftimate. Themoney was ifllied from the trealury, and the confularmilitary tribunes were commiflioned to lay it out inthe purchafe of gold. A fuSHcient quantity of this'i i 3 metal







OCR Output








21(5 THE HISTORY, &e.


BOOK the conful hefitated, between the confidence which^^^-^^he knew he might place in the valour of his men,Y.R. a86. and the difficulty of the ground, all cried out, withB. c. 466. one voicC, that they would proceed; and they in-ftantly put their words in execution; fticking theirfpears in the ground, that they might be lighter toclimb the fteeps, they ran forward in full fpeed.The Volfcians having at the firft onfet difchargedtheir miffive weapons, began to pour down on them,as they approached, the ftones which lay among theirfeet, and by inceflant blows from the higher ground,ib galled and difordered the Romans, that,their leftving was by this means almoft overborne; whenthe conful, juft as they were beginning to give way,reproaching them with their ramnefs, and at thefame time with want of ipirit, made their fears give.place to fhame. At firft, they ftood their groundwith determined firmnefs; then, as they recoveredltrength to renew the attack, in fpite of the difad-vantage of fituation, they ventured to advance, andraifing the mout anew, moved forward 'in a body."Then, rufhing on again in full career, they forcedtheir way, and got over the difficult part of theground; when they had reached almoft to the fum-mit of the hill, the enemy turned their backs, andthe purfuers and purfued, exerting their utmofbfpeed, both rufhed into the camp together, almoiiin one body. In this confirmation the camp wastaken. Such of the Volfcians as could make theirefcape, took the road to Antium; thither alfo theRoman army marched; and, after a fiege of a fewdays, the town furrendered, not becaufc the force ofthe befiegers was ftronger now than in the formt.rfiege, but becaufe the fpirits of the befieged werebroken by the late unfuccefsful battle, and the lofsof their camp.







OCR Output








O F R O M E. 37,


"mould not laft longer than a year and a half." BOOKNext day, he got the law pafied with the univerfal t ^' ^approbation of the people; and then faid, " To Y.R. 3u."convince you by my conduct, Romans, how much B. c. 431."I difapprove of long continuance in office, I here"refign the dictatorfhip." Having thus put anend to one office, and limits to another, he was,upon his refignation, efcorted by the people to hishoufe, with the warmeft expreffions of gratitude andaffedtion. The cenfors, highly offended at his hav­ing impofed a reftriction on a public office of theRoman ftate, degraded Mamercus into a lower tribe*,and, increafing his taxes eight-fold, disfranchifedhim f. We are told, that he bore this treatmentwith great magnanimity, regarding the caufe of thedifgrace rather than the dilgrace itfelf: and that theprincipal patricians, though they had been averfe toa diminution of the privileges of the cenforlhip, were,neverthelefs, highly difpleafed at this inftance ofharfl^ feverity in the cenfors: every one perceiving,that he muft be oftener and for a longer time fubje&to others in the office of cenfor, than he could holdthe office himfelf. The people's indignation cer­tainly rofe to fuch a height, that no other per-fon's influence but that of Mamercus himfelf could


• The Hi vi lion of the people into tribes* mada by Romulus, re.garded the ftock, or origin, of the conftituent members; the fublc-quent one, by Serviui, was merely local, and a tribe then fignificdnothing more than a certain fpace of ground with its inhabitants: butas the tribes increafcd in number, which they did at laft to thirty.five,this kind of divilion was kt afide, and a tribe became, not a quarterof the city, but a fraternity of citizens, connected by a participationin the common rights of the tribe, without any reference to their placetof refidence. The ruftic tribes were always reckoned more honour­able than the city tribes, becaufe the bulinefs of agriculture was heldin the higheft ethmation, and becaufe the lowrft of the people were en­rolled in the latter. The difference of rank, among the ruftic tribes,depended, partly, on their antiquity, and, partly, on the number ofilluftrious families contained in each. In many cafes, the tribes tooktheir names from fome of thofe diliinguifhed famllitt.
f A.I .u .uiu facere, lignifies to lirip a perfon of all the privileges qf* citizen, on which he became ' civil aerarins/ a citizen fo far only a*he paid uxer.


have







OCR Output








OF ROME.


cc foldiers retained the fame abilities after the expul- BOOK"fion of the decemvirs, which they had poffefied, ni. __,"before their appointment; and that the valour of Y.R. 50*."the Roman people was not diminifhed by the B.c. **'•"eftablifhment oflawswhich equalized their rights."After fpeaking to this purpofe among the battalionsof the infantry, he flew from thence to the cavalry."Come on, young men," faid he, "fhew that"ye excel the infantry in valour, as ye excel them"in honour and in rank. The infantry at the firft"onfet have made the enemy give way; before they"recover the fhock, give the reins to your horfes,"and drive them out of the field; they will not"fupport your charge, and even now, they rather"hefitate than refift." They fpurred on theirhorfes, and drove furioufly againft the enemy, whowere already difordered by. the attack of the foot;and after they had broken through the ranks, andpufhed on to the rear of their line, a part of them,wheeling round in the open fpace, cut off the ene­my's retreat to their camp, towards which the greaternumber of them now began to fly on all fides j and,by riding on before them, compelled them, throughfear, to take another courfe. The line of infantry,and the conful himfelf, with the main body of the .army, rufhed into the camp, and made themfelvesmafters of it, killing a vaft number, and gettingpofiefllon of booty ftill greater in proportion. Thenews of this victory was carried both to the city, andto the other camp in the country of the Sabines: in,the city it excited only general joy; in the camp itfired the minds of the foldiers with emulation of theglory their fellow foldiers had acquired. Hbratiushad already, by inuring them to excurfions, and try­ing them in fkirmiLhes, accuftomed them, rather toplace confidence in themfelves, than to think of theignominy which had been incurred under the com­mand of the decemvirs; and thefe flight engage­ments had ftrengthened their hopes with regard to a
general







OCR Output








O F R O M E. 263


he was requefted to " put on his gown, and hear a B O O K"meflage from the fenate." Surprized, and afk- •__ _T_ _jing if " all was well?" he bade his wife Racilia Y.R. 196.bring out his gown, quickly, from the cottage j Bt c. *s6'when he had put it on, after wiping off the fweatand duft, he came forward towards them; then thedeputies congratulated him, and faluted him dicta­tor j requefted his prefence in the city, and informedhim of the alarming fituation of the army: a vefielhad bee A prepared for Quintius by order of govern­ment, and, on his landing at the other fide, he wasreceived by his three fons, who came out to meethim; then by his other relations and friends, andafterwards by the greater part of the patricians.Surrounded by this numerous attendance, and thelictors marching before him, he was conducted tohis refidence. The plebeians, too, ran together fromall quartersj but they were far from beholdingQuintius with equal pleafure, for they thought thepowers annexed to that office too unlimited, and theman himfelf more arbitrary, even than the office.During that night, no farther fteps were taken thanto poft watches in the city.
XXVII. NEXT day, the dictator coming into theForum before it was light, named Lucius Tarqui-tius mafter of the horfe; he was of a patrician fa­mily, but though, by reafon of the narrownefs ofhis circumftances, he had ferved among the foot,yet he was accounted by many degrees the firft, inmilitary merit, among all the young men of Rome.Attended by his mafter of the horfe, he came to theafiembly of the people, proclaimed a ceflation ofcivil bufinefs, ordered the mops to be fhnt in allparts of the city, and that no one mould attend toany private affairs; then iflued orders that all whowere of the military age mould attend, under arms,in the field of Mars, before fun-fet, with victualsfor five days, ready drefied, and twelve palifadeseach j and that thofe whofe age rendered them unfit
s 4 for







OCR Output








i2o THE HISTORY


BO o K" of terror to my countrymen? Does my reputation.j__Tl__i " among you depend on fo mere a trifle.? Is myY. R.14.?." title to your confidence fo flightly founded, thatB. c. 507. 1i \t is more to be confidered where I am, than what"I am? Citizens, the houfe of Publius Valerius"fhall be no obftructicn to your freedom j the Ve-"lian mount fhall be fccure to you: I will not only"bring down my houfe to the plain, but will fix it"under the hill, that your dwellings may overlook"that of your fufpected countryman. Let thofe"build on the Velian mount to whom ye can better"intruft your liberty, than to Publius Valerius."Immediately all the materials were brought downfrom the Velian mount, and the houfe was built atthe foot of the hill, where the temple of victory nowftands.
VIII. SOME laws were then propofed by the con-ful, which not only cleared him from all fufpicion ofa defign to porlcfs himfelf of regal power, but wholetendency was fo contrary thereto, that they even ren­dered him popular, and from thence he acquired thefurname of Pubiicola. Such, particularly, was thatconcerning an appeal to the people againft the de­crees ot the magiftrates, and that which devotedboth the perfon, and £,oods, of any who fhould forma defign of afluming regal power. Thefe laws•were highly acceptable to the populace, and, havingeffected the ratification of them, while aicne in of­fice, in order that the credit of them might be en­tirely his own, he then held an afien;b!y for the elec­tion of a new colleague. The conful elected wasSpurius Lucretius, who, being far advanced in years,and too feeble to fupport the duties of his office,died in a few days after. Marcus Horatius Pulvilluswas fubftituted in the room of Lucretius. In fomeold writers I find no mention of Lucretius as conful;they place Horatius as immediate fucceffor to Bru­tus: I fuppofe he was not taken notice of, becaufe


his







OCR Output








THE HISTORY


 


LIII. " BUT the cafe itfelf compels us to leave acity defolated by fire and ruin, and remove toVeil, where every thing is entire, and not todiftrefs the needy commons by building here."Now, I think, Romans, it muft be evident to"yourfelves, though I fhould not fay a word on'c the fubjett, that this is byt a pretext held out to"ferve a purpofe, and not the real motive. For yc'' remember, that this fcheme of our removing to"Veii was agitated before the coming of the Gauls,"^vhen the buildings, both public and private,"were unhurt, and the city ftood in fafety. Now'' obferve, tribunes, the difference between my"way of thinking and yours. Ye are of opinion,•' that, even though it were not advifeable to be"done at that time, yet it is plainly expedient now.rc On the contrary, and be not furprifed at what I"fay, until ye hear my reafons, even allowing that"it had been advifeable to have removed at that"time, when the whole city was in a ftate of'c fafety, I would not vote for leaving thefe ruins"now. Becaule at that time the caufe of our re-"moving into a captured city would have been a"victory obtained, a caufe glorious to us and our"pofterity; fuch a removal, now, would be"wretched and difhonourable to us, glorious to"the Gauls. For we fhall appear not to have left"our country in confequence of vicctory, but to"have loft it by being vanquifhed; and, by the"flight at the Allia, by the capture of the city,"by the blockade of the Capitol, to have been laid"under the neceffity of forfaking our dwellings,"and betaking ourfelves to exile and flight, from a"place which we were not able to defend. And"have the Gauls been able to demoiim Rome, and'"fhall the Romans be deemed unable to reftore it ^"What remains, then, but that ye allow diem to"come with new forces, for it is certain they have"numbers fcarcely credible, and make it their
6 "choice







OCR Output








O F R O M E. 43


of fuccefs, he was rather inclined to violent meafures. B O O KBoth of them then turning their thoughts to devifefome glan, they adopted one, for which accident hadalready laid the foundation.
XXIV. IT happened, that, in each of the armies,there were three twin brothers, between whom therewas no difparity, in point of age, or of ftrength.That their names were Hbratius and Curiatius, wehave fufficient certainty, for no occurrence of anti­quity has ever been more univerfally noticed; ye"t,notwithftanding that the fact is fo well afcertained,there ftill remains a doubt refpecting the names, towhich nation the Horatii belonged, and to whichthe Curiatii: authors are divided on the point;finding, however, that the greater number concur, incalling the Horatii, Romans, I am inclined to followthem. To thefe three brothers, on each fide, thekings propofed, that they fliould fupport by theirarms the honour of their refpective countries; in­forming them, that the fovereignty was to be en­joyed by that nation, whofe champions mould provevictorious in the combat. No reluctance was (hewnon their parts, and time and place were appointed.Previous to the fight, a league was made betweenthe Romans and Albans, on thefe conditions; that,whichever of the two nations fhould, by its charrt-pions, obtain victory in the combat, that nationfliould, without furthet difpute, pofiefs fovereigndominion over the other. Various treaties • areformed on different terms, but the mode of ratifica­tion is the fame in all. The following is the man­ner in which, as we are told, they proceeded onthat occafion j and we have no record of any moreantient treaty. The herald afked the king, in thefewords; "Doft thou, O king, order me to ftrike"a league with the Pater Patratus * of the. Alban
• The duty of the Pater Patratuj was, to attend the making ofthe treaty, and to ratify it by oath.
"nation?"







OCR Output








tw THEHISTORY


BOOK ftyle: the privileges of all ranks being now reduced^-^-_. to one level, thefe grew uneafy at the reftraint here-Y.K.H.S. by laid on their irregularities, and complained hea-B.c. 507. yily among themfelves, that the liberty of others hadimpofed flavery on them. '" A king was a human"being; from him might a requeft be obtained,"whether right or wrong; with him there was"room for favour, and for acts of kindnefs; he'' could be angry, and he could forgive; he knew(< a diftinction between a friend and an enemy. But"the law was a deaf inexorable being, calculated"rather for the fecurity and advantage of the poor,"than of the rich; and admitted of no relaxation or"indulgence, if its bounds were tranfgrefied. Men"being liable to fo many miftakes, to have no other"fecurity but innocence, is a hazardous fituation."While their minds were in this difcontented ftate,ambafiadors arrived from the Tarquinii, who, with­out any mention of their reftoiration, demanded onlytheir effects: the fenate, having granted them anaudience, continued their deliberations on the fub-ject for feveral days, being apprehenfive that a re-fufal to give, them up, would afford a plaufible rea-fon for a war, and the giving them up, a fund inaid of it. Meanwhile the ambafTadors were bufilyemployed in fchemes of another nature: whilft theyopenly demanded the effects, they were fecretlyforming a plan for recovering the throne, and ad-dreffing themfelves to the young nobles, feeminglyon the bufinefs which they were fuppofed to have incharge, they made trial of their difpofitions. Tothofe who lent a favourable ear to their propofals,they delivered letters from the Tarquinii, and con­certed meafures with them for receiving thofe princesprivately into the city by night.
IV. THE bufinefs was firft intrufted to the bro~thers of the name of Vitellii, and thofe of the nameof Aquillii j a lifter of the Vitellii had been married
to







OCR Output








O!" ROME. 213


from the burning of the country houfes, and by the B O O Kinhabitants flying to the city, that the Volfcians were . -,at hand; this incident reprefied the fedition, when Y.R.juft ripe, and on the point of breaking forth. The B.*-''confuls were inftantly obliged by the fenate to leadout the youth, from the city, againft the enemy jand this made the reft of the commons lefs turbulent.On the other fide, the enemy, without performingany thing farther than alarming the Romans withneedleis apprehenfions, retired with great precipita­tion. Numicius marched to Antium againft theVolfcians; Virginius againft the vEquans. Here,the army falling into an ambufcade, and being inthe utmoft danger of a total overthrow, was refcuedby the bravery of the foldiers from the imminentperil to which the carelefihefs of the conful hadex-pofed them. The operations againft the Volfcianswere better conducted; in the firft engagement, theenemy were routed, and compelled to fly into /-.i-tium, which, confidering thofe times, was a city ofgreat ftrength; the conful therefore not choofing toventure to attack it, took from the Antians anothertown called Ceno, which was not near fo ftrong.Whilft the .fltquans and Volfcians gave employmentto the Roman armies, the Sabines carried depreda­tion to the very gates of the city; however, theythemfelves, in a few days after, fuffered, from thetwo Roman armies, greater lofies than any whichthey had occafioned; both the confuls, provoked attheir proceedings, having marched into their ter­ritories.
LXIV. TOWARDS the clofe of the year, therewas fome interval of peace, but difturbed, as wasalways the cafe, by ftruggles between the patriciansand plebeians. The latter were fo incenfed, thatthey refufed to attend the afiembly held for the elec­tion of confuls, fo that by the votes of the patri-cians and their dependents, Titus Qnintius and
p 3 Quintus







OCR Output








OF ROME. 31


perfbn whofe teftimony, as we are told, deferved BOOKrefpect in any cafe, even of the greateft importance,Awhile the public were foil of grief for the king, andof difpleafyre againft the fenators, came put into anaiFembly of the people, and faid, " Romans, yefter-}' day at the dawn of day, Romulus, the parent of"this^pur city, defcendjng fuddenly from heaven,"appeared before me; and when, feized with hor-"ror, I flood in a worfhipping pofture, and adrf' drefled him, with prayers, that I might be al-5C lowed to behold him without being guilty of ira­ff piety, Go, faid he, tell the Romans that it is the"will of the gods that my Rome .mould be thef' metropolis of the world. Let them therefore"cultivate the arts of war; and be aflured, and5' hand this aflurance down to pofterity, that no hu-"man power is able to withftand the Roman arms.5C After thefe words, he went up, and vanifhed from"my fight." It was wonderful how readily thisftory, told by that man, was credited; and howmuch the grief of the people, and of the army, wasalTuaged, iby their being fatisfied of his immor­tality.
XVII. MEANWHILE the mmds of the fenatorswere agitated by ambition and contention for theyacant throne. Factions had not yet taken their rifefrom the interefts of individuals; for, among a new;people, no one yet pofiefled any eminent fuperiorityover the reft. The conteft lay between the differ­ent bodies of which the ftate was compofed: thofeof Sabine defcent were anxious that a king mould becliofen from among them, apprehenfive left theymight lofe their claim by difufc, there having beenno king of their race fince the death of Tatius;although, by the terms of the union, they were en­titled to equal privileges: on the other hand, theoriginal Romans fpurned the thought of a foreignerbeing placed on the throne. Notwithftanding this
diverfity







OCR Output








THE HISTORY


if I could, would I venture to pronounce an opi­nion; for I am aware that the matter is both remotein antiquity, and has been already treated by manyothers j the lateft writers always fuppofing them-felves capable, either of throwing fome new light onthe fubject, or, by the fuperiority of their talentsfor composition, of excelling the more inelegantwriters who preceded them. However that maybe, I mall, at all events, derive no fmall fatisfac-tion from the reflection that my beft endeavoursnave been exerted in tranfmitting to pofterity theatchievments of the greateft people in the world;and if, amidft fuch a multitude of writers, my namefbould not emerge from nbfcurity, I fhall confolemyfelf by confidering the diftinguimed reputation andeminent merit of thofe who ftand in my way in thepurfuit of fame. It may be farther obferved, tha;fuch a fubjecr. muft require a work of immenie ex­tent, as our refearches muft be carried back througha fpace of more than feven hundred years j that theftate has, from very fmall beginnings, gradually in-crcafed to fuch a magnitude, that it is now diftreffedby its own bulk; and befides, that there is every reafonto apprehend that the generality or readers will receivebut little pleafure from the accounts of its firft origin,or of the times immediately fucceeding, but will beimpatient to arrive at thefe modern times, in whichthe powers of this overgrown ftate have beenlong employed in working their own deftruction.On the other hand, I fhall efteem this as fomereward of my labour, that, fo long at leaf t as I fhallluve my thoughts totally occupied in inveftigatingthe tranfac~lions of fuch diftant times, without beingcmbarrafied by any of thofe unpleafing confidera-tions, which, though they might not have power towarp a writer's mind from the truth, would yet beflifficient to create uneafinefs, I fhall withdraw my-fe.lf from the light of the many evils to which ourcyes, in this age, have been fo long accuftomed.
• As







OCR Output








64 THE HISTORY


BOOK where all nobility was of late date, and acquired bymerit, fhe thought there would be room for a martof fpirit and induftry. She confidered that Tathjs,a Sabine, had enjoyed the throne; that Numa hadbeen called to the crown from Cures; and that An-cus was of a Sabine family by his father, and couldfhew only the fingle image of Numa to entitle himto nobility. She found it eafy to perfuade her huf-band, who was ambitious of honours, and had nonatural attachment to Tarquinii, except through hismother. Wherefore, carrying their effects alongwith them, they fet out together for Rome. Theyhappened to come through the Janiculum; there,as he fat in the chariot with his wife, an eagle, fuf-pending herfelf on her wings, ftooped gently, andtook off his cap, and, after hovering for fome timeover the chariot, with loud fcreams, replaced it in itsproper pofition on his head, as if fhe had been fentby fome deity to perform that office; and then, fly­ing up into the air, difappeared. It is faid, that thisaugury was received with great joy by Tanaquil, whowas well fkilled in celeftial prodigies, as the Etruriansgenerally are. Embracing her hufband, fhe defiredhim to cherifh hopes of high and magnificent fortune,for that fuch a bird, from fuch a quarter of the heaven,the mefienger of fuch a deity, portended no lefs; thatit had exhibited the omen on the moft elevated partof the human body, and had lifted up the ornament,placed on the head of man, in order to replace it onthe fame part, by direction of the gods. Full of thefethoughts and expectations, they advanced into thecity, and having purchafed a houfe there, they gaveout his name as Lucius Tarquinius. The circum-ftance of his being a ftranger, and his wealth, foonattracted the general notice of the Romans; nor washe wanting, on his part, in aiding the efforts of for­tune in his favour; he conciliated the friend fhip ofall, to the utmoft of his power, by his courteous ad-drefs, hofpitable entertainments, and generous acts i
at







OCR Output








 


 







OCR Output








5* THE HISTORY


B o o K affairs, with that which they had enjoyed underNuma,L '__. became pofiefied of an opinion, that the only prof-pect left them, of being relieved from the ficknefs,was, in obtaining pardon and favour from the gods. Itis faid, that the king himfclf, turning over the com­mentaries of Numa, and difcovering there, that cer­tain fecret folemn facrifices had been performed toJupiter Elicius, fhut himfelf up, and fet about theperformance of this foltmnity; but, not having un­dertaken, or conducted, the rites, in due form, he notonly failed of obtaining any notification from thegods, but, through the refentment of Jupiter, forbeing addrefied in an improper manner, was ftruckwith lightning, and reduced to afhes, together withhis houfe. Tullus reigned thirty-two years, highlyrenowned for his military atchievements.
Y. R. XXXII. ON the death of Tullus, the directionjVc. Of affa'rs, according to the mode adopted from the6s*. beginning, fell into the" hands of the fenate; theynominated an interrex, who prefided at the election,when the people created Ancus Marcius king, andthe fenate approved of their choice. Ancus Mar­cius was the grandfon of Numa Pompilius, by hisdaughter. As foon as he was in pofieffion of thethrone, reflecting on the glory which his grandfa­ther had acquired, and confidering that the lateireign, though highly honourable in other refpecl:s,yet, in one particular, had been very deficient, theaffairs of religion having been either quite neglecl:edor improperly managed, he judged it to be a matterof the utmoft confequence, to provide that the public•worfhip fhould be performed in the manner infti-tuted by Numa, and ordered the pontiff to makea tranfcript of every particular r.Ite, from the com­mentaries of that king, on white tables, and to ex-pofe it to the view of the public. From thefe pro-'. ceedings, not only his fubjeccts, whofe wifhes tendedto peace, but the neighbouring ftates alfo, conceived
6 hopes







OCR Output








OF ROME. ,4J


frefh ftnpes: on this fight, after fuch a relation, a B o o Kgreat uproar arofej and the tumult was no longer . _*1 .confined to the Forum, but fpread through every Y.R. IJ9.part of the city: thofe who were then in confine- B.C.493,ment, and thofe who had been releafed from it,forced their way into the public ftreet, and imploredthe protection of their fellow-citizens: there was nofpot which did not afford a voluntary affociate to addto the infurrection; from all quarters they ran in bo­dies, through every ftreet, with great clamour, intothe Forum: in no fmall danger were any of the fe-nators who happened to be in the Forum at thattime, and fell in the way of this mob: they wouldcertainly have proceeded to violence, had not the con-fuls, Publius Servilius and Appius Claudius, haftilyinterpofed, to fupprefs the tumult: to them the mul­titude turned their applications; mewed their chains,and other marks of wretchednefs; faid, this waswhat they had deferved; and, upbraiding them withtheir former fervices in war, in various engagements,infifted, with menaces, rather than fupplications, thatthey mould afiemble the fenate; they then placed .themfelves round the fenate-houfe, that they mightact as witneffes, and directors of the councils of go­vernment. A very fmall number of the fenators,whom chance threw in the way, and thefe againfttheir will, attended the confuls: fear kept the reftat a diftance, not only from the fenate-houfe, buteven from the Forum, fo that no bufinefs could bedone, by rcafon of the thinnefs of the fenate. Thepopulace then conceived an opinion, that there wasa defign to elude their demands, and throw delaysin the way of their bufinefs; that the abfence of fuchof the fenators as did not attend, was occafioned notby chance, nor by fear, but by their wifhes to ob-ftruct the bufinefs j that the confuls themfelve*fhewed a backwardnefs, and that their miferies weremanifeftly made, a matter of mpckery. The affairvot, i. L had



