


OCR Output








OF TACITUS, 197





ful to that emperor, and, after his death, bookdeclared with equal zeal in favour of Otho.Knowing their own strength, they Avereinspired with confidence, but a confidencethat made them judge for themselves, andproceed on their march by slow journeys,as their humour prompted. The cavalryand auxiliary cohorts came forward withmore alacrity.
The troops that marched from Romewere a formidable body. They consistedof five praetorian cohorts, several squadronsof horse, and the first legion. To thesewere added two thousand gladiators; aresource altogether ignoble, but "in civilcommotions often employed by generals ofthe first reputation. Annius G alius andVestricius Spurinna (b) were sent at thehead of this whole force, with orders totake post on the banks of the Po. Thefirst intention was to keep the enemy lockedup in Gaul; but that project proved abor­tive, Caecina having already passed theAlps. Otho followed with a select bodyof the praetorian guards, and all the vete­rans of that corps, with the city cohorts,







OCR Output








OF TACITUS. 77


rushed forward to commit a detestable book


i.


parricide, forgetting, in their frantic rage,that crimes of that atrocious nature are sure 822.to be punished by the prince that succeeds 69.to the sovereign power.
XLI. The prastorians no sooner ap­peared in sight, than the standard-bearerof the cohort still remaining with Galba(his name, we are told, was Attilius Yer-gilio) tore from the colours the image ofGalba, and dashed it on the ground. Thatsignal given, the soldiers, with one voice,declared for Otho. The people fled inconsternation. Such as lingered behindwere attacked sword in hand. The men,who carried Galba in a litter, were struckwith terror. In their fright they let himfall to the ground near the Curtian lake(tf).His last words, according as men admiredor hated him, have been variously re­ported. According to some, he asked, ina suppliant tone, What harm he had done ?and prayed for a few days, that he mightdischarge the donative due to the soldiers.Others assure us, that he presented hisneck to the assassin's stroke, and said







OCR Output








376 NOTES ON THE


The southern part of Gaul was called Gallia Narbonen-sis, and also Braccata.
Section XXIII.(a) This village, which, according to Cluverius, stoodat the distance of twenty miles from Cremona, and isnow called Caneto, has been rendered famous by thedefeat of Otho, and afterwards, as will be seen in thethird book of this History, by that of Vitellius.
Section XXIV.
i , • • • *
(a) It appears in Suetonius, that the place which
is called Castorum by Tacitus, was a spot where the
Temple of Castor was built: Otho trihus quidem, verum
mediocribus prceliis, apud Alpes, circaque Placentiam, et
ad Castoris (supple Templum) quod loco nomen est,
vicit. Sueton. in Qthone, s. 9. It was about twelve
miles from Cremona, between the Po and the Addua
(now Adda).
Section XXV.
(a) Epiphanes was the son of Antiochus IV. king ofCommagene, a district of Syria.
Section XXVII.
(a) Ticirium, a city built by the Transalpine Gauls onthe river Ticinus, which is beautifully described by Si-lius Italicus in the following lines:
Cseruleas Ticinus aquas et stagna vadosoPerspicuus servat turbari nescia fundo,- Et nitidum viridi lente trahit amne liquorem jVix credas labi, ripis tarn mitis opacisArgutosjJKer, volucrum certamina, cantusSomnrferam ducit lucenti gurgite lympham.
De Bello Punico, lib. iv. ver. 82.







OCR Output








186 THE HISTORY





book animated by the gallant exertions of thearmy under Vespasian, and fired with aspirit of emulation. Having no enemy tooppose, they were not made soldiers inthe field; but their spirit was roused, and,being unimpaired by fatigue, they wereready for a vigorous campaign. The twocommanders had an additional force ofauxiliary horse and foot, besides a navalarmament on the coast, and the supportof all the neighbouring kings. Add tothis, their own military character was atower of strength. Both stood high in re­putation, but for different reasons, and forqualities peculiar to each.
V. Vespasian possessed all the requi­sites that form a soldier and an officer.Prompt and zealous in the service, he wasoften seen at the head of a march ; hewent in person to mark out the ground ofhis camp, and, by night as well as day,he kept the enemy in a constant alarm,planning his measures with judgment, and'executing with vigour. To his diet he paidno regard, content with whatever camebefore him. In his apparel, plain and







OCR Output













OCR Output








OF TACITUS. 81





manner. The former brought to his mind bookan idea of majesty fallen from a state ofelevation ; and the death of the latterawakened the memory of an early friend­ship, and even into a heart like his, fierce,cruel, and ambitious, infused a tincture ofmelancholy. When Piso fell, an enemy ex­pired. Feeling for him neither regret norcompunction, he gave a loose to joy. Thethree heads were fixed on poles, and car­ried, amidst the ensigns of the cohorts,with the eagle of the legion, through thestreets of Rome. A band of soldiers fol­lowed, stretching forth their hands reek­ing With blood, and boasting aloud thatthey gave the mortal wounds, or that theywere present aiding and abetting; all, withtruth or falsehood, claiming the honourof an atrocious deed. No less than onehundred and twenty memorials, presentedon this occasion, by persons who claimedthe reward of crimes committed on thatdreadful day, were afterwards found byVitellius; and the several authors, afterdiligent search made by his orders, Werepunished with death, not from motives ofregard for the memory of Galba, but withvol. v. o







OCR Output








384 NOTES ON THE


Section LXXVII.
(a) In the reign of Claudius, Vespasian had obtainedtriumphal ornaments for his conduct in Britain. Suet.in Yesp. s. 4.
(b) Titus had served in the rank of military tribunein Britain as well as Germany, and gave early proofsof the modest merit that distinguished his character.'Suet, in Tito, s. 4.
Section LXXVIII.
(a) For a number of oracles and prodigies, see Suet.in Ve3p. s. 5 and 7-
(b) For Mount Carmel, see the Geographical Tableat the end of the Eighth Volume.
Section LXXX.
(a) In this passage Tacitus, perhaps, had his eyeupon the character of Scipio, as drawn by Livy. Fuitenim Scipio, 7ion veris tantum virtutibus mirabilis, sedarte quddam ab juventd in ostentationeni earum compo­sites. Livy, lib. xxvi. s. ig.
Section LXXXI.
(a) Sohemus, king of the country called Sopherie.Annals, xiii. s. 7- Antiochus, king of Commagene.Annals, xii. s. 55. Agrippa II, king of part of Judcea.Annals, xiii. s. 7- Berenice, sistar to> Agrippa, famousfor her love of Titus. See Appendix, to Hist. v.
(b) For Berytus, sec the Geographical Table at theend of the Eighth Volume.
Section LXXXII.(a) For the conduct of Titus, and the progress ofhis arms against the Jews, see Appendix to Hist. v. s. 21.







OCR Output








340 the HistonY





book the latter incurred the hatred of the peo*pie (c). From past transactions, the pro­vince and the allies in the neighbourhoodformed their idea of what they had to ex­pect under the reign of either of them:but the event convinced them of theirerror.
XCVIII. The exertions in Africa wereat first carried on with vigour. ValeriusFestus, the governor of the province, co­operated with the zeal of the people, butin a short time began to waver betweenthe contending parties. In his letters andpublic edicts he stood firm for Vitellius;his secret correspondence favoured Vespa­sian ; and, by this duplicity, he hoped, inthe end, to make terms for himself withthe conqueror. In Rhajtia and the adja­cent parts of Gaul, certain emissaries, em­ployed by Vespasian's friends, were seized#with letters and proclamations in theirpossession. They were sent to Vitellius,and by his order put to death. Others,by their own address, or the protection oftheir friends, escaped detection. The con­sequence was, that the measures adopted


4







OCR Output








OF TACITUS. 95





event. After the defeat of Julius Vindex {a), bookand the total rout of his armies, thevictorious legions, enriched with booty,grew wanton with success. To men, whowithout fatigue or danger had closed alucrative war, the love of enterprise be­came a natural passion. They preferredhostilities to a state of inaction, and plun­der to the soldier's pay. They had, tillthe late commotions called them forth, en­dured the hardships of a rigorous service,in a bleak climate and a desolate coun­try, where, even in time of peace, disci­pline Was enforced with strict severity.But discipline, they knew, would be re­laxed by civil discord. In the distractionsof parties, both sides encourage licentious­ness; and, by consequence, fraud, cor­ruption, and treachery triumph with im­punity. The mutinous soldiers were abun­dantly provided with arms and horses, bothfor parade and service. Before the latewar in Gaul, they saw no more than thecompany, or the troop of horse, to whichthey belonged. . Stationed at differentquarters, they never went beyond theirlimits, and the boundaries of the provinces


6







OCR Output








FIRST BOOK OF THE HISTORYt 365


{I) Arrius Antoninus, who appears in the foregoinglist of the consuls, was grandfather to Antoninus Pius,the upright and virtuous emperor. See letters to himby the younger Pliny, lib. iv. epist. 3 and 18; lib. v.epist. 10.
(c) For Cadius Rufus, see Annals, xii. s. 22. ForPedius Blaesus, see Annals, xiv. s. 18.
Section LXXVIII.(a) For the cities of Hispali» and Emerita, sec theGeographical Table at the end of the Eighth Volume,(J) See Suetonius, Lite of Otho, s. 7«
Section LXXXIV.
(a) This rule of military subordination stands con­firmed by experience in every age and country. Weread in Livy a speech of Paulus jEmilius to the sameeffect. Unum imperatorem in exercitu providere et con-sulere, quid agendum sit, debere, nunc per se, nunccum Us quos advocaverit in consilium. In quo exercitu,militeSf consul, et imperator, rumoribus vulgi circam-aguntur, ibi nihil salutare esse. Livy, lib. xliv. s. 34.
Section LXXXVI.(a) The isle in the Tiber, now called Isold di St.Bartolomeo.
(I) The Sublician Bridge, so called, because builtwith wood. A foundation of solid marble was laidafterwards, but nothing remains at present but theruins.
Section LXXXVII.
(a) See Annals, xiii. s. 24.







OCR Output








OT TACITUS. 47





tural knowledge, a man of the name of bookPtolemy, accompanied Otho into Spain.He had there foretold that Otho wouldsurvive the reign of Nero; and, the eventgiving credit to his art, he took upon himto promise greater things. He saw Galbaon the verge of life, and Otho in thevigour of his days. From that circum­stance, and the currents of popular rumourthat filled the city of Rome, this man drewhis conjectures, and ventured to announceOtho's elevation to the imperial dignity.These bodings were welcome to the ear ofOtho : he considered them as the effect ofscience, and believed the whole, with thatcredulity which, in a mind intiamed withambition, stands ready to receive the mar­vellous for reality. From this time, Pto­lemy was the chief actor in the darkscenes that followed. He inspired theplan of treason, and Otho embraced itwith impetuous ardour. The heart thathas formed the wish, and conceived theproject, has seldom any scruple about themeans.
XXIII. Whether this bold conspiracy


8







OCR Output








FIRST BOOK OF THE HISTORY. 359


thence called Rostra. For Galba's death and funeral,see Suetonius in Galba, s. 20.
Section XLII:
(a) Galba laboured under the weight of crimes com­mitted by his minister, Titus Vinius, who is said tohave been an accomplice in the plot, which was occa­sioned by his own iniquity.
Section XLIV.
(a) On seeing the head of Galba, Otho cried out,This is nothing, my fellow soldiers : bring me the headof Piso. See Plutarch, Life of Galba.
Section XLYI.
(a) Flavius Sabinus bad been appointed prajfect ofthe city by Nero. The soldiers loved the vices of theformer reigriy and for that reason continued Sabinus inthe same office. For more of Sabinus, see-History, ii,s. 74 and 751 and Suet, in Vespasian, s. 1.
Section XLVII,
(a) The two consuls, Galba and Vinius, being cutoff, the power of convening the senate devolved to thecity praetor. See Cicero's, Epistles, lib. x. cpist. 12.
(b) For Verania, the wife of Piso, see Pliny theconsul, lib. ii. epist. 20.
(c) Crispina, the daughter of Vinius, bought herfather's head at a great price from the bands of assassins,Plutarch, Life of Galba.
Section XLVIII.(a) Calvisius Sabinus, mentioned in this place, wasprobably the person who, in Caligula's reign, com­manded in Pannonia, and, on his return to Rome, wa?







OCR Output








OF TACITUS. 207





* . I
ntan squadron, .hady as already men­tioned (a), forced their way into Italy, andthere fixed the seat of war. In the con­duct of these men nothing proceeded fromprinciple. They had no regard for Otho,nor so much as a wish to serve Vitellius ;but, their vigour being relaxed by a longpeace, and their minds debased and pre­pared for slavery, they stood ready tostretch their necks to the yoke, whateverhand imposed it, in their choice of a mas­ter wholly indifferent. The fairest portionof Italy (b), extending from the Po to theAlps, with all its fertile plains and flou­rishing cities, was in the possession of Vi­tellius ; the forces sent forward by Caecinahaving already penetrated into that quar­ter. At Cremona a Pannonian cohort laiddown their arms ; and between Placentiaand Ticinum a party of a hundred horse,with a thousand .marines, were made pri­soners. In this tide of success nothingcould withstand the vigour of the Vitel-lians. The Po opposed its stream andits banks in vain. To the Batavians, andthe troops from beyond the Rhine, theriver was no more than a new motive to







OCR Output








328 THE HISTORY





of freedmen. The whole court seemed tobe in a state of intoxication. In the as­semblies held for the election of con­suls (b), Vitellius assumed nothing abovethe rights of a citizen. He behaved to thecandidates on a footing of equality. Heattended in the theatre, giving his ap­plause as a common spectator, and in thecircus, mixing with the factions of thepopulace. By those arts he tried to gainthe suffrages of the electors; arts, it mustbe acknowledged, often practised, and,when subservient to honest purposes, notto be condemned. But in a man likeVitellius, whose former life was too wellknown (c), the artifice served only to sinkhim into contempt.
He went frequently to the senate, evenon frivolous occasions, when the subjectof debate was altogether uninteresting.In that assembly Helvidius Priscus (d),praetor elect, happened to differ from theopinion of the emperor. Vitellius tookfire in the moment, but, checking himselfin time, called upon the tribunes of thepeople to support his authority. Hisfriends, apprehending the consequences







OCR Output








374 NOTES ON THE


In Pannonia. sThe seventh Galbian, trie1 thirteenth.In Dalmatia. /
The eleventh, the fourteemh.In Metsia. -,/rThe seventh Claudian, the eighth.
The third, fourth, sixth, twelfth.
In Jndcea.
The fifth, tenth, fifteenth.
^ InJEgijpt. j
The third, the twenty-second.
In Africa.
The third.
That so small a number of legions should be able notonly to conquer but to keep in subjection the wide extentof the Roman world, might be matter of wonder, if wedid not know the wisdom with which the legions wereestablished, and the military discipline that was, for anumber of ages, strictly maintained throughout theRoman armies. Brotier observes, that Marshal Saxe,whose extraordinary genius and great experience areuniversally known, was of opinion that France would dowell to adopt the system of the Roman legions, andnew-model her armies on that admirable plan of disci*pi inc. See Memoires sur VInfanterie, ou Trait c-des LS-gions, suivant I'Exemple des anciens Remains > par M- leMarecfw.1 de Saxe,
Section VIII.(a) A number of impostors, at different times, as­sumed the name of Nero. See Suetonius, in Nero,s, 97.


4







OCR Output








1 j4 THE HISTOTtY





mandcr in chief, subordination ceases,
discipline is at an end, and the best
concerted enterprise may be defeated.
And are we now to imagine, that the
" soldier, when the enemy is at hand,
" may seize his arms, and, as caprice or
" fancy prompts, sally forth in the dead
" of night ? Shall two or three drunken
*' men (in the last night's fray, I do not
" believe there were more) imbrue their
" hands in the blood of their officers?
" Shall they murder the centurions, and,
" in a fit of phrensy, rush to the pavilion
" of their general?
LXXXIV. " You, my fellow-soldiers," have transgressed the bounds of your" duty; the fact must be admitted; but" your zeal for mc was the cause. And" 3Tet, reflect for a moment, what might" have been the consequence ? Amidst" that general uproar, in the gloom of" midnight darkness, the assassins blow" might have been aimed at me, whom" you wished to defend. Give Vitellius" his option ; let him and his rebel soLdiers" have the power of choosing, and what







OCR Output








150 THE HISTORY





vengeance, now against the centurions,and, at times, against t^ie whole body ofthe senate. The soldiers neither knew thecause nor the object of their phrensy, and,having no particular victim in view, theyresolved to lay a scene of general slaugh­ter. They forced their way into the apart­ment of the prince. Otho, forgetting hisown rank and the majesty of empire,stood up on his couch, with tears and sup­plications imploring the soldiers to desist.He prevailed at length. The men retiredto the camp, with a sullen spirit, and guiltat their hearts. On the following dayRome had the appearance of a city takenby assault. The houses were shut, thestreets deserted, the populace in a generalpanic. The soldiers wandered about in asullen mood, with looks of discontent, ra­ther than repentance. The two praefects,Licinius Proculus and Plotius Firmus,went round to the several companies, andharangued the men, each according to hisown peculiar temper, in soothing terms,or in a style of reproach. A distributionof five thousand sesterces to each manconcluded the business. The tumult over,







OCR Output








OF TACITUS. 195





knight, and in the reign of Nero an in- bookformer by profession. In the beginning of'Galba's reign, it was ordained by a decree,that all causes against the race of publicaccusers should be fairly heard. This law,however salutary, was forced to yield to thetemper of the times; it was enforced, orrelaxed, as the person accused happenedto be of weight and consequence, or poorand friendless : it was, notwithstanding,still in force; and Crispus, availing him­self of it, exerted all his influence to ruinthe man who had been the prosecutor ofhis brother (a). In the senate his partywas strong and powerful. Without hear­ing the criminal, the fathers were for con­demning him to immediate execution.The violence of this proceeding stirred upan opposition. A party was formed againstthe overgrown power of the prosecutor.They insisted that the specific chargeshould be exhibited, and a day fixed,when the delinquent, however guilty,should be allowed the common right ofbeing heard in his defence. This motionwas carried, and the hearing of the causewas adjourned for a few days. The trial,


o 2







OCR Output








272 THE HISTORY





book The army wished to see him raised to thedignity of a Roman knight. Vitelliusknew that the request was a flight of adu­lation, and had the spirit to reject it; butsuch was his natural levity, that what herefused in public, he granted in privateover his bottle. And thus a despicableslave, who was goaded on by ambition,and had nothing to recommend him buthis vices, was honoured with the eques­trian ring.
LVIII. About the same time Vitelliusreceived advices that the two Mauri-tanias (a) had acceded to his party. Thisevent was occasioned by the murder ofLuceius Albinus, the governor of thatcountry. The province which was calledCaesariensis had been by Nero committedto Albinus; and the other, called Tingi-tana, was afterwards added by Galba.In consequence of his extensive com­mand, the governor was master of a con­siderable force; not less than nineteencohorts, five squadrons of horse, and anumerous body of Moors, accustomed tolive by depredation, and by their hardy







OCR Output








0F fAOJTUS* 257





big with danger to all parties, might have bookbeen renewed, and carried on with vigour.
XLVII. Otho had weighed all circum­stances : ambition was at an end, and heprepared to close the scene (a). He adjdressed the soldiers to the following effect:** When I behold the ardour that glows in" every breast; when I consider the virtue" that inspires so many gallant friends * I" cannot think of exposing you again to" the destructive sword; nor do I value" my life at such a pricei The views** which you display to me, were I dis*" posed to live, are bright and tempting:'* by renouncing them, I fall with greater" glory. I have made acquaintance with" fortune; we have tried each other; for" what length of time is not material; but" the felicity, which does not promise to** last, cannot be enjoyed with modera-" tion. Vitellius began the war; he" claimed the empire, and, by conse-" quence, I was obliged to have recourse•* to arms. That we fought once, his am-** bition was the cause; to end the dis-" pute by the event of one battle, and stop
vol. v. s







OCR Output








302 THE HISTORY





" that Nero towered above Vitellius : and" remember besides, that, in the eyes ofthe person who lives in fear, the man who" makes himself dreaded is illustrious." Do we doubt whether the armies can** create an emperor ? Vitellius furnishes" the proof; a man, without military fame," who never served a campaign; but owes" his elevation, not to his own merit, but" to Galba's want of popularity. His vic-" tory was not obtained by the ability of*' his generals, or the valour of his troops:" Otho was conquered by his own hand." That precipitate action made Vitellius" master of the Roman world, and, in re*•' turn, the infamy of Vitellius gives a lustre** to the name of Otho, insomuch that men" regret that unfortunate prince*
" At present, what is the conduct of our" new emperor ? He disbands the legions;" he disarms the cohorts, and every day** furnishes arms against himself. The fe-" rocity of his soldiers, whatever it may" have been, has long since evaporated in** victualling-houses and drunken revelry.•* After the example of their master, the


2







OCR Output








OF TACITUS. 187


simple, he was scarce distinguished from bookthe common men. With all this he had v—v—'a leaven of avarice. Forgive that vice, »w.
A. D.
and he was equal to the best generals of «»•
antiquity.
Mucianus was of a different cast. Richand magnificent, he appeared with an airof elevation above the rank of a privatecitizen. An able orator, and versed incivil business, he laid his schemes withjudgment: the politician appeared in all hismeasures. In the two men was seen a rareassemblage of extraordinary qualities. Byweeding out the vices of each, and unitingtheir virtues, the commonwealth wouldhave had an accomplished prince. Situatedas they were in contiguous provinces, Ves­pasian in Judaea, and Mucianus in Syria,they beheld each other, for some time,with the jealousy of rivals. The death ofNero put an end to their dissensions.From that time they began to act in con­cert. Their mutual friends made the firstadvances towards a reconciliation, and,by the address of Titus, a mere cessationof animosities was turned into a lasting







OCR Output








78 THE IlISTOftT





book with a firm tone of voice, ** Strike, if thegood of the commonwealth requires it."To ruffians thirsting for blood no matterwhat he said. By what hand the blow wasgiven cannot now be known. Some im­pute it to Terentius, a resumed veteran ;others, to a fellow of the name of Lecanius.A report still more general has transmitteddown to us the name of Camurius, a com­mon soldier of the fifteenth legion. Thisman, it is said, cut Calba's throat. Therest fell on with brutal rage, and, findinghis breast covered with armour, disseveredhis legs and arms. Nor did the barbariansdesist, till the emperor lay a headlesstrunk, deformed with wounds, and wel­tering in iris blood.
XLII. Titus Vinius was the nextvictim. The manner in which he met hisfate is likewise left uncertain. Whetheron the first assault his utterance was sup­pressed by fear, or whether he had powerto call out, that Otho had given no ordersagainst his life, we have now no means ofknowing. Those words, if really spoken,might be an effort of pusillanimity to save







OCR Output








226 THE HISTORY





book by a stroke of policy, to divide the muti­nous troops, whom, in their collectivebody, he found impatient of control.This measure gave umbrage to the rest ofhis army. The auxiliaries murmured, andthe legions complained aloud, " that they" were now to lose the bravest troops in" the service. The enemy was near at" hand, and was that a time to withdraw" a body of gallant soldiers, who had so" often fought with undaunted courage," and so often returned crowned with vic-" tory ? If a single province is of more•**•' moment than the city of Rome, and the" empire is but a secondary consideration,Ai why not march with the united strength" of the whole army ? On the other hand," if Italy must be the theatre of war; if'•'' there, and there only, a decisive victory- ■ can be obtained; why. separate from" the army those gallant veterans, like the'- soundest limbs cut off from the body?"
■' XXIX. To allay this ferment, Valenswent forth, preceded by his lictors. Themen paid no regard to their general; they







OCR Output








OF TACITUS. 273





course of life prepared for the fatigues of bookwar. Albinus, on the death of Galba, de­clared in favour of Otho, and, not contentwith his power in Africa, began to forman enterprise against Spain, which wasseparated by a narrow channel (b). Clu-vius Rufus presided in Spain. Alarmedat the projects of the commander inAfrica, he ordered the tenth legion tomarch to the sea-coast, with a design, ashe gave out, to cross the sea. In the meantime he dispatched a few chosen centu­rions to tamper with the Moors, and drawthem over to the interest of Vitellius. Thiswas not a difficult task. The fame of theGerman armies resounded through all theprovinces. A report prevailed, at the sametime, that Albinus, disdaining the title ofprocurator, had usurped the regal dia­dem, and the name of Juba.
LIX. The currents of popular opi­nion were by these circumstances entirelychanged in Africa. Asinius Pollio, whocommanded a squadron of horse in thatcountry, and professed himself devotedto Albinus, was immediately murdered.


vol. v. T







OCR Output








OF TACITDS. 297





with care all possible events. He consi- bookdered the importance of the war, and madean estimate of his strength, the resourcesin his power, and the forces at a distance,as well as those that lay near at hand. Thelegions were devoted to his interest, inso­much that, when he showed himself thefirst to swear fidelity to Vitellius, and offerup vows for the prosperity of his reign, thesoldiers marked their displeasure by a sul­len silence. Mucianus was the friend ofTitus, and by no means averse from thefather. The praefect of iEgypt, whosename was Alexander, was ready to pro­mote the enterprise. The third legion,which had been removed from Syria toMaesia, Vespasian considered as his own,and had, besides, good reason to hope,that the forces in lllyricum would enterinto the confederacy. In fact, the armies,wherever stationed, were every day moreand more incensed against the soldiers thatcame amongst them from the Vitellianparty ; a set of men, rough and horrid intheir appearance, savage in their man­ners, and in their brutal discourse affect­ing to treat the legions of the East with







OCR Output








oi? Tacitus. 129





Vitelliusj when he was the proconsular bookgovernor (b) of Africa. Nero, when he pro­jected an expedition into iEgypt, orderedthem to sail for that country ; but, beingsoon after alarmed by the commotionsstirred up by Vindex, he called them backto Italy, where they remained from thattime. Their officers, unacquainted withOtho, and closely connected with Vitellius,espoused the interest of the latter. By re­presenting to the men the strength of thelegions then on their march to the inva­sion of Italy, and by extolling the valourof the German armies, they drew the wholesquadron into their party. As a furtherproof of their zeal for their new prince,they attracted to his interest the chiefmunicipal towns on the other side of thePo, namely, Mediolanum (c), Novaria,Eporedia, and Vercelles. Of this fact Cae-cina was apprised by dispatches from theofficers. But a single squadron, he knew,was not sufficient to defend so large a tractof country. In order to reinforce them, hesent forward the cohorts of Gaul, of Lursitania, and Britain, with the succoursfrom Germany, and the squadron pf hprsevol. v. k







OCR Output








OF TACITUS. 131





Otho ventured to enter the camp. The booktribunes arid centurions gathered roundhim, but without the military ornamentsof their rank, praying to be dismissed fromthe service, that they might retire to Jivein ease and safety. The soldiers felt therequest as a reproach for their own con­duct. Remorse and sorrow took posses­sion of every mind. They expressed theirwillingness to return to their duly, and, oftheir own motion, desired to see the au­thors of the insurrection brought to pu­nishment.
LXXXI1L In this delicate conjunc­ture, when the tinies were big with dan­ger, and a discordant soldiery heightenedthe distraction, Otho felt that he had adifficult game to play. All, who wishedwell to the service, called for an imme­diate reform of the army; Avhile, on theother hand, the loose and profligate, al­ways the greatest number, liked nothingso well as tumult and insurrections, underthe conduct of an ambitious leader. Tosuch minds, Otho knew that the strongestmotives to a civil war are the hopes of







OCR Output








OP TACITUS. 51





dertook, they dared to execute. A few book


only were conscious of the plot. The rest,though held in suspense, were managedwith such dexterity, that they stood inreadiness, as soon as the blow was struck,to second the conspirators. The soldiersof note were told, that having been di­stinguished by Nymphidius, they lived indanger, suspected, and exposed to theresentment of Galba. The loss of thedonative, so often promised, and stillwithheld, was the topic enforced, to ir­ritate the minds of the common men.Numbers lamented the loss of Nero, andthe agreeable vices of that dissolute reign.All were averse from the new plan of dis­cipline, and the idea of a further reformdiffused a general terror.
XXVI. The spirit of disaffection spread,as it were by contagion, to the legionsand the auxiliary troops, all sufficientlyagitated by the revolt in Germany. Thevile and profligate were ready for any mis­chief, and among the few of'sober con­duct, inactivity was no better than treasonin disguise. The conspirators saw their


i.


E 2







OCR Output








OF TACITUS 79





his Life* or they were the confession of a bookman, who was actually an accomplice inthe conspiracy. His life and mannersleave no room to doubt but he was capa­ble of joining in a parricide, of which hisown administration (a) was the principalcause. He fell by a wound that shatteredthe joint of his knee, and, a9 he laystretched in that condition, he was runthrough the body by Julius Carus, a le­gionary soldier. He expired before thetemple of Julius Caesar.


XLIII. While the rebels were actingtheir horrible tragedy, the age beheld, inthe conduct of one man, a splendid ex­ample of courage and fidelity. Sempro-nius Densus was the person; a centurionof the praetorian cohort. Having been or­dered by Galba to join the guard that es­corted Piso, he no sooner saw a band ofarmed assassins, than he advanced to op­pose their fury, brandishing his poniard,and exclaiming against the horrible deed.With his voice, with his hand, with everyeffort in the power of man, he made a brave







OCR Output








320 THE HisToar





The armies of Maesia and Pannoniaformed a junction, and drew the forcesof Dalmatia into the revolt. The con­sular governors of those provinces wereneutral on the occasion; they took noshare in the business, nor did the soldierswait for their direction. Titus AmpiusFlavianus ruled in Pannonia, and Pop-paeus Silvanus in Dalmatia; both rich,and advanced in years. Cornelius Fuscus,descended from illustrious ancestor, andthen in the vigour of life, was, at thesame time, imperial procurator. In hisyouth he had resigned his senatorian rank,to seek in solitude a retreat from publicbusiness. Joining afterwards with Galba,he drew forth, in support of that emperor,the strength of his own colony, and forhis services obtained the post of procu­rator. In the present commotions, hedeclared for Vespasian; and, by hisardent spirit, gave life and vigour to thecause. Self-interest did not mix with themotives that determined his conduct. Hispride was in the field*of action. Hegloried in facing danger, and despised







OCR Output








OP TACITUS. 261





composed himself to rest, and, in a short booktime, began to prepare for the last act ofhis life. In that moment he was inter­rupted by a sudden uproar. The soldiers,he was told, threatened destruction to allwho offered to depart, and in particular to'Verginius (a), whom they kept besieged inhis house. Otho went forth to appeasethe tumult. Having reproved the authorsof the disturbance, he returned to hisapartment, and received the visits of allthat came to bid the last farewell: he con­versed with them freely and cheerfully,and saw them depart without let or moles­tation. Towards the close of day, he calledfor a draught of cold water, and, havingquenched his thirst, ordered two poniardsto be brought to him. He tried the pointsof both, and laid one under his pillow.Being informed that his friends were safeOn their way, he passed the night in quiet.We are assured, that he even slept. Atthe dawn of day, he applied the weaponto his breast, and fell upon the point. Hisdying groans alarmed his freedmen andslaves. They rushed into the chamber, andwith them Plotius Firmus, the praetorian







OCR Output








24 THT3 HISTORY





book responses of oracles, were better under­stood.


XL Mgyvt, and the forces stationedthere to bridle the several provinces, were,according to the system established byAugustus, confided to the Roman knights,who exercised all the powers of the an-tient kings. In order to keep in subjec­tion a country difficult of access, and atthe same time a granary of corn; wherethe genius of the people (a), deeply tingedwith superstition, was ever wavering, andprone to change; where there was no plan ofregular government, and, by consequence,no respect paid to the civil magistrate;it was the policy of Augustus to retain theadministration, like a mystery of state, inhis own hands, and under his own cabinetcouncil. In the present juncture (b), Ti­berius Alexander, a native of the country,was intrusted with the government of theprovince.
Africa, and the legions quartered there,were, since the murder of Clodius Macer,grown indifferent to all modes of govern-
%







OCR Output








.'. PAIR


32101 019099108













OCR Output








OF TACITUS. 91





was great: his talents not above mediocrity. Free from vice, he cannot be celebrated for his virtues. He knew the valueof fame, yet was neither arrogant nor vain­glorious. Having no rapacity, he was an^economist of his own, and of the publictreasure careful to a degree of avarice.To his friends and freedmen he was open,generous, and even resigned to their will.When his choice was happily made, his in­dulgence, however excessive, was at worstan amiable weakness ; when bad men sur­rounded him, his good-nature bordered onfolly. The splendour of his rank, and thefelicity with which he steered through thexiangers of a black and evil period, helpedto raise the value of his character; his in­dolence passed for wisdom, and inactivitytook the name of prudenceV In the vigourof his days, he served with honour in Ger­many; as proconsul of Africa, he governedwith moderation; and the NethermostSpain, when he was advanced in years,felt the mildness of his administration.While no higher than a private citizen, hismerit was thought superior to his rank;and the suffrages of mankind would have







OCR Output








333 THE HISTORY





book less, that they forgot where they werequartered. Having no regular place ofrendezvous, and performing no kind ofduty, they gave themselves up to the dis­solute manners of the city, and the prac­tice of vices too foul to be named. Inthis course of life, their bodily strengthdecayed; the vigour of their minds wassunk in sloth, and their health entirelyneglected. They chose for their abodethe most vile and infamous places in theneighbourhood of the Vatican (a), wherethey contracted diseases, till an epidemicdistemper began to rage amongst them.A dreadful mortality followed. TheGauls and Germans suffered most by theirown imprudence. Infected with disor­ders, inflamed with fevers, and being na­turally impatient of heat, they plungedinto the Tiber, which unluckily was nearat hand, and took delight in cooling theirlimbs; which proved a remedy as bad asthe disease. The confusion, introducedby another circumstance, proved the baneof the army. It was thought advisable toraise sixteen cohorts (b) for the praetoriancamp, and four for the city, each to con-







OCR Output








114 THE HISTORY





book thereupon Yitellius, flushed with hope,abounding in resources, and strong innumbers, resolved to carry the war intoItaly by two different routes, under theconduct of two commanders. Fabius Va-lens was sent forward, with instructions todraw to his interest the people of Gaul,and, if he found them obstinate, to laywaste their country with fire and sword.He was afterwards to pass over the CottianAlps{a\ and make an irruption into Italy.Caecina, the other general, was ordered totake a nearer way, over the Penine moun­tains, and make his descent on that side.The floAver of the army from the LowerRhine, with the eagle of the fifth legion,and the cohorts and cavalry, amountingto forty thousand men, were put underthe command of Valens. Caecina ad­vanced from the Upper Germany with noless than thirty thousand, of which theone-and-twentieth legion was the mainstrength. Each commander had a rein­forcement of German auxiliaries. Vitel­lius followed them, with a third army, tqcrush whatever resisted, and bring up thewhole weight of the war.







OCR Output








278 THE HISTORY





able to muster eight thousand men. Atthe head of that deluded multitude, hemade an attempt on the adjacent villagesof the iEduans. The people of that na­tion were not to be deluded. They armedthe flower of their youth, and, with a rein­forcement from the Roman cohorts, at­tacked the fanatics, and put the wholebody to the rout. Mariccus was takenprisoner, and soon after given to the wildbeasts (a). The populace, astonished tosee that he was not immediately torn topieces, believed him to be sacred and in­violable. Vitellius ordered him to be ex­ecuted under his own eye; and that ca­tastrophe cured the people of their bi­gotry.
- LXII. From this time the partisans ofOtho were no longer persecuted. Theirpersons and their effects remained invio­lable. The last wills of such as fell inthat unfortunate cause were allowed to bevalid, and, where no will was made, thelaw in cases of intestacy took its course.In fact, it was the luxury of Vitellius that'oppressed mankind: from his avarice there







OCR Output








164 THE HISTORY





book Paulinus, to check the ardour of Celsus,and to thwart the judgment of Gallus.An enemy to every excellence of thosethree officers, he' found, as usually hap­pens, that worth and modest merit wereno match for malice and left-handed po­licy.
LXXXVIII. Before Otho set outfrom Rome, Cornelius Dolabella was,by his order, conveyed under a guard tothe Aquinian colony (a), there to be keptout of the way, but not in close confine­ment. His only crime was the antiquityof his family, and his affinity to Galba.Several magistrates, and others of consularrank, had it in command to attend Othoon his expedition, not to assist in the warby their counsels or their valour, but toswell the pomp of the emperor's retinue.Jn the number was Lucius Vitellius, who.Avas suffered to mix with the rest of thetrain, undistinguished cither as the bro­ther of one emperor, or the enemy oranother. During these preparations, Homepresented a scene of hurry and confusion-No order of men was exempt from fear or







OCR Output








OF TACITUS. 31





son of Marcus Crassus and Scribonia, bookboth of illustrious descent. His aspectwas grave, and his deportment formal;such as gave an idea of primitive man­ners. By the candid aiid impartial hewas called strict and severe; by his ene­mies, morose and sullen. With great ex­cellencies, he had a mixture of those qua­lities that are often the shades of eminentvirtue; but those very shades, whichseemed to others too dark and gloomy, inthe eyes of Galba were the strokes of cha­racter, that gave Piso a cast of antiquity,and made him worthy to be the adoptedheir to the empire.
XV. Galba, we are told, taking Pisoby the hand, addressed him in the follow­ing manner: " If the adoption which I" am now to make, were, like the act of a" private citizen, to be acknowledged, as" the law Curiata (a) directs, in the pre-" sence of the pontiffs, I should derive" honoui to myself from an alliance with" a person descended from the great" Pompey and Marcus Crassus: and, in" return, you would add to the nobility of







OCR Output













OCR Output








OP TACITUS. 249





began the attack. Their army was in re- bookgular order, and their numbers were su­perior. The Othonians, still in disorder,and fatigued by their march, received thefirst impression with undaunted firmness.The place where the action grew warmbeing thick with trees and interwovenvine-branches, the combat varied accord­ing to the nature of the ground. Theyfought man to man; they engaged at adistance; they discharged their darts andmissive weapons; they brought forwardseparate battalions, or advanced in theform of a wedge. On the high road the en­gagement was close and obstinate. Dartsand lances were of no use. They foughthand to hand, foot to foot, and buckleragainst buckler. With their swords andaxes they cut through helmets and breast­plates. They knew one another; each in­dividual was conspicuous to his friendsand enemies; his exploits were seen by all;and every man fought, as if the issue ofthe war depended upon his single arm.
XLIII. Upon an open plain of con­siderable extent, that lay between the Po


2-







OCR Output








OF TACITUS. 223





ed the whole Vitellian army. In the camp, bookin the field of battle, in the flight, andamongst the parties that came to supportthe fugitives, the confusion was such, that,if Paulinus had not sounded a retreat, itwas the general opinion that Coecina, withhis whole army, might have been cut topieces. In defence of his conduct, Pau­linus answered, that, seeing how muchtoil and labour still remained, he was notwilling to expose his men, already spentwith the fatigue of the day, to fresh forceskept in reserve, and ready to issue fromthe adverse camp. An exhausted soldierymight, in that case, be overpowered; and,if once broken, no post, no station re­mained behind. With this reasoning thejudicious few were satisfied, but in thelower ranks of the army discontent andmurmuring still prevailed.
XXVII. The loss sustained in this en­gagement had no other effect on the van­quished Vitellians, than to reduce theirturbulent spirit to a sense of military duty.Ceecina threw the whole blame of his de­feat upon the ungovernable temper of the







OCR Output








OF TACITUS. 6*1


A. D.


forces from Ulyrium, at that time en- book
camped under the portico of Vipsanius(a). * J »
Orders were likewise given to Amulius A'8"yC'Serenus and Domitius Sabinus, t\vo centu­rions of the first rank, to draw from thetemple of Liberty the German soldiersquartered in that place. The legion,draughted from the marines, was not to betrusted. They had seen, on Galba's entryinto Rome, a cruel massacre of their com­rades, and the survivors, with minds ex­asperated, panted for revenge. At thesame time, Cetrius Severus, Subrius Dex­ter, and PoinpeiusLonginus, three militarytribunes, made the best of their way to thepraetorian camp, with an intention, whilethe ferment was still recent, and before ageneral flame was kindled, to mould theminds of the men to a pacific temper.Subrius and Cetrius were repulsed withmenaces. Longinus was roughly handled.The soldiers took away his weapons* un­willing to listen to a man, whom theyconsidered as an officer promoted out ofhis turn, by the favour of Galba, and, forthat reason, faithful to his prince. The ma­rine legion, without hesitation, joined the







OCR Output








OP TACITUS. 145





mind, but may be said to be out of the bookman. In an engagement with the infan­try, nothing can be more dastardly; in anonset of the cavalry, they are impetuous,fierce, and irresistible. Their weapons arelong spears or sabres of an enormous size,which they wield with both hands. Thechiefs Avear coats of mail, formed withplates of iron, or the tough hides of ani­mals, impenetrable to the enemy, but tothemselves an incumbrance so unwieldy,that he Avho falls in battle is never able torise again.
In their encounter with the Romans, aheavy fall of rain and a sudden thaw de­prived them of all advantage from thevelocity of their horses ; the consequencewas, that they were overwhelmed in a deepwaste of snow. The light breast-plates ofthe Romans were no impediment. Withtheir missive weapons, and their swords ofa moderate length, they were able to rushinto the thickest ranks ; while the Sarma-tians, who wear neither shield nor buckler,were a mark at a distance, or in close en­gagement cut to pieces. The few who


vol. v. L







OCR Output








356 NOTES ON Tlfcf


business. Jove tonante, fulgurante, comitia populi ha­bere nefas. Cicero De Divinatione, lib. ii. s. 18.
(//) According to a military custom, established in. anearly period of the commonwealth, every Roman soldierchose his favourite comrade, and by that tie of friend^-ship all were mutually bound to share every dangerwith their fellows. The consequence was, that a warlikespirit pervaded the whole army. See Livy, lib. ix. s. 39.
Section XX.(«) See Suetonius, in Galba, s. 15.
Section XXI.
(a) See in Suetonius an account of Otho's circum­stances, and his expensive luxury. Otho did not scru­ple to say, that nothing short of the imperial powercould save him from utter ruin; and whether he died inbattle, or fell a Victim to his creditors, was immaterial.Nisi principern se stare hon posse; nihilque referre, abhoste in acie, an inforo sub creditoribus caderet. Suet.in Otho, s. 5. See also Plutarch, in the Life of Galba.
(b) Piso had been by Nero ordered into exile, andmight probably return with a mind exasperated, anddeep-smothered resentment, according to the versesmade against Tiberius, during his retreat in the isle ofRhodes.
"•j . ,«, Regnabit sanguine multo
Ad regnum quisquis venit ab exilio.
Suet, in Tib. s. 59.i
Section XXII.(a) The character of Otho, as here delineated by th»unerring pencil of Tacitus, is finely copied by Corneillehi'his tragedy, entitled Otho. A review of the various


4







OCR Output








tttfe
history
OP
TACITUS.


BOOK IT.
r i i l i ii





I. rORTUNE was already preparing, in bookanother quarter of the world, to openan important scene, and to. produce tomankind a new imperial family, destined,at first (a), to flourish in prosperity, and,in the end, after a disastrous reign, to fallby a dreadful catastrophe. While Galbastill possessed the sovereign power, Titus,by order of Vespasian, his father, set outfrom Judaea, with congratulations to thatemperor, and, as was natural, with theambition of a young man eager to beginthe career (b) of public honours. The com­mon people, according to their custom,


n2







OCR Output








THE rs?


WORKS
OF


CORNELIUS TACITUS;


WITH AN


-^ ^ ESSAY ON HIS LIFE AND GENIUS,
r, . NOTES, SUPPLEMENTS, &c.


tV? BT


ARTHUR MURPHY, ESQ.


Praecipuum munus annalium reor, ne virtutes sileantur, utque praviidicti» factiaque ex poeteritate et infamil menu lit.
TACITUS, Annates, iii. -. «J.


A NEW EDITION,
WITH THE AUTHOR'S LAST CORRECTIONS.


IN EIGHT VOLUMES.VOL, V.





3LonDon:
PRINTED FOR JOHN STOCKDALE, PICCADILLT.1805.







OCR Output








OF TACITUS. 343





lius, and was, therefore, easily persuaded bookto merit the protection of a new prince.
C. Cecina took leave of Vitellius,and received at parting the highest marksof distinction. He sent forward a de­tachment of the cavalry to take possessionof Cremona. The veterans of the four­teenth (a) and sixteenth legions followed,and after them the fifth and twenty-second.The rear was closed by the twenty-first,distinguished by the name of Rapax, andthe first legion called the Italic, with thevexillaries of three British legions, andthe flower of the auxiliary forces. Caecinawas no sooner set out on his expedition,than Valens sent directions to the army,which he had conducted into Italy, towait for his arrival, according to the planwhich, he said, was settled between him­self and Caecina. But the latter, being onthe spot, and, by consequence, havinggreater weight and influence, assured themen that, upon mature deliberation, thatwhole plan had been altered, to the endthat they might meet the first impressionof the enemy with the united vigour of







OCR Output








354 KOTES ON THE


the Lower Rhine, while Hordeonius Flaccus, a man inyears, and greatly afflicted' with the gout, was likelyto remain inactive in the province of Upper Germany,See Suet, in Vitellio, s. 7.
, (l>) The short reflection of Tacitus on the appoint­ment of Vitellius, is understood two different ways bythe commentators. According to some, the true read­ing is, Id satis videbatur, That by Galba was thoughtsufficient; according to others, Id fatis videbatur, Thefates ordained it. The last is in the manner of Tacitus,and therefore adopted in the translation.
Section X.(a) See the History, book ii. s. 1.
Section XI.
(a) It has been mentioned in former notes, that itwas the policy of Augustus to keep the management ofiEgypt, the great corn-market of Rome, in his ownhands. The expression of Tacitus is remarkable; dorniretinere, to reserve the administration for his own cabinetcouncil. See Annals, ii. s. 59.
(b) Tiberius Alexander is said to be a native ofMgypt; but, to qualify him for the office of governor,he was made a Roman knight. He was probably theSame person who is mentioned, Annals, xv. s. 28.
(c) For Mauritania, Rdetia, Noricum, and Thracia,see the Geographical Table at the end of the Eighth Vo­lume.
Section XII.
(a) Belgic Gaul began from the Scheld (L'Estwit)and extended to the river Sequana (the Seine). ■ Therevolt of the legions on the Upper Rhine is related bySuetonius, in Galba, s. 16.







OCR Output








CONTENTS. BOOK I.


racier of Galba. L. Vkellius, before Galba's death9aims at the sovereignty. LI. Origin of the revoltamong the German legions. Vitellius saluted emperor .He sends two armies to invade Italy, one under FabiusValens, and the other under Ccecina. Vitellius folloiuswith a third army. His excessive luxury and stupi­dity. The cruelty and rapine of Valens and Ccecina.LXlII. The Gauls, partly through fear and parti?/from inclination, swear fidelity to Vitellius. LXIV.Valens on his march hears of the death of Galba.LXVII. Ccecina attacks the Helvetians, and lays wastethe country. He passes over the Penine mountains intoItaly. LXXI. Otho's conduct at Rome : he begins toact with vigour. LXXH. Death of Tigellinus, andhis character. LXXIV. Letters between Otho andVitellius: they endeavour to over-reach each other.Emissaries employed by both. The people of Sarmatiainvade the province of Mcesia, and are put to the routwith great slaughter. LXXX. An insurrection of thesoldiers at Rome. LXXXIII. Otko's speech to thesoldiers. LXXXVI. Portents and prodigies spread ageneral alarm at Rome. LXXXVI I. Otho consultsabout the operations of the war : lie appoints /lis gene­rals, and sends his fleet to invade the Narbon Gaul.LXXXIX. Melancholy condition of the people atRome. Otho proceeds on his expedition against theViiellian forces, and leaves his brother, Salvias Titia-nus-, chief governor of Rome.
These transactions passed in a few months.
Years Of
of Rome—Christ Consuls.
922 69 Servius Galla, id time, Titus VinlusRjtfinus.







OCR Output








236 THE HISTORY





book majesty of empire. From this day theruin of Otho may be dated. He took withhim a considerable detachment of the prae-rtorian cohorts, the body-guard, and astrong party of horse. After their depar>ture, the spirit of the army began to droop.They suspected their officers. The prince,to whom the soldiers were faithfully aUtached, and who, in return, confided inthem, and them only, abandoned his cause,without leaving a head to direct, or ageneral to whose authority the men werewilling to submit.
XXXIV. During these transactions,nothing of all that passed was a secret inthe camp of Vitellius. From the deserters,who in civil wars are always numerous, andalso from the spies, whose genius it is,while they pry into the secrets of others,to betray their own, every thing transpired.Caecina and Valens lay in wait for the mo­tions of an enemy, whom they saw con­triving their own destruction. To plan anenterprise was unnecessary, where the bestwisdom was to succeed by the folly ofothers. In order, however, to give jealousy


1







OCR Output








OF TACITUS. 251


cut to pieces the gladiators attempting in bookboats to cross the Po, came into the field, ^—v—'flushed with success, and charged the 82s.enemy in flank. <&,
XLIV. The centre of Otho's army gaveway, and fled with precipitation towardsBedriacum. A long space lay beforethem; the road was obstructed with heapsof slain, and the enemy hung upon theirrear. In civil wars no prisoners are re­served for sale: the slaughter, for that rea­son, was the more dreadful («). Sueto­nius Paulinus and Lieinius Proculus fleddifferent ways, both resolved not to returnto the camp. Vedius Aquila, who com­manded the thirteenth legion, by his ownindiscretion exposed himself to the fury ofthe soldiers. . He entered the camp, whileit was yet broad day-light; and the verymen, who were the first to turn their backson the enemy, were now the foremost insedition. They crowded round their su­perior officer with a torrent of abusive lan­guage, and offered violence to his person.They charged him with treachery, and de­sertion, in the true spirit of vulgar minds,







OCR Output








210 THE HISTORY





book and submission. The tribunes and cen­turions regained their influence, and allwere loud in praise of their general, whohad, with judgment, chosen a strong andpowerful colony for the seat of war. Spu-rinna seized his opportunity, choosing ra­ther to convince by reason, than to irritateby reproof. Having quelled the sedition,he left some flying parties to watch themotions of the enemy, and, with an armynow disposed to obey his orders, marchedback to Placentia. The fortifications ofthe place were repaired ; new works wereadded ; toAvers were constructed; the sol­diers were provided with arms; and, whatwas of greater moment, a spirit of disci­pline and prompt obedience was diffusedthrough the army. This was, no doubt,an essential service. Want of couragecould not be imputed to Otho's part}'.Inattention to their superior officers wasthe disadvantage under which they la­boured.
XX. C.ecina advanced into Italy witha well-conducted army, observing in hismarch the strictest discipline, as if on the







OCR Output








OF TACITUS. 183





III. The founder of the temple, if we bookbelieve antient tradition, was king A eri as ;a name ascribed by some writers (a) to thegoddess herself. According to a more re­cent opinion, the temple was built anddedicated by king Cinyras (b), on the spotwhere the goddess, after emerging fromher native waves, was gently wafted to theshore. The science of■divination, we aretold, was of foreign growth, imported byThamiras (c), the Cilician, and by himestablished with mysterious rites and cere­monies. In consequence of this institu­tion, it was settled, by mutual compact,between the priest and Cinyras, the kingof the island, that the sacerdotal func­tion should be hereditary- in the descen­dants of their respective families. In pro­cess of time, the race of Thamiras, willingthat the sovereign should be distinguishedby a superior prerogative, resigned intothe hands of Cinyras the whole conduct ofthe mysteries, of which their ancestorswere the original founders, A priest ofthe royal line is, at present, the only per­son consulted. For victims, to be offeredas a sacrifice, animals of every species are







OCR Output








338 THE HISTORY





book sooth their master, endeavoured to palliateevery circumstance. They called it theseditious spirit of one legion only, whileevery other army preserved unshaken fide­lity, and there was, therefore, no danger tobe apprehended. Vitellius addressed thesoldiers to the same effect. He addedthat the praetorians, lately disbanded,were the authors of false reports, fabri­cated with a seditious intent to disturbthe public peace: but still there was noreason to fear a civil war. He made nomention of Vespasian; and, to suppressall talk among the populace, a band ofsoldiers had orders to parade the streets.The policy, however, did not answer theend. Silence was commanded, and thepeople talked with greater freedom.
XCVII. Dispatches were, notwith­standing, sent to Germany, to Spain, andBritain, for a supply of men; but, as Vi­tellius wished to conceal the urgency ofhis affairs, his orders were not decisive,and, by consequence, the governors of theprovinces were in no haste to obey. Hor-deonius Flaccus («), who commanded on


3







OCR Output








120 THE HISTORY





LXV. The late war had kindled afreshthe deadly feud, which had long subsistedbetween the people of Lyons and the in­habitants of Vienne (a). In the variousbattles, which they had fought with al­ternate success, and prodigious slaughter,it was visible that so much animosity waanot merely the effect of party-rage in acontest between Nero and Galba. Thepeople of Lyons had felt the weight ofGalba's displeasure; they saw their re­venues (b) wrested out of their hands, andconfiscated to the imperial treasury, whiletheir inveterate enemies enjoyed the fa­vours of the emperor. Hence a new sourceof jealousy. The two cities were separatedby a river (c); but they were hostile neigh­bours, and they saw each other with in­flamed resentment. Revenge and malicewere not to be appeased. The citizens ofLyons omitted nothing that could excitethe legions against their rivals : they talkedwith the soldiers, man by man, and no­thing less than the utter destruction ofVienne could satisfy their indignation." Lyons," they said, " had been besieged" by their mortal enemies, who had- taken







OCR Output








104 THE HISTORY


book was ready to break out; and some dread-»—^—j ful mischief seemed to be impending,
A U C .
822. when Hordeonius Flaccus, in the dead of
A' D.
69.' night, ordered the deputies to departwithout further delay. A report soon pre­vailed that they were all treacherouslymurdered, and that, if the soldiers didnot instantly provide for their own safety,the best and bravest of the army wouldbe cruelly butchered, under covert of thenight, far from their comrades, and with­out the knowledge of their friends. A se­cret combination was immediately formed.The soldiers joined in a bond of union.The auxiliary cohorts, at first suspectedof a design to rise against the legions, andput the whole body to the sword, enteredinto the league with eager ardour. Suchis the nature of profligate and abandonedminds: inpeace and profound tranquillity,they seldom agree; but for seditious pur-iposes a coalition is easily formed.
LV. The legions on the Lower Rhine,on the calends of January, went throughthe usual form of swearing fidelity toGalba; but the form only was observed.







OCR Output








1(52 THE HlSTOfcY





book terror. Otho was preparing to set out onhis expedition. His way was over the fieldof Mars, and the Flaminian road ; butboth places were impassable. This circum­stance, though accidental, or the effectof natural causes, was magnified into aprodigy, by which the gods denounced theslaughter of armies and a train of publiccalamities.
LXXXVII. The emperor ordered alustration (a), and, having purified the city,turned his thoughts to the conduct of thewar. The Penine and the Cottian Alps,with all the passes into Italy, were in thepossession of Vitellius and his armies. Othoresolved, therefore, to make a descent onthe coast of Narbon Gaul, with a fleetwell manned, and in force to keep thecommand of those seas. All who sur­vived the massacre at the Milvian bridge,and had been, by Galba's orders, throwninto prison, were released by Otho, andincorporated' with the legions. He de­pended on the fidelity of those men, and',by giving to others the like hopes of pre­ferment, he inspired the whole body with


- 2







OCR Output








OF TACITUS. 14$





of his own. He ordered the two praeto- bookrian commanders to go forth, in order toappease the tumult, and, in the meantime, advised his company to depart.They fled with precipitation. The magis­trates threw aside the ensigns of their of­fice, and dispersed without their friends^without their train of attendants. Old menand women of distinction wandered aboutin the dark, they knew not whither. Fewdared to venture towards their own habi­tations. The greatest part took shelterwith their friends; and where the meanestof their dependants lived, that place theythought the safest refuge.
LXXXII. The madness of the soldierswas not to be controlled. They burst thepalace gates, and rushed forward to thebanqueting room, with outrageous cla­mour demanding a sight of Otho. JuliusMartialis, one of the tribunes, and VitelliusSaturninus, the praefect of the legion, en­deavoured to oppose the torrent, and wereboth wounded in the fray. Nothing was tobe seen but the flash of arms, and nothingheard but threats and denunciations of,fj







OCR Output








274 THE HISTORY





book Festus and Scipio, each the praefect of acohort, shared the same fate. Albinu*himself, after a short voyage from the pro­vince of T ingitana to that of Caesariensis,was put to death as soon as he landed.His wife, attempting to oppose the assas­sins, perished with her husband. Thesetransactions passed without the notice ofVitellius. Nothing awakened his curio-sity. Even in matters of the highest im­portance, the attention of a moment wasall that could be expected from a manwho had neither talents nor application tobusiness. He ordered his army to pursuetheir march into Italy, while he himselfsailed down the Arar (a); not with thepomp and grandeur of a prince, but stillexposing to public view the distress andpoverty (l>) of his former condition. Atlength Junius Blaesus, at that time go­vernor of the Lyonese Gaul, a man ofa large and liberal mind, by his birth il­lustrious, and of a spirit equal to his vastpossessions, supplied Vitellius with a trainsuited to the imperial dignity, and at­tended in person- to do honour to thenew emperor. Vitellius saw this display


4







OCR Output








OF TACITUS. 83.





and, in the last extremity, continued faith­ful to that unhappy prince. His talentsand integrity gave offence to a lawlesscrew, with whom every virtue was a crime.They demanded his immediate execution.But their views were too apparent. Thebest and ablest men in Rome were doomedto destruction by a set of men, who pantedto let loose their rage, and lay a scene ofblood, of plunder, and devastation. Othowas not yet in fulness of power. His au­thority was sufficient to command the per­petration of crimes ; to prohibit them wasstill beyond him. The part he assumedwas that of a man enraged, and bent onsome atrocious deed. In that pretendedfury, he ordered Celsus to be loaded withirons, as a man reserved for heavier punish­ment, and by that stratagem saved himfrom destruction.
XLVI. The praetorians, from this time,knew no control. They chose their ownpraefects; namely, Plotius Firmus, for­merly a common soldier, raised afterwardsto the command of the night-guard, and,even during the life of Galba, a partisan


a 2







OCR Output








132 THE HISTORY





friends, and, in a short time afterwards,appointed him one of his generals to con­duct the war. Celsus accepted the com­mission, and remained steady to his trust.His fidelity was honourable, but unfortu­nate. The clemency of the prince gavegreat satisfaction to the leading men atRome; the populace applauded, and eventhe soldiers admired the virtue which theyhad condemned.
LXXII. The joy excited on this occa­sion was followed by an event no less ac­ceptable, but for reasons of a differentnature. The public voice was loud againstSophonius Tigellinus (a), and accordinglyhis doom was fixed. From low beginningsthis man had raised himself to eminencein the state. His birth was obscure.Stained in his youth with the worst impu­rities, he retained, in his advanced years,all his early habits, and closed with dis­grace a life begun in infamy. By his vices,the surest road to preferment, he obtainedthe command, first of the city cohorts, andafterwards of the praetorian guards. Thereward* which were due to virtue only, he







OCR Output








OF TACITU8. 165





danger. The principal senators, enfeebledby age, or softened by a long peace; thenobility, sunk in sloth; and the Romanknights, who had lost their warlike spirit,were all obliged to put themselves in rea­diness. They assumed an air of courage,but their fears were seen through the vaindisguise. Some affected to make a di­splay of their alacrity. They bought withvain ostentation the most splendid ar­mour, horses for parade, and all theconveniences of a luxurious table, as ifsuch implements were a necessary part oftheir camp-equipage. The wise and mo­derate thought of nothing but their ownsafety and the public welfare; while thevain and senseless, whose views did notextend to remote consequences, filled theirminds with chimerical expectations; andall who were bankrupts both in fame andfortune, hoped to find in the distractionsof their country that security, which, inquiet times, they had never known.
LXXXIX. The people at large, unac­quainted with the secrets of state, and ofcourse free from solicitude, began, how-







OCR Output








OF TACITUS. 109





and the Roman people. Those specious bookwords, which a few days before resoundedwith so much energy, Avere dropt at once;and the men, it now was plain, were neverin their hearts the soldiers of a republic.The Agrippinian people, the Treveri, andLingones were determined not to be be­hind-hand in demonstrations of zeal. Theyoffered a supply of arms and horses, ofmen and money, in proportion to their re­spective abilities. The strong and valiantwere willing to serve in person; the richopened their treasure; and the skilfulgave their advice. The leading chiefs, aswell in the colonies as in the camp, whohad already enriched themselves by thespoils of war, wished for another victorythat might bring with it an accumulationof wealth. The zeal with which they enrtered into the league, was. what might beexpected; but the alacrity of the commonmen Avas beheld with wonder. Poor anddestitute, they made a tender of their tra­velling subsistence, their belts, their ac­coutrements, and the silver ornaments oftheir armour; all excited by one generalimpulse, a sudden fit of blind enthusiasm.







OCR Output








OF TACITUS. 283


son of that name, but was the mother book


h.


of Vitellius(c). She persevered with thesame equal temper, never elated by the 822.splendour of her family, nor deceived by 69.the voice of flattery. In the prosperityof her sons she took no part; in their di­stress, she grieved for their misfortunes.
LXV. Vitellius set out from Lyons,but had not proceeded far, when he wasmet by Marcus Cluvius Rufus, who camefrom his government in Spain to congra­tulate the emperor on his accession. Thatofficer appeared with joy in his counte­nance, and anxiety in his heart. Heknew that an accusation had been pre­pared against him by Hilarius, one of theemperor's freedmen, importing that, du­ring the war between Otho and Vitellius,Rufus intended to set up for himself, andconvert both the Spains into an indepen­dent state; and that, with this view, hehad issued various edicts, without insert­ing the name of any prince whatever, andalso made public harangues, to blackenthe character of Vitellius, and recommendhimself to popular favour. The interest







OCR Output








OF TACITUS. 13g





obedience to Otho; but a little time bookshowed, that the obligation of an oath wasno longer binding. .All principle, all af­fection, and all truth were banished. .Fear,and the necessity of the times, governedin every quarter. Narbon Caul accededto Vitellius. A party in force, and nearat hand, found no difficulty in drawingtheir neighbours into a league with them­selves. The distant provinces, and allplaces separated by the Mediterranean,adhered to Otho, not from motives of re­gard for him or his party, but because thename of Rome and the senate was still re­spected by foreign nations. Besides this,Otho, being the first announced in foreignparts, had already made his impression.The army in Judaea, under the conduct ofVespasian, and that in Syria, under Mu-cianus, swore fidelity to Otho. /Bgypt,and the provinces in the East, acknow­ledged his authority. The same disposi­tion prevailed in Africa. That wholecountry was willing to follow the exampleset by the people of Carthage. In thatcity, without any order or authority fromVipsanius Apronianus, then proconsular


4







OCR Output








86 THE HISTORY





condemned to an island, there, as wasgiven out, to pass the remainder of hisdays; but a veteran soldier, whom Othohad dispatched for the purpose, put anend to his life. Martianus Icelus, beingof no higher rank than that of a manu­mitted slave, died by the hand of theexecutioner. i. ,
XLVII. After the horrors of a dayspent in guilt, and blood, and carnage, ifany thing could add to the public misery,it was the joy that succeeded to that dis­mal scene. The praetor of the city (a) sum­moned a meeting of the senate. The otheimagistrates strove to distinguish them­selves by the vilest adulation. The fathersassembled without delay. The tribunitianpower, the name of Augustus, and all im­perial honours enjoyed by former princes,were by a decree granted to Otho. Severalmembers of that assembly were consciousof having thrown odious colours on thename and character of their new emperorand hoped to expiate, by present flatterythe bitterness of former invectives. Whether Otho despised those injurious reflec







OCR Output








OF TACITUS. 155





" greater curse could they invoke? what book
" calamity could they call down upon us,
" so much to be dreaded, as a turbulent
" and factious spirit, and all the e\'ils of
" discord and sedition ? Let the soldier
" refuse to obey his centurion ; let the
" centurion shake off the authority of the'
" tribune; let the cavalry and the foot
" soldiers be intermixed, without order or
" distinction; and let us all, in one pro-
" miscuous body, go forward to the war.
" Need our enemies wish for more ? We
" should rush on sure destruction. It is
" obedience, my fellow soldiers, implicit,
" prompt obedience (a), without pausing
" to wrangle with our superior officer, that
" gives to military operations all their
" energy. The army that shows itself, in
" time of peace, attentive to discipline and
" good order, is jure to be the most for-
" midable in the day of battle. It is yours
" to arm in the cause of your country, and
" to face the enemy with heroic valour: be
" it mine to form the plan of operations,
" and, in the execution, to direct and
" guide the courage of the army. The
" guilt of last night extends to a few only;







OCR Output








OP TACITUS. 45





K with greater force on the mind of a book" young man (6), by nature harsh, and in" his exile grown fierce and savage. Otho" was, perhaps, already doomed to de-" struction. But the authority of CJalba" was on the decline, and that of Piso not" yet established. This was, therefore," the time to strike a sudden blow. The" convulsion of states, and the change" of masters, afford the true season for" courage and vigorous enterprise. In" such a period, when inactivity is certain" ruin, and bold temerity may be crowned" with success, to linger in doubt might" be the ruin of his cause. To die is the" common lot of humanity. In the grave," the only distinction lies between those" who leave no trace behind, and the he-" roic spirits who transmit their nam*u to posterity. And since the same end" awaits alike the guilty and the innocent," the man of enterprise will provoke his" fate, and close the scene with glory."
XXII. The mind of Otho was not, likehis body (a), soft and effeminate. Hisslaves and freed men lived in a course of







OCR Output








OF TACITUS. 227





pelted him with stones; they forced him bookto fly before them; they pursued withopprobrious language, accusing him ofhaving embezzled, to his own private use,the spoils of Gaul, the gold of Vienne (a),and the recompense due to the soldiers forall their toil and labour. They rushed tohis pavilion, pillaged his camp-equipage,and, in hopes of finding hidden treasure,pierced the ground with their spears andjavelins. Valens, in the mean time, dis­guised like a slave, lay concealed in thetent of an officer of the cavalry. Alphe-nus Varus, the prajfect of the camp, sawthe phrensy subsiding, and, in the ebb oftheir passions, thought it best to let re­pentance take possession of them by de­grees. With that intent, he gave ordersto the centurions neither to visit the nightwatch, nor suffer the usual signals to begiven by sound of trumpet. A dead si­lence followed. The mutineers stood co­vered with astonishment, wondering thatno one assumed the command; theygazed at each other, and trembled at beingleft .to. themselves. By silence and resig­nation they hoped to give a proof of re-


q 2







OCR Output








OF TACITUS. 239





destruction. The soldiers clamoured for bookhis blood. One of them darted his lance,and actually wounded him; while the restrushed on sword in hand, and would havekilled him on the spot, if the tribunes andcenturions had not interposed to save himfrom- their fury. In a short time after,Vestricius Spurinna, having, by order ofOtho, left a moderate garrison at Placen-tia, can$e up to the main body with thecohorts under his command. Macer wassuperseded, and in his place Flavius Sa-binus, consul elect, was appointed; tothe great joy of the common men, whosaw with pleasure every change of theirofficers. The commanders, in their turn,saw the unruly spirit of the army, and,with reluctance, accepted a service sooften disturbed by tumult and sedition.
XXXVII. I find it asserted as a fact,and by authors of credit, that the two ar­mies, dreading the calamities of war, andat the same time detesting the two rivalprinces, whose flagitious deeds grew everyday more notorious, were disposed to laydown their arms, and either to name a







OCR Output








OF TACITDS. 159





mour of the day, all degrees and ranks bookwere obliged to set their faces for the oe-'casion: if bad, they were afraid of seem­ing to despond ; and, if propitious, un­willing to be thought backward in demon-strations of joy. With events of eitherkind, their features were taught to comply.
The fathers had the hardest task. Si­lence in the senate might be thought sul-len discontent, and liberty of speech mightbe deemed a crime. Adulation itself wasat a stand. Who could deceive a prince,who was but latety a private man, and, inthat station, practised flattery till he be­came a perfect master of that insidiousart ? The fathers were driven to little stra­tagems ; they tortured every sentence intoa thousand forms, and, to diversify oneand the same thought, all the colours ofrhetoric were exhausted. All agreed tocall Vitellius a public enemy and aparricide. This was the burthen ofevery speech. Cautious men, who lookedforward to their own security, avoided en­tering into particulars, content with hack­neyed declamation: others, without re-







OCR Output








220 THE HISTORY





book pected sally could be made from thewoods. The stratagem was betrayed tothe generals of Otho's army. Paulinustook the command of the infantry, whileCelsus led on the cavalry. Their menwere ranged in order of battle. In theleft wing were placed the vexillaries ofthe thirteenth legion, four auxiliary co­horts, and five hundred horse. The highroad was occupied by three praetorian co­horts, who formed the centre. The leftwing consisted of the first legion, twoauxiliary cohorts, and five hundred horse.Besides these, a thousand of the cavalry,selected from the praetorian and auxiliarybands, were kept as a body of reserve tosupport the broken ranks, or, if the enemygave way, to rush on at once and completethe victory.
XXV. Before the two armies came toaction, the Vitellians feigned a flight.Aware of the stratagem, Celsus checkedthe ardour of his men, and in his turnpretended to give ground. The adverseparty, as they lay in ambush, thought theysaw their opportunity, and,rushing forward







OCR Output








OF tacituju 73





" the best designs must prove abortive, book" It is not to a war, nor even to danger," that I am now to conduct voti: the ar-" mies of Rome are on our side. The" single cohort remaining with Galba is" composed of citizens, not of soldiers ;" they are gowned, not armed ; they do" not stand forth in his defence ; they de-" tain him as their prisoner. When they" see you advancing in firm array, and" when my signal-is given, the only strug-" gle will be, who shall espouse my cause" with the greatest ardour. The time" forbids all dull delay: we have under-" taken bravely; but it is the issue that" must justify the measure, and crown us" with applause." Having closed his ha­rangue, be ordered the magazine of amis tobe thrown open. The soldiers seized theirweapons; they paid no regard to militaryrules; no distinction was observed; thepraetorians, the legions, and the auxiliariescrowded together, and shields and helmetswere snatched up in a tumultuary manner.No tribune, no centurion was allowed togive orders. Each man was his own com­manding officer. While the friends of disci-







OCR Output








306 THE IIISTORV





and verdure. This was considered by theinterpreters of prodigies as an early pre­lude to future grandeur. At length, hav­ing obtained triumphal honours, together-with the consular rank, when he had con­ducted the war against the Jews with suchrapid success, the prediction seemed to beverified; and thus encouraged, he lookedfrom that eminence to higher elevation,and even to the imperial dignity* BetweenSyria and Judvea stands a mountain, knownby the name of Mount Carmel (b), onthe top of which a god is worshipped, underno other title than that of the place, and,according to antient usao-e, without a tem-pie, or even a statue. An altar is erectedin the open air, and there adoration is paidto the presiding deity. On this spot Ves­pasian offered a sacrifice. In the midstof the ceremony, while his mind expandedwith vast ideas, Basilides, the officiatingpriest, examined the entrails of the victims,and, in his prophetic manner addressinghimself to Vespasian, " Whatever," hesaid, " are your designs, whether to build" a mansion, to enlarge your estate, Or in-" crease the number of your slaves, the







OCR Output








OP TACITUS. l 13


Galba was still to be performed. They bookknew that war is the soldier's harvest.*—/—'
A. U. C.
Peace affords no opportunity to gain the 822."recompense due to valour; and the favours *a-of the new prince would be engrossed bythe legions, to whom he owed his eleva­tion. Fired by these reflections, and fur­ther instigated by the arts of NymphidiusSabinus (b), their commanding officer,whose ambition aimed at the imperialdignity, they began to meditate a secondrevolution.


The conspiracy was crushed in the bud,and Nymphidius perished in the attempt.But the soldiers had thrown off the mask,and the sense of guilt served only to goadand spur their resolution. They talkedof Galba with contempt and ridicule;they laughed at his advanced age;they inveighed against his avarice; andthe rigorous discipline (c) by which he hadacquired his military character, inflamedthe prejudices of men, who had beenenervated by a long peace of fourteenyears. During that time, the dissolutemanners of Nero diffused a general







OCR Output








180 THE HISTORY





book found deeper reasons for the journey,Titus, they believed, was to be adoptedheir to the empire, and what they believedthey took care to circulate. The advan­ced age of Galba, and his want of issue,gave colour to the story; and the busyspirit of the populace relied on vain con­jecture, impatient to decide what still re­mained in suspense. The character andpersonal accomplishments of Titus addedweight to the report. He had talents forthe highest station, and to the dignity ofhis stature united a graceful mien and ami­able countenance* The success, that at­tended the exploits of the father, threw alustre round the son t oracular responses (c)foretold the grandeur of the family; and,while the minds of men stood ready forthe reception of every rumour, even tri­fling incidents, the mere result of change7confirmed the popular opinion. At Co­rinth in Achaia, Titus received intelligenceof the death of Galba, and, at the sametime, undoubted assurances, that Vitel-lius, at the head of powerful armies, wasin motion to claim the empire. In thisposture of affairs, he called a council of







OCR Output








222 THE HISTORY





book every danger, was wounded in the engage*ment.


XXVI. At length the infantry, underthe command of Paulinus, entered intothe action. The front line of the enemygave way at once, and the parties thatcame to support them were in like mannerput to the rout. Caecina had not thejudgment to act with his whole strengthat once. He brought up his men in de­tachments ; and the consequence was,that, coming forward in succession, andno where strong enough, they soon gaveway, and fled with the ranks alreadybroken. During this confusion, a violenttumult broke out in Caecina's camp. Thesoldiers were enraged that the whole armywas not drawn out. They seized JuliusGratus, the praefect of the camp, andloaded him with irons, on a suspicion thathe held secret intelligence with his brotherJulius Fronto, at that time a tribune inOtho's army, and, under a similar accusa­tion, then confined in prison by the ad­verse party. Nothing now could equalme disorder and consternation that cover­


2







OCR Output








268 THE HISTORY





tive of this man for framing a story sofalse and groundless, was because he sawOtho's orders for road horses (a) and car­riages no longer in force, and he wished torevive their former authority. By thisstratagem he gained a quick conveyanceto Rome, and in a few days was put todeath by order of Vitellius. In the meantime, the Othonian soldiers gave credit tothe fiction, and even believed that the fa­thers, who had departed from Mutina todeliberate at Bononia, were gone over tothe enemy. From this time the senatewas convened no more. Every manacted with his own private views, till let­ters arrived from Fabius Valens, and putan end to all their fears. Besides this,the death of Otho was universally known.The velocity of fame was equal to theglory of that heroic action.
LV. Meanwhile, at Rome a generalcalm prevailed. The games sacred toCeres (o) were celebrated according toannual custom. In the midst of thepublic spectacle intelligence arrived thatOtho was no more, and that all the mili­







OCR Output








0* TACITUS.- 153





"for me, sincere indeed, but generous to book" excess, that hurried you on to acts of in-" temperance, and even violence. You list-" ened to your passions, but not to your"judgment; and where judgment does not" direct and guide, the best counsels and" the best cause are often ruined. We are" going forth to a great and important war.*' And must all intelligence be communi-" cated to the army ? Must every secret" be disclosed? And must councils of war" be held in a public assembly of the sol-" diers ? The reason of things, and the op-" portunity, which must be seized at once" or lost for ever, will not allow a mode" of proceeding so slow and dangerous to" the service. To know some things is" the duty of the soldier; in others, not" to be informed is his happiness, and" submission is his virtue. Even the tri-" bunes and centurions must often receive", their orders, without a reason assigned:" to know the motives that weiijh with" the general, is not their province ; to" obey is the duty of the inferior officer." If every subaltern may discuss the ope-" rations of war, and cavil with the com-







OCR Output








OF TACITUS. 67





cowards in their hearts. No man knew bookthat Otho was slain, yet all averred it as afact. In this situation, wanting certainintelligence, but deceived by his courtiers,Galba determined to go forth from hispalace. He called for his armour. Theweight was too much for his feeble frame;and» in the throng that gathered roundhim, finding himself overpowered, he de­sired to be placed in a litter. Before heleft the palace, Julius Atticus, a soldierof the body guard, accosted him with abloody sword in his hand, crying aloud," In me you see the slayer of Otho : it" was I that killed him." Galba calmlyanswered (a), Who gave you orders ? Suchwas the spirit of the man even in the lastextremity, still determined to repress thelicentiousness of the soldiers ] by their in­solence undismayed, by their flattery neversoftened.
XXXVI. Meanwhile, the praetorianguards threw off the mask, and with onevoice declared for Otho. They rangedthemselves in a body round his person,and, in the ardour of their zeal, placed


f2







OCR Output








CONTENTS—BOOK IT: 17*


ger. LV. Tranquillity prevails at Rome. The gamesin honour of Ceres celebrated according to custom.Otko's death made known in the theatre: the peopledeclare for Vitellius with shouts of applause. LVI.Italy ravaged by the Vitellians. LVI I. yitellius ad­vances towards Italy, and hears of the victory gainedby his officers. The two Mauritanias declare in hisfavour; Albinus tlieir governor cut off by the emissa-ties ofCluvius Rufus, who had passed over from Spaininto Africa. LX. Vitellius orders the bravest ofOtho's centurions to be put to death. The wild at­tempt of Mariccus in Gaul. In a Jit of enthusiasm hecalls himself a god: he is taken, and put to death.LXII. The gluttony of Vitellius: Italy exhausted tosupply his voracious appetite. In his dispatches toRome he declines for the present tlie name tf Augus­tus, and wholly rejects that of Ceesar. The judicialastrologers banished out of Italy. Laws for restrain­ing the Roman knights from appearing on the stage,or in the games of the circus. LXIII. Dolabella putto death with treachery by Vitellius. The furioustemper of Triaria, the wife of L. Vitellius, and theamiable character of his mother Sextilia. LXV.Cluvius Rufus arrives from Spain, and is pardoned byyitellius. The vanquished troops still retain their fe­rocity. A quarrel between tfie Batavians and tliesoldiers of the fourteenth kgion. LXVIII. A violentsedition at Ticinum, while Vitellius carouses at afeast. LXX. Vitellius proceeds to Cremona, andViews the field of battle at Bedriacum, ivhich was stillcovered with a dreadful carnage. He vies with theluxury of Nero, and marches to Eononia, still plun­ging into deeper debauchery as lie draws near to Rome.LXXII. A slave of the name of Geta assumes the


i







OCR Output








• 3 8Q5
v. 3


R. Tat ton and Co. Printers, Shoe Lane.







OCR Output








SECOND BOOK OF THE HISTORY. 369


Section II.
(a) Berenice was sister to Agrippa II. and wife ofHerod, king of Chalcis, in Syria. For more of her, andher connexion with Titus, see Appendix to Hist. v. s. 21.
(b) When Titus no longer sails along the coast, butputs off to sea, Tacitus calls it a bolder voyage, audentio-ribus spatiis; an expression, which, in the present stateof navigation, may provoke the smile of a mariner. Thecompass was not invented, and men did not like to losesight of the shore.
(c) At the town of Paphos, which stood on the westernsideof the isle of Cyprus, a temple was dedicated to Venus,thence called the Paphian Venus. The account of therites and ceremonies, which Tacitus gives us, has beencondemned by some critics as an idle digression: butwhen it is considered that the history of superstition wasnot uninteresting to the' Romans, this passage will notbe thought improper. The great historian has beencharged with irreligion; but the attention shown on thisoccasion, and many others, to the various modes ofworship, may serve to vindicate his character.
Section III.
(a) Aerias has been mentioned in another place, asthe founder of the Paphian temple: Annals, iii. s. 63.Tacitus adds, that the name of Aerias was applied bymany to the goddess herself; and accordingly, Pausa-nias, lib. i. cap. 14, calls her Ovgavlav.
(b) Cinyras is said by Apollodorus to have been oneof the kings of Assyria.
(c) Thamiras introduced the science of augury, whichwas founded altogether in deceit and fraud. Accor­dingly, we find that care was taken to keep it in the
VOL. V. 2 B







OCR Output








OP TACITUS. 235


persons sent for the purpose, he acceded bookto the counsels of Paulinus. Otho was


for trying the issue of a battle,brother Titiapus, and Proculus, the pra>fect of the praetorian guards, thoughneither of them had any military ex­perience, did what in them lay to incitea temper of itself rash and precipitate.The gods, they said, and the tutelar geniusof Otho, were present in council, andwould not fail to guide and animate thebattle. Such was the lanouase of rlatterv.They made their poison palatable, and noman presumed to administer an antidote.
To offer battle was the result of thedebate; but whether the emperor shouldcommand in person, or withdraw to aplace of safety, was a question still to bediscussed. Celsus and Paulinus gave noopinion. To expose the prince to thedangers of the field, was more than theychose to hazard. That point was left toihe authors of the pernicious counsel al­ready given. By their advice Otho re­tired to Brixellum, there to reserve him­self for the good of the people and the










OCR Output








OF TACITUS. 157





" when you yourselves behold that mag- book" nificent city, do you imagine that it" consists in walls, and buildings, and a" pile of stones? Inanimate structures and" mute and senseless edifices may moul-" der away, and rise again out of their" ruins ; but the stability of empire de-" pends upon the senate : upon the safety" of that august assembly, the welfare ofSi the community, the peace of nations," your fate and mine are grafted. It was" Romulus, the founder of the city, and" the father of the Roman state, who" instituted, with solemn auspices, that" sacred order. It has subsisted in vigour" from that time; from the expulsion of" Tarquin, to the establishment of the" Caesars, it has been preserved inviolate." We received it from our ancestors; let" us transmit it to our posterity, unshaken," unimpaired, immortal. From your or-*' der, from the people at large, the senate" is supplied with its brightest ornaments;" and from the senate you derive a suc-" cession of princes."
. * *
. LXXXV. This speech, seasoned with







OCR Output








O* TACITTS. 123





vith poverty, he grew suddenly rich, but booktoofe no pains to conceal his affluence.The art of rising in the world with mode­ration, was not the talent of Valens. Hispassions had been restrained by indigence,and now, when fortune smiled, the suddentaste of pleasure hurried him into excess.A beggar in his youth, he was, in old age,a voluptuous prodigal.
The army proceeded by slow marchesthrough the territory of the Allobrogians,and thence to the Vocontians; the general,during the whole progress, making hismarket at every place, and selling his fa­vours for a sum of money. For a bribe hefixed the length of each day's march, andshifted his camp for a price agreed uponbetween him and the owners of the lands.In all these exactions Yalens enforced hisorders with unrelenting cruelty, nor did heblush to drive open bargains with the ma­gistrates of the several cities. Torches andfirebrands were prepared to fire the townof Lucus, situate in the territory of theVocontians; and the place would infal­libly have been burnt to the ground, if the







OCR Output








OF TACITUS. 25





meat. Having experienced the authority bookof an inferior master, they were willing tosubmit to any prince. The two Maurita­nia (c), Raetia, Noricum, and Thrace, withthe places committed to the care of impe­rial procurators, had no fixed principle,no hatred, and no affection, but what wasinspired by the force nearest at hand.They were always united in opinion withthe strongest. The provinces, which wereleft naked and defenceless, and Italy inparticular, were open to the first invader,the ready prey of any conqueror. Suchwas the situation of the Roman world,when Servius Galba, in his second consul­ship, and Titus Vinius, his colleague, begantheir year; a fatal year, which broughtthem both to a tragic catastrophe, andthe commonwealth to the brink of ruin.
XII. In a few days after the calends of
January, letters arrived at Rome fromPompeius Propinquus, the procurator ofBelgic Gaul (a), with intelligence of a re­volt in Upper Germany. The legions inthat quarter, disregarding the obligationof their oath, shook off all obedience, and







OCR Output








OF TACITUS. "^i^S ^/


&


however, which lay contiguous to the boGerman armies, the inhabitants of theseveral cities saw, with discontent, thatthey were not thought worthy of the likeindulgence. Some of them complainedthat their territories were circumscribedwithin narrower limits; and, in vulgarminds, the good extended to. others wasan aggravation of the injury done to them­selves. •■''
The legions in Germany did not show acountenance that promised a perfect calm.The restless temper of the soldiers, bytheir late victory (c) flushed with pride,yet dreading the imputation of.havingconquered Galba's party, was thrown intoviolent agitations, by turns inflamed withrage, and overwhelmed with fear. Fromsuch a number of soldiers, who had thepower of the sword in their own hands,nothing but danger was to be appre­hended. They balanced for some time,before they detached themselves fromNero; nor did Verginius, their command­ing officer, declare immediately for Galba.Whether that tardy movement was occa-





\ c2







OCR Output








OP. TACITUS. 141





mere expedients of the day. He named bookhimself and his brother Titianus joint con­suls (a), to continue in office till the ca­lends of March. For the two followingmonths, with a view to curry favour withthe German army, he appointed Vergi-nius, and gave him for his colleague Pop-paeus Vopiscus. For the nomination ofthe latter he pretended motives of friend­ship ; but, as men of penetration thought,his real view was to pay court to the peopleof Vienne. With regard to future consuls,no alteration was made in the arrange­ment settled by Nero or by Galba. CaeliusSabinus and his brother Flavius were tosucceed for the months of May and June.From the first of July to September, At-rius Antoninus (b) and Marius Celsus wereto be in office. Nor did Vitellius, afterhis victory, disturb this order of succes­sion. Otho, at the same time, thoughtproper to grant the augural and pontificaldignities, as the summit of civil honours,to such of the senators as were grown grayb public stations; nor was he unmindfulof the young patricians lately recalledfrom banishment To. sooth the remem-.







OCR Output













OCR Output








' ;> • i


.i.:i


; . • *


i


,


. . -i ) .' ,-. ,.»,,/, r . .'I .it -. i


• . J .1 My


.! >







OCR Output








216' THE HISTORY





book solved to raise the siege, and leave a camp,where he had nothing to expect but re­proach and shame. He repassed the Po,and bent his inarch towards Cremona.He had not proceeded far, when he wasjoined by Turullius Cerealis, a centurionof principal rank, who had served underhim in Germany, and also by Julius Bri-ganticus, a Batavian by birth: the formerdeserted with a strong body of marinesoldiers, and the latter, with a small partyof horse.
XXHI. Spurinna, as soon as he wasinformed of the movements of the enemy,sent dispatches to Annius Gall us, with theparticulars of the siege, the gallant defenceof Placentia, and the measures concertedby Caecina. Galius was then on his march,at the head of the first legion, to the reliefof the place, little imagining that a fewcohorts would be able to hold out againstthe strength and valour of the Germanarmy. It was, however, no sooner knownthat Caecina had abandoned his enterprise,and was then proceeding to Cremona, thanthe spirit of the legion blazed out at once.







OCR Output








362 NOTES ON THE •


Section LXV.
(a) For the animosity that subsisted between thepeople of Lugdununi (Lyons) and the city of Vienne,see the Appendix to Annals, xvi; and for Vienne, seethe Geographical Table at the end of the Eighth Volume.
(I) The people of Lyons waged war against Vindex,and on that account Galba made them feel his resent­ment.
(c) The cities of Lyons and Vienne were separatedby the river Rhodanus; now the Rhone.
(d) The people of Vienne favoured the revolt ofVindex. See the Appendix to Annals, xvi.
Section LXVI.
(a) Olive branches and sacred vestments were usuallydisplayed in cases of distress, when the conquered suedfor mercy. So we read in Livy : Ramos olece ac vela-menta supplicum porrigenfes, orare, ut reciperent sese,rcceptosque tutarentur. Livy, lib. xxiv. s. 30.
Section LXVII.
(a) The territory of the Helvetii was a part of CelticGaul, more extensive than what is now called Switzer­land. The people are celebrated by Julius Cassar fortheir military virtue, and constant warfare with theGermans. Helvetii reliquos Gallos virtute prcecedunt,quod fere quotidianis prceliis cum Germanis contendant,cum avt suis finibi/s eos prohilent, aid ipsi in eorum
Jinilus lellwn gerunt. Caesar Bell. Gall. lib. i. s. l.
(b) Brotier says, this place was called in antient in­scriptions, Respublica aquensis, on account of the salu­brity of the waters. He supposes it to be what is nowcalled Baden, in the territory of Switzerland.







OCR Output








316' THE HISTORY





pose, in all questions touching the sumdemanded, he regarded neither the truthnor the justice of the case. To be richwas to be liable to taxation, and moneywas to be raised in all events. Informa­tions followed without number, and con­fiscations without mercy. Oppressive asthese proceedings were, the necessity ofthe times gave a colourable e.xcuse; butthe misfortune was, the practice did notcease with the war, but continued, in theseason of profound peace, to harass andoppress mankind. Vespasian, in the be­ginning of his reign, showed no disposi­tion to enrich his coffers by acts of injus­tice ; but, being corrupted afterwards bythe smiles of fortune, and listening topernicious counsels, he learned the artsof rapacity, and dared to practise them (a).Mucianus, from his own funds, contri-, buted to the exigencies of the Avar, gene­rous from Ins private purse, that he mightafterwards indemnify himself at the ex­pense of the public. The rest of theofficers, following his example, advancedsums of money, but were not, in likemanner, repaid with usury.







OCR Output








20 THE HISTORY





book sioned by his own ambitious projects, can­not now be known. The soldiers, it iscertain, made him a tender of the imperialdignity. The death of Fonteius Capitowas another cause of discontent. Evensuch as could not deny the justice of themeasure, exclaimed against it with indig­nation. While the minds of men werethus distracted with contending passions,Galba thought fit, under a show of friend­ship, to recall Verginius (d) from his post.The legions had now no chief at theirhead, and, if the conduct of their generalwas arraigned, they considered themselvesas men involved in the same accusation.
IX. The legions on the Upper Rhinewere ill retained in their duty by Hordeo-nius Flaccus, an officer far advanced inyears, without vigour of mind, disabled inhis limbs, and, by his infirmities, exposinghimself and old age to scorn. Unequalto the command even in quiet times, hewas now, in a camp full of bold and tur­bulent spirits, unable to support his au­thority. His endeavours to enforce obe­dience served only to irritate the minds of







OCR Output








2G THE HISTORY





book demanded another emperor; willing, how­ever, to soften the violence of their pro­ceedings, and, for that purpose, to leavethe choice to the judgment of the senate,and the Roman people. The use thatGalba made of this intelligence was, tohasten the adoption of a successor; apoint which he had for some time revolvedin his mind, and often discussed with hissecret advisers. During the few monthsof his reign, no subject had so much en­grossed the public conversation. Thepeople, alwavs politicians, and fond ofsettling state affairs, gave a loose to theirusual freedom of speech; and, besides, anemperor on the verge of life made it na­tural to advert to the succession. Fewwere able to think Avith judgment, andfewer had the virtue to feel for the publicgood. Private views and party connec­tions suggested various candidates. Dif­ferent factions were formed, and all in­trigued, caballed, and clamoured, as theirhopes or fears directed. Titus Vinius didnot escape the notice of the public. Hegrew in power every day, and the hatredof the people kept pace with his rising







OCR Output








OP TACITUS. 205





of the islands in those seas, were over­awed by the victorious fleet, and kept insubjection to Otho. Corsica, indeed, suf­fered a sudden convulsion from the teme­rity of the governor. The name of thisofficer was Decimus Pacarius. Thoughthe island, in a war carried on by suchpowerful adversaries, was of no impor­tance, he endeavoured to seduce the in­habitants to the interest of Vitellius. Theproject, which would have decided no­thing, ended in his own ruin. He sum­moned a council of the leading men, andcommunicated his design. Claudius Phir-ricus, who commanded the galleys on thatstation, and Quinctius Certus, a Romanknight, objected to the measure, and wereput to instant death. The rest of the as­sembly, terrified by this act of violence,swore fidelity to Vitellius. The populace,as usual, blind and ignorant, but by con­tagion catching the fears of others, fol­lowed the example of the leading chiefs.Pacarius began to muster his men, andtrain them to the use of arms. A race ofrude and vulgar peasants, who had no re­lish for the fatigue of military discipline,







OCR Output








34 THE HISTORY





book " and dignify the human character; butthe arts of insidious men will lay siegeto your best qualities, and undermine" them all. Dissimulation will deceive" you; flattery will find admission to your" heart; and self-interest, the bane of all" true affection, will lay snares to seduce" your integrity. To-day you and I con-" verse without disguise, in terms of plain" simplicity: how will others deal with" us ? Their respect will be paid to our" fortunes, not to ourselves. To talk the" language of sincerity to a prince, and" guide him by honest counsels, is a labo-" rious task: to play the hypocrite re-" quires no more than to humour his in-" clinations, whatever they are. It is the" grimace of friendship : the heart has no" share in the business.
XVI. "If the mighty fabric of this" great empire could subsist on any other" foundation than that of a monarchy,'" the glory of restoring the old republic" should this day be mine. But, at my" age, all that remains for me is to be-" queath to the people an able successor:" your youth may give them a virtuous







OCR Output








52 THE HISTORY





advantage, insomuch that, on the dayensuing the ides of January, they formeda resolution to take Otho under their care,as he returned from supper, and, with­out further delay, proclaim him emperor.This project, however, did not take effect.In the darkness of the night, and the con­fusion inseparable from it, no man couldanswer for the consequences. The citywas full of soldiers; and among men in­flamed with liquor, no union, no con­certed measure, could be expected. Thetraitors desisted from their purpose, butwith no public motive. The general wel­fare made no impression on men, who hadconspired to imbrue their hands in theblood of their sovereign. What theychiefly feared was, that the first whooffered himself to the troops from Ger­many and Pannonia, might by thosestrangers, and in the tumult of the dark,be mistaken for Otho, and saluted by thetitle of emperor. The plot, thus checkedfor the present, began to transpire, andmust have been by various circumstancesbrought to light, had not the chief con­spirators laboured to suppress all appear­







OCR Output








OF TACITUS* 10/





the eighteenth legion, namely, Nonius Re-ceptus, Donatius Valens, Romilius Mar-cellus, and Calpurnius Repentinus, at­tempted to defend the images of Galba.The soldiers attacked them with impe­tuous violence, and all four were loadedwith fetters. From that moment all 'fide*lity was at an end. The obligation of theformer oath was no longer binding. Ithappened in this, as in all seditions: oneset appeared to be the most numerous,the rest followed the leaders, and thewhole herd was of one party. In thecourse of the night that followed the ca­lends of January, the eagle-bearer of thefourth legion arrived at the Agrippiniancolony (a), where Vitellius was engaged ata banquet, with intelligence, that thefourth and eighteenth legions, having de­stroyed the images of Galba, took a newform of oath to the senate and romanpeople. As that government existed nolonger, the oatli Avas deemed a nullity. Inthis crisis it was judged proper to seizethe opportunity that fortune offered, and,by the nomination of an emperor, fixthe wavering temper of the legions. Di-







OCR Output








344 THE HISTORY





book the army. • Having thus secured in hisown hands the whole command, he or­dered the legions to proceed by rapidmarches to Cremona, while a large de­tachment went forward to Hostilia (&).He himself turned off towards Ravenna,under a pretence of conferring with theofficers of the fleet, but, in fact, with adesign to make the best of his way to thecity of Pavia, judging that place the fittestfor a treasonable convention. He theremet Lucilius Bassus (c), a man, who, froma squadron of horse, had been raised byVitellius to the command of two fleets,one at Ravenna, and the other at Mise-num. Not content with that sudden rise,he thought himself entitled to be madepraefect of the praetorian guards, Thatdisappointment he considered as an in­jury, and therefore resolved to gratify hisunjust resentment by a stroke of perfi­dy. For this purpose he joined Caecina.Which seduced the other cannot now beknown. Two evil minds might form thesame black design, and, having formed it,they would find in congenial qualities asecret impulse to each other.







OCR Output








214 THE HISTORY





book the town, the honour of the city cothorts, and the dignity of the praetorianbands, were the topics that inflamed theirminds with heroic ardour, They consi-idered the Vitellians as a set of desperateadventurers, and despised them as Barba-'rians, foreigners, and aliens in Italy; while,in their turn, they were held in contemptby the besiegers, as a weak enervate band,who had lost every warlike principle inthe circus and the theatres of Rome. Othoand Vitellius were the subject of alternatepraise and calumny; but praise was soonexhausted, and forabuse each party foundabundant materials.
XXII. At the return of day, the cityand the country round displayed a sceneof warlike preparation: the walls andramparts were covered with Othonian sol­diers, and the fields glittered with theblaze of hostile arms. The legions in closearray advanced to the assault, and theauxiliaries in separate divisions. The at­tack began with a volley of stones anddarts aimed at the highest part of the for­tifications ; and where the works were







OCR Output








350 NOTES ON THE


reign A. U. C. 849, and died in the year 851, whenTrajan succeeded by adoption.
Section II.
(a) The history included the whole time from thefirst of Galba to the assassination of Domitian; and, forthat reason, some of the commentators are of opinionthat the four princes put to the sword are Galba, Otho,Vitellius, and Domitian. Others, observing that thewhole of Domitian's reign is lost, adapt their notions tothe present state of our author's work, and reckon Piso,who was adopted by Galba, one of the four murderedprinces.
(6) The insurrection against Galba was an act of sud­den violence ; soon begun and ended. The three civilwars were as follows : I. Otho and Vitellius: 2. Vi­tellius and Vespasian : 3. Lucius Antonius and Domi­tian, A. U. C. 845. The account of this last war islost. All that can be collected at present is, that Anto­nius, who commanded the legions on the Upper Rhine,formed a league with some of the German nations, anddeclared war against Domitian. He hazarded a battlewith Lucius Maximus, and met with a total overthrow.He was slain in the engagement. Suet, in Domitian.s. vi. The foreign wars that distracted the empire, du­ring the rage of civil commotions, were, one in Judaea,and the other with Civilis, the Batavian chief.
(e) Britain was finally subdued in the reign of Domi­tian. See the Life of Agricola. It was afterwards neg­lected and almost lost.
(d) For the Sarmatians and the Suevians, see the Geo­graphical Table.
(e) For more of the pretended Nero, see Hist. ii. s. 8,The Parthians were on the point of declaring war in fa­







OCR Output








198 THE HISTORY





and a prodigious number draughted fromthe marines. On the march he betrayedno symptom of sloth (c), no passion forluxury : he advanced on foot, at the headof the colours, covered with an ironbreastplate, rough and soldier-like, exhi­biting a striking contrast to his formercharacter.
XII. In this posture of affairs, fortuneseemed to open a flattering prospect. Othowas master of the greatest part of Italy,and his fleets had the command of the sea.To the foot of the maritime Alps (a) thecountry was in his possession. To passover those mountains, and make a descenton Narbon Gaul, was the measure whichhe had projected. To conduct that expe­dition he appointed Suedius Clemens, An-tonius Novellus, and iEmilius Pacencis.The last was loaded with irons by his ownsoldiers. Antonius Novellus lost all au­thority ; and Suedius Clemens, proud of hisrank, but not knowing how to maintain it,yielded too much to the humours of themen. He preserved no discipline, andyet was eager for action. His army pre







OCR Output








330 THE HISTORY





tinguished, broke out at Rome with re­doubled violence. Their friends, with of­ficious care, envenomed the minds of therival statesmen, and the various factionsthat for ever distract the city of Rome,furnished every day new materials to in­flame their jealousy. They vied with eachother for pre-eminence, and by intrigue,by cabal, by their train of followers, andtheir crowded levees,endeavoured to mani­fest their superiority; while Vitelliuswavered between both, and, as his inclina­tions shifted, the balance changed alter­nately from one to the other. Their au­thority exceeded all bounds, and wastherefore, like all ill-gotten power, un­certain and precarious. They saw thecaprice that marked the character of Vi­tellius, one moment inflamed with anger,and the next, lavish of his favours. Nei­ther of the ministers could be sure offixing the affections of his master, andboth despised and feared him.
Nothing, however, could satisfy theirrapacity : they seized houses, gardens, andthe whole wealth of the empire; while anumber of illustrious men, whom Galba







OCR Output








336 NOTES ON THE


(c) Vitellius, in the time of Nero, passed his timeamong pantomime actors, charioteers, and wrestlers.Suet, in Vitel. s. 4 and 12,
(rf) Helvidius Priscus often mentioned, Annals, xii.xiii. xvi; and Life of Agrieola, s, 2, note (a).
(e) Partus Thrasea, Annals, xiv. s. l?j xvi. s, 9\ jAppendix tp Annals, xv». s. 1.
. Section XCIII.
(a) The lands round the Vatican were covered withstagnated water, and the air, of course, was unwholeT.spme. St. Peter's church stands there at present; bntBrotier says, the cardinals never reside jn that quarter.
(b) Before the augmentation, the praetorian cohorts(that is, those that were encamped near Rome,) wereonly nine j the city-guard cpnsisted of three, calledCokortes. Urbqna*. Annals, iv. s. 5.
Section XCV,
(a) The birth-day of Vitellius is left uncertain. Sue­tonius, in Vitel. s. 3, says it was the eighth of the.kalends of October, or, according to others, the seventhof the ides of September, in the consulship of DrususCaesar and Norbanus Flaccus, A. U. C. 768,
(/') An order of priests was established by Romulusin honour of Tatius the Sabine king, A. U. C. 7\Annals, i. s. $4.
(c) Mucianus was the active partisan of Vespasian(this book, s. 76). Eprius Marcellus, a man whoraised himself by his flagitious deeds (Annals, xvi.s. 28), was the favourite minister under Vc£pa.s'an,See the Dialogue concerning Oratory, s. 8.







OCR Output








OF TACITUS. 35


prince. Under Tiberius, Caligula, and bookClaudius, we were all the property ofv—v—'one family. By hereditary right the 822.Roman- world was theirs. The prince 69-is now elective, and the freedom ofchoice is liberty. The Julian and theClaudian race are both extinct, andvirtue may now succeed by adoption.To be born the son of a prince isthe result of chance; mankind con­sider it in no higher light. The methodof adoption allows time to deliberate,and the public voice will serve as aguide to direct the judgment of theemperor. Let Nero be for ever beforeyour eyes: proud of his long line ofancestors, and warm with the blood ofthe Caesars, he did not fall by the re­volt of Vindex, at the head of a pro­vince naked and disarmed; nor washe deposed by me, who had only onelegion under my command: his ownvices, his own cruelty hurled him fromhis throne, no more to trample on thenecks of mankind. Of a prince con­demned by a public sentence, therewas till then no example,


s


d 2







OCR Output








OP TACITUS. 331





had recalled from banishment, were left bookto languish in distress and poverty. Theirsituation awakened no compassion in thebreast of the emperor. He restored them,it is true, to their rights over their freed-men; and, by that act of justice, not onlygratified the senators and other grandeesof the city, but also gained the applauseof the populace. But even this show ofbenignity was rendered useless by the lowcunning that marks the genius of slavery.To evade the claims of their patrons, thefreedmen concealed their wealth in ob­scure places, or else deposited it in thecustody of the great. Some of them con­trived to insinuate themselves into the im­perial family, and, there growing intofavour, looked down with pride and in­solence on their disappointed masters.
XCIII. The multitude of soldiers wasso enormous, that the camp overflowed,and poured the redundant numbers intothe city; a wild disorderly band, who fixedtheir station in the public porticos, andeven in the temples. The men wanderedabout the streets of Rome, so utterly care>-


1







OCR Output








OF TACITUS. 345





CI. In the memoirs of various authors bookwho composed their work during the reignof the Flavian family (a), we are told thatCaecina acted on the most upright princi­ples, with a view to the public tranquil­lity, and the good of his country. Butthis seems to be the language of flatteryto the reigning prince. The conduct ofCaecina may be fairly traced to other mo­tives. The natural inconstancy of theman, and, after his treachery to Galba,the confirmed habit of betraying withouta blush, would be sufficient to remove alldoubt, if we had not to add to the ac­count his disappointed ambition, and thecorrosions of envy, with which he sawhimself eclipsed by the superior genius ofhis rival. Rather than be supplanted byothers in the esteem of Vitellius, the ruinof that emperor was his remedy.
Having settled his plan of operationswith Bassus, Caecina once more put him­self at the head of the legions, and by va­rious artifices began to undermine the in­terest of Vitellius, and wean the centurionsand soldiers from all affection for his per-







OCR Output








264 THE HISTORY





waved its wings, and vanished out of sight.The people of the village aver the fact;and according to curious observers, whomade an exact computation of the time,this extraordinary phenomenon talliedexactly with the beginning of the battleand the prince's death (c).
LI. The grief of the soldiers, at the fu­neral ceremony, drove them, in a fit ofdistraction, to another mutiny. No offi­cer assumed the command; no one inter­fered to allay the ferment. The men de­manded a sight of Verginius; one momentcalling upon him to accept the sovereignty,and the next, with mingled prayers andmenaces, pressing him to undertake anembassy on their behalf to Valens andCaecina. Verginius, seeing them deter­mined to enter his house by force, madehis escape at the back door. The cohortsthat lay encamped at Brixellum, deputedRubrius Gallus with terms of submission.That officer obtained their pardon. Atthe same time Flavius Sabinus made termsfor himself, and, with the troops underhis command, submitted to the conqueror.
i







OCR Output








O , THE HISTORY





book scene of civil distraction, all power andauthority were surrendered to a singleruler, the historic character disappeared,and genius died by the same blow thatended public liberty. Truth was reducedto the last gasp, and various circumstancesconspired against her. A new.constitutiontook place, undefined, and little under­stood. Men resigned their rights, andlived like aliens in their native country.Adulation began to spread her baneful in­fluence, and a rooted hatred of their am­bitious masters rankled in the breast ofnumbers. Between both parties, One pay­ing their court, and the other broodingover public injuries, the care of transmit­ting due information to posterity was ut­terly lost. It is true, that, against theseductions of the time-serving writer youmay be upon your guard; but, on theother hand, spleen and calumny are de­voured with a greedy ear. Flattery wearsa badge of servitude, while malignityspeaks the tone of independance, and istherefore well received. With regard,tothe writer of the following work, he canwith truth aver, that Galba, Otho, and







OCR Output








64 THE HISTORY


L





book " rous measures. Before the conspiracy" of a few traitors gained an accession of" strength, one brave exertion might prove" decisive. Confront the danger, and" Otho will shrink back with terror and" dismay. It is not long since he went** forth by stealth. He has been joined" by a few incendiaries, and hurried away" to a camp, where no plan is settled; but" now, while Galba's friends remain inac-'* tive, he assumes the sovereign, and has" time to learn how to play his part." And shall we linger here in cold debate," till the usurper, having mastered the" camp, conies forth to invade the forum," and, under the eye of a lawful prince," ascends the capitol ? In the mean time," must our valiant emperor remain trem-" bling in his palace, while his warlike" friends barricade the doors, preparing," with heroic resolution, to stand a siege ?" But, it seems, the slaves are to be arro­wed; and they, no doubt, will render" effectual service, especially if we neg-" lect the people now ready to support" our cause, and suffer their indignation


6







OCR Output








80 THE HISTORY





resistance, and gave Piso, wounded as hewas, an opportunity of making his escape.Piso reached the temple of Vesta, where aslave of the state, touched with compas­sion, conducted him to his own privateapartment. Piso lay concealed for sometime, not indebted to the sanctity of thetemple, nor to the rites of religion, butsheltered by the obscurity of the place.At length, Sulpicius Florus, who belongedto a British cohort, and had been madeby Galba a citizen of Rome, and StatiusMurcus, a praetorian soldier, arrived inquest of him by Otho's special order. Bythese two men Piso was dragged to thevestibule of the temple, where, under re­peated blows, he breathed his last.
XLIV. In the midst of a general mas­sacre, no murder, we are told, gave somuch satisfaction to Otho, nor was there,among the heads cut off (a), one, at whichhe gazed with such ardent eyes. By thisevent he felt himself relieved from all ap­prehensions. The fate of Galba and ofTitus Vinius affected him in a different







OCR Output








OF TACITUS. 163





eeal and ardour. In order to strengthen b<k>khis fleet, lie embarked the city cohorts,and a Considerable detachment from thepraetorian guards; a body of men capableof defending their generals by their courage,and of assisting with their advice. Theconduct of the marine was committed tothree officers; namely, Antonius Novellusand Suedius Clemens, both centurions ofprincipal rank, and iEmilius Pacensis, atribune degraded by Galba, but, since thedeath of that emperor, restored his rank.A freedman of the name of Oscus wasappointed to direct the operations of thefleet, and act as a spy on better men thanhimself. The land forces, both horse andinfantry, were put under the command ofSuetonius Paulinus, Marius Celsus, andAnnius Gallus. To them was added Lici-nius Proculus, the praefect of the praeto­rians, and in him Otho reposed his wholeconfidence. This officer, in time of peace,discharged the functions of his stationwith sufficient ability ; but he had seen noservice, and had therefore no skill in mili­tary affairs. He had talents for mischief,and knew how to obstruct the authority of


ir 2







OCR Output








208 TIIE HISTORY





book inflame their ardour. They passed ovetwith their usual rapidity under the wallsof Placentia, and in sight of the enemy.Having gained a footing on the land, theyintercepted the enemy's scouts, and spreadsuch a general panic, that all who escapedtheir fury fled with precipitation, an­nouncing the arrival of Caecina and hiswhole army.
XVIII. Spurinna, who commandedat Placentia, was well informed of Caeci-na's motions. He knew him to be still ata distance ; and, if at any time he shouldshow himself before the place, he hadtaken his measures. Three praetorian co­horts, and no more than a thousand vexil-laries, with a small body of horse, wouldbe ill opposed to a veteran army. He re­solved, therefore, to remain within his for­tifications. But an unruly soldiery, fierceand unskilled in military operations, wasnot to be restrained. They seized the co­lours, and sallied forth in a body. Thegeneral endeavoured in vain to check theirviolence; the men pointed their weaponsat his breast; they spurned at the tribunes


3







OCR Output








THE
HISTORY
OF
{
TACITUS.


BOOK I.


VOL, V.


B


Six


238734







OCR Output
















OCR Output








OF TACITUS. 97





and carried by storm, the plunder of bookhouses, and the desolation of the country.In the heat of imagination, every mananticipated the booty that was to fall tohis share. To their arrogance and avarice,the never-failing vices of the strongest,they united the indignation of men, whofelt themselves insulted by the vainglorywith which the iEduans and the rest of theobnoxious states made it their boast, that,in despite of the legions, they had extortedfrom Galba a remission of one fourth oftheir tribute, and an extension of theirterritory. To these incentives was addeda report, artfully thrown out and readilybelieved, that the legions were to be deci­mated, and the best and bravest of thecenturions to be dismissed from the ser­vice. To increase the ferment, tidings ofan alarming nature arrived from everyquarter, and, in particular, a storm wassaid to be gathering over the city of Rome.The people of Lyons, still faithful to thememory of Nero, and the avowed enemiesof Galba, took care to disseminate theworst reports. From that place, as fromthe centre of intelligence, rumours con-
VOL. V. U







OCR Output








Of TACITUS. Ill


fespeCt. To pardon openly was not in bookthe power of Vitellius : he could execute v«^^/in open day; but to be merciful, he was *siobliged to deceive. Burdo remained in «»prison till the victory obtained by Vitel­lius appeased the wrath of the soldiers.He then was set at liberty. In the meantime, Centurio Crispinus, who with hisown hand had shed the blood of Capito,suffered as a victim to expiate that atro­cious deed. His guilt was manifest; thesoldiers demanded his blood, and Vitelliusthought a man of that description no kindof loss.
LIX. Julius Civilis was the nextwhom the army doomed to destruction ;but being of high rank and consequehceamong the Batavians, fear of a ruptureWith that fierce and warlike people savedhis life. There were, at that time, in thoterritory of the Lingones, no less thaneight Batavian cohorts, annexed at first asauxiliaries to the fourteenth legion, butseparated in the distraction of the times;a body of men, in that juncture, of thegreatest moment. It. was in their power







OCR Output








292 THE HISTORY


book his recent victory. The fields around*—£*-' presented a mournful spectacle. Forty822. days (a) had elapsed, and the plain wases- still covered with bodies, gashed andmangled; with broken limbs, and men; and horses in one promiscuous carnage;clotted gore, and filth, and putrefaction; thetrees cut down, and the fruits of the earthtrampled under toot; the whole a drearywaste, the desolation of nature. The view, of the high road was no less shocking tohumanity. The people of Cremona, amidstthe horrors that covered the face of thecountry, had strewed the way with rosesand laurels, and had even raised altars,where victims were slain, as if a nation ofslaves1 had been employed to adorn thetriuntph of a despotic prince. But theseservile acts, with which an abject peoplerejoiced over human misery, in a shorttime afterv brought on their own destruc­tion. Valens and Caecina attended theemperor to the-field. They pointed to theparticular spots, Avhere the stress of the'battle lay: "Here the legions rushed on" to the attadk; there tlje cavalry bore" down-all before them; from that quarter







OCR Output








OF TACITUS. 135


LXXIII. About the same time, the bookexecution of Calvia Crispinilla (a) was de- *—*—'
A U C
manded by the public voice : but by va- 822.rious artifices, in which the duplicity of est.'the prince covered him with dishonour,she was saved from danger. She had been,jn the reign of Nero, the professed teacherof lascivious pleasures, and, in the variousscenes of that emperor, the caterer forhis appetite. She passed afterwards intoAfrica, and, having instigated ClodiusMacer to revolt, became an accomplice inthe plot to cause a famine in the city ofHome, She wajs married soon after to a. man of consular rank, and, by thatconnection, gained ^ powerful interest,insomuch that, during the reigns of Galba,Otho, and Yitellius, she lived in perfectsecurity. Even in the following reignshe was high in credit. Her riches, andher want of children, placed her in aflourishing state; and those two circum­stances, in good as well as evil times, aresure to be of weight,
LXXIV. Otho, in the mean time, en­deavoured by frequent letters to djyert







OCR Output








op taCiTi/s. 285





tion, breathing vengeance and new com­motions. The fourteenth legion took thelead, denying, with ferocity, that they wereever conquered. It was true, they said,that at Bedriacum a vexillary detachmentfrom their body was defeated, but the le­gion had no share in the action. To re­move such turbulent spirits, it was judgedproper to order them back into Britain,where they had been stationed till re­called by Nero. The Batavian cohortswere ordered to march at the same time;and, as an old animosity subsisted betweenthem and the soldiers of the fourteenth le­gion, orders were given that they should allbe quietly quartered together. Betweenmen inflamed with mutual hatred a quar­rel soon broke out. It happened, at thecapital of the Turinians («), that a Bata­vian soldier had words with a tradesman,whom he charged with fraud and im­position. A man belonging to the le­gion took the part of his landlord, Adispute ensued; their comrades joinedthem; from abusive language they pro­ceeded to blows; and, if two praetoriancohorts had not overawed the Batavians,a bloody conflict must have been the con-







OCR Output








OF TACITUf. 121





"up arms in the cause -of Vinde*, awl ioox" lately raised recruit* to complete the" legions in the service of Galba," Tothese incentives they added the tempta­tion of plunder in a rich and opulentcity. Finding that they had infused theirrancour into the minds of the soldiers,they no longer depended on secret prac­tices, but openly, and in a body, pre­ferred their petition, imploring the armyto march forth the redressers of wrong,and rase to the ground a city, that hadbeen the nursery of war, and a hive ofenemies; a foreign race, who hated theRoman name. Lyons, they said, was aconfederate colony (d), a portion of thearmy, willing, at all times, to share in thegood or evil fortune of the empire. Theissue of the present war might be dis­astrous to their party. They therefore im­plored the legions not to leave them, inthe event of a defeat, at the mercy of afurious and implacable enemy.
IjXVI. These entreaties had their ef­fect. The legions were roused to ven­geance, and the flame rose to such a







OCR Output








OP TACITUS. 315





that danger at a distance is always magni­fied. He was followed by the sixth legion,and thirteen thousand veterans, formingtogether a considerable army. The fleetat Pontus had orders to assemble at By­zantium. That station was thought con-venient, as Mucianus had not yet deter­mined, whether he should not avoid theterritory of Msesia, and proceed in forceto Dyrrhachium; while his naval arma­ment commanded the seas of Italy, and,by consequence, protected the coasts ofAchaia and Asia against the attempts ofVitellius, who, in that case, would not onlysee Brundisium and Tarentum in danger,but also the whole coast of Calabria andLucania kept in a constant alarm.
LXXXIV. Throughout the pro­vinces nothing was heard but the din andbustle of warlike preparations. Soldierswere assembling; ships were preparingfor sea, and the clink of armourers re­sounded in every quarter. How to raisesupplies of money was the chief difficulty.Pecuniary funds, Mucianus used to say,were the sinews of war. For this pur-


8







OCR Output








184 THE HISTORY





book allowed, at the option of the votarist, pro­vided he chooses from the male kind only,Discoveries made in the fibres of kids aredeemed the best prognostics. The altar isnever stained with blood, and, though ex*posed to the open air, never moistened (d)by a drop of rain. Supplications and thepure flame, of fire are the only offerings.The statue of the goddess bears no resem*blance to the human form. You see around figure, broad at the base, but grow*jng fine by degrees, till, like a cone, it les­sens to a point. The reason (e), what­ever it be, is not explained.
IV. Tit us viewed the wealth of thetemple, the presents of eastern kings, andthe collection of rarities, which the geniusof the Greeks, fond of tradition and the dercorations of fabulous narrative, affected tQtrace from remote antiquity. He then,consulted the oracle about his futurevoyage. A palm seq, and a safe passagewere promised- He slew a number ofvictims, and, in terms properly guarded,attempted to pry into his own destiny.The priest, whose narne was Sostratus,







OCR Output








OF TACITUS. 317





LXXXV. Vespasian, in the mean booktime, saw his affairs assume a promisingaspect. The army in Illyrieum went overto his interest. In Maesia the third legionrevolted, and drew after them the eighth,and also the seventh, called the Claudian ;both devoted to Otho, though not en­gaged in the action at Bedriacum. Beforethe battle, they had advanced as far asAquileia ; and being at that place in­formed of a total overthrow, they as­saulted the messengers who brought thenews; broke to shivers the standards thatdisplayed the name of Vitellius; plun­dered the military chests; and, havingdivided the spoil, proceeded to every actof outrage and sedition. Conscious ofthat offence, and dreading the punishmentthat might follow, they consulted toge­ther, and clearly saw, that what thejr haddone required a pardon .from Vitellius,but with Vespasian stood in the light ofreal merit^To strengthen their cause,they sent dispatches to the army in Pan-nonia, inviting them to join the league ;determined, if they did not comply, tocompel'them by force of arms. In this







OCR Output








OF TACITUS. 133





obtained by his crimes. To his effeminatequalities he united some of those rougherevils which may be called manly passions,such as avarice and cruelty. Havinggained an entire ascendant over the affec­tions of Nero, he was, in some instances,the adviser of the horrors committed bythat prince, and in others the chief actor,without the knowledge of his master. Hecorrupted Nero at first, and in the end de­serted him. Hence it was that the bloodof a criminal was never demanded withsuch violent clamour. The men whodetested the memory of Nero, and thosewho still regretted him, concurred in oneopinion. They all joined in the cry forpublic justice. During the short reign ofGalba, he lived secure under the protec­tion of Titus Vinius. In fact, he had somemerit with that minister, having saved thelife of his daughter; but, in that very act,humanity was not his motive. A manwho had shed so much innocent blood,could not be suspected of a single virtue.His design was, by a new connection, toscreen himself from future danger.







OCR Output








126 THE HISTORY





LXVIII. The spirit of the Helvetians,fierce and intrepid, while the danger was ata distance, began to droop as soon as thewar drew nearer. In the beginning of thesehostilities they had chosen Claudius Se-verus to command their forces, but terrorand confusion followed. They neither- knew the use of their arms, nor the advan­tage of discipline. To keep their ranks inbattle was not their practice, nor were theyable to act in concert with their unitedforce. The contest they now perceivedmust be unequal with a veteran army;and, their fortifications being every Avherein decay, to stand a siege was not advisable.Caecina advanced at the head of a nume­rous army; the cavalry and auxiliary forcesfrom Rhaetia, with the youth of that coun­try, enured to arms, and trained to theart of war, were ready to attack them inthe rear. The country was laid waste, anda dreadful carnage followed. The Helve­tians betook themselves to flight; and,after wandering about in a general panic,wounded, maimed, and unable to resist,they threw down their arms, and fled forrefuge to the mountain, known by thename of Vocetius (a). A band of Thra-







OCR Output








144 THE HISTORY





book intent on the great scene that began toopen, no wonder if foreign affairs fell intoneglect. Encouraged by the inattentionthat prevailed at Rome, the Rhoxolanians,a people of Sarmatia, who in the preced­ing winter had cut off two entire cohorts,made an irruption into the province ofMaesia, with nine thousand horse; a bandof freebooters, determined to ravage thecountry. Plunder, and not war, was theirpassion. They prowled about in quest ofprey, without order, or apprehension of anenemy, when, on a sudden, they foundthemselves hemmed in by the third legionand their auxiliaries. The Romans ad­vanced in order of battle. The Sarma'tians, overloaded with booty, were takenby surprise. On a damp and slipperysoil, the swiftness of their horses was of nouse. Unable to retreat, they were cut topieces, more like men bound in fetter,than soldiers armed for the field of battle.It may seem strange, but it is not lesstrue, that the courage of the Sarmatianshas no inward principle, but depends alto­gether upon external circumstances; akind of courage, that has no source in the


6







OCR Output








op Tacitus. 143


Cappadocia, and another to Africa; all bookpopular grants, and splendid for the pre- v-^^/sent, but soon to fade away, and sink into ««ioblivion. Amidst these innovations, all *>.'of them temporizing acts, occasioned bythe pressure of his affairs, and perhaps onthat account excusable, he did not forgethis tender passions. Even in the momentwhen the sovereign power was still atstake, his love of Poppaea was not extin­guished. With fond remembrance of thatconnection, he caused her statues to berestored by a decree of the senate. Thereis reason to think, that, with a view to po­pularity, he intended to celebrate the me­mory of Nero with public honours. Manywere for erecting the statues 'of that em­peror (6), and even proposed it as a publicmeasure. The populace and the soldiers,as if they meant to decorate their emperorwitb additional splendour, saluted him bythe title of Nero Otiio. He .heard theiracclamations, but remained silent; per­haps unwilling to reject the compliment,perhaps ashamed to accept it.
LXXIX. The public mind being now







OCR Output








OP TACITUS. £01





on the rack, and pressed the unhapy mo- iookther to tell where she had secured her son.She laid her hand on her womb, and" here," she said " here my child is shel-" tered." From that moment, unmoved bymenaces, and unsubdued by torture, shenever changed her tone. Nothing couldconquer that generous obstinacy. Shedied a bright example of undaunted virtue.
XIV. Meanwhile, Fabius Valens re­ceived intelligence that Otho's fleet washovering on the coast of Narbon Gaul, withintent to invade that province, which hadalready embraced the interest of Vitellius.The adjacent colonies, by their deputies,sued for protection. Valens dispatchedtwo Tungrian cohorts, four squadrons ofhorse, with the whole cavalry of the Tie-viri, under the command of Julius Glassi-cus; reserving, however, a sufficient de­tachment from those forces, to garrisonthe port of Forojulium, that the colonymight not, while the troops marched upthe country, lie exposed to sudden incur­sions from the fleet. This arrangement







OCR Output








334 THE HISTORY


a
A.U. C., 8SS.A.D.


book proper, and chose his own station inthe service. Some preferred the city co­horts; and without considering merit or«* fitness for that employment, their wishwas gratified. Others, who ought to havebeen selected, were suffered, at their ownwill and pleasure, to continue in the le­gions or the cavalry. This was the choiceof numbers, who had impaired their con­stitutions, and were therefore willing toremove from the sultry heats of Italy to amore temperate climate. By these ar­rangements, the main strength of thelegions and the cavalry was drafted away.A motley body of twenty thousand menAvas formed out of the whole army, with­out choice or judgment. The conse­quence was, that the camp retained nei­ther the strength nor the beauty of mili­tary system.


Vitellius thought fit to harangue thesoldiers. In the midst of his speech, aclamour broke out, demanding the ex-»ecution of Asiaticus, and of Flavius, andllufinus, who bad been commanders inCaul, and listed on the side of Vindex.


/







OCR Output








1S8 ! *&Z HISTOEY





book less ferocity* He gave yentto a torrent ofabuse, and threw out violent menaces. Atlength Claudius Cossus, one of the depu­ties, who possessed an uncommon share ofeloquence, but had the skill, under an ap­pearance of well-acted terror, to concealhis power over the passions of his audi­ence, had the address to sooth the mindsof the soldiers. Their rage subsided, andcompassion took its turn. Such is the na­ture of the multitude; easily inflamed,and with a sudden transition shiftingto the opposite extreme. They meltedinto tears, and never ceased their suppli­cations till they prevailed on Vitellius,and saved the people from destruction.
LXX. CiEciNA, wanting further in­structions from Vitellius*, and, at the sametime, making all proper arrangements forhis passage over the Alps, halted for a fewdays in the territory of the Helvetians. Inthat situation, he received intelligencethat the squadron of horse called Sylla"ssquadron (a), at that time quartered onthe banks of the Po, had sworn fidelity toVitellius. They had formerly served under







OCR Output








246 THE HISTORY





book in restless anxiety, and hope and fear dis­tracted him.
XLI. On the same day, while Caecinawas employed in throwing a bridge overthe Po, two praetorian tribunes arrived todemand an interview. They were admit­ted to an audience, when a sudden alarmfrom the scouts announced the enemy athand. The business broke off abruptly,and the intention of the tribunes was leftin the dark. What their design was, whe­ther to betray their own party, to lay asnare for the Vitellians, or to make a fairand honourable proposal, cannot now beknown. Caecina dismissed the tribunes,and made the best of his way to the camp.He found that Valens had lost no time:the signal for battle was already given, andthe men were drawn out under arms.While the legions were eagerly employed insettling by lot the order in which they wereto take their stations in the field, the ca­valry advanced to charge the enemy, and,contrary to all expectation, were put to therout by an inferior number. The Otho-nians pursued with vigour, and would have







OCR Output








14 THE HISTORY





book corruption, insomuch that the virtues,which formerly gained the affection of thearmy, were fallen into contempt., Nerowas endeared to the soldiers by his vices,dalba, on the contrary, was rendered un­popular by the austerity of his manners.He was used to say, that he chose his sol­diers, but never bought them. The maximwas worthy of the old republic, but noman thought it an effusion from the heart.His conduct and his words were too muchat variance.
VI. Galba, being now in the declineof life, resigned himself altogether toTitus Vinius (a) and Cornelius Laco; theformer the most profligate of men, and thelatter despised for his sluggish inactivity.By those pernicious ministers he was in­volved in the popular hatred due to theirown flagitious deeds. The wickedness ofVinius, and the incapacity of Laco, provedhis ruin in the end. He made his approachto Rome (b) by slow journeys, in his pro­gress marking his way with blood andcruelty. Cingonius Varro, consul elect,ajad Petronius Turpilianus, of consular


3







OCR Output








OF TACITUS. 335





Nor did Vitellius endeavour to appease bookthe tumult. From his sluggish tempernothing like firmness or authority could beexpected. He knew that the time for dis­charging the promised donative was draw­ing near; and having no funds to answerthe expectation of the soldiers, he thoughtit his best policy to atone by mean com­pliances for that deficiency. In order,however, to raise supplies, a tax was im­posed on all the freedmen of former em­perors, to be collected in proportion to thenumber of their slaves. To squanderwith wild profusion, was the only use ofmoney known to Vitellius. He built aset of stables for the charioteers, andkept in the circus a constant spectacle ofgladiators and wild beasts; in this man­ner dissipating with prodigality, as if histreasury overflowed with riches.
XCV. CjECisfA and Valens resolvedto celebrate the birthday [a) of their mas­ter with all demonstrations of joy. Theygave a show of gladiators in every quarterof the city, with a display of pomp av-dmagnificence beyond all example. Vitel*







OCR Output








FIRST BOOK OF THE HISTORY. 353


Section VII.
(a) The murdar of Fonteius Capito on the LowerRhine, and of Clodius Macer in Africa, ha9 been re­lated in the Appendix to Annals, xvi.
(I) Galba, at his elevation to the imperial dignity, wasseventy-three years old. See the Appendix to An­nals, xvi.
Section VIII.
(a) Cluvius Rufus was a writer of history. Pliny theyounger says, he told his friend Verginius, If you meetwith any thing in my History that gives you offence,you will be so good as to remember, that History mustnot betray the cause of Truth. You know, replied Ver­ginius, that whatever I have done, it has been ever mywish to have all my actions faithfully related by such awriter as yourself. Pliny, lib. ix. epist. 19.
(l.) The people of Gaul, who stood for Vindex, werethe Sequani, the ^Edui, and the Arvcrni; for whom seethe Geographical Table at the end of the Eighth Volume.The states that lay near the legions on the Upper andLower Rhine, were the Lingones and the Rcmi. Seethe Geographical Table at the end of the Eighth Volume.
(c) The German armies obtained a complete victoryover Vindex at Vesontium. See the Appendix to An­nals, xvi.
(d) Verginius commanded the legions on the UpperRhine. For an account of him and his conduct, see theAppendix to the Annals, xvi. s. 12. When he was re­called by Galba, Hordconius Flaccus succeeded to thecommand.
Section IX.(a) This was Vitellius, whom in the sequel we shallsee emperor of Rome. Galba sent him to command onvol. v. 2 a







OCR Output








OF TACITUS. 339


the banks of the Rhine, having reason to bookfear the designs of the Batavians, expected *—v—'to have a war upon his hands (b), and 822.therefore thought it prudent not to dhni- 69.nish his force. In Britain, Vectius Bo-lanus was kept in a constant alarm by thereestless gnius of the natives. At the sametime, those two officers began to balancebetween Vitellius and Vespasian. Spainshowed no alacrity. That country, leftwithout a governor of proconsular autho­rity, was under the direction of three com­manders of legions, all equal in rank, andall willing, as long as Vitellius flourishedin prosperity, to hold their employmentsunder him, but in the day of distressready to abandon his cause. Affairs inAfrica wore a better aspect. The legionand the cohorts, which had been raised inthat country by Clodius Macer, and dis­banded by Galba, were again embodiedby order of Vitellius, and the young men.of the nation went in crowds to be enrolledin the service. The fact was, Vitelliusand Vespasian had been proconsuls inAfrica : the former governed with moderation, and was remembered with gratitude :


7,2







OCR Output








OF -TACITUS. 65





" to evaporate without striking a blow, book" What is^ dishonourable is always dan- v—v-—'.
A. U. C.
" gerous. It we must fall, let us bravely »i»41 meet our fate. Mankind will applaud 6»"our valour,, and Otho, the author of our" ruin, will be the object of public detes-" tation." Vinius maintained his formeropinion, Laco opposed him with warmth,and even with violent menaces. In thisIcelus was the secret prompter. That fa­vourite hated the consul, and, in a momentbig with danger, chose to gratify a littleand^a narrow spirit at the expense of theemperor and the public.
:Jfit4> '• *•'.',-
XXXIV. Galea adopted what ap­peared to him the most specious and mostprudent advice. Piso, notwithstanding,was sent i'orward tp the camp. The pre­sence of a young man of high expectation,an4.lately called to, the first honours ofthe state, might give a tum:to the passionsoftliearmy. He.-was, besides consideredas the enemy ofVVaiyus. rlf, in fact, hedid not hate him, the.enethics of'the ^mini­ster wished it; and malice^ imputed to themind of man, is easily believed to be avol. v. 1'







OCR Output








100 THE HISTORY





book equivocal: he had also crushed the ma­chinations of Capito, and for those ser­vices thought himself ill requited. Stungwith resentment, he now endeavoured torouse the ambition of Vitellius. " The" soldiers," he said, " were zealous in his" service, and the name of Vitellius stood" in high esteem throughout the Roman" world. From Hordeonius Flaccus no" opposition was to be apprehended." Britain was ready to declare against" Galba, and the German auxiliaries" would follow their example. The pro-" vinces wavered in their duty, and, by" consequence, the precarious authority" of a feeble old man would be soon trans-" ferred to other hands. Fortune courted" Vitellius: he had nothing to do but to" open his arms, and receive her favours." Verginius, indeed, had every thing to*' chill his hopes, and damp his resolution." He had no splendid line of ancestors to" recommend him. He was of an eques-" trian family; but his father lived and" died in obscurity. A man of his cast" would have proved unequal to the" weight of empire. A private station was







OCR Output








FIRST BOOK OF THE HISTORY. 355


Section XIII.
(a) Icelus, the favourite freedman, has been men­tioned in the Appendix to Annals, xvi. s. 13. SeePliny the elder, lib. xxxiii. s. 2.
(Z) For Otho's connection with Poppaea, see Annals,xiii. s. 45 and 46. .
Section XIV.
(a) Suetonius says, Pisonem Licinianum, nobilemegreg'mmque juvenem, ac sibi olim probatissimum, testa-mentoque semper in bona et nomen adscitum, repente emedia salutantium turbd apprehendit, jiliumque appel-lans, perduxit in castra, ac pro condone adoptavit.Suet, in Galba, s. 17. According to this account,Galba was determined in his choice, and did not wantthe advice of Laco. He adopted Piso from inclination,propria electione. Plutarch, in the Life of Galba,gives the same account. For an account of Piso's pe­digree, see Brotier, 4to edition, vol. iii. page 365.
Section XV.
(a). Romulus classed the citizens of Rome in thirtycurias, and from that circumstance the Lex Curiatatook its name. The law was enacted by the people as­sembled in their several curias. See Annals, xi. s. 22.
(b) Piso's father, mother, and brother were put to. death by Claudius. Another brother (the conspiracy
against Nero being detected) opened his veins and bled todeath. See Annals, xv. s. 59.
Section XVIII.
(a) Thunder- and lightning were always consideredby the Romans as a warning not to transact public


2A 2







OCR Output








SECOND BOOK OF THE HISTORY. 387


Section XCVII.
(a) Hordeonios Flaccus was appointed by Galba tothe command on the Upper Rhine, in the room ofVerginius Rufus. See Appendix to Annals, xvi. s. 12.
(I) For the war in which Flaccus was engaged withCivilis, the Batavian chief, see Hist. iv. s. 18.
(c) Suetonius gives a different account of Vespasian'sadministration in Africa. In Vesp. s. 4.
Section XCVIII.(a) For the Pannonian Alps, see the GeographicalTable at the end of the Eighth Volume.
Section C.
(a) Brotier thinks that there is a mistake in the text.The fourteenth legion, he observes, stood firm for Otho,find, for that reason, was sent into Britain. But per­haps the veterans, who had served their time, and werestill retained in the service, were left in Italy.
(b) For Hostilia, see the Geographical Table at theend of the Eighth Volume.
Section CI.
(a) That is, during the reigns of Vespasian, Titus,^nd Domitian, the last of the Flavian line.


END OF THE FIFTH VOLUME.


Printed by R. Taylor and Co. 38, Shoe-Lane, Fleet-Street.







OCR Output








346 . THE HISTORY OF TACITUS.
book son. Bassus, on his part, was equally ac-


ii.


tive, and met with little difficulty. Theofficers and men belonging to the fleet re-membered that they had lately distin­guished themselves in the cause of Otho,and were therefore ready to declareagainst the enemy who had triumphedover him.





END OF BOOK II.







OCR Output








206 THE HISTORY


II.





book began to consider the nature of theirsituation, and their inability to support awar. " They were islanders, remote from". Germany, and out of the reach of the" legions. The fleets of Otho commanded" the seas, and had lately ravaged the" maritime countries, though defended by" the cohorts and cavalry of Vitellius."This reflection produced a sudden changein every mind. They resolved to asserttheir independance, not with open force,but by covert stratagem; and, for, thatpurpose, to lie in wait for their opportu­nity. Pacarius, as soon as his train of vi­sitors left him, retired to his bath. In thatmoment the conspirators fell upon himnaked and disarmed. He was put to in­stant death, and his attendants sufferedthe same fate. Their heads, like those oftraitors, were conveyed to Otho. Andyet the assassins were neither rewardedby that prince, nor punished by Vitellius.In the mass of atrocious deeds that dis­graced the times, petty villanies were suf­fered to pass with impunity.
XVII. The cayalry, called the Syla-







OCR Output
















OCR Output








OF TACITUS. 327


1L
a. u. c.a. n.


passed, had known and felt his aban- bookdoncd profligacy. The populace, as usual,knowing neither truth nor falsehood, and "%*-indifferent about both, paid their tribute 09-of flattery with noise and uproar. Theypressed him to accept the title of .Au­gustus: he declined it for some time, butthe voice of the rabble prevailed. Heyielded to their importunity ; but his com­pliance was useless, and the honour wasof short duration.
XCI. In a city, where superstition in­terpreted every thing, the first act of Yi-tellius, in the character of sovereignpontiff, was considered as an omen thatportended mischief. He issued an edictconcerning the rights and ceremonies ofreligion, dated the fifteenth before thecalends of August, a day rendered inaus­picious by two victories formerly obtainedover the armies of Rome ; one at Creme-ra (a), and the other at Allia. But Vitelliuswas unacquainted with the antiquities ofhis country. He knew nothing of laws,either human or divine. The same stu­pidity possessed his friends and his band







OCR Output








SECOND BOOK OF THE HISTORY. 381


(I) Regium was about fifteen miles from Brixellum,where Otho breathed his last.
(c) See Suetonius, in Vesp. s. 5.
Section LTII.(a) Eprius Marcellus was the inveterate enemy of-Paetus Thrasea. Annals, xvi. s. 22 and 28.
Section LIV.(a) The passports, called Diplomata Otliahis, weregranted for the protection of travellers and messengers.See Pliny, lib. x. epist. 14 and 54.
Section LV.(a) The festival of. Ceres began on the 19th ofApril. See Annals, xv. s. 53.
Section LVII.(a) For more of Asiaticus, see Suetonius, in Vitel.
S. 12
Section LVHT.
(a) For Mauritania, see the Geographical Table atthe end of the Eighth Volume.(b) The Straits of Gibraltar.
Section LIX.
(a) The Arar, now the Soane. See Annals, xiii. s. 5S.
(b) For the extreme poverty of Vitellius, see Suet.
in Vitel. s. 7.
Section LX.
(a) Cascilius Simplex was consul when Vitellius,finding his affairs utterly ruined, was willing to abdicate.Hist. hi. s. 68. For an account of the consuls in theCourse of this year, see Hist. i. s. 77. note (a).







OCR Output








OF TACITUS. 203





peasants, from the high grounds, discharg­ed a volley of stones, and, being expertslingers, annoyed the enemy in flank.They mixed in the lines with the regularsoldiers, and performed feats of valour. Inthe moment of victory, there was no dis­tinction between the coward and the brave;all pursued their advantage with equal ar­dour. The Vitellians were thrown into,disorder; and, being driven towards themargin of the sea, they were there attack­ed in the rear by the soldiers belonging tothe fleet. This was a danger unforeseen.Hemmed in on every side, they must havebeen to a man cut off, if the night had notcome on in time to favour their retreat,and restrain the victorious army from pur­suing them in their flight.
XV. The Vitellians, though defeated,still retained their warlike spirit. With areinforcement drawn together in haste,they returned to the charge; and, findingthe enemy elate with joy, and by successlulled into security, they assaulted theoutposts, put the advanced guard to thesword, and forced their way into the







OCR Output








OF tAClTtTSi 131





Relayed anew and unexpected character, bookHe renounced his love of pleasure, or, atleast, dissembled for the present. Scorn­ing to loiter in luxury and inglorious ease,he assumed a spirit becoming the majestyof empire. And yet the change diffuseda general terror: men knew that his virtueswere false, and they dreaded a return ofhis former vices. He ordered Marius Cel-sus, the consul elect, whom he had put inirons (a) in order to rescue him from thehands of the soldiers, to appear before himin the capitoh To acquire the fame ofclemency, by releasing a man of illustriouscharacter, and well known to be an enemyto Otho and his party, was the object ofhis ambition. Celsus appeared with un­shaken constancy. He confessed the crimeof adhering faithfully to the unfortunateGalba, and., by that firmness, gave theemperor a fair opportunity to grace hischaracter. Otho did not assume the toneof a sovereign granting pardon to a crimi­nal ; but> to show that he could think ge­nerously of an enemy, and to remove alldoubt of the sincerity of his reconciliation,he received Celsus among his intimate


t2







OCR Output








OF TACITtJS. 301





" the craft of the politic Tiberius. Not is it*' against Caligula, Claudius, or Nero, that" we propose to rise in arms. They had" a kind of hereditary right: their families" were in possession of the sovereignty.


" Even Galba could boast of an illustri-
* ous line of ancestors, and for that reason' you were willing to acknowledge his' title. But in the present juncture, to4 remain inactive, and leave the common-' wealth a prey to vice and infamy, were
* a desertion of the public, which nothingcan excuse. Do you imagine that in a
' state of servitude you can find your own' personal safety ? Even in that case, sub*
* mission would be attended with disgrace' and infamy. But ambition is not now im-' puted to you for the first time : you have
** been long suspected, and nothing re-' mains but vigorous enterprise. The so^' vereign power is your only refuge. Have' we forgot the fate of Corbulo («)? It may' be said that the nobility of his birth (su-' perior, it must be confessed, to you as' well as myself) exposed him to danger."It may be so ; but let it be remembered,







OCR Output













OCR Output








tf* CONTENTS—BOOK It;


Othomians prove victorious. Valens enters Italy\ Cae~etna resolves to strike a itow before the arrival of thatgeneral. He lays a snare for the Othonians, but isdefeated by Suetonius Paulinas at a place called Ca-storum. King Epiphanes, on Otho's side, is wounded.XXVIL Salens arrives at Ticinum. A violent sedi­tion occasioned by the Batavians. Valens joins' thettrmy under Ccecina. XXXI. Comparison of Othoand Vitellius. Otho holds a council to deliberate onthe plan of the war. Some are for delay ; others foran immediate action. Otho is for a decisive blowtand, by advice, retires to Brixellum. XXXIV. Cee-eina and Valens wait for the motions of the enemy.A bridge thrown over the Po to amuse Otho's forces*who are worsted in a skirmish. XXXVII. A reportthat both armies were inclined to peace, shorvn to lihighly improbable. XXXIX. Tilianus, Otho's bro­ther, and Proculus, the prafect of the praetorianlands, intrusted with the chief command. They en­camp within four miles of Bedriacum. Otho, by di­spatches from Brixellum, hurries them oft to artengagement. XLI. The battle of Bedriacum. TheOthonians defeated, and On the next day lay dourttheir arms. The Vitellians enter the camp* and both,armies embrace with tears tf joj/. XLV. Otho istveary of civil war* and, though the soldiers are stilldevoted to his cause, resolves to prevent further effu­sion of blood; he falls on his bum sword. His finer alimmediately performed'; Some of the men slay them­selves near the funeral pile. L. Otho's origin andcharacter^ LI. A mutiny among his soldiers; Ver^ginius in danger from their fury. LI I. A great partof the senate, who had followed Otho, involved in dan-







OCR Output








■OF TACITUfr. , 325





rose hastily to resent what was no more boothan an accident, and from abusive lan­guage proceeded sword in hand to themost violent outrages. The tribunes andcenturions, at the head of their troops ofcavalry, paraded the streets in a war­like manner, and spread a general panicthrough the city.
LXXXIX. Vitellius himself, in hismilitary apparel, mounted on a superbhorse, advanced from the Milvian bridge,while the senate and the people pressedon before him to make way for their newmaster. His friends, however, remon­strated against his making a public entryin a military style, like a conqueror march­ing into a city taken by storm. He con­formed to their advice, and, having put onhis senatorian robe, made his entry in apacific manner. His troops followed inregular order. The eagles of four legionsled the way, with an equal number ofstandards on each side. The colours oftwelve squadrons of horse were displayedwith great pomp. The infantry followed,and after them the cavalry. The pro-







OCR Output













OCR Output








110 THE HISTOR*





I
In their motives there was* no doubtja mingle of avarice ; and plunder* theyhoped, would be the reward of valour.
LVIII. Vitellius, after bestowing the;highest praise on the spirit Avith which thdSoldiers embraced his cause, proceeded toregulate the various departments of publicbusiness. He transferred the offices* hi­therto granted to the imperial freedmen, tothe Roman knights; and the fees claimedby the centurions for exemptions fromduty, were, for the future, to be defrayedout of the revenue of the prince. The furyof the soldiers* demanding vengeance onparticular persons, was not to be repressed.He yielded in some instances* and in otherseluded their resentment under colour ofreserving the obnoxious fof heavier pu­nishment. Pompeius Propinquus, the go­vernor of Belgic Gaul, was put to deathon the spot; but Julius Burdo, who com­manded the German fleet, was saved byart artful stratagem. The army consi­dered that officer as the accuser first, andafterwards as the murderer of FonteiusGapito,' whose memory was still held in







OCR Output








OF fAGITUS; 289





glittering of arms. A report was instantly bookspread, that the fourteenth legion was re­turning to offer battle; but the mistake wassoon discovered. It was found, that themen who brought up the rear of the armywere approaching. That circumstancebeing known, the tumult subsided, till oneof the slaves of Verginius was observed bythe soldiers. They seized the man, and,in their fury, charged him with a designto assassinate Vitellius. With this notionin their heads, they rushed directly to thebanqueting-room, and with rage and cla­mour demanded the immediate executionof Verginius. The emperor, though bynature addicted to suspicion, entertainedno doubt of Verginius. He interposed tosave his life, and with difficulty restrainedthe men, who thirsted for the blood of aconsular commander, at one time theirown general/ It had ever been the fateof Verginius, more than of any other offi­cer, to encounter the seditious spirit ofthe army. His character, notwithstand­ing, was held in great esteem; his bril­liant talents extorted admiration evenfrom his enemies; but the moderationvol. v, u •







OCR Output








OF TACITUS. 169





the speech, the style and manner of that bookcelebrated orator. Otho was received withacclamations: the populace, according tocustom, yielded to the impulse of the mo­ment, full of sound and servile adulation,but nothing from the heart. You wouldhave thought that it was Caesar the dicta­tor, or Augustus the emperor, for whomthey contended with so much emulation.And yet, in all this show of zeal, therewas at the bottom neither love nor fear;servility was the motive; all courted theyoke, and all rushed headlong into slavery.The public, at this time, presented nobetter spectacle than what is seen everyday in a family of domestic slaves: eachindividual had his own private views; andfor the public interest, or the honour ofthe state, no care remained. Otho wasnow ready to depart: he left the govern­ment of Rome, and the whole weight ofempire, to his brother Salvius Titianus (b),and proceeded on his expedition.
END OF BOOK I.







OCR Output








88 THE HISTORY


1
A. U. CA. D.


book prince. By the adoption of Galba bewas raised above his elder brother; but,823. ' by that preference, all he gained was tobe murdered first.
Titus Vinius had reached the age of fifty-seven ; a man of unsettled principle* andvarious manners. His father was of a prae­torian family; his grandfather by the marternal line was in the number proscribedby the triumvirate. His first campaign,under Calvisius Sabinus (a), began withdisgrace. The wife of hi& commandingofficer, prompted by wanton curiosity,went by night, in the disguise of a com­mon soldier, to view the site and dispo­sition of the camp. In her frolic, she wentround to visit the sentinels, and the postsand stations of the army. Arriving atlength at the place where the eagles weredeposited, she did not scruple to committhe act of adultery on that sacred spot.Vinius was charged as her accomplice,and, by order of Caligula, loaded withirons. By the revolution which soon afte*happened, he regained his liberty, andfrom that time rose to honours. He dis­







OCR Output








92 THE HISTORY


book pronounced him worthy of empire, had he*—v*—* never made the experiment.
A. U. C.822.
«9. L. Iif this disastrous juncture, whileRome was shuddering with horror at thelate dreadful carnage, and, from the wellknown vices of Otho's nature, men were indread of worse evils still to come, dis­patches from Germany brought an ac­count of a new storm ready to burst inthat quarter. The revolt of Vitellius, andthe armies under his command, was nolonger a secret. The intelligence arrivedbefore the death of Galba, but was sup*pressed by that emperor, that the seditionon the Upper Rhine might be thoughtthe only mischief that disturbed the tran­quillity of the empire. At length the truestate of affairs was known, and a generalpanic spread through the city. Not onlythe senators and Roman knights, who hadstill some shadow of authority, but themeaner populace, mourned over the dis­tractions of their country. All weregrieved, to see two men of the most perni­cious characters, enervated by luxury, andabandoned to every vice, choseis by some







OCR Output








|24 THE HISTORY





book people had not ransomed themselves witha considerable sum. Where pecuniarybribes were not to be had, women wereobliged to resign their persons, and pro­stitution became the price of common hu­manity. In this manner, gratifying hisavarice, or his brutal passions, Yalens.ar?rived at the foot of the Alps, . .
LXVII. C.ucina, who commanded thesecond army, marked his way with greaterrapine and more horrible cruelty. Hefound in the territory of the Helvetians-abundant cause to provoke a man of hisferocious temper. The people of that di­strict, originally a Gallic nation (a), wererenowned in former tiroes for their valour,and their exploits in war. Of late yearsthe history of their ancestors was their only•glory. Not having heard of the death ofGalba, they were unwilling to acknow­ledge Vitellius. In this disposition of theirminds, they had soon a cause of quarrel,occasioned by the rapacity of the twenty-first legion. That body of men fell in with.a party, who were escorting a sum ofmoney to a strong fort, where the Helve­







OCR Output








OF TACITUS. 189


ii.





tf as there decided by the forces of the b o o kWest. It is true, that Pompey, Cassius,Brutus, and Anthony, carried the waracross the Mediterranean, and had reasonto repent. Syria and Judaea heard of theCaesars, but seldom saw them. Thelegions, undisturbed by sedition, had nowar upon their hands. Embroiled at dif­ferent times with the Parthians (a), theyhad a few slight conflicts, with doubtfulsuccess, and passed the rest of the year inprofound tranquillity. In the late civil■war (b), when every part of the empire wasin motion, the East was perfectly quiet.Galba obtained the sovereignty, and theoriental legions acquiesced; but it was nosooner known that Otho and Vitellius wereengaged in an impious war against theircountry, than they began to shake off theirpacific temper. They saw the supremeauthority in the hands of other armies,who granted it away at their own pleasure,and reaped the profits of every revolution,'while the soldiers of the East had nothingbut a change of'servitude, condemnedat the will of others, to submit to newmasters.







OCR Output








380 NOTES ON THE


speech upon this occasion shows that he could thinkwith dignity. See Suetonius, life of Otho, s. lO.
Section XLVIII.(a) Augustus, Tiberius, and Caligula, were of theJulian line; Claudius, and Nero (by adoption) were ofthe Claudian ; Galba was of the house of Servius; Otho,of the Salvian family.
Section XLIX.
(a) This was Verginius Rufus, who conquered Vindexin Gaul, and had the moderation to decline the imperialdignity when offered to him by the legions. See Appen­dix to Annals, xvi. s. 12.
(A) Nero, in his last distress, fearing that his headwould be exhibited as a public spectacle, gave directionsfor his funeral. Otho did the same: though tainted withNero's vices, he closed the scene with dignity.
(c) Plutarch tells us, that he himself visited Otho'stomb at Brixellum. Those perishable materials havelong since mouldered away; but the epitaph, written byMartial, will never die. The poet admits that Otho leda dissolute life; but adds, that, in his end, he was noway inferior to Cato.
Dum dubitaret adhuc belli civilis Enyo,
Forsitan et posset vlncere mollis Otho;Damnavit multo staturum sanguine Martefn,
Et fodit certa pectora nuda manu.Sit Cato dum vivit, san£ vel Caesare major;Dum moritur, numquid major Othone fuit ?
Lib. vi. epig. 31.Section L.
(a) See Annals, xiii. s. 46 j Hist. i. s. IS; and Sueto­nius and Plutarch.


2







OCR Output








372 NOTES ON THE


14. Legio Sexta Ferrata; another sixth legion,with the addition of Ferrata, to distinguish it from the.former.
15. Legio Septima Claudiana, the seventh, calledalso the Claudian.
16. Legio Septima Galbiana, the seventh, calledthe Gallian.
17. Legio Octava, the eighth legion, sometimescalled hivicta.
i


18. Legio Nona, the ninth legion; sometimes calledQemim, because it was one legion formed out of two.
• 19. Legio Decima, the tenth legion, quartered inSpain.
20. Legio Decima, another tenth legion, quarteredin Judaea.
21. Legio Undecima, the eleventh legion, some­times with the additional title of Claudiana.
22. Legio Duodecima, the twelfth legion, some­times called Legio Duodecima Fulminea.
23. Legio Tertia Decima, the thirteenth legion,called also Gemina, because composed of two unitedinto one. Legio Quarta Decima, the fourteenth le­gion.
24. Legio Quint a Decima, the fifteenth legion,stationed in the Lower Germany.
25. Legio Oointa Decima, another fifteenth le­gion, quartered in Judsea, sometimes called Legio QuintaDecima JpoUinaris.
26. Legio Sexta Decima, the sixteenth legion.
27. Legio Septima Decima, the seventeenth legion,thought to be one of those that suffered in the slaughterof Varus.
28. Legio Dcodevicessima, the eighteenth legion,,another of the legions under Varus.







OCR Output








NOTES
ON
THE SECOND BOOK


OF


THE HISTORY.


Section I.


(a) THACITUS says that fortune was then laying thefoundation of a new imperial house, whichproved to be beneficial and disastrous to the people, andalso to the very family that was raised to that pre-emi­nence. This is perfectly clear, when we consider, thatRome was happy under Vespasian and Titus, but groanedunder Domhian, till the tyrant was destroyed, and theFlavian line was extinguished.
{b) Titus, at this time, was in his twenty-eighth year.By the favour of Narcissus, to whom Vespasian paid hiscourt, Titus was educated in the palace with Britannicus,the son of Claudius. The prince, then destined by hisfather to succeed to the empire, was cut off by the vil-lany of Nero; and Titus, whose elevation was not thenforeseen, lived to be the delight of the Roman people.
(c) Suetonius tells us that Narcissus, the favouritefreedman, consulted a fortune-teller about the destiny ofBritannicus : the answer was unfavourable fo the youngprince, but assured Titus that he was born to the impe­rial dignity. Suetonius, in Tito, s. 2.







OCR Output








262 THE HISTORY





book praefect. They found that with one woundhe had dispatched himself. His bodywas burnt without delay. This had beenhis earnest request, lest his head (b) shouldfall into the hands of his enemies, and bemade a public spectacle. He was borneon the shoulders of the praetorian soldiersto the funeral pile. The men, during theprocession, paid all marks of respect tohis remains. They printed kisses on hishands, and on the mortal wound, and, ina flood of tears, poured forth their warmestpraise. At the funeral pile some of thesoldiers put an end to their lives; not fromany consciousness of guilt, nor yet im­pelled by fear; but to emulate the ex­ample of their prince, and to show them­selves faithful to the last. At Bedriacum,Placentia, and other camps, numbers fol­lowed the example. A sepulchre (c) wasraised to the memory of Otho, but of anordinary structure, protected by its mean­ness, and therefore likely to last.
L. Siich was the end of Otho, in thethirty-seventh year of his age. He wasborn in the municipal city of Ferentum.







OCR Output








OF TACITUS. 3229





reached the camp. The flame of sedition bookwas ready to break out a second time. Allagreed, that by the treachery of Valensthey were detained from the field of bat­tle. They resolved to linger no longer;they scorned to wait the motions of an in­active commander; they inarched beforethe colours, and, ordering the standard-bearers to push on with alacrity, neverhalted, till, by a rapid march, they joinedCarina's army. In that camp Valens wasin no kind of credit. The vanquishedsoldiers complained, that with an inferiorforce they were left exposed to the enemy;and, by extolling the strength and valourof their new friends, they hoped to conci­liate esteem, and throw from themselvesthe imputation of cowardice. Valens wasat the head of an army which exceededthat of Caecina by almost double thenumber, and yet the latter was the favour­ite of the men. His liberal spirit gainedhim friends, and his generosity was praisedby all. To the vigour of youth he uniteda graceful figure, and he possessed thosenameless qualities (a), which, though of nosolid value, conciliate favour, men know







OCR Output








op Tacitus. » 305





" dom; but I expect no less advantage book" from the ignorance, the stupidity, and" cruel disposition of Vitcllius. In a word," war must be our choice; to us it is safer" than peace, for we have already deli-" berated; and he who deliberates, has" rebelled."
LXXVIII. By this animating speech allwho assisted at the council were inspiredwith new confidence. They pressed roundVespasian, exhorting him to undertake theenterprise; they recalled to his memorythe responses of oracles (a), and the pre­dictions of men skilled in judicial astro­logy. Nor was Vespasian untincturcdwith that superstition. Even afterwards,when possessed of the supreme authority,he retained a mathematician named Seleu-cus, to assist his councils with his insightinto future events. A number of progno­stics, that occurred to him in his youth,came fresh in his mind. He recollected acypress tree of prodigious size, on his ownestate, that fell suddenly to the ground,and, on the following day, rose on thesame spot, and flourished in new strength
VQL. V. X







OCR Output








OF TACITUS. 271


own vices practised by others. Italy was booklong since exhausted, and, in that impo- *—v—'verished state, obliged to maintain nume- «*-'•
A. D.
rous armies, and to bear the superadded ",grievances of riot, insult, and devastation.
LVII. Vitellius, in the mean time,advanced towards Italy with the remain­der of the German armies, ignorant of hisvictory, and still conceiving that he wasto meet the whole weight of the war. Afew of the veteran soldiers were left be­hind in winter quarters; and to recruitthe legions, which retained little morethan their name, hasty levies were made inGaul. On the frontiers bordering on theRhine the command was given to Hordeo-* nius Flaccus. To his own army Vitelliusadded eidit thousand men from Britain.Having marched a few days, he receivedintelligence of the victory at Bedriacum,and the conclusion of the war by thedeath of Otho. He called an assembly ofthe soldiers, and, in a public harangue,extolled the valour of the troops that con*quered in his service. He had with hima freedman of the name of Asiaticus (a).







OCR Output








266 ' THE HISTORY





book the people of Mutina increased the appre­hensions of the senators. The magistratesof the city made a tender of arms andmoney for the public service, and, in thestyle of their address, gave to a smallparty of senators the appellation of con­script fathers; a title always applied tothe collective body.
LIII. In the debate that followed in athin meeting of the fathers, a violent dis­pute broke out between Licinius Caecinaand Eprius Marcellus; the former, withwarmth and vehemence, charging it as acrime against Marcellus, that he spoke inambiguous terms and with studied ob­scurity. The case was by no means sin­gular; all were equally dark and myste­rious : but the name of Marcellus, whohad conducted so many prosecutions (a),was universally detested; and Caecina, anew man lately admitted into the senate,thought to rise by encountering powerfulenmities. The dispute was ended by theinterposition of wiser men. The senateadjourned to Bononia, intending there tomeet again, when they hoped to have


7







OCR Output








173


CONTENTS.
BOOK II.
I. TITUS, sent by his father Vespasian to congratulateGalba, hears of that emperor's death, and stops at Co­rinth. He resolves to return to Syria, and sails toRhodes and Cyprus. At the last place he visits the tem­ple of the Paphian Venus. Some account of the goddess,and the rites of worship. He lands in Syria. V. Cha­racter of Vespasian, and of Mucianus. They lay asidetheir mutual animosities, and act in concert. The le­gions of the East resolved to have a share in the makingof emperors. VIII. A counterfeit Nero detected andseized. X. From trivial matters great discord atRome. Viblus Crispus accuses Annius Faustus, aninformer, and procures his condemnation, though hatedhimself for the same practices. / XI. An account ofOtho's forces. XII. His fleets command the sea ex­tending to the maritime Alps. The city of Inteme-lium sacked and plundered by the Othonians. Theexemplary courage of a mother in the protection of herson. XIV. Otho's fleet infests the coast of NarbonGaul. An engagement with the Vitellians in thatquarter, in which the Othonians have the advantage.XVI. Pacarius, the governor of Corsica, favours thecause of Vitellius, and is murdered. XVII. Ccecina,with the Vitellian forces, enters Italy, and besiegesPlacentia. Spurbma, one of Otho's officers, defendsthe place. Ccecina raises the siege, and retires withhis army to Cremona. A battle at that place, and the







OCR Output








42 THE HISTORY


book of the ambassadors easily arranged. , The
v—s—' whole was left to G albas judgment, and
822. he executed it with caprice and shameful
A. I).
69.' indecision. Men were appointed, and re­moved ; others were substituted, andchanged again; some excused themselves;numbers, as fear or ambition prompted,made interest for the preference, or forpermission to remain at home.
XX. The means of raising money camenext under consideration. A7arious expe­dients were proposed, but none appeared sojust, as that of making reprisals on such asby their rapacity impoverished the com­monwealth. Nero had lavished in pensionsand donations above two-and-twenty mil­lion of sesterces. The men who had en­riched themselves by this wild profusionwere allowed to retain a tenth part (a) of' the plunder, and condemned to refund
the rest. But their tenth part was nolonger in their possession. Prodigal noless of the public money than of their own,they had squandered all in riot and de­bauchery. They had neither landsj, norfunds of any kind. The wreck of their







OCR Output








234 .' THE HISTORY





book " in reserve a store of wealth, both public" and private; and riches at all times are the
sinews of war, in public dissensions more" powerful than the sword. The soldiers" in the service of Otho arc in good con-" dition, inured to Italy, or seasoned to" the heat in warmer climates. In their*' front the river Po is a barrier, and theretf are fortified cities, strongly garrisoned,** all determined to hold out to the last.** Of this the gallant defence of Placentia" is a sufficient proof. Tor these reasons," a slow and lingering Avar is the best ex-" pedient. Pass but a few days, and the*' fourteenth legion,famous for its bravery,w will arrive with a strong reinforcement*' of auxiliaries from Maesia. A council of" war may then be called ; and should it*< he thought advisable to hazard a battle," Otho, in that event, may take the field" with a superior army."
XXXIII. Marius Celsus concurredin this opinion. Annius Gallus was notpresent. He had been hurt by a fall frombis horse a few days before, and was notyet recovered; but, being consulted by







OCR Output








OF TACITUS. 237





to the gladiators (a) on the opposite bank bookof the Po, and at the same time to keeptheir own soldiers employed, they beganto throw a bridge over the river. As afoundation for the work, they ranged inproper order a number of boats, made fastat equal distances by strong timbers, withtheir prows turned against the current, andby their anchors secured from driving fromthe spot. The cables were of a length toplay in the water, in order, when thestream increased, that the vessels mightbe gently lifted up and down withoutdanger or confusion. In the boat at thefurther extremity of the bridge, they causeda tower to be erected, which served atonce to close the passage, and give themen a station, where they might, withtheir battering engines, prevent the ap­proach of the enemy. ,
XXXV. The Othonians also raised atower on the opposite bank, and thencewere able to annoy the enemy with massystones and flaming brands. A small islandstood in the middle of the river. Thegladiators attempted to pass over in boats;







OCR Output








194 THE HISTORY


II.





book duct either to Syria, or to iEgypt. Themasters of the galle3rs, alarmed at the pro­posal, or intending to deceive, desiredtime to prepare the minds of their sailors,faithfully promising to return without de­lay. Asprenas, duly informed of all thatpassed, gave orders to attack the impos­tor and his crew of adherents. The shipwas seized, and the pretended emperor,whoever he was, suffered death. The airof the man, his eyes, his hair, and theferocity of his countenance (a), bore astrong resemblance to Nero. His bodywas conveyed to Asia, and afterwardssent to Rome.
X. In a city, distracted by internaldiscord, and, after so many revolutions,fierce with a spirit of liberty that led tothe wildest anarchy, no transaction, how­ever trifling in itself, could pass, withoutexciting violent commotions. Vibius Cris-pus, a man, for his wealth, his power, andhis talents, always ranked among the mosteminent citizens, but never for his virtuesnumbered with the good, cited to the barof the senate, Annius Faustus, a Roman


6







OCR Output








286 The history





book sequence. Vitellius, satisfied with thefidelity of the Batavians, incorporatedthem with his army. The legion had or­ders to proceed over the Graian Alps (&),and by no means to approach the city ofVienne, where the inhabitants were sus­pected of disaffection. The legion march­ed in the night, and left their fires burning.The consequence was a conflagration, bywhich a great part of the Turinian citywas destroyed. The loss sustained by theinhabitants, like many other calamities ofAvar,.was soon obliterated by the ruin ofother cities. The soldiers had scarce de­scended from the Alps, when they orderedthe standard-bearers to march towards thecolony of Vienne. The attempt, however,was prevented by the good sense of suchas were observers of discipline, and thewhole legion passed over into Britain.
LXVII. The praetorian cohorts gave noless disquietude to Vitellius. To breaktheir force, he separated them first intosmall parties, and soon after dischargedthem from the service; professing, how­ever, in order to soften resentment, thatthey were, by their length of service, en­







OCR Output








140 THE HISTORY ' '





book governor of the province, a public treatwas given by a pragmatical fellow, of thename of Crescens, one of Nero's freedmen,who had the ambition to distinguish him­self as an active partisan in the interest ofOtho. Such, in times of public distrac­tion, is the presumption of the lowest menin the state. They think it time to emergefrom their obscurity, and act their part, asif they had an interest in the common­wealth. The mob of Carthage expressedtheir zeal with all demonstrations of joy,and the rest of Africa followed their ex­ample.
LXXVII. In this posture of affairs,while the armies and the several provincesembraced opposite interests, it was evi­dent that Vitellius, to secure his title, hadnothing left but the decision of the sword.Otho, in the mean time, remained atRome, discharging all the functions of thesovereign power, as if he was establishedin profound tranquillity. His conduct, insome instances, was such as became thedignity of the state; but his measures, forthe most part, were hastily adopted, the







OCR Output








SECOND BOOK OF THE HISTORY. 3f3


29. Legio Undevicessima, the nineteenth legion,another legion under Varus.
30. Legio Vicessima, the twentieth legion, calledbyDio Valeria Victrix.
31. Legio Una-et-vicessima, the twenty-first le­gion, sometimes with the addition of Rapax.
32. Legio Duo-et-vicessima, the twenty-secondlegion, stationed in Germany.
33. Legio Duo-et-vicessima, another twenty-se­cond legion, quartered in iEgypt.
34. Legio e Classicis, a legion formed out of themarine soldiers by Vitellius in his last distress, but soonreceived into Vespasian's party, and never more distin­guished.
Such were the names of the legions that occur in Ta­citus. If, from the whole number, we deduct the seven­teenth, eighteenth, and nineteenth, which were all cutoff under Varus, and also the last, formed out of the ma­rines by Vitellius, and heard of no more, it will appearthat, in the beginning of the ensuing wars, the militaryestablishment, exclusive of the forces in Italy, consistedof Thirty Legions. Their stations were as follows:


, In Britain. .The second, ninth, twentieth.


In Spain.


tit8''


^


The first Adjutrix, the sixth, the tenth.
In Gaul.
The first Italic.


\yFN^y in i^ower Germany. „ ,
The first, fifth\fifteenth, sixteenth. M* *'In Upper Germany.The fourth, twenty-first, twenty-second.


r


a







OCR Output








OF TACITUS. 253





" Bedriacum, had no share in the action, book" These were still in reserve; they were" not conquered ; and if a total overthrow" was to be their lot, they might fall with" glory in the field of battle." With theseand suchlike reflections the praetorianskept their minds in agitation, by turns in­flamed with anger, or depressed with fear.They saw their ruined condition ; despairsucceeded, and from despair they derivedcourage and a spirit of revenge.
XLV. The victorious army halted atthe distance of five miles from Bedriacum.The generals did not think it advisable onthe same day to attempt the enemy's camp.Expecting a voluntary surrender, theywere willing to give their men some timeto repose. To encamp was not in theirpower. The soldiers took the field, pre­pared for battle, unincumbered, and ofcourse without the means of throwing upentrenchments. Their arms and their vic­tory were their only fortification. On thefollowing day the Othonians showed a pa­cific disposition; and even those, who thesight before breathed nothing but war and







OCR Output








OF TACITUS. 29





in consequence of that connection, be­came the worthy depositary to whom theprince intrusted the care of his dearly be­loved Poppaea(6), till such time as Octaviawas, by a divorce, removed out of the way.But Qtho's fidelity soon became suspect­ed. Nero's jealousy could not bear arival. He sent his favourite companionto govern the province of Lusitania, and,under that pretext, banished him fromRome. It is true that Otho, in the courseof his administration, gained, by his mildand courtly manners, no small degree ofpopularity. In the late revolution, heWas the first to espouse the interest ofGalba. While the war lasted, he conti­nued an active partisan, and, by his splen­did appearance, did no small credit' to theCause. Hence his hopes of being calledto the succession. The soldiers favouredhis pretensions; and the creatures of Nero'scourt promised themselves, under a sove­reign so nearly resembling their master, areturn of the same vices.
XIV. Galba saw, with deep anxiety, a







OCR Output








OP TACITUS. 307





" fates prepare for you a vast and magni- book" ficent seat, with an immense territory," and a prodigious multitude of men.This prediction, though involved in my­sterious language, was spread abroad at thetime, and now received a favourable in­terpretation. The story gathered strengthamong the populace, and in conversationwith Vespasian was the favourite topic ofhis friends, who thought they could notenlarge too much on the subject, while thepassions of the hearer stood ready to receivetheir advice.
LXXIX. Mucianus and Vespasiansettled their plan, and took leave of eachother: the former went to Antioch, thecapital of Syria, and the latter to Caesarea,the metropolis of Judaea. The first publicstep towards creating Vespasian emperorof Rome, was taken at Alexandria iniEgypt^ Tiberius Alexander, the praefectof the province, eager to show his zeal, ad­ministered the oath to the legions under hiscommand. The ceremony was performedon the calends of July, and that day was«ver after celebrated as the first of Ves*


x %







OCR Output








OF TACITUS. 219


iianus, and committed to him the whole book


h.


conduct of the war. The interval was
A. U. C-
filled by Celsus and Paulinus with active 822.'enterprise and brilliant success. 69.


XXIV. Case in a felt the disgrace ofhis late defeat, and saw with anxiety thefame of his army mouldering away. Hehad been roughly handled at Placentia,his auxiliaries were cut to pieces, and inevery skirmish, not worthy of a particulardetail, the enemy had the advantage. Helikewise knew by sure intelligence thatValens was advancing with his army, andthat commander might reap the laurels ofthe war. To prevent a circumstance sohumiliating, he resolved, with more cou­rage than judgment, to redeem his gloryWith this intent he marched to a villagecalled Castorum(a), distant about twelvemiles from Cremona. At that place, in awood that overhangs the road, he station­ed the flower of his auxiliaries in ambus'-cade. His cavalry had orders to take anadvanced post, and, after provoking anengagement, to give ground at once, anddraw the enemy forward, till an unex-







OCR Output








OF TACITUS." 71


M these Cingonius Varro, butchered on his bookmarch, Turpiliauus in the heart of the v—v
A. U.
city, and Nymphidius in the camp. Is wa.there a province, is there in any part of «»•the empire a single camp, which he hasnot defiled with blood ? This, he willtell you, is a reform of the army. In hislanguage, murder is a legal remedy:what all good men agree to call a deedof barbarity, passes with him for a cor­rection of abuses. Under speciousnames he confounds the nature ofthings: cruelty is justice, avarice isceconomy, and massaere is military dis*ciphne. Since the death of Nero notmore than seven months have elapsed ;and, in that time, Icejus his freedman ^has amassed, by plunder, more enor­mous wealth than the Polycleti (&), theVatinii, the Elii, and the Haloti wereable to do in the whole course of thatemperors reign. Even Titus Vinius, ifhe himself had seized the empire, wouldhave had the grace to blush at suchenormities; nor should we have groan­ed under such a load of oppression.Though no higher than a private citi-







OCR Output








182 THE HISTORY





book ted to his love of queen Berenice (a). Itis true, that princess had engaged his af­fections ; but the business of his heart neverinterfered with the duties of his station.Youth being the season of pleasure, Titusgave a loose to those desires, which heafterwards so well knew how to regulate.In his own reign he was remarkable forthat self-control, which he never prac­tised under his father. He set sail fromCorinth, and after steering along the coastof Achaia and Asia, which lay to the left,he directed his course towards Rhodes andCyprus. From those islands he went, bya more bold navigation (6), across the Opensea to the coast of Syria. At Cyprus cu­riosity led him to visit the temple of thePaphian Venus, famous for the worshippaid by the inhabitants, and the confluxof strangers who resorted thither from allparts. If we take this opportunity to tracethe origin of that singular worship (c), andto describe the situation of the temple,and the form of the Goddess, differing en­tirely from what is seen in any other place,the digression will, perhaps, be neithertedious, nor unacceptable to the reader.







OCR Output








298 THE HISTORY





book contempt and derision. But, in an enter-prise of such importance, it was naturalto doubt, and hesitate. Vespasian re­mained for some time in a state of sus­pense, now elate with hope, and soon de­pressed with fear. " What an awful day" must that be, when he should unsheath*' the sword, and commit himself, at the" age of sixty, with his two sons (a) in the" prime season of life, to the danger of a" civil war ! In undertakings of a private" nature, men may advance or retreat, as" they see occasion; but when the contest" is for sovereign power, there is no middle" course. You must conquer, or perish" in the attempt."
LXXV. An officer of his experience wasno stranger to the strength and valour ofthe German armies. " The legions under" his command had not been tried in a warft against their fellow citizens, while, on" the other hand, the Vitellians added to" their experience all the pride of victory." The vanquished would, undoubtedly," be dissatisfied; but to murmur discon-" tent was all that fortune left in their







OCR Output








336 THE HISTORY





book Hus resolved to solemnize the obsequies ofNero. He erected altars to that emperorin the Field of Mars. The sight was highlypleasing to the vile and profligate, butgave disgust to all who had any principle,or a spark of remaining virtue. Victimswere slain, fires were kindled, and thetorch was carried by the Augustan priests;ah order dedicated by Tiberius to theJulian family, in imitation of that conse­crated by Romulus to Tatius (b) the Sabineking. From the victory at Bedriacumfour months had not elapsed; and yet, inthat short time, Asiaticus, the manumittedslave of the emperor, had already accu­mulated riches nothing short of the Poly-cleti, the Patrobii, and others of the ser­vile race, whose names have been givenup to the execration of mankind. Thecourt of Vitellius was not the scene ofhonest emulation. No man endeavouredto rise by his virtue or his talents. Theroad to preferment was open to viceand luxury.^ He who entertained theprince in the gayest manner, and withS&mptuous banquets glutted that cravingappetite* was sure to be in favour. To







OCR Output








142 tMe rtistoSY





book brance of their sufferings, he bestowedi.
upon them the sacerdotal honours which
had been enjoyed by their ancestors; Ca-Uius Rufus(c), Pedius Blaesus, and Saevi-nus Pomtinus, who under Claudius orNero had been charged with extortion*and expelled the senate, were restored totheir rank. To varnish this proceeding!the real offence was suppressed, and whatwas, in fact, public rapine, in the style ofthe pardon took the name of violated ma­jesty; a charge held in such general detes­tation, that, to elude it, the best and wisestlaws were set aside.
LXXVIII. In order to extend his po­pularity, Otho, in the next place, turnedhis thoughts to the cities and provinces,little doubting but by acts of munificencehe should be able to strengthen his inte­rest. To the colonies of Hispalis andEmerita («), then on the decline, he trans­planted a number of families: the Lin-gones were honoured with the privilegesof lloman citizens, avid to the province ofBaetica all the Moorish cities Were an­nexed. He gave a new code of laws to







OCR Output








OF TACITUS. 295


offence, though other reasons were pre- booktended. For this proceeding, Vitellius re- v-v-'ceived public thanks: to acts of oppres- 822. 'sion, the servility of the times gave the 69.name of wisdom.


LXXIL About this time a daring fraudwas attempted, at first with rapid success,but in a short time totally defeated. Aman of low condition thought he mightemerge from obscurity, by taking uponhim the name of Scribonianus Came-rinus (a). His story was, that, during thereign of Nero, to elude the fury of thetimes, he had lain concealed in Istria,where the followers of the antient Crassistill occupied the lands of their formermasters, and retained their veneration forthat illustrious house. To carry on thisridiculous farce, the impostor engaged thevile and profligate in his interest. The vul­gar, with their, usual credulity, and thesoldiers, either led into an error or excitedby their love of innovation, joined in theplot. Their leader was seized, and broughtinto the presence of Vitellius. Being in­terrogated who and what he was, he was







OCR Output








SECOND BOOK OF THE HISTORY. 3T9


horses of their country, to ride before their carriage*,and give notice, by a cloud of dust, that a great manwas on the road. For this fact we are indebted to Se­neca, who says, Omnes jam sic peregrinantur, ut illosNumidarum prcecurrat equitatus, at que ut agmen cur-sorum antecedat: turpe est, nullos esse, qui occurrentesvid. dejiciant; qui honestum hamrnem ventre magno pul-vere ostendant. Seneca, epist. 123.
Sedtion XLII.(a) Suetonius expressly says, that Otho, in the lastengagement at Bedriaeum, was defeated by a stratagem.His soldiers were called out to be present at a generalpacification, and, in the very act of saluting the Vitellianarmy, were suddenly attacked. Sueton. Life of Otho,8. Q.
. Section XLIII.
(a) For the twenty-first legion called Rapax, see thisbook, s. 6, note (c).
Section XLIV.(a) In. the civil wars no prisoners were made, to beafterwards sold to slavery; and, by consequence, noquarter was given. Plutarch, in his account of thisbattle, describes a most dreadful carnage. See the Lifeof Otho.
Section XLVI.
(a) We have here a noble sentiment, in direct opposi­tion to the stoic doctrine of suicide.
Section XLVII.(a) Tacitus has told us, that Otho's mind was not,like his body, dissolved in luxury. Non erat Ot/wnismollis, et corpori s'milis animus. Hist. i. s. 22. His







OCR Output








218 THE HISTORY





book and, with a strange perversity, to put theworst construction on the conduct of theirofficers. The base of heart and petulantof tongue combined together, and withvirulent invective defamed and blackenedevery character without distinction. EvenAnnius Gallus, Suetonius Paulinus, andMarius Celsus, three eminent generals, didnot escape the shafts of calumny. Theywere charged with various crimes. Butthe murderers of Galba were the worst in­cendiaries. Conscious of their guilt, andfinding no respite from remorse and fear,these miscreants made it their business toembroil, to distract, and throw every thinginto confusion. They gave vent to theirseditious designs with open insolence, andby clandestine letters infused their venominto the mind of Otho; a mind too sus­ceptible, always hearkening to every ma­lignant whisper, and only guarded againstmen of worth and honour: in prosperityweak and irresolute; in distress collected,firm, determined; misfortune made hima better man. In his present situation,easily alarmed, and suspecting all his offi­cers, he sent to Rome for his brother Ti­







OCR Output








256 THE HISTORY





book generous soldiery, who had undergone somuch, and were* still ready to face everydanger. " The noble mind (a), he, said," stands a siege against adversity, "while" the little spirit capitulates at once. True" courage grapples with misfortune, and," in the last distress, still makes head" against every difficulty The mean" and abject sink down in despair, and•* yield without a struggle." The soldiersfixed their eyes on the prince, and withevery symptom in his countenance theirpassions varied. If he assented, theythundered forth their applause; if heseemed inflexible, a groan expressed theanguish of their hearts. Nor was the spiritconfined to the praetorians, who were pro­perly the soldiers of Otho; it extendedto the detachment sent forward by theMscsian legions. Those men with one voicedeclared for Otho; they assured him, thatthe same zeal pervaded their comrades, whowere coming forward by rapid marches*and even then had entered Aquileia.Hence it is evident, that great resourcesstill remained, and that a fierce and ob­stinate war, uncertain in the event, and







OCR Output








OP TACITUS. 167





ample, the praetorian bands and city co- bookhorts were obliged to take the field. Theeast and west were engaged in the contest;the several provinces, which the leadingchiefs left behind them, were up in arms;and, under better generals, there wereample materials for a long and difficultwar. Otho was now on the point of begin­ning his march. A scruple was started todeter him from proceeding, till the cere­mony of depositing the sacred shieldscalled the ancilia (b) was performed withdue rites and ceremonies. He rejected theadvice. Delay had been the ruin of Nero,and Caecina by this time had passed theAlps. The time called for vigour and expe­dition.
XC. On the day preceding the idesof March, Otho called a meeting of thesenate. He recommended the care of thecommonwealth to the wisdom of thatassembly, and ordered the property ofsuch as had been recalled from banish­ment, since the death of Nero, to be re­stored to the respective owners. To thisliberality nothing could be objected: it







OCR Output








OF TACITUS. 311


pasian. His party was further strengthened bookby Sohemus («), „who joined the league v—v—*with the whole weight of his kingdom, and s«s.'also by Antiochus, who inherited immense «»treasures from his ancestors, and was, ofall the kings who submitted to the autho­rity of Rome, the most rich and powerful.Agrippa, who was then at Rome, receivedprivate expresses from the East, request­ing his presence in his own country. Hedeparted, before Vitellius had any intelli­gence, and by a quick navigation passedover into Asia. Queen Berenice, at thattime flourishing in the bloom of youth, andno less, distinguished by the graces of herperson, espoused the interest of Vespasian,to whom, notwithstanding his advancedage, she had made herself agreeable bymagnficent presents. The several mari­time provinces, with Asia and Achaia,and the whole inland country betweenPontus and the two Armenias, entered intothe general confederacy; but from the go­vernors of those provinces no forces couldbe expected, as they were not, at thattime, strengthened by the legions stationedin Cappadocia. To settle the plan of ope-







OCR Output








230 THE HISTORY





book not why. Hence a spirit of emulationbetween the two commanders. Caecinaobjected to his rival the sordid vices thatdisgraced his character; and, in return,Valens laughed at a man elate with prideand vain ostentation. And yet the twochiefs acted towards each other with dis­guised hostility. In their zeal for thecommon cause, their mutual animositieswere suppressed, though not extinguished.In their letters, they treated Otho and hislicentious practices in a style that showedthey scorned all terms of future reconci­liation. The conduct of the officers inthe. opposite army was very different.They spoke of Vitellius with reserve; andthough his manners afforded ample mate­rials for invective, they chose to containthemselves within the bounds of pru­dence.
XXXI. It may be here observed, that,whatever were the shades of vice in theopposite characters of the contendingchiefs, death, in the end, made the truedistinction between them : Otho fell withglory, and Vitellius with disgrace and in­







OCR Output








OF TACITUS. J1S





Vith keener acrimony, and embittered by bookthe distractions of a civil war. Cteliuswas charged by his superior officer withbeing the fomenter of sedition, and anenemy to discipline and good order: inreturn, he recriminated, alleging that thecommander in chief plundered the legions,and left the soldiers to languish in distressand poverty. From this dissension be­tween their officers the common mentaught the infection. All discipline wasat an end. Licentiousness prevailed, andtoe tumult rose at length to such a height,that Trebellius, insulted openly by theauxiliaries, deserted by the cavalry, andbetrayed by the cohorts, wps obliged to% for refuge to Vitellius. The province,however, notwithstanding the flight of aconsular governor, remained in a perfectstate of tranquillity. The commanders ofthe legions held the reins of government,by their commissions equal in authority,but eclipsed by the enterprising geniusand the daring spirit of Caelius.
LXL The arrival of the forces fromBritain was an accession of strength; andvol* v. i







OCR Output








36 THE HISTORY





" As to myself, raised as I was by the" events Of war, and called to the so-" vereignty by the voice of a willing peo-" pie, I know what I have to expect:" envy and malice may pursue me, but" the glory of doing good shall still be" mine. After the storm that lately shook" the empire, you will not wonder that a" perfect calm has not succeeded ; and, if" two legions waver in their duty, your" courage must not be disconcerted. My" reign did not begin in the halcyon days" of peace. Old age, at present, is the" objection urged against me: but when" it is known whom I have adopted, I shall" appear young in my successor. Nero is" still regretted by the vile and profligate:" that good men may not regret him, it" will be ours to provide by our future" conduct. More than I have said the" time will not admit; if I have made a" proper choice, I have discharged my" duty. One rule, however, there is wor-" thy of your consideration. In all ques-" tions of good and evil, ask yourself," when you was a subject, what did you" expect from the prince, and what did







OCR Output








OP TACITUS. 303





" soldiers are dissolved in sloth and luxury." On the other hand, you have in Syria," Judaea, and iEgypt, no less than nine" legions, all high in spirit, unimpaired by" war, and not yet taught by sedition to" renounce all regard for discipline. You*' have an army enured to the operations" of war, and crowned with victory over" the enemies of their country. You have" a body of cavalry, auxiliary cohorts, a" naval armament, and powerful kings," all devoted to your cause. Above all,M you have your own talents and your re-" nown in arms.
LXXVII. " To myself I arrogate no-" thing: yet let me not be thought inferiorw to Valens or Caecina. If Mucianus does" not aspire to be your rival, you will not" therefore think meanly of him. Willing" to yield to Vespasian, I claim precedence" of Vitellius. Your house has been di-" stinguished by triumphal honours (a)'," you have two sons, and one of them (6)" is already equal to the weight of empire," The German armies saw him give an" earnest of his future character. Were I







OCR Output








160 THE HISTORY





book serve or management, poured out a tor­rent of virulent invective, but generallychose to rise in the midst of noise and cla­mour, when nothing could be distinctlyheard, and the speaker could mouth andbellow, without the danger of being un­derstood or remembered.
LXXXVI. A number of prodigies,announced from different quarters, dif­fused a general panic. The goddess ofvictory, in the vestibule of the capitol,let the reins of two horses, harnessed toher chariot, fall from her hand. A formof more than human size was seen to issuefrom the chapel of Juno. In an island inthe Tiber (a), the statue of Julius Caesar,without any apparent cause, on a day per­fectly serene and calm, turned round fromthe west to the east. In Etruria an ox wassaid to have spoken : animals brought forthmonstrous births : and to these was addeda variety of praeternatural appearances,such as in rude and barbarous ages werethe coinage of superstition; and, even inprofound peace, made an impression onvulgar credulity, though of late years they







OCR Output








of.Tacitus? 231





famy. During their lives, men dreadeclgreater mischief from the unbridled pas­sions of Otho, than from the sluggish de­bauchery of Vitellius. The murder ofGalba made the former an object of de­testation ; while the latter was nevercharged with being the author of thewar (a). Vitellius, by his gluttony andsensual appetites, was his own enemy ;Otho, by his profusion, his cruelty, andhis daring spirit, was the enemy of hiscountry. As soon as the forces underCarina and Valens had formed a junction,the Vitellian party wished for nothing somuch as a decisive action. Otho was notdetermined which was most for his inte­rest, a speedy engagement or a lingeringwar. In this state of irresolution, he calleda council, when Suetonius Pauhnus, anofficer surpassed by no man of that age,judged it consistent with his high militarycharacter, to weigh all circumstances, andupon the whole to give a decided opinion.He contended, that to bring the disputeto an immediate issue, was the business ofVitellius; and, on the contrary, to drawthe War into length, was the game that







OCR Output








44 THE HISTORY





book and that a timid court, not daring at onceto go the length of its resentment, wouldproceed to cull them out man by man.
XXI, Otho, in the mean time, feltevery motive that could inflame ambition.In quiet times he had nothing before himbut despair; trouble and confusion were hisonly source of hope. His luxury was toogreat for the revenue of a prince (a), andhis fortune was sunk to the lowest ebb,below the condition of a private man. Hehated Galba, and he saw Piso with an eyeof envy. To these incentives he addedreal or imaginary fears for his own personalsafety, and in those fears he found newmotives for rebellion. " He had. felt the*' weight of Nero's displeasure; and must'* he now wait for a second Lusitania?" Was he to expect, under colour of" friendship, another honourable banish-" ment? The man whom the public voice" has named for the succession, is sure'; to be suspected by the reigning prince." It was that jealousy that ruined his in-" terest with a superannuated emperor;" and the same narrow motive would act







OCR Output








358 NOTES ON THE


Section XXXV.
(a) Suetonius says, Galba put on his breasNpfate,observing, at the same time, that it would be a poordefence against so many swords. Life of Galba, s. 19.Plutarch relates that the soldier, being asked by Galba,Who gave him orders, had, the spirit to answer, " Myoath and my duty."
Section XXXVI.
(a) In every Roman camp the. statue of the emperorwas placed in the tribunal, at the head quarters of thegeneral. See Annals, xv. s. 39.
■ (b) The form of the military oath was as follo.ws:Jurant milites, omnia se strenue facturos, quce prcece-perit imperator ; nunquam deserturos militiam, nee mor­tem recusaturos pro Romand repullicd. Vegetius, lib. ii.cap. 5. . ■
Section XXXVII.
(a) See the Appendix to Annals, xwi.
(b) Polycletus, Vatinius, Heljus, and Halatus werefavourite freedmen, who rose to wealth and honours inthe reign of Nero. For more of Halotus, see Suet,in Galba, s. 15.
(<r) Vinius alone had amassed riches enough to dis­charge the donative, which had been promised to thesoldiers by Nymphidius, in the name of Galba, butwhich was still withheld. See Appendix to Annals, xvi.
Section XLI.
(a) This was in the Forum, near the Rostra. It hasbeen observed in a former note, that the Pulpit ofHarangues was adorned with the beaks of ships, and


1







OCR Output








11B THE HISTORY





book they thought of nothing but the spoils ofwar. The Gauls, released by this eventfrom their attachment to Galba, were nowat liberty to choose their party. Othoand Vitellius were objects of their detes­tation ; but they feared the latter. Thearmy proceeded on their march to theterritory of the Lingones, a people welldisposed towards Vitellius. They metwith a friendly reception, and passed theirtime in acts of mutual kindness. Butthis amicable intercourse was interruptedby the intemperance of the cohort (6),which had been separated, as alreadymentioned, from the fourteenth legion, andby Valens incorporated with his army.Being of the Batavian nation, and by na­ture fierce and warlike, they lived onbad terms with the legions. Opprobriouswords passed between them ; from wordscontention arose: the legionary soldiersentered into the dispute, and joined thedifferent parties as judgment or inclina­tion prompted. The quarrel rose to sucha pitch, that, if Valens had not interposed,and, by making a few examples, recalledthe Batavians to a sense of their duty, a







OCR Output








238 THE HISTORf





book but the Germans, expert in swimming,dashed into the stream, and took posses­sion of the place. In order to dislodgethem, Macer put off with a strong partyof gladiators on board his galleys: but thegladiators were not able to cope with re­gular soldiers ; and the motion of the ves­sels not allowing them a firm footing, theyfought at a disadvantage with men, whofrom the land were able to discharge theirmissive weapons with surer aim and morecertain effect. On board the vessels allAvas hurry and confusion. The rowers andcombatants obstructed each other. TheGermans plunged into the river, and,seizing hold of the boats, boarded several,and sunk others to the bottom. The wholepassed under the eye of both armies. TheVitellians looked on with joy, while theadverse party, stung with indignation,railed at Macer, whom they called theauthor of their disgrace.
XXXVI. The gladiators, in such ves­sels as they could save, retreated from theisland, and by their flight put an end tothe engagement. Macer was devoted to







OCR Output








296 THE HISTORY


book found to be a fugitive slave, of the name ofv—v—' Geta, recognized, as soon as seen, by his
A. U C
822. ' master. He was condemned to suffer the
A D
69.' death of a slave (b), in the manner in­flicted by the law.
LXXIII. Advice was at length re­ceived from Syria and Judaea, that theEast submitted to the new emperor. Thepride with which Vitellius was bloatedupon this occasion, is scarcely credible.Intelligence from that part of the worldhad been hitherto vague and uncertain;but Vespasian was in the mouths of men,and the rumour of the day filled the worldwith reports, that sometimes roused Vitel­lius from his lethargy. He started at thename of Vespasian. At length the cloudwas blown over, and a rival was no longerdreaded. The emperor and his armyplunged into every excess of cruelty,lust, and rapine, as if a foreign tyrannyand foreign manners had overturned theempire.
LXXIV. Meanwhile Vespasian tooka view of his own situation, and weighed







OCR Output








OF TACITUS. 225





gones, of commotions in favour of Vitel-lius, went over to the standard of FabiusValens. Their arrogance, from that time,knew no bounds. They paraded the camp,in every quarter, and in the tents of thelegions, making it their boast, " that by" them the fourteenth legion had been" overawed; by them Italy was wrested" out of the hands of Nero; and upon" their swords the issue of the war de-" pended." The Roman soldiers heardthese speeches with indignation ; disputesand quarrels filled the camp, and disci­pline was at an end. Valens saw his au­thority lessened, and knew too well, that,from clamour to actual mutiny the transi­tion is short and sudden.
XXVIII. In this posture of affairs, Va­lens received advice that the Tungriansand Treverians had met with a defeat,and that Otho's fleet was hovering on thecoast of Narbon Gaul. He took thatopportunity to order a detachment ofthe Batavians to march to the relief ofthe province; intending, at the same time,


vol. v. Q







OCR Output








OF TACITUS. 101





" to him a post of safety. The case of book" Vitellius was very different. Sprung" from a father who had been three times" consul, once in conjunction with the em-" peror Claudius, and who, moreover,** had discharged the office of censor, he" might well aspire to the highest eleva-" tion. The honours of his family marked" him out for the imperial dignity. Too" great for a private station, he must reach" the summit of power, or be utterly" lost." Notwithstanding this inflamma­tory speech, the phlegmatic temper of Vi­tellius was not to be roused. A few faintwishes fluttered at his heart, but hopecould find no admission.
LIII. Meanwhile Caecina, who ser­ved in the army on the Upper Rhine, haddrawn to himself the affections of the army.Young, and of a comely figure, tall andwell proportioned, with an air of dignityin his deportment, a flow of eloquencejand an aspiring genius, he had all thequalities that made an impression onthe military mind. Though a young man,he discharged the office of quaestor in the







OCR Output








OF TACITUS. S3





" the state : ambition had no share in my book" conduct. I brought with me to the" seat of government an upright inten-" tion; and that I now act on the same" principle may be fairly seen, when, in" my present choice, I postpone not only" my own relations, but even those of" your own family. You have a brother," in point of nobility your equal; by" priority of birth your superior; and," if your merit did not supersede him," a man worthy of the highest eleva-" tion.
" You are now at the time of life at" which the passions subside. Your for-" mer conduct requires no apology. For-'* tune has hitherto (b) frowned upon you :" you must now beware of her smiles." Prosperity tries the human heart with" the deepest probe, and draws forth the" hidden character. We struggle with" adversity, but success disarms us. I" trust, however, that you will carry" with you, to the highest station, the" candour of your mind, your good faithj" your independent spirit, and your con-" stancy in friendship; virtues that exalt
vot.. v. D







OCR Output








OF TACITUS. 59





" instance of one who made atonement by book'* his virtues ? Is there a man who gained" an empire by iniquity, and governed it*' with moderation ?


** Galba was raised by the voice of a" willing people to his present situation:" his inclination, and your consent, have" added me to the line of tbe Caesars," But after all, if the commonwealth, the" senate, and the people, are no better" than mere empty names, yet let me ask" you, my fellow soldiers, will you sufferu a lawless crew to overturn the govern-u mcnt ? From the worst and most aban-" doned of mankind will you receive an" emperor ? The legions, it is true, have" at different times mutinied against their" generals ; but your fidelity has never" been questioned. Nero abdicated ; you" did not desert him. He fell without" your treachery. And shall thirty ruf-" fians—thirty did I say ? their number" is less—shall a wretched handful of" vile conspirators, whom no man would" sutler to vote in the choice of a tribune" or centurion, dispose of the Roman







OCR Output








290 THE HISTORY


book with which he rejected the imperial dig-v—^—»nity, was considered as an affront* The822. soldiers thought themselves despised, and«. from that moment resented the injury.
LXIX. On the following day, the de­puties from the senate, who according toorder attended at Ticinum, were admittedto an audience. That business over, Vitel-lius visited the camp, and, in a publicharangue, expressed a lively sense of thezeal which the soldiers had exerted in hisservice. This proceeding roused the jea­lousy of the auxiliaries. They saw theinsolence of the legionary soldiers, andthe impunity with which they commit­ted the most outrageous actions. It wasto prevent the consequences of this dan­gerous jealousy, that the Batavian co­horts had been ordered back to Germany,the fates even then preparing the seeds ofa foreign (a) and a civil war. The alliesfrom Gaul were also dismissed to their re­spective states; a vast unwieldy multi­tude, drawn together in the beginning ofthe revolt, not for actual service, but chieflyUK vain parade, and to swell the pomp of







OCR Output








188 THE HISTORY





book peace. The power of winning the affec­tions of menwas in an eminent degree thetalent of that young officer. Nature andart conspired to render him acceptable toall; and even Mucianus could not resisthis influence. The tribunes, the centu­rions, and the common men were, by va­rious artifices, fixed in the interest of thetwo commanders. The diligent met withencouragement, the licentious with indukgence, and, according to the bent of eachman's disposition, all were secured bytheir virtues or their vices.
VI. Before the arrival of Titus, botharmies had sworn fidelity to Otho, withthe precipitation of men who had quickintelligence of all that passed at Rome.They were not, in that juncture, ripe for arevolt, Preparations for a civil war are intheir nature slow and difficult. The Easthad been composed by a long peace, andnow, for the first time, began to think ofmixing in the feuds that shook the empire.They had hitherto seen the convulsions ofthe state at a distance only. The quarrelalways broke out in Gaul or Italy, and







OCR Output








SECOND BOOK OF THE HISTORY. 375


Section IX.
(o) The same ferocity appeared in Nero's countenanceafter he was dead. Sec Appendix to Annals, xvi. s. IS.
Section X.
(a) His brother was Vibius Secundus; a man con­victed of extortion, Annals, xiv. s. 68.
Section XI.
(a) See Annals, xiv. s. 29; Suetonius, in Nero,s. 39, 40.
(ii) For the excellent character, of Vestricius Spurinna,see Pliny, lib. ii. epist. 7; and lib. iii. epist. 1 and 10.
(c) Juvenal has given a different description of Othoon his march, sat. ii. ver. 99. But poetic license cannot-weigh against the truth of-history.
Section XII.
{a) For the maritime Alps, see the Geographical",Table at the end of the Eighth Volume 3 and 6ee An­nals, xv. s. 32, note (a).
•Sestim XVII.
f/i) :For.SyUa's cavalry, seeHist. i. s. 70.
(b) The country between the Po and the Alps, com­prising Piedmont, Mont-ferrat, the Milanese: the prin­cipal cities were, Me/diolawmyNovvria, gporodia, Ver~cellce. See Hjst. i. s.,70; and see the Geographical
Tabic
Section XX.
(a) Csecina wore the sagum,. wb,ich was the Germandress (see The Manners of the Germans, s. 17), and thelracccet or breeches, which distinguished the Gauls.







OCR Output








OF TACITUS. 11





IV. Before we take up the thread of book
i.
our narrative, it will nut be useless to en­quire what, in that period, was the state ofaffairs at Rome, and what the spirit thatwent forth among her armies; how theprovinces stood affected, and wherein con­sisted the strength or weakness of the em^pire. By proceeding in this manner, weshall not content ourselves with a barerecital of facts, which are often ascribedto chance ; we shall see the spring of eachtransaction, and a regular chain of causesand effects will be laid open to our view.
The death of Nero, in the first tumultof emotion, was considered as a publicblessing; but the senate, the people ofRome, the praetorian guards, and the le­gions, wherever stationed, were variouslyaffected by that event. A new politicalsecret was then for the first time discovered.It was perceived, that elsewhere than.atRome an emperor might be invested withthe sovereign power. rJhe fathers seizedthe opportunity, during the absence of aprince yet new (a) to the reins of govern-.ment, to exercise their antient rights,







OCR Output








8 THE HISTORY





book three civil wars (b); with foreign enemiesa greater number, and, in some conjunc­tures, both depending at once; prosperityin the East, disasters in the West; Illyri-cum thrown into convulsions; both theGauls on the eve of a revolt; Britain (c)conquered, and, in the moment of con­quest, lost again; the Sarmatians and theSuevians (d) leagued against the Romans;the Dacian name ennobled by alternatevictory and defeat; and, finally, the Par-thians taking the field under the bannersof a pretended Nero (e). In the courseof the work, we shall see Italy over­whelmed with calamities; new woundsinflicted, and the old, which time hadclosed, opened again and bleeding afresh;cities sacked by the enemy, or swallowedup by earthquakes (/), and the fertilecountry of Campania made a scene of de­solation; Rome laid waste by fire; herantient and most venerable temples smok­ing on the ground ; the capitol (g) wraptin flames by the hands of frantic citizens ;the holy ceremonies of religion violated;adultery reigning without controul; theadjacent islands filled with exiles; rocks







OCR Output








OF TACITUS. 245





of an army going to offer battle. They bookmarched as if going to open a campaign,not to decide it. The measure was in di­rect opposition to the advice of Celsus andPaulinus. Those officers represented thedanger of exposing the soldiers, fatiguedby their inarch, and bending under theweight of their baggage, to the attack ofan enemy unincumbered, and fresh froma march of four miles only. An army inthat condition would seize their opportu­nity, and begin a general assault beforeOtho's men could form the line of battle;perhaps they were dispersed in small par­ties, or employed at the entrenchments.Titianus and Proculus were not to beconvinced. When oveicome by argument,they resorted to their orders, and the willof the prince was a decisive answer. Aboutthe same time a Numidian horseman (6),posting at full speed, arrived with lettersfrom Otho, in a style of sharp reproofcondemning the tedious operations of thearmy, and, in a peremptory tone, com­manding his generals to bring on a decisiveaction. To a mind like his the interval ofsuspense was dreadful. Delay kept him







OCR Output








382 NOTES ON THE


Section LXI.(a) The seditious were generally given to be devouredby wild beasts. That was deemed the punishment dueto pernicious citizens.
Section LXII.
(a) Whoever- desires to know more of Vitellius'sgluttony, may find a number of particular instancescollected by Brotier, in his 4to edition of Tacitus,vol. iii. page 433.
Section LXFII.
(a) This was Lucius Vitellius, whom we have seenwith the senators at Bononia. This book, s. liv.
Section LXIV.
(a) Petronia was the first wife of Vitellius. Suet, inVitel. s. 6.
(b) For Sextilia, the mother of Vitellius, see Suet,in Vitel. s. 3.
(c) See Suetonius in the place last quoted.
Section LXV.
(a) Lucius Arruntius was appointed governor ofSpain by Tiberius, and for ten years after detained atRome. Annals, vi. s. 27.
(I) Trebellius Maximus commanded in Britain, andwas obliged to save himself by flight from the fnry ofthe soldiers. Hist. i. s. 60.
(c) For Vettius Bolanus, see the Life of Agricola,s. 8 and 16.
Section LXVI.
(a) See the Geographical Table at the end of theEighth Volume.







OCR Output








FIRST BOOK OF THE HISTORY. 367


Section XC.
(a) M. Valerius Trachalus was joint consul withSilius Italicus, A. U. G. 821. See Appendix to An­nals, xvi.
(b) Gtho left the city of Rome on the 24th day ofMarch, as appears from Suetonius, who mentions hisneglect of the institutions relating to the Ancilia, as aninauspicious beginning of the war. Suetoniu3 adds,that he set out on the day when all who paid theirworship to the mother of the gods began the usualceremonies. Now that day was the gth of the kalendsof April, which answers to the 24th of March. SeeSuetonius, Life of Otho, s. 8.







OCR Output








OP TACITUS. 9





and desert places stained with clandestine book
i.murder, and Rome itself a theatre of hor­ror; where nobility of descent, and splen­dour of fortune, marked men out for de­struction ; where the vigour of mind thataimed at civil dignities, and the modestythat declined them, were offences withoutdistinction; where virtue was a crime thatled to certain ruin; where the guilt of in­formers, and the wages of their iniquity,were alike detestable; where the sacer­dotal order, the consular dignity, the go­vernment of provinces (A), and even thecabinet of the prince, were seized by thatexecrable race, as their lawful prey; wherenothing was sacred, nothing safe from thehand of rapacity; where slaves were sub­orned, or, by their own malevolence, ex­cited against their masters ; where freed-men betrayed their patrons; and he, whohad lived without an enemy (i)9 died bythe treachery of a friend,
III. ANB-yet this melancholy period,barren as it was of public virtue, produced,some examples of truth and honour. Mo­thers went with their sons into voluntary







OCR Output








28S THE HISTORY





book with redoubled fury (a). The occasion wasas follows: Vitellius gave a banquet atTicinum, and Verginius was of the party.The manners of the chiefs are ever sure toset the fashion for the tribunes and cen­turions. From the example of the officers,vice or virtue descends to the soldiers. Inthe army of Vitellius, all was disorder andconfusion ; a scene of drunken jollity, re­sembling a bacchanalian rout, rather thana camp, or a disciplined army. It hap­pened that two soldiers, one belonging tothe fifth legion, the other a native ofGaul, serving among the auxiliaries ofthat nation, challenged each other to atrial of skill in wrestling. The Romanwas thrown; his antagonist exulted withan air of triumph; and the spectators,who had gathered round them, were soondivided into parties.
The legions, provoked by the insolenceof the Gaul, attacked the auxiliaries sw6rdin hand. Two cohorts were cut to pieces.The sudden danger of another tumult putan end to the fray. A cloud of dust wasseen at a distance, and, at intervals, the







OCR Output








294 THE HISTORY


.
BoftfK wards the capital, riot and licentiousnessgrew still more outrageous. Players of in-


A. U. C'
822. " terludes and a band of eunuchs mixed with
A. IX.
69. the soldiers, and revived all the vices ofNero's court. Vitellius admired the man­ners of that shameful period; and where-ever Nero went to display his voice andminstrelsy, he was sure to be one of hisfollowers, not by compulsion, as was thecase with men of integrity, but of hisown motion, a willing sycophant, alluredby his palate, and bribed by gluttony. Inorder to open the way for Valens and Cas-cina to the honours of the consulship, thetime of those in office (a) was abridged.Martius Macer (b), who had been a generalin Otho's party, was passed over in silence;and Valerius Marinus, who had been putin nomination by Galba, was also set aside,not for any charge alleged against him,but because, being a man of a passivetemper, he was willing to acquiesce underevery injury without a murmur. PedaniusCosta shared the same fate. He had takenan active part against Nero, and even en­deavoured to excite the ambition of Ver-ginius. He was, in fact, rejected for that







OCR Output








OF TACITUS. 213


lonists, who saw with envy a spacious and book
magnificent structure, that surpassed every *—., '
monument of art and labour throughout 82J.
A. D.
Italy. The sense of this misfortune, how- 69.ever begun, was lost in the pressure of im­mediate danger; but the enemy was nosooner withdrawn from the walls, than theinhabitants, in the moment of security,lamented the loss of their amphitheatre, asthe worst calamity that could befall them.Caecina was repulsed with considerableloss. The night, on both sides, was em­ployed in necessary preparations. The Vi-tellians provided themselves with movingpenthouses, and other Avarlike machines,under which the men might advance tosap the foundation of the walls. The be­sieged were busy in preparing stakes andrafts of timber, with huge heaps of stoneand lead and brass, in order to crush theassailants under their own works. Botharmies felt every motive that could rousetheir valour. The love of glory, and thefear of shame, throbbed in every breast.In the camp of the Vitellians, nothing washeard but the vigour of the legions, andthe fame of the German armies; within







OCR Output








OF TACITUS. 103


A. D.


seditious meetings, in which the soldiers bookgrew more corrupt, envenomed as they *—v—'
.7 A. U C
were by the politics of discontented pea- ***.sants. Hence their zeal to promote theinterest of Verginius, and, when that pro­ject failed, their readiness to list underany other chief.
LIV. The Lingones, in token of friend­ship, had sent presents to the legions, and,in conformity to their antient usage, thesymbolical figure of two right hands clasp­ing one another. Their deputies appear­ed with the mien and garb of affliction.They went round the camp, and in everyquarter disburthened their complaints. Inthe tents, and in the place for the stand­ards and eagles, they painted forth theirown private injuries, while other statesenjoyed the favour and the protection ofGalba. Finding that they made an im­pression, they represented to the soldiersthe dangers that hung over their ownheads, and the hardships under whichthey laboured. The Romans caught theinfection. A general phrensy spreadthrough the camp; the flame of sedition







OCR Output








212 THE HISTORY





book of fruitless artifices, Caecina began to con­cert his measures for the reduction ofPlacentia. He determined to invest theplace; and knowing how much the fameof the genera], and, by consequence, theevents of war, depend on the first exploit,he made every preparation to carry on thesiege with vigour.
XXI. The first approach to the towndisplayed the bravery, but nothing of theskill, which might be expected from aveteran army. The soldiers, intoxicatedwith liquor, advanced to the foot of thewalls, without shelter, or due precaution.In this attack, a magnificent amphithea­tre, which stood on the outside of the for­tifications, was set on fire, and levelled tothe ground. Whether this was occasionedby the flaming brands and other combus­tibles thrown in by the besiegers, or bythe like missive weapons discharged fromthe works, cannot now be ascertained.The vulgar herd of the city, apt and will­ing, like the populace in every quarter, tobelieve whatever malignity can invent, im­puted the disaster to the neighbouring co­


8







OCR Output








OF TACITUS. 193





his way to greet the praetorian bands in bookthe name of the Syrian army, and, intoken of friendship, to present two righthands clasping each other. Apprehendingdanger from so bold an adventurer, Si-senna made his escape from the island.A general panic seized the inhabitants.Numbers rejoiced to find the name ofNero once more revived, and, hating thenew system, wished for nothing so muchas another revolution.
IX. The fame of this pretended Nerogained credit every day, when by a sud­den accident the illusion vanished. Ithappened that Calpurnius Asprenas, whomGalba had appointed governor of Galatiaand Pamphylia, arrived, on his way tothose provinces, at the isle of Cj'thnus,Avith two galleys from the fleet that lay atMisenum. The commanders of the shipswere summoned, in the name of Nero, toattend their lawful prince. The impostorcontinued to act his part. He receivedthe naval officers with an air of dejection,and, by the duty which they owed him,implored their assistance, and safe con-
vol. v. o







OCR Output








62 THE IIISTORir





BdoK praetorian malecontents. The detachmentfrom the Ulyrian army caught the infec­tion, and obliged Celsus to retire under atshower of darts. The veterans fromGermany remained for some time insuspense. They had been sent by Neroto Alexandria; but, being recalled in ashort time afterwards, they returned toRome in a distressed condition, worn outwith toil, and weakened by sickness du­ring their voyage. Galba attended totheir wants, and, in order to recruit theirstrength, administered seasonable relief.The soldiers felt the generosity of theprince, and gratitude was not yet effacedfrom their minds.
XXXII. The populace, in the meantime, with a crowd of slaves intermixed,rushed into the palace, demanding ven­geance on the head of Otho, and his par­tisans. The clamour was loud and disso­nant, like that of a rabble in the circusor amphitheatre, roaring for the publicsports, or some new spectacle. The wholewas conducted without principle, withoutjudgment, or sincerity; and, before the







OCR Output








102 THE HISTORY





book province of Bretica in Spain, and wasamong the first that went over to Galba'sinterest. That emperor, to reward his zeal,-gave him the command of a legion in Ger-many; but finding, afterwards, that hehad been guilty of embezzling the publicmoney, he ordered him to he called to astrict account. Caecina was not of a tem­per to submit with patience. He resolvedto embroil the state, and in the generalconfusion hoped to find a remedy for hisown private afflictions. The seed-plots ofrebellion were already laid in the army.In the war against Vindex they had takenthe field, and, till they heard that Nerowas no more, never declared in favour ofGalba. Even in that act of submission,they showed no forward zeal, but sufferedthe legions on the Lower Rhine to take thelead. There was still another circum­stance that helped to sharpen their dis­content. The Treviri, the Lingones, andother states, which had felt the severity ofGalba's edicts, or had seen their territoryreduced to narrower limits, lay contiguousto the winter-quarters of the legions.Hence frequent intercourse, cabals, and







OCR Output













OCR Output








OF TACITUS. 329





of a deep and smothered resentment, in- bookterposed with their good offices to softenprejudice. His answer was, " Nothing" new has happened: two senators have"differed in opinion: and is not that a" common occurrence ? I have myself" often opposed the sentiments of Thra-" sea (e)." The allusion to a characterso truly eminent provoked a smile ofcontempt. Some, however, were glad tofind, that, instead of the men who glit­tered in the sunshine of a court, he choseThrasea for the model of true greatness.
XCII. Publius Sabinus, the praefectof a cohort, and Julius Priscus, a centu­rion, were advanced from those inferiorstations to the command of the praetorianguards. The former owed his elevationto the friendship of Valens, and the latterto that of Caecina. By those two mi­nisters, though always at variance witheach other, the whole power of the statewas usurped and exercised. The autho­rity of the emperor was merely nominal.Valens and Caecina transacted every thing.Their mutual animosity, which had beensuppressed during the war, but not ex-







OCR Output








36"0 NOTES on Tut


compelled to end his days, A. U. C. 792. His wifeCornelia, whom we find abandoned to her libidinouspassions, almost redeemed her character in the last actof her life. She perished with her husband. Senecatalks of a person of the name of Calvisius Sabinus,who, he says, did not know how to enjoy his successin the world with moderation; but whether that wasthe Sabinus of Tacitus is uncertain. Nunquam vidihominem leatum indeccntiiis. Seneca, epist. xx'vi'i.
Section L.
(<?) The battle of Pharsalia was A. U.C. 706; thatof Mutina, between Marc Antony and the consulsIlirtius and Pansa, 711; of Philippic in the year ofRome 712 ; and the siege of Perusia, A. U. C. 714.
(l<) Vespasian, in the reign of Caligula, was a time­serving flatterer; and, being afterwards overwhelmedwith debts, was a man of an equivocal character. SeeSuet, in Vespas. s. 2, 3, and 4.
Section LI.
(a) For the revolt of Vindex, and the overthrow ofhis army, see the Appendix to Annals, xvi.
Section LI I.(a) See Suetonius, in Vitellio, s. 7.
Section LVI.(a) For Colonia Agrippinensis, see the GeographicalTable at the end of the Eighth Volume.
Section LVII.(a) The first legion was probably stationed at Bonna.See the Geographical Table at the end of the EighthVolume.







OCR Output








200 THE HISTORY


book not make head against a regular army,
^—^i > Expecting no fame from victory, they
822. ' feared no disgrace irom an ignominious


A.D.


69. flight.


XIII. An opposition so rash and fee­ble served only to exasperate the Otho-nian soldiers. They fell with fury uponAlbium Intemelium, a municipal town.The late victory was a fruitless advantage,affording neither spoil nor plunder. Thepeasants had no property, and their arms-were of no value. Even prisoners of warcould not be made. The fugitives knewthe course of the country, and were tooswift of foot. Enraged at the disappoint­ment, the soldiers wreaked their vengeanceon the innocent inhabitants of Inteme­lium, and glutted their avarice with theeffects of innocent men. Amidst the bar­barities committed on this occasion, a Li-gurian woman gave a noble example ofcourage and maternal affection. She hadconcealed her child from the fury of theslaughtering sword. The soldiers, fullypersuaded that she had deposited hertreasure in the same place, stretched her







OCR Output








156 v THE HISTORY





book " and of those few, two only shall expiate'" the offence. That done, let us bury inoblivion the horrors of that shamefultumult; and may no other army hear" those dreadful imprecations uttered" against a Roman senate ! Against that" venerable body, the head of the empire," and ithe fountain, from which justice" flows through the provinces, not even" Vitellius, nor his rash-levied crew of" Germans, would dare to meditate so" vile a deed.
" And can there be in Italy a race of" men, the genuine offspring of Roman" citizens, who are capable of so foul a par*" ricide ? who can lift their impious hands" against the sacred order, from whom" our cause derives so much lustre, to the" confusion of Vitellius and the scum of" nations that follows him to the field ?" Some states, it is true, have been in-*' duced to join his standard; he has the" appearance of an army; but the senate** is on our side. The commonwealth is*' with us; our enemies are the enemies" of Rome. And when I mention Rome,







OCR Output








136 THE HISTORY





book Vitellius from his purpose. His proposalswere in the soft style of female persuasion;he offered money, and a retreat for volup­tuous enjoyments, with all that the prince'sfavour could bestow. Vitellius answeredin the same delicate strain. Both partiescorresponded in dainty terms, with dis^sembled hatred, and frivolous negotiation,till, exasperated by want of success, theychanged their tone, and, with unguardedinvective, charged each other with crimi-nal pleasures and flagitious deeds. Bothhad truth on their sides, Weary of alter­cation, Otho recalled the deputies, whohad been sent by Galba, and, in theirroom, dispatched others to the Germanarmy, to the Italic legion, and the troopsquartered at Lyons, with instructions tonegotiate in the name of the senate. Themen employed in this embassy tarriedwith Vitellius, and, by their cheerful com­pliance, left no room to think that theywere detained by force. Under pretence ofdoing honour to the embassy, Otho hadsent a detachment of the praetorian guards.Without suffering them to mix with thesoldiers, Vitellius ordered them to return







OCR Output








260 TH* HISTORY





book commended the goodness of his heart,
but his fears, he said, were out of season.
" Could it be supposed that Vitellius, find-
" ing his own family safe, would refuse,
" with brutal inhumanity, to return the
" generosity shown to himself? My death
" will leave him without a rival, and that
" very act will be a demand upon his cle-
" mency; especially, since it is not an act
" of despair, but a voluntary resignation,
" made at a time when a brave and gene-
" rous army calls aloud for another battle.
" For the good of the commonwealth I am
" a willing victim. For myself I have
" gained ample renown, and I leave to my
" family an illustrious name. After the
" Julian race (a), the Claudian, and the
" Servian, I am the first who transferred
" the sovereignty to a new family. It be-
" comes you, young man, to act with
" courage; you must dare to live. Re-
" member that Otho was your uncle, but
" remember it with modesty, and without
" resentment."
• -• . • .''
XLIX. Afte,r this, he desired his
friends to withdraw. Being left alone, he







OCR Output








314 THE HISTORY





book to complete the conquest of that country,while Vespasian made himself master ofthe passes into iEgypt. To make headagainst Vitellius, part of the army waadeemed sufficient, under the conduct ofsuch a general as Mucianus, with the ad­ditional terror of Vespasian's name, andthe fates on his side superior to every dif­ficulty. Letters were dispatched to the se­veral armies, and the officers in command,with instructions to conciliate the prae*torian soldiers, who had been disbandedby Vitellius, and by a promise, that allshould be restored to their rank, to invitethem once more into the service.
LXXXIII. Mucianus, with the ap^pearance rather of an associate in the so­vereign power, than of a general officer,advanced at the head of a light-armed de­tachment, never lingering in the course ofhis progress, that delay might not bethought a symptom of irresolution; and,on the other hand, not proceeding by rapidmarches, that fame might fly before him,and spread the terror of his approach. Heknew the weakness of his numbers, and







OCR Output








106' THE HISTORY





book example. Unwilling, however, to incurthe imputation of a rebellion against theircountry, they agreed to revive the anti­quated names of the senate and romanpeople, and in that republican form tookthe oath of fidelity. Not one commander1 of a legion, nor even so much as a tribune,appeared in favour of G alba; on the con­trary, many of them, as often happens incases of public confusion, not only con­nived, but helped to increase the tumult.The mutineers were still without a leader.No man took upon him to harangue themultitude; no orator ascended the. tri­bunal; nor could the incendiaries tellin whose service their eloquence was to beemployed.
LVI. Hordeonius Flaccus beheldthis scene of confusion, and, though aconsular commander, never once inter­posed with his authority to restrain theviolent, to secure the wavering, or to ani­mate the well affected. He looked on, acalm spectator, tame and passive ; it maybe added, innocent, but innocent throughsluggish indolence. Four centurions of


2







OCR Output








OF TACITUS. 247





forced them to fly for shelter to their en­trenchments, had not the Italic legionopposed the runaways, and sword in handcompelled them to return to the charge.Meanwhile, the rest of the army, withouthurry or confusion, drew up in order ofbattle, unmolested by the enemy, and, infact, without being seen; as a thick cop­pice, that stood between both parties, in­tercepted their view.
In Otho's army nothing was seen but tu­mult and distraction; the chiefs withoutcourage, or authority; the men mistrust­ing their officers; the ground not clearedof the baggage, and the followers of thecamp mixing in the ranks. The roadwhich they occupied was rendered so nar­row, by a ditch on each side, that, eventhough no enemy were at hand, a marchover the causey would have been per­formed with difficulty. Their whole armywas in confusion; some crowding abouttheir colours ; others at a loss, and runningto and fro to find their proper post; all ina confused clamour, roaring for their com­rades, answering to their names, and con-







OCR Output








OF TACITUS. 255





taken his resolution, waited, without fear, book
II.
or dejection of mind, for an account of'the event. Vague and uncertain rumoursreached his ear. At length the fugitives,who escaped from the field, brought sureintelligence that all was lost. The soldiers,who stood near his person, did not stay tohear the sentiments of the emperor, butbroke out with impatient ardour, exhort­ing him to summon up his best resolution.There were forces still in reserve, and, intheir prince's cause, they were ready tobrave every danger. In this declarationthere was no flattery: they spoke from theheart. In a fit of instinctive fury they de­sired to be led against the enemy; by theirexample the drooping spirit of their friendswould be once more excited to deeds ofvalour.' The men, who stood at a distance,stretched forth their hands in token oftheir assent, while such as gathered roundthe prince fell at his feet, and clasped hisknees. Plotius Firmus distinguished him­self by his zeal. This officer commandedthe praetorian guards. He implored hismaster not to abandon an army devotedto his interest, nor to renounce a brave and


7







OCR Output








66 THE HISTO&Y





book natural passion * Piso was hardly goneforth, when a rumour prevailed that Othowas slain in the camp. The report at firstwas vague and uncertain, but, like all im­portant lies, gathered as it went, and grewinto credit. It was confirmed by menwho averred that they were eye-witnesseson the spot, and saw the blow given. Thetale was welcome to a great many, andthe credulous swallowed it without furtherinquiry. It was afterwards thought to bea political lie, framed by Otho's friends,who mingled in the crowd in order to en­tice Galba from his palace.
XXXV. The city resounded with ac­clamations* Not only the vulgar andignorant multitude were transported be­yond all bounds, but the knights and sena­tors were hurried away with the torrent;they forgot their fears ; they rushed to theemperor's presence ; they complained thatthe punishment of treason was taken outof their hands. The men who, as it ap­peared soon after, were the most likely toshrink from danger, displayed their zealwith ostentation; lavish of words, yet


2.







OCR Output








134 THE HISTORY





book Such at all times is the policy of theworst of men: they dread a reverse offortune, and, in the hour of need, hope toshelter themselves under the protection ofsome pernicious, favourite. Innocence isno part of their care; they know that theguilty are ever ready to defend each other.But the friendship of Vinius, who was stillremembered with detestation, was anadditional spur to the populace. Theycrowded together from all quarters; theysurrounded the palace; they filled theforum; and in the circus and the theatre,where licentiousness is most apt to s'howitself, they clamoured, with a degree ofviolence little short of sedition, for thepunishment of a vile malefactor. Tigellirnus was then at the baths of* Sinuessa (b).Orders were sent to him to put a periodto his life. He received the fatal ne^s ina circle of his concubines; he took leavewith tenderness; and after mutual enirbraces, and other trifling delays, lie cuthis throat with a razor; by the pusil­lanimity of his last moments disgracingpyen the infamy of his former life. , — -'







OCR Output








276 THE HISTORY





book the legions caught the infection, and,being already on bad terms with the Ger­man soldiery, began to meditate a revolt.Suetonius Paidinus and Licinius Proculuswere kept for some time in a wretchedstate of suspense. Being at length ad­mitted to an audience, they made a de­fence, which nothing but the necessity ofthe times-could excuse. They chargedthemselves with treachery to Otho, and totheir own sinister designs ascribed themarch of the army on the day of battle,the fatigue of the troops, and the confu­sion in the ranks, occasioned by not re­moving the baggage, with many other in­cidents, from which, though accidental,they derived to themselves the merit offraud and perfidy. Vitellius gave themcredit for their guilt, and pardoned,though they had been in arms againsthimself, their attachment to his enemy.Salvius Titianus was exempt from danger.Natural affection made him join his bro-theri and his despicable character shel­tered him from -resentment. Marius Cel-sus, consul elect,, was suffered to succeedto hia honours, though Cireilius Simplex,


2







OCR Output











CReSlorecl througha arant in
from
(The Cartwright Foundation 5
(





PRINCETON
UNIVERSITY
K LIBRARY J







OCR Output











-s*H


D\frnr/ti'"^


A


»>,,>•«


3h


Um'iis"""


llii^/^
3k.**zS[m
i v^X
S 9V F^
1 1
'^^AlMfiA
Jw«_* ~—\
'
i»a-
1
l_-—~^4^



J9


Coek> xcui/i.







OCR Output








FIRST BOOK OF THE HISTORY. 361


Section LIX.
(a) For the legion called the Italic, see History, ii.g. 6, note (e).
(b) The Taurinian squadron was so called from theTaurini, or people of Turin. See the GeographicalTable at the end of the Eighth Volume.
Section LX.
(a) For Trcbcllius Maximus, see Life of Agricola,
s. IG.
Section LXI.
(a) The vast range of mountains called the Alps,separating Italy from Gaul and Germany» were dividedinto several parts, which have their distinct names,such as Cottian Alps, Pcnine Alps, &c. See the Geo­graphical Table at the end of the Eighth Volume.
Section LXI I.
(a) For the sloth, drunkenness, and other vices ofVitellius, see Suetonius, in Vitel. s. 17.
(b) Suetonius, in Vitel. s. 8.
Section LXITT.(a) For Divodurum, and the Mediomatrici, see theGeographical Table at the end of the Eighth Volume.
Section LXIV.
(a) The original says, in civitate Leucorum; but itshould be remembered that civitas, as used by Tacitusand other Roman writers, generally implies a stale, andnot a city in the modern acceptation of the word. Forthe Leuci, see the Geographical Table at the end of theEighth Volume.
(b) See this book, s. 59.
(c) This cohort was usually quartered at Lyons. SeeAnnals, iii. s. 41.







OCR Output








OF TACITUS. 9g





charged the office of preetor, and after- bookwards commanded a legion, free from re- <proach. His name, however, was soonafter branded with a crime, which a com­mon slave would have blushed to commit.Being a guest at the table of Claudius, bewas charged with pilfering a golden goblet.On the following day, that emperor, todistinguish Vinius from the rest of hiscompany, gave orders that he should betrusted with nothing better than a cup ofearthen ware. Notwithstanding this dis­grace, he became proconsul of NarbonGaul, and acquitted himself in hi:s admini­stration with distinguished firmness andequal integrity. The friendship of Galbaplaced him on the brink of a precipice-Bold and prompt in action, of an enter­prising genius and undaunted courage,he was at the same time dark, subtle,and deceitful. Qualified to succeed inwhatever he undertook, and by natureready for good or evil deeds, he practisedvice and virtue with alternate success andequal ardour. His last will, on accountof his immoderate wealth, was declared







OCR Output








OF TACITUS.' 533





sist of a thousand men. This measure, by bookcabals among the soldiers, and the jea­lousy subsisting between the two com­manding officers, was the ruin of alldiscipline. Valens arrogated to himselfthe chief direction of the business. Hehad relieved Caecina and his army, and onthat account claimed pre-eminence. TheVitellian party had certainly gained noadvantage over the enemy, till the arrivalof Valens gave life and vigour to thecause. If the slowness of his march wasat first liable to censure, the victory thatfollowed made ample atonement, and re­deemed the character of the general. Thesoldiers from the Lower Germany were toa man devoted to his interest. It wasupon this occasion, according to the ge­neral opinion, that Cuecina first began tomeditate the treachery, which he after­wards carried into execution.
XCIV. The indulgence shown by Vi-tellius to his principal officers was ex­ceeded by nothing but the licentiousnessof the common soldiers. Each man en­rolled himself in what company he thought







OCR Output








254 THE HISTORY





book vengeance, with one consent agreed t»send a deputation to the enemy. The Vi-tellian leaders were willing to hearken toterms of accommodation. The deputiesnot returning immediately, the suspenseoccasioned an awful interval in Otho'scamp. Peace was at length announced,and the entrenchments were thrown open.A tender scene ensued. The conquerorsand the conquered embraced each other,and with mingled joy and sorrow lamentedthe horrors of civil war. In the same tents,relations, friends, and brothers dressedeach others wounds. They now perceivedthat their hopes were a mere delusion, andthat slaughter, sorrow, and repentance, weretheir certain lot. Nor was there in thetwo armies a single person, who had notthe death of a friend or a relation to lament.The body of Orphidius, the commander ofa legion, after diligent search, was foundamong the slain, and burnt with the usualsolemnities. A few of the common menwere buried by their friends: the rest wereleft to welter on the bare earth.
XLYI. Otho, in the mean time, having







OCR Output








OF TACITUS. 259





" look back to arraign either gods or men, book" still clings to life, and quits it with re-" gret."
XLVIII. Having thus declared his sen­timents, he talked apart with his friends,addressing each of them in gracious terms,according to his rank, his age, or dignity,and advising all to depart without loss oftime, and make their terms with the con­queror. He entreated the old men, andwith the young exerted his authority.Calm and undisturbed, serenity in hiscountenance, and firmness in his voice, hesaw his friends weep, and endeavoured torepress their tears. He ordered boats orcarriages for those who were willing todepart. He selected all such papers andletters as happened to contain expressionsof duty towards himself, or ill will to Vi-tellius, and committed them to the flames.He distributed money in presents, but notwith the profusion of a man quitting theworld. Observing that his brother's son,Salvius Cocceianus, a youth in the flowerof his age, was dissolved in tears, he en­deavoured to assuage his sorrows. He


s 2







OCR Output








OF TACITUS. 15





rank, were, by his orders, put to death; book.the former, as an accomplice in the enter­prise of Nymphidius, and the latter, be­cause he had been appointed to commandthe army under Nero. Thpy were con­demned, unheard, and, for that reason,thought the innocent victims of a bar­barous policy.
Galba's entry (c) into the city of Rome,after the massacre of several thousands ofunarmed and defenceless soldiers, struck ageneral panic. The people at large werethrown into consternation, and even themen, who executed the orders of their ge­neral, stood astonished at the horrors ofthe scene. Rome, at that time, was filledwith a prodigious body of troops, assem­bled from various parts of the empire. Be­sides the forces drawn from the fleet (c/),and left as a garrison by Nero, Galbu,when he entered the city, brought withhim a legion from Spain. To these mustbe added the (e) several companies fromGermany, from Britain, and lllyricum,which had been sent forward towards theCaspian streights (/'), to serve in the war







OCR Output








204 THE HISTORY





book camp. The Othonians were struck withterror, and near the fleet all was tumultand disorder. The surprise, however, soonbegan to subside. The Othonians betookthemselves to an adjacent hill, and, havingthere collected their strength, rushed downwith impetuous fuiy. A dreadful slaugh­ter followed. The Tungrian cohorts stoodthe brunt of the action, till their com­manding officers fell under a shower ofdarts. The Othonians conquered, buttheir victory was dearly bought. Theypursued the flying enemy with more ragethan prudence, when the Treverian ca­valry, wheeling round, attacked them inthe rear, and put a large party to thesword. From this time the two armiesremained inactive. As if a truce hadtaken place, and both sides had agreed bycompact to suspend hostilities, and no moremolest each other by sudden incursions,the Vitellians retired to Antipolis, a mu­nicipal town of Narbon Gaul, and theOthonians to Albingaunum, in the inlandpart of Liguria.
XVI. Corsica, Sardinia, and the rest







OCR Output








OF TACITUS. 379





•
was nothing to fear. His gluttony (a)knew no bounds. To administer to hisappetite, Rome and Italy were ransackedfor rarities. The roads from both the seasrung with a din of carriages, loaded withwhatever was exquisite to the palate. Toentertain him on his march, the principalmen of every city were obliged to lavishall their wealth, and the country was ex­hausted. The soldiers, degenerating intoa band of epicures, lost all regard for mi­litary duty. They despised their prince,yet followed his example. Vitellius, byan edict sent forward to Rome, signifiedhis pleasure to postpone for the presentthe title of Augustus; and for that ofCaesar, he declined, it altogether. Theprerogative of the prince was sufficientfor his ambition. He ordered the mathe­maticians to be banished out of Italy,and, under heavy penalties, restrained theRoman knights from disgracing themselvesby fighting prizes like common gladiators,and by exhibiting their persons on thepublic stage. That infamous practice wasintroduced by former princes, who did notscruple to allure men to the theatre by







OCR Output








192 xtit fclsfoit*





book jecture had ample materials. Hefted nufn-bers asserted that Nero survived the furyof his enemies, and they found credulityready to believe them. In the course ofthis work the reader will hear of variouspretenders, and the fate that attendedthem. The impostor who now took uponhim to personate that emperor, was a slavefrom Pontus, or, according to some wri­ters, a freedman from Italy, who playedwith skill on the harp, and had a musicalvoice. With those talents, and a counte­nance that resembled Nero, he was ableto impose on vulgar minds. By the force ofpromises he drew to his party a number ofdeserters, whom their poverty induced tolead a vagrant life. With this crew heput to sea, but was thrown by adversewinds on the isle of Cythnus. At thatplace he fell in with a party of soldiers on— their return from the East. Some of thesehe listed; and such as refused, he orderedto be put to death. Having plunderedthe merchants, and armed the stoutest oftheir slaves, he endeavoured to seduceSisenna, a centurion from Syria, who hap-'pohed teland on the island of Cythnus, on


3







OCR Output








122 THE HISTORY





book height, that the commanders and otherofficers despaired of being able to extin­guish it; The inhabitants of Vienne hadnotice of their danger. They came forthin solemn procession, bearing in theirhands (a) the sacred vestments, and all theusual tokens of peace and humble suppli­cation. They met the Romans on theirmarch, and, falling prostrate on theground, clasped their knees, and in a pa­thetic strain deprecated the vengeanceready to burst upon them. Fabius Valensjudged it expedient to order a distributionof three hundred sesterces to each man.The soldiers began to relent, and thecolony was respected for its worth and an-tient dignity. The general pleaded in be­half of the inhabitants, and was heard Avithattention. The state, however, was ob­liged to furnish a supply of arms and war­like stores. Individuals, with emulation,contributed from their private stock. Thereport, however, was, that the people, ingood time, applied a large sum of money,and purchased the protection of the com­mander in chief. Thus much is certain,that, after being for a longtime depressed







OCR Output








FIRST BOOK OF THE HISTORY. 357


passages, which are transplanted into the French play,would be an agreeable amusement to every reader oftaste, but cannot be comprised within the limits of anote. Tt will be sufficient to state what Corneille him­self has said in the preface to his tragedy. He makesit his boast that he translated as much as he possiblycould ; and it does not appear that the malignant criticsof that day charged him with petty larceny, or railed athim with virulence for the use which he thought properto make of a great historian. Corneille's words are asfollows: Le svjet de cctte tragedie est tiri de Tacite,qui commence ses histoires par celle-ci. Les caractcres deceux que j'y Jais parler, y sont ks mimes que Chez cetincomparable auteur, quej'ai traduit (ant qn'il in'u Stepossible.
Section XXVII.
(a). The place called Velabrum lay between tha.Forum and Mount Palatine. The Millarium aureumwas at the upper part of the Forum. The Temple ofSaturn was at the foot of the Capitohue Hill.(b) See Suetonius, Life of Otho, s. 6.
Section XXX.
(a) See Juvenal's description of Otho's effeminacy,and his looking-glass, sat. ii. v€r. 99.
Section XXXI.
(a) A portico built by Vipsanius Agrippa in th« fieldof Mars. Horace says,


-Cum bene notum


Porticus Agrippae, et Via te conspexerit Appi.
Hob. lib. i. epist. 6.







OCR Output








50 THE HISTORY





Cocceius Proculus, a soldier of the body­guard, was engaged in a litigation withone of his neighbours about the boundariesof their respective grounds, Otho boughtthe whole estate of the adverse party, andconveyed it to the soldier as a present.And yet these practices gave no jealousyto the commander of the praetorian bands.To penetrate dark transactions was so farfrom being his talent, that he could notsee what escaped no eye but his own. ..-. ;
XXV. Otho took into his councils oneof his freedmen, by name Onomastus.This man was chosen to conduct the en­terprise* He selected for his accomplices,Barbius Proculus, whose duty it was? tobear the watch-word to the night-guar^d,and one Veturius, his chosen assistant.Otho .sounded them apart; and findingthem, fit instruments. for his purposes^subtle, dark,,and resolute, he loaded.theujboth with presents, and dismissed th$D>with a sum of money, to be employed i^bribing ; the rest of the guards. In -thj§manneij, two soldiers undertook to disposea£±hc $oj»an; empire,. and.whaMhex un~







OCR Output








OP TACITUS. 99





Usually vested in consular generals. Heseemed to be an officer of superior weightand grandeur. Reflecting men saw thebaseness of his motives (a), while his crea­tures extolled every part of his conduct.The profusion, which, without judgmentor oeconomy, lavished away in bountiesall his own property, and squandered thatof others, was by his sycophants calledbenevolence and generosity. Even thevices, that sprung from lust of dominion,were by his creatures transformed into somany virtues.
In. the two armies on the Upper andLower Rhine, there were, no doubt, menwell disposed, and of sober conduct; but,at the same time, both camps were in­fested by a set of desperate incendiaries.At the head of the factious and the tur­bulent stood Alienus Ca?cina and FabiusValens, each the commander of a legion,both remarkable for their avarice, and bothof a daring spirit, ready for any desperateenterprise. Valens had served the interestof Galba, by detecting Verginius, as soonas the conduct of that officer seemed to be


n 2







OCR Output








OF TACITUS. 49





times, when, at their ease, they traversed bookthe lakes of Campania, and went on sail­ing parties to the cities of Achaia; butnow the scene was changed to the Alps,the Pyreneans, and long tracts of country,where they were to march under a load ofarmour scarce supportable.
XXIV. While the minds of the sol­diers were, by these means, thrown into vio­lent agitations, Maevius Pudens, a near re­lation of Tigellinus, added fuel to the flame.Whoever was known to be of a light andversatile disposition, in distress for money,or fond of public commotions, this manattracted to his party. He sapped hisway with a degree of dexterity, as un-perceived as it was successful. As oftenas Galba was entertained at Otho's house,he distributed to the cohort on duty ahundred sesterces for every man, undercolour of an allowance for their usual con­vivial party. This generosity, which pass­ed under the name of a largess, was in­creased by the secret, but well applied,bribery of Otho; who became at last acorruptor so bold and open, that, when
vol. v. E







OCR Output








228 THE HISTORY





book turning virtue. In the end they burstinto tears, and with humble supplicationsimplored forgiveness. Valens venturedto appear. As soon as the soldiers sawhim beyond expectation safe, unhurt, ina sordid dress, with tears starting from hiseye, a mingled tumult of joy and sorrowand affection swelled in every breast.With the quick transition of passions com­mon with the multitude, they poured forththeir congratulations; and with shouts ofapplause placed their general amidst theeagles and standards, on his tribunal.Valens acted with well-timed moderation.No man was singled out for punishment.Afraid, however, that, by too much cool­ness, he might make them suspect somedeep design, he thought fit to reprimand afew by name, and his resentment went nofurther. In the distractions of a civil war,he knew that the power of the general isnever equal to the liberty claimed by hissoldiers(b).
XXX. While Valens employed hisarmy in throwing up entrenchments atTicinum, an account of Caecina's defeat







OCR Output








108 THE HISTORY





book spatches were accordingly sent to informthe army in the Lower Germany, that thesoldiers on the Upper Rhine had revoltedfrom Galba, and that, by consequence, itremained for them either to march againstthe rebels, or, for the sake of peace andmutual concord, to create another em­peror. In choosing for themselves theywould hazard little; but indecision mightbe dangerous.


o


LVII. The winter-quarters (o) of thefirst legion were nearest to the residenceof Vitellius. Fabius Valens was the com­manding officer; a prompt and daringleader of sedition. On the following dayhe put himself at the head of the cavalrybelonging to his own legion, and, with aparty of the auxiliaries, proceeded by arapid march to the Agrippinian colony.He no sooner entered the city, than hesaluted Vitellius by the title of emperor.The legions of the province, with zeal andardour, followed his example; and threedays before the nones of January, the le­gions in Upper Germany declared for Vi­tellius, losing all memory of the senate







OCR Output








OF TACITUS. 147





bustle, chose his time towards the closeof day, when the camp was quiet. Heopened the magazine of arms, and orderedthe waggons to be loaded. The latenessof the hour filled the men with suspicion ;the intention seemed dark and dangerous,and the affectation of secrecy produced ageneral tumult. The soldiers were in li­quor, and, at the sight of their arms, rea­soning like drunken men, they thought ittheir business to seize them without delay.They murmured, they complained; theycharged the tribunes and centurions withtreachery, declaring aloud, that a darkconspiracy was formed, with intention toarm the slaves and domestics of the se­nators against the life of Otho. A sceneof uproar and confusion followed. Somewere stupefied with liquor, and compre­hended nothing: the profligate liked theopportunity to commit midnight plunder;and the multitude, as usual, were ready tomix in any sudden commotion. Thosewho regarded discipline and good orderwere undistinguished in the dark. Thetribune, who attempted to restrain theirfury, was-murdered on the spot. ■ The


l 2







OCR Output








168 THE HISTORY





book was an act of justice, in appearance mag­nificent, but of little use, as the publicofficers had already seized the whole intotheir own hands. From the senate Othoproceeded to harangue the people; hetalked in a pompous style of the fathers,and the majesty of the Roman citizens.He mentioned the adverse party in marnaged terms, imputing to the legions errorin judgment rather than a turbulent andfactious spirit. Of Vitellius he made nomention; perhaps from motives of delicacy,or, more probably, because the writer ofthe speech, looking forward to his ownsafety, thought it prudent to exclude allpersonal invective. For the last opinionthere seems to be some foundation. Inall military operations, Suetonius Paulinusand Marius Celsus were Otho's confidentialadvisers; but in matters that concernedthe civil administration, Galerius Tracha-lus (a) was the person on whose talents herelied. That minister had gained repu-Hion at the bar; and those who wereacquainted with his mode of elo-> and the harmony of his copious'liscovered, in the composition of







OCR Output








THE
HISTORY
OF
TACITUS.


BOOK I.





I. X HE aera, from which it is my inten- booktion to deduce the following narration,is the second consulship of Servius Galba,when Titus Vinius was his colleague inoffice. Of the antecedent period, inclu­ding a space of eight hundred and twentyyears (a) from the foundation of Rome,the history has been composed by variousauthors, who, as Jong as they had beforethem the transactions (b) of the Romanpeople, dignified their work with elo­quence equal to the subject, and a spirit offreedom worthy of the old republic. Afterthe battle of Acfium, when, to close the







OCR Output








OP TACITUS. 323





graceful connections of the emperor, and bookhe enjoyed them without a blush. Tosupply so vast a body with provisions,the colonies and municipal cities wereexhausted; the fruits of the earth, thenripe and fit for use, were carried off; thehusbandman was plundered; and hisland, as if it were an enemy's country*was laid waste and ruined.
LXXXVIII. The fierce animosity thatbroke out at Ticinum between the legionsand the auxiliaries, was not yet extin­guished. Frequent quarrels occurred, andended always in mutual slaughter.Against the peasants and farmers theywere sure to be unanimous, but agreed innothing else. The most dreadful carnagehappened within seven miles of Rome.At that place Vitellius ordered victuals,read}' dressed, to be distributed amongthe soldiers, as if he had prepared a feastto pamper a band of gladiators. Thecommon people, who had come in crowdsfrom Rome, were dispersed through thecamp. To divert themselves with whatthey thought an arch and pleasant trick,


y 2







OCR Output








324 THE HISTORY





book they cut away the belts of the soldiers,and with an air of humour asked, Whetherthey were properly accoutred? The sol­diers had no taste for raillery. They re-*taliated with their weapons, and fell withfury on the defenceless multitude. Amongthe slain was the father of one of the sol­diers, killed as he stood engaged in con­versation with his son. The unhappyvictim was soon known; and, by that in­cident, the further effusion of blood wasprevented. Rome, in the mean time, wasthrown into consternation. A number ofsoldiers entered the city in a tumultuousmanner, and rushed forward to the forum,impatient to see the spot where Galbaperished. Covered with the skins ofsavage beasts, and wielding large andmassy spears, the spectacle which theyexhibited to the Roman citizens wasfierce and hideous. Unused to crowdedstreets, they had not the skill to con­duct themselves amidst a vast concourseof^people, but with rude force pushedagainst the passengers ; and sometime*slipping down, or, as might happen,thrown-by the pressure of the throng, they
'-• i







OCR Output








r


,


^


Vj


v





I.


, u. c.
}22.69.


*


C










OCR Output








OF TACITUS; 275





of magnificence with an evil eye, but bookunder specious and even servile caressestook care to hide his jealousy. At Lyonsthe general officers of both parties, as wellthe vanquished as the victorious, attendedto do homage to the prince. Vitellius ina public speech pronounced the panegy­ric of Valens and Caecina, whom he placedon each side of his curule chair. He thenordered out the whole army to receive hisson, then an infant of tender years. Thesoldiers obeyed. The father took the childin his arms, and, having adorned him witha purple robe, and other marks of princelygrandeur, saluted him by the title of Ger-manicus; in this manner bestowing ex­travagant honours, even in the tide of pro­sperity, ill judged and out of season; but,perhaps, in the reverse of fortune thathappened afterwards, some Source of con­solation.
LX. The centurions who had sig­nalized themselves in Otho's service, wereby order of Vitellius put to death. Bythis act of cruelty he lost the affections ofthe forces from Illyricum. The rest of


t 2







OCR Output








158 . THE HISTORY


book reproof, yet tempered with conciliating
v-^—' language, was favourably received ; and
saa. ' the moderation of the prince, who pu-
AD
69. nished only two of the mutineers, gavegeneral satisfaction. By that lenient mea­sure, the soldiers, too fierce to be controll­ed, were quieted for the present. Home,however, was not in a state of tranquillity.A constant din of arms was heard, andwarlike preparations were seen in everyquarter. The soldiers did not, as before,riot in tumultuous bodies ; but, being di­spersed throughout the city, they foundmeans, - in various shapes, to insinuatethemselves into houses, where they watch­ed, with sufficient malignity, the motionsand words of all, who bjr their nobility,their wealth, or their talents, were eminent-enough to be objects of calumny. A re­port prevailed at the same time, that Vi-tellius had a number of emissaries dispersedamong the populace, to act as spies, andwatch the state of parties. Hence jea­lousy, mistrust and fear. No man thoughthimself safe under his own roof. Abroadand under the eye of the public the alarmwas still greater. Whatever was the ru-


7







OCR Output








OP TACITUS. 267





more certain intelligence. They stationed bookmessengers on all the public roads to in­terrogate every man that passed. One ofOtho's freedmen came in their way. Be­ing asked why he had left his master, hemade answer, " I have with me the dir*' rections and last will of the prince, who'* is still alive, but he renounces all the" joys of life: his thoughts are fixed upon" posterity, and he has now no other" care." This account made an impres­sion on every mind : all stood astonished,and soon after, without asking any furtherquestions, went over to Vitellius.
LIV. Lucius Vitellius, brother ofthe new emperor, attended the meeting ofthe senate. The fathers began to addresshim in a flattering strain, and he was will­ing to receive their incense. His joy wassoon interrupted. One Caenus, a freed-man of Nero's, by a bold and impudentfalsehood, threw the assembly into conster­nation. He affirmed it as a fact, that thefourteenth legion, with the forces fromBrixellum, attacked the victorious party,and gained a complete victory. The ino-







OCR Output








282 THE HISTORY





of inveterate hatred. Petronia, his formerwifc(«), was no sooner divorced, than Do-labella married her. Hence that unhappyman was an object of the emperor's fixedresentment. By letters dispatched toRome, he invited him to his presence, ad­vising him, at the same time, to shun theFlaminian road, and come more private­ly by the way of Interamnium. At thatplace, he ordered him to be put to death.The assassin thought he should lose toomuch time. Impatient to do his work, heattacked Dolabella at an inn on the road,and, having stretched him on the ground,cut his throat. Such was the beoinninarof the new reign, a prelude to scenes ofblood that were still to follow. The fu­rious spirit of Triaria, who took so activea part in this affair, was the more detested,as it stood in contrast to the mild characterof Galeria, the emperor's wife, and also tothat of Sextilia (b), his mother; a womanof virtue and benevolence, formed on themodel of antient manners. On receipt ofthe first letters from the emperor, whereinhe assumed the title of Germanicus, sheis said to have declared, that she had no







OCR Output








CONTENTS.
BOOK I.
I. PREFACE to the History. U. Summary view ofthe whole work. State of the city, the armies, and theprovinces. VI. Galba's court, and the reigning vices.VllF. Condition of Spain, Gaul, the Upper and LowerGermany, Syria, JEgypt, and Africa. The uaragainst the Jews conducted by Vespasian. XII. Re­volt of the legions in Upper Germany. Galba consultsabout the choice of a successor. Different opinionsamong his ministers, Vinius, Laco, and Icelus, one ofhis freedmen. Otho has hopes of the nomination.XIV. Choice of P'nofor the succession. XV. Galba'sspeech upon the occasion. He declares his adoption ofPiso in the camp, and in the senttle. Ill-timed severityof Galba. An embassy to the German legions. XXI.Otho plans a revolution. He corrupts the preetorianguards. Two common soldiers undertake to dispose ofthe sovereignty. Otho proclaimed emperor. XXIX.Galba, in the mean time, employed in a sacrifice in thecapital. Piso's speech to the soldiers. XXXVII.Otho harangues the praetorians in the camp. XL.The praetorians rush into the city. Galba murdered.XLII. Death of Titus Vinius. The constancy of acenturion. Piso put to death. Otho received u ithadulation by the senate and the people. XLVI. Allthings directed by ike soldiers. Numbers executed.Manus Celsus saved by the artifice of Otho. XLVIII.Characters of Piso and Titus Vinius. XLIX, Cka-


B 2







OCR Output








284 THE HISTORY '





book of Rufus was too powerful. He triumphedover his adversary, and the freedraan wascondemned to punishment. Rufus, from,that time, ranked among the emperor'sintimate friends. He continued in favourat court, and, at the same time, retainedhis government of Spain ; -during his ab­sence carrying on the administration ofthe province by his deputies, according tothe precedent left by Lucius Ammtius (a),whom Tiberius, from suspicion and the jea­lousy of his nature, never suffered to de­part from Rome. Trebellius Maximus (6)had not the good fortune to meet withequal favour. He had been the governorof Britain, but by a mutiny among thesoldiers was obliged to escape out of theisland. Vectius Bolanus (c), then a fol­lower of the court, succeeded to the com­mand.
LXVI. Vitellius heard, with deepanxiety, that the vanquished legions stillretained a fierce and unconquered spirit.Dispersed through Italy, and in everyquarter intermixed with the victorioustroops, they talked in a style of disaffeo







OCR Output








TOF TACITUS. '265





LII. Though the war was now at an bookend, a great part of the senate, who ac­companied Otho from Home, and by himwere left at Mutina, found themselves in­volved in the utmost danger. They re-reived an account of the defeat at Bcdria-cum, but the soldiers treated it as a falsealarm. Suspecting the integrity of thefathers, and fully persuaded that theywere, in secret, enemies to Otho and hiscause, they watched their motions, listenedto their words, and, with their usual ma­lignity, gave to every thing that passedthe worst construction. They proceededto reproach and every kind of insult,hoping to find a pretence for an insurrec­tion and a general massacre. The senatorssaw another cloud gathering over theirheads : they knew that the Vitellian partytriumphed; and, if they were tardy withtheir congratulations, the delay might bethought a spirit of disaffection. In thisdilemma they called a meeting of the wholeorder. No man dared to act alone. Inthe conduct of all, each individual hopedto find his own personal safety. At thesame time an ill-judged compliment from


2







OCR Output








OF TACITUS. 137





without delay. Fabius Valens took the bookopportunity to write, in the name of theGerman army, to the prastorian guards.His letters, in a style of magnificence, setforth the strength of the legions, and,, atthe same time, offered terms of mutualconcord. He condemned the forwardzeal, with which they presumed to trans­fer to Otho an empire which had beenvested in Vitellius. He mingled promiseswith expressions of anger, and, after treat­ing the praetorians as men unequal to animportant war, gave them assurances thatthey would lose nothing by peace andUnanimity, These letters, however, werewithout effect. The praetorians continuedfirm in their duty,
LXXV. The rival chiefs began to laysnares for each other. They waged a warof treachery. Emissaries were sent byOtho into Germany, and others by Vitel­lius to Rome. Both parties missed theiraim. The agents of yitellius passed un­detected. Amidst a concourse of people,in so vast a city as Rome, they could lurkwith impunity; while, on the other hand,







OCR Output








OF TACITUS. 313





example, and succeeded more by gentle bookmethods than by the rigour of authority.To the failings of his friends he was oftenblind, but never to their virtues. He ad­vanced some to the administration of pro­vinces, and others to the rank of senators;all men of distinguished character, whorose afterwards to eminence in the state.There were others who owed their successmore to their good fortune, than to theirmerit. Mucianus in his first haranguemade incidental mention of a donative,but in guarded terms; nor did Vespasian,though engaged in a civil Avar, grant at anytime a larger bounty than had been usualin times of profound peace. He chosethat his soldiers should act on principles ofhonour, not from motives of bribery andcorruption. To that firmness he owed thegood order and regular discipline of his i_army. Ambassadors were sent to the courtsof Parthia and Armenia, in order to settlea mutual good understanding, that, whenthe legions marched forward to open thecampaign, the back settlements should notbe exposed to sudden incursions of theenemy. Titus was to remain in Judaea (a),







OCR Output













OCR Output











. 2805


v.*


DATE ISSUED
DATE DUE
DATE ISSUED
DATE DUE
ittl


'W*^







OCR Output








OF TACITUS. 105





No man was seen to act with alacrity. In bookthe foremost ranks a feeble sound washeard ; the words of the oath were re­peated with an unwilling murmur, whilethe rest remained in sullen silence; eachman, as usual in dangerous enterprises,expecting the bold example of his com­rades, ready to second the insurrection,yet not daring to begin it. A leaven ofdiscordant humours pervaded the wholemass of the army. The first and fifth le­gions were the most outrageous: some ofthem pelted the images of Galba with avolley of stones. The fifteenth and six­teenth abstained from acts of violence,but were loud and clamorous: they bawledsedition, but waited for ringleaders to be­gin the fray.
In the Upper Germany the tumult wasstill more violent. On the same calends ofJanuary, the fourth and eighteenth legions,quartered together in one winter-camp,dashed the images of Galba into frag­ments. In this outrage the fourth legionled the way; and the eighteenth, afterbalancing for some time, followed their







OCR Output








SECOND BOOK OF THE HISTORY. 3Z5


,.;.' ,' * - •♦ ''. •,;. • : V
Section LXXXIV.(a) Vespasian, in the height of his powei% did notscruple to raise large sums of money by severe ex­actions ; but the apologv for his avarice was the liberalspirit with which he adorned Rome and Italy withgrand and useful works. See Suet, in Vesp.'s. 16.
Section LXXXV,
iiil.7 i • . • .-. . / . ; . - - ../..',
(a) For Apronius Saturninus and Tertius Juli.mus,
' 'Tt- ' • ' - '' '
seeHjst. i. s.,79.
Section LXXXVf.
(a) Primus. Antpnius, now the leacjer of Vespasian'<armies, was, formerly convicted of extortion. Sec Au-nals,_xiv. s. 18.
Section LXXXIX.
(c) Vitellius's mother, S^xtilia. Sec this book, s.,G4.
' ,''' '" > ' ' . , ;.;. / ; , f-t
. . t ( . Sectioji XCI. , .
(a) The defeat at Cremera, a river in Tuscany {.no*-La Varca), was A. U. C. 277- At Allia (how TurrentediCatino) the Roman army was put to the sword bythe Gauls, under Brennus, A.U. C. 3(>4. Theslaughtqrwas so great, that the day on which it happened {DiesAlliensis) was marked as unlucky in the calendar, and,according to Cieero, thought more iiatal.than that onwhich the city of Rome was taken; .\ \
(I) The assemblies, in which the .consuls were created,are mentioned by Suetonius, in Vitel. s. H. For themanner in which that business was conducted by theemperor Trajan, see Pfiny's Panegyric, s. 63.
VOL. V. % C







OCR Output













OCR Output








40 THE HISTORY





book tribunes, notwithstanding, and the cen­turions and soldiers who stood nearest tohis person, raised a shout of approbation.Through the rest of the lines a deep andsullen silence prevailed. The men saw,with discontent, that, on the eve of a war,they Avere deprived of those gratuitieswhich had been granted in time of peace,and were now become the soldier's right.The emperor, beyond all doubt, had it inhis power to secure the affections of thesoldiers. From a parsimonious old manthe smallest mark of liberality would havemade an impression. But in an age thatcould no longer bear the virtues of the oldrepublic, rigid oeconomy was out of sea­son, and, by consequence, the worst ofpolicy.
XIX. From the camp Galba proceededto the senate. His speech, like that tothe soldiers, was short, unadorned, andsimple. Piso delivered himself with graceand eloquence. The fathers heard himwith attention; some with real affection,and others, who in their hearts opposedhis interest, with overacted zeal; while







OCR Output








OP TACITUS. 87





tions, or stored them in his memory for bookfuture occasions, is uncertain. The short­ness of his reign has left that matter unde­cided. He was conveyed in triumph tothe capitol, and thence to the imperialpalace. In his way, he saw the forumdiscoloured with blood, and heaps ofslaughtered citizens lying round him. Hegranted leave to remove the dead bodies,and to perform the rites of sepulture. Theremains of Piso were buried by his wifeVerania (b), and Scribonianus his bro­ther. The last duty to Titus Vinius wasperformed by his daughter Crispina (c).Their heads, which the murderers had re­served for sale, were found, and redeemedat a stipulated price,
XLVIII. Pi so had well nigh completedthe thirty-first year of his age; always highin the esteem of the public, yet neverhappy. Two of his brothers suffered aviolent death; Magnus, by the commandof Claudius, and Crassus, by the crueltyof Nero. He himself had passed a. con­siderable part of his time, in banishment;an outlaw for some years, and four days a







OCR Output








310 THE HISTORY





•book speech, though in Greek, was eloquent.In that language he had acquired suf­ficient facility, and he possessed, besides,the happy art (a) of giving grace and dig­nity to whatever he uttered. He inflamedthe passions not only of the army, but alsoof the province, by asserting roundly," that it was a fixed point with Vitellius," to quarter the German troops in the de-*' lightful region of Syria, that, in a richw and plentiful province, they might grow" wanton in ease and luxury; while, in ex-*' change, the legions of Syria were to be" removed to cold encampments in Ger-*' many, there to endure the inclemency" of the weather, and the rigours of the" service." The natives of the provincehad lived in habits of friendship with thelegions, and, by intermarriages, had form­ed family connections. The soldiers, ontheir part, were naturalized in the country,and the stations, to which they were accus-.tomed, were, by long residence, grown asdear to them as their native home.
LXXXI. Before the ides of July, thewhole province of Syria acceded to Ves-*







OCR Output








TtfF TACITUS: 55





€fee current. The conspirators, brandish- booking their swords, and rending the air withacclamations, pursued their course, whilenumbers followed in profound silence, de­termined to sec the issue before they tooka decided part.
XXVIII. Julius Martialis, a mili­tary tribune, was at that time command­ing officer in the camp. Amazed at atreason so bold and daring, and perhapsimagining that It extended wider, he madeno attempt to oppose the torrent. Hisinactivity had the appearance of a con­federacy in guilt. The rest of the tri­bunes and centurions followed the sameline of caution, in their solicitude fortheir own safety losing all sense of honourand of every public principle, Such,in that alarming crisis, was the dispositionof the camp: a few seditious incendiariesdared to attempt a revolution; morewished to see it, and all were willing toacquiesce.
XXIX. Galba, in the mean time, ig­norant of all that passed, continued in the







OCR Output








ob TAetTira.v 209"


" the auxiliaries wheeled about, and sur-BooK


««


rounded the enemy." The tribunes and;*


IL


praefects of cohorts talked of fchej^owW: e>x-> 822.
. . . AD
ploits; and the truth, if they mingled anyV <*•'was warped and disfigured by exaggera­tion. The common soldiers quitted theroad, to mark the places where they hadfought, and to survey the arms and deadbodies of the vanquished piled up in heaps.They viewed the scene .with brutal joy,and wondered at the destruction they hadmade. Some, with generous sympathy}felt the lot of humanity, and tears gushedfrom every eye. Vitelliws ; sh0w(ed<. nosymptom of compassion. He saw, withoutemotion, the [bodies,..of Roman citizensunjburied on the naked ground, an^d* jMjitfrfell delight, of&r.ed asacrifiee to .the^'deities.of;■the place,.,Ijjttle,\ jt,hen.<p wpfffitfRg,,tfcreverse■of fQrfc^ne,Wiiiich.w*§ &PO» tjatoverrtake^inpejf, ,,',.'Mf fj r,,iii')d //f.vnd h«i•••'I''fjif '1-,.' ii'p'tt: (ii >.fii!!['7 ,.r>-fr ui a'X<in t
JLXXh A.T' J5.onpnia; Fabius Valets e^r __.}iibited a show of; gladjatofti iW>i}t(h,a,pQU>'pous display of decorations^; which he hadordered■to i be brought from Rome. Inproportion as the^>e:mpern^ advanced, to-







OCR Output








SECOND BOOK OF THE HISTORY. 377


It may be doubted, however, whether this description is
strictly true. Mr. Addison says, he does not know why
the poet has, represented it as so very gentle and still a
river, as the bishop of Salisbury ran down with th«
stream thirty miles in an hour, by the help of but one
rower.
Section XXIX.
(a) The people of Vienne were obliged to purchasethe protection of Valens. Hist. i. s. 66.
(I) In an army, where all alike from the highest tothe lowest committed the most violent outrages, the sol­diers knew no subordination. Guilt, when widely spread,levels all distinction. Lucan truly observes,, Facinus, quos inquinat, sequat.
Pharsal. lib. v. ver. 290.
Section XXX.(«) Cascina was admired by his soldiers for thoseagreeable secondary qualities, which often gain the affec­tions of the multitude. . Corbulo, the great commander,who is so much extolled by Tacitus, united to his supe­rior talents the specious trifles that conciliate favour.Super experienliam sapientiamque, etiajn specie inaniumvalidus. Annals, xiii. s. 8.
Section XXXI.
(a) Vitellius was of so sluggish a disposition, that heseemed to act under the direction of others, not from the.impulse of his own mind.
Section XXXIV.
(a) It has been already mentioned, that Otho had in hisarmy two thousand gladiators; a disgraceful expedient,says Tacitus, but in civil wars adopted by the ablest ge«







OCR Output








166 THE HISTORY





book ever, to feel the ill effects of the impend­ing war. They saw the public revenueexhausted in the service of the army;they laboured under a scarcity of provi­sions, and the price was rising every day;whereas, in the troubles stirred up byVindex, none of those inconveniences af­fected the city of Rome. That commotionwas at a distance, a war in the remoteparts of Gaul, decided between the legionsand the provincial insurgents. The Romancitizens looked on in perfect tranquillity,as if it were no more than a foreign quarrel.From the reign of Augustus, when that em­peror established the power of the Caesars,this had constantly been the case. Theissue of every war affected the sovereignonly. Under Tiberius and Caligula, theevils of peace were the worst calamities.The attempt of Scribonianus (a) to shakethe authority of Claudius was crushed assoon as discovered. Nero was undoneby rumours and vague intelligence, not byforce of arms. In the present juncture,the face of things was changed. The pres­sure was felt at home. The fleets and le­gions were in motion, and, beyond all ex­







OCR Output








or tac itu*. J85





explored the entrails of various animals, ioo»and, finding that the goddess was propi­tious, answered, for the present, in theusual style, but afterwards, at a secretinterview, laid open a scene of glory.Titus, with a mind enlarged, and swellingwith vast ideas, proceeded on his voyage,and joined his father. The armies andprovinces of the East were at that timewavering; but Jthe presence of Titus in­spired them with vigour and alacrity,Vespasian had almost brought the Jewishwar to a conclusion. Nothing remainedtut the siege of Jerusalem («); an arduousenterprise, which threatened great toil anddifficulty, not on account of the strengthpr resources of the enemy, but by reasonof a hill almost inaccessible, and, what was?till more hard to conquer, the stubborngenius of superstition. Vespasian, asalready mentioned, had three legionsunder his command, all inured to the ser­vice, and eager against the enemy. Mu-cianus, in a province where profoundtranquillity was established, was at thehead of four legions, not, as usual intiiae of peace, relaxed in indolence, but







OCR Output








OF TACITUS. 119


bloody battle must have been the conse- bookquence. ^—v—'
1 A.U.C
822.A. D
A colourable pretext for falling on the w.iEduans was the ardent wish of the army;but that people not only complied withthe demand of money and arms, but addeda voluntary supply of provisions. Whatwas thus done by the iEduans throughmotives of fear, the people of Lyons per­formed with inclination and zeal to servethe cause of Vitellius. From that city theItalic legion and the Tauiunian ca­valry were ordered to join the army.The eighteenth cohort (c), which had beenused to winter there, was left in-garrison.Manlius Valens at that time commandedthe Italic legion. This officer had ren­dered good service to the cause; but hisservices were repaid with ingratitude byVitellius. The fact was, Fabius Valens,the commander in chief, had given a secretstab to his reputation, and, to cover hismalice, played an artful game, with allthe plausible appearance of sly hypocrisy.In public he praised the person whom hewounded in the dark,







OCR Output








OF TACITUS. 37





"you wish him to avoid? It is not at book" Rome as in despotic governments,*' where one family towers above mankind," and their subjects groan in bondage." You are to reign over the Roman pco-" pie; a people whom no extreme will" suit; when in full possession of liberty," enemies to their own happiness; when" reduced to slavery, impatient of the" yoke." To this effect Galba delivered .himself, little doubting but that he wasthen creating a prince: the courtiers con­sidered it as a complete legal act, andpaid their homage to their future so­vereign.
XVII. During the whole of this solemntransaction, Piso, we are told, never lostthe even tenor of his mind. From thefirst moment all eyes were fixed upon him;yet, on his part, no emotion was seen, nosymptom of joy, no surprise, no confusion.He addressed the emperor, now his father,in terms of profound respect, and spokeof himself with reserve and modesty. Hismien and countenance never betrayed thesmallest inward alteration. He behaved







OCR Output








300 THE HISTORY





book effect as follows : V" In all great and ardu-»ii. . /»
" ous undertakings, the questions of iin-
" portance are, Is the enterprise for the
" good of the commonwealth ? Will it do
" honour to the man who conducted it ?
" And are the difficulties such as wisdom
" and valour may surmount ? Nor is this
" all: the character of the man who
" advises the measure should be duly
** weighed: Is he willing to second the
" counsel, which he gives, at the hazard
41 of his life ? What are his views ? And
" who is to reap the reward of victory ? It
" is Mucianus who now calls upon Ves-
" pasian; Mucianus invites you to im-
" perial dignity; for the good of the com-
" monwealth he invites you; for your own
"glory he exhorts you to undertake the
" enterprise. The gods are with you,
" and under them the rest depends upon
" yourself. The advice which I give is
" honest: there is no flattery in it. For,
" let me ask, can it be flattery to prefer
"you to Vitellius ? To be elected after
"such, an emperor is rather a disgrace.
" With whom are we to conteud ? Not with
*' the active mind of Augustus., nor with







OCR Output








270 THE HISTORY





book throughout Italy; but it was a peacemore destructive than the calamities ofwar. The Aritellian soldiers, quartered inthe colonies and municipal cities, werestill bent on spoil and rapine. They com­mitted the most horrible outrages, de-flouring the women, and trampling on alllaws human and divine. Where they re­frained from injury, they received a bribefor their forbearance. Nothing sacred orprofane was spared. Innocent men weremarked out as soldiers of Otho's party,and, under that pretence, murdered bytheir private enemies. The soldiers whobest knew the country, fixed upon theopulent farmers as their devoted prey.Where the lands were rich, they laid wasteand plundered without control. All whoresisted were put to the sword. The ge­neral officers had no power to check themischief. What they had done them­selves, they could not oppose in others.Caecina had not the avarice of his col­league ; popularity was his passion. Va-lens, on the contrary, had made himselfinfamous by his rapacity, and was there­fore obliged to connive, when he saw his







OCR Output








16 THE HISTORY





book then intended against the Albanians. In ashort time afterwards, on the first noticeof the revolt excited in Gaul by the tur­bulent genius of Vindex (g), they were allrecalled ; and the consequence was, thatRome saw within her walls the unusualspectacle of a vast military force. In solarge a number of soldiers, not yet de­voted to the interest of a single leader,the seed-plots of a new rebellion wereprepared, and ready to break out on thefirst alarm.
VII. It happened, at this point of time,that an account arrived of two murders,committed at a distance from Rome; oneof Clodius Macer in Africa, and the otherof Fonteius Capito (a) in Germany. Ma­cer, beyond all doubt, was engaged inschemes of ambition, and, in the midst ofhis projects, was cut off by Trebonius Gar-rucianus, the procurator of the province,who had received his orders from Galba.Capito was put to death by CorneliusAquinus and Fabius Valens, on a like sus­picion of plotting innovations in the state.But the charge against him was by no







OCR Output








OF TACITUS. 337


enjoy the present hour, and seize with bookavidity the pleasures near at hand, was v—^—'.the whole occupation of Vitellius. Future 822.'events and distant consequences gave him e».no solicitude. He is said to have dis­sipated in a few months no less than*nine millions of sesterces^ Such was thesad condition of Home; a great yet mise­rable city, obliged, in the space of one3*ear, to groan under the yoke of an Othoand a Vitellius; and still worse, to sufferthe depredations of Vinius, Valens, Icelus,and Asiaticus, till the people were atlength transferred, like a herd of slaves,to Mucianus and Marcellus (c). Newmen succeeded, but the measures werestill the same.
XCVI. The first intelligence of a re-volt, that reached the ear of Vitellius,was that of the third legion in lllyricum.The account was sent by Aponius Satur-ninus, before that officer had formed hisresolution to join Vespasian. His di­spatches, made up in the first tumult ofsurprise, did not state the whole of themischief. The ^creatures of the court, to
vol. v. z N







OCR Output








OP TACITUS. 127





ciaris was sent to dislodge them... Driven B ° ° kfrom their fastness, they betook themselvesto the woods, or fled to their lurking-placeswhile the Germans and Rhaetians hungupon them in their flight. Several thou­sands were put to the sword, or sold toslavery. Having ravaged the country,and laid a scene of desolation, the armymarched to the siege of Aventicum (b), thecapital city of the Helvetians. The in­habitants sent their deputies, offeringto surrender at discretion. Their sub­mission was accepted. Julius Alpinus,one of the leading chiefs, charged withbeing the author of the war, was byorder of Caecina publicly executed. Therest were left to the mercy or resentmentof Vitellius.
LXIX. The Helvetians sent their am­bassadors to the new emperor; but whichwas most implacable, he or his army, it isdifficult to decide. The soldiers clamouredfor the utter destruction of the whole race.They brandished their arms in the face ofthe ambassadors, and threatened blowsand brutal violence. Vitellius showed no







OCR Output








258 THE HISTORY





the effusion of Roman blood, shall bemy glory. By this conduct let posterityjudge of Otho. I restore to Vitellius" his brother, his wife and children. I" want no revenge, I seek no lenitives to" sooth calamity. Others have held the" sovereign power longer than I have" done ; with equal calmness no man has" resigned it. Can I give to the edge of" the sword so many gallant soldiers ? Can" I see the armies of Rome devoted to* mutual slaughter, and for ever cut off" from their country ? It is enough for me," that in my cause you are ready to shed" your blood. Let that generous zeal" attend me to my grave. I thank you" for it: but you must still survive to serve" the commonwealth. For this great end,*' let us agree to remove all obstacles; I" will be no bar to your preservation; nor" will you attempt to frustrate my reso-" lution. When death approaches, to lin-" ger in vain discourse is the sign of" a little spirit. The temper, with whichu I meet my fate, will be seen and known" by this circumstance: I complain of no" man. He who, in his last moments, can







OCR Output








OF TACITUS. 211





Other side of the Alps he had left hiscruelty and love of plunder. His dressgave offence to the colonics through whichhe passed. His mantle, decorated withvarious colours, passed for a mark of ar­rogance ; and his drawers (a), used onlyby savage nations* did not agree with theideas of a Roman citizen. Besides this,the splendid appearance of his wife, Salo-nina, mounted on a superb horse, adornedwith purple ornaments, though in itself amatter of no importance, and certainly in­jurious to no person whatever, was held tobe a public insult Such is the nature ofthe human mind, disposed at all times tobehold with jealousy the sudden elevationof new men, and to demand, that he,who has been known in a humble station,should know how to rise in the worldwith temper and modest dignity. Caecinapassed the Po, and by negotiation andartful promises endeavoured to seduce theleaders of Otho's party. The like insi­dious game was played against himself.Both sides talked of peace and concord,but they amused each other with words ofspecious sound, importing nothing. Tired


p2







OCR Output








370 NOTES ON THE


hands of two families, that the secret of the art mightnot transpire.
(d) This circumstance is mentioned by Pliny in hisNatural History. Celebre fanwn halet Veneris Paphos,in cujus quandum aram non impluit. Pliny, lib. ii.8. 98.
(e) The worship paid to Venus, as the parent of thewhole animal creation, was of antient date, and knownfor ages to the Assyrians. The rude state of sculpturemay, perhaps, account for the representation of thegoddess, as described by Tacitus. Clemens of Alexan­dria makes that observation. The statuary, he says,had not the-skill to give the elegance of symmetry andproportion: he therefore left the form and delicacy ofVenus to the imagination. As Ovid says, si qua latent?meliora putat.
Section IV.(a) The rapid success of Vespasian had well nighended the Jewish war. Jerusalem was the only placethat held out. See the Appendix' to Annals, xvi. s. 10}and the Appendix to Hist. v. s. 3.
Section VI.
(a) The Parthians were originally a people from Scy>-thia: in process of time, when their empire grew instrength, they became the grand rivals of the Romans. Theoverthrow of Crassus is well known. Both nations expe-irienced alternate disasters in the course of their variouswars. See Annals, xv. s. 24 and 27.
(b) The last civil war was that between Vindex andNero. See Appendix to Annals, xvi. s. 12.
(c) It will be proper, in this place, to state the namesof the Roman legions, and the places where they were







OCR Output








1% THE HISTORY





book pleased with the novelty of freedom, andthe resumption of their legislative autho­rity. The Roman knights caught theflame of liberty. Honest men began toentertain hopes of the constitution. Suchas stood connected with families of credit,and the various clients and freedmen ofillustrious men driven into exile, were allerect with expectation of better times.The inferior populace, who loitered awaytheir time in the theatre and the circus;the slaves of abandoned characters, andthe sycophant crew, who, without sub­stance of their own, had been pamperedby the vices of Nero ; all of that descrip­tion stood covered with astonishment, yetpanting for news, and eagerly swallowingthe rumour of the day.
V. The praetorian guards (a) had been,by habit and the obligation of their oath,always devoted to the imperial family.Their revolt from Nero was not so muchtheir own inclination as the managementof their leaders. Acting without principle,they now were ready for new commotions.The promise of a donative in the name of


6







OCR Output








232 THE HISTORY


BOOKU.


A.U. C
822.
A.D.
69.


Otho ought to play. He argued as fol­lows :


XXXII. " The whole collected forceof Vitellius is now in Italy: the re?sources which he has left behind him areinconsiderable. From Gaul he has no­thing to expect. The spirit of thatfierce and turbulent people is still inagitation; and while Germany, withhostile numbers, is ever ready to invadethe Roman provinces, the banks of theRhine cannot be left naked and de­fenceless. The legions in Britain havethe natives on their hands, and theyare divided by the sea. Spain cannotboast of resources. The province ofNarbon Gaul has been harassed byOtho's fleet, and is still covered withconsternation. The part of Italy whichlies beyond the Po is shut in by theAlps, deprived of all relief by sea, andthe armies that passed that way havemade the whole country a scene of de-isolation. There is no place from whichVitellius can hope to be supplied withgrain; and he who wants provisions, in







OCR Output








OF TACITUS. 161





have so far lost their effect, that, unless it bookbe a time of public distress, they passaway unheeded and forgotten. Amidstthe omens, which seemed to threaten im­pending danger, an inundation of the Ti­ber was the most alarming. The watersswelled above their banks, and overflowedthe adjacent country. The Sublician bridgewas carried away by the flood; and theruins, that fell in, obstructing the courseof the river, the torrent was driven backwith such impetuous violence, that notonly the level parts of the city, but eventhe higher grounds, were covered with ageneral deluge (&). The people in thestreets were swallowed up, and numberswere drowned in their shops, and in theirbeds. The corn in the public granarieswas destroyed; a famine ensued, and thecommon people were reduced to the lastdistress. The waters, that lay for sometime in the streets of Rome, sapped thefoundation of several insulated houses;and when the flood fell back into its chan­nel, the superstructure tumbled to theground. This disaster was no sooner over,than a new occurrence spread a generalvol. v. M







OCR Output








OF TACITUS. 43


fortunes consisted of little more than the bookutensils of luxury, vice, and folly. To en- *—*-—'force a resumption of all enormous grants, sm.
1 n A. IX.
a court of commissioners was established, ««.consisting of thirty Human knights. Thistribunal, odious on account of its novelty,and still more so for its number of officers,and the spirit of cabal that prevailed inevery part of the business, was found vexa­tious and oppressive. The auctioneerplanted his staff in every street; the pub­lic crier was heard; sales and confiscationswere seen; a general ferment spreadthrough the city. And yet this scene ofdistress was beheld with pleasure. Themen who had been pillaged by Nero, sawthe minions of that emperor reduced to alevel with themselves. About the sametime several tribunes were discharged fromthe service. In that number were An-toniusTaurus and Antonius Naso, both ofthe praetorian guards ; vEmilius Pacensis,from the city cohorts, and Julius Fronto,from the night-watch. But this, so farfrom being a remedy, served only to alarmand irritate the rest of the officers. Theyconcluded that all were equally suspected,







OCR Output








38 ' THE HISTORY





book with the apathy of a man who deserved toreign, but did not desire it. The next con­sideration was, in what place the adoptionshould be announced; in the forum beforean assembly of the people, in the senate,or in the camp. The latter was thoughtmost eligible: the army would feel the com­pliment; the affections of the soldiers,though of little value if purchased bybribery and low intrigue, are, notwith­standing, when they are gained by fairand honourable means, always of moment,and never to be neglected. Meanwhile,the populace rushing in crowds from everyquarter, surrounded the palace, burningwith impatience for the important news,and growing still more eager in propor­tion to the delay of the profound poli­ticians, who affected an air of mystery,when the secret had already transpired.
XVIII. On the fourth of the ides ofJanuary the weather was uncommonlytempestuous, accompanied with heavyrains, thunder and lightning, and all theuproar of the elements, which usuallyalarms the superstition of the multitude.







OCR Output








326 THE HISTORY





book cession was closed by four^and-thirtycohorts, distinguished by the arms andhabits of their respective nations. Theprefects of the camp, the tribunes, andprincipal centurions, arrayed in white,preceded their several eagles. The restof the officers marched at the head oftheir companies. The blaze of arms andrich apparel added splendour to the scene,The burnished collars of the commonmen, and the trappings of the horses, glit­tered to the eye, while the whole presenteda magnificent spectacle, worthy of a bet­ter emperor. In this manner Vitelliusproceeded to the capitol, and there, em­bracing his mother (o), saluted her by thename of Augusta.


3*


XC. On the following day, Vitelliusdelivered a public harangue, and spoke ofhimself in magnificent terms, as if he hadfor his audience the senate and people of•a foreign city. He assumed the virtuesof industry and temperance; never con­sidering, that he was in the hearing ofmen who had seen his vices, and thatevery part of Italy, through which he had







OCR Output








148 THE HISTORY





book centurions, who exerted themselves on theoccasion, suffered in like manner. Thesoldiers seized their arms; they mountedtheir horses, and, entering the city swordin hand, rushed in a body to the imperialpalace.
LXXXI. Otiio was engaged at a grandentertainment, to which he had invited themost distinguished of both sexes. A sud­den terror seized the whole company. Thecause was unknown. Was it an accidentalfray among the soldiers, or the perfidy ofthe emperor? What was to be done?Should they stay and perish together ? orwas it more advisable to disperse, and flydifferent ways ? In the hurry and agita­tion no one could decide. They madea show of resolution : their courage failed ;they stood covered with consternation,and, with their eyes fixed on Otho, en­deavoured to peruse his countenance.The usual fate of suspicious minds at­tended them all. They were afraid . ofOtho, and he stood trembling for him­self. He trembled also for the senate,and thought of their danger no less than







OCR Output








46 THE HISTORY





book luxury, unknown to private families.They nattered their master's taste; theypainted to him in lively colours the joys ofNero's court, and the perpetual round ofgay delights in which he had passed hisdays; they represented to him adulterywithout control, the choice of wives andconcubines, and scenes of revelry scarce­ly known to Asiatic princes. These,if he dared nobly, they represented to himas his own ; if he remained inactive, as theprize of others. The judicial astrologersadded a spur to inflame his ardour. Theyannounced great events, and to Otho ayear of glory. Society has, perhaps, neverknown a more dangerous pest than thisrace of impostors, who have been everready, with vile infusions, to poison thehearts of princes, and to stimulate am­bition to its ruin ; a set of perfidious men,proscribed by law, and yet, in defiance ofall law, cherished in such a city as Rome.
It was with this crew of fortune-tellersthat Poppaea held consultations when sheaspired to the imperial bed. It happenedthat one of these pretenders to praeterna­







OCR Output








10 THE HISTORY





book exile; wives followed the fortune of theirhusbands; relations stood forth in thecause of their unhappy khidred ; sons ap­peared in defence of their fathers ; slaveson the rack gave proofs of their fidelity;eminent citizens, under the hard hand ofoppression, were reduced to want andmisery, and, even in that distress, re­tained an unconquered spirit. We shallsee others firm to the last, and, intheir deaths, nothing.inferior to the ap­plauded characters of antiquity. In ad­dition to the misfortunes usual in. thecourse of human transactions, we shallsee the earth teeming with prodigies, thesky overcast with omens, thunder rollingwith dreadful denunciation, and a varietyof prognostics, sometimes auspicious, oftenbig with terror, occasionally uncertain,dark, equivocal, frequently direct andmanifest. In a word, the gods never gavesuch terrible instructions, nor, by, theslaughter of armies, made it so clear andevident, that, instead of extending pro­tection (a) to the empire, it was theirawful pleasure to let fall their vengeanceon the crimes of an offending people. .







OCR Output








318 THE HISTORY





book juncture, Aponius Saturninus (a), gover­nor of Maesia, conceived the design ofperpetrating a barbarous murder. Undercolour of public zeal, but with malicefestering at his heart, he dispatched acenturion to murder Tertius Julianus,who commanded the seventh legion. Thatofficer had timely notice. He providedhimself with guides, who knew the courseof the country, and escaped through de­vious tracks as far as Mount Haemus.From that time, he took no part in thecivil war. He affected often to be on thepoint of setting out to join Vespasian;but delayed his journey, at times seemingeager to depart, then doubting, hesita­ting, waiting for intelligence, and, du­ring the whole war, resolving withoutdecision.
LXXXVI. In Pannonia, the thir­teenth legion, and the seventh, called theGalbian, embraced the interest of Ves­pasian. They still remembered, with in­dignation, their defeat at Bedriacum, andthe influence of Antonius Primus proveda powerful instigation. That officer, con­







OCR Output








94' THE HISTORY





iook " tellius are now the competitors : and forthem, or ekher of them, shall the peo­ple crowd to the temples ? Must theypray for a tyrant to reign over them ?" Vows, in such a cause, were impious," since, in a war between two detestable" rivals, he, who conquers, will be armed" with power to commit still greater crimes,u and prove himself the worst/1 Such werethe reasonings of the people. Some, whosaw at a distance, fixed their eyes onVespasian, and the .armies in the East.They foresaw new commotions in that partof the world, and dreaded the calamitiesof another war. Vespasian, they agreed,was in every respect superior to the twochiefs, who now convulsed the state; buteven his character (b) was rather proble­matical. The truth is, of all the princes,who to his time reigned at Rome, he wasthe only one, whom power reformed, andmade a better man.
LI. That the revolt under Vitellius maybe seen in its true light, it will be necessaryto state the causes that produced it. Itherefore go back to the origin, of that







OCR Output








n THE HISTORY


BOOKI.


A. U. C.822.AD.
89:


zen, he plunders without remorse; heseizes our property, as if we were hisslaves; and he despises us as the ser­vants of another master. His housealone (c) contains wealth sufficient todischarge the donative every day pro­mised, but promised merely to insultyou.
XXXVIII. " That your hopes of bet­ter times may never succeed, Galba hastaken care, by his choice of a successor,to entail upon you endless misery. Hehas adopted a man from whom you canhave nothing to expect; a man recalledfrom banishment, in his temper darkand gloomy, hardened in avarice, thecounterpart of the emperor himself.You remember, my fellow soldiers, theday on which that adoption was made ;a day deformed with storms and tem­pests, when the warring elements an­nounced the awful displeasure of thegods. The senate and the people arenow of one mind. They depend uponyour valour. It is your generous ardourthat must give vigour and energy to ourpresent enterprise. Without your aid







OCR Output








224 THE HISTORY





book army, at all times more disposed to mit*tiny than to face the enemy. The mennow saw their error, and began to submitto authority. Nor was this the case withregard to Caecina only : the same reforma­tion showed itself in the camp of FabiusValens, who was now advanced as far asTicinum (a). The soldiers under his com­mand were taught, by the late event, nolonger to despise the enemy. To retrievethe honour of the army, they now werewilling to behave with due submission totheir general. They had been, not longbefore, guilty of a bold and dangerous tu­mult, of which, at the-exact point of time,no notice could be taken, without break­ing the thread of the narrative, and de­parting too much from the transactionsunder Caecina.
It ma}' now be proper to give an ac­count of that insurrection. The readerwill remember, that, in the war betweenNero and Vindex, the cohorts of the Ba-tavian nation separated from the four.1teenth legion, then on its way to Britain;and having heard, in the city of the Lin­







OCR Output








OF TACITUS. 221





inconsiderately, fell into a snare. The le­gions flanked them from both wings; thecohorts attacked in front; and the caval­ry, wheeling round with rapidity, chargedin the rear. Suetonius Paulinus still kepthis infantry out of the engagement. Byhis natural temper slow and deliberate, hechose to take his measures with precau­tion, rather than hazard a sudden conflict,and owe his success to the chance of war.He ordered the hollows to be filled up, theground to be cleared, and his ranks to beextended; wisely judging that it wouldthen be time to think of victory, when hehad taken care not to be conquered.During this delay the Vitellians seized theopportunity to shift their ground. Theybetook themselves to the adjacent vine­yards, thick with interwoven branches,and, by consequence, difficult of access.Having there, and in a wood that lay conti­guous, found a safe retreat, they recoveredtheir courage, and sallied out to attackthe praetorian cavalry. The best andbravest officers of that corps were cut topieces. Epiphanes (a), the eastern king,who in support of Otho's cause faced







OCR Output








74 THE HISTORY


book plifte stood astonished at the scene of*—\r—> wild confusion, the evil-minded saw with
A. U C'
822. * pleasure that the regulars were offended,«9. and in that sentiment found a new motiveto increase the disorder. , . . yr.i i


XXXIX. The number of the rebelsincreased every moment, and their noiseand clamour reached the city of Rome.Piso did not think it advisable toproceed to the camp. He met Gaiba,who had left the palace, on his way tothe forum. Marius Celsus had alreadybrought alarming tidings. Some advisedthe emperor to return to his palace; otherswere for taking possession of the capitol,and the major part for proceeding directlyto the tribunal of public harangues : num­bers gave their advice, for no better rea­son than to clash with the opinions ofothers; and, in the distraction of jarringcounsels, the misfortune was, that whatought to have occurred first, was seen toolate. They decided when the opportunitywas lost. We are told that Laco, withoutthe privity of Galba, formed a designagainst the life of Vinius. The murder of







OCR Output








248 THE HISTORY





book founding one another with noise and up­roar. Some, still shifting their ground,advanced to the front line; others fell intothe rear; none remaining in one spot, butshifting their ground, as fear or couragehappened to prompt them.
XLII. The Othonians had scarce re­covered from their surprise, when a sud­den incident diffused a general joyj but ajoy that tended to lull them into security,and relax their courage into languor andstupid amazement. A report was spread,that the forces of Vitellius had abandonedhis cause: but from what quarter it tookits origin; whether by design or chance (a);from the emissaries of the Vitellians, orthe adverse party, has never been ex­plained. The effect on the minds of theOthonians, was altogether extraordinary.Laying aside all thoughts of coming to'action, they saluted the opposite army,who stood astonished, and returned a deepand hollow murmur. Those in Otho's ranks,who did not know the cause of the civilityshown by their friends, thought themselvesbetrayed. In that moment the Vitellians







OCR Output








82 THE HISTORY


book the. usual policy of princes, who think,v—v—' by punishing the malefactors of a formerA822.c' reign, that they establish a precedent, and,69.' by the terrors of future vengeance, effec­tually secure themselves.
XLV. Another senate and anotherpeople seemed now to be in possession ofRome. All pressed forward to the camp.You would have thought it a race of ser­vility, in which every man endeavoured tooutstrip his fellow-citizens, and be the firstto pay his court. They joined in revilingthe name of Galba, and all applauded theconduct of the soldiers. They throngedround Otho, fawning to kiss his hand, and,in proportion to their want of sincerity,playing the farce with overacted zeal.Otho was not deficient in the mummeryof thanks and gratitude. Attentive to all,and gracious to individuals, he took careat the same time, by his looks and actions,to restrain the soldiers, who, by the fero-eity of their looks, seemed to threatenfarther mischief. Marius Celsus, the con­sul elect, was the object of their venge­ance. He had been the friend of Galba,







OCR Output








'DP TACITUS. 17





means clear, nor had the emperor issued bookhis orders. The general opinion was, thatCapito, howeveT branded with avarice,rapacity, and other vices, had not addedto his crimes the guilt of rebellion; butthat the authors of his destruction, havingfirst endeavoured to draw him into theirown designs, combined to execute on aninnocent victim the vengeance due totheir own iniquity.
Galba, with his usual facility, or, per­haps, wishing to avoid the danger of aninquiry into what could not be recalled,thought it prudent to give his sanction tothe acts of his officers, however unjust andcruel. Both executions were, notwith­standing, the subject of public clamour;the usual fate of all unpopular princes :their actions, when the current of thetimes is set against them, are taken in thegross, and, whether good or evil, con­demned without distinction. Venality andcorruption were now fully established.The emperor's freedmen engrossed thewhole power of the state, and every thingwas put up to sale. Even the slaves, in
vot. v. c







OCR Output








22 THE HISTORY





book cumstance proved the best expedient toprevent a combination of the military.They could neither act with a spirit ofuniOn, nor, by communicating their vices,spread a general infection through thelegions that lay remote from each other.
X. The East was hitherto free fromcommotion. Licinius Mucianus govern­ed the province of Syria with four le­gions under his command. He was anofficer of experience, distinguished, in theearly parts of his life, by alternate vicissi­tudes of good and evil fortune. In hisyouth the favour of the great was the ob­ject of his ambition, and in that pursuithe wasted his fortune. His circumstancesgrowing desperate, and a storm impendingfrom the displeasure of Claudius, he re­tired into Asia, and there lived in obscu­rity, as little removed from the state andcondition of a real exile, as he was after­wards from the splendour of imperial for­tune. He united in his character a rareand wonderful mixture of repugnant qua­lities. He was affable and arrogant; ad­dicted to pleasure, and by fits and starts







OCR Output








202 THfe HISTORY





book being made, Classicus marched in questof the enemy, at the head of twelve troopsof horse, and a select body from the co­horts. To these were added the Liguriancohort, which had been usually quarteredat Forojulium, and five hundred men fromParinonia, not yet ranged in -companiesunder distinct and regular colours. Nei­ther side declined an engagement. Thedisposition made by Otho's officers was asfollows: A body of marines, intermixedwith the peasantry, took post on the heightsnear the sea. The level space betweenthe hills and the coast was occupied bythe praetorian soldiers ; and, to supportthem, the fleet stood in close to the shore,drawn up in order of battle, and present­ing a formidable line. The strength ofthe Vitellians, consisting in cavalry,' wasstationed in front; the infantry close em­bodied in their rear, and their Alpinemountaineers on the ridge of the neigh­bouring hills. The Treverian squadronsbegan the attack with less skill than cou­rage. The veterans of Otho's army re­ceived the attack in front, while their







OCR Output








OF TACITUS. 309





body followed their example. They press­ed forward in crowds, calling him by thename of Caesar, styling him Augustus, andconferring every other title of imperialgrandeur. Vespasian balanced no longer.His fears subsided, and he now resolved topursue the road of ambition. Even in thistide of his affairs he still preserved the equaltenour of his mind, free from arrogance,and such in his manners as he had alwaysbeen. The new man never appeared.The change, as was natural, dazzled hisimagination; but he took time to allay thehurry of his spirits, and then calmly ad­dressed the men in the .language of a sol­dier. He was heard with shouts of ap­plause. Mucianus waited for this event.On the first intelligence, he declared forVespasian, and the soldiers with alacritytook the oath of fidelity to the new empe­ror- That business over, Mucianus wentto the theatre of Antioch, where the inha­bitants were used to hold their public de­bates. He found a crowded meeting, andwas received with acclamations.
He harangued the multitude, and his







OCR Output








70 THU HISTORY





book " We must live or perish together. Thereis no alternative. The humanity ofGalba is well known to us all. Perhaps,even while I speak, he has pronounced" our doom. To yield to the advice of" his friends, will be an easy task to him," who without a request, of his own free" will, in cold blood, could give to the" edge of the sword so many thousand in-" nocent soldiers, all destroyed in one" inhuman massacre. My heart recoils" with horror, when I reflect on the dis-" astrous day when he made his public" entry into the city. After receiving the" submission of the soldiers* with un-" heard-of treachery he ordered the whole" body to be decimated (a); and, in the" view of the people, exhibited a scene of" blood and horror. These are the exploits" of Galba, and this his only victory. With" these inauspicious omens he entered the" city of Rome;—and what has been since" the glory of his reign ? Obultronius Sa-" binus and Cornelius Marcellus have" been murdered in Spain; Betuus Chilo" in Gaul; Fonteius Capito in Germany ;" and Clodius Macer in Africa. Add to







OCR Output








OF TACITUS. 217





They desired to be led against the enemy, bookTheir impatience rose to a pitch littleshort of sedition. It was with difficultythat Galius appeased the tumult. Hemade halt at Bedriacum (a), a village si­tuated between Verona and Cremona, andunhappily famous for the slaughter of twoRoman armies. About the same time theOthonians gained a second advantage overthe enemy. Marti us Macer fought withsuccess near Cremona. That officer, withthe spirit of enterprise that distinguishedhim, embarked the gladiators on the Po,and, making a sudden descent on the op­posite bank, fell with fury on the auxilia­ries of Vitellius. All who attempted tomake head against him were put to thesword; the rest fled with precipitation toCremona. Macer was not willing to loseby rashness the fruit of his victory. Heknew that, by the arrival of fresh forces,the fortune of the day might be changed,and, for that reason, recalled his men fromthe pursuit. This measure spread a generral discontent amongst the soldiers. Itwas the misfortune of Otho's party to beon all occasions infected with suspicion,







OCR Output








OF TACITUS. S9





In antient times this phenomenon would bookhave been sufficient (a) to dissolve all pub­lic assemblies: but Galba was not to bedeterred from his purpose. He proceededto the camp, regardless of prodigies, whichhe considered as the effect of naturalcauses; or, it may be, that what is fixedby fate cannot by human prudence beavoided. A vast conflux of soldiers as­sembled in the camp. Galba addressedthem in a short speech, such as becomesthe imperial dignity. He told them that,in conformity to the example of Augustus,and the practice of the army, where eachsoldier chooses his companion in war (b),he bad adopted Piso for his son. Fearingthat his silence on the subject of the Ger­man revolt might tend to magnify thedanger, he added, that the fourth andeighteenth legions were, by the artifice ofa few factious leaders, incited to tumultand disorder; but their violence went nofurther than words, and he had no doubtbut they would soon be sensible of theirerror. Such .was his plain and manly lan­guage. He added no flattering expressions,no soothing hopes of a donative. The







OCR Output








252 THE HISTORY





book transferring to others their own guilt andinfamy. Titianus and Celsus owed theirsafety to the darkness of the night. Theydid not venture into the camp, till thesentinels were stationed at their posts, andthe tumult was appeased by the entrea­ties, the advice, and authority of AnniusGallus, who had the address to make themen sensible of the folly and madness ofadding to the havoc of the field by theirown destructive fury. Whether the warwas at an end, or to be once more renewedwith vigour, he represented, in either case,the necessity of union among themselves.A face of sorow and dejection covered thecamp. All were hushed in silence; allbut the praetorians, who still grumbleddiscontent, asserting that they were de­feated by treachery, not by the valour ofthe enemy. " The Vitellians, they said," could not boast of a cheap victory." Their cavalry was routed, and one of" their legions lost their eagle. Otho still" survived, and the troops beyond the Po" were ready to advance; the legions from" Maesia were on their march; and a con-" siderable part of the army, detained at







OCR Output








112 THE HISTORY





book to turn the scale in favour of whateverparty they espoused. Nonius, Donatius,Romilius, and Calpurnius, the four centu­rions already mentioned, were, by orderof Vitellius, hurried to execution. Theyhad remained steady in their duty to theirprince; and fidelity is a crime which menin open rebellion never pardon. ValeriusAsiaticus, the governor of Belgic Gaul, towhom, in a short time after, Vitellius gavehis daughter in marriage'; and JuniusBlaesus, who presided in the province ofLyons, and had under his command theItalic legion (a), and the body of horsecalled the Taurinian cavalry (Z>), went overto the party of the new emperor. Theforces in Rhaetia were not long in suspense,and the legions in Britain declared, with­out hesitation, in favour of Vitellius.
LX. Britain was, at that time, go­verned by Trebellius Maximus (a); a man,for his avarice and sordid practices, de­spised and hated by the army. Betweenhim and Roscius Caelius, who command­ed the twentieth legion, there had been along subsisting quarrel, renewed of late


8







OCR Output








OF TACITUS. 233


A. U. C8W.A. D.


" a short time will want an army. The book" Germans, a brave and warlike people, v-IJ^-/" constitute the strength and bulwark of" the Vitellian party: protract the war," and will they be able to go through a" summer campaign? The change of" soil, and the heat of the climate, will" relax their vigour. The war, that by" strenuous efforts may be pushed to a" prosperous issue, grows languid when" drawn into length, and in a state of te-" dious suspense whole armies have moul-" dered away.
" On the other hand, Otho's party is in" no want of supplies; their friends arc" firm, and great resources are still in re-" serve. Pannonia, Maesia, Dalmatia, and" the eastern provinces, are able to send'.' numerous armies into the field. All•. Italy declares for Otho : Rome, the ca--' pital of the empire, is still in his posses-" sion; and, above all, he has on his side" the senate and the Roman people; illus-" trious names, and always of the first im-" portance, though their glory in some con-" junctures has been eclipsed. -There is still







OCR Output








240 THE HISTORY





book person worthy of the succession, or to re­fer that matter to the choice of the senate.This, we are told, was the considerationthat weighed with Otho's generals, whenthey proposed to draw the war into length,and, in particular, that Paulinus actedwith that motive* He was the first andmost distinguished of the consular rank,the highest in military reputation, and hisconduct in Britain (a) had given jwiperiorlustre to his name. But though it may bereasonable to admit, that a few, in thatjuncture, had the public good at heart,and wished to see two vile competitors,the most abandoned of mankind, post­poned to a virtuous prince; it is, notwith­standing, highly improbable that Paulinus,a man of experience and consummate un­derstanding, should, in an age so corruptand profligate, amuse himself with hopesof finding one spark of virtue. He knewthe madness of the times; and could heexpect, that the same infatuated mui-titude, whose wickedness had kindled theflame of war, would on a sudden preferthe blessings of peace, and consent, forthe repose of the world, to sheath the de­







OCR Output








OF TACITUS. 181





select friends. The conjuncture was alarm­ing, and to choose among difficulties wasall that was left. " If he proceeded on his" way to Rome, the homage intended for" a prince now no more, would have no" merit with his successor; and to remain" a hostage in the custody of Otho, or Vi-" tellius, would, most probably, be his" lot. On the other hand, if he returnedM to Judaea, that cold indifference would" give umbrage to the conqueror; and yet," while the issue of the war Mas still un-" certain, the conduct of a young man" would admit of alleviating circumstances" in the opinion of the prince whom" Vespasian should think proper to join." Above all, it was possible that Ves-" pasian might declare himself a can-" didate: in that case, petty offences" would be of little consequence, when all" were to be involved in a general war."
II. After balancing the motives onevery side, and fluctuating for some timebetween opposite passions, hope, at length,prevailed, and Titus returned to Judeea.A change so sudden was by some impu-







OCR Output








332 NOTES ON THE


See Cicero to the same effect, De Nat. Deorum^lib. iii. s. 32.
Section IV.
(a) Galba, who was not arrived from Spain.
Section V.
(a) The prsetorian guards had shown themselves, atall times, firmly attached to the Caesarean family.
(i) For an account of Nymphidius and his rash am­bition, sec the Appendix to the Sixteenth Book of theAnnals.
(c) The rigour with which Galba supported and en­forced military discipline, is stated by Suetonius, inGalba, s. vu
Section VI.
(a) For Titus Vinius and Cornelius Laco, see the Ap­pendix to the Sixteenth Book of the Annals.
(b) For Galba's journey from Spain, the fate of Cin-gonius Varro, and Petronius Terpilianus, see Appendixto Annals, xvi.; and this book, s. xxxvii.
(c) See also in the same Appendix, an account of theslaughter committed near the gates of Rome by Galba'sorder; and this book, s. xxxvii.
(d) Nero had formed a new legion composed of mendraughted from the marines. See this book, s. xxxi.
(e) The forces from Britain and Germany, whichNero had sent forward on a wild expedition to thestraits of the Caspian Sea, were all recalled to quell theinsurrection of Vindex in Gaul.
{/) See the Appendix to Annals, xvi.
(g) For the rebellion in Gaul, excited by the enter­prising spirit and undaunted courage of Vindex, seeAppendix to Annals, xvi.







OCR Output








32 THE HISTORY





book « your own family the lustre of the Sul-pician and Lutatian name. I now ad­dress you in a more exalted character.It is the emperor of Rome that speaks." Called by the consent of gods and men*' to that high station, I am now deter-" mined in my choice by your rare ac-" complishments, and the love I feel for" my country. I invite you to the impe-" rial dignity ; that dignity for which our" ancestors led armies to the field, and" which I myself obtained in battle." Without your stir I now make to you a" voluntary offer. For this proceeding I** have before me the example of Augus-" tus, who associated to himself, first his** sister's son Marcellus, and then Agrippa" his son-in-law, his grandsons afterwards," and, finally, Tiberius, the son of his" wife. Augustus, indeed, looked for an" heir in his own family; I choose in the" bosom of the commonwealth. If, upon** such an occasion, I could listen to pri-" vate affection, I have a numerous train'* of relations, and I have companions in" war. But it was not from motives of** pride that I accepted the sovereignty of







OCR Output













OCR Output








OP TACITUS. 287





titled to an honourable dismission. Theydelivered up their arms to the tribunes;but, being informed that Vespasian wasin motion, they assembled again, andproved the best support of the Flaviancause. The first legion of marines wasordered into Spain, that in repose and in­dolence their spirit might evaporate. Theseventh and eleventh returned to their oldwinter quarters. For the thirteenth em­ployment was found in the building of twoamphitheatres; one at Cremona, and theother at Bononia. In the former Caecinawas preparing to exhibit a spectacle ofgladiators, and Valens in the latter; bothwishing to gratify the taste of their master,whom, in the midst of arduous affairs, no­thing could wean from his habitual plea­sures.
LXVIII. Br these measures the van­quished party was sufficiently weakened ;but the spirit of the conquerors could notlong endure a state of tranquillity. Aquarrel broke out, in its origin slight andridiculous, but attended with conse­quences that kindled the flame of war







OCR Output








SECOND BOOK: OP THE HISTORY, 383


(b) For the Graian Alps, see the Geographical Tableat the end of the Eighth Volume.
Section LXIX.(a) The foreign war was with the Batavians, underCivilis; the domestic,, with Vespasian.
Section LXX,(a) .This was the 24th of May.
Section LXXI.
(a) Valens and Csecina entered on thair joint consul­ship on the kalends of November. See Hist. i. s. 77,and note (a).
(£) Martius Macer commanded Otho's gladiators onthe banks of the Po. This book, s. S3.
Section LXXII.
(a) Sulpicius Camerinus and his son were put todeath by order of Helius, Nero's freedman, A. U. C.820. See the Appendix to Annals, xvi. s. 9.
(b) The slaves were condemned to suffer death on aeross.
Section LXXIV.
(p) Vespasian's two sons, Titus and Domkian,
Section LXXV.
-(a) Furius Camillus Scribonianus raised a rebellionin Dalmatia, in the reign of Claudius, and was soonafter slain, A. U. C. 795.
Section LXXVI.
(a) Corbulo was put to death by Nero. See Appendixto Annals, xvi. s. 11,







OCR Output








OF TACITUS. 277





as was generally believed, endeavoured by bookbribery to supplant him. His ambitionaimed at the consulship, and would fainhave risen on the ruins of an Othonianofficer. The attempt was afterwards ob­jected to him in open senate. The empe­ror, however, withstood his solicitations,but, in time, raised hjm (a) to that high of­fice, without the guilt of bribery or murder.Trachalus was attacked by his enemies,but owed his safety to the protection ofGaleria, the wife of Vitellius.
I/XI. Amidst the dangers that invol­ved the first men of the age, it may bethought beneath the dignity of history torelate the wild adventure of one Mariccus,a Boian by birth, and sprung from thedregs of the people. This man, howevermean his condition, had the presumptionto mix his name with men who fought forthe empire of the world. In a fit of en­thusiasm, pretending to have preterna­tural lights, he called himself the tutelarDeity of Gaul, and, in the character of agod, dared to defy the Roman arms. Heplayed the impostor so well, that he was







OCR Output








76 THE HISTORY





book Thch* eyes watched every motion, andtheir ears caught every sound. The in­terval was big with terror; it was neithera tumult, nor a settled calm, but ratherthe stillness of fear, or smothered rage,such as often precedes some dreadful ca­lamity. Otho was still in the camp. Hereceived intelligence that the populace hadrecourse to arras, and thereupon orderedhis troops to push forward with rapidity,and prevent the impending danger. At hiscommand the Roman soldiers, as if march­ing to dethrone an eastern'monarch, aVologeses, or a Pacorus, and not theirown lawful sovereign, advanced with im­petuous fury to imbrue their hands in theblood of an old man, naked and disarmed.They entered the city; they dispersed thecommon people; they spurred their horsesat full speed, and, rushing into the forumsword in hand, trampled the senators underfoot. The sight of the capitol made npimpression ; the temples, sanctified by thereligion of ages, could not restrain theirfury ; for the majesty of former princesthey had no respect, and of those whowere to succeed, no kind of dread. They







OCR Output








250 THE HISTORY





book and the high road, two legions met infierce encounter; on the part of Vitellius,the one-and-twentieth, famed for its va­lour, and commonly known by the nameof Rapax (a); on the side of Otho, thefirst legion, entitled Adjutrix, whichhad never been in action, and now pantedfor an opportunity to flesh their maidenswords. Their first attack was not to beresisted. They broke through the ranksof the one-and-twentieth, and carried offtheir eagle. Roused by this disgrace, theVitellians added rage to bravery, and boredown all before them. Orphidius Benig-nus, who commanded Otho's legion, fellin the conflict. His men were driven backwith great slaughter, and the loss of se­veral standards. In another part of thefield, the thirteenth legion was routed bythe fifth, and the fourteenth was hemmedin by superior numbers. Otho's generalshad long since fled the field, while Caecinaand Valens continued to exert themselves,watching every turn of the battle, and sup­porting the ranks in every quarter. Freshforces came to their assistance. The Ba-tavians, under Varus Alphenus, having







OCR Output








close of -day,. $e^f^f9« mouths-were open bqokto bawl for the reverse o4';what they de*-. s^rv-—'sired in the morning, To be ready, with* 822. 'shouts and vopifpratiori, let who will be co.'the reigning prinqe,, has been in, all agesthe zeal of the vulgar. Galba^ in the mean*time, balanced between two opposite opi«nions. Titus Vinius was for his remain*-,ing in the palace. " The slaves," he saidr" might be armed, and all the avenues," secured. The prince should by no." means expose himself to a frantic mob.," Due time should be alloAved for theser" ditious to repent, and for gpod men to." form a plan of union, and .concert their." measures. Crimes succeed rhy shurry" and sudden dispaten: honest counsels." gain vigour, b^.jdejajv Should it be*V thereafter proper to. sally ^orth^ that qxt," pedient wpJLijldf,be,8tiUrin./esecve!;.Jbut if." once hazarded, X^e;e^£or.:wouJd;be;secn»"too late,- Tjbej^riiirce^jiji that.casg, Y9*dd>
"■tew &*]>3WM&<te\wm&i"'


.*■rlft


> 1I w «' 11 ¥1 _ . J . - .J ^ _' Hi *VA •.'> I. 1 i^.l.»







OCR Output








48 THE HISTORY





book was then first imagined, or prepared andsettled long before, cannot now be known.It is, however, certain that Otho had beenin the habit of courting the affections ofthe army, and this, either with a view ofbeing called to the succession, or, if;not,with a design to seize it, by force. Heomitted no opportunity to ingratiate him­self with the common men; on their march,in the lines, at their quarters, he made ithis business to converse freely with all; heaccosted the veterans by name, andr re­membering their service under Nero,called them his brother-soldiers; he re­newed his acquaintance with some; heinquired after others, and with his interestand his purse was ready to be their friend.In these discourses he took care to minglecomplaints, and, with half-hinted malig­nity, to glance at Galba. He omittednothing that could fill the vulgar mindwith discontent. The soldiers were pre­pared to receive the worst impressions.Fatiguing marches, provisions ill supplied,and a plan of rigorous discipline latelyrevived, turned their hearts against thereigning prince. They had known gentler







OCR Output








68 The history





book him amidst this standards and eagles> onthe very tribunal where, a little before,stood the golden statue (a) of Galba. Thetribunes and centurions were not sufferedto approach, The common soldiers, hav­ing no kind of confidence in their officers,gave the word to watch the motions of allin any rank or command. The camp re­sounded with shouts and mutual exhor­tations, not with that faint-hearted zealwhich draws from the mob of Rome theirfeeble acclamations, but with one mind,one general impulse, all concurred in sup­port of their new emperor. The praeto­rians were almost frantic with joy. Theyembraced their comrades as they saw themadvancing forward; they clasped theirhands; they led them to the tribunal;they repeated the military oath (b), andadministered it to all. They recommendedthe prince of their own choice to the affec­tions of the men, and the men, in theirturn, to the favour of the prince. Otho,on his part, omitted nothing that couldconciliate the affections of the multitude-He paid his court to the rabble with hishands outstretched, bowing lowly down,


1







OCR Output








54 THE HISTORY





book as had been concerted, was a signal, thatthe conspirators were ready to throw offthe mask, and strike the decisive blow.Otho quitted the temple, having first toldsuch as wondered at his sudden departure,that, being on the point of purchasingcertain farm-houses, not in good repair,he had appointed workmen to examinethe buildings before he concluded his bar­gain. Having made that feigned excuse,he walked off, arm in arm, with his freed-man ; and, passing through the palaceformerly belonging to Tiberius, went di­rectly to the great market-place, calledthe Velabrum, and thence to the goldenmile-pillar (a) near the temple of Saturn.At that place a small party of the prae­torian soldiers, in number not exceedingthree- and-twenty, saluted him emperor.The sight of such an insignificant handfulof men struck him with dismay) but hispartisans drew their swords, and, placinghim in a litter (b), carried him off intriumph. They were joined in their wayby an equal number, some of them ac­complices in the treason ; others, in won­der and astonishment, hurried along by







OCR Output








566 NOTES ON THE


Section LXXXVIII.
(a) See the Geographical Table at the end of theEighth Volume.
Section LXXXIX.
(a) Furius Camillus Scribonianus commanded inDalmatia, A. U. C. 795. Being a man of enterpriseand bold ambition, he induced the soldiers to swearfidelity to himself, and went into open rebellion. Hisletters to the emperor Claudius were written in a toneof menace, requiring him to abdicate, and live a pri­vate citizen. In the mean time, the rebel legions,with the versatility common to the military mind, re­turned to their duty; Scribonianus fled to a small islandof the Adriatic, on the coast of Illyricum, and therewas. seized and put to death by Volaginius, a commonsoldier, on the fifth day of his revolt. Suetonius, inClaudio, s. 35. See Tacitus, Hist. ii. s. 75.
(£) Numa, the founder of religious ceremonies,made the Romans believe, that as long as they preservedthe celestial arms, called Ancilia, which, he said, weresent down by the gods, Rome would prove invincible,and triumph over all her enemies. Accordingly weread in Livy the procession of the Salian priests, onstated days, attending the Ancilia with song and dancethrough the streets of Rome. Salios ccelestia arma,quae Ancilia appellantur,ferre) ac per urlem irecanentetcarmina cum tripudiis solemnique saltatu jusserat Numa.Livy, lib. i. s. 20. This institution was neglected byOtho. Suetonius, Life of Otho, s. 8.







OCR Output








OP TACITtJS. ljjl





h- apt to corrupt the ablest generals, from bookthe present chiefs what was to be expected ?Their own vices would destroy them. Dis­cord, sloth, and luxury would be the ruinof both : one would be undone by the fateof war, and the other by success. Forthese reasons it was agreed to suspend allmilitary operations. Vespasian and Mu-cianus, lately reconciled to each other,concurred in this opinion, which had beenbeforehand adopted by their friends. Menof principle gave their advice with a viewto the public good; others looked for theirown private advantage; and public con­fusion was the only resource of such as, intheir domestic affairs, saw nothing butdistress and ruin. One mind, one spiritpervaded the whole army. Good and evilmotives conspired, and, for different rea­sons, war became the passion of all.
VIII. About this period of time, a re­port that Nero was still alive, and actuallyon his way to the provinces of the East,excited a general alarm through Achaiaand Asia. The accounts of that emperor'sdeath (a) had been so various, that con-







OCR Output








I5t THE HISTORY





book growing rich by the spoils of the public jnor was he to learn, that power obtainedby guilt, is incompatible with a new sy*stem of laws and the rigour of antient man­ners. But still the danger that hung overthe city and the Roman senate, filled himwith anxiety. In this alarming situation,he spoke to the following effect: •
" I come not now, my fellow-soldiers," to excite your zeal for me and the cause" in which we are engaged; much less do" I come to add new ardour to your cou-" rage. Both are too well known: they*' need no incentive. Perhaps some re­straint may be necessary; perhaps the" zeal, that pervades you all, requires a*' degree of moderation. In the late tu-" mult, it was not the love of plunder,*' nor ill-will to any man, or any set of**' men, that urged you on. From those" motives, discord and mutiny have often" broke out in various armies; but upon" your conduct they had no effect. Nor" was there in that transaction any fear of" danger, or so much as a wish to re*** nounce your duty. It was your regard


a







OCR Output








OF TACITUS. 281





labella broke from his place of confine- bookment, to offer himself as a leader to thevanquished party, and, with that view,had endeavoured to seduce to his interestthe cohort stationed at Ostia. In thecourse of the trial, Dolabella heard thewhole of the evidence with undauntedfirmness, never showing the smallest sym­ptom of anxiety : but sentence of con­demnation was pronounced, and he thenfound it too late to sue for mercy. Thebusiness, however, seemed to Flavius Sa-binus of such importance, that he beganto hesitate, till Triaria, the wife of LuciusVitellius, a woman fierce and cruel beyondher sex, advised him not to seek the fame ofclemency by sacrificing the interest of theprince. Sabinus did not want humanity;but, when danger threatened himself, hisresolution failed. With a sudden changeof mind he began to temporise, and, inorder to secure his own personal safety,lent his aid to precipitate the fall of aman, whom he did not dare to protect.
LXIV. By this business Vitellius wasalarmed for himself, and he had motives







OCR Output








378 NOTES ON the:


nerals. Drforme auxtlium, sed per civilia arma eliamseveris dttcibus itsurpatum. See this book, s. xi.
Section XXXVII.
(a) For the conduct of Suetonius Paulinus, and thebrilliant success of his arms in Britain, see Annals, xi v.from section 29 to 40.
Section XXXVIII.
(a) Sal lust has a similar observation: Natura morta-liwnavida imperii, et prceceps ad cxplendam animi<u-pidinem. De-Bell. Jugurth. s. 6. The sequel of thissection, in which the progress of the human passionsand the causes of civil commotion are unfolded, hassome resemblance to a passage in Lucan, which has beenquoted in a former note.
Namque ut opes nimias mundo fortuna subacto
Intulit, &c.
Et cum consulibus turbantes jura tribuni.
• r« # # * • * Pharsal. lib.i. ver.i6o.
Section XXXIX.
(a) *Brotier Observes, that the place to which theOthonians advanced is now called Tor Anzolini, be­tween the rivers Ollio and Dermona.
Section XL.
(a) The Addua (now Adda) falls into the Po, aboutsix miles to the west of Cremona.
{I) The taste for show and splendour was so great,that none, who, in that age, were what we now call peo­ple of fashion, chose to appear on the Appian or Fla-minian road, or to make an excursion to their villas,without a train of Numidians mounted on the swift







OCR Output








OF TACITUS. 7 •7





Vitellius were neither known to him bymarks of favour, nor by personal injury.The foundation of his fortune (c) was laidby Vespasian, advanced by Titus, andcarried higher by Doraitian. The factmust not be dissembled : but the historian,who enters on his office with a professionof integrity, must not desert the cause oftruth. No character should be touchedwith partiality ; none should be disfiguredby passion, or resentment. Of Nerva andTrajan (d), if my health continues, it ismy design to compose the history; it is afavourite plan, rich in materials, and everyway safe. I have reserved it for the eveningof my days ; a glorious period ! in which,through the rare felicity of the times, aman may think with freedom, and what hethinks he may publish to the world.
II. The subject now before me presentsa series of great events, and battles fierceand bloody; a portion of time big withintestine divisions, and even the intervalsof peace deformed with cruelty and horror:the whole a tragic volume, displaying, insuccession, four princes (a) put to death;







OCR Output








OF TACITUS. 115





LXII. The new-emperor and hispresented a striking contrast: theiburneis with impatience, mnr~"witkvonevoice demanded to be. led against t!enemy. " It was time/1 they said, " toft push on the war with vigour, while the** two Gauls are in commotion, and Spain" is yet undecided. The winter season" is far from being an obstacle; nor were" the men to be amused with idle nego-" tiations to bring on a compromise." Italy,in all events, must be invaded, and** Rome taken by storm. In civil dissen-u sions, it is expedition that gives life and" energy to all military operations. The" crisis called for vigour, and debate Avasa out of season." Vitellius, in the meantime, loitered away his time in dull repose,lifeless, torpid, drunk at noon-day, andoverwhelmed with gluttony (a). The im­perial dignity, he thought, consisted inriot and profusion, and he resolved to en­joy the prerogative of a prince. The spiritof the soldiers supplied the defects oftheir prince. They neither wanted himin the ranks to animate the brave, nor torouse the tardy and inactive. Each matt
:, 12 v







OCR Output








6* tacitus. 209





and centurions, who extolled the wisdomef their superior officer; they rejected alladvice, declaring aloud that treason wasat work ; they were betrayed : and Caecinawas invited to take possession of the place.Spurinna was obliged to yield to this sud­den phrensy, and even to proceed on themarch,. He went forth against his will,but with a show of approbation, in hopes,if the sedition died away, that he mightthen resume his former authority.
XIX. The soldiers pushed on withspiritj till the Po appearing in sight, andnight coming on, they halted for the firsttimei It was now judged necessary tofortify a camp. Labour and castrameta-tion were new to men who had only servedwithin the walls of Rome. Their ferocityabated, and they began to see their error.The veterans in the service condemnedtheir own credulity, and pointed out totheir comrades the common danger of all,if Caecina with a numerous army had comeup in time to surround them in a widechampaign country. Throughout theranks nothing was heard but penitence
vol. v. p







OCR Output








OP TACITUS. 243





conspired to urge them on to mutual bookslaughter. Their war, it is true, was endedby a single battle; but for that speedyissue the world was indebted, not to thevirtue , of the armies, but to the abjectspirit of the contending princes. Butthese reflections on the spirit of antientand modern times have betrayed me intoa long digression. I resume the threadof my narrative.
XXXIX. From the time when Othowithdrew to Brixellum, his brother Ti-tianus assumed all the pride and pomp ofcommander in chief, but the power andreal authority remained in the hands ofProculus. Celsus and Paulinus were nomore than mere nominal generals. No mansought their advice. They were, in fact,superseded; serving no purpose but thatof screening the folly of others, and bear­ing the blame of blunders not their own.The tribunes and centurions could renderno effectual service, while ignorance andinsufficiency were preferred, and real ta­lents lay neglected. The common menappeared with an air of alacrity, but more


r 3







OCR Output








304 THE HISTORY





book " this very moment possessed of the sove^" reign power, I should call Titus my sonby adoption; with propriety, therefore,I yield to his father. The enterprise, to" which I exhort you, will not, in its con-" sequences, be the same to us both. If" we succeed, the honours which I may" receive must flow from you : in toil and" danger I am willing to be your rival; or*" if you will (and it is the best expedient)," remain here to issue your orders, and" leave me to conduct the war.
" The troops that lately conquered are" by no means formidable. In the van-" quished party there is more order and" better discipline. The latter, stung with" shame and indignation, are burning for" revenge. All motives conspire to inflame** their ardour. The Vitellians, on the con-" trary, intoxicated with success, ajid elate" with pride, disdain all rules of subordi-" nation. They are undone by luxury," Their wounds, as yet scarcely closed," will open in a new war and bleed afresh," My dependence, it is true, must be upon*' your vigilance, your ceconomy, your wis*







OCR Output








522 THE HISTORY





book city of Rome. In all the villas and mu­nicipal towns through which he passed,carousing festivals were sufficient to retarda man abandoned to his pleasures. Hewas followed by an unwieldy multitude,not less than sixty thousand men in arms,all corrupted by a life of debauchery.The number of retainers and followers ofthe army was still greater, all disposed toriot and insolence, even beyond the na­tural bent of the vilest slaves. To thesemust be added a train of officers andservile courtiers, too haughty to be re­strained within due bounds, even thoughthe chief had practised the strictest dis­cipline. The crowd was still increased bya conflux of senators and Roman knightswho came from Rome to greet the princeon his way ; some impelled by fear, othersto pay their court, and numbers, not tobe thought sullen or disaffected. <&yA\\went with the current. The populacerushed forth in crowds, accompanied byan infamous band of pimps, of players,buffoons, and charioteers, by their utilityin vicious pleasures all well known anddear to Vitellius. Such were the dis-







OCR Output








OF TACITUS. 203





His father was of consular rank; his grand­father had discharged the office of prstor.By the maternal line his descent was re­spectable, though not illustrious. Thefeatures of his character, as well in hisearliest days (a) as in the progress of hisyouth, have been already delineated. Bytwo actions of his life he stands distin­guished ; one, atrocious and detestable;the other, great and magnanimous ; theformer has consigned his name to eternalinfamy, and the last will do honour to hismemory. History cannot descend to thefrivolous task of collecting vague reports,in order to amuse the reader with a fabu­lous detail; but there are traditions, whichhave been handed down with an air ofauthenticity, and these I shall not takeupon me to suppress or to refute. On theday when the battle was fought at Bedria-cum, a bird of unusual appearance wasobserved to perch in a grove near RegiumLepidum (b), and, notwithstanding thegreat concourse of people, and a numerousflight of other birds, never to move fromits place till Otho put an end to his life.That event no sooner happened, than it







OCR Output








W Tacitus. 319





victed of forgery (a) in the reign of Nero, bookremained obnoxious to the laws, till,among the evils that spring from civildissension, he rose from infamy to hissenatorian rank. He was advanced byGalba to the command of the seventhlegion, and, according to report, offeredhimself to Otho, desiring, by letters, therank of general against his benefactor.Otho paid no attention to the proposal,and, by consequence, Antonius remainedinactive. In the present juncture, seeinga storm ready to burst upon Vitellius, he.veered round to Vespasian, and becamethe grand support of the party. To hisvices he united great and useful qualities;brave and valiant, he possessed uncom­mon eloquence; an artful and insidiousenemv, he had the art of involving; othersin danger; in popular insurrections, abold and turbulent leader; at once aplunderer and a prodigal, what he gainedby rapine he squandered in corruption ;during the calm season of peace, a per­nicious citizen; in war, an officer not tobe neglected.







OCR Output








30 THE HISTORY





book storm gathering in Germany, and where itwould burst he could not foresee. Of Vi-tellius and his designs no certain accountarrived. The revolt of the legions filledhim with apprehensions, and he reposedno confidence in the praetorian guards.The nomination of a successor seemed, insuch a crisis, to be the best expedient;and for that purpose he held a cabinetcouncil. Besides Vinius and Laco, hethought proper to summon Marius Celsus^consul elect, and Ducennius Geminus, thepraefect of the city. Having prefaced thebusiness in a short speech concerning hisage and infirmities, he sent for Piso Lici-nianus (a); whether of his own free choice,or at the instigation of Laco, remainsuncertain. That minister had lived infriendship with Piso. He contracted anintimacy with him at the house of Rubel-lius Plautus, though he had now the ad­dress to conceal that connection, affecting,with public /motives, to recommend astranger. To this conduct, the fair es­teem, in which Piso was held, gave anappearance of sincerity. Piso was the







OCR Output








342 THE HISTORY





book cumbrance; and the men, drooping underthe heat of the season, overpowered bythe dust, and unable to endure the wea­ther, presented to all who beheld theirmarch, a languid, spiritless, and dejectedarmy; averse from labour, and, for thatreason, ready to revolt.
The character of Caecina must be takeninto the account. Ambition was his rulingpassion: sloth and indolence, the effect ofsuccess and luxury, were vices newly con­tracted ; or, perhaps meditating even thena stroke of perfidy, it was part of his planto countenance whatever tended to im­pair the vigour of the army. The revoltof this commander has been ascribed byvarious writers to Flavius Sabinus, whohad the address, by the means of RubriusCallus, his intermediate agent, to seduceCaecina to the interest of his brother, un­der positive assurances that the terms sti­mulated between them would be ratifiedby. Vespasian. The jealousy subsistingbetween Caecina and Valens had its effecton the mind of an aspiring chief, who sawhis rival in the highest credit with Vitel­







OCR Output








OF TACITUS. 55





and by servile employments, he gainedenough to enrich his officer; and the of­ficer, in return, sold a dispensation fromlabour and the duties of the service. Who­ever had hoarded up a little money, was*for that reason, harassed with discipline,and oppressed with labour, till he pur­chased the usual indulgence. By theseextortions the soldier was impoverished,his stock was exhausted ; and after a va­gabond life, his industry relaxed, and hisvigour wasted, he returned to the campwithout courage, strength, or money. Bythese pernicious practices corruption grewinto a system. The common men forgot alldiscipline; their morals went to ruin; and,in the natural progress of vice, all becameripe for tumult, insurrections, and civilwar. To remedy the mischief, and, atthe same time, not to alienate the mindsof the centurions, Otho undertook to payan annual equivalent to the officers out ofhis own revenue. This reform was, nodoubt, both wise and just. Good princesadopted it afterwards, and it is now asettled rule in the military system. Laco,die late c6aunander of the praetorians, was







OCR Output








OF TACITUS. 21





men disposed to mutiny. On the Lower bookRhine, the army had been for some timewithout a general of consular rank, tillAulus Vitellius (a), son of the person ofthat name who had been censor, and threetimes consul, was sent by Galba to takeupon him the command. This to Galbaseemed sufficient, and the Fates (b) pr-dained it.
In Britain every thing was quiet. Thelegions stationed in that island had no/party-divisions to distract them. Duringthe civil wars that followed, they took nopart in the contest. Situated at a distance^and divided by the ocean from the restof the world, they did not catch the epi­demic phrensy of the times. They knewno enemies but those of their country, and .were not taught by civil discord to hateone another. Illyricum remained in astate of tranquillity, though the legionsdrawn by Nero from that country foundthe means, while they loitered in Italy, oftampering with Verginius. But the armieswere at distant stations, separated by along tract of sea or land; and that cir-







OCR Output








130 THE HISTOR?





book called the ala petrina (d). How lie1


himself should pass into Italy, was hisnext consideration. His first plan was tomarch over the Rhaetian mountains (e), inorder to make a descent into Noricum,where Petronius Urbicus, the governor ofthe province, supposed to be a partisanin Otho's service, was busy in collectingforces, and destroying the bridges overthe rivers. But this enterprise was soon re­linquished. The detachment already sentforward might be cut off, and, after all,the secure possession of Italy was the im­portant object. The issue of the war,wherever decided, would draw after it allinferior places, and Noricum would fall,by consequence, into the hands of the con­queror. He resolved, therefore, to pro­ceed by the shortest way into Italy. Forthis purpose, he ordered the troops lightlyarmed to proceed on their journey, and,with the legions heavily armed, he marchedhimself over the Penine Alps (/), througha waste of snow, and all the rigours of thewinter season. _ ; _
LXXI. Otho, in the mean time, di­







OCR Output








OF TACITUS. 4t





the neutral and indifferent (by for thegreatest number) made a tender of theirservices, all with private views, regardlessof their country. This was the only pub­lic act in which Piso appeared. In thetime that followed between his adoptionand his death (an interval of four days) heneither said nor did any thing that meritsthe attention of history.
Affairs in Germany began to wear agloomy aspect. Messengers uppn theheels of one another came posting toRome ; and in a city where men stoodathirst for news, and swallowed the worstwith avidity, nothing was seen but hurryand confusion. The fathers resolved totreat by their deputies with the Germanlegions. In a secret council it was pro­posed that Piso should set out at the headof the embassy, that the army might havebefore their eyes the authority of thesenate, and the majesty of the empire. Itwas further thought advisable that Laco,the praefect of the praetorian guards,should accompany the deputation; but hedeclined the office. Nor was the choice


.'3







OCR Output








**6 , CONtENTS'—BOOK it.


name of Scrilionianus: he is detected, and put to deathby order of Vitellius. LXXIV. Deliberations heldin the East by Vespasian and Mucianus. The speech ofMuciamts on the occasion. LXXVII. Vespasian en­couraged by the responses of oracles. His consultationon mount CarmeL LXXIX. Vespasian if declaredemperor, first in Algypl, and afterwards by the armyin Syria. LXXXI. The kings Sohemus, Antiochusjand Agrippa, as also queen Berenice, enter into theleague. LXXXII. Plan of the war: Vespasian holdsjRgypt in his possession.' his son Titus carries on thewar against the Jews: Mucianus sets out on his marchtowards Italy. LXXXV. The legions in Mcesia,Pannonia, and Dalmatia, revolt to Vespasian, at theinstigation of Antonius Primus and Cornelius Fuscus.LXXXVII. Vitellius, at the head of a prodigiousmultitude, all debauched by luxury, enters the city ofRome. XC. He makes a speech, in pompous termscelebrating his own praise. His conduct there.XCII. Ccecina and Valens carry on the administra­tion. Sloth, riot, and mortality among the soldiers.Vitellius in want of money, and yet prodigal beyondall measure. Asiaticus, his freedman, amasses enor­mous wealth. XCV. The people distressed, and yetthe birth-day of Vitellius celebrated with pomp andprofusion. The emperor performs the funeral obse­quies of Nero. Rumours of a revolt in the East inef­fectually suppressed. Vitellius sends for succours intoSpain, Germany, and Britain, but endeavours to dis­guise the necessity. XCIX. Parties of the enemy ad­vance into Italy. Ccecina and Valens ordered to takethe field. Ccecina's treacliery: he combines with Lu-cilius Bassus, the commander of the fleets at Ravennaand Misenum.







OCR Output








OF TACITUS. 321





the reward of merit. War was his pas­sion ; and, though possessed of an amplefortune, he preferred a life of enterpriseto indolence and his own personal safety.He acted in concert with Antonius Pri­mus, and both exerted themselves tokindle the flame of war in every quarter.Where they saw a discontented spirit,they were sure to increase it by infusionsof their own venom. They sent dispatchesto the fourteenth legion in Britain, andto the first in Spain, knowing that bothhad favoured the cause of Otho againstVitellius. Their letters were spread allover Gaul, and, by their joint efforts, theRoman world was roused to arms. Theforces in Illyricum declared for Vespasian;and in other parts, as soon as the firstblow was struck, the troops stood readyto take the field.
LXXXVII. While Vespasian and theleaders of his party were thus employedin concerting measures throughout theprovinces, Vitellius, sunk in sloth, andgrowing every day more contemptible,advanced by slow marches towards the
vol. v. Y







OCR Output








NOTES


ON


THE FIRST BOOK


OF


THE HISTORY.


Section I.
(fe) rPACITUS computes 820 years from the founda­tion of Rome to the end of Nero, when thefollowing History begins. The battle of Actium wasin the year of Rome 723; from that time the reigns ofAugustus and the succeeding emperors form a period of98 years to the end of Nero, who died A. U. C. 821.
(b) The history of Rome to the end of the republic, isemphatically called by Tacitus the history of the Romanpeople. From the battle of Actium, it is properly thehistory of the emperors.
(c) Tacitus was, probably, raised to the office of quse-stor by Vespasian, and perhaps to the senatorian rank.Under Titus he advanced, in the regular gradation of themagistracy, to the functions either of tribune or sedile;and in the time of Domitian he was one of the quinde-cimviral college, as well as prsetor. See Annals, xi.ft. 11.
(d) It is evident from this passage that Tacitus pub­lished his History in the reign of Trajan, since Nerva iscalled the Deified Nerva, and the apotheosis of the em- ,perori was always after their death. Nerva began bis







OCR Output








SECOND BOOK OF THE HISTORY. 371


stationed. A short, but clear, account of this matterwill help to remove the difficulties which might other­wise occur in the sequel of the history. Brotier hasperformed this useful task with his usual accuracy. Seequarto edition, vol. iii. p. 408. A compendious viewof what he has said on the subject will, perhaps, be ac­ceptable ; as it will show the whole strength of the em­pire in the important crisis now before us.
The names of the several legions were as follow:
1. Legio Prima, the first legion.
2. Legio Prima Italica, the first Italic legion,raised by Nero, as appears in Dio, lib. lv.
3. Legio Prima Adjutrix, an additional legion,according to Dio raised by Nero from the marines, and,for that reason, called Legio Prima Adjutrix Classi-corum.
4. Legio Secunda, the second legion.
5. Legio Secunda Adjutrix, raised by Vespasianduring the war with Vitellius.
6. Legio Tertia, the third legion; stationed in Sy­ria.
7. Legio Tertia ; another, called also the third, in;Egypt.
8. Legio Tertia ; another, stationed in Africa.
9. Legio Quarta, the fourth legion, called, to di­stinguish it from another fourth legion, Legio QuartaMacedonka.
10. Legio Quarta, another fourth legion, called,for the sake of distinction, Legio Quarta Scythica.
11. Legio Quinta, the fifth legion.
12. Legio Quinta Macedonica, the fifth legion,called the Macedonian.
13. Legio Sexta, the sixth legion, sometimes calledLegio Sexta Fictrix.







OCR Output








308 THE HISTORY


II.





book pasian's reign, though the army in Judaeaswore fidelity on the fifth before the nonesof the same month, in the presence of Ves­pasian himself. Titus was then on his wayfrom Syria with dispatches from Mucianus,but the impatience of the men could notbrook the delay of waiting for the em­peror's son. The whole transaction origi­nated with the soldiers, and was hurried onwith such violent impetuosity, that thebusiness was finished without any publicharangue, and even without a previous as­sembly of the legions.


LXXX. For this great revolution noarrangement was made; no time, no placewas fixed; nor was it known who was to bethe author of the measure. In this state ofuncertainty, while every bosom pantedwith hope and fear, and the motives to therevolt, with all the dangers that might en­sue, kept the army in agitation, a smallnumber of soldiers, who mounted guardnear the apartment of the general, nosooner saw him coming forth from hischamber, than with one voice they salutedhim by the title of emperor. The whole







OCR Output








OF TACITUS.' 53





ances of lurking treason. Some facts, book
however, reached the ears of Galba; but
the folly of Laco explained every thing
away, and, by consequence, the emperor
was lulled into security. The praefect of
the guards had no knowledge of the mili­eu o
tary character. Nothing could open theeyes of a man, who opposed every mea­sure, however excellent, which did notoriginate with himself. By the perversityof his nature, he was always at variancewith talents and superior judgment.
XXVII. Ok the eighteenth day beforethe calends of February, Galba assisted ata sacrifice in the temple of Apollo. In themidst of the ceremony, Umbricius theaugur, after inspecting the entrails of thevictims, announced impending treason,and a lurking enemy within the walls ofRome. Otho, who stood near the empe­ror, heard this prediction, but interpretedit in his own favour, pleased with omensthat promised so well to his cause. Inthat moment, Onomastus came to informhim, that his builders and surveyors werewaiting to talk with him on business. This,







OCR Output








115 THE HISTORY





book was his own general* With one consent
they formed the ranks, and demanded the
signal for the march. They saluted Vitel-
lius by the name, of Germanicus (£}; that
of Caesar he chose to decline, and even
after his victory always rejected it. Va-
lens began his march. On that very day
his army beheld a joyful omen. An eagle
appeared at the head of the Mnes, measuring
his flight by the movement of the soldiersr
as if to guide them on their way. The
air resounded with shouts of joy, while
the bird proceeded in the same regular
course, undismayed by the uproar, and
still seeming to direct the march. A phae-
nomenon so unusual was considered as a
sure prognostic of a signal victory,
LXIII. The army advanced in goodorder towards the state of the Treveri,whom they considered as their friends andallies. At Divodurum (a) (a city of theMediomatrici) they received every markof kindness, but were seized unaccounta­bly with a sudden panic, in its effect scextraordinary, that the soldiers graspectheir arms, and fell upon the innocent in


3







OCR Output













OCR Output








242 THE HISTORY





book riches, and contentions arose between thesenate and the people. Factious tribunesprevailed at one time, and ambitious con­suls at another. In the heart of the city,and even in the forum, the sword of dis­cord was drawn, and those dissensionswere a prelude to the rage of civil war.Caius Marius, a man sprung from thedregs Of the populace, and Lucius Sylla,fierce and cruel beyond the rest of thenobility, overturned the constitution oftheir country, and on the ruins of publicliberty established a system of tyranny andlawless power. Pompey came soon after,with passions more disguised, but no waybetter. From that time, the struggle hasbeen for supreme dominion. The legionsthat filled the plains of Pharsalia, andafterwards met at Philippi, though com­posed of lloman citizens, never oncethought of laying down their arms. Andare we to believe that the armies of Othoand Vitellius were of a more pacific tem­per ? They had instigations equally power­ful : the same wrath of the gods pursuedthem ; the same popular phrensy kindledthe flame of discord; and the same vices







OCR Output








OP TACITUS. 341


by Vitellius were known to the opposite bookparty, while those of Vespasian remained <—I—»an impenetrable secret. The stupidity of 822. 'Vitellius gave the enemy this advantage «>.in the outset. Afterwards, when the passesover the Pannonian Alps (a) were securedby a chain of posts, all intelligence byland was entirely cut off; and by sea, theEtesian winds, that favoured the naviga­tion to the east, were adverse to the home­ward voyage.
XCIX. Vitellius, finding that theadvanced parties of the enemy had madean irruption into Italy, and news big withdanger arriving from every quarter, gaveorders to his generals to take the fieldwithout delay. Caecina undertook thecommand, while Valens, who was justrisen from a sick bed, remained at Romefor the recovery of his health. The .Ger­man forces, marching out of the city, ex­hibited an appearance very different frorrlthe ferocity of their first approach. Theirstrength wasted; their vigour of minddepressed; their numbers thinned; theirhorses slow and lifeless; their arms an in-







OCR Output








OF TACITUS. ' 215





either impaired by time, or thinly manned, book


the Vitellians attempted a scalade. TheGerman auxiliaries, rending the air withtheir savage war-songs, and, according tothe custom of their country, waving theirshields over their shoulders, advanced withimpetuous fury; while the garrison, withdeliberate aim, discharged a volley ofstones and darts. In the mean time, thelegionary soldiers, under their coveredwaj7, battered the foundation of the walls,and, having thrown up mounds of earth,attempted to force the gates. A pile ofmassy stones, which had been preparedby the besieged, was instant! v rolled downwith prodigious ruin: the Vitellians,crushed under the weight, or transfixedwith darts, lay wounded, maimed, andmangled, at the foot of the ramparts.Horror and confusion followed. TheOthonians were inspired with fresh cou­rage. The slaughter increased; and theassailants, finding all their efforts defeated,with great precipitation, and no less dis­honour, sounded a retreat. Chechia sawthe folly of an enterprise rashly under­taken. To avoid further disgrace, he re-


ii.







OCR Output








OF TACITUS. 269





tary then in the city had, at the requisi­tion of Flavius Sabinus, sworn fidelity toVitellius : the people heard the news withtransport, and the theatre shook withapplause. The audience, crowned withlaurel wreaths, and strewing the way withflowers, went forth in procession, and, withthe images of Galba displayed in a trium­phant manner, visited the several temples,and afterwards with their chaplets raiseda fancied tomb to his memory, on thespot, near the lake of Curtius, where thatemperor breathed his last. The varioushonours which flattery at different timeshad lavished on former princes, were de­creed by the senate to the new sovereign.They passed a vote of thanks to the Ger­man armies, and dispatched special mes­sengers to congratulate Vitellius on hisaccession to the imperial dignity. A let­ter from Fabius Valens to the consuls wasread in the senate; and though there wasnothing of arrogance in the style, the re­spectful modesty of Caecina, who remain­ed s$ent, gave greater satisfaction,
LVJ. Peace was now established







OCR Output








96 THE HISTORY





book kept the armies distinct and separate.Being at length drawn together to makehead against Vindex, they felt their ownstrength; and, having tasted the sweets ofvictory, they wanted to renew the troubles,by which their rapacity had been so amplygratified. They no longer treated theGauls as their allies and friends; they con­sidered them as enemies, and a vanquishedpeople.
In these hostile sentiments they wereconfirmed by such of the Gallic nation asdwelt on the borders of the Rhine. Thepeople, on that side of the country, hadtaken up arms against Vindex, and hisallies, whom, since the death of that chief,they chose to call the Galbian Faction;and now, by every artifice, by infusionsof their own malice, they endeavoured tokindle a war between the Romans andtheir countrymen. The animosity of thelegions was easily excited- The Se-quanians, the iEduans, and other states,according to their opulence, were thechief objects of resentment. The soldiersthought of nothing but towns assaulted


7







OCR Output








OF TACITWS. 27





grandeur. In the sudden elevation ofGalba, this man and his adherents, with allthe creatures of the court, saw their oppor­tunity to enrich themselves with the spoilsof their country; and, encouraged as theywere by the facility of a weak, a credu­lous, and superannuated prince, they wereresolved to lose no time. In such a pe­riod the temptation was great, and guiltmight hope to plunder with impunity.
XIII. The whole sovereign power wasin the hands of Titus Vinius, the consul,and Cornelius Laco, the proefetl of thepraetorian gutwds. A third favourite soonappeared on the political stage, with a de­gree of influence not. inferior to either ofthe former. The name of this man wasIcelus (a), one of the emperor's freedmen,lately created a Roman knight, and, tosuit his new dignity, honoured with thename of Martianus. The three confiden­tial ministers were soon at variance. Theyclashed in interest, and, in all inferiortransactions, drew different ways ; but inthe choice of a successor tbey were di­vided into two factions. Vinius declared







OCR Output








364 NOTES ON THE


Section LXXII.
(a) Tigcllinus has been often mentioned. See An­nals, xiv. s. 57 ; xv. s. 37 ; and Appendix to Annals,xvi.
(I) For Sinuessa, see Annals, xii. s. 66 ; and see th*Geographical Table at the end of the Eighth Volume.
Section LXXIII.
(a) For Calvia Crispinilla, see Appendix to Annals,xvi.; and see Plutarch, in Galba.
Section LXXV.(a) Suetonius, in Vitell. s. C.
Section LXXVII.
(a) The number of Consuls, in the course of this
eventful year, was so great, that it will not be useless to
place the list in one view before the eye of the reader.
A. U. C. 822. Consuls.
On the Kalends of January, f Galba,Hist. i. s. 1. tVinius.
Kalends of March, f Salvius Otho,Hist. i. s. 77* ITitianus Otho..
Kalends of May, fVerginius Rufus,
Hist. i. s. 77- I Pompeius Vopiscus,Kalends of July, f Caelius Sabinus,Hist. i. s. 77- iFlavius Sabinus.Kalends of Septem- f Arrius AntoninuSj
ber,Hist. 1. s. 77. IMarius Cejsus.Kalends of Novem-f Fabius Valcns,ber, Hist. ii. s. 1. \ Alienus Caecina.Caecina being pronounced a traitor by the senate, onthe day before the kalends of January, A.U. C. 823,the consul for a single day, being the last of the year,was Rosius Rcgulus. Hist. iii. s. 37.







OCR Output








280 THE HISTORY





book donations of money, and, when briberyfailed, to drive them to it by force andviolence. The contagion reached themunicipal towns and colonies, where itbecame the general practice to lie in waitfor the young and profligate, in order, bythe temptation of money, to invite themto disgrace and infamy.
LXIII. The character of Vitellius, soonafter the arrival of his brother (a) andother courtiers from Rome, came forth inthe blackest colours. That perniciouscrew began to teach their maxims of de­spotism, and the prince displayed his cruel­ty and his arrogance. He gave orders forthe execution of Dolabella, who, as al­ready stated, on the first breaking out ofthe war was banished by Otho to the co­lony of Aquine. Being there informedof that emperor's death, he ventured to re­turn to Rome. That step was objected tohim as a crime by his intimate friend,Plancius Varus, a man of praetorian rank.He preferred his accusation, in form, be­fore Flavius Sabinus, the praefect of thecity. The specific charges were, that Do-







OCR Output








FIRST BOOK OF THE HISTORY. 35 \


vour of another impostor, who took the name of Nero inthe reign of Titus, A. U. C. 834, and afterwards in thereign ofDomitian, A.U. 841.
(f) The cities of Herculaneum and Pompeii were de­stroyed by an eruption of the lava of Mount Vesuvius,in the beginning of Titus's reign, A.U. C. 832.
(g) See the conflagration of the Capitol, Hist. iii.s. 67 and 71.
(/t) Collectors of the imperial revenue were institutedby the emperors, in order to entrench on the power ofthe proconsuls, who were the proper officers in all theprovinces that remained under the authority of the se­nate. Informers were raised to the office of imperialprocurators, and obtained weight and influence in thecabinet. Adepti procurationes et interiorem potentiam.(i) The treachery of friends was the scourge and pestof society for several years. Trajan repressed the mis­chief. See his praise for that public benefit in Pliny'sPanegyric, s. 42. Reddita est amicis fides, liheris pie-tus, obsequium servis.
Section III.
(a) Some of the commentators have objected to thesentiment expressed by Tacitus in this place. JBrotiercalls it alrox sententia. But what is the fair construc­tion ? It is this : The crimes of the Roman people weresuch, that they could no longer expect the protection ofthe gods. They had drawn down the vengeance of hea­ven. Lucan has a similar sentiment:
Felix Roma quidem, civesque habitura beatos, #
Si Libertatis superis tarn cura fuisset,
Quam vindicta placet.
Pharsal. lib. iv. ver. 107.







OCR Output








OF TACITUS. 93





fatality to be the bane and ruin of the com­monwealth. The crimes and miseries,which, under the late emperors, were onecontinued pestilence, were no longer theobjects that employed the public mind.The civil wars were fresh in the memoryof all; they talked of Rome besieged andtaken by her own armies; they remem­bered Italy laid waste, the provinces plun­dered, the battles of Pharsalia and Philip-pi, and the siege of Modena and Peru-sia (a), two places well known in history,and each of them the scene of publiccalamity.
" In those tempestuous times, the strug-" gle, it was observed, lay between men" of illustrious character, and by their" contentions the state was brought to the" brink of ruin. But even then, under" Julius Caesar, the empire still survived" and flourished. It survived under Au-" gustus, and gained additional lustre." Under Pompey and Brutus, had their" arms prevailed, the republic would have" been once more established. But those" men have, passed away. Otho and Vi-







OCR Output








OF TACITUS." 23





a man of business. When at leisure from bookaffairs, he gave a loose to his luxuriouspassions; if his interest required it, hecame upon mankind with superior talents.The minister was praised, and the privateman detested. The art of conciliating thegood will of others was his in an eminentdegree. With his inferiors he knew howto soften authority; to his friends andequals his address was courtly; and yet,with these attractive arts, a man so va­rious was fitter to raise others to the impe­rial dignity, than to obtain it for himself.
The Avar against the Jews had beencommitted by Nero to Flavius Vespasian,who was then in Judaea at the head ofthree legions. That commander hadformed no design, nor even a wish, againstthe interest of Galba. He sent his sonTitus to Rome, as will be seen hereaf­ter (a), with congratulations to Galba, andassurances of fidelity. It was not thenperceived that the sovereign power wasdestined, by the decrees of Heaven, forVespasian and his two sons. After hisaccession, portents and prodigies, and the







OCR Output








18 v ,, > • THE HISTORY


\ ;^





book haste to grow rich, and fearing the uncer­tainty of an old man's life, began to seizetheir share of the plunder. The new courtopened with all the vices of Nero's reign,but without the same apology. The ad­vanced age (b) of Galba was a subject ofridicule. Dissipation, at his time of life,excited laughter and contempt. Appear­ances are the reasons of the populace :they were accustomed to the youthful fro­lics of Nero, and, in their comparison ofprinces, elegance of figure and the gracesof deportment are decisive qualities.
VIII. Such was the posture of affairs atRome, and such the sentiments that per­vaded the mass of the people. With re­gard to the provinces, Spain was governedby Cluvius Rufus (a), a man distinguishedby his eloquence, and well accomplishedin the arts of peace, but of no reputationin war. In both the Gauls, the name ofVindex was still held in veneration; andthe people, pleased with their recent ad­mission to the freedom (b) of Rome, andthe diminution of their tribute, showed nosymptoms of disaffection. In those parts,


7







OCR Output








60 THE HISTORY





«


empire at their will and pleasure ? Willyou establish such a precedent ? and,by establishing it, will you become ac­complices in the guilt? The examplewill pass into the provinces ; confusionand anarchy will be the fatal conse­quence. Galba may fall, and I mayperish with him; but the calamities of" a civil Avar must remain for you. By" murdering your prince you may earn" the wages of iniquity; but the reward" of virtue will not be less. Judge" which is best, a donative for your inno-" cence, or a largess for murder and re-" bellion." »
XXXI. During this harangue, thesoldiers belonging to the guard withdrewfrom the place. The rest of the cohortshowed no sign of discontent. Withoutnoise or tumult, the usual incidents of se­dition, they displayed their colours ac­cording to the military custom, and not,as was imagined afterwards, with a designto cover, by false appearances, a settledplan of treachery and revolt. Celsus Ma-rius Avas sent to use his influence with the







OCR Output








98 THE HISTORY





book stantly issued : but the camp was the majgazine of news, where invention framedthe lie of the day, and credulity stoodready to receive it. The passions of thesoldiers were in constant agitation: maliceembittered their minds, and fear held themin suspense. But they viewed their num­bers, and their courage revived. Theyfound themselves in force, and in full se­curity laughed at the idea of danger.
LIL It was near the calends of De­cember in the preceding year, Avhen Au-lus Vitellius first appeared in the LowerGermany. He made it his business to re­view the legions in their winter-quarters;he restored several officers who had beendegraded, and relieved others from thedisgrace of an ignominious sentence. Inthese proceedings he acted, in some hv 'stances, with justice, in others, with aview to his own ambition. He condemnedthe sordid avarice with which FonteiusCapito granted or refused rank in the army.He established a fair and regular system ofmilitary promotion, and in the eyes of thesoldiers appeared to exceed the powers







OCR Output








OFTACITUS. 117





habitants sword in hand. In this dread­ful outrage the love of plunder had noshare; a sudden phrensy possessed everymind; and, as the cause was unknown,no remedy could be applied* No lessthan four thousand men were massacred;and, if the entreaties of the general hadnot at length prevailed, the whole cityhad been laid in blood. The rest of Gaulwas alarmed by this horrible catastropheto such a degree, that, wherever the armyapproached, whole cities, with the magis­trates at their head, went forth in a sup­pliant manner to sue for mercy. Motherswith their children lay prostrate on theground., as if a conquering enemy ad­vanced against them; and, though northing like hostility subsisted, the wretchedpeople were obliged, in profound peace,to deprecate all the horrors of war.
LXIV, Valens arrived with his armyat the capital city of the Leucians (a). Atthat place he received intelligence of themurder of Galba, and the accession ofOtho. The news made no impression onthe soldiers. Unmoved by joy or fear,







OCR Output








of TAcrrus. 299.





" power. In the rage of civil war the com- book" mon soldier renounces every honest prin­ciple; treachery becomes habitual; and" every man who sets no value on his own" life, holds the chief in his power. Cohorts" of foot, and squadrons of horse, make" a vain parade, if one intrepid villain," for the reward promised by the adverse" party, may strike a sudden blow, and" by a murder terminate the war. Such" was the fate of Scribonianus (a) in the" reign of Claudius: he was murdered" by Volaginius, a common soldier, and" the highest posts in the service Avere" the wages of that desperate assassin." An army may be drawn up in order of" battle, and to animate them to deeds of" valour is not a difficult task : but the" private ruffian is not easily avoided."
LXXVI. Such were the reflections thatpresented themselves to the mind of Ves­pasian. His friends and the principal of­ficers endeavoured to fix his resolution.Mucianus lent his aid, and, not contentwith private conferences, took a publicopportunity to declare his sentiments, in







OCR Output








1<X> THE HISTWY





book at length, came on, and Faustus was con-it
demned, but not with that universal as­sent of the people which a life of iniquitymight have warranted. The accuser, itwas well known, had been concerned in theconduct of prosecutions, and received theprofits of his trade. Men rejoiced to seethe punishment of a crime so dangerousand detestable ; but the triumph of a no­torious offender gave disgust.
XI. Meanwhile, the affairs of Othowore a favourable aspect. The armies inDalmatia and Pannonia were on theirmarch to join him. A detachment of twothousand advanced by rapid marches, whilethe main body followed at moderate di­stances. The legions that composed thisforce, were the seventh, which had beenraised by Galba; the eleventh, the thir­teenth, and fourteenth, all veterans inthe service, and the last in great renownfor the vigour with which they quelled theinsurrection in Britain (a), and still morefamous for the choice made by Nero, whohad selected that corps as the best in theempire. They remained, to the last, faith­







OCR Output








OF TACITUS.' 75


that minister, he thought, would appease bookthe fury of the soldiers, or it may be that ^v~^he suspected treachery, and thought him 822.joined in a secret league with Otho : per- ee.'haps his own malice was the motive. Butfor this dark purpose neither the time northe place was convenient: the sword oncedrawn, there -was no knowing where thescene of blood would end. Messengersarriving every moment increased the con­sternation ; the spirit of Galba's friendsbegan to droop; numbers deserted him;and of all that zeal which a little beforeblazed out with so much ardour, everyspark was now extinguished.
XL. Galba, in the midst of a prodi­gious conflux of people, had not strengthto support himself; and, as the wavingmultitude was impelled different ways, hewas hurried on by the torrent. The tem­ples, the porticos, and great halls roundthe forum, were filled with crowds ofgazing spectators. The whole presentedan awful spectacle. A deep and sullensilence prevailed. The very rabble washushed. Amazement sat on everv face.







OCR Output








312 THE HISTORY





book ration, a grand council was held at Bery-tus (b). Mucianus attended. He was ac­companied by a train of officers, tribunes,and centurions, and a considerable bodyof soldiers, selected to swell the pomp andgrandeur of the scene. From Judaea themost distinguished officers went to the/ meeting, with the flower of their troops.An assembly, consisting of such a nume­rous train of horse and foot, and of easternkings, AvIio vied with each other in splen­dour and magnificence, presented a spec­tacle worthy of the imperial dignity.
LXXXII. The first and most importantobject was to raise recruits, and recall theveterans to the service. In all the strongand fortified cities, workmen were ap­pointed for the forging of arms, and amint for gold and silver coin was esta­blished at A ntioch. The Avhole was carriedon with diligence, under the direction ofproper inspectors. Vespasian visited everyquarter, by his presence giving spirit andanimation to the cause. He encouragedthe industrious by the warmth of his com­mendations ; he roused the inactive by his







OCR Output








56 THS ITISTOIfcT


I.





book temple, attentive to the sacred ritesvandwith his prayers fatiguing the gods of anempire now no longer his. Intelligence atlength arrived, that a senator (who by nameno man could tell) was carried in triumphto the camp. Otho Mas soon after .an­nounced. The people in crowds rushedforward from every quarter, .some repre­senting the dangers greater, than it .was,others lessening it, and, even in ruini stillretaining their habitual flattery. A coun^cil was called, Afterduedeliberation, it wasthought advisable to sound the dispositionsof the cohort then on duty before -the ^a»lace, but without the inteqwsition ofGalba, His authority was to be reservedfor the last extremity. Piso called themen together, and, from; the steps of ;the -palace, addressed them to the foJj^WBig'purport: # It.is.;now».Jny feHow,:jsoidiefs," the sixth day since: I was snjaderbjr adoo;-" tion presumptive, heir totfeis grea^eBi'.w pire, Whether I .wag, called to fefBfet""of honour, or of danger, was moreitkan" I could then foresee. The offer was ho-" nourable, and I accepted it i with what** advantage to my own family in >|>artU







OCR Output








190 THfi HISTORY


book Discontent and loud complaints wereit. *
>—v—-' heafd throughout the army. The common822. men began to survey their strength andea- numbers. They reckoned seven legions (c),besides a large body of auxiliaries. Syriaand Judtea were in their possession.jEgypt had two legions at their service.Cappadocia and Pontus afforded ampleresources; and the forces that lined thefrontier of Armenia stood ready at theirbeck. Asia, and the rest of the provinces,were provided with men and money. Ina word, the islands, and the sea that sur­rounds them, were under their command;and the Mediterranean, while it separatedthem from the rest of the empire, left themat leisure to prepare for war.
VII. The zeal of the soldiers was nosecret to the commanders in chief; butthey judged it best to wait the issue of thewar in Europe ; aware that, between thevictor and the vanquished, a sincere coali­tion never can succeed, and whether for­tune favoured the arms of Otho or Vitel-lius, the consequence in cither event wouldbe the same. And if the pride of victory







OCR Output













OCR Output








FIRST BOOK OF THE HISTORY. 363


Section LXVIII.i
(a) For Mons Vocetius, see the Geographical Tableat the end of the Eighth Volume.
(b) For Aventicum, see the Geographical Table.
Section LXX.
(a) The Ala Syllana was a body of cavalry, originallyraised by Sylla. For the Padus (now the Po), see theGeographical Table at the end of the Eighth Volume.
(I) Vitellius had been proconsul in Africa, where headministered the affairs of the province with an unble­mished reputation. Suetonius, in Vitell. s. 5.
(c) For the municipal cities here enumerated, see theGeographical Table at the end of the Eighth Volume.
(d) The squadron of horse, called Ala Petrina, hadbeen stationed in Cumberland, as appears by a lapidaryinscription set forth in Camden's Britannia.
(e) See the Geographical Table at Jthe end of theEighth Volume.
(/) Penine Alps; see the Geographical Table at theend of the Eighth Volume. The Sulsignanus Miles,mentioned in this passage, means the soldier who foughtunder the colours, Vexilla, and not under the Eagles.The auxiliaries, the veterans detained in the service, andthe men draughted from the legions, were of this de­scription.
Section LXXI.
(a) Otho, to appease the fury of the soldiers, hadthrown Marius Celsus into prison. At that time, hecould instigate the soldiers to perpetrate any atrociousdeed, but to command them to forbear was not in hispower. Othoni nondum auctoritas inerat ad prohilen-dum scelus; julerejam poterat. See this book, s. xh\







OCR Output








OF TACITUS. , 199





sented no appearance of men marching bookthrough their own country. They forgotthat Italy was their native soil, and thatthe lands and houses belonged to their fel-Jow citizens. Regardless of the Romanname, they laid waste the country with.fire and sword; they pillaged, destroyed,and plundered, as if the war had been in aforeign realm, against the enemies of theircountry. The wretched inhabitants wereoppressed by men, against whom, havingentertained no fear, they had prepared nodefence. The fields were covered withgrain and cattle; the houses were open;and the owners, with their wives and chil­dren, went forth, in the simplicity of theirhearts, to meet the army. In the midstof peace, they were surrounded with allthe horrors of Avar. Marius Maturuswas, at that time, governor of the mari­time Alps. He resolved to dispute thepassage with"Otho's troops, and, for thatpurpose, armed the youth of the country.In the first encounter, the mountaineerswere either cut to pieces or put to therout. A band of rustics, suddenly levied,and ignorant of military discipline, could







OCR Output








.58 TIIJE IIISTO'KY





" of moderation. • I arrogate nothing tdmyself. In opposition to Otho there is?" no necessity to call our virtues, to out" aid. The vices of the man, even then," when he was the friend, or rather the" pander of Nero, were the ruin of his" country. In those vices he places all his" glory. And shall a life of debaucher\'," shall that effeminate air, and that soft** solicitude (a) tor gay apparel, give an" emperor to the Roman world ? They," who suffer profusion to pass for libe-" rality, will in time perceive their error." Otho may squander, but to bestow is" not in his character. What think you" are the objects that now engross his" thoughts ? What are his views? What" does he aim at? Scenes of luxury, law-" less gratifications, carousing festivals," and the embraces of lascivious women," are the imaginations of hisheart. These" Avith him are imperial pleasures, the" rights of sovereignty. The joy will be"his: it Avill be yours to blush for your"new piaster. In the whole catalogue of*' those daring usurpers, avIio by their" crimes have risen to. power,;is therein







OCR Output











tians had, immemorially maintained a gar- bookrison. The Romans seized the whole as law­ful plunder. An act of violence, so unwar­ranted, raised the indignation of the people*Determined to make reprisals, they inter­cepted a small party on their way to Pan-nonia, with letters from the German armyto the legions stationed in that country.They seized the papers, and detained incustody a centurion with some of his sol­diers. This, to such a man as Caecina, wasample provocation. He wished for notlungso much as a pretence for open hostility.Whenever he took umbrage, he struck hisblow without delay. To defer the punish­ment, were, to leave time for repentance.He marched against the Helvetians, and,having laid waste the country, sacked aplace, built, fusing the leisure of a longpeace, in the form of a municipal town,remarkable for the beauty of the situation*and, by reason of its salubrious waters (b),much frequented. Not content with thisact of revenge, he sent ■dispatches intoRhaetia, with orders to the auxiliaries ofthat country to hang upon the rear,of theHelvetians, while he advanced to attack-them in front.







OCR Output








244 THE HISTORY





book disposed to cavil with their generals, thanto execute their orders. A sudden resolu­tion was taken to shift their ground, andencamp within four miles of Bedriacum (a).They conducted their march, and chosetheir station, with such want of skill, that,though it was then the spring of the year,and the country round abounded withrivers, the army was distressed for want ofwater. The expediency of hazarding abattle became again the subject of debate.Otho, by frequent dispatches, insisted onthe most vigorous measures: the soldierscalled for their emperor, and with clamourdemanded his presence on the day ofbattle. Many were of opinion, that theforces beyond the Po should be called into reinforce the army. History has notmaterials to decide what would have beenthe most prudent measure; but it is cer­tain, that of all possible evils they chosethe worst.
XL. They resolved to march to theconflux of the Po (a) and the Addua, atthe distance of sixteen miles. In this move­ment the soldiers presented no appearance







OCR Output








NOTES


ON


THE HISTORY.







OCR Output








OF TACITUS. 291





a numerous army. The imperial revenues bookbeing well nigh exhausted, there was rea­son to apprehend a want of funds to an­swer the largesses of the prince. To pre­vent that distress, Vitellius ordered thecomplement of the legions and auxiliariesto be reduced, and no new levies to bemade. Dismissions from the service weregranted indiscriminately to all who ap­plied. The policy was of the worst con­sequence to the commonwealth, and, atthe same time, a grievance to the soldiers,who felt themselves oppressed by returnsof military duty, too frequent for thescanty numbers that remained. Their fa­tigue increased, while their manners weredebauched, and their vigour wasted bythe vices of a luxurious life, so differentfrom the institutions of the old republic,when money was despised, and virtue wasthe energy of the state.
LXX. Vitellius proceeded to Cre­mona. Having there attended a spectacleof gladiators exhibited by Caecina, he wasled by curiosity to the field of Bedriacum,in order, to see on the spot the vestiges of


u2







OCR Output








145 THE HISTORY





book escaped from the slaughter, fled for refugeto their fens and marshes, and there diedof their wounds, or perished under the in­clemency of the season. An account ofthis transaction being received at Rome, atriumphal statue was decreed to MarcusAponius, then governor of Maesia. Ful-vius Aurelius, Julianus Titius, and Numi-sius Lupus, all three commanders of le­gions, obtained the consular ornaments.The joy expressed byOtho Avas beyond allbounds. He assumed the merit of thevictory, boasting with vain glory, that, byhis own auspicious fortune, and the valourof his officers and his armies, he had ag­grandised the Roman name.
LXXX. From a cause altogether con­temptible, and in its origin threatening nokind of danger, a violent sedition wellnigh involved the city in ruin. The seven­teenth cohort, then quartered at Ostia,had orders to remove to Rome. The careof providing them with arms was commit­ted to Varius Crispinus, a tribune of theprcetorian baiids. That officer, intending-to execute his orders without noise or







OCR Output








OP TACITUS. (39


and, in order to be emperor, crouching booklike a slave. The marine legion did not <k—v—'
A U C
hesitate to take the oath of fidelity. By h«.that event Otho felt himself inspired with «»•uncommon ardour. Having hitherto tam­pered with the soldiers man by man, hejudged right to address them in a body.He took his station on the rampart of thecamp, and spoke to the following effect:
XXXVII. " In what light, my fellow" soldiers, shall I now consider myself?** In what character must 1 address you ?M A private man I cannot call myself, for" 3'ou have bestowed upon me the title of" prince: but can 1 assume that title," while another is still in possession of the"sovereign power? In what descriptionf* you yourselves are to be classed, is to" me matter of doubt; and must remainSi so, till the question is decided, Whether.*. you have in your camp the emperor of" Rome, or a public enemy ? You have" heard the cry that has gone forth: the" same voice that demands vengeance on*' me, calls aloud for your destruction,.*' With my life your fate is interwoven,







OCR Output








138 THE HISTORY





book in a camp where all were known to eachother, the men employed by Otho weresoon discovered by the novelty of theirfaces. Vitellius, anxious for his family,then residing at Rome, sent letters to Ti-tianus, the brother of Otho, threatening, ifany violence was offered to his mother orhis children (a), to make reprisals, and putboth him and his son to death. Both fa­milies remained unhurt. As long as Otholived, fear might be the motive : Vitellius,after his victory, added to his laurels thepalm of clemency,
LXXVI. The first occurrence that in­spired Otho with confidence in his cause,was an account from Ulyricum that thelegions of Dalmatia, of Pannonia, andMaesja had declared in his favour. Ad­vices from Spain brought the like intelli­gence ; and in a public edict, honourablemention was made of Cluvius llufus, thegovernor of the province. That compli­ment, however, was found to be prema­ture. Spain went over to the interest ofVitellius. The people of Aquitaine, underthe influence of Julius Cordus, had sworn







OCR Output








of Tacitus* 241





structive sword ? Can it be imagined, that to okthe armies then in the field, dissonant inlanguage, and in their manners still morediscordant, could ever be brought tocoalesce in one opinion ? Above all, canit be supposed that the leading chiefs^ aset of men immersed in luxury, over*whelmed with debts, and conscious oftheir crimes, would submit to any masterwho was not, like themselves, plunged invice, and by gratitude for his elevationobliged to be the patron of the most per­nicious citizens ?
XXXVIII. The love of power and do­mination seems to be an instinct of thehuman heart (a), implanted by the handof nature. Coeval with the foundation ofHome, it grew with the growth of the em­pire, and, in the hour of pride and gran­deur, broke out with resistless violence.Before that period, while the republic wasin its infancy, the equality of conditionswas easily preserved. In process of time,when the pride of foreign kings was hum­bled, and rival nations submitted to theRoman arms, avarice began to accumulate
vol. v. n







OCR Output








OF TACITUS. 57





** cuJar; or to the commonwealth at large, book"it will be yours to determine. For my-" serf, I have nothing to fear. Trained in"the-school of adversity, I now perceive"that the smiles are no less dreadful than"the frowns of fortune. But for myself I" feel no concern: I feel for the situation" of an aged father; I feel for the se-" nate;' I feel for my country. The lot of" aH three will be grievous, whether we"fail this day by the hands of assassins, or,"which to a generous mind is no less af-"ilictrag, find ourselves obliged to shed"-the blood of our fellow citizens. In the"-tate-pevolution, it was matter of joy to" allgdod men, that the city was not dis­coloured with Roman blood, and that,*'without civil discord, the reins of go­vernment passed into other hands, 'To" secure the same tranquillity was the ob-" jtect Of the late adoption. By that mea-" sure, Galba had reason to think that he** closed the scene of war and civil com-" motion.
XXX. ** I will; neither mention the" nobility of my birth, nor claim the merit







OCR Output








28 THE HISTORY





book for Marcus Otho : Laco and Icelus joinedin opposition to that measure, not somuch to favour a friend of their own, asto thwart the designs of a rival. Galbawas not to learn the close connection thatsubsisted between Vinius and Otho. Thebusy politicians, who love to pry intoevery thing, and divulge all they know,and all they think, had circulated a reportthat reached the ear of the emperor. Vi­nius had a daughter, at that time a widow;Otho was unmarried, and a match betweenthem would make the minister the father-in-law of his future emperor.
Galba resolved to act with caution, andwith due regard to the public welfare.He saw the sovereign power wrested outof the hands of Nero, but wrested iisvain, if transferred to a man like Otho; astranger, from his earliest days, to everyfair pursuit, and iii the prime of manhooddistinguished by nothing but riot and de­bauchery. It was his taste for luxury andvicious pleasures that first recommendedhim to the notice of Nero. He vied withhis master in all kinds of dissipation, and,







OCR Output








90 THE HISTORY


book null and void. That of Piso was confirmedv-^—/ by his poverty. ( .
A. U. C.622.AD
69.' XLIX. Galba's body, during the nightthat followed the murder, lay exposed tonumberless indignities. It was at lengthconveyed by Argius, an antient slave andsteward of that unfortunate emperor, tothe private gardens of his master, andthere deposited in an humble manner,without honour or distinction. His head,in a mangled condition, was fixed on apole by the rabble of the camp, and setup to public view near the tomb of Patro-bius, a slave manumitted by Nero, andby order of Galba put to death. In thatsituation it was found on the followingday, and added to the ashes of the body,which had been already committed to theflames. Such was the end of ServiusGalba, in the seventy-third year of his age.He had seen the reign of five princes, andenjoyed, during that whole period, a seriesof prosperity; happy as a private citizen,as a prince unfortunate. He was descendedfrom a long line of ancestors. His wealth







OCR Output








84 THE HISTORY


book in favour of Otho. To him they addedv—v—' Licinius Proculus, a man who lived in n>822. timacy with Otho, and was supposed to«*- be an accomplice in all his dark designs.For the office of governor of Rome theynamed Flavius Sabinus (a), influenced intheir choice by their respect for the me­mory of Nero, who had committed to himthe same important charge. The majorityhad another motive : by concurring in thisnomination, they meant to pay a compli­ment to Vespasian, the brother of Sabinus.Their next object was, to abolish the feesexacted by the centurions for occasionalexemptions from duty, and for leave ofabsence. These fees, in fact, were anannual tribute out of the pockets of thecommon men. In consequence of thisabuse, a fourth part of every company wasseen rambling about the country, or idlyloitering in the very camp. The centurionreceived his perquisite, and had no othercare. Nor was the soldier solicitous aboutthe price ; he purchased a right to be idle,and the means by which he enabled him­self to defray the expense gave him nokind of scruple. By theft, by robbery,







OCR Output








THE
HISTORY
OF
TACITUS.


BOOK II.



