


OCR Output








Printed by T. Davison, Whitefriars.







OCR Output








OF THE ANNALS. I97


the diadem on his head (b), amidst the re-* appbv.peated shouts and acclamations of the^-^rvpeople. sip;"


A.D.


IV. The Parthian prince, not yet re-­covered from his surprise, in the hurry andagitation of his spirits, addressed himselfto Nero, in substance as follows: " You" see before you a prince descended from" the line of the Arsacida?; you behold" the brother of two kings, Vologeses and" Pacorus; and yet I own myself your" slave. You, no less than (a) Mithra, are" to me a god. I pay you the same vene~" ration as I do to the Sun. Without your" protection, I have no kingdom; my rights" must flow from you. You are the author" of my fortune; and your will is fate."An ancient praetor undertook to be inter­preter on the occasion. The people, wellconvinced that Nero, by his vices, had for­feited all kind of claim to such respectfullanguage, received it as the homage of aking to the majesty of the Roman name.The speech was sufficiently mean and abpject, but the arrogance and ferocity ofNero's answer (b) exceeded every tiling







OCR Output








OF TACITUS. 77


tion. His orders were peremptory. The book


XV.


pilots, to mark their zeal, set sail in tern-
A U C
pestuous weather from the port of Formia (c). 8i7. 'While they were endeavouring to double c*<the cape of Misenum, a squall of wind fromthe south threw them on the coast of Cuma,where a number of the larger gallies, andalmost all the smaller vessels, were dashedto pieces.1
XLVII. Towards the close of the yearomens and prodigies filled the minds of thepeople with apprehensions of impendingmischief. Such dreadful peals of thunderwere never known. A comet appeared, andthat phenomenon was a certain prelude tosome bloody act to be committed by Nero.Monstrous births, such as men and beastswith double heads, were seen in the streetsand public ways; and in the midst of sa­crifices, which required victims big withyoung, the like conceptions fell from theentrails of animals slain at the altar. Inthe territory of Placentia (a) a calf wasdropped with its head growing at the ex­treme part of the leg. The constructionof the soothsayers was, that another head







OCR Output








SIXTEENTH BOOK OF THE ANNALS. S95


(c) The superstitious veneration with which the Par-fhians considered the Sea, has been already mentioned.Pliny says, Tiridales navigate- voluerat, quonia&n ex-spuere in niarta, aliisque morialium necessitatibus vio-lare naturam earn fas non putant. Lib. xxx. s. 2.
(d) See the Geographical Table.
(e) For Dyrrachium, see the Geographical Table.
Section VI.
(a) Suetonius says, Nero, having placed his laurelCrown in the capitol, and being complimented with thetitle of Imperator, closed the temple of Janus. IA Nero,s. 13.
(b) Suetonius mentions his intended expedition to theCaspian Sea, s. 19.
(c) These levies of men six feet high, to be calledthe Alexandrian phalanx, are stated by Suetonius, iiiNero, s. 19.
fd) See Suetonius, in Nero, s. 22.
(e) Suetonius, in Nero, s. 30.
(J) Suetonius, in the place last cited.
Section VII.
(a) Helius, the f reedman, is mentioned by Dio Ca«-«ius in the character of a prime minister during Nero'sabsence from Rome. Corneille has described a slaverising to preferment, with the sententious brevity of Ta-citus :
Jamais un affranchi n'est qu'un esclave infame ;Bien qu'il change d'etat, il ne change point d'ame.
Cinna, act iv. scene 6.
(b) See the Geographical Table.
(c) The city of Cassiope, and the temple of JupiterCassius, are both mentioned by Pliny, lib. iv. s. J 2.







OCR Output








'3-76 NOTES ON THE


Section LXIV.


(a) This poison was called cicuta. Seneca says, itmade Socrates a great man : Cicuta magnum Socratemfecit, Epist. xiii.
Section LXVIII.
i
(a) Statilia Messalina had been Nero's third wife.Seethe Genealogical Table, No. 39.
Section LXX.
(a) The commentators point out different passages inthe Pharsalia, but all depend on mere conjecture. Lip-gius thinks the description of Lycidas, at the point ofdeath, most probable.
Ferrea dum puppi rapidos manus inserit uncos,Affixit Lycidam : mersus foret ille profundo,Sed prohibent socii, suspensaque crura retentantScinditur avulsus ; nee sicut vulnere, sanguisEmicuit lentus : ruptis cadit undique venis,Discursusque animae diversa in membra meantisInterceptus aquis ; nullius vita peremptiEst tanta dimissa via; pars ultima trunciTradidit in Letum vacuos vitalibus artus;Aut tumidus qua pulmo jacet, qua viscera fervent,Hseserunt ibi fata diu, luctataque multumHac cum parte viri vix omnia membra tulerunt.
Pharsal. lib. iii. ver. 635.
Other critics contend for the following lines;
Sanguis erant lacrymse; quxcumque foramina novitHumor, ab his largus manat cruor; bra redundant,







OCR Output








CONTENTS.


thanks to the gods. VIII. He travels round thecountry, but avoids Athens and Sparta. lie givesa loose to vice, indulges in new pleasures, and marriesSporus, the eunuch. IX. The exhausted finances ofthe prince supplied by draining the people. The arro­gance of Helius, an imperial freedman, who directsevery thing at Rome. X. Nero attempts to open apassage for the sea through the Isthmus of Corinth.For that purpose, a number of Jew prisoners sent byVespasian to labour at the work. Vespasian appointedcommander against the Jews. XI. Helius, who go­verns every thing at Rome, in the absence of Nero,insults the senate and the people. He writes an ac­count to Nero of all that passes, and presses him toreturn to the capital. Nero forms a design againstthe life of Corbulo. Arrius Farms, an officer in Asia,sends an accusation against Corbulo. Corbulo passesinto Greece, to have an interview with Nero. Corbulocompelled to dispatch himself. Nerd.s labours at theIsthmus of Corinth. He embarks for Italy, andarrives at Naples. He enters Rome in triumph. XII.A conspiracy discovered, and the accomplices put todeath. A retolt in Gaul. Virginius Rufus defeatsthe insurrection of Vindex. Galba, in secret, favouredthe cause of Vindex, and is much alarmed at his defeat.XIII. Nero resolves to destroy the whole senate. Hisdesigns discovered by a favourite slave. The fathers,alarmed for their own safety, prepare to counteractNerd's designs. Nero adjudged to suffer death, as anenemy to his country. XIV. Nero terrified: He isdriven to despair, laments his sad condition, and, atlq.st puts an end to his life: the last and worst of thehouse of Ceesar. XV. Prodigies: the sudden joy,and changeable humours of the populace. Nymphidius







OCR Output








J72 THE ANNALS





book of the accusers, and their malice knew how
XVI.
to use it.


XXVIII. Cossutianus took the lead.Eprius Marcellus followed him, with moreforce andacrimony. "The commonwealth,"he said, " is on the brink of ruin. Certain" turbulent spirits rear their crest so high," that no room is left for the milder virtues" of the prince. The senate for some time" past has been negligent, tame, and pas-" sive. Your lenity, conscript fathers," your lenity has given encouragement to" sedition. It is in consequence of your" indulgence that Thrasea presumes to" trample on the laws; that his son-in-law," Helvidius Priscus (a), adopts the same per-" nicious principles; that Paconius Agrip-" pinus (b), with the inveterate hatred** towards the house of Caesar, which he" inherits from his father, declares open" hostility; and that Curtius Montanus (c)," in seditious verses, spreads abroad the" venom of his pen. Where is Thrasea" now ? I want to see the man of consular"rank in his place; J want to see the







OCR Output








OF TACITUS. 81


man knights, namely,Tullius Senecio, Cer- bookvarius Proculus, Vulcatius Araricus, Julius'


Tugurinus, Munatius Gratus, Antonius "sis. "
> ' a. o.
Natalis, and Martius Festus. Senecio, the #•
first in the list, had lived in the closest in­timacy with the prince, and, being stillobliged to wear the mask, he found theinterval big with anxiety, mistrust, anddanger. Antonius Natalis was the bosom-friend land confidential agent of Piso: therest had their separate views, and in a re­volution hoped to find their private ad­vantage. There were, besides SubriusFlavius and Sulpicius Asper already men­tioned, a number of military men ready todraw their swords in the' cause. In thisclass were Granius Silvanus and StatiusProximus, both tribunes of the praetorianbands; Maximus Scaiirus and VenefusPaullus, two centurions. But the mainstrength and pillar of the party was FeniusRums1 (a), commander in chief of the Prae­torian guards; a man of principle, and forthe integrity of his conduct esteemed and'Honoured by the people. But Tigellinus1Stood in higher favour with the prince, andby his cruel devices no less than by hisvol. iv. o







OCR Output








384 NOTES ON THE


(b) For Gallio, the brother of Seneca, see Annals, xv.8.73.
(c) Brotier exclaims in this place, let the detractorsfrom the merit of Lucan hear what Tacitus says of him,and let them blush for their malignity. That a youngpoet, who ended his career in the 27th year of his age,should aim in many passages of his work at ambitiousornaments, and the false glitter which the example of hisuncle Seneca and the taste of the age encouraged, can­not be matter of wonder ; but, to atone for his faults,his poem is a treasure of sentiments worthy of a Roman.Lucan taught Corneille to think, and to express histhoughts with force and dignity.
(d) Juvenal gives us to understand that Lucan waspossessed of great riches, and might therefore seek no re­ward but fame:
Contentus fama jaceat Lucanus in hortisMarmoreis. Sat. vii. ver. 79.
(e) The plot to which Tacitus refers, is not relatedwith perspicuity by any historian. All that is now knownis, that Cerealis was the informer, and that Sextus Passie-nus, the chief of the conspiracy, with several men ofrank, was put to death by ordc of Caligula.
Section XVIII.
(a) This is the writer whom Pope has celebrated inthe Essay on Criticism:
Fancy and art in gay Petronius please,
The scholar's learning, with the courtier's ease.
The account here given of him by Tacitus, is elegantand interesting. See Plutarch, on the difference betweena friend and a sycophant; and see Pliny, lib. xxxvii. s. 7^







OCR Output








340 GENEALOGICAL TABLE.


when Caligula, enamoured of her beauty,carried off by force, and in a few daysafter repudiated her.—Suet. Life of Ca­ligula, s. 25. Dio, book lix.
89- Lollia Paulina, grand-daughterof Marcus Lollius, who was tutor to CaiusCaesar, the son of Agrippa (No, 48), anddrew on himself a load of disgrace and ob­loquy on account of the prodigious pre­sents, which he received with a rapacioushand from the oriental princes. Hisdaughter Lollia Paulina was married toCaligula. The emperor ravished her fromCaius Memmius Regulus, and in a shorttime after dismissed her from his embraces,Pliny assures us, that he saw her, not ata time of public festivity, but at a mo­derate entertainment, placed at the ban­queting table, in a dress overcharged withjewels and pearls, artfully intermixed andblended, tangled in her hair, shining onher head, at her ears, round her neck,with rich bracelets on her arms, and herfingers loaded with rings; the whole of thislaboured magnificence was not worth lessthan four hundred thousand sesterces,


-







OCR Output








OF TACITUS. 95


soon as he heard that Natalis had made a book
• • xv-discovery, saw. the inutility of remaining u-v^o
silent. Thinking the whole conspiracy 'si's. *detected, he yielded to his fears; and, «.*following a mean example of pusillanimity,discovered his accomplices. Three of thenumber, namely, Lucan, Quinctianus, andSenecio, persisted for some time to denythe whole with undaunted firmness, till in­duced, at length, by a promise of pardon,they thought they could not do enough toatone for their obstinacy. Lucan did notscruple to impeach (a) his own mother,whose name was Acilia. Quinctianusgave information against Glicius Gallus,his dearest friend; and Senecio, in likemanner, betrayed Annius Pollio.
LVII. Nero did not forget that Epi-charis was still detained in custody, on theevidence of Volusius Proculus. The weak­ness of a female frame, he imagined, wouldnot be able to endure the pangs of therack. He therefore ordered her to be putto the most exquisite torture. But neitherstripes, nor fire, nor the brutal rage of theexecutioners, who were determined not to







OCR Output








• FIFTEENTH BOOK OF THE ANNALS. 365


Section XXX.
(a) The night in a Roman camp was divided into fourwatches, each for the space of three hours. When thesentinels were changed, notice was given by the sound oftrumpet. See Hist. lib. ii. s. 29.
Section XXXI.
(a) Vologeses king of Parthia, and Pacorus king ofMedia, were brothers to Tiridates. For Ecbatana, seethe Geographical Table.
(b) None but persons of high rank were admitted toembrace the governors of provinces. According to theideas of that age, the honour was so high, that the Par­thian king thought proper to make it a preliminaryarticle.
Section XXXII.
fa) The capital of the Maritime Alps was called Ebro-dunum, now Embrun. See an account of the territo­ries of the Duke of Savoy. The rights and privileges ofLatium have been already mentioned, Annals, xv. s. 32.
(b) The Roscian Law, so called after L. Roscius Otho,was established A. U. C. 685. It assigned fourteen rowsin the theatre to the Roman knights ; but was silent asto the Circus, where the senators, the knights, and thecommonalty were mixed in a promiscuous concourse.Afterwards in the consulship of Cinna and Messala,A. U. C. 1ST, the senators and knights had a place as­signed at the spectacle of the Circus, where they satapart from the plebeians, but without any distinction be­tween their own two orders. Claudius allotted properplaces for the senators. Suet- in Claud, s. 21. It re­







OCR Output








OF TACITUS. 47


" of Rome to wild ambition and the havoc book
XV.
" of a destructive war. The internal dis-1


" sensions that distract the kingdom of iie.'" Parthia are too well known. It is also 63.'" known that Vologcses has for his subjects" fierce and barbarous nations, whom no" law can check, no government can con-" troul. Nero, on the contrary, sees a" settled calm throughout the Roman" world, and, except the rupture with" Parthia, has no other war upon his" hands." Such was Corbulo's answer. Togive it weight, he added the terrors of the. sword. The grandees of Armenia, who hadbeen the first to revolt, were driven outof their possessions, and their castles werelevelled to the ground. Between the weak,who made no resistance, and the brave andresolute, no distinction was made. Allwere involved in one common danger; noplace was safe; hills and mountains noless than the open plain were filled withconsternation,
XXVIII. The name of Corbulo was not,as is usual among adverse nations, hatedby the enemy. He was, on the contrary,







OCR Output








GENEALOGICAL TABLE OF THE CJESARS. 359


Poppaea Sabina, wife of Nero . . •Posthumus, see Agrippa Posthumus.
H.
Rubellius Blandus, husband of JuliaPiubellius Plautus, son of Rubellius Blan­dus . . . . . .


No.
37


7.5


76


S.Sabina, see Popp.-ea Sabina.Scribonia, wife of AugustusSilanus, see Appius Junius Silanus.Silanus, see Junius Silanus.Silanus, see Lucius'Junius Silanus.Silanus, see Marcus Junius Silanus.Silanus, see Junius Silanus Torquatus.Silanus Torquatus,-nephew to Junius Tor­quatus . .-..-.Statilia Messalina, wife of NeroSylla, see Cornelius Sylla.Son of Drusus Caesar ~\Son of Pompey the Great All died younSon of Tiberius, emperor > their namesSons of Agrippa not known.Sons of Germanicus J
5'
5939
r73
8
< 78I 28192
Tiberius, emperor of Rome . . .68Tiberius, grandson of Tiberius, emperor . 72 ,







OCR Output








OF THE ANNALS. 207


Amidst this din of amis, and all this appen.
B.XVL.
mighty tumult of warlike preparations, an ^-«nr>jincident occurred of more moment to Nero 8i9."
A. D
than the glory of the Roman name. A de- «Vputation arrived at Rome from the citiesof Greece, where the theatre, and poetry,and music flourished, with orders to pre­sent to the emperor, from tjie severalplaces, the victor's crown (d) for minstrelsyand song. An opportunity so bright andunexpected was not to be neglected. Nerowas transported with joy: he toweredabove himself and all competition. Thedeputies were admitted to his presence;they were caressed, invited to his table,and all other business, however important,gave way to the elegant arts. The Greekswere skilled in the trade of adulation.They beseeched the prince to honour theniwith a specimen of his talents. Nero sungto his guests; they heard, they applauded,they were thrown into ecstasies. He in histurn admired their taste; they were theonly people who had music in their souls;they, and they only, had an ear for finersound; the true masters of harmony; thejudges who deserved to hear his exquisite







OCR Output








328 " CENEALOGICAL TABLE.


tus, lmperator, Augur, Chief Pontiff, vestedwith the Tribunitian Power.
69. Vipsania Agrippina, daughterof Marcus Vipsanius Agrippa by his firstwife Pomponia, who was the grand-daugh­ter of Atticus, to whom Cicero addressedthe well-known collection of letters. Vip­sania Agrippina was first married to Ti­berius, the emperor, but by him unwil­lingly repudiated during her pregnancy,to make way for a match with Julia, thedaughter of Augustus.—Tacit. Annal. booki. s. 12. Suet. Life of Tiberius, s. 7. Dio,book liv. After her divorce, she marriedAsinius Gallus, the son of Asinius Pollio,the consul and celebrated orator, the fa­vourite of Augustus, and, what is now ofmore consequence, celebrated by Horaceand Virgil. Of all the children of Agrippa,she is the only one that died a natura}death, A. U. 773. Tacit. Annal. bookiii. s. 19.
For Asinius Gallus, see Tacit. An­nal. book i. s. 8.







OCR Output








374 ' NOTES ON THE


his mother, a woman who boasted neither rank nor for­tune, would not, among a great number of daring con­spirators, be deemed an object worthy of notice ; and,besides, the terrors of the rack may conquer the most he-' roic mind. When the executioner appears with his tor­turing engines, it is no longer the moment of courage.He who in the ranks of war is ready to face every danger,may shrink from the pangs prepared for him in a dungeon,where he must suffer under a villain's hand, unseen, un-pitied, unapplauded. When Felton, who stabbed theDuke of Buckingham at Portsmouth, was examined be­fore the privy council, the bishop of London said to him,If you will not confess, you must go to the rack. Theman replied, If it must be so, I know not whom I mayaccuse ; perhaps some Lord at this board. Sound sense,says Judge Foster, in the mouth of an enthusiast and aruffian ! In the same distress, the same hurry and per­turbation of spirit, Lucan mentioned his mother. Hemight think that she was. not of consequence to provokeresentment; and the event shewed, if he thought so, thathis conclusion was right. Nero affected to forget her.She and Seneca's wife were suffered to live. For thesereasons, the conduct of Lucan may admit of some exte­nuation ; more especially, when he had before his eyesthe example of senators, and men of consular rank. Buta late writer thinks he has discovered a better ground ofdefence- He denies the fact, and says, Tacitus hasadopted a gross calumhy, invented by Nero to vilify theobject of his envious abhorrence. But it may be asked,If Nero framed the story, is it probable that a writer,who wages an incessant war against evil men and evildeeds, would have descended to be the accomplice of atyrant ? Tacitus, through the whole of his narrative, has







OCR Output








156 THE ANNALS


book without profusion; an epicure, yet not a^-y^ prodigal; addicted to his appetites, but8i9. with taste and judgment; a refined and««• elegant voluptuary. Gay and airy in hisconversation, he charmed by a certaingraceful negligence, the more engaging as' it flowed from the natural frankness of hisdisposition. With all this delicacy, andcareless ease, he shewed, when he was go­vernor of Bithynia, and, afterwards, in theyear of his consulship, that vigour of mindand softness of manners may well unite inthe same person. With his love of sensu­ality he possessed talents for business.From his public station he returned to hisusual gratifications, fond of vice, or of plea­sures that bordered upon it. His gaietyrecommended him to the notice of theprince. Being in favour at court, andcherished as the companion of Nero in allhis select parties, he was allowed to be thearbiter of taste and elegance. Withoutthe sanction of Pctronius nothing was ex­quisite, nothing rare or delicious.
Hence the jealousy of Tigellinus, whodreaded a rival, in the good graces of the







OCR Output








152 THE ANNALS





book much more must the uniformity of thexvi. . J
present subject be found irksome, and/
even repulsive! We have nothing before
us but tame servility, and a deluge of blood
spilt by a tyrant in the hour of peace. The
heart recoils from the dismal story. But i
let it be remembered by those, who may ]
hereafter think these events worthy of their \
notice, that I have discharged the duty of an /
historian, and if, in relating the fate of so j
many eminent citizens, who resigned their
lives to the will of one man, I mingle tears )
with indignation, let me be allowed to feel /
for the unhappy. The truth is, the wrath of]
Heaven was bent against the Roman state, j
The calamities that followed cannot, like ]
the slaughter of an army, or the sacking \
of a city, be painted forth in one general
draught. Repeated murders must be given
in succession; and, if the remains of illus- /
trious men are distinguished by their fune- \
ral obsequies from the mass of the people, (
may it not be considered as a tribute duej
to their memory, that, in like manner, their
deaths should be snatched from oblivion,
and that history, in describing the last act
of their lives, should give to each luVdi-







OCR Output








OF THE! ANNAtS. Igg


arid the spectators admired his address and appen.


B. XVI;


A. U. C.


the vigour of his arm. Historians relateas a fact (g), that two bulls were transfixed "siaby one arrow, and died on the spoL ■ M>'
IIL Nero proceeded, with a grand'cavalcade, on his way to Rome, where themost splendid preparations were made forhis reception. The whole city was illu-minated, and the houses decorated withgarlands and laurel wreaths. The peoplefcrowded together from all quarters, andrent the air with shouts and acclamations,while the emperor, with Tiridates and theParthian nobility in his train, made histriumphal entry. A day was fixed forTiridates to receive the diadem from thehands of Nero* Nothing could equal thepomp and splendour, with which that ce­remony was performed (a). On the pre­ceding evening, the city was again illu­minated, and the streets adorned withflowers. At the dawn of day, an incredi­ble multitude repaired to the forum; thetops of houses were crowded with spec­tators, and a splendid, but theatrical pomp


0'2







OCR Output













OCR Output








272 APPENDIX TO BOOK XVI.


B. XVI.





this is infamy ; 3011 linger in disgrace ;" this is no time for dejected passions; the" moment calls for manly fortitude."
Those words were no sooner uttered,than he heard the sound of horses advanc­ing with speed towards the house. Thishe signified by repeating a line fromHomer (p). The fact was, the senate hadgiven orders, that he should be broughtback to Rome to undergo the judgmentwhich they had pronounced, and the offi­cers, charged with that commission, werenear at hand. Nero seized his dagger,and stabbed himself in the throat. Thestroke was too feeble. ' Epaphroditus lenthis assistance, and the next blow was amortal wound. A centurion entered theroom, and, seeing Nero in a mangled con­dition, ran immediately to his assistance,preftnding that he came with a friendlyhand to bind the wound, and save the em­peror's life. Nero had not breathed hislast. He raised his languid eyes, andfaintly said, " You come too late: is this" your fidelity (q) ?" He spoke and expired.The ferocity of his nature was still visible







OCR Output








OF THE ANNALS. 257


news that filled all Italy, he forgot his by- appk*draulic organ, and returned to Rome, co-


ADC
vered with consternation. His fears were iti.soon dispersed. Letters from Virginius <*•Rufus arrived at Rome. .The death of Vin-dex, and the total overthrow of his army,transported Nero beyond all bounds ofjoy. He called for his musical instru­ments; he tuned his harp, and warbledsongs of triumph.
In Spain, the minds of men were affectedin a very different manner. Galba saw anunexpected reverse of fortune. He blamedhis own imprudence, and accused the follyof an old man, who, at the close of life,was weak enough to listen to the call ofambition. To try, if possible, to retrievehis affairs, he sent dispatches to Virgi­nius Rufus, inviting him to a participationof councils and of future grandeur. Theoffer was rejected. It was a maxim withRufus, that the senate and people had thesole right of creating an emperor. Thecivil power, he said, in every well consti­tuted government, ought to be supreme;to obey is the virtue of a soldier. Galba
VOL. iv. s







OCR Output








Stf2 GENEALOGICAL TABLE.


the elder. He was father of the famousMessaliua.—Suet. Life of Claudius, s. 26.
25. Domitia Lepida, daughter of An-tonia the younger, by her husband LuciusDomitius iEnobarbus. She was the wifeof the last-mentioned Valerius Messala,and mother of Messalina; a woman ofdebauched and profligate manners, anda violent impetuous spirit; in point ofbeauty, riches, and vice, the rival of Agrip-pina, Nero's mother. She was condemnedto death A. U. 807-—Tacit. Annal. xi. s.37- Annal. xii. s. 64. See Suet. Life ofClaudius, s. 26. Life of Nero, s. J.
26. Valeria Messalina, daughter ofValerius Messala and Domitia Lepida.She was wife to the emperor Claudius; awoman of furious and till then unheard oflewdness. While Claudius was at Ostia,she had the hardiness openly to celebrateher nuptials with Silius, and for that unpa­ralleled crime was put to death A. U. 801.—Tacit. Annal. xi. s. 26. Suet. Life ofClaudius, s. 26.







OCR Output








CONTENTS.


favours Galb.Cs party, meaning at the same time toseize the sovereignty. He is slain. XVI. Proceedingsagainst all the instruments of Nero's cruelty. Galbainformed of the death of Aero. He marches at thehead of his army towards Italy, and begins his reignwith cruelty and great effusion of blood.
These transactions passed in three years.
A. U. C—Of Christ Consuls.
819 66 Suetonius Paulimis, Lucius Telesinus.
820 6T Fonteius Capito, Julius Rufus.
821 68 Silius Italicus, Galerius Trachalus.







OCR Output








78 THE ANNALS


o o k was preparing For the government of the


XV.


world, but would prove weak, insufficient,
A U C
8i7.' and be soon detected, like the monstrous
A. D. -. .
m. ' productions, which did not rest concealedin the womb, but came before their time,and lay exposed to public view near thehigh road*


A"-c- XLVIII. Silius Nerva and Atticus
O JO.
AD.


65.


Vestinus entered on their consulship. Inthat juncture a deep conspiracy was formed,and carried on with such a spirit of enter­prise, that in the moment of its birth it wasalmost ripe for execution. Senators, Ro­man knights, military men, and even womengave in their names with emulation, allincited by their zeal for Caius Piso, andtheir detestation of Nero. Piso was de­scended from the house of Calpurnius, byhis paternal line related to the first familiesin Rome. His virtues, or his amiablequalities that resembled virtues, made himthe idol of the people. An orator of highdistinction, he employed his eloquence inthe defence of his fellow citizens; possessedof great wealth, he was generous to hisfriends; by nature courteous, he was affable







OCR Output








226 APPENDIX TO BOOK XVI


flames. In the mean time, Traja•son was afterwards emperor of Rome, was


appen. flames. In the mean time, Trajan, whose
B. XVI. ■'


A U C
826.' sent, at the head of the tenth legion, to«7. spread terror and destruction through thecountry. He laid siege to the city of' Japha (e), and, meeting with an obstinate," resistance, carried the - works by assault.'All, who were capable of bearing arms, innumber not less than fifteen thousand, wereput to the sword. The Samaritans, whohad collected their forces on Mount Gari-zim (f), were treated with the same severi­ty. Cerealis, who afterwards commandedagainst Civilis, the Batavian chieftain, andalso in Britain, had orders to march withthree thousand foot and six hundred horseto attack the fastnesses on the hills, anddislodge the enemy. He formed lines ofcircumvallation round the hill, and by aclose blockade cut off all communicationwith the adjacent country. The Samari­tans were reduced by famine to the lastdistress; yet, even in that condition, heldout to the last with determined obstinacy.Cerealis ordered his men to advance up thehill. The soldiers forced their way up thesteep ascent, and with resistless valour soon







OCR Output








OF THE ANNALS; 073


in his countenance. His eyes fixed ancUwEN.
1 • r B. XVI.
glaring, and every feature swelled with -—~r—■/warring passions, he looked more stern, iai. "more grim, and terrible than ever. es."
Nero died in the thirty-second year ofhis age, on the eleventh day of June, aftera reign of thirteen years, seven months,and twenty-eight days (r). The news wasreceived at Rome with all demonstrationsof joy. The populace ran wild about thestreets, with the cap of liberty on theirheads (s). The forum sounded with accla­mations. Icelus, a freedman, who ma­naged Galba's affairs at Rome, had beenthrown into prison by Nero; but, on thesudden accession of his master, he wasnow become a man in power and high au­thority. He consented that Nero's bodyshould be committed to the flames at theplace where he died. The funeral riteswere performed without delay, and with-out pomp. His remains were conveyed tothe monumental vault of the Domitian fa­mily, his paternal ancestors. The urn wascarried by two female servants, and Ac-t6 (t), the famous concubine. The secrecy,
VOL. IV. T







OCR Output








GENEALOGICAL TABLE. 397


6. Julia, daughter of Julius Caesar byCornelia. She married Servilius Caepio,and, being divorced from him, became thewife of Pompey the Great, A. U. 695. Shedied A. U. 700. Her funeral oration wasspoken by Octavius. Honours were insti­tuted to her memory by Julius Caesar.—Suet. Life of Caesar, s. 21.
7. Cneius Pompeius Magnus, bornA. U. 648. He married Julia, Caesar'sdaughter. He entered on the public ma­gistracy at the age of eighteen. He wasdefeated by Julius Caesar in the battle ofPharsalia, and put to death in iEgypt,A. U. 706.—Veil. Pat. book ii. s. 29. Plu­tarch, Life of Pompey.
8. A son of Pompey the Great, by Ju­lia, the daughter of J. Caesar. Died A. U.701.—-Veil. Pater, book ii. s. 47.
9. A daughter of Pompey, by Julia,Caesar's daughter. Died A, U. 701.—Plu­tarch, Life of J. Caesar.
10. Pompeia, daughter of Quintus







OCR Output








OF TACITUS. 131





and a chosen band of mariners sent on book
XVI-board. Rome, in the mean time, was dis­tracted with hope and fear, with doubtand expectation. No other subject wastalked of. The common people, with theirusual facility, believed every thing; whilemen of reflection argued in a differentmanner. It happened that the quinquen­nial games (a) were to close the secondlustre of five years. During that festival, theexpected treasure was the subject on whichthe orators expatiated, and the poets ex­hausted their invention. In their flightsof fancy, the earth was no longer contentwith pouring forth fruit and grain, and pro­ducing metals intermixed with veins ofprecious ore; the present fecundity shewedthat the gods were working miracles tobless the reign of Nero. These were thebright conceits, which flattery displayedwith rapture, and eloquence adorned withher richest colouring. While the passionsof Nero stood ready to receive every newdevice, fiction passed for truth, and nothingwas too hyperbolical for the credulity ofthe prince.


k 2







OCR Output








OF TACITUS. 153


stinct and proper character, for the ia-Boos
f m
formation ot posterity? v^-v-o
A.U.C.819.
XVII. I proceed to add to the list of 66.'murdered citizens, Annaeus Mela, CerealisAnicius, Rufius Crispinus, and Petronius.In the compass of a few days they were allcut off, as it were at one blow. Melaand Crispinus were no higher than Romanknights; but in fame and dignity of cha­racter equal to the most distinguished sena­tors. Crispinus, at one time, commandedthe prcetorian bands; he was afterwardsinvested with the consular ornaments, butlately charged as an accomplice in theconspiracy, and banished to the island ofSardinia (a). At that place he receivedthe emperor's mandate, and died by hisown hand. Mela (b) was brother to Senecaand Gallic He abstained through lifefrom the pursuit of civil honours, vainlyflattering himself, that a simple knightcould rise to the highest splendour, andtower above the consular dignity. By re­maining in his rank, he was qualified toact in the administration of the imperialrevenue, and that employment he thought







OCR Output








OF TACITUS. 51


to capitulate was before the eye, and the booksame spot exhibited a reverse of fortune- v^s^^They saw Tiridates on the poirit of setting 'si6."out for Rome, a spectacle to the nations 63.'through which he was to pass, and to ex­hibit, in the presence of Nero, the humblecondition of a suppliant prince; how littlebetter than a captive!
XXX. To the glory resulting from theseevents Corbulo added the graceful qualitiesof affability and condescension. He in*vited Tiridates to a banquets The princewas struck with the novelty of Romanmanners. Every object awakened hiscuriosity. He desired to know the reasonof all that he observed. When the watch (a)was stationed, why was it announced by acenturion ? Why did the company, whenthe banquet closed, rise from table atthe sound of a trumpet? And why wasthe fire on the augural altar lighted with atorch? The Roman general answered allenquiries, not without partiality for hiscountry. He aggrandized every thing, andgave the Parthian the noblest idea of themanners and institutions of the ancient


e 2







OCR Output








OF TACITUS. 7£


and polite to all. To these accomplish- b o o kments he united a graceful figure and an


engaging countenance. In his moral con- 8i».duct neither strict nor regular, he led a «.life of voluptuous ease, fond of pomp and /
splendour, and, at times, free and luxuriousin his pleasures. His irregularities servedto grace his character. At a time whenvice had charms for all orders of men, it ('
was not expected, that the sovereign shouldlead a life of austerity and self-denial.
XLIX. The conspiracy did not origin­ate from the ambition of Piso. Among somany bold and generous spirits it is noteasy to name the person who first set thewhole in motion. Subrius Flavius, a tri­bune of the praetorian guards, and SulpiciusAsper, were the active leaders. The firmnesswith which they afterwards met their fatesufficiently marks their characters. AnnaeusLucan, the celebrated poet, and PlautiusLateranus, consul elect, entered into theplot with ardour and inflamed resentment.Lucan had personal provocations: Nerowas an enemy to his rising fame: not beingable to vie with that eminent genius, he







OCR Output








320 GENEALOGICAL TABLE.


54. Marcus ^Emilius Lepidus, sonof Lucius iEmilius Lepidus and Julia thedaughter of Agrippa. He married Dru-silla, and committed adultery and incestwith her sisters. His vices endeared himto Caligula. He was condemned for trea­sonable practices, and put to death A. U.792. Caligula, upon that occasion, gavea donative to the soldiers, and dedicatedto Mars the Avenger three swords,which had been prepared by the conspira­tors.—Dio, book lix. Suet. Life of Cali­gula, s. 24 and 36. Tacit. Annal. xiv. s. 2.
55. -ZEmilia Lepida, the daughter ofLucius iEmilius Paulus and Julia, thedaughter of Agrippa and Julia, conse­quently grand-daughter to Augustus. She.was contracted to Claudius, afterwards em­peror, when he was extremely young; andafterwards married to Junius Silanus.—Suet. Life of Claud, s. 26. Pliny, book vii,s. 13.
56. Junius Silanus, \he husband ofthe last-mentioned /Emilia Lepida. No­







OCR Output








OF THE ANNALS. 261





resolution to massacre the senate, and, after appen.
B.XVI.
setting fire to the city a second time, to letloose his whole collection of wild beasts, todevour the people in the general conster­nation, and save himself by flying intoEgypt. This horrible scheme was nosooner conceived than brought to light byone of his favourite eunuchs. This mis­creant had been, for some time, subservientto the vices of his master, and lived withhim in the dearest intimacy. From a per­son so beloved nothing was concealed. liewas the confidential friend of the emperor,not only in scenes of riot, but also in themost important councils. But the jealousyof an upstart, raised above his base condi­tion, is easily alarmed, The favourite (d)thought himself slighted. His pride wasroused, and, to revenge the injury, he dis­covered the particulars of the intendedmassacre.
A design so black and horrible raisedthe general indignation. ^ The fathers trem­bled for themselves, but the habit of slaveryhad debased their faculties. They saw thatno time was to be lost, and yet could not







OCR Output








24 THE ANNALS





book pardon from Paetus. The merciful disposi­tion of that officer might incline him toforgive; but, for himself, he favoured nonebut such as conquered by their valour. Hethen addressed his own legions, visitingthe ranks, and inspiring all with zeal andardour. He called to mind their past ex­ploits, and opened to their view a new fieldof glory. " It is not," he said, " the towns," and villages of Armenia that now de-" mand our swords: a Roman camp in-" vokes our aid, and two legions look to us^for relief. Their delivery from the Bar-" barians will be the reward of victory. If'* to a private soldier the civic crown (b)," delivered by the hand of his general, is" the brightest recompense for the life of a" citizen saved; how much greater will be" the glory of the present enterprise, inu which the number of the distressed is" equal to those who bring relief, and, by" consequence, every soldier in this army" may save his man \" By this discourseone general spirit was diffused through theranks. The men had private motives toinflame their courage; they felt for theirbrothers; they wished to succour their re­







OCR Output








392 NOTES ON THE APPENDIX TO THE


imitantur ? Cum cos etiam, qui non indigent dementiaullius, nihil magis uuam lenitas deceat. Atque ego op­timum et emendatissimum exist imo, qui ceteris it a ig-noscit, tanquam ipse quotidie peccet; ita peccatis abstinet,tanquam nemini ignoscat. Proindc hoc domi, hocforisthoc in omni vita genere teneamus, ut nobis implacabilessimus, e.vorabiles istis etiam, qui dare xeniam nisi sibinesciunt; mandemusque memorize, quod vir mitissimus,et ob hoc quoque maximus, Thraseadicere crebro solebatTQui vitia odit, homines odit. Plin. lib. viii. epist.22. Mr, Melmoth, the elegant translator of Pliny, says,The meaning of this maxim seems to be, that as it is diffi­cult to separate the action from the man, we should notsuffer the errors of the world to raise in us that acrimonyof indignation, which, if well examined, will, perhaps,be oftene rfound to proceed from some secret principleof malice, than a just abhorrence of vice. And, there­fore, as Seneca observes, Satius est publicos mores ethumana vitia placide accipere. See Melmoth's Pliny,book viii. epist. 22.
(c) Helvidius Priscus was recalled from exile, andafterwards put to death in the reign of Vespasian. SeeAppendix to book v. of the History; and see Life ofAgricola, s. ii. and note (b).
(d) Paconius Agrippinus has been mentioned, Annals,xvi. s. 28.
(e) These particulars are related by Arrian, in Epic-teto, 1.
(J) Arrian has recorded this fact. Seneca has men­tioned Demetrius with the highest applause, and chieflyfor the following sentiment: Nothing can be more un­fortunate than the man who has never felt the stroke ofadversity : he has had no experience of himself. Nihilntihividetur wj'elifius eo, cui nihil unamm evenit adversi:







OCR Output








OF TACITUS. 91


homing in his breast. He desired the same book
& . XV.
Milichus to prepare bandages for the brae-'


A. U. C.
ing of wounds, and applications to stop si's.the effusion of blood. If this man was, «.before that time, apprised of the plot, hehad till then acted with integrity; but themore probable opinion is, that he wasnever trusted, and now from all the cir- ■cumstances drew his own conclusion!
The reward of treachery no sooner pre­sented itself to the servile mind of an en­franchised slave, than he saw wealth andpower inviting him to betray his master.The temptation was bright and dazzling;every principle gave way; the life of hispatron was set at nought; and for the giftof freedom no sense of gratitude remained.He advised with his wife, and female ad­vice was the worst he could take. Thewoman, with all the art and malice of hersex, alarmed his fears. Other slaves, shesaid, and other freedmen had an eye onall that passed. The silence of one couldbe of no use. The whole would be broughtto light; and he, who first made the dis­covery, would be entitled to the reward.







OCR Output








33% GENEALOGICAL TABLE.


bellius Blandus and his wife Julia. Thepopular voice marked him out a properperson to succeed to the imperial dignity,and for that reason he was put to death byNero A. U. 815.—Tacit. Annal, book xiii.s. 19; book xiv. s. 22. and 58.
77- Antistia Pollutia, daughter ofLucius Antistius Vetus, and wife of Rubel-lius Plautus (No. 76). She was put to deathwith her father and Sextia, her mother-in-law, A. U. 818. Her crime was, that, whileshe lived, Nero considered her and her fa^mily as a living reproach for the murder ofher husband Rubellius Plautus.—- Tacit,Annal. book xvi. s. 10 and 11.
78. A son of Tiberius the emperor byJulia, the daughter of Augustus (see No.46). He was born at Aquileia, and diedin his infancy A. U. 747- His name is no­where mentioned.—Suet. Life of Tiberius,s. 7. Dio, book lv.
79- Nero Claudius Drusus, son ofTiberius Claudius Nero (see No. 67) andLivia, afterwards married to Augustus.







OCR Output








11(5 THE ANNALS


book he was conducted to a warm bath, and;


XV


A.U. C.
818.


being put into the water, expired withoutsis.0'a complaint, and without a groan. His«/ guests, in the mean time, remained in thebanqueting room, imprisoned by the guards.It was late at night before they were releas­ed. Nero heard the account with pleasure.He saw, in the sport of his imagination, a setof men assembled at a convivial party, andevery moment expecting their final doom.He laughed at their distress, and saidfacetiously, " They have paid for their con-'.' sular supper."
LXX. Lucan, the famous poet, wasthe next sacrifice to the vengeance ofNero. His blood flowed freely from him,and being soon well nigh exhausted, heperceived that the vital heat had left theextremities of his limbs. His hands andfeet were chilled, but, the warmth retiringto his heart, he still retained his senses andthe vigour of his mind. The lines in hispoem, which describe a soldier dying inthe same condition (a), occurred to hismemory. He repeated the passage, andexpired. His own verses were the last*







OCR Output








578 APPENDIX TO BOOK XVI.


appen. tard the execution of his designs. Men ofi^v>j consular rank, who had commanded ar-82i*. " mies and governed provinces, did not68. * blush to pay their court to him. The se­nate (f) acted with the same servile adu­lation. They crowded to his levee, andSuffered him to prescribe the form andsubstance of every decree that passed.The populace broke out with licentious■fury, and Nymphidius, effectually to se­duce the vulgar mind, encouraged themadness of the times. The images andstatues of Nero were dragged through thestreets, and dashed to pieces. A crewof vile incendiaries spread consternationthrough the city ; a scene of blood andmassacre followed (g), and the innocentfell in one promiscuous carnage with theguilty. Mauricus beheld the phrensy ofthe multitude with such inward horror,that he could not help saying in the senate,** Let us take care that we have not reason" to regret the loss of Nero (h)."
Nymphidius soon perceived that hishopes of being the only statesman in pow-.er, and of governing the Roman world in







OCR Output








i(56 THE ANNALS


50 ok dour of that magnificent scene, the horrors
AVI. » #
v*ry>Jof domestic cruelty would be lost; per-
A- V. C. *' .
819. . haps, it seemed a fair opportunity to dis-66.* play to a foreign prince the grandeur of aRoman emperor, and convince him, bythe murder of two eminent citizens, thatthe imperial power was nothing short oforiental despotism.
. .
XXIV. The city went forth in crowdsto meet the emperor (a), and gaze at theeastern monarch. Thrasea received ordersnot to appear on the occasion. A mindlike his was not to be disconcerted. Withhis usual fortitude he sent a memorial tothe prince, requesting to know by whatact of his life he had deserved such a markof displeasure. He pledged himself, if afair hearing were granted, to confute hisenemies, and place his innocence in theclearest light. Nero received the memo­rial with eager curiosity, expecting to findthat Thrasea, under the operation of fear,had descended to the language of flattery,and tarnished his own honour by magni­fying the glory of the prince- Stung fcbydisappointment,- he refused! to grant an­







OCR Output








•OF TACITUS. 31


eye; The usual forms of military saluta- booktion were suppressed by the general condol- ^-v*jencei The pride of courage and the sense 8is.
\ ° AD.
of glory, which, in the day of prosperity* 6a-are natural passions, were now convertedinto grief and sympathy. The lower thecondition of the soldier, the more sincerehis sorrow. In that class of men the honestemotions of the heart appeared withoutdisguise. j
• XVII. The conference between the twocommanders was short, and without cere­mony. Corbulo complained that all hislabours were rendered abortive, whereasthe war might have been terminated by thetotal overthrow of the Paithians. Paetusobserved in reply, that all things were stillin the same condition. He proposed toturn the eagles against the enemy, and,since Vologeses had withdrawn his forces,by their joint force Armenia would beeasily reduced. Corbulo rejected the offer.He had no such orders from the emperor.It was the danger, in which the legionswere involved, that drew him out of hisprovince, and, since it was uncertain where







OCR Output








348 GENEALOGICAL TABLE.


101. Plautia Urgulanilla, daugh­ter of Aulus Plautius, who had enjoyed thesplendour of a triumph. She was the firstwife of the emperor Claudius, and by himrepudiated on account of her licentiousmanners, and a suspicion of homicide thatblackened her character.—Suet. Life ofClaudius, s. 26. Dio, book lx.
102. Drusus, son of the emperor Clau­dius and Urgulanilla. A match betweenhim and the daughter of Sejanus was pro­jected by that ambitious favourite A. U.773; but Drusus, as yet of tender years,lost his life by an accident. A pear, whichin a playful manner he had tossed up inthe air, fell into his mouth and chokedhim.—Suet. Life of Claudius, s.27. Tacit.Annal. iii. s. 29.
103. Claudia, daughter of Urgulanilla.She was born in less than five months afterher mother's divorce from Claudius; andyet the emperor thought proper to disownher as his child, alleging that she was be­got by one of his freedmen, and as such







OCR Output








OF THE ANNALS. 249





" they dash him from a rock into the sea. appf.n.
B. XVI.
" Behold this youth (t), whom I have■?* brought before you from one of the Ba-" learic islands, where he was condemned" to live in exile. He is too young to" know the nature of a crime, or his own" wretched lot. Npt yet a citizen, and,•" behold! he is banished from his coun-■" try. These are the exploits of Nero." Vindex has undertaken to be the de-" liverer of his country. For you, and all" Spain, I am willing to brave every dan-" ger. My commission is from the senate," and the Roman people. I disclaim the" authority of Nero: to me he is no longer" emperor. I know that by him I am ad-r" judged to death; but, if you resolve to" assert your rights; if you make a com-" mon cause with me in that glorious" struggle, I am willing to close my days" in your service." This speech inflamedthe multitude with uncommon ardour.The place resounded with acclamations,and Galba was saluted Emperor of Rome.His modesty, or his prudence, made himdecline that title. He desired to be called







OCR Output








OF THE ANNAL& 223


mariners to sail round the Peloponnesus, appen.
B XVT
struck his fancy, and fired him with ideas <-^y^jof immortal fame (a). The Greeks op- 820.posed the design, and endeavoured to «?•dissuade him from undertaking it. Th&language of superstition was, that to at­tempt to join what had been severed forages, would be an impious violation of thelaws of nature. Nero was not to be de­terred from his purpose; religious prin­ciples were urged in vain; to conquer' na­ture were an imperial work, and what the.gods ordained, might be new modelled byhis superior judgment. He knew, besides,that the attempt had been made byDemetrius Policrates, an eastern king,by Julius Caesar and Caligula (b); andto accomplish an arduous work, whichthose three princes had undertaken with­out effect, appeared to him the height ofhuman glory. He resolved, therefore, tobegin the work without delay. Havingharangued the praetorian soldiers, andurged every topic that could inflame theirardour, he provided himself with a goldenpick-axe (for such hands were not to besullied by baser metal), and, advancing







OCR Output








OF TACITUS. 61


the adjacent groves and buildings blazed bo ok


XV.


over the lake. A concert of music, vocal
A U C
and instrumental, enlivened the scene, in."
A. D.
Nero rioted in all kinds of lascivious plea- 64.'sure. Between lawful and unlawful gra­tifications he made no distinction. Cor­ruption seemed to be at a stand, if, at theend of a few days, he had not devised anew abomination to fill the measure of hiscrimes. He personated a woman, and inthat character was given in marriage to oneof his infamous herd, a Pathic, named Py­thagoras (d). The emperor of Rome, withthe affected airs of female delicacy, put onthe nuptial veil. The augurs assisted atthe ceremony ; the portion of the bride wasopenly paid (e); the genial bed was dis­played to view; nuptial torches were light­ed up; the whole was public, not even ex­cepting the endearments which, in a naturalmarriage, decency reserves for the shadesof night.
XXXVIII. A dreadful calamity fol­lowed in a short time after, by some as­cribed to chance, and by others (a) to theexecrable wickedness of Nero. The au-







OCR Output








OF TACITUS. 14/


cause in the atmosphere, a contagious bookdistemper broke out, and swept away a ^*vwvast number of the inhabitants. The sis'. '
A. D
houses were filled with dead bodies, and «*»the streets with funeral processions. Nei­ther sex nor age escaped. Slaves and menof ingenuous birth were carried off, withoutdistinction, amidst the shrieks and lament­ations of their wives and children. Num­bers, while they assisted their expiringfriends, or bewailed their loss, were sud­denly seized, and burnt on the samefuneral pile. The Roman knights and se­nators suffered the common lot of morta­lity; but death delivered them from thepower of the tyrant, and, for that reason,they were not regretted.
In the course of the year new levies weremade in Narbon Gaul, and likewise inAsia and Africa, in order to recruit the le­gions in Illyricum, at that time much re­duced by the discharge of such as by ageor infirmity were rendered unfit for service.The city of Lyons having before this timesuffered a dreadful disaster (a), Nero, torelieve the inhabitants, ordered a remit-


12







OCR Output








S56 INDEX TO THE


No.
Drusus Caesar, son of Germanicus . . 83
Daughter of Pompey the Great . . 9
JE.
JElm Petina, daughter of Claudius, em- •
peror . ..... 104
vEmilia Lepida, wife of Drusus Caesar . 84
vEmilia Lepida, wife of Junius Silanus . 55vEmilius Paulus, husband of Julia, the
daughter of Tiberius, emperor . . 53
./Emilius Lepidus, husband of Drusilla . 54
G.


Germanicus Caesar, son of Nero ClaudiusDrusus . . , •. " . .79
. J.
Julia, sister of Caesar the dictator . . 12
Julia, daughter of Caesar the.dictator . 6
Julia, daughter of Augustus ... 46
Julia, daughter of Agrippa ... 52
Julia, daughter of Drusus Caesar . . 74
Julia Drusilla, daughter of Caligula . 91
Julius Caesar, father of Caesar the dictator 1
Julius Caesar, the dictator SJulius Antonius, husband of Marcella the
younger . . . . " •. . 29
Junia Calvina, wife of Vitellius . , 62







OCR Output








OF TACITUS. 179


appearance of Publius Egnatius (a), the book
client of Soranus, hired to give evidence ^v-**
. . A.U. c.
against his patron and his friend, kindled 8i9-'
a general indignation. This man professed ee.himself a follower of the stoic sect. Hehad learned in that school to retail themaxims of virtue, and could teach his fea­tures to assume an air of simplicity, whilefraud and perfidy, and avarice, lay lurkingat his heart. The temptation of moneydrew forth his hidden character, and thehypocrite stood detected. His treacherygave a standing lesson to mankind, that, inthe commerce of the world, it is not suffi­cient to guard against open and avowediniquity, since the professors of friendshipcan, under a counterfeit resemblance ofvirtue, nourish the worst of vices, and prove,in the end, the most pernicious enemies.
XXXIII. The same day produced asplendid example of truth and honour inthe person of Cassius Asclepiodotus ; aman distinguished by his wealth, and rank­ed with the most eminent inhabitants ofBithynia. Having loved and followed So­ranus in his prosperity, he did not desert
US







OCR Output








THE


WORKS


/■i


OF


CORNELIUS TACITUS:
WITH AN
ESSAY ON HIS LIFE AND GENIUS,
NOTES, SUPPLEMENTS, &c.
SY
ARTHUR MURPHY, ESQ.


Preecipuum munus annalium rcor- ne virtutes sileantur, utque pravisdictis factisque ex posteritate et infami ametus sit.
TACITUS- Amulet- tii. a. 65.


A NEW EDITION,
WITH THE AUTHOR'S LAST CORRECTIONS.
IN EIGHT VOLUMES.• VOL. IV.





ilOH&Ott :
PRINTED FOR JOHN STOCKDALE, PICCADILLY.
1805.







OCR Output








GENEALOGIGAL TABLE. 343


execrable parricide Agrippina was barba­rously murdered A. U. 812.—*Tacit. An-nal. book ii. s. 54; book iv. s. 53; bookxii. s. 64; book xiv. s. 6, 7, 8. Suet. Lifeof Caligula, s. 7- Dio, book lx.
For Cneius Domitius ^Enobarbus,her first husband, and the father of Nero,?ee No. 34.
94* Passiestus Crisfus, a celebratedorator, and twice consul. He was firstmarried to Pomitia (see No. 40), andsecondly to Agrippina. A shrewd sayingof his concerning Caligula is well known:There never was a better slate, nor a worsemaster. Upon other occasions he was usedto observe, " We all oppose the door to flat­tery, but none of us shut it."—Pliny, book&vi. c. 44, s. 91, Tacit. Annal. book vi.s. 20. Seneca, Qusest. Natural, book iv.Preface.
For Claudius, the third husband ofAgrippina, see No. 100.
95. Drusilla, daughter of Germanicus







OCR Output








$54 INDEX TO THE


No.


Anton ia, daughter of the emperor Clau­dius ...... 105
Antonius, son of Julius Antonius . . 30Anthony the triumvir, husband ofOctavia 31Antonius (M. Julius), husband of Mar-
cella the younger . . . .29
Appius Junius Silanus, husband of Domi-
tia Lepida . . . 25
Apuleia Varilia, daughter of Marcellathe elder ...... 32
Apuleius, husband of Marcella the elder 21Atia, wife of Caius Oetavius ; . 14
Atius Balbus, husband of Julia, the sister
of Julius Caesar . . 13
Augustus, see Oetavius Augustus.Aurelia, mother of Cassar the dictator . 2
B.
Balbus, see Atius Balbus.
Blandus, see Rubellius Blandus.
Britannicus, son of the emperor Claudius 108
C.
Caesonia, see Milonia Caesonia.
Caius Cassar, son of Agrippa . . 48
Caius Caesar, son of Germanicus . . 85
Caius Caligula, emperor of Rome . . 86
Caius CassiuSj husband of Lepida , . 65
Calpurnia, wife of Cassar the dictator r 11







OCR Output








CONTEJfTS.—BOOK XV.


innocent, put to death with cruel barbarity. XLVII,A variety of extraordinary omens. XLVIII. A con­spiracy against Nero in favour of Caius Piso. Anumber of Roman knights and senators engaged inthe plot. The first mover of it unknown. SubriusFlavius a forward leader. Epicharis, an enfranchisedslave, endeavours to animate the conspirators. By herimprudence, and the information of Milichus, a freed-man, the conspiracy is detected. LVI- The conspiratorshetray their accomplices. Lucan the poet accuses hismother. LVII. The fortitude of Epicharis on therack. Fenius Rufus, though engaged in the plot, actswith vehemence against the rest of the accomplices.Several illustrious men put to death. LX. Seneca ac-,cused, and a tribune sent to him with the particulars ofthe information. His answer. He receives orders todie. His wife, Pompeia Paulina, saved by order ofNero. Seneca dies in the bath, LXVI, Fenius Rufusaccused by the rest of the conspirators. LXVII, The.firm behaviour of Subrius Flavius, his intrepid answerto Nero, and his death. LXVIII. Vestinus, the consul,though innocent, commanded by a tribune to open hisveins. LXX. Lucan the poet dies, repeating his ownverses, LXXII. Nero distributes a largess among thesoldiers. The senate convened. Their base and ser­vile flattery. Oblations decreed to the gods. Themonth of April styled by the name Nero,
These transactions passed in little more than three years.
Years Of
of Rome—Christ, Consuls.
815 62 continued, Marius Celsus, Asinius Callus.
816 63 Memmius Regulus, Verginius Rufus.'817 64 C. Lacanius Bassus, M. Licinius Crassus.
8J£ 65 LiciniusN&rvaSUianus,M.Vestinus Atticus,







OCR Output








236 APPENDIX TO BOOK XVI.


appen. did he suffer his gracious intention to be


B.XVI


uttered by the public cryer. Such a gift820.' required the accents of his own heavenlyen.' voice. He ascended the tribunal of ha­rangues, and, having declared Greece afree country (m), set sail for Italy.
mi. ' XII. The consuls next in office were«8.' Galerius Trachalus and Silius ltalicus.They were both men of genius ; both ad­dicted to study, and distinguished by theirextensive literature. Trachalus (a) was anorator in great celebrity, always copious,and often sublime. Silius ltalicus (b) hadalso distinguished himself at the bar, butnot with unblemished reputation. He knewthat, under Nero, to be the accuser of in­nocence was the road to preferment; butJie returned to the paths of virtue, and byhis poetry, which he published afterwards,^transmitted his name to posterity. Duringhis consulship, Nero returned from Greece,to close the scene of vice and folly. Aftera tempestuous voyage, he arrived at Na­ples, where the first displays of his geniushad been seen in their dawn(c). His famewas now in its meridian lustre. The con-







OCR Output








OF THE ANNALS. 251





himself called, in a style of contempt, 0e~ appkm.nobarbus (w), and a vile comedian. Enrag­ed at the indignity offered to his talents,he started up in a sudden fury, overturnedthe banqueting-table, wrote to the senateto exert the strength of the empire, and, tofire them with indignation, added in pa­thetic terms, ** Judge yourselves, conscript" fathers, judge of the insolence of Vindex;" in his own words see the malignity of" that audacious rebel. He has dared im-" piously to say that I have a bad voice," and play ill on the guitar." A complamtof that importance could not fail to makean impression on the fathers. They passeda decree, declaring Galba a public enemy,and promising a reward of ten millions ofsesterces for the head of Vindex. TheGaul, with superior magnanimity, offeredhis own head (x) to whoever should bringhim that of Nero. If he freed the worldfrom a monster, he set no value on his ownlife; he then would die content.
Virginius Rufus, who, at that time, com­manded on the Upper Rhine, had receivedorders to take the field against the rebels







OCR Output








210 APPENDIX TO BOOK XVI.





aspen- the freedman, who exercised all the powersof the imperial prerogative. This manbroke loose at once, and was soon felt asa public calamity. Pride and insolence,avarice and cruelty, the never-failing vicesof those detestable miscreants, who fromthe dregs of the people rise above theirfellow-citizens, marked the conduct of thisfavourite freedman, and debased the peo­ple, who submitted to so vile a master.All degrees and ranks of men, the senate,and the Roman knights, groaned under theiron rod of an ignoble tyrant, who confis­cated their estates, sent them into banish­ment, or took away their lives at his willand pleasure. The people, who shudder­ed at the presence of the emperor, wereobliged, in misery of heart, to lament hisabsence.
Nero, in the mean time, arrived at Cas-siopoea (b) in the isle of Corcyra, and there,-in the temple of Jupiter Cassius (c), hetuned His harp, and sung in the presenceof the people. From that place he set sailfor Greece. Being safely landed, his firstcare was, like' a great officer, before he







OCR Output








APPENDIX


TO THE


SIXTEENTH BOOK


OF


THE ANNALS.







OCR Output








338 GENEALOGICAL TABLE.


name of Caligula, fourth emperor ofRome, the son of Germanic us and Agrip-pina. He was born at Antium 31st Au­gust, in the consulship of Germanicus andFonteius Capito, A. U, 765. He practisedthe arts of dissimulation during the life ofTiberius, and had the skill to conceal hisreal character. Having obtained the sove­reign power, he threw off the mask, andshewed himself a monster of vice andcruelty. He wished with impious arro­gance to be worshipped as a god, and wasat the same time a tyrant of savage fero­city, the scourge of human kind. His de­light in blood was so keen and ardent, thathe was often heard to express his wish,that the Roman people had but one neck,that he might at a blow destroy the wholerace. He dissipated in Less than a yearthe whole treasure left by Tiberius, com­puted to be an immense sum. Nor canthis be wondered at in a man who spentfor one dinner a hundred thousand ses­terces. Costly and effeminate in his dress,he was so extravagant as to appear in shoescomposed of pearl. He was slain by Cas­eins Cherea, tribune of a praetorian cohort,







OCR Output








SIXTEENTH BOOK OF THE ANNALS. Sf)7


Sed mihi jam numen; nee si te pectore vatesAccipiam, Cirrhaea velim secreta moverrtemSolicitare Deum.» PiiARSAL. lib. i. ver. 63.
(f) He became the wife of Pythagoras. Annals, xv.S. 37.
.(g) Chrysostomus says, Oration xxi, Nero offereda great reward to the person, who should change Sporusinto a woman; and there were not wanting empyrics,who promised to accomplish that metamorphosis.
(h) For more of her, see History, i. s. 73 ; and seeDio, lib. lxiii.
Section IX. ^
(a) See Crevier, Life of Nero.
(b) For Sulpicius Camerinus, see Annals, xiii. s. 52 ;and see Crevier, vol. iv. p. 310.
(e) Nero's dislike of every great man at Rome, joinedto his rapacity, induced him, by means of his satellites,to kill, or force them to dispatch themselves, the richestand most illustrious of those, who till then had escapedhis cruelty. Crevier, vol. iv. p. 311.
Section X.
(a) For this attempt to penetrate the Isthmus of Co­rinth, see Suetonius, in Nero, s. 19 ; and Dio, lib. lxiii.
(b) Pliny relates this fact: Pcrfodere atveo navigabiliangustias eas tentavere Demetrius rex, dictator desar,Caius princeps, JJomitius AJero, in j'austo (ut omniumpatuk exitu) incepto.
(c) For Ascalon, see the Geographical Table.
(d) See the Geographical Table.
(e) For Japha, see the Geographical Table.
(f) See the Geographical Table. • .







OCR Output








I2f THE ANNALS


book to investigate the truth, entertained-a doubt
XV. .
urvOat the time; and since the death of Nero,8ii ' the acknowledgment of all, who returned«.' from banishment, established the fact be­yond a controversy. Nero was receivedby the senate with the basest flattery. Inthat assembly, the men, who had the great­est reason to be overwhelmed with grief,were the most forward to offer incense tothe emperor. Junius Gallio (a), the brotherof Seneca, was, by the loss of that excel­lent man, so struck with terror, that to savehis own life he descended to humble sup­plications. Salienus Clemens rose to op­pose him, as a parricide and an enemy tothe state. He continued his invective tillthe fathers checked his violence. It wasnot now, they said, a time to gratify per­sonal animosity, under an appearance ofzeal for the public good; nor would it be­come any man to open again the woundswhich the clemency of the prince hadclosed for ever.
LXXIV. Oblations and public thanks­givings were decreed to all the gods, andparticularly to. the Sun, in whose temple*







OCR Output








106 THE ANNALS


book these pathetic terms, he directed his atten-


XV


tion to his wife. He clasped her in his
A {J C
'sis. * arms, and in that fond embrace yielded for
. A. D.
65. a while to the tenderness of his nature. Re­covering his resolution, he entreated her toappease her grief, and bear in mind thathis life was spent in a constant course ofhonour and of virtue. • That considerationwould serve to heal affliction, and sweetenall her sorrows. Paulina Avas still incon­solable. She was determined to die withher husband; she invoked the aid of the ex­ecutioners, and begged to end her wretched-being. Seneca saw that she was animatedby the love of glory, and that generousprinciple he thought ought not to be re­strained. The idea of leaving a belovedobject exposed to the insults of the world,and the malice of her enemies, piercedhim to the quick. " It has been my care,"he said, " to instruct you in that best philo**" sophy, the art of mitigating the ills of'" life; but you prefer an honourable death," I will not envy you the vast renown that" must attend your fall. Since you will'" have it so, we will die together. We will







OCR Output








164 THE ANNALS


book[" otherwise, let us take from the friends of
XVI. ? '
'" innovation their leader and their oracle.The sect, whose precepts he affects to" admire, has ever been proud and dogma­tical, busy, bold, and turbulent. It was" that stoic school that formed the Tube-" ros (d) and the Favonii; names detested-** even by the old republic. And what is" now the principle of the whole faction ?To subvert the fabric of a great empirethey hold forth the name of liberty; if" they succeed, they will destroy even'" liberty itself. Of what use can it be to" Nero, that he has banished a Cassius, if" the followers of Brutus are still allowed" to flourish, and multiply their numbers ?.*? Upon the whole, you have no occasion,*' Caesar, to write to the senate; you need" not mention Thrasea to that assembly:*' leave him to our management, and the** judgment of the fathers." Nero praisedthe zeal of Cossutianus', and added fury toa mind already bent on mischief. To for­ward his villany, he gave him for a coad­jutor Eprius Marcellus, an orator of a tur­bulent spirit and overbearing eloquence.
XXIII. The prosecution against Bareas







OCR Output








OF TACITUS. 151


From a general of his experience he lived book
a r XVI.
in fear of a sudden attack, and the late *—*—*
A.U. C.
conspiracy kept him in a constant alarm. 8i9.The centurion obeyed his orders, and hav- 66-ing first secured all the avenues round thehouse, communicated the emperors orders.Ostorius turned against himself that couragewhich had often made the enemy fly beforehim. He opened his veins, but, thoughthe incision was large, the blood flowedwith languor. He called a slave to hisassistance, and having directed him to holda poniard with a firm and steady hand, helaid hold of the man's arm, and applyinghis throat to the point, rushed on certaindeath.
XVI. If the narrative, in which I amengaged, presented a detail of foreignAvars, and a register of men, who died withhonour in the service of their country, evenin that case, a continued train of disasters,crowding fast upon one another, wouldfatigue the writer, and make the readerturn, with disgust, from so manv tratricissues, honourable indeed, but dark, me­lancholy, and too much of a colour. How







OCR Output








274 APPENDIX TO BOOK XVI.


APPEN.with which the obsequies were performed,v—vJ was the cause of some untoward conse-A'82i'.C' quences," that afterwards disturbed the68.' commonwealth. A doubt remained in theminds of many, whether Nero had notmade his escape into Asia or Egypt. Themen, who, under a corrupt and profligatereign, had led a life of pleasure, and were,by consequence, enamoured of Nero'svices, paid every mark of respect to hismemory, willing, at the same time, to be­lieve that he still survived. They raised atomb, and, for several years (u), dressed itwith the flowers of spring and summer.The Parthians honoured his memory, and,being afterwards deluded by an impostor,who assumed the name of Nero, were ready,with the strength of their nation (w), toespouse his cause. The race of Caesarsended with Nero: he was the last, and per­haps the worst, of that illustrious house.
XV. In that age, Avhen the public mindwas overcast with gloomy apprehensionsand religious fear, superstition saw portentsand prodigies (a) in the most common ac­cidents, and no great event was suffered to







OCR Output








OF TACITUS. 83


r
devoted victim, and die in solitude. On book
XV
the other hand, the idea of a brave exploit, v^-v>jperformed in the presence of applauding sis'.0'numbers, fired the generous ardour of that «.*heroic mind. But prudential considera­tions had too much weight. He wishedto gain immortal fame, and he thought ofhis own personal safety; a tame reflection,always adverse to every great and nobleenterprise.
LI. While the conspirators lingered insuspense, prolonging the awful period oftheir hopes and fears, a woman, of the nameof Epicharis, apprised of the plot (by whatmeans is still a mystery), began to animatetheir drooping spirit, and to blame theircold delay. What made her conduct sin­gular on this occasion was, that, before thistime, not one great or honourable sentK •ment was ever known to have entered herheart. Seeing the business languish, sheretired in disgust, and went into Campania.But a spirit like hers could not be at rest.She endeavoured to seduce the officers ofthe fleet then lying at Misenum. She be­gan her approaches to Volusius Proculus?


g 2







OCR Output








134 THE ANNALS


book would let them taste the supreme delight*^^o of hearing and enjoying all his divine ac-8i8. complishments. Such was the language65- of the populace. In compliance with theirwishes, he mounted the public stage, con­forming in all things to the rules of theorchestra, where no performer was to sitdown, nor to wipe the sweat from his facewith any thing but his own garment, andnever to spit or clear his nostrils in sight ofthe audience. Having exhibited his skill,he went down on his knee, and stretchingforth his hands with pretended agitationsof hope and fear, waited in that humbleposture for the decision of the judges. Thepopulace, accustomed to applaud the notesand gesticulations of the common players,paid their tribute of admiration - to theprince, with measured cadence, in oneregular chorus of applause. You wouldhave thought their joy sincere, and, per­haps, it was so in fact: the rabble wishedto be diverted at any rate, and for the dis­grace that befel the state vulgar minds feltno concern.
V. Thinking men were affected in'







OCR Output








OF TACITUS. 167


audience. The sight of that illustrious bookcitizen, the countenance, the spirit, and wv-*/
A U. C
the virtue of the man, were too much to 8i9. *encounter. He ordered the senate to be e«-convened. Thrasea, in the mean time,consulted with his friends, which wouldbe most advisable, to enter at large intohis defence, or to behave with silent in­dignation. They were divided in theiropinions.
XXV. Some advised him to enter thesenate, and confront his enemies in thepresence of that assembly. " Of his con-" stancy no doubt could be entertained;" they knew that nothing could fall from" him unworthy of himself. Every word" from his lips would tend to augment his" glory. When danger threatened, to take" shelter in the shade of obscurity, were" the act of a degenerate spirit. For him," he ought to have the people round him" to behold the scene; a great man ad-" vancing bravely to meet his fate, would" be a spectacle worthy of their applause." The senate would hear with astonish-" ment the energy of truth, an4 the sub-







OCR Output








OF TACITUS. in


indignation of all. In the examination of book
. . . YV
Scevinus that officer pressed his interroga- <


tories with over-acted zeal, and by menaces sis.endeavoured to extort a confession. See- 65.'vinus answered with a smile, " No man" knows the particulars better than your-" self. You now may shew your gratitude" to so good a prince." Rufus was coveredwith confusion. To speak was not in hispower, and to remain silent was dangerous.He trembled, faultered, and hesitated ananswer. His embarrassment betrayed hisguilt. The rest of the conspirators, withCervarius Proculus, a Roman knight, attheir head, were eager to depose againsthim. At length a soldier of the name ofCassius, remarkable for his robust stature,and for that reason ordered to attend, laidhold of Rufus by the emperor's order, andloaded him with irons.
LXVII. The same witnesses gave evid­ence against Subrius Flavius. In answerto the charge, he relied much on his courseof life, and the dissimilitude of mannersbetween himself and his accusers. " Was"■'* it probable that a soldier, inured to the







OCR Output








SIXTEENTH BOOK OF THE ANNALS. 399


criticised, no mention is made of Silius Italieus. It istherefore probable, that his work had not appeared, whenQuintilian' published his Institutes, in the reign of Domi-tian. Silius (like Lucan before him) undertook tomake a great historical event the subject of an epic poem ;but departing from the precedent left by Lucan, he hasinterwoven with the truth too much of fable, and whatthe critics call machinery. The poem, however, hasmany beautiful passages. The author raised a considera­ble fortune, and was possessed of two villas: one that'had been the property of Cicero, and the other of Virgil.I^C' lived to the age of seventy-five, and then put an endto his days by abstinence; being instructed in the stoicschool, and by the practice of the age, that suicide wasnot against the law of nature. Seneca, the admired phi­losopher, has, among many others, the following maxim:*' Live so, as to welcome death; and even if you think" fit, to seek it. Whether it comes to you, or you go" to it, is immaterial." Exerce te, ut mortem et ex-cipias, et, si ita res suadebit, arcessas. Interest nihil,an ilia ad nos veniat, an ad Mam nos. Epist. lxix. Itwas not understood by Seneca, nor was the light of naturestrong enough to inform the stoic school, that the lifeinto which we are called, ought to be preserved duringthe pleasure of the Supreme Being that gave it. Plinythe consul gives an account of the death of Silius Italieus.Towards the end of a long life, he had contracted anincurable disease, and therefore resolved to close thescene. He had practised at the bar in the beginning oflife, and, in Nero's time, incurred the disgrace of beinga voluntary accuser. Leeserat farnam suam sub Nerone;credebatur sponte aecusasse. But he afterwards, in amore retired life, retrieved his reputqtion. Maculamyeforis indutfria hudabili otio abluerat.' He w^s % poet,







OCR Output








OF THE ANNALS. 283


and let us give proof of our fidelity. Let appen.


b. xv r.


*' us deserve the esteem of Galba, by de-
*' livering him from a traitor." Aa2i.
A-1).


6S.


This speech made an impression on thesoldiers. One mind, one sentiment per­vaded the whole camp; Galba was theiremperor, and they would acknowledge noother. This was followed by a generalshout. Nymphidius heard the sound, andproceeded to the camp (q). Whether hethought that the acclamations of the menwere in his favour, or that his presence wasnecessary to quell an insurrection, cannotnow be known. He went attended by anumerous train, and a blaze of torches,with the speech composed for him by Cin-gbnius Varro, ready in his hand to be readaloud to the soldiers. The gates of thecamp were shut, and guards were stationedon the ramparts. Nymphidius desired toknow, by whose order they were underarms ? The men answered with one voice,We are armed in the cause of Galba, andwe know no other emperor. Nymphidiushad not the prudence to retire from thewalls. Dissimulation he thought would







OCR Output








OF TACITUS. 141





ney. He there supported life with a tem-BooKper that gave dignity to undeserved mis­fortune, till a centurion, employed to com­mit the murder, rushed upon him abruptly.That officer advised him to open his veins." Death," said Silanus, " has been familiar" to my thoughts, but the honour of pre-" scribing to me I shall not allow to a ruf-" fian and a murderer." The centurion,seeing that he had to do with a man, un­armed, indeed, but robust and vigorous,not a symptom of fear in his countenance,but, on the contrary, an eye that sparkledwith indignation, gave orders to his soldiersto seize their prisoner. Silanus stood onthe defensive : what man could do withouta weapon he bravely dared, struggling,and dealing his blows about him, till he fellby the sword of the centurion, like a gal­lant officer, receiving honourable wounds,and facing his enemy to the last.
X. Lucius Vetus, and Sextia hismother-in-law, with Pollutia his daughter,died with equal fortitude. Nero thoughtthem a living reproach to himself for themurder of Rubellius Plautus (a), the son­







OCR Output








86 THE ANNALS


book without delay. The place they fixed upon
v—v^ was a villa belonsrino; to Piso, in the neigh-a. u. c.sis. bourhood of Baiee, where the emperor, at-
«• tracted by the beauties of that delightful
spot, was used to enjoy the pleasure of
bathing, and his convivial parties, divested
of his guards, and unincumbered by the
parade of state. Piso objected to the
measure. " What would the world say, if
" his table were imbrued with blood, and
** the gods of hospitality violated by the
" murder of a prince, however detested for
" his atrocious deeds ? Rome was the proper
" theatre for such a catastrophe. The
" scene should be in his own palace, that
" haughty mansion built with the spoils of
" plundered citizens. The blow for liberty
" would be still more noble before an as-
" sembly of the people. The actions of
" men, who dared nobly for the public,
" should be seen by the public eye,"
Such were the objections advanced by
Piso in the presence of the conspirators: in
his heart he had other reasons. He dreaded
Lucius Silanus (a), knowing his high de-
. scent, and the rare accomplishments which







OCR Output








OF TACITUS. 157


emperor almost his equal; in the science bookof luxury his superior. Tigellinus deter- v-S^omined to work his downfall; and, accord- ^9°'ingly, addressed himself to the cruelty of A66°'the prince; that master-passion, to whichall other affections and every motive weresure to give way. lie charged Petroniuswith having lived in close intimacy withScevinus (b), the conspirator; and, to givecolour to that assertion, he bribed a slaveto turn informer against his master. • Therest of the domestics were loaded withirons. Nor was Petronius suffered to makehis defence.
XIX. Nero, at that time, happened tobe on one of his excursions into Campania.Petronius had followed him as far as Cuma,but was not allowed to proceed furtherthan that place. He scorned to linger indoubt and fear, and yet was not in a hurryto leave a world which he loved. Heopened his veins, and closed them again,at intervals losing a small quantity ofblood, then binding up the orifice, as hisown inclination prompted. He conversed







OCR Output








OF TACITUS. . 45


removed them into Syria; and, in ex-book


change, reinforced himself with the sixthlegion, and the third; both in full vigour, Ve.'inured to hardship, and no less distinguish- 63."ed by their success than by their valour.To these he added the fifth legion, whichhappened to be quartered in Pontus, and,by consequence, had not suffered in thelate defeat. The fifteenth legion had latelyjoined the army, as also a body of selecttroops from Illyricum and /Egypt, withthe cavalry, the cohorts, and auxiliariessent b}1- the confederate kings. The wholeforce assembled at Melitene (a), whereCorbulo proposed to cross the Euphrates.His first care was to purify his army by asolemn lustration (b). Those rites perform­ed, he called his men to a meeting, and ina spirited harangue painted forth the au­spicious government of the reigning prince;he mentioned his own exploits, and im­puted to the imbecility of Paetus all thedisasters that happened. The whole of hisdiscourse wras delivered in a style of au­thority, the true eloquence of a soldier.


XXVII, He began his march without







OCR Output








OF THE ANNALS. 227


A. U. C.
820.A.D.


gained the summit. A dreadful carnage appen.followed. Twelve thousand of the Samaritans perished on the spot. The city *mof Gamala (k) was taken by assault, and 6Vthe garrison, with all the inhabitants, putto the sword.
Vespasian, during these operations, car­ried on the siege of Jotapata (i), the strong­est place in Galilee. Josephus (k), thehistorian, had been appointed governor ofthe province, and he now commanded thegarrison, determined to make a vigorousdefence, and hold out to the last extremity.The particulars of the siege are related byhimself, and therefore need not to be hererepeated. It will be sufficient to say, thathe discharged all the duties of an ableofficer, by his own example, no less thanby his spirited exhortations, animating thesoldiers, and in every part of the works ex­citing them to deeds of valour. The siegelasted seven-and-forty days. In one of theapproaches to the walls, Vespasian waswounded by a lance aimed at him fromthe works ; but he bore the pain with such


q2







OCR Output








OF THE ANNALS. 339


apprehensions. A conspiracy (k), beyond appen.all question, was actually formed, and ^—*-»/ready to break out, had it not been dis- 82i. '*covered by a trifling accident. It hap- «»•pened that one of the conspirators (/),towards the close of day, passed by thetheatre. He saw, in one of the porticos, aman loaded with fetters, and in bitternessof heart bewailing his unhappy lot. Uponenquiry it was found, that he was to beled into the presence of Nero, which heconsidered as sure destruction. The con­spirator was touched with compassion. Hedrew nearer to the prisoner, and, to assuagehis fears, whispered in his ear, " Have a*' good heart; live till to-morrow, and you" will have reason to thank me as your de-" liverer." These were words of comfortto a wretch, who expected instant death.His hopes revived; such welcome tidingsfilled him with delight and wonder; butwonder was the strongest emotion. Thenovelty of an incident so unexpected fixedhis attention. By what means was he tobe delivered from impending ruin? No­thing but a dark conspiracy could' bringabout such an event. He resolved to re-







OCR Output








OF tacitus: 161





of being capitally condemned for his verses booklevelled at Nero. Thrasea was the authorof a milder sentence (b). There was stillanother circumstance: when divine ho­nours were decreed to Poppaea, he wilfullyabsented himself, nor did he afterwardsattend her funeral. These offences werenot suffered to sink into oblivion. Thewhole was treasured up by CossutianusCapito (c), a man, who to a bad heart andtalents for every species of iniquity unitedmotives of personal ill-will to Thrasea,which he nourished in secret, ever sincethe victory obtained over him in a charget)f extortion conducted by the deputiesfrom Cilicia, and supported with all thecredit and eloquence of Thrasea.
XXII. The fertile genius of the pro­secutor was not at a loss for new allega­tions. The heads of his charge were," That Thrasea made it a point to avoid" renewing the oath of fidelity usual at the" beginning of the year (a), and, though- a" member of the quindecemviral college," he never assisted at the ceremony of*' offering vows for the safety of the prince,
VOL. iv. >f







OCR Output








220 APPENDIX TO BOOK XVI.


appen. with all the decorations of female ele
TJ XVI
v^v^ gance; and Tigellinus, amidst the ap
A.U.C.


820.' plause of the astonished Greeks, who, with«7. arch sneers of ridicule, had still the addressto pay their adulation, gave away Sporusin marriage to the emperor of Rome.It was said upon the occasion, that itwould have been well for mankind, ifNero's father had been married to such awife.
IX. Nero could not, in this unboundedmanner, riot in vice and folly without vastexpence, and a prodigious waste of thepublic treasure. To supply his prodigality,Melius the freedman, who conducted theadministration at Rome, laboured hard,by every iniquitous measure, by extortion,and cruelty, to raise enormous sums ofmoney. A tame and complying senatewas easily induced by the arts of the primeminister, to vote an immense annual sumto be remitted to the emperor, during hisabsence from the capital. The rapacityof Helius was not to be appeased. Thecompanions of the Augustan society (a)had bound themselves by a vow to erect







OCR Output








OF TACITUS. 73


checked the growth of a dangerous super-bookstition (c); but it revived soon after, and t-^v-ospread with recruited vigour, not only in aiV,Judaea, the soil that gave it birth, but even 64.in the city of Rome, the common sink intowhich every thing infamous and abominableflows like a torrent from all quarters of theworld. Nero proceeded with his usual ar­tifice. He found a set of profligate andabandoned wretches, avIio were induced toconfess themselves guilty, and, on the evi­dence of such men, a number of Christianswere convicted, not, indeed, upon clearevidence of their having set the city on fire,but rather on account of their sullen hatredof the whole human race (d). They wereput to death with exquisite cruelty, and totheir sufferings Nero added mockery andderision. Some were covered with theskins of wild beasts, and left to be devouredby dogs; others were nailed to the cross;numbers were burnt alive; and many, co- ,vered over with inflammable matter, werelighted up, when the day declined, to serveas torches during the night (e).
For the convenience of seeing this tragic







OCR Output








3q5 GENEALOGICAL TABLE.


and cruel. He commanded in Germany,.and marched his army beyond the Elbe(Albis); and having penetrated farther thanany Roman had done before him, he ob-"tained the honours of a triumph. He-diedA. U. 778. Suet. Life of Nero, s. 4. Tacit.Annal. iv. s. 44.
34. CSTEIUS DOMITIUS iENOBARBUS,
son of the last-mentioned L. D. iEnobar-bus, by Antonia the elder. He marriedAgrippina, the daughter of Germanicus,A. U. 781; was consul A. U. 785. Hislife was a series of evil deeds. He was thefather of Nero, and was used to say, thatfrom himself and Agrippina nothing goodOr valuable could be born.—Suet. Life ofNero, s. 5. Tacit. Annal. iv. s. 75.
lor Agripphsta, his wife, see No. 93.
35. Lucius Domitius Nero, the sixth.Roman emperor, son of Cneius DomitiusJEnobarbus by Agrippina the daughter ofGermanicus. She was grand-daughter tothe famous Agrippa, by Julia the daughterof Augustus. Nero was born 15th De­







OCR Output








OF TACITUS. 13


the present enterprise gave him no reason B£X?Kto alter his sentiments.


A.U.C.815■
A.D.


The siege promised no kind of advant- 62-age; Tigranes possessed a strong hold, wellgarrisoned, and provided with ample sup­plies; the forces, that attempted to stormthe works, met with a total overthrow; theRoman legions were in possession of Ar­menia, and others were in readiness, notonly to cover the province of Syria, but topush the war into the Parthian territories;)iis cavalry suffered for want of forage, and,all vegetation being destroyed by a swarmof locusts, neither grass nor foliage couldbe found, Determined by these considera­tions, yet disguising his fear, Vologeses,with the specious appearance of a pacificdisposition, returned for answer to Cas-perius, that he should send ambassadors toRome, with instructions to solicit the cession^pf Armenia, and the re-establishment ofpeace between the two nations. Mean­while, he sent dispatches to Mpneses, withorders to abandon the siege of Tjgranocerta,and, without farther delay, returned to hiscapital.







OCR Output








180 THE ANNALS


book him in the hour of distress. He still ad-xvr.
*—v—i hered to him with unaltered friendship, and
A. U- C.
819, for his constancy was deprived of his all,m- and sent into banishment; the gods, intheir just dispensations, permitting an ex­ample of virtue, even in ruin, to stand incontrast to successful villany. Thrasea,Soranus, and Servilia, were allowed tochoose their mode of dying. HelvidiusPriscus and Paconius Agrippinus were ba­nished out of Italy. Montanus owed hispardon to the influence of his father, butwas declared incapable of holding anypublic office. The prosecutors were amplyrewarded. Eprius Marcellus and Cossu-tianus received each of them fifty thousandsesterces. Ostorius Sabinus obtained agrant of twelve thousand, with the orna­ments of the qua'storship.
XXXIV. Towards the close of day,the consular quaestor (a) was sent to Thrasea,who was then amusing himself in his gar­den, attended by a number of friends, themost illustrious of both sexes. Deme­trius (b), a philosopher of the cynic school*was the person who chiefly engaged his







OCR Output








222 APPENDIX TO BOOK XVI.


appen. amassed by those iniquitous means, was
R VVI
uvO not sufficient for the prodigality of Nero.820. ' The Greeks had flattered his vanity, and,67.' in return, were doomed to feel the handof oppression. The cities, which had re­vered him as a god, had reason in the endto execrate him as a tyrant. They sawtheir best and most distinguished citizensput to death, or sent into banishment, thatthe emperor might enjoy the spoils of theirplundered property (c).
X. The fame of a divine voice, and anexquisite hand on the guitar, was not suf­ficient for the ambition of Nero. Hewished to distinguish himself by somerunheard of enterprise. The grand, thevast, and almost impossible fired hisimagination. He arrived at Corinth,and was there surprised to see by whata narrow isthmus the two seas wereseparated. Like the hero of Statius thepoet, he heard the murmur of the billows,on the Ionian and the iEgeafi shores; inmediis audit duo litora campis. The pro­ject of piercing through the land, andforming a navigable canal to communicatethe two seas, and render it unnecessary for







OCR Output








268 APPENDIX TO BOOK XVI.





APPEN. station at the palace, and joined their
B. XVI.
comrades in the camp, where, by theinfluence and direction of Nymphidius,Galba was proclaimed emperor. The se­nate met, and, after a short debate, con­firmed the nomination of the praetorianguards. The time was at length arrived,when that assembly could act with au­thority. They resolved to mark the day bya decree worthy of a Roman senate. Withone voice they declared the tyrant, whohad trampled on all laws human anddivine, a public enemy (k), and by theirsentence, condemned him to suffer death,according to the rigour of ancient laws,and the practice of the old republic.
XIV. Nero, in the mean time, madethe best of his way towards the freedman'svilla. He heard the praetorian camp ringwith acclamations, and the name of Galbasounded in his ear. A man at work in afield adjoining to the road, started up atthe sound of horsemen pressing forwardwith expedition, and behold! he said," Those people are hot in pursuit of Nero."Another asked, " What do they say of







OCR Output








OF TACITUS. 155


of cutting him off, while such men as Ru- book


XVI.


fius Crispinus and Anicius Cerealis were
A TT C
suffered to live in security, though they were 'sis.both envenomed enemies of the prince. The 66.clause, however, was thought to be fabri­cated, with a view to justify the murder ofCrispinus, which was already perpetrated,and to hasten the sentence then in ao-ita-tion against Cerealis, who, in a few daysafterwards, dispatched himself. He fellunlamented. The public remembered thathe formerly discovered a conspiracy (e) toCaligula, and, for that reason, no man re*gretted him in his end.


XVIII. With regard to Caius Petro-nius (a), his character, his course of life,and the singularity of his manners seem tomerit particular attention. He passed hisdays in sleep, and his nights in business, orin joy and revelry. Indolence was at oncehis passion, and his road to fame. Whatothers did by vigour and industry, he ac­complished by his love of pleasure andluxurious ease. Unlike the men who pro­fess to understand social enjoyment, andruin their fortunes, he led a life of expence,







OCR Output








OF TACITUS. 67


temple dedicated to the moon by ServiussooK\ J XV.
Tullius; the fane and the great altar con- <-^>J
A.U C.
secrated by Evander, the Arcadian, to Her- sii.'... . A.D.
cules, his visitor and his guest (a); the w-
chapel of Jupiter Stator (b), built byRomulus; the palace of Numa, and thetemple of Vesta (c), with the tutelar godsof Rome. With these were consumed thetrophies of so many victories, the inimitableworks of the Grecian artists, with the pre­cious monuments of literature and ancientgenius, all at present remembered by menadvanced in years, but irrecoverably lost.Not even the splendour, with which thenew city rose out of the ruins of the old,could compensate for that lamented dis­aster. It did not escape observation, thatthe fire broke out on the fourteenth beforethe calends of July (d), a day remarkablefor the conflagration kindled by the Se-nones, when those Barbarians took the cityof Rome by storm, and burnt it to theground. Men of reflection, who refined onevery thing with minute curiosity, calcu­lated the number of years, months, anddays, from the foundation of Rome to thefiring of it by the Gauls; and from that


f2







OCR Output








OF TACITUS. 177


ther, whom by her imprudent zeal she had bookinvolved in new misfortunes.


A. 0.
XXXI. The accuser pressed her with ■ ««•questions. He desired to know, whethershe had not sold her bridal ornaments, herjewels and her necklace, to supply herselfwith money for magic sacrifices ? She fellprostrate on the ground, and wept in bit­terness of heart. Her sorrows were too bigfor utterance. She embraced the altars,and rising suddenly, exclaimed with vehe­mence, " I have invoked no infernal gods;" I have used no unhallowed rites, no ma-" gic, no incantations. My unhappy pray-" ers asked no more than that you, Caesar," and you, conscript fathers, would extend" your protection to this best of men, this" most affectionate parent. For him I sold'" my jewels; for him I disposed of my" bridal ornaments, and for him I gave up" the garments suited to my rank. In the" same cause I was willing to sacrifice my" life: the blood in my veins was at his" service. The men whom I consulted were" all strangers to me; I had no knowledge" of them. They best can tell who theyvol. IV. N







OCR Output








U >i v'' .• f


)S )' \\ I <'ih''^/''A


' '**{ V)


/ ; ..'. !i ''[:>■' ■/■- . /'-'Vi


'V' \ -'


)i t I'"!'


'\n\ r


v •


■■' i >11 .''


■ ■







OCR Output








FIFTEENTH BOOK OF THE ANNALS. 369


clear the ground at his own expencc. By that artifice hosecured all the remaining property of the unhappy suf­ferers for his own use. To add to his ill-gotten store, helevied contributions in the provinces, and by those meanscollected an immense sum. Suet. in Neron. 8. 38. Bro-tier has given an elaborate description of the New Palace,vol. ii. p. 490, 4to edit.
(b) The Lake Avernus was in the neighbourhood ofBaiae, now Lago Averno.
(c) Now Paludi Pontine, in the territory of Rome.
Section XLIII.
(a) Strabo says, that by an ordinance of Augustus,no new-built house was to be more than seventy feet high.Trajan afterwards, according to Aurelius Victor, fixedthe elevation at sixty feet. The rule prescribed by'NeroCannot now be known.
Cb) We are told by Suetonius, that Nero introduced anew model for building in the city, and, by porticos andpiazzas before the front, contrived, in case of fire, tohinder the flames from spreading. In Neron. s. 16.
(c) Vitruvius says, that the Alban and Gabian stonewas not the hardest, but it resisted fire; while the stonefrom other quarries was apt, when heated, to crack, andfly ofF in fragments. Vitruvius, lib. ii. cap. 7.
(d) Brotjer observes, that by a law of the Twelve Ta­bles, a space of something more than two feet was to beleft between all new-built houses.
(e) It is known, Says Brotier, from the experience ofmedical people, that at Rome there are more patients,during the summer, in the wide parts of the city, whichlie open to the sun, than in the narrow places, where theinhabitants are shaded from the intense heat.
vol. iv. 3 B


'







OCR Output








OF THE ANNALS. 233


himself passed over into Greece. He met appen.
r B. XVI.
Nero at Corinth, and, by giving him, in u^v~ostriking colours, a dreadful picture of the 826. *state of affairs, enforced the necessity of «7-'returning to the capital. The grand enter­prise was abandoned, and the Ionian andiEgean Seas were left to flow in the direc­tion which nature had appointed. Butstill there was an object that attracted Ne­ro's fond regard. The time of celebratingthe Isthmian games was near at hand. Hisfavourite passion hurried him to the place.The pugilist and the charioteer banishedfrom his mind all fear of plots and insur­rections. He thought of the crowns ofvictory which he had obtained in everyquarter. His heart expanded with joy,with self-congratulation, and gratitude to­wards a people, who had declared himmatchless and unrivalled in all the gamesand exercises throughout the country. Itbehoved so great a conqueror to leavea lasting monument of munificence, andimperial grandeur. Elate with pride, andtouched with generous sentiments, he re­solved to give Greece her liberty. "Withthat design he repaired to the forum. Nor







OCR Output








OF TACITUS. I59


Seal, which he took care to break, that, book
XVI.
after his death, it might not be used for<-r>«*the destruction of any person whatever. 8i<>.


A.D.
66.


XX. Nero saw, with surprise, his clan­destine passions, and the secrets of his mid­night revels, laid open to the world. Towhom the discovery was to be imputedstill remained a doubt. Amidst his con­jectures, Silia, who by her marriage with asenator had risen into notice, occurred tohis memory. This woman had often pro­cured for the libidinous pleasures of theprince, and lived, besides, in close inti­macy with Petronius. Nero concludedthat she had betrayed him, and for 'that of­fence ordered her into banishment. Havingmade that sacrifice to his own resentment,he gave another victim to glut the rage ofTigellinus, namely, Numicius Thermus, aman of praetorian rank. An accusationpreferred against the favourite, by a slaveenfranchised by Thermus, was the causethat provoked the vengeance of Tigellinus.For that daring attempt against a man inpower the informer suffered on the rack,







OCR Output








THE


ANNALS


OF


TACITUS.


BOOK XVI.







OCR Output








OF TACITUS. 25


lations, and, without halting night or day, book


XV.


pursued their march with alacrity and
' ' "' A.V.C.
vigour. sis.
A. D,
62-
XIII. Meanwhile Vologeses pressedon the siege. He assaulted the entrench­ments; he endeavoured to storm a castle,where the weaker sex, the aged, and infirmwere lodged for security. In these severalattacks, he came to a closer engagementthan usually consists with the militarygenius of his country. By a show of te­merity he hoped to bring on a decisiveaction. The Romans remained close intheir tents, content with a safe post withintheir entrenchments; some in deference tothe orders of their general; others, throughwant of spirit, tamely waiting to be relievedby Corbulo. If, in the mean time, theenemy overpowered them, they called tomind, by way of consolation, the exampleof 'two Roman armies that passed underthe yoke; one at Caudium (a), and theother at Numantia. By those two eventssubmission, in their present distress, wouldbe fully justified, since neither the Sam-jaites, nor the Carthaginians,' those famous







OCR Output








-£.f





A.U.C.


OF TACITUS.
display of strength, that the Parthianabandoned their enterprise, and, withoutattempting any thing against the Syrians, si*.drew off their forces to the invasion of *••
Armenia.
I XvP-etus had fixed his head-quartersm that country, little aware of the stormready to burst upon him, and so much off'his guard, that he suffered the fifth legionto remain in Pontus, at a considerable di­stance, while he still weakened his numbersby granting leave of absence to his soldierswithout reserve. In this situation he re­ceived intelligence of the approach of Vo-logeses with a powerful army.V He calledthe twelfth legion to his assistance, and, bythe necessity of that reinforcement, betray­ed to the enemy the feeble condition of hisarmy. He was, notwithstanding, suffici­ently strong to maintain his post, and baffleall the efforts of the Parthians, had it beenin the genius of the man to pursue withfirmness either his own idea, or the counselof others. But in pressing exigencies, heno sooner embraced the plan recommendedby officers of known experience, than his


c 2







OCR Output








OF TACITUS. 143


by a band of ruffians. Upon that occa-Booicsion she opposed her person to the assas- ^^-^
sins stroke: she clung to her husband's si's.'
A. i>.bleeding neck, and preserved the garment su­stained with his blood. From that timenothing could assuage her sorrows: she re­mained a widow, a prey to grief, inconso­lable, loathing all food, except what wasnecessary for the support of nature. InIhe present distress, by her father's advice,she set off for Naples, where Nero then re­sided. Not being admitted to his pre­sence, she watched the palace-gates, and,as soon as he came forth, she cried aloud," Hear my father, hear an innocent man;" he was your colleague (b) in the consul-" ship; extend your mercy, nor let him fall" a sacrifice to the pernicious arts of a* vile abandoned slave." She persisted, asoften as Nero passed, to renew her appli­cation, sometimes in tears and misery ofheart; often in a tone of vehemence, rousedby her sufferings above the weakness of hersex. But neither tears nor reproaches hadany effect on the cruelty of Nero: insen­sible to both, and heedless of the popular







OCR Output








NOTES
ON THE
APPENDIX
TO
THE SIXTEENTH BOOK
OF
THE ANNALS.
Section I.
'(a) T^PICTETUS, as we are told by Arrian, recorded-*—* the Apothegms of Thrasea, and in particularthe sentiment here ascribed to him.
(b) Pliny the consul observes, that many, who arethemselves slaves to every vice, are, notwithstanding,malicious declaimers against the errors of others; yet,surely, a lenity of disposition is of all other virtues themost becoming. The rule which ought to be most reli­giously observed, is, Let us be inexorable to our ownfailings, while we treat those of the rest of the worldwith tenderness, not excepting even such as forgive nonebut themselves, remembering always what the humane,and, therefore, the great Thrasea used to say : " He" who hates vice, hates mankind." Nostine has, quiomnium libiilinum servt, sic alioruin vitiis irascuntur,quasi invideant, et gravissimi puniunt, qiws maximi







OCR Output








3S8 NOTES ON THE


Section XXVI.(a) Arulcnus Rusticus lived to establish a great andvirtuous character. He was put to death by Domitian,A. U. C. 847, A. D. 94. See Life of Agricola, s. xi ;and note (a).
Section XXVII.(aJ The emperors had their own special quaestors forthe conduct of their affairs. Augustus was the first thatestablished such an office. Suetonius says, he acquaintedthe senate with the scandalous behaviour of his daughterJulia by a narrative in writing, which was read to thefathers by the quaestor. Suet, in Aug. s. 65:
Section XXVIII.
(a) For more of Helvidius Priscus, see History, bookiv. s. 5 ; and see Life of Agricola, s. ii. and note (b).
(b) Marcus Paconius, the father of Paconius Agrip-pinus, was cruelly put to death by Tiberius. See Suet,in Tib. s. 61. "''> '"*
(c) For more of Curtius Montanus, see History, iv.S. 40 and 42.
Section XXIX.
(a) It is supposed by some of the commentators, thatthe Montanus mentioned in this place is the person intro­duced by Juvenal in the deep consultation held by Do­mitian, about the manner of dressing a fish of enormous-size:
Quidnam igitur censes ? conciditur ? absit ab illoDedecus hoc, 'Montanus ait, &c.
Sat. iv. ver. 130.







OCR Output








$16 APPENDIX TO BOOK XVI.


appen, on the race-ground, and astonish the mul-
6. XVI.
' titude with his dexterity in whirling round


820.' the course. Determined to perforin won-
AD ■■
f?,' ders, and surpass all ancient fame, hemounted a car drawn by six horses, buthad the misfortune, in the heat of hiscareer, to be thrown from his seat. Hemounted again; but either hurt by his fall,or not able to bear the velocity of the mo­tion, he was obliged to descend before hereached the goal. He was, notwithstand­ing, declared conqueror. He contendedafterwards for the prizes at the Pythian,the Nemean, and all the other games ofGreece, with equal success at every place.He was proclaimed victor in all trials ofskill, and gained no less than eighteenhundred different crowns. The honour soobtained was always understood to reflecta lustre on the conqueror's native country.With a view to that custom, the form ofthe proclamation (h) in favour of Nero wasjas follows: "Nero C;esar is victor in.the combat (naming it), and has won
:THE CROWN FOR THE ROMAN PEOPLE,AND THE UNIVERSE, OF WHICH HE IS
master." Care was taken to transmit to







OCR Output








3Gl2 NOTES ON THE


(b) The civic crown for saving the life of a citizen,•was often granted by the emperor ; but the consular com­manders had the same power at the head of their armies.
Section XIII.
(a) The Roman army defeated by the Samnites, passedunder the yoke at the Caudina Furca, now Forckie,A. U. C. 183. A more terrible defeat happened after­wards at Numantia, A. U. C. 617. The place is nowcalled Numancia, and the ruins of antiquity are still tobe seen.
Section XV.
(a) See the Geographical Table.
(b) Suetonius says expressly, that the legions passedunder the yoke. In Neron. s. 39.
Section XIX.
(a) It was a settled rule of law, that in all electionsfor the magistracy, or the government of provinces, thepreference should be given to the candidate who had thegreatest number of children. See Annals, ii. s. 51.
(b) By the law Papia Poppaea, the estates of thosewho did not entitle themselves to the privileges annexedto ths paternal state, were to devolve to the public asthe common parent of all. Annals, iii. s. 28.
Section XX.
(a) The Cincian Law against venal advocates has beenmentioned, Annnls, xi. s. 5. Laws were also establishedby Augustus, called Leges Julia, to prevent bribery atelections. Suet, in Aug. s. 34 and 40.
(b) The Calpurnian Law was introduced by Lucius







OCR Output








316 GENEALOGICAL TABLE.


rection, with public buildings no less use­ful than magnificent. Augustus, to shewa grateful sense of his services and his me­rit, raised him to three several consulships,and even made him his associate in the tri-bunitian power. On the death of MarcusMarcellus (see No. 18), Augustus chosehim for his son-in-law, and gave him inmarriage his daughter Julia, then a widow,A. U. 733. Agrippa, though a new man,had the art of rising in the world with su­perior dignity. He died A. U. 742, in thefifty-first year of his age. Augustus spokehis funeral panegyric.—Tacit. Anna!, i. s. 3.Pliny, book iii. s. 2; book vii. s. 8; bookxxxv. s. 4. Dio, book liv. Veil. Patercu-lus, book ii. s. 06.
He was called in ancient medals, il/or-cus Agrippa, Son of Lucius, Consul threetimes, Commander of the Fleet, and Projectof the Sea-coast.
48. Caius Cjesar, son of Agrippa andJulia, born A. U. 734 ; adopted by Augus­tus as his son, prince of the Roman youth,and consul elect. He was prematurely cut







OCR Output








. .*•%


20 THE ANNALS
book little spirit was stung with jealousy, and*v-*-v""0 lest he should be thought to stand in need
A. U. C.
815." of advice, he was sure to adopt very dif-«2. ferent measures, always changing for theworse.
On the first approach of the Parthians,he sallied out of his entrenchments, deter­mined to hazard a battle. Ditches andramparts, he said, were not given to him incommission, nor had he any need of thatdefence: the soldier and the sword wereall he wanted. In this vapouring strairihe led his legions to the field; but a cen­turion, and a few soldiers, who had beensent to reconnoitre the enemy, being cutoff, his courage failed, and he sounded aretreat. He was no sooner in his camp,than perceiving that Vologeses had notpressed on the rear, he once more grewbold, and, in a fit of valour, ordered threethousand of his best infantry to take poston the next eminence of Mount Taurus, todispute the pass with the Parthian king.The Pannonians, who formed the strengthof his cavalry, were drawn up on the openplain. He placed his wife and her infant







OCR Output








oQ THE ANNALS





book rivals of the Roman republic, could becompared with the extensive power of theParthian empire: and moreover, the boastedvirtue of the ancient Romans, howeverdecorated by the praises of posterity, wasalways pliant in misfortune, and willing tomake terms with the conqueror. By this.unwarlike spirit of his army Paetus Avasdriven to despair. He wrote to Vologeses.His letter was more in the style of reproachthan the language of a suppliant. " Ho-** stilities," he said, " were commenced by" the Parthians to wrest the kingdom off* Armenia from the Romans] a kingdomf always in the power of the emperor, or" governed by kings invested by him with" the regal diadem. Peace is equally thef* interest of both nations. From the present** juncture no conclusion can be drawn,P since the whole weight of Parthia is em-" ployed against two legions, and Rome** has it still in her power to arm in her? cause the remaining nations of the" world "
XIV. Vologeses, without entering into-^ the question of right, returned for answer,







OCR Output








OF THE ANNALS. 205


tion, as if his vajour had subdued the na- appen,
B. XVL
tions, thought fit to shut the temple of J a- u^-v-o1if us (a). But that pacific disposition did 'si 9.'not last long. Intoxicated by the homage es. *which he had received from Tiridates, hewanted to renew the same scene of splen­dour and vain glory, by the humiliation ofVologeses, the Parthian king. For that pur­pose, he endeavoured, by pressing invita­tions, to induce that prince to undertake a *journey to Rome. At length the easternmonarch gave a decisive answer: " You" can cross the sea, which I hold to be a" forbidden element; come to Asia, and*' we will then settle the ceremony of our44 meeting." Fired with indignation bythat peremptory refusal, and the tone ofgrandeur with which ft■ was delivered, Nerowas upon the point of declaring war, ifOther projects had not dazzled his imagin*ation. He concerted his measures, andlaid plans of vast ambition; but the ca­price that dictated them yielded to the firstnovelty that occurred. He intended toopen the temple of Janus for four wars atonce (b). The first,' against the Jews, whofelt themselves oppressed by the -avarice







OCR Output








34 ' THE ANNALS


book the treasury, for the exigencies of the state,xv. . •" b
i—.—i six millions ot sesterces.
A. U. C.815.A. D.
62. XIX, A custom, highly unjust andprejudicial to the rights of others, was, atthis time, in general vogue. When thetime drew near for the election of magi­strates, or the allotment of provinces, it wasthe practice of men, who had no issue (a),to become fathers by adoption. Havingserved their turn in a contest with realparents for the praetorship, and the ad­ministration of provinces, they emanci­pated their pretended sons, and resumedtheir former state. Against this abusewarm remonstrances were made to thesenate. The complainants urged the rightsof nature, the care and expence of rearingchildren, while the compensation by lawestablished (b) was wrested from them byfraud, by artifice, and the facility of feignedadoptions. It was surely a sufficient ad­vantage to such as had no children, thatthey could live free from all charge andsolicitude, without leaving the road tofavour, to preferment, and honours opento them in common with men who are of







OCR Output








52 THE ANNALS


book Romans. On the following day Tiridates


XV.





desired reasonable time to prepare for solong a journey, and, before he undertookit, desired that he might be at liberty tovisit his mother and his brothers. His re­quest was granted. The prince deliveredup his daughter, as a hostage, and dis­patched letters to Nero in terms of sub­mission.
XXXI. He met his two brothers, Pacorusin Media, and Vologeses at Ecbatana (a).The Parthian king was not inattentive tothe interest of Tiridates. He had alreadysent dispatches to Corbulo, requesting thathis brother should not be disgraced by anycircumstance that looked like a badge ofslavery; that he should not be obliged tosurrender his sword; that the honour ofembracing the governors (6) of the severalprovinces should not be denied to him;that he should not undergo the humiliatingaffront of waiting at their gates, or in theirantichambers; and that at Rome he shouldbe treated with all the marks of distinctionusually paid to the consuls. The truth is,the Parthian king, trained up in all the







OCR Output








OF TACITUS. IO9





Seneca lingered in pain. The approach bookof death was slow, and he wished for hisdissolution. Fatigued with pain, worn outand exhausted, he requested his friend,Statius Annaeus, whose fidelity and medicalskill he had often experienced, to administera draught of that swift-speeding poison (a),usually given at Athens to the criminalsadjudged to death. He swallowed thepotion, but without any immediate effect.His limbs were chilled: the vessels of hisbody were closed, and the ingredients,though keen and subtle, could not arrestthe principles of life. He desired to beplaced in a warm bath. Being conveyedaccording to his desire, he sprinkled hisslaves with the water, and " Thus," he said,
** I MAKE LIBATION TO JuPITER THE
" deliverer." The vapour soon over­powered him, and he breathed his last. Hisbody, without any funeral pomp, was com­mitted to the flames. He had given di­rections for that purpose in his last will,made at a time when he was in the-zenithof power, and even then looked forward tothe close of his days.







OCR Output








544 GENEALOGICAL TABLE.


and Agrippina, born A. U. 770. She wasfirst married to Lucius Cassius LonginusA.U. 786", and afterwards to Marcus iEmi-lius Lepidus. Caligula, her brother, hadan incestuous intrigue with her; and afterher death, which happened A.U. 7915 hecanonized her for a goddess by the name ofPa nt he a. On that occasion Livius Ge-minius declared on his oath, that he hadseen her in her ascent to heaven. For thisextraordinary testimony he was amply re­warded by Caligula.—Tacit. Annal. vi.s. 15. Suet. Life of Caligula, s. 7 and 24.Dio, book lix.


On ancient coins: Drusilla Augusta.


96. Lucius Cassius Longiistus, mar­ried to Drusilla (No. 95). He was raisedto the consulship A.U. 783, and afterwardsstood forth the accuser of Drusus, his wife'sbrother (see No. 83).—Suet. Life of Cali­gula, s. 24. Tacit. Annal. vi. s. 15. Dio,book lviii.
For Marcus jEmilius Lepidus, thesecond husband of Drusilla, see No. 54.







OCR Output








gl± APPENDIX TO BOOK XVI.


jfrpPEv. that 4ivine voice in a sullen mood, or, asC*-*-^; happened to him at Rome upon a formeriip.' occasion, he fell asleep (/). For this of-in- fence, he was ordered to appear no morein the presence of the emperor. He retiredto a small village, and there, in an obscurel»rjking-p]ace, hoped to fiud a shelter from•resentment. He remained for some timein that state of anxious suspense, when thefates called him forth to scenes of futureglory. The Jews were in the field with apowerful army; they had defeated CestiusGallus with great slaughter, and taken aneagle from one of the legions. The crisiswas big with danger, and called for vigor­ous measures. But Nero did not thinkthat Judaea was the field of glory. Hegave the command to Vespasian, appre­hending no danger from a man of obscuredescent, and austere manners, whom hewas no longer willing to retain near hisperson. Vespasian departed to take uponhim the command in Syria, and Nero con­tinued his progress through Greece. Hewas received every where with public de­monstrations of respect; but the peoplecould scarce refrain from laughter, when







OCR Output








350 GENEALOGICAL TABLE.


put to death by order of Claudius.—Suet.Life of Claudius, s. 27 and 29.
107. Faustus Cornelius Sylla, ofillustrious birth, the second husband ofAntonia (No. 105). He was banished byNero into Narbon Gaul, and there put todeath by assassins dispatched from Rome,A. U. 815.—Suet. Life of Claudius, s. 27.Tacit. Annal. xiii. s. 25; xiv. s. 57.
For Messalina, the third wife of Clau­dius, see No. 26.
108. Britannicus, son of Claudiusand Messalina, born 12th of February,A. U. 794. By his birth, and his father'sintention, who carried him in his arms andrecommended him as heir apparent to theaffections of the army, he was next insuccession to the sovereignty; but bythe artful policy of Agrippina, the fourthwife of Claudius, he was postponed toNero, and afterwards destroyed by poi­son, in the fourteenth year of his age,A. U. C. 808,—Suet. Life of Claudius, s.







OCR Output








J98 APPENDIX TO BOOK XVI.


appen." I congratulate you on the wisdom, thati#--v-*-»" brought you thus far to enjoy the sun-
8i9.'" shine of my presence, and my protection.
§6, u The diadem, which your father could*' not leave you, nor your brothers confirmu in your hand, is the gift which I bestow.*' The kingdom of Armenia is yours: I" place you on the vacant throne. From" this day you and your brothers may" learn, that it is mine to raise or depose*' the monarchs of the earth, as my wisdom« shall direct."
Such was the haughty style, in whichNero spoke of himself; but he did not longsupport his grandeur. The coronation be­ing over, he adjourned to Pompey's thea­tre, where the scene was prepared, at anenormous expence, with the most superbdecorations. The stage, and the whole in­side of that noble structure, were cased (c)-with gold. Such a profusion of wealth andmagnificence had never been displayed toview. To screen the spectators from the%iys of the sun, a purple canopy, inlaidwith golden stars, was spread over theirJjeads. - In the centre was seen, richly env»







OCR Output








330 GENEALOGICAL TABLE.


death she married Drusus the son of Tibe­rius. Sejanus seduced her affections fromher husband. Engaged in a course ofadultery with that flagitious minister, shehoped to rise with her paramour to the im­perial dignity, and with that ambitiousview conspired against her husband. Herguilt being afterwards fully detected, shewas put to death by order of Tiberius (seeSupplement to Annals, book v. s. 38, 39);and by a decree of the senate, her picturesand statues were all destroyed, and hermemory branded with infamy.T-,-Suet. Lifeof Claudius, s. 1. Life of Tiberius, s. 62.Tacit. Annal. book iv. s. 3, and 40; bookvi. s. 2. Dio, book Iviii,
72 Tiberius, son of Drusus Caesar(see No. 70) and Livilla (No. 71), grandrson to Tiberius the emperor, born with atwin-brother A. U. 772. Tiberius was soelated with joy on that occasion, that heboasted of the birth of twins, as an eventwhich had never happened to any Romanof equal rank. Caligula deprived him ofthe succession and his life, A. U. 790.—rTacit. Annal. book ii. s. 84. Dio, book fix.







OCR Output








386 NOTES ON THE


*


Caesar. In process of time, to swear on the Acts of theEmperors grew into use ; though we have seen Tiberiusrefusing to admit that form of oath.
(b) Thrasea was forbid the presence of the emperor,A. U. C. 816. See book xt. s. 23. From that time itdoes not appear that he entered the senate.
(e) The Journals of the Roman people, called in theoriginal Diurna Populi Romaiii. These were the Ro­man newspapers. It is to be regretted that no collectionof those fugitive pieces has come down to us. Weshould have the pleasure of seeing minutely and distinctly'the private life of the Romans, and the opportunity wouldbe fair to make a comparison between a Roman journalistand the doer of a modern newspaper. ,
(d) Cicero, in the Oration for Mursena, gives a sketchof Tubero's character: " He was a man of illustrious" birth, a scholar, and a professor of the stoic philosophy." Being desired, at the funeral of Scipio Africanus, to** lay out the couches for the farewel supper, he chose" the vilest sort, such as were used at Carthage, and," having covered them with goat skins, arranged in pro-" per order a number of Samian vases, which were" earthen ware ; as if he were preparing for the funeral" of Diogenes the cynic, and not for that of the divine" Africanus, to whose honour Quintus Maximus, in a" panegyric from the rostrum, said, he thanked the im-", mortal Gods that such a man was born a Roman citi-M zen ; for wherever Scipio lived, there by consequence^" would be fixed the empire of the world." Ciceroadds, that Tubero, a good and upright citizen, the grand­son of Paulus jEmilius, and nephew to the deceasedScipio, gave umbrage to the people by his perverse wis­dom, and for his goat skins lost his election when candi­date for the prajtorship. Atqice Hie, homo erudiiissmus.







OCR Output








OF TACITUS. 35


service to the community. Real parents bookare taught by the laws to expect the re- «~-v—»ward due to useful members of the com- sii.
A. D.
munity; but the laws are eluded, and the 62-promised reward is snatched away, if such,as have raised no heirs to themselves, areallowed to become parents without pater­nal affection, and childless again withoutregret. The deception of a moment servesto counterbalance whole years of expecta­tion, and the true father sees all his hopesdefeated. The senate passed a decree, bywhich it was provided, that in all cases,either of election to the magistracy, orsuccession by testament, no regard shouldbe paid to adoptions merely colourable.
XX. Claudius Timarchus, a nativeof Crete, was cited to answer a prosecutioncommenced against him. Besides the al­legations usually laid to the charge of suchas rise in the provinces to overgrownwealth, and become the oppressors of theirinferior neighbours, all expression, that fellfrom him, excited the indignation of thesenate. This man, it seems, bad made ithis boast, that addresses of public thanks


d2







OCR Output








GENEALOGICAL TABLE. 331


73. The twin-brother of Tiberius (No,72), the son of Drusus and Li via, orLivilla, died when about four years old,A. U. 776.—Tacit. Annal. book ii. s. 84;book iv. s. 15. His name is no-where men­tioned.
74. Julia, daughter of Drusus Caesar(No. 70) and Livia (No. 71) married firstto Nero Caesar, son of Germanicus andAgrippina, and afterwards to RubelliusBlandus. She was cut off by the maliceof Messalina A. U. 796.—Tacit. Annal.book iii. s. 29; book vi. s. 27; book xiii.s, 19 and 32. Dio, book lx.
For Nero Ccesar, son of Germanicus andAgrippina, the husband of Julia, see No.82.
75. Rubellius Blandus, son of aRoman knight, and the second husband ofJulia, the daughter of Drusus (see No. 70).He was married to her A. U. 786.—Tacit.Annal. book vi. s. 27. Dio, book lviii.
76. Rubellius Plautus, son of Ru­







OCR Output








GENEALOGICAL TABLE. 345


97. Julia, daughter of Germanicus andAgrippina, called by Suetonius Livilla.She was born A. U. 771- Caligula, on ac­count of her debaucheries, ordered her tobe conveyed to the isle of Pontia, A. U.792. She was recalled in the reign ofClaudius; but Messalina, without anycrime alleged, contrived to drive her intobanishment, and afterwards put her todeath, A. U. 796.—Suet. Life of Caligula,s. 7 and 24. Life of Claudius, s. 29. Dio,book lix.
98. Quinctilius Varus, son of Clau­dia Pulchra, who was cousin to Agrippina.
He married Julia (No. 97). An accusation •was framed against him by Domitius Aferand Dolabella, A. U. 780.—Seneca, Con-trov. book i. s. 3. Tacit. Annal. iv. s. 52and 66.
99. Marcus Vinicius. He marriedJulia (No. 97) A. U. 786; was twice con­sul, but, by a wicked stratagem of Messa­lina, was destroyed by poison A. U. 799.It was to this man, in the year of his con­sulship, that Velleius Paterculus dedicated







OCR Output








264 APPENDIX TO BOOK XVI.


appen. cessant fatigue. The legions from Illyri-
p.XVl. & & ! O
u-v-j cum returned with alienated minds. Scorn-
A.U. C. . .
82i. mg to disguise their sentiments, they sent«s- a deputation to Virginius on the UpperRhine, expressing their ardent desire, thathe would yield to the request of the le­gions under his command, and accept theimperial dignity. Eight Batavian cohortshad shewn a spirit of disaffection, and thepraetorian guards were under the influenceof Nymphidius. In this desperate situa­tion Nero looked round for assistance,but he looked in vain. He wanderedthrough the apartments of his palace, andall was solitude. He, who but a few daysbefore was the god of the senate and thepeople, was now in dread of being theirvictim. Conscience began to exercise herrights. Her voice was heard; Nero re­viewed his crimes, and shuddered with hor­ror and remorse. He repeated in despairand anguish of heart, a line, which, whenpersonating QEdipus, he had often de­claimed on the public stage (e): " My wife," my father, and my mother doom me" dead." Of all his courtier-fry, and allhis instruments of guilt, not one adhered







OCR Output








6 THE ANNALS





rook formed no settled plan. - He was at vari-
XV. r
ance with the Hyrcanians, and, after along and obstinate conflict, that brave andpowerful nation still made head againsthim. While he continued wavering, freshintelligence fired him with indignation.Tigranes marched his army into the terri­tory of the Adiabenians, a people border­ing on Armenia, and laid waste their coun­try-. The enterprise did not resemble the*sudden incursion of Barbarians roving inquest of prey : a regular war seemed to bedeclared in form. The chiefs of the Adia­benians saw, with resentment, their landsmade a scene of desolation, not by a Ro­man army, but by a foreigner, a despi­cable hostage, who for years had lived atRome undistinguished from the commonslaves.
Monobazus, the sovereign of the pro-. vince, inflamed the discontents of thepeople, and, at the same time, roused thepride of Vologeses by frequent messages,•importing, that he knew not which wayto turn, nor from what quarter to expect 'relief. Armenia, he said,.was lost, and the







OCR Output








64 ,''''' THE ANNALS





book wild with affliction for their friends andxv.
relations whom they could not save, em­braced a voluntary death, and perished inthe flames. During the whole of this dis­mal scene no man dared to attempt anything that might check the violence of thedreadful calamity. A crew of incendiariesstood near at hand denouncing vengeanceon all who offered to interfere. Some wereso abandoned as to heap fuel on the flames.They threw in firebrands and flamingtorches, proclaiming aloud, that they hadauthority for what they did. Whether, infact, they had received such horrible or­ders, or, under that device, meant to plun­der with greater licentiousness, cannot nowbe known.
XXXIX. During the whole of thisterrible conflagration Nero remained atAntium, without a thought of returning tothe city, till the fire approached the build­ing by which he had communicated thegardens of Maecenas (a) with the imperialpalace. All help, however, was too late.The palace, the contiguous edifices, andevery house adjoining, were laid in ruins.







OCR Output








80 " THE ANNALS


book ordered him not to make his verses public,
XV. .
i^-j determined to silence what he vainly strove'sis.' to emulate. Lateranus brought with him65.' no private animosity: he acted on noblerprinciples; the love of his country inspiredhim, and he knew no other motive. FlaviusScevinus and Afranius Quinctianus, bothof senatorian rank, stood forward to guidethe enterprise with a degree of spirit littleexpected from the tenour of their lives.Scevinus, addicted to his pleasures, passedhis days in luxury, sloth, and languor.Quinctianus was decried for the effeminacyof his manners. Nero had lampooned himin a copy of defamatory verses, and to re­venge the injury Quinctianus became apatriot.
L. The conspirators had frequent meet­ings. They inveighed against the vices ofNero; they painted forth in glaring coloursall his atrocious deeds, by which the em­pire was brought to the brink of ruin; theyurged the necessity of choosing a successorequal to the task of restoring a distressedand tottering state, and, in the interval,enlisted in their confederacy several Ro­







OCR Output








OF TACITUS. 1$5


Soranus was already in the hands of Osto- B°$*rius Sabinus, a Roman knight. Soranus %*£%.was returned from his proconsular govern- Ho.ment of Asia. His conduct in the province "'stood distinguished by justice and therectitude of his measures; but by thejealousy of Nero the virtues of the mini­ster were converted into crimes. He hadopened the port of Ephesus, and leftunpunished the obstinate resistance ofthe people of Pergamus, who refused tolet Acratus (a), one of the emperor's freed-men, carry off the statues and picturesthat adorned their city. This meritoriousconduct was an offence not to be forgiven;but constructive crimes were to be heldforth to the public. The heads of the,ac-icusation were, that Soranus had contracteda close and intimate friendship with Plan-tus(6), and had endeavoured by popUlaParts to incite the eastern provinces to Vrevolt. To decide the fate of twd Upright1citizens, Nero chose a juncture favourable1to his dark design. Tiridates- was* ;on fits■1way to Rome, to receive the diadem oFArmenia front the hands of the emperor.' *He thought it probable, tfcat, in the spietP







OCR Output








208 APPENDIX TO BOOK XVL


appen. powers. From that moment all his war-
B. XVI.
c*-v^o like projects vanished from his mind. He8i9.' thought no more of humbling the Par­se' thian king; the ^Ethiopians and Albaniansmight enjoy their independent state, andVespasian might take the field against theJews. The fame of a coachman, a min­strel, and a singer, was of greater moment.He resolved, without delay, to set out forGreece. How the administration was tobe conducted during his absence, was thefirst consideration- That did not embar­rass him long. The whole authority andall the functions of the prince were com­mitted to Ilelius, one of his freedmen.That upstart minister, with Polycletus, hisassociate, had already enriched himselfwith the plunder of the public, and wasnow, with the whole power in his hands, togive a full display of his character. Thatpoint being settled, a weightier care stillremained. An imperial charioteer, and acomedian of illustrious rank, who was tobe nobly covered with Olympic dust, andto bring back laurel crowns for his vic­tories ih song and pantomime, could notundertake such an expedition without the







OCR Output








THK


ANNALS


OF


TACITUS.


BOOK XV.


vol. iv.


.">©
/f w


0?


C^-


CO O^


238733







OCR Output








$94 NOTES ON THE APPENDIX TO THE


Section IV.
(a) The Sun, under the name of Mithra, was wor­shipped by the Persians, and almost ail the eastern na­tions. See Hyde, History of the Persian Religion.
(b) The speech of Tiridates, and Nero's answer, arerecorded by Dio Cassius, lib. lxiii.
(e) Pliny mentions the decorations of the Theatre,and the vast display of gold for the reception of Tiridates.Nero Pompeii Theatrum operuit auro in unum diem,quod Tiridati regi Armenia ostenderet. Lib. xxxiii. s.3. See also Dio Cassius, lib. lxiii.
fdj Dio says, this feast was given in Nero's goldenpalace ; for which, see Pliny, lib. xxxiii. s. 3.
(e) Rome, under the emperors, was often disturbedby the violent spirit of theatrical factions, the leaders ofwhich were distinguished by the colour of their dress,such as white, blue, green, and yellow. This is what Ta­citus, in another place, has called Histrionalis Favor.Montesquieu has considered it as one of the causes of thedeclension of the Roman empire. See the Dialogue con­cerning Oratory, s. xxix. note (c).
(f) Dio relates this remark made by Tiridates.
(g) Pliny the elder has given an account of Nero'spassion for the occult sciences, lib. xxx. s. 2.
Section V. *
(a) Suetonius says, Nero spent in treating Tiridateswith unparalleled magnificence, eight hundred thousandsesterces a day; a sum almost incredible ! and at hisdeparture presented him with above a million. Sueton.in Nero, S. 30.
(b) The destruction of Artaxata has been mentioned.Annals, xiii. s. 41.







OCR Output








OF TACITUS. 97


birth, when officers, Roman knights and booksenators, untried by the pangs of torture, <^robetrayed, with a kind of emulation, their sis.'friends, their relations, and all that was es.'dear to them. Quinctianus, Senecio, andeven Lucan continued to give in the namesof the conspirators. Every new discoveryfilled Nero with consternation, though hehad doubled his guard and taken everyprecaution to secure his person.
LVIIL Parties of soldiers under armswere stationed in every quarter, on thewalls of Rome, on the sea-coast, and alongthe banks of the Tiber. The city presentedthe appearance of a garrisoned town. Theforum and the open squares were filledwith cohorts of horse and foot. The neigh­bouring villages and the country roundwere invested. Even private houses weresecured. The German soldiers, orderedout on duty, mixed with the rest of thearmy. Being foreigners, Nero dependedon their fidelity. The conspirators wereled forth in a long procession to the tri­bunal of the prince. They stood in crowdsat his garden-gate, waiting their turn to be
VOL. IV. H







OCR Output








OF TACITUS. 123


mind of Nero. Though his heart never «ookknew remorse for the worst of crimes, his <-tsjear, unaccustomed to the voice of truth, A8i8.tvshrunk from the sound of freedom, and «?'startled at reproach. Flavius was orderedfor execution. Veianius Niger, one of thetribunes, led him to the next field, andthere directed a trench to be opened. Theprisoner surveyed the spot, and, finding itneither wide nor deep enough, turned witha smile to the soldiers, and " This," he said," shews no military skill." Niger desiredhim to extend his neck with courage:" Strike," said Flavius, " and prove your" courage equal to mine/' The tribunewas seized with a tremor in every joint.He severed the head at two blows* andmade a merit of it with Nero, giving thename of cruelty to his want of firmness.He made it his boast, that, by repeatingthe stroke, he made him die twice* 2 '- • ' ■
< ■ • • i _ < ••_
LXVIII. StrtPiciirs Asper, the cen­turion, gave the next example of magna­nimity. Being asked by Nero, why he con-Spired-against his life ? he answered shortly,"J knew no other relief from your ilagiti-
VOL. IV, i







OCR Output








292 APPENDIX TO BOOK XVI.


appen. mined to extort by force what they const-
b.xvi. •; J
^—v-^ derecl as a legal right. Galba was not of
A. U. C.
sal a temper to yield to sudden emergencies.
«8- He ordered his soldiers to disperse an in­solent rabble. The cavalry rushed on to thecharge with impetuous fury, and, meetingwith a feeble resistance, cut their waywith dreadful slaughter. It is said thatno less than seven thousand were put tothe sword. The rest submitted at discre­tion, and were afterwards ordered to bedecimated.
This tragic catastrophe spread a generalconsternation. Galba entered the city ofRome through a scene of blood, and menexpected nothing less than a renewal of allthe cruelties of Nero's reign. He carriedwith him many virtues, but he had in histrain Titus Vinius, Cornelius Laco, andIcelus, his freedman (p); three perniciousministers, who gained an entire ascendantover a venerable, but indolent, old man,and by their vices occasioned the dreadfulcalamities, which, in the following year,overwhelmed themselves, their master, andthe public.







OCR Output








OF TACITUS. „ 137


VI. The public games were followed book


XVI.


by the death of Popprea (a). She died of <
a kick on her womb, which Nero gave her sis.'
A. D.
in a sudden passion, though she was then 6s.'advanced in her pregnancy. Some writerswill have it that she was carried off by adose of poison; but they assert it withmore spleen than truth. Nero was desir­ous of having issue, and he loved his wifewith sincere affection. Her body was not,according to the Roman custom (b), com­mitted to the funeral pile, but, after themanner of the eastern kings" embalmedwith precious spices (c), and deposited inthe monument of the Julian family. Theceremony was performed with great pomp,and Nero pronounced the funeral oration.He Avas lavish in praise of her beaut}'; andthe peculiar happiness of being the motherof an infant (d) enrolled among the gods,was a topic on which he dwelt with plea­sure. By enlarging on that and other ac­cidental circumstances, he made a pane­gyric, in which not one virtue could find aplace,
VII. The death of Poppsea occasioned







OCR Output








OF THE ANNALS. 285


Nymphidius, were seized, and, without appek.further enquiry, or any form of trial, put —~*~~>to death. Cingonius Varro, at that time wi.'
- A. 0.
consul elect, was in the number; and, what w.was very extraordinary, Mithridates (a), thedethroned king of Pontus, who had sur­rendered to Claudius, and from that timelived at Rome, was hurried to execution,without beino; heard in his defence. Pe-tronius Turpilianus (b) was another unhap­py victim. He had been chosen by Neroto command his armies; and, though henever went from Rome to execute hiscommission, the very appointment wasdeemed a sufficient crime. These bloodyexecutions were inauspicious in the open­ing of a new reign. The cruelty of Neroseemed to be renewed, when the peopleexpected a milder government, and a re-ngular administration of law and justice.The fate of Turpilianus filled the city withmurmurs of discontent. It was known thatTigellinus presided at the execution ; andthat a man of worth and honour shouldbleed under the eye of a detested mis­creant, appeared to be a continuation of







OCR Output








OF TACITUS. 123


situated ia the forum, the murder was to boorhave been perpetrated, if that god had not *-»-y^«idispelled the clouds that hung over the ma- "sis.chinations of evil minded men, and brought *■their dark proceedings into open day-light.It was further ordered, that the sports ofthe circus, in honour of Ceres, should becelebrated with an additional number ofchariot-races; that the month of April (a)should be styled after the name of Nero;and that, on the spot, where Scevinus fur­nished himself with a dagger, a templeshould be erected to the goddess ofsafety. The dagger itself was dedicatedin the capitol, with an inscription to theavenging god, called Jupiter Vinde^.The inscription, at that time, had noequivocal meaning; but soon after, whenJulius Vindex (b) excited a revolt inGaul, it was considered as an omen of im­pending vengeance.
In the journals of the senate I find anentry, by which it appears, that CerealisAnicius, consul elect, moved in his place,that a temple should be raised, at the publicexpence, to the deified Nero, who, in







OCR Output








GENEALOGICAL TABLE. - 315


count of her adulterous intrigues, she wasbanished by Augustus to the island ofPandataria A. U. T52. She was left thereby Tiberius, to pine in want and misery.She died A. U. 7b7.—Pliny, bookvii. s. 45.JDio, book rv. Tacit. Annal. i. s. 53. Veil.Patcreulus, bookii. s. 100.
For her first husband, Marcus Mar-cellus, see No. 18.
47. Marcus Vipsanius Agrippa;a man of low extraction, in his mannersunpolished, even to a degree of rusticity.For those defects he made ample atone­ment by superior qualities; in war, a greatcommander; and through life a man ofunblemished integrity. Me gained signalvictories both by land and sea, and by hisbrilliant success established Augustus onthe imperial throne. A stranger to lettersand the fine arts, he was, notwithstanding,the friend of science. At a time when gerographical knowledge had made little orno progress, he framed a map of the world;and presented it to the public. Not onlyRome but Italy was adorned, under his di-







OCR Output













OCR Output








GENEALOGICAL TABLE. 3l7


off, on his return from Armenia, A. U. 757-Tacit. Annal. i. s. 3. Dio, book liv.
He was married to Livia, the sister ofGermanicus.—Tacit. Annal. iv. s. 40.
For Livia, his wife, see No. 71.
49. Lucius Cjesar, son of Agrippa andJulia, brother to Caius Caesar, born A. U.737; adopted by Augustus into the Caesa­rian family; styled prince of the Romanyouth; and declared consul elect. Hedied at Marseilles, on his way to join thearmy in Spain, in the month of August,A. U. 754. Tacit. Annal. i. s. 3.
In ancient medals, both brothers areCalled, Cams and Lucius Ccesars, Sons ofAugustus, Consuls elect, Princes of the Ro­man Youth.
50, Marcus Agrippa Posthumus,son of Agrippa and Julia ; brother to Caiusand Lucius; born after his father's death,A. U. 742. He was adopted by AugustusA. U. %57t and soon after, on account of







OCR Output








OF TACITUa 135


a very different manner. All who came book
from the municipal towns, or the more re- u«-y-w>- t , ■ , . a. u. c.
mote parts of Italy, where some tincture sis.
of ancient manners still remained; and a ".considerable number, besides, who arrivedfrom the provinces on public business, ortheir own private affairs, as 3Tet strangersto vice, and undebauched by luxury, be­held the scene with heaviness of heart. Aspectacle, in which the prince exposed hisfrivolous talents, gave them the highestdisgust. They thought the applause dis­honest, but they were obliged to concurwith the rest. They acted their part withwarm, but aukward zeal. Their unprac- ,tised hands were easily tired; they werenot able to keep time in the grand concert,and, exerting themselves without skill, theydisturbed the general harmony. For everyblunder they were chastised by the sol­diers, who were stationed at their posts,with orders to take care, that the applauseshould be kept up with spirit, without aninterval of rest, or silence. It is a certainfact, that several Roman knights, endea­vouring to make their way through thecrowd, were crushed to death in the nar-







OCR Output








CONTENTS.—BOOK XVI.


tion both of Thrasea and Soranus at the time whenTiridates arrives at Rome to be invested with thecrown of Armenia. Thrasea debates with his friendswhether it were best for him to attend the senate.Different opinions on the subject. XXVII. The se­nate-house surrounded with guards. XXVIII. Bit­ter speech of Eprius Marccllus against Thrasea.XXX. Servilia, the daughter of Soranus, involved 'in the same danger with her father. Her noble de­fence. Both cendanned, as also Thrasea, The choiceof their death left to themselves. Helvidius Pris­ms banished out qf Italy. Montanus charged withwriting a satirical poem against Nero; he is par­doned, but never to exercise any public office. Thethree accusers, Eprius Marcellus, Cossutianus, andOstorius Sabinus amply rewarded. XXXIV. A queestorsent to see Thrasea finish his days. The remarkablebehaviour of Thrasea, and his noble advice to the qua-stor.—'The rest of this book is lost.
These transactions passed, partly in the former consul-•■ ■ ship, and in the following year.
Years Of ■ . • i
•f Rome—Christ. Consuls.
"818 65 Silius Nerva, Atticus Vestrinus.
-«,« *c (Caius Suetonius Paulinus, Cains Lucius
519 66 -j .
I I elennus.







OCR Output








146 THE ANNALS





book fire and water. The treed man of Vetus,xvi.
Avho betrayed his master, and the accuser,
who undertook the conduct of the prose­cution, obtained, to reward their villany* aseat in the theatre among the officers whofollow in the train of the tribunes. Themonth of April was already styled by thename of Nero (b), and, in like manner, Maywas changed to that of Claudius, and Juneto Gennanicus. Cornelius Orfitus was theauthor of this innovation. His reason forthe last was, because the two Torquati (c)suffered in the month of June, and that in­auspicious name ought, therefore, to beabolished from the calendar.
XIII. To the blood and horror, thatmade this year for ever memorable, we mayadd the vengeance of Heaven, declared instorms and tempests, and epidemic disor­ders. A violent hurricane made the coun­try of Campania a scene of desolation;whole villages were overthrown; planta­tions were torn up by the roots, and thehopes of the year destroyed. The fury ofthe storm was felt in the neighbourhoodof Rome, where, without any apparent







OCR Output








396 NOTES ON THE APPENDIX TO' THE


(d) See Suetonius, in Nero, s. 23.
(e) The destruction of the statues erected to the va­rious conquerors in the public games of Greece, is men­tioned by Suetonius, in Nero, s. 24.
(f) See Annals, book xvi. s. 5.
(g) Dio Cassius tells us, that when Nero performedthe part of Canace, one of the spectators asked, Whatis he doing now ? A man answered, He is in labour.For a list of the characters acted by Nero, see Suetonius,in Nero, s. 21.
(It) See Crevier's Roman Emperors, Life of Nero,vol. iv. p. 304.
Section VIII.
(a) Suetonius says, Nero, after the murder of hismother, was not able to bear the reproaches of his ownconscience, though he had received the congratulatoryaddresses of the army, the senate, and the people ; hefrequently confessed that he was haunted by his mother'sghost following him with the whips and burning torchesof the furies. Exagitari se viaternd specie, verberibus
furiarum ac tadis ardentibus. In Nero, s. 34.
(b) When Nero made the tour of Greece, he did not -dare to attend the Eleusinian mysteries, having heard thecryer warning all impious and nefarious villains not toapproach the place. Sueton. in Nero, s. 34.
(c) Suetonius says, he attempted to call up his mo­ther's ghost, in order to appease and mollify her wrath.In Nero, s. 34.
(d) See this related by Suetonius, in Nero,■s. 40.
(e) The territory of Cirrha was for many years an­nexed to the temple of Delphi: hence Lucan says in hisaddress to Nero:







OCR Output








OF TACITUS. 145


same chamber, and with the same instm- book


XVI.


ment, the father, the mother-in-law, andthe daughter opened their veins, and with- sis.'out any other covering, than such as de- «•cency required, were conducted to a warmbath; the father with his eyes fixed uponhis daughter; the grandmother gazing onthe same object; and she,' in return, look­ing with tender affection on both her pa­rents ; each of them wishing to avoid thepain of seeing the others in the pangs ofdeath, and praying to be released. Na­ture pursued her own course. They diedin the order of their respective ages, theoldest first. After their decease, a prose­cution was carried on in due form of law,and all three were adjudged to capital pu­nishment. Nero so far opposed the sen­tence, as to give them the liberty of choos­ing their mode of dying. When the tra­gedy was already performed, such was thefarce that followed.
XII. Publius Gallus, a Romanknight, for no other crime than his inti­macy with Fenius Rums (a), and some con­nection with Vetus, was interdicted from
VOL. IV. I.







OCR Output








OF THE ANNALS. 201





number of the Parthian Magi, he thought appew.the opportunity fair to learn all the secretsof an occult science, which he believedwas not the mere illusion of mathemati­cians and pretended philosophers. Tiri-rdates studied to ingratiate himself, andwas proud to have the emperor of Romefor his pUpil(g). By his desire, the Magiopened all their stores of knowledge, andNero, with the anxiety of a guilty mind,was eager to pry into futurity. He wasmaster of the Roman world, and, with theassistance of his oriental teachers, flatteredhimself that he should soon be able to con-troul the ways of Providence, and give thelaw to the gods. With tins view he passedhis time in close conference with a set«ofChaldean impostors; but Tiridates was notable, in return for the kingdom of Arme­nia, to teach his benefactor the art ofholding commerce with evil spirits. Nerofound the whole to be a system of fraud.Instead of being enabled to hold a councilwith infernal powers, he was left to thesuggestions of his own heart, and the adviceof a pernicious crew of abandoned menand women, who were the emperor's con-







OCR Output








334 GENEALOGICAL TABLE.


Inscription on ancient coins: Nero Clau­dius Drusus, Germanicus, Imperator.
For Antonia the younger, the wife ofDrusus, see No. 42.
80. Sons of Drusus and Antonia. Theydied before A. U. 745, and their names arenow unknown.—Suet. Life of Claudius,s. 1.
81. Germanicus Cesar, son of NeroClaudius Drusus (No. 79) by Antonia theyounger (No. 42), the worthiest son ofthe worthiest parents. Tiberius, by thecommand of Augustus, adopted him A. U.757* but afterwards, when possessed of thesupreme power, beheld him with a malig­nant eye. He died on his return from atour in Egypt, not without strong suspi­cions of being poisoned by the contrivanceof Livia, the mother of Tiberius, and thevillany of Piso and Plancina, A. U. 772,in the thirty-first year of his age. The fu­neral ceremony was performed at Antioch.Germanicus succeeded to his fa titer in the







OCR Output








JL30 THE ANNALS


XVI.





book the form of coin, but in rude and shapeless»ingots, such as were in use in the early agesof the world. In one part of the cavewere to be seen vast massy heaps, and inother places columns of gold towering to aprodigious height; the whole an immensetreasure, reserved in obscurity to add tothe splendour of Nero's reign. To giveprobability to his story, he pretended, thatDido, the Phaenician (a), when she fledfrom Tyre, and founded the city of Car­thage, deposited her whole stock in the-bowels of the earth, that so much wealthmight neither prove the bane of a new-colony, nor excite the avarice of the Nu-midian princes (b), of themselves alreadyhostile to her infant state.
II. Nero neither weighed the characterof the man, nor the circumstances of sowild a report. He had not even the pre­caution to send commissioners to informthemselves on the spot. He helped tospread the report; he began to count hisriches, and dispatched his agents to trans­port the treasure to Rome. The lightgalleys were equipped with expedition,







OCR Output








246 APPENDIX TO BOOK XVI.


appen. The tide of affairs rushed on with a swellb.xvi. ,
«-~y-o that overpowered a mind by nature indo-
A. U. C
821.' lent, and enfeebled by age. In the num-68.' berof Galba's friends Titus Vinius was theonly person that endeavoured to rouse hisdrooping spirit. To hesitate in such ajuncture appeared to him a privation ofmind nothing short of madness. The onlyquestion, he said, was, which was most eligi­ble, to act in conjunction with Vindex, orto wage war against him ? against a manwho wished to depose a tyrant, and callto the succession a prince who possessedthe virtues of humanity? Galba saw thenecessity of taking a decided part, but hisnatural irresolution was not easily conquer­ed. He wished to sound the inclinationsof the people, and, for that purpose, sum­moned a grand council to meet at NewCarthage (p), in order, as he pretended, tosettle the manumission of slaves. Hisfriends knew that greater matters were inagitation, and, accordingly, spread a gene­ral alarm. On the day appointed, an in­credible multitude assembled from all partsof the country. Galba ascended the tri­bunal, prepared by a well-imagined arti-







OCR Output








14 - THE ANNALS





* xvK ^' Thjese events, ascribed by the gene­ral voice to the conduct of the general, aridthe terror impressed on the mind of Vo­logeses, were extolled in terms of the high­est commendation. And yet malignity wasat work. Some would have it, " That" there was at the bottom a secret compact** to make an end of the war. According6 to their sinister interpretation, it was sti-
* pulated, that Vologeses should return to" his own dominions, and that Armenia
* should be evacuated by Tigranes. With" what other view were the Roman soldiers" withdrawn from Tigranocerta ? Why give** up, by an ill-judged peace, what had** been so well defended in time of war ?•* Could the army find, at the extremity of" Cappadocia, in huts suddenly thrown up," better winter-quarters, than in the capital" of a kingdom, which had been preserved" by force of arms ? Peace is held forth;" but it is, in fact, no more than a truce, a**" suspension of arms, that Vologeses may!" have to contend with another general," and that Corbulo should not be obliged** to hazard the great renown, which he had







OCR Output








GENEALOGICAL TABLE. 335


affections of the Roman people. Of gentlemanners, mild and gracious to all, he wasbeheld with pleasure, and heard with ap­plause. Ambition, if we except the fairdesire of being distinguished by his virtues,had no influence on his conduct. Unde-bauched by pleasure, he discharged all theduties of an upright citizen and an ableofficer. He commanded the Roman le­gions in Germany ; in war victorious, andin peace moderate to the vanquished. Pos­sessed of great accomplishments, he was innothing inferior to Alexander, and freefrom the vices of that warlike chief. Hewas on the side of virtue greatly his supe­rior. Rome deplored his death, and withhim lost all hopes of seeing the old consti­tution restored. Foreign nations paid theirtribute of respect to his memory.—Tacit.Annal. book i. s. 3, 33, 34, 42, &c.; bookii. s. 72, 73. Dio, book lv.
■Inscriptions on ancient coins: Germa-nicus Casar, Son of Tiberius Augustus,Grandson to the deified Augustus, Consid.
After his death, in the reign of his son










OCR Output








INDEX


TO THE


GENEALOGICAL TABLE


OF


THE CESARS.


A No.
GRIPPA, see Vipsanius Agrippa.
Agrippa Posthumus .... 50
Agrippina, see Vipsania Agrippina.
Agrippina, daughter of Agrippa and wife
ofGermanicus . . . .51
Agrippina, d" ghter of Germanicus and
mother o jJero .... 93
Antistia Pollutia, wife of Rubellius Plautus 77Antonia the elder, daughter of Octavia
and Anthony the triumvir . . 32
Antonia the younger, sister of Antonia
the elder, and wife of Nero Claudius
Drusus '42
•VOL. IV. A A







OCR Output











mzz


w







OCR Output








GENEALOGICAL TABLE. 339


on the fourth day of the Palatine games,A. U. 794; a man, says Seneca, designedby nature to shew what the worst vices cando in the height of power.—Seneca de Con-solat. c. ix. Suet. Life of Caligula, s. 8,37, 58. Pliny, book vii. s. 8; book xxxvii.s. 2. Tacit. Annal. book vi. s. 20.
Inscriptions on ancient coins: Cains Ca-sar Augustus Germanicus, Son of TiberiusAugustus, Grandson to Augustus, Great-Grandson to the deified Augustus, Caius Ca-sar, a God and Emperor. ■>
As adopted son of Tiberius, he wasgrandson to Augustus; as the son of Ger­manicus, he was great-grandson.
87' Claudia, daughter of M. Silanus*married to Caligula A. U. 786. She diedin child-bed. Suetonius calls her JuniaClaudilla.—Tacit. Annal. book vi. s. 20.Suet. Life of Caligula, s. 12.
»
88. Livia Oristilla; called by Dio,Cornelia Orestina. She was on thepoint of marrying Caius Calpurnius Pisa,


z 2







OCR Output








OF TACITUS. 65


To relieve the unhappy people, wandering B°°Kin distress without a place of shelter, he^-^^0
1 A. U. C.
opened the field of Mars, as also the mag- *"■nificent buildings raised by Agrippa (6), 64>and even his own imperial gardens (c). Heordered a number of sheds to be thrownup with all possible dispatch, for the useof the populace. Household utensils andall kinds of necessary implements werebrought from Ostia, and other cities in theneighbourhood. The price of grain wasreduced to three sesterces. For acts likethese, munificent and well-timed, Neromight hope for a return of popular favour;but his expectations were in vain; no manwas touched with gratitude. A reportprevailed (d) that, while the city was in ablaze, Nero went to his own theatre, andthere, mounting the stage, sung the de­struction of Troy, as a happy allusion tothe present misfortune.
XL. On the sixth day the fire was sub­dued at the foot of mount Esquiline. Thiswas effected, by demolishing a number ofbuildings, and thereby leaving a void space,where for want of materials the flame ex-
vol. iv. F







OCR Output








103 THE ANNALS


book finish by the sword. Natalis was the only
v—v—' person who had mentioned his name. The
8i8. chief head of his accusation Was, "That
A. D.
«. " he himself had been sent on a visit to" Seneca, then confined by illness, with in-" structions to mention to him, that Piso" often called at his house, but never could" gain admittance, though it was the in-* terest of both to live on terms of mutual" friendship:" To this Seneca made an­swer, " That private interviews could be of" no service to either; but still his happi-" ness was grafted on the safety of Piso/'Granius Silvanus, a tribune of the praeto­rian guards* Avas dispatched to Seneca, withdirections to let him know what was allegedagainst him, and to enquire whether he ad*mitted the conversation stated by Natalis,with the answers given by himself. Seneca,by design or accident, was that very dayon his return from Campania. He stoptat a villa of his own (a) about four milesfrom Rome. Towards the close of day thetribune arrived, and beset the house with aband of soldiers. Seneca was at supperwith his wife Pompeia Paulina, and two







OCR Output








GENEALOGICAL TABLE OF THE CJESARS. 355


No.
Calvina, see Junia Calvina.Cassius Longinus, husband of Drusilla . 96Claudia, daughter of the emperor Clau­dius . . . . . . 103
Claudia, daughter of Nero the emperor . 38Claudia, wife of Caligula . _ .87
Claudius, emperor, see Tiberius Claudius.Claudius Marcellus, husband of Octavia 17Clodia, wife of Augustus . . .38
Cornelia, wife of Julius Caesar . . 5
Cornelius Sylla, husband of Antonia . 107Cossutia, wife of Julius Caesar . . 4


D.
Domitia, daughter of Domitius JEno
barbus .....Domitia Lepida, mother of MessalinaDomitius ^Enobaibus, father of NeroDomitius Lucius iEnobarbus, husband o
Antonia the elder . . . -Domitius Nero, emperor of RomeDrusilla, daughter of GermanieusDrusilla, daughter of Caligula, see Julia


402534
33


Drusilla.Drusus, brother of Tiberius, emperor, see
Nero Drusus Claudius.Drusus, son of Claudius, emperorDrusus Caesar, son of Tiberius, emperor
3595
10270


a a 2







OCR Output








SIXTEENTH BOOK OF THE ANNALS. 387


etc stoicus, stravit pelliculis hadinis lectulos punicanos, etexposuit vasa Samia ; quasi vero esset Diogenes cynicusmortuus, et von dhini hominis A/ricani mors Iwnestare-tur; quern cum supremo ejus die 2uinius Maxiinuslaudaret, gratias egit J)iis immortalibus, quod ilie virin hoc republicd potissimum natus esset: rwcesse enimJuisse, ibiesse terrarum imperium, ubi Me esset. Hujusin morte celebrandd graviter tulit populus Romamis hancperversam sapientiam Tuberonis; itaque homo inte-gerrimus, civis optimus, aim esset Lucii Pauli nepas,Africani sororisjilhis, his h.sdinis pelliculis pneturddejectUS est. Tully pro Muraent, vol. ii. p. 266, Delph.edit. Seneca, who was a professed stoic, says of thatschool, that there was no sect more benevolent, nonefnoTe affectionate, and none more zealous to promote thegood of society. Nulla secta benignior, leniorque est;nulla amantior kominum, et communibus bonis atten-tidr. De Clementia, lib. ii. cap. 5. But the sameSeneca teaches the impious doctrine of suicide. Ineum intravimus nuindum, in quo his legibus vivitur IPlacet? Pare. Non placet? Quacurnquc vis, cxi.Epist. 91.
Section XXIII.
(a) Acratus has been mentioned as a person sent intoAsia, to plunder the cities of th«ir statues. Annals, xr.t. 45.
(b) Rubellius Plautus, for whom see Annals, xiv. s,
4? and 59,
»
Section XXIV.(a) Nero was on his return from Campania.


cc2







OCR Output








346 GENEALOGICAL TABLE.


hi* elegant compendium of the RomanHistory; a work admired for the beautyof the style, but debased by the fulsomepraise of Tiberius and Sejanus.—Tacit. An-pal, vi. s. 15. See Supplement to Annals,v. 8.11. Dio, book lx.


100. Tiberius Claudius DitususGermanicus, fifth emperor of Rome.He was son to Nero Claudius Drusus (No.79) and Antonia the younger (No. 42); hewas brother to Germanicus; born at Ly­ons (Lugduni) A. U. 744.' He discoveredin the first dawn of infancy a degree ofdulness that bordered on stupidity. Hegrew up so sluggish in body and mind, thatAntonia his mother often declared that hewas an imperfect production, sent into theworld unfinished by the hand of Nature.He succeeded to the supreme power A. U.794, during the whole of his reign governedaltogether by his wives or his freedmen.He was poisoned by the contrivance ofAgrippina his wife, and died on the 13th ofOctober, in the sixty-fourth year of his.age, and the fourteenth of his reign, A. U.#07'. After his death he was numbered







OCR Output








206 APPENDIX TO BOOK XVf.





appen. and rapacity of Gessius Florus, the gover­nor of the province, and were, at that time,in open revolt. The second enterprisewas intended against the Ethiopians; thethird, against the Albanians on the bordersof the Caspian sea; the fourth, to revengethe insult offered to him by the haughtyspirit of Vologeses. The love of fame,whatever he did, was the inspiring motive;whether he sent forth his armies, or drovea chariot, or sung a song, praise was stillthe ultimate end. If by his victoriousarms the ^Ethiopians and Albanians couldbe reduced to subjection, the glory of en­larging the boundaries of the empire was*to be the bright reward. His exertions'were, therefore, made against the two last-mentioned states. He sent detachmentsforward to survey the country; he formedflying camps in those distant regions; lie"began to collect the forces of the empire;and, not content with drawing from Bri-tain, from Germany, and Illyricum, theflower of his armies, he formed a newlegion, composed of men six feet high,and this he called the phalanx (.c) of Alex­ander the Great.







OCR Output






















OCR Output








GENEALOGICAL TABLE. 327


■den starts of passion. Before he rose tothe supreme power, he distinguished him­self by his warlike spirit. When masterof the Roman world, dissimulation was theprominent feature of his character. Whenhe had waded far in guilt and flagitiousdeeds, he lay on the torture of the mind inrestless eestacy. Goaded by his conscience,and alarmed by constant suspicions, he fledfrom danger to the isle of Capreae, butcould not fly from himself. He was oftenheard to utter a most horrible wish, ex_pressed in a Greek verse;
Me mortuo terra misceatur igni.
*' At my death let the earth be involved in** flames." He called Priam the happiestof men, because his kingdom perished withhim.—Veil. Pat. book ii? s. 75. Tacit, inthe six first Annals, passim. Pliny, bookxxviii. s. 2.
Inscriptions on ancient medals: TiberiusPcrsar, Augustus Son of the deified Augus­







OCR Output








SIXTEENTH BOOK OF THE ANNALS . 381


Section VI.
(a) Suetonius says, he married Poppsea twelve daysafter his divorce from Octavia, and, notwithstanding thevehemence of his love, killed her with a kick when shewas big with child, only because she took the liberty tochide him for returning late from the chariot race. Hehad by her a daughter, called Claudia Augusta, who diedin her infancy. Suet, in Neron. s. 35.
(b) The first Romans did not burn their dead, butinterred them, according to the custom of other nations.Pliny the elder says, that the practice of committing thedead to the funeral pile, was not introduced till it wasknown that the bodies of soldiers, who died in foreignwars, were dug up by the enemy, and exposed to publicview. And yet Plutarch, in his Life of Numa, observesthat Numa was buried, pursuant to his own express in­junction, directing that his body should not be committedto the flames; which shews that burning was known atRome in that early period. The custom of burning thedead was held in abhorrence by several nations, and, ac­cording to Herodotus, by the Persians as well as the./Egyptians. Notwithstanding what Plutarch has said,Pliny assures us, that before Sylla the dictator,'the bodiesof the deceased were always interred by the Romans,and that the reason for burning that extraordinary man,was because, having dug up the body of Marius, he wasafraid of being treated in the same way himself, andtherefore ordered his remains to be consumed to ashes.Pliny, lib. vii. s. 54. The custom of burning at Romeceased under the Antonines.
(c) Besides the spices with which the body of Poppsea'was embalmed, a prodigious quantity was burnt on the







OCR Output








OF THE ANNALS. 203


of success in the attempt to make Nero appex.


B.XVL


believe in the religion of the Magi, served,in some degree, to open the eyes of Tiri- *8i9.


A. U. C.


A.D.


dates, and remove the errors of eastern su- w.perstition. In order to visit Rome, he hadtaken a wide compass over an immensetract of country, and travelled all the wayby land. The cause of this circuitous andlaborious journey must be referred to thesuperstition of his native county. In thecreed of the Parthian Magi, the sea wassaid to be a sacred element (c); and tospit in it, or defile the purity of the wa­ters by the superfluities of the humanbody, was held to be profane and impious.The design, probably, was, by that doctrineto prevent migration, and what at first waspolicy received in time the sanction of re­ligion. But Tiridates, during his stay atRome, so far weeded out the prejudices ofeducation, that he made no scruple to re­turn by sea. He embarked at Brundu-sium (d), and, having crossed the Adria­tic, arrived at the port of Dyrrachium (e).From that place he pursued his voyagealong the coast of Asia, and, being safelylandedt visited the Roman provinces, and







OCR Output








398 NOTES ON THE APPENDIX TO THE


(g) For Gamala, see the Geographical Table.
(h) For the city of Jotapata, see the GeographicalTable.
(i) The works of Josephus are well known. Th^rcontain a mixture of good sense and credulity, of truthand fable.
(I) For the city of Tarichjea, see Suetonius, in Tito,«. 4; and see the Geographical Table.
(m) Josephus says, Vespasian supplied Nero with sixthousand Jews, all strong young men, chosen out of avast number of prisoners.
>


Section XI.
fa) Suetonius, in Nero, s. 23.
(b) For the fate of Corbulo, see Dio, lib. Ixiii.
(e) The tame submission with which so many braveand eminent men received orders to die, fills the mindwith astonishment and indignation.
f/J For Pactius Africanus, see History iv. s. 41.
(g) For the fate of Crassus, see Crevier, vol. iv. p.313.
(h) See the History, book iv. s. 42.
(i) For Regulus, see Pliny the Younger, lib. i. epist.S; and Life of Agricola, s. ii. note (a).
(k) For Piso, adopted by Galba, see History, i. s.15 and 16.
(I) See the Geographical Table.
(m) SuetoniuSj in Nero, s. 24.
Section XII.
(a) Trachalus was an orator of eminence, commend­ed by Quintilian, lib. x. cap. i. He is also mentioned byTacitus, History, i. s. 90.
(b) In the list of Roman poets, whom Quintilian has







OCR Output








OF TACITUS. 133


troubles by a voluntary death. Accord- book
Xvi.


A. U. C.
8i8.


mg to some writers, he was instantly seized,and loadea with irons, till Nero orderedhim to be released, but seized his effects, kdetermined to enjoy the fortunes of a wildadventurer, since he could not obtain thewealth of Dido.
IV. The time of contending for theprizes in the quinquennial games beingnear at hand, the senate, with intent toward off from the emperor (a) the disgraceof being a candidate, offered to adjudge,in his favour, the victory in song, and thecrown of eloquence. The fathers hoped,that honours freely granted would satisfythe prince, and prevent a ridiculous dis­play of theatrical talents. Nero returnedfor answer, that he stood in no need offavour or protection. He depended onhimself alone, and would fairly enter thelists with his competitors. The equity ofthe judges was to decide, and by that testhe was willing to stand or fall. With thatspirit he entered the scene, and recited apoem of his own composition. The peo­ple, with earnest entreaty, prayed that he







OCR Output








GENEALOGICAL TABLE. 301


Claudius Marcellus by his wife Octavia,and sister to the last-mentioned Marcellus.She was first married to Apuleius, and af­terwards to Valerius Messala.—Suet. Lifeof Aug. s. 53.
21. Apuleius, husband of Marcella theelder. He is thought to have been the sonof Sextus Apuleius, who was consul A.U.725.—Dio Cassius, book liv.
22. Apuleia Varilla, daughter ofMarcella the elder by her husband Apu­leius. She was also grand niece to Augus­tus. Being condemned for adultery A U.770, she was banished two hundred milesfrom Rome.—Tacit. Annal. ii. s. 50.
23. M. Valerius Messala Barba-
tus, second husband of Marcella the elder.He was consul A. U. 742. — Suetonius,Life of Augustus, s. 63. Life of Claudius,
s. 26.
24. M.. Valerius Messala, son ofValerius Messala Barbatus and of Marcella







OCR Output








174 THE ANNALS


book " repines at the flourishing state of his
i**-y-o" country: he deserts the forum; he avoids
si"'. '" the theatre, and the temples of the city?
«.' " he threatens to abjure his country, and
" retire int» voluntary banishment; he ao
" knowledges none of your laws; your
" decrees are to him no better than
** mockery; he owns no magistrates, and
" Rome to him is no longer Rome. Let
" him therefore be cut off at once from a
'* city, where he has long lived an alien;
" the love of his country banished from
" his heart, and the people odious to his
" sight."
XXIX. Marcellus delivered this in­vective in a strain of vehemence, that gaveadditional terror to the natural ferocityof a stern and savage countenance. Hisvoice grew louder, his features more en­larged, and his eyes flashed with fire. Thesenate heard him, but with emotions unfeltbefore: the settled melancholy, which thatblack period made habitual, gave way tostronger feelings. They saw a band ofsoldiers round them, and they debatedin the midst of swords and javelins. Thrasea







OCR Output








176 THE ANNALS


*ook accusations had been long since fabricated,J^o and were then grown threadbare; but the^iVifj prosecutor was ready with a new allega-««.'] tion, which involved Servilia, the daughterof Soranus, in her father's danger. Thecharge against her Avas, that she had distri­buted sums of money among men skilledin judicial astrology. The fact was, Ser­vilia, with no other motives than those offilial piety, had the imprudence, natural ather time of life, to apply to a set of for­tune-tellers, in order to satisfy her mindabout the fate of her family, and to learn-'whether Nero's resentment was by any pos­sibility to be appeased, and what would bethe issue of the business in the senate.
She was cited to appear in the senatebefore the tribunal of the consuls. On oneside stood the aged father; on the otherhis daughter, in the bloom of life, not hay­ing yet completed her twentieth year, buteven then in a state of destitution, still la­menting the fate of her husband, AnniusPollio, lately torn from her, and condemnedto banishment. She stood in silent sor-»row, not daring to lift her eyes to her fa^







OCR Output








Genealogical table. 323


obliging wife, and afterwards an imperiousmother. Her enmity to Germanieus andhis wife Agrippina was subtle, close, andunrelenting. She died A. U. 782, at theage of 86.—Velleius Pat. book ii. s. 75.Suet. Life of Tiberius, 6. 3 ajid 4. Dio,book xlviii. Tacit. Annal. book v. s. 1.
Her inscriptions on ancient medals:Livia Augusta, Julia, Augusta, Mother ofher Country.
After her death: The deified Livia, Wifeof the deified Augustus, the deified JuliaAugusta.
67. Tiberius Claudius Nero, thefirst husband of Livia, and by her the fa­ther of Tiberius, afterwards emperor, andof Nero Claudius Drusus (for whom seeNo. 79)- He obtained the dignities ofpraetor and pontiff; a man of brilliant ta­lents and extensive learning. He attachedhimself to Anthony the triumvir; and afterthe defeat of that party, he withdrew withhis wife Livia and Tiberius, then an infantabout two years old, into Sicily A. U. 714.







OCR Output








SIXTEENTH BOOK OF THE ANNALS. 389


Section XXXII.{a) Egnatius, the professor of the stoic philosophy,who appears as a witness against Bareas Soranus, is men­tioned by Juvenal:
Stoicus occidit Baream, delator amicum,Discipulumque senex. Sat. iii. ver. lift.
See the History, book iv. s. 10.
Section XXXIV.
(a) Notice has been taken, s. xxvii. note (a), of theimperial quaestors. The consuls also had their quaestors,as we read in Dio, lib. xlviii. where it is said that AppiusClaudius and Caius Norbanus, consuls A. U. C. 716,had each of them two quaestors under their own imme­diate direction.
(b) Demetrius is praised by Seneca, not merely as aphilosopher, but as a man of consummate virtue. DeBeneficiis, lib. vii. cap. 8. In another place he calls himemphatically, not the teacher, but the witness of truth.Non praceptor veri, sed testis. Epist. xx.
(c) Arria, his wife, was the daughter of the cele­brated Arria, who, in the reign of Claudius, A. U. C.195, plunged a dagger in her own breast, to give herhusband Caecina Paetus an example of undaunted courage. .See the Life of Agricola, s. ii. notes (a) and (b).
END OF THE NOTES
ON THI
LAST SIX BOOKS OF THE ANNALS.







OCR Output








112 THE ANNALS


*


xv.
A.U.C.818.A.D.


profession of arms, would associate withan effeminate set of men, strangers tosis.*" " danger and to manly enterprise I" Find­er' ing himself pressed by the weight of evid­ence, he changed his tone, and with heroicfortitude avowed the part he had acted.Being asked by Nero, what could inducehim to forget the solemn obligation of hisoath ? " Because," he said, " I hated, I" detested you. There was a time when no" soldier in your army was more devoted" to your service, and that was as long as" you deserved the esteem of mankind. I" began to hate you when you was guilty" of parricide; when you murdered your" mother and destroyed your wife; when**you became a coachman, a comedian," and an incendiary " I have given thevery words of this intrepid conspirator, be­cause they were not, like those of Seneca,published to the world; and the roughsentiments of a soldier, in his own plain,but vigorous language, merit the attentionof posterity.
In the whole discovery of the plot no­thing made so deep an impression on the







OCR Output








OF THE ANNALS. 289


ginius Rufus, who remained in suspense, appen.and, with affected delays, hesitated about ^-~y-»j
A. U C
his final answer. Galba received the news Wi.'
A. D.
of Capito's death with secret satisfaction, es.but he thought it more prudent to connive,than openly to approve. Virginius was stilla dangerous rival. In order to draw himaway from the army, and free himself fromall danger in that quarter, he invited him toan amicable interview, having secretly ap­pointed Hordeonius Flaccus to succeed tothe command of the legions. The strata­gem succeeded. The conqueror of Vindexwent to the meeting, and found himself thedupe of pretended friendship. He met witha cold reception, very different from whatwas due to the man who wished to establishthe civil authority, and to place the legis­lative power of the state in the senate only.He lived to be a spectator of the distrac­tions and calamities that followed; and,that he was not an actor in those scenes ofblood and horror (/), was the recompense ofuncommon virtue.
Galba had no further reason to bealarmed. He saw the armies of Romevol. iv. v







OCR Output








OF TACITUS. 171


XXVII. On the following day two prae- book


XVI.


torian cohorts, under arms, surrounded the
A U C
temple of Venus. A body of citizens, with 'sip.
A Dl
swords ill concealed beneath their gowns, *«.invested all the avenues. In the forum,the open squares, and round the adjoiningtemples, bands of soldiers took their sta­tion, and through that military array thesenators were obliged to pass, surroundedby soldiers and praetorian guards. The as­sembly was opened by Nero's quaestor (a),with a speech in the name of the prince,complaining, " That the fathers" (no par­ticular name was mentioned) "deserted" the public interest, and by their example" taught the Roman knights to loiter away" their time in sloth, and inattention to the" welfare of the state. Nor could it be" matter of wonder, that the senators from" the distant provinces no longer attended" their duty, when men of consular rank," and even of sacerdotal dignity, thought" of nothing but the embellishment of their" villas, and the beauty of their gardens" and pleasure-grounds." This messagewas intended to be a weapon in the hands







OCR Output








88 THE ANNALS


pook public games, which were soon to be per-1 formed in the circus, according to esablish-


A. U C
sis.' ed usage, in honour of Ceres. During that$5. festival, the emperor, who rarely shewedhimself to the people, but remained se­questered in his palace or his gardens,would not fail to attend his favourite di­versions; and, in that scene of gaiety,access to his person would not be difficult.Th.e assault was to be made in the follow­ing manner. Lateranus, a man of un­daunted resolution, and an athletic form,was to approach the prince, with an humbleair of supplication, as if to entreat relief forhimself and family; and, in the act of fall­ing at his feet, to overthrow him by somesudden exertion, and by his weight keephim stretched on the ground. In that con­dition the tribunes, the centurions, and therest of the conspirators, as the opportunityoffered, and as courage prompted, were tofall on, and sacrifice their victim to the justresentments of the people.
Scevinus claimed the honour of beingthe first to strike. For this purpose, hehad taken a dagger from the temple of










OCR Output








406 NOTES ON TOE APPENDIX TO THE


mand of the praetorian guards ; and his frecdman Icelus,who was dignified with the privilege of wearing a ring,and the name of Martianus. To these men Galba re­signed himself with such implicit confidence,1 that hisconduct was never consistent; at one time frugal andrigorous ; at another remiss, complying, and more lavish,than became a prince of his advanced age, who had beenraised to the imperial dignity by the voice of the people.Suet, in Galba, s. 14. For" more of the three favourites,see the History, i. s. 6 and 13.
(k) Plutarch, Life of Galba., (I) For the origin of Nymphidius, see Annals, xv. s."72.
(m) Plutarch, Life of Galba. Cingonius Varro hasalready occurred, Annals, xiv. «. 45.
(n) For more of Honoratus, see Plutarch, Life ofGalba.
(o) This speech may be seen in Plutarch.
(p) See Plutarch, in Galba ; though Suetonius says,Galba was no way allied to the house of Caesar. Suet.in Galba, s. 2.
(q) All these particulars are to be found in Plutarch.
Section XVI.
(a) Plutarch, Life of Galba. For Mithridates broughtbefore the emperor Claudius, see Annals, xii. s. 21 •, andHistory, i. s. 6.
(b) For Petronius TupiliamiSj.see Annals, xv. s. 12 ;and History, i. s. 6.
fij Suetonius, in Gaiba, s 11.
(d) The''•"ate of Obultronius Sabinus, Cornelius Mar-ccliu's, and Bet mis Chilo, is mentioned by Tacitus, His­tory, i. s. '57■
(e) Fat Cladius Macer, murdered in Africa, see Hi­story, i. s' 3 and 11■







OCR Output








THE ANNALS


XV





book LV. At the daivn of day Milichus madethe best of his way to the gardens of Ser-vilius. Being refused admittance, he de­clared that he had business of the first im­portance, nothing less than the discoveryof a dark and dangerous conspiracy. Theporter conducted him to Epaphroditus,one of Nero's freedmen, who introducedhim to the presence of his master. Milichusinformed the emperor of his danger, andlaid open the machinations of his enemies,with all that he knew and all that he con­jectured. He produced the dagger, de­stined to give the mortal stab, and desiredto be confronted with the criminal.
Scevinus was seized by the soldiers, anddragged in custody to answer the charge." The dagger," he said, " was a sacred" relic, left to him by his ancestors. He" had preserved it with veneration, and" kept it safe in his chamber, till the" perfidy of a slave surreptitiously convey-" ed it away. As to his will, he had often" changed it, often signed and sealed a new" one, without any distinction of days." He had been always generous to his do­







OCR Output













OCR Output








APPENDIX


TO THE


SIXTEENTH BOOK


OF


THE ANNALS.


I. IT is not without regret that we lose the appen.
G B. XVL
words of a great man at the point of death, ^--v^o
A. V. C.
All we know is, that Thrasea fixed his eyes si9.
A. D.
on his friend Demetrius, and there Tacitus 66-fails us. What the philosopher said, cannotnow be collected from any contemporaryhistorian. It is probable that he expiredin a short time after. Seeing the vices ofthe age, and the savage cruelty of thereigning prince, it cannot be matter ofwonder, that a man of virtue, fortified'bythe doctrines of the stoic school, did notthink it awful to die. He. was often heardto say, that he had rather lay down his life







OCR Output








380 NOTES ON THE


Section IV.
(a) Nero did not scruple to appear upon the stageamongst other performers, even in the spectacles pre­sented by the magistrates. He sung tragedies masked,the vizors of the gods and goddesses being formed into aresemblance of his own face. Among the rest, he actedCanacein Labour, Orestes the Murderer of his Mother,(Edipus blinded, and Hercules mad. In the last tragedya soldier, at his post in the theatre, seeing the emperorbound with chains as the play required, ran to his assist­ance. Suet, in Neron. s. 21. See also the same,'s. 22,23 and 24. This ridiculous display of talents, beneaththe dignity of a prince, is well described by Racine in hisplay of Britannicus:
Pour toute ambition, pour vertu singuliere,
II excelle a conduire un char dans la carriere ;
A disputer des prix indignes de ses mains,
A se donner lui-meme en spectacle aux Romains j
A venir prodiguer sa voix sur un theatre,
A reciter des chants qu'il veut qu'on idolatre.
Act. iv. scene 4.
Racine's play was performed before Lewis XIV, who hadbefore that time mixed in the dance on the public stage.The picture of Nero's folly made the monarch see himself,and from that time he resolved never to degrade the royalcharacter.
Section V.(a) See Suetonius in Neron. s. 23.







OCR Output








372 NOTES ON THE


Tacitus calls a pernicious superstition. Pliny adds, inthe same letter, that, in order to come at the real truth,he ordered two female slaves to be put to the torture, buthe could discover nothing more than a rooted and ex­cessive superstition. Trajan, in his answer to this letter,determines, that if Christians are brought before thegovernor, and proved to be guilty, they must be punished,unless they renounce their errors, and invoke the gods ofRome. In that case they were to be pardoned, notwith­standing any former suspicion. But the emperor says tohis minister, " I would not have you officiously enter into" any enquiries concerning them." Pliny's letter, Mr.Melmoth observes, is esteemed as almost the only ge­nuine monument of ecclesiastical antiquity, relating tothe times immediately succeeding the apostles, beingwrote not above forty years after the death of Paul. Itwas preserved by the Christians themselves, as a clear'and unsuspicious evidence of the purity of their doctrines.It is therefore with good reason, says Brotier, that'Ter-tullian, in a strain-of exultation, declares, That the Christ*ians, " for their innocence, their probity, justice, truth," and for the living God, were burnt alive. The cruelty," ye persecutors !. is all your own ; the glory is ours."Pro tantd innocentid, pro tantd probitate, pro justitid,pro virtute, pro Deo vivo cremamur: Crudelitas pcstra;gloria est nostra.
(d) The Jews, as will be seen in the History, book v.s. 5, were charged with harbouring a sullen" aversion to­wards all mankind. It is unnecessary to vindicate dieChristian religion from that imputation.
fej Juvenal alludes, with his usual indignation, to thebarbarous cruelties described by Tacitus. See sat. i.ver. 155.







OCR Output








368 NOTES ON THE


Section XXXIX.
(fi) The gardens of Maecenas were near Mount Esqui-Iine.
(bj The monuments of Agrippa were, his house, hisgardens, his baths, and the Pantheon. The last remainsat this day.
(c) Nero's gardens joined to the Vatican.
(d) Suetonius says, in express terms, that Nero beheldthe conflagration from a tower on the top of Maecenas'shouse, and, being highly pleased with so grand a sight,went to his own theatre, and in his scenic dress tunedhis harp, and sung the destruction of Troy. Suet, inNeron. s. 38.
Section XLI.
(a) Evander was originally a native of Arcadia inGreece. The visit of Hercules forms a beautiful episodein Virgil's iEneid, book viii.
(b) For the temple of Jupiter Stator, see Livy, lib. i.$. 12.
(c) The palace of Numa was on Mount Palatine, after­wards the mansion of Augustus, near the temple ofVesta, where the vestal virgins watched the perpetualfire. See Horace, lib. i. ode 2.
(d) The fourteenth of the calends of July, or theeighteenth of June. This is confirmed by Livy, whosays, lib. vi. s. 1, that the battle at Allia was fought onthe fifteenth of the kalends; and book v. s. 41, he says thevictorious Gauls entered Rome on the following day.
Section XLII.
(a) According to Suetonius, Nero turned the publiccalamity to his own private advantage. He promised toremove the bodies that lay amidst the ruins, and to


*







OCR Output








262 APPENDIX TO BOOK XVI.





appen. resolve to act with vigour. Nymphidius
B. XVI. ...
tried by every means to inspire them withzeal and courage. He had seduced thepraetorian guards, and, to secure their af­fections, promised in Galba's name, butwithout his authority, a reward of thirtythousand sesterces to each praetorian, andfive thousand to each legionary soldierthroughout the armies of the empire; asum so prodigious, that, as Plutarch ob­serves, it could not be raised without worsetyranny, and more violent rapine, than hadbeen felt during the whole reign of Nero.The promise proved, afterwards, fatal toGalba, but served the purposes of a man,who was bent on the ruin of Nero, and,by raising the military above the civil au­thority, intended to introduce into the po­litical system, two pernicious maxims; thefirst, that emperors were to be created inthe camp, not in the senate; and, se­condly, that the imperial dignity was ve­nal, to be, for the future, set up to sale,and disposed of by the soldiers to thehighest bidder.
Having settled his measures, and laid







OCR Output








OF THE ANNALS. 22g


public example, and, in compliance with appen.Nero's letters, sent six thousand prisoners ^-v^o(m) to work at the isthmus of Corinth. sao.


A.U.67.


XI. While Vespasian pursued his con­quests, and, in one campaign, overran theprovince of Galilee, Rome was a scene oftumult and distraction. Helius reignedlike a second emperor: the people calledhim the worst of the two. Each day pro­duced new proofs of avarice, cruelty, andall the vices of an upstart slave. The se­nators began to wake from their lethargy;the clamours of the populace were loudand fierce > rage and indignation glowed inevery breast; and the flame was ready tomount into a blaze. The freedman sawhis danger. He dispatched letters to in­form the emperor that the urgency of hisaffairs required his presence at Rome (a).But Nero's vast designs were of too muchimportance. His answer to the favouritewras, " You advise me to return to Rome," but whatever your reasons are, you" ought rather to recommend a longer ab-" sence; that I may fmish my grand un-" dertaking, and then revisit the capital,







OCR Output








GENEALOGICAL TABLE. 305


of the shame that branded his former con­duct.—See Velleius Paterculus, book ii.s. 60 and 87. Pliny the elder, book vii.s. 45. Plutarch, Life of Anthony. Cicero,Philippic Orations.
The inscriptions of him on medals are,Marcus Antonius, Marci Films, Marci Ne-pos, Augur, Imperator, Consul designatesiterum et tertium, Triumvir Reipublicte con-stituendes.
32. Antonia the elder, daughter of An­thony the triumvir by Octavia sister toAugustus. She married L. Domitius iEno-barbus. She is called by Tacitus, Antoniathe younger, which makes it probable thatMarc Anthony had a former daughter,called Antonia, by his wife Fulvia.—SeeTacit. Annal. iv. s. 44. Suet. Life of Ne­ro, s. 5. Plutarch, Life of Marc Anthony.
33. Lucius Domitius ./Enobarbus,son of Cneius Domitius, one of the conspir­ators against Julius Caesar, and husbandof Antonia the elder; a man of an impe­tuous temper, violent, proud, extravagant,
vol. iv. x







OCR Output








OF THE ANNALS. ' 271





eagerness, and found himself, not only de- appen.
B. XVI
clared a public enemy, but condemned tosuffer death, with the rigour of ancientusage. He asked, What kind of death isthat ? and what is ancient usage ? He wastold, that, by the law of the old republic,every traitor, with his head fastened betweentwo stakes, and his body entirely naked,suffered the pains of a slow death under thelictor's rod. The fear of that ignominiouspunishment inspired Nero with a short-livedpassion, which for the moment had the ap­pearance of courage. He drew two daggers,which he had brought with him, and, as ifmeditating some prodigious deed, tried thepoints of both; then calmly replaced themin their scabbards, saying, " The fatal rao-" ment is not yet come." He turned toSporus, and requested him to begin thefuneral lamentation. " Sing the melan-'*, choly dirge ; and offer the last obsecfuies" to your friend." He cast his eyes aroundhim: And why, he said, why will not someone dispatch himself, and teach me howto die ? He paused for a moment, and sheda flood of tears. He started up, and criedout, in a tone of wild despair, " Nero,







OCR Output








266 APPENDIX TO BOOK XVI.


B. XVI.





appen. render at discretion to the mercy of Gaiba.But no ship was ready at Ostia. Variousprojects presented themselves to his mind,in quick succession, increasing the tumultof his passions, and serving only to distracthim more. To try his powers of eloquence■was another expedient that occurred tohim. For that purpose he proposed to goforth in a mourning garb to the forum, andthere, by a pathetic speech, obtain his par^don from the people. Should their obdu­rate hearts remain impenetrable to the softinfluence of persuasive oratory, and refuseto reinstate their emperor in the full enjoy­ment of his prerogative, he had no doubtbut he could, at the worst, wring fromthem the government of Egypt, where, inthe character of praefect, he might givefree scope to his inordinate passions. Thisproject seemed to promise success; but aray of reflection struck him with suddenhorror. The populace, without waiting tohear the divine accents of that harmoniousvoice, might break out into open sedition,and in their fury tear their prince limbfrom limb. What course could he pursue ?Where could he hide himself? He looked







OCR Output








OF TACITUS. 175


was absent, but the venerable figure of the »ooc
... xvi-man presented itself to every imagmation. um>j
They felt for Helvidius Priscus, who was siidoomed to suffer, not for imputed guilt, <*•but because he was allied to an innocentand virtuous citizen. What was the crimeof Agrippinus? The misfortunes of hisfather, cut off by the cruelty of Tiberius,rose in judgment against the son. Thecase of Montanus (a) was thought hard andoppressive. His poetry was a proof of ge­nius, not of malice; and yet, for a pre­tended libel on the prince, a youth ofexpectation was to be driven from hiscountry.
XXX. Amidst th^ tumult and distrac­tion which this business excited^ OstoriusSabinus, the accuser of Bareas Soranus,entered the senate. He opened at once,and charged as a crime, the friendship thatsubsisted between Soranus and RubelliusPlautus. He added, that the whole tenour ,of his administration in Asia was directed,not for the public good, but to promotehis own popularity, and to spread a spirit ^of sedition through the provinces. These \







OCR Output








42 THE ANNALS


XV.





book " the Parthians, not Avithout disgrace to" the Roman name. Tigranes had been" hemmed in by a close blockade; Partus" and his legions Were enveloped in the" like distress, and, in the moment when" destruction hung over them, the whole" army was suffered to decamp. The Par-** thians displayed at once their superior" valour and their moderation. But even" in the present juncture Tiridates had no" objection to a long journey to Rome, in" order to be there invested with the sove-" reignty; but, being of the order of the" Magi, the duties of the sacerdotal func-" tion (a) required his personal attendance." He was willing, however, to proceed to" the Roman camp, and there receive the" regal diadem under the eagles, and the" images of the emperor, in the presence" of the lesions."


"&*


XXV. The style of this letter differedessentially from the account transmittedby Paetus, avIio represented the affairs ofthe east in a nourishing situation. Toascertain the truth, a centurion, who hadtravelled with the ambassadors, was inter­







OCR Output








234 APPENDIX TO BOOK XVI.


APPEN.the family, in the opinion of Aquileiusvl-v-w' Regulus, had not shed blood enough.-82o.' That pernicious informer knew that to be67. accused, was to be condemned. He in-vented a charge of an atrocious nature, andCrassus shared the fate of his murderedfamily. He left two brothers; the eldest,Crassus Scribonianus; the youngest, the'unfortunate Piso, at that time a banishedman, but afterwards adopted by Galba (k),too soon to fall from that dangerous emi­nence.
Durjng these bloody tragedies, the greatbusiness of piercing the isthmus was not ne­glected. The work began at a place GalledLechaeum (/), a sea-port on the Ionian sea.It went on with strenuous exertion for anumber of days. A trench was dug fourstadia in length, with was computed to bea tenth part of the isthmus. But the flameof discord was lighted up at Some. Astorm was gathering in Gaul, and com­motions shook every part of the empire.In that' alarming conjuncture, Heliusthought fit to leave his associate Poly-cletus, as his vicegerent at Rome, and he







OCR Output








OF THE ANNALS. 237


Olympic, the Pythian, and theIsthmian games was to enter the city in


queror in the Olympic, the Pythian, and the appem.


triumph; and for this purpose the usual Vm.avenues were not sufficient. The occasion **•required something new and extraordinary.The custom in Greece was to throw downpart of the city wall(rf), that the conquerorin the sacred games might enter throughthe breach. Nero ordered an opening tobe made for himself, and entered the cityin a triumphal car, drawn by six milk-white horses. The splendour of the dayexceeded the triumph of Flamminius (e)or Mummius. They had obtained victo­ries, and subdued a nation: but what Ro­man triumphed over the arts of Greece?Who, before Nero, was declared the bestcharioteer, and the finest player on theguitar? From Naples he went to An-tium (/), his native city, and there dis­played the same pomp and ceremony.But Rome was the place where his pridewas to appear in all its grandeur. A longprocession led the way. His crowns ofvictory in the various games glittered tothe eye, and inscriptions, in glaring letters,blazoned forth the fame of Nero, the first







OCR Output








1$4 APPENDIX TO BOOK XVI.


appf.n. could extort his sword. He is said to have
B. XVI. "7
v—v-^ nailed it to the scabbard. The magnani-
A. IT. c. °
J^ mity, with which he refused to comply,M; obtained the applause of all, who beheld ascene so new and magnificent.
The court set out for Rome. Nerothought proper to make some stay atPuteoli (e), in order to entertain his royalvisitor with a show of gladiators. Thespectacle was exhibited by Patrobius (/"),one of the emperor's freedmen, with greatcxpence and prodigious pomp. The geniusof Nero could not lie still on such an oc­casion. In his opinion it was fit that aforeign prince, and his Parthian courtiers,should know how well the emperor ofHome could sing. Tiridates beheld thewhole with mixed emotions of wonder, ad­miration and contempt. The example ofNero did not tempt him to exhibit his per­son as a show to the people. He scornedto descend into the arena, but did notthink it beneath his dignity to call for hisbow and arrow, arid from the throne, wherelie was seated, to give a specimen of hisdexterity. He aimed at the wild beasts,







OCR Output








286 APPENDIX TO BOOK XVf.


appen. the late reign, and the triumph of vice
B.XVI. ° *
> over every virtue.


a. v. c-
82i.A. D.


«8.' Galba set out from Spain, proceedingby slow marches, and still wearing the mi­litary robe of a general officer, with a dag­ger (c) hanging from his neck down to hisbreast. Strong suspicion, a sense of inju­ries, and dark mistrust, with other passionsunworthy of a prince, lay lurking in hisheart. Before he began his journey, Obul-tronius Sabinus (d), and Cornelius Marcel-lus, two governors of provinces in Spain,who had shewn no inclination to his party,were put to death by his order. BetuusChilo met with the same fate in Gaul.Dispatches were also sent to Garrucianus,in Africa, commanding the immediate ex­ecution of Clodius Macer (e), the proprae­tor of the province, who was known tohave concerted measures for a revolt. Ithappened, however, that Calvia Crispi-nilla (f), the famous manager of Nero'spleasures, arrived in Africa, and insinuatedherself into the secret councils of the go­vernor. By her advice he formed a reso-







OCR Output








142 THE ANNALS


book in-law of Lucius Vetus. The root of bit-
XVI.
> terness rankled in Nero's heart, till Fortu-


A U C
sis. natus, one of the manumitted slaves of«.' Vetus, gave him an opportunity to wreakhis vengeance on the whole family. Thefreedinan had been employed by Vetus inthe management of his affairs, and havingdefrauded his master, he thought it timeto add treachery to peculation, and giveevidence against his patron. In this blackdesign he associated with himself one Clau­dius Demianus, a fellow of an abandonedcharacter, who had been charged in Asia,while Vetus was proconsul of the province,with various crimes, and sent to Rome infetters. To forward the prosecution, Neroset him at liberty.
Vetus heard, with indignation, that theevidence of a freedman was receivedagainst the life of his patron, and retiredto his country-seat in the neighbourhood ofFormia?. A band of soldiers followed him,and beset his house. His daughter wasthen with him. A sense'of former injurieswas still fresh in her mind. She had seenher husband, Rubellius Plautus, massacred







OCR Output








FIFTEENTH BOOK OF THE ANNALS. 373


Section XLVI.
(a) For Prxneste, see the Geographical Table.
(b) Sparticus, a gladiator, kindled up the Servile WarA.U.C. 681.
(c) For Formiae, see the Geographical Table.
Section XLVII.
(a) For Placentia, see the Geographical Table.
Section L.
(a) Fenius Rufus has been mentioned to his honour,Annals, xiv. s. 51.
(b) Agrippina, Nero's murdered mother.
Section LII.
(a) Lucius Silanus, the son of Marcus Junius Silanus.See the Genealogical Table, No. 59.
(b) Caius Cassius, banished to Sardinia A. U. C. 8 18.See Annals, book xii. s. 11 and 12.
Section LVI.
(a) The weakness here imputed to Lucan, cannot beread by any man who has a respect for genius, and thetrue dignity of the human character, without emotions ofpity and regret. But, perhaps, without any studied com­ment, the case admits a plain and obvious apology. Twoeminent men (Natalis and Scevinus) had been taken intocustody. At the sight of the rack their resolution failed,and they discovered their accomplices. Lucan knew thatthe same engine of cruelty was ready for himself and histwo friends, Quinctianus and Senecio. All three weretempted by a promise of pardon, and they endeavoured toearn it by making discoveries. Lucan might think that







OCR Output








OF THE ANNALS. 255





Arvemi followed the banners of Vindex. appem.
B. XV L
The Lingones, and the people of Rheims,accustomed to slavery, and hating the op­posite party, declared for Nero. The citiesof Vienne and Lyons,. which lay contigu­ous, renewed their ancient animosity; theformer listing on the side of Vindex; thelatter, with a pretended regard for theiroath of fidelity, espousing the cause ofNero. In that disposition of the publicmind, Virginius entered Gaul at the headof his legions, with a strong reinforcementof Belgic auxiliaries, and the Batavian co­horts. He proceeded by rapid marches toVesontium (z), a city in league with Vin­dex. The inhabitants refused to opentheir gates. Virginius pitched his camp,determined to lay siege to the place. Vin­dex advanced to the relief of his confede­rates. The two armies were in sight ofeach other. The Gallic chieftain,' littledoubting that the Roman general's opinionof Nero coincided with his own, thought itprudent, before he tried the issue of abattle, to negociate by his deputies. Heaccordingly made his overtures. Variousmessengers passed between the two com-







OCR Output








OF TACITUS. 29


violent hands on the apparel of the soldiers, bookwho yielded, with fear and trembling, to1


avoid a new cause of quarrel. 8i5.
63.
Volageses, as a monument of his victory,raised a pile of dead bodies, and armstaken from the enemy; but declined to bea spectator of the legions in their flight.He first indulged his pride, and then soughtthe fame of moderation. He waded acrossthe Arsanias, mounted on an elephant,while his train and his near relations fol­lowed him on horseback. The reason was,a report prevailed, that, by the fraudulentcontrivance of the builders, the wholefabric of the bridge would give way atonce; but by those, who made the expe­riment., it was found to be a firm and solidstructure.
XVI. The besieged, it is now clear,were provided with grain in such abund­ance, that, on their departure, they burned <their magazines; and, on the other hand,%■ the account given by Corbulo, it ap­pears, that the Parthians, having consumedtteir whole stock of provisions, were on the







OCR Output








SIXTEENTH BOOK OF THE ANNALS. 403


(k) See Suetonius in Nero, s. 49. Hostem a senatujudicatum, et quariut puniatur more ma jorum. It isimpossible to read this passage without feeling a thou­sand mixed emotions. We acknowledge the justice ofthe sentence; we know that vengence was due to theperpetrator of so many horrible crimes; and we rejoiceto find that the senate could resume its long-forgottendignity, and act even for a day with a becoming spirit.The interests of humanity required that the world shouldbe delivered from such a monster.
The case is very different, when Louis XVI. is citedto appear before a French Convention. We see themost benevolent of men tried by an assembly of assassins,plunderers, levellers, and Athiests ; by the scum anddregs of France, mixed with the refuse of other nations.When a good and virtuous, an upright and blamelessmonarch is sentenced, contrary to every principle oftruth and justice, to suffer as a criminal} indignation is,for the moment, lost in astonishment, at the daring guiltof men, who have emerged from obscurity to be thetyrants of their country ; a Pandemonium of regicides !France is now left without church or king ; withoutlaw or morals ; without a constitution ; and without hu­manity. The nations of Europe shudder with horror atthe bloody tragedy that has been acted. The virtues,which the murdered king displayed, with wonderfulmeekness, on the throne, in prison, and on the scaffold,are now known to the world. They will be transmittedto the latest posterity, and
Will plead, like angels trumpet-tongued, againstThe deep damnation of his taking off.
But the demagogues of France will perhaps not allow







OCR Output








GENEALOGICAL TABLE. 307


eember, A. U. 790, the destestable off­spring of two pernicious parents. He wascalled simply Domitius, till by the adop­tion of Claudius, A. U. 803, he passed intothe Claudian family, and took the name ofNero. He began his reign, A. U. 807,with such favourable circumstances, as, fora time, gave promise of a virtuous prince.His enormities, afterwards, delivered himdown to the execration of posterity. Theburning of Rome was imputed to him.The Christian religion has to boast, that*the foe of human kind was the enemy ofher moral doctrine. He was a burthen tohimself, and detested by all orders of men,He was condemned to die, more majorum,by a decree of the senate. He escaped apublic execution, and died in a dastard­ly manner by his own hand, A. U. 821,A. D. 68. By his death the race of theCaesars became extinct.—Suet. Life of Ne­ro, s. 6. Tacit. Annal. xii. s. 25; and seeAppendix to Annals, book xvi. Pliny,book xxii. s. 22 and 46.
The inscriptions on medals are, NeroClaudius, Divi Claudii Filius, Ctfsar, Au-


x 2







OCR Output








OF THE ANNALS. 219


■iiere. The oracle was to be silenced, ov appen.
. B.XVL
so profaned as to lose its credit With this \~>v*+/
A. U. C.
intent, he ordered a number of men to be 820.
^ A. D.
massacred on the spot; and having poured 67«libations of their blood into the opening ofthe ground, from which the exhalationsissued, that were supposed to inspire thepriestess with enthusiastic fury, he closedthe orifice, and with pride and insolence lefta place which had been revered for ages.After this exploit, he returned to his formerluxury, and in the gratifications of yicehoped to find some respite from his anxiousthoughts. But even vice required variety.Repetition might pall the sated appetite,and, if he did not show an inventivegenius, the flattery of the Greeks was indanger of being exhausted. He had madehimself at Rome the wife of Pythago­ras (f); but that was become an obsoletestory, and no longer excited wonder. Hewas determined, therefore, to resume hissex, and many Sporus, the eunuch. Theceremony was performed (g) with greatpomp and splendour. Calvia Crispinilla (h)was appointed mistress of the wardrobe tothe emperor's wife. She adorned the bride







OCR Output








OF TACITUS. 71


a reservoir at hand to stop the progress of book
the mischief, u*-v*j
a. u. c.
817.
It was also settled, that the houses should e*-no longer be contiguous, with slight party-walls to divide them (d); but every housewas to stand detached, surrounded and in­sulated by its own inclosure. These regu­lations, it must be admitted, were of publicutility, and added much to the embellish­ment of the new city. But still the oldplan of Rome was not without its advo­cates. It was thought more conducive tothe health (e) of the inhabitants. The nar­rowness of the streets and the elevation ofthe buildings served to exclude the rays ofthe sun; whereas the more open space,having neither shade nor shelter, left menexposed to the intense heat of the day.
XLIV. These several regulations were,no doubt, the best that human wisdomcould suggest. The next care was to pro­pitiate the gods. The Sibylline bookswere consulted, and the consequence wasthat supplications were decreed to Vulcan,to Ceres, and Proserpine. A band of ma-







OCR Output








182 THE ANNALS OF TACITUS.





book ment out of Italy. The decree of the se-
XVI. f
> nate, drawn up in form, being delivered tohim, he withdrew to his chamber, attendedby Helvidius and Demetrius. He therepresented both his arms; and the veins be­ing opened, as soon as the blood began toflow, he desired the quaestor to draw nearer,and sprinkling the floor with his vitaldrops, " Thus," he said, " let us make li-" bation to Jupiter the deliverer!" Behold, young man, a mind undaunted*' and resigned: and may the gods avert" from you so severe a trial of your virtue !" But you are fallen on evil times, in which" you will find it expedient to fortify" your soul by examples of unshaken eon-" stancy." The approach of death wasslow and lingering. As his pains increas­ed, he raised his eyes, and turning to De­metrius *****


the rest of this book is lost.







OCR Output








298 GENEALOGICAL TABLE.


Pompeius, grand-daughter of Lucius Sylla,and third wife of Julius Caesar, who repu­diated her on account of a supposed in­trigue with Publius Clodius. Being askedwhat was his reason, he made answer, Cae­sar's wife must not only be free from guilt,but also from suspicion.—Suet. Life ofCaesar, s. 6. Plutarch, Life of Caesar.
11. Calpuunia, daughter of L. Cal-purnius Piso, married to J. Caesar, A. U.6*95. After the death of her husband shefled for protection to Marc Anthony.—Suet. Life of Caes. s. 81.
12. Julia, sister of Julius Caesar, beingthe daughter of C. J. Caesar the praetor, andAurelia his wife. She was married to M.Atius Balbus.—Suet. Life of Augustus,s. 4.
13. Marcus Atius Balbus, marriedJulia, the sister of Julius Caesar. He wasgrandfather to Augustus.—Suet. Life ofAug. s. 4.
14. Atia, daughter of M. Atius Bal­







OCR Output








336 GENEALOGICAL TABLE.


Caligula: Germanicus Ccesar, Father ofCasar Augustus, the deified Germanicus.
For Agrippina, his wife, see No. 51.
82. Nero Cesar, son of Germani­cus and Agrippina. He married Julia,daughter of Drusus the son of Tiberius(see No. 70), A. U. 773. By the wickedarts of Sejanus he was banished to the isleof Pontia, and there put to death A. IL784.—Tacit. Annal. book iv. s. 59, 60;book v. s. 3, 4. Suet. Life of Tiberius,s. 54. Dio, book lviii.
For Julia, the wife of Nero Caesar, seeNo. 74.
83. Drusus CiESAR, son of Germanicusand Agrippina, brother to Nero Caesar andCaligula, afterwards emperor. He marriediEmilia Lepida, who was induced by Seja­nus to betray her husband. Deluded him­self by the arts of that evil minister, heconspired against the life of his brother,Nero Caesar. He was imprisoned at Romeby order of Tiberius, and died in confine­







OCR Output








144 THE ANNALS





book hatred, he remained obdurate and impla-
XVI. x
cable.


XI. Pollutia returned to her father,and, since not a ray of hope was left, ex­horted him to meet his fate with a becom­ing spirit. Intelligence arrived at the sametime, that preparations for the-trial weregoing on with rapidity, and that the senateshewed a disposition to pronounce the se­verest sentence. Among the friends ofCassius some were of opinion, that thesurest way to secure part of his fortune forhis grand-children, would be by makingthe emperor heir in chief. lie rejectedthat advice as unworthy of his character.Having lived his days with a spirit of inde-pendance, he resolved to die with honour.He distributed the money then in his pos­session among his slaves, and ordered themto remove for their own use all the effectsthat could be carried off, with an excep­tion of three couches, to serve as funeralbeds for himself and his family.
They retired to die together. In the







OCR Output








GENEALOGICAL TABLE.


1-Gaius Julius Cesar, descended fromthe illustrious line of the Julian family, andfather of Caesar the dictator. He servedthe office of praetor. He, and his brotherLucius Caesar, died A. U. 670. Julia, theirsister, married C. Marius, who was seventimes consul.—Suetonius, Life of Jul. Caes.s. 1, 6. Pliny the elder, book vii. s. 53.Plutarch, Life of Marius.
2. Aurelia, the wife of C. J. Caesar,and mother of the dictator; a woman ofextraordinary talents and virtue.— Plut.Life of Jul. Caes. Tacitus, Dialogue ofOratory, s. 28.
3. Caius Jultus Cesar, the dictator;born in the sixth consulship of Marius,A. U. 654; before Christ, 100. He gained







OCR Output








NOTES


ON


THE SIXTEENTH BOOK


ov


THE ANNALS.


Section I.
(a) HPHE account of Dido's flight from Tyre with th«treasures of her husband Sichieus, to avoid thefury of Pygmalion, who had basely murdered his brotherfor the sake of his riches, is finely given by Virgil.JEneid i. ver. 34-7.
(b) The kings of Numidia, and the African princesin the neighbourhood of Carthage, were enemies to theinfant state founded by Dido.
Hinc Getulae urbes, genus insuperabile bello,Et Numidae infrani cingunt.
Virgil, lib. iv. verse 40.
Section II.
fa) The Quinquennial festival was established byNero, A. U. C. 813. Annals, xiv. S. 20.
Section III.
(aJ Suetonius relates the whole of this impostor's de­ception, and the chimerical projects of Nero in conse­quence of it. In Neron, s. 31..







OCR Output








218 APPENDIX TO BOOK XVI.


appen. conduct; in the agitation of his spirits, hereviewed those deeds of horror, which for-


A. tJ. C.
*82((. bore to goad him, while his mind was be-
A. P. .
67. calmed by vanity and pleasure. Consci­ence may grant a truce to the guilty, butnever makes a lasting peace. Distractedby his fears, and sunk in the gloom ofsuperstition (c), he resolved to consult theoracle at Delphi. The Pythian priestesswarned him to beware of seventy-threeyears (d). He received the admonition as acertain promise of long life, not then think­ing of Galba, who had reached his seventy-third year, and in a short time after suc­ceeded to the imperial dignity. The oraclepleased him at first by agreeable bodings,but did not continue long in his goodgraces. The parricide, he was told, whichhe had committed, placed him in the samerank with Alcmeon and Orestes, who hadmurdered their mothers. Nero kindledwith indignation. He resolved that thegod should feel his resentment, and, in. his fury, ^disfranchised the territory ofCirrha (e), which had been appropriatedto the temple, and was held to be conse­crated ground. Nor did his phrensy end







OCR Output








256 APPENDIX TO BOOK XVI.


appen. fact, to remove a rival, whom Nero dread-
B. XVI.
u^jed, and to leave him at a distance from
A U C.
mi. ' Rome, in a state of honourable banish­es, ment. Otho considered himself as no bet­ter than a state prisoner, in a remote partof the empire. Resentment prompted himto revenge; and ambition like his waseager to come forth from obscurity, andact a principal part on the great stage ofpublic business. He melted down all hismassy gold and silver; and, having con­verted it into coin, went with his wholetreasure, and the forces of his province, tosupport the enterprise of an old man, whohe knew, in the course of nature, could notlong enjoy the supreme authority. Theother governors and propraetors followedhis example. The Roman empire seemedto be transferred to Spain. Nero was atlast sensible of his danger. He orderedthe legions in Illyricum to advance by ra­pid marches into Italy; he recalled thetroops that had been sent against the Al­banians to the borders of the Caspian Sea;and he expected the fourteenth legion,then in Britain, to come without loss oftime to his assistance. Distracted by the,







OCR Output








OF TACITUS. iffy


to his person. The cruelty of Nero left booknone at liberty. In a general panic w-,0good men might follow the worst ex- si9. *ample. It would become the character i&.'of Thrasea to rescue from infamy thataugust assembly, which his presence hadso long adorned. If he did not attendthe meeting, the part, which, after hear­ing Thrasea in his own defence, thefathers might have acted, will remainproblematical; and by that uncertaintythe honour of the senate may be saved.To hope that Nero would blush for hi*crimes, were to misunderstand his cha­racter. His unrelenting cruelty wouldmost probably fall on Thrasea's wife, onhis whole family, and all that were dearto him. For these reasons, an eminentcitizen, who had ever supported the ho­nour of his name, and still flourishedwith unblemished integrity, would dowell to remember who were the teachersof wisdom, that furnished the principles
' and the model of his conduct. Since hehad crowded into his life all their virtues,
' it would become him to emulate their
* glory in his fall."







OCR Output








GENEALOGICAL TABLE. 311


life in a state of widowhood, and by thewhole tcnour of her conduct almost eclips­ing the lustre of her ancestors.—Pliny,book vii. s. 19- Suet. Life of Caligula,s. 1. Tacit. Annal. iii. s. 3. Annal. xi. s. 3.Plutavch, Life of Marc Anthony. Vale­rius Maximus, book iv. s. 3.
43. Caius Octavics Cesar, Augus­tus, emperor of Rome. He was the son ofCaius Octavius by his wife Atia, who wasniece to Julius Caesar. lie was born 23dSeptember, A. U. 691. At the age of nine­teen he took the lead in the civil wars, and,in three years after, not one of the conspi-.rators against Julius Caesar (who had adopt­ed him for his son) survived the fury of thedestructive sword. Sextus Pompeius wastotally defeated in a naval engagement offthe coast of Sicily. Lepidus, one of the tri­umvirate, Avas dismantled of his power;and Marc Anthony was overthrown at thebattle of Actium. After those events,Octavius was the only surviving chief ofthe Julian party. He became emperor ofRome A. U. C. 724.







OCR Output








230 APPENDIX TO BOOK XVI. '


appen. " crowned with immortal glory." He saw
p yVT
1 the number of labourers sent by Vespasian,


85o." and, in consideration of that timely sue-67. cour, forgave the merit of that victoriousgeneral. Corbulo(6) had not the good for­tune to be remembered with equal mode­ration. Tiridates had mentioned him withthe praise due to his virtue, and his famein arms. That commendation was sufficientto provoke the ingratitude of a tyrant,who beheld distinguished talents with a jea­lous eye, and suffered no man to be greatand virtuous with impunity. Being atlength determined to execute the bloodypurpose, which he had for some time har­boured in secret, he wrote to Corbulo interms of great esteem and kindness, call­ing him his friend and benefactor, and ex­pressing his ardent wish to have an inter­view with a general who had rendered suchSignal services to the empire. Having sentthat insidious invitation, he held a privatecorrespondence with Arrius Varus, whoserved in Asia; a young man of a daringspirit, in haste to rise by his crimes. Tofabricate a charge against his commandingofficer he knew would be the way to ingra-


v







OCR Output








OF TACITUS, 115


to Nero's resentment. Vestinus married boor
XV.
Statilia Messalina (a), though he knew that'


the prince was one of her lovers. sis.
LXIX* No witness appeared againstVestinus; no crime was laid to his charge,and, by consequence, no proceeding couldbe had in due form of law. But the willof the tyrant still remained. He sentGerelanus, one of the tribunes, at the headof a cohort, with orders so to take his mea­sures, that the consul might not be able tostand on the defensive, and, for that pur­pose, to invest his house, which, like aproud citadel, overlooked the forum, andcontained a numerous train of young andhardy slaves, in the nature of a garrison,Vestinus had that very day discharged allthe functions of his consular office. Hewas at table with his friends, free from ap­prehension, or, it may be, affecting an airof gaiety, when the soldiers entered, andinformed him that the tribune had import­ant business with him. He rose and leftthe room. The scene of death was instantlylaid. He was shut up in a chamber; aphysician attended; Ins veins were opened;


. i 2







OCR Output








36 THE ANNALS


book to the proconsular governors of Crete^--v^ depended entirely on his weight and in-8i5. fluence. Paetus Thrasca seized this op-63- portunity to convert the incident to thepublic good. He gave his opinion thatthe offender ought to be banished from theisle of Crete, and proceeded as follows;" Experience has taught us, conscript fa-" thers, that the wisest laws and the best" examples of virtue owe their origin to the" actual commission of crimes and misde-" meanours. Men of integrity make it" their study, on such occasions, to deduce" good from evil. To the corrupt prac-" tices of public orators we are indebted" for the Cincian law (o), and for the Julian" to the intrigues and open bribery of the" candidates for public honours. The Cal-" purnian regulations (b) were produced by" the avarice and rapacity of the magi-" strates. Guilt must precede the punish-" ment, and reformation grows out of'* abuse. We have now before us the" pride and insolence of petty tyrants in" the provinces. « To check the mischief," let us come to a resolution, consistent" with good faith, and worthy of the Ro­







OCR Output








GENEALOGICAL TABLE. 303


27- Marcella the younger, daughterof Claudius Marcellus and Octavia, sisterto Augustus. She was first married to M.Vipsanius Agrippa, and afterwards to M.Julius Antonius.—Suetonius, Life of Au­gustus, s. 63. Plutarch, Life of Marc An­thony.
For M. Vipsanius Agrippa, see No. 47.
28. The issue of Vipsanius Agrippa, byhis first wife Marcella, before he was mar­ried to Julia, the daughter of Augustusby his wife Scribonia.—Suet. Life of Aug.s. 63.
29. Marcus Julius Antonius, sonof Marc Anthony the triumvir and Ful~via his wife. He married Marcella theyounger, when repudiated by Agrippa.He was consul A. U. 744; a man of li­bidinous passions. He was put to deathfor his adulterous commerce with Julia, thedaughter of Augustus. The ode of Ho­race, Pindarum quisquis studet cemulari, is'addressed to him.—Tacit. Annal. iii. s. 18.Annal. iv. s. 44. Horace, book iv. ode 2.







OCR Output








iSt ' THE ANNALS


book " and the preservation of that melodious


XVI.


A.U.C.


u voice. A magistrate formerly of unre­al*" " mitting assiduity, he took a part in every««.' " debate, supporting or opposing the most" trifling motions; and now what is his" conduct ? For three years together he" has not so much as entered the senate (b)." Even on a late occasion, when the busi-" ness relating to Silanus and Vetus drew" the fathers to a crowded meeting, Thrasea' " was not at leisure; the affairs of his" clients engrossed his attention, and the" patriot was detained from the senate by** his own petty concerns. What is this" but a public secession! He is at the" head of a faction, and if his partisans" take fire from his example, a civil war" must be the consequence. Caesar and" Cato were the names that formerly kept" the world awake; at present, in a city" ever rent by discord, Nero and Thraseas " engage the public mind.
** The popular demagogue has his sec-" taries and his followers; a set of men" not yet, like their master, ambitiously" sententious, but, in imitation of his mien







OCR Output








OF THE ANNALS. |3|


tiate himself with Nero. He sent a formal appbn,
iii-i • i B.XVI.
accusation, loaded with every crime that ^-v**/
" A. U C.
ealumny could suggest. Corbulo fell into wo.the snare. A mind like his, impregnated '«•with honour and heroic fortitude, couldadmit no suspicion of intended treachery.He embarked without any retinue, andlanded at Cenchreae, a Corinthian harbourin the iEgean sea. Nero was there at thetime, dressed in his pantomime garb, andready to mount the stage, when the arrivalof his general officer was announced. Hefelt the indecency of giving an audiencein his comedian's dress to a man, whomhe respected, while he hated him. To fi£ehimself from all embarrassment, he took:the shortest way, and sent a death warrant.Corbulo saw too late that honesty is toooften the dupe of the ignoble mind. Hescorned to expostulate. " I have deserved" this," he said, and fell upon his sword(e).
The blood of one great man could notappease the cruelty of Nero. Whoeverwas eminent for talents, riches, or nobilityof birth, was considered as a state-crimi­nal. In that number were the two Scribo­







OCR Output








400 NOTES ON THE APPENDIX TO THE


but he wrote with more care than genius. Scribebatcarmina viajore curd, quam ingenio. He possessed anumber of villas, and had a large collection of books,statues, and pictures. He celebrated Virgil's birth-day,and visited his tomb near Naples, as if it were a temple.It was his glory, that Nero perished in his consulship,and by that event the world was delivered from a monster.Pliny, book iii. epist. 7. Martial has left several epi­grams in praise of Silius Italicus, whom, as it seems, heesteemed and loved.
(c) Suetonius in Nero, s. 25.
(d) This custom is recorded by Vitruvius, book ix.and Suetonius, s. 25.
(e) Flamminius triumphed over the last Philip of Ma-cedon, and Mummius conquered Corinth. •
(f) For Antium, see the Geographical Table.
(h) Suetonius mentions the car of Augustus, and theprocession to the temple of Apollo, s. 25.. (i) Suetonius, s. 25.
(k) This was, probably, the conspiracy formed by Vi-nicius. See Sueton. in Nero, s. 36.
(I) The particulars here related, are told by Plutarch,in his Essay on Garrulity.
(in) See Suetonius in Nero, s. 40.
(n) The Hither Spain was called Hispania Terraco-nensis. In that province, Galba received letters fromVindex, requesting him to put himself at the head ofmankind, the assertor of public liberty. Sueton. inGalba, s. 9.
(o) This speech of Vindex is recorded by Dio, lib.lxiii.
(p) Now Carthagena, in' Spain.
(qJ See Suetonius in Galba, s. 10.
(r) Seneca, and his brother Annccus Mela, were born







OCR Output








44 THE ANNALS





book fifteenth legion, then in Pannonia under thecommand of Marius Celsus, was ordered tojoin the army. Directions were also givento the kings and tetrarchs of the east, as alsoto the governors and imperial procuratorsof the several provinces in those parts, tosubmit in every thing to the commanderin chief. Corbulo was now invested withpowers little short of what the Roman peoplecommitted to Pompey (a) in the war againstthe pirates. Paetus, in the mean time, re­turned to Rome, not without apprehensionsof being called to a severe account. Neroappeased his fears, content with a fewsallies of mirth and ridicule. His wordsWere, " I make haste to pardon you, lest a" state of suspense should injure a man of" your sensibility. Since you are so apt" to take fright, delay on my part might" hurt your nerves, and bring on a fit of" illness."
XXVI. Corbulo expected no advant­age to the service from the fourth andtwelfth legions, the bravest of their menbeing all cut off, and the survivors still re­maining covered with consternation. He







OCR Output








358 INDEX TO THE


No'


N.
Nero Caesar, son of Germanicus . . 82
Nero, emperor of Rome, see DomitiusNero.
Nero, see Tiberius Claudius/Nero, fatherof Tiberius the emperor.
Nero, Claudius Drusus, brother of Tibe­rius, emperor of Rome '. . .79
O.
Octavia, sister of Augustus ,. . . 16
Octavia, daughter of Claudius, emperor . 56
Octavius, father of Augustus . . 15
Octavius Augustus, emperor . . 43Orestilla, see Livia Orestilla.
P.
Passienus Crispus, husband of Agrippina 93Paulina, see Lollia Paulina.Petina, see iElia Petina.Plautia Urgulanilla, wife of Claudius, em­peror . ..... 101
Plautus, see Rubellius Plautus.
Pollutia, see Antistia Pollutia.
Pompeia,"wife of Julius- Caesar . . 10
Pompeia, wife of Marcellus' . . 19
Pompeius Magnus, husband of Julia . 7
Pompeius, husband of Antonia . .106







OCR Output








120 THE. ANNALS





book corn, which they had been used to pur­chase at the market-price, to be distributedas the bounty of the prince. He thenordered the senate to be convened, with asmuch importance as if the events of warand splendid victories occasioned the meet­ing. He granted triumphal ornaments toPetronius Turpilianus (a), of consular rank,to Cocceius Nerva (b), proctor elect, andTigellinus, commander of the praetorianguards. The two last were mentioned byhim in strains of the highest commendation.Not content Avith erecting their statues inthe forum, adorned with triumphal decora­tions, he placed them also in the imperialpalace. Nymphidius (c) was honouredwith the ensigns of consular dignity. Ofthis man, who now occurs for the first time,since he is to figure hereafter on the stageof public business, it may be proper m thisplace to say a few words.i
He was the son of an enfranchised femalestave, distinguished by her beauty, and theease with which she granted her favours tothe slaves as well as the freedmen aboutthe court. Nymphidius, however, pre­







OCR Output








£38 APPENDIX TO BOOK XVI.





appen. Roman who gained the prize of theatricalv. xvi. ° * .
talents. Festive songs, and thanksgiving
hymns, were sung, not to Jupiter (A), theguardian god of Rome, but to Apollo, thedeity of singers and harpers. The tri­umphal car, in which Augustus had beenseen, was brought forth on the occasion.That emperor, after all his victories, en*tered the city in triumph: Nero sat in thesame carriage, a coachman, and a player.Augustus was attended by Agrippa; Nerohad by his side Diodorus, the musician.The streets resounded with acclamations:Io! Victory ! Victory in the Olympic, thePythian, and the Isthmian games! Io! theconqueror of Greece! Happy the peoplewho heard that melodious voice ! Victimswere slain, incense rose to heaven, andflowers (i) covered all the way. ,


Nero returned to his palace. Pomp andsplendour were at an end; the scenes ofvanity passed away, and he was left atleisure to think and to be wretched. He-lius had told him that the conjuncture wasbig with danger. Plots, insurrections, andconspiracies filled his mind with dreadful







OCR Output








296 GENEALOGICAL TABLE.


a complete victory at Pharsalia, and be­came emperor of Rome, A. U. 706. Hewas killed in the capitol by Brutus, Cas-sius, and other conspirators, A. U. 710. Thenumber slain in his wars is computed at1,192,000 men. Plutarch says that Caesar,in his various battles, engaged no less than3,000,000; that he killed 1,000,000, andtook another million prisoners.—VelleiusPaterculus, book ii. s. 41. Pliny, book vji.s. 25.
He was called after his death the divineJulius, Divus Julius.
4. Cossutia, Julius Caesar's first wife,of an equestrian family, and immoderatelyrich. Caesar married her when he wasyoung, and was soon divorced,—Suet. Lifeof Caesar, s. 1.
5. Cornelia, Caesar's second wife. Shewas the daughter of Cinna, four times con­sul. Sylla tried in vain to compel J. Cae­sar to repudiate her. He spoke her funeralpanegyric.—Suet. Life of Caesar, s. 1, 6.Plutarch, Life of J. Caesar.







OCR Output








OF THE ANNALS. 225


ransacked, and the armies in Syria andAPPE^
— - ■ J B.XVI.


Palestine had it in command to send to'Corinth all the prisoners taken in battle. A83o.C"


The conduct of the war against theJewish nation had been, as mentionedabove, committed to Vespasian, who hadalready carried his victorious arms throughthe province of Galilee. The enemy, assoon as they had intelligence that he wasadvancing at the head of a powerful army,endeavoured to surprise a Roman garrisonin the city of Ascalon (c), but were repulsedwith prodigious slaughter. Not less thaneighteen thousand were put to the swordby the legions, who had orders to give noquarter. Vespasian found it necessary,against a fierce and obstinate race, at thattime for their manifold crimes devoted todestruction, to forget the maxims of Ro­man clemency. It is certain that thosemerciful conquerors never spilled so muchhostile blood in any of their wars from thefirst foundation of Rome. The city ofGadara (d) was taken by storm, and reduc­ed to ashes. The garrison and the wholebody of the inhabitants perished in the


vol. IV. Q


A- D.
67.







OCR Output








OF TACITUS. 103


of his friends, when Silvanus entered the book
XV.
room, and reported the orders of thev-^v-o
a. u. c.emperor. sis.
x A. D.


65.


LXI. Seneca did not hesitate tp ac­knowledge that Natalis had been at hishouse, with a complaint that Piso's visits"were not received. His apology, he said,imported no more than want of health, the-love of ease, and the necessity of attendingto a weak and crazy constitution. " That" he should prefer the interest of a private" citizen to his own safety, was too absurd" to be believed. He had no motives to" induce him to pay such a compliment" to any man: adulation was no part of his" character. This is a truth well known" to Nero himself: he can tell you that, on" various occasions, he found in Seneca a" man, who spoke his mind with freedom," and disdained the arts of servile flattery."Silvanus returned to Rome. He found theprince in company with Poppaea and Ti-gellinus, who, as often as cruelty was inagitation, formed the cabinet-council. Intheir presence the messenger reported hisanswer, Nero asked, " Does Seneca pre-*







OCR Output








OF TACITUS. S3


arches on the mount of the capitol. This book
XV.
was ordered by the senate, while the war<-»»N^jwas still depending; nor was the work dis- eii. 'continued, when the event was known. The c?."public eye was amused at the expence oftruth. To add to the imposition, and toappear free from all solicitude about fo­reign affairs, Nero ordered all the damagedgrain, that lay in the public stores, to bethrown into the Tiber. By this act ofostentation an idea of great abundance wasto be impressed on the minds of the people.Nor did he suffer the price of corn to beraised, though near two hundred vessels,loaded with grain, were lost in the harbourby the violence of a storm, and a hundredmore, working their way up the Tiber, weredestroyed by the accident of fire. At thesame time Nero committed the care of thepublic imposts to three men of consularrank, namely, Lucius Piso, DucenniusGeminus, and Pompeius Paullinus. Inmaking this arrangement he animadvertedwith severity on the conduct of former em­perors, whose extravagance made heavyanticipations of the revenue; whereas hehimself, by his frugality, paid annually into
VOL. IV. D







OCR Output








OF TACITUS. 59


** purpose: the people of Rome have the book" same ascendant over the mind of their v^v^*»
A. C.C.
" sovereign. I feel their influence; I vield »"•
3 A.D.
" to their wishes." M ith these and such 6*like expressions he amused the multitude.Their love of public spectacles made themeager for his presence, and, above all, theydreaded, if he left the capitol, a dearth ofprovisions. The senate and the leadingmen looked on with indifference, unable todecide which was most to be dreaded, hispresence in the city, or his tyranny at adistance. They agreed at length (as inalarming cases fear is always in haste toconclude) that what happened was theworst evil that could befall them.
XXXVII. Nero wished it to be bolieved that Rome was the place in whichhe most delighted. To diffuse this opinion,he established convivial meetings in all thesquares and public places (a). The wholecity seemed to be his house. Of the vari­ous feasts given upon this occasion, that,which was prepared for the prince by Ti-gellinus, exceeded in profusion and luxuryevery thing of the kind. I shall here give







OCR Output













OCR Output








290 APPENDIX TO BOOK XVI.





appen. willing to acquiesce, and peace in everypart of the empire. He, therefore, chang­ed his military robe for the Roman gown,and assumed the name (m) of Caesar. Buteven in that tide of his. affairs, the simpli­city of his manners suffered no alteration.The same frugality, the same contempt ofpomp and luxury, and the same austeritystill rehiained. Vinius covered his tablewith a profusion of luxury ; and Otho,who attended the cavalcade into Italy, dis­played all the magnificence of Nero'scourt. Galba still preserved his rules ofancient frugality, and condemned the vain.parade (n) with inflexible rigour. He shew­ed himself ready to punish and slow to re­ward. In his manners no affability, no en­gaging courtesy. During the whole of hismarch he never once endeavoured, by anact of condescension, to gain the affectionsof the people. The army in Italy consisted,at that time, of four different classes ofmen; namely, the legions, both foot andcavalry, composed chiefly of Roman citi­zens ; the auxiliary forces, drafted from thestates in alliance with Rome ; the body ofmarines, levied in the tributary cities, and







OCR Output













OCR Output








FIFTEENTH BOOK OF THE ANNALS. 375


done ample justice to all who died with glory; to Epi-charis, the enfranchised slave, who displayed her con­stancy, in defiance of the keenest torture; to Seneca,■who left an example of unshaken virtue ; to SubriusFlavius, whose last words to Nero were, " I hated you" when you became a coachman, a comedian, and an" incendiary," to Sulpicius Asper, the centurion; and,above all, to Lucan himself, who died with undauntedcourage, repeating a passage from his own poem. Letit also be remembered, that when Lucan's father suffereddeath in the following year, Tacitus says, that the sonreflected the highest honour on the father; grande adju-onentum claritudinis. The writer who has treated Lucanwith so much candour, would neither adopt noi* invent acalumny, to brand his name in the page of history. Butto conclude this long note : It is by no means probable,that Tacitus, who wrote in the reign of Trajan, notmuch more than thirty years after the death of Lucan,■would hazard a glaring falsehood in the face of his con­temporaries ; and it is less probable, that Mr. Hayley, atthe distance of more than n 30 years, should be betterinformed than the great historian, who lived at the verytime of the transaction. See Poems, by William Hayley,Esq. vol. iii. p. 206.
Section LX.
(a) This was Seneca's villa, called JVonientanwn,which he mentions, epist. ex. and also civ. in Nonvetutanum meum fugi.
Section LXIII.(a) For his diet, see in this book, s. 45.







OCR Output








OF TACITUS. 11


: Corbulo was thus concert­ing measures for the defence of Syria,


IV. While Corbulo was thus concert- B°?K
XV*


A. U. C.


Moneses advanced by rapid marches, and 8i5.with all his forces entered Armenia. He 62hoped to outstrip the fame that flies beforean enterprising general, and to fall uponTigranes by surprise. That prince, awareof the design, had thrown himself into thecity of Tigranocerta, a place surroundedby high walls (a), and defended by a nu­merous garrison. The river Nicephorius (b),with a current sufficiently broad, washesa considerable part of the walls. A deeptrench inclosed the rest. There was a com­petent number of soldiers to man the works,and provisions had been laid in with dueprecaution. Some of the foraging partieshaving rashly ventured too far were sur­rounded by the enemy. This check, how­ever, instead of disheartening the garrison,served only to inspire them with a spirit ofrevenge. The operations of a siege are illsuited to the genius of the Parthians, whosecourage always fails in a close engagement.A few arrows thrown at random made noimpression on men sheltered by their forti­fications. The besiegers could only amuse







OCR Output








8 . THE ANNALS





B ££K " mogeniture, he ceded to me the diadem1" of Parthia: in return I placed him on" the throne of Armenia, the third king-" dom among the eastern nations. Media," in fact, is the second, and Pacorus, at" that time, was in possession. By this" arrangement, I provided for my family," and, by the measure, extinguished for" ever those unnatural jealousies, which" formerly envenomed brothers against" brothers. This system, it seems, has" given umbrage to the Romans; they de-" clare against it; and though they never" broke with Parthia without paying dearly" for their temerity, they now are willing" to provoke a war, and rush on their own"destruction. Thus much I am willing" to declare; the possessions, which have" descended to me from my ancestors," shall never be dismembered; but I hadrather maintain them by the justice ofmy cause, than by the decision of the" sword. I avow the principle, and if, in" consequence of it, I have been too much" inclined to pacific measures, the vigour*' of my future conduct shall make atone-" nient. The national honour, in the







OCR Output








OF THE ANNALS. 245





M storm : and what was their motive ? In appen.
B. XVI.
" those days the love of plunder was suf-" ficient to provoke a war. We have a** nobler cause; the cause of public liberty.M It is that, my friends, it is that glorious" cause that now invites us. Let us obey" the call, and draw the avenging sword." The nations round us, fired with indig-" nation, are ready to assert their rights." Let them not be the first to prove them*" selves men. The enterprise has in it allw that is dear to man, all that is great" in human nature; and shall we not be" the first to seize the glorious opportu** nity ? Let us go forth at once, and be" the deliverers of the world."
This speech was received with shouts ofapplause. The deputies, inflamed withardour in the cause of liberty, returnedto their respective cities; a warlike spiritwas kindled in the mass of the people ; aleague was formed, and the din of arms washeard in every part of the country, Galbawas informed of all that passed. He alsoknew that he was proscribed by Nero, andthat his effects were sold by public auction.







OCR Output








382 NOTES ON THE


occasion, insomuch that Pliny says, all Arabia did notproduce in an entire year as much as was consumedat the funeral of Poppaea. Periti rerum asseverantArabiam nonjerre tantum thuris et myrrhs annuofaetu, quantum Nero princeps novissimo Poppace sutedie concremaverit. Pliny, lib. xii. s. 18.
(d) For the apotheosis of Nero's daughter by Poppaea,see Annals, xv. s. 23.
Section VII.
(a) The name of this person was Cassius Longinus, alawyer far advanced in years, and blind. His crime, ac­cording to Suetonius, was, that among the busts of hisancestors he kept that of the famous Cassius, who stabbedJulius Caesar. Suet, in Neron. s. 37.
Section VIII.
(a) Lucius Silanus was son to Marcus Junius Si-lanus, who was great-grandson to Augustus. See theGenealogical Table, No. 59. For his uncle Silanus Tor-quatus, see Annals, xv. s. 35.
(b) For Lepida, see the Genealogical Table, No. 64.
(c) Marcellus Cornelius was afterwards put to deathby Galba. Hist. lib. i. s. 37.
Section IX.(a) Barium, a city in Apulia, now Bari.
Section X.
(a) For the death of Rubellius Plautus, see Annals,xiv. s. 58 and 59.
(b) Nero and Antistius Vetus were joint consuls,A. U'. C. 808. See Annals, xiii. s. 11.







OCR Output








FIFTEENTH BOOK OF THE ANNALS. 367


Pythagoras, and also of his taking Sporus, the eunuch,to be his wife. See Appendix to book xvi. s. 8.
(e) Juvenal has described this scene of impious pros­titution : /
Dum sedet ilia parato
Flammeolo, Tyriusque palam genialis in hortisSternitur, et ritu decies centena dabunturAntiquo ; veniet cum signatoribus auspex.
Sat. x. ver. 333.
Adorn'd with bridal pomp she sits in state,The public notaries and aruspex wait;The genial bed is in the garden drest;The portion paid, and every rite exprest,Which in a Roman marriage is profest
Dryden's Juvenal.


est, £st 3


Section XXXVIII.
(a) Suetonius relates the fire of Rome, and has nodoubt of Nero's guilt. He tells us, that somebody re­peating in conversation,
'Ejioa 8a.wrof yoiia. fu%!)iijna -itvt),When I am dead let fire devour the world;
Let it be, said Nero, whilst I am living, epa gujvrc;.And accordingly, pretending to dislike the old buildings,and the narrow winding of the streets, he set fire to thecity in so barefaced a manner, that several men of con­sular rank met Nero's domestic servants with torches andcombustibles, but did not dare to apprehend them. Suet,in Neron. s. 38. See Dio, lib. lxii.
(b) Livy observes, that, after the city was fired by theGauls, it was rebuilt in close, narrow, winding streets.See Livy, lib. v. s. 55.







OCR Output








OF TACITUS. 9


" mean time, has suffered no diminution. B°?K
"Your glory is unimpaired, and I have v*'v^,'
" added to it the virtues of moderation; »l*.
a- a
" virtues, which the gods approve, and 62-** which no sovereign, however great and" flourishing, ought to despise,"
Having thus delivered his sentiments,he placed the regal diadem on the head ofTiridates, and, at the same time, gave toMoneses, an officer of distinguished rank,the command of the cavalry, which, byestablished usage, is always appointed toattend the person of the monarch. Headded the auxiliaries sent by the Adia-.benians, and, with that force, ordered himto march against Tigranes, in order to ex*terminate the usurper from the throne ofArmenia. In the mean time, he proposedto compromise the war with the Hyrcanians,and fall with the whole weight of his king­dom on the Roman provinces.
,111, Cqrbulo was no sooner apprisedof these transactions, than he dispatched,to support Tigranes, two legions, under thecommand of Verulanus Severus autj Vettius







OCR Output








288 APPENDIX TO BOOK XVI.


appkn. happened that he sat in judgment on a
•■r^— soldier accused of a capital crime, and
82i- condemned him to suffer death. " Know,ad. ■
6S- " said the prisoner, that I appeal to Cae-" sar." Capito rose, and, placing himselfon a higher seat, told the man, " Now ap-*' peal to Caesar: make your defence in his" presence." The soldier obeyed, and wassent to execution. This transaction wasreported to Fabius Valens (i), who com­manded a legion in Lower Germany; anofficer of acknowledged ability, intrepid,active, and ambitious ; eager in the pursuitof honours, and panting to signalize himselfby some bold exploit. The opportunitynow occurred, and he resolved to seize it.Crispinus, a centurion (k), was devoted tohis service. In that man he found a readyassassin, and Fonteius Capito fell a victim.The death of that commander Valens con­cluded would be considerable merit withthe new emperor. He lost no time, butsent an express to inform Galba of whathe had done, with zeal for the service ofhis sovereign. He added, in the same let­ter, that the legions on the Upper Rhinehad made a tender of the empire to Vir­







OCR Output








'


J


' ' t
V '■
f* ■■■■


'


■







OCR Output








OF THE ANNALS. £13





party to applaud, and distributed bribes appen.among the judges who were to decide.Wherever he performed, a legion of Romanknights was stationed in the theatre, bytheir own example to excite and animatethe admiration of the multitude, and teachthe Greeks what was excellent in the arts,which they themselves had invented, andcarried to perfection. By these and suchlike preconcerted measures, Nero securedhis triumph in all quarters. Competitionwas invited, and at the same time inti­midated. In one of the cities, a man wellskilled in music, but a bad politician, ex­perienced the danger of contending with apowerful rival. Zealous for the honour ofhis art, and proud of his own talent, hepersisted to dispute the prize, till thelictors drove him to the wall, and theredispatched him in the sight of the audi­ence. Vespasian had found it necessaryto pass from Syria into Greece, in orderto appear among the band of courtiers,and pay his homage to the emperor. But,unfortunately, he either had no ear formusic, or he did not reckon it among theaccomplishments of a prince. He heard







OCR Output








OF TACITUS. 103


his friends, and " You see," he said, " that book
XV.
" I am not at liberty to requite your ser- «~v-*" vices with the last marks of my esteem, sis." One thing, however, still remains. I leave cs-" you the example of my life, the best and" most precious legacy now in my power." Cherish it in your memory, and you will" gain at once the .applause due to virtue," and the fame of a sincere and generous" friendship." All who were present meltedinto tears. He endeavoured to assuagetheir sorrows; he offered his advice withmild persuasion; he used the tone of au­thority. " Where," he said, " are the pre-" cepts of philosophy, and where the words" of wisdom, which for years have taught" us to meet the calamities of life with" firmness and a well prepared spirit ? Was" the cruelty of Nero unknown to any of" us ? He murdered his mother; he destroy-" ed his brother; and, after those deeds of" horror, what remains to fill the measure" of his guilt but the death of his guardian" and his tutor?"
LXIII, Having delivered himself in







OCR Output








212 APPENDIX TO BOOK XVI.


appen. likewise to be the most skilful driver of av^-v-J curricle. With that bright object in view,820. ' he had for some years before meditated an67.' expedition into Greece; and finding thatthe Olympic games were, in their regularcourse, to be celebrated in the summer,in the year of Rome eight hundred andsixteen, he even then had the precaution,by a positive command, to defer the exhi­bition of that great national spectacle tillhis arrival in Greece. The law, or, whichwas equivalent, his will and pleasure, be­ing announced, the people prepared for hisreception. He began his tour through thecountry; he visited the several cities, andgave himself a spectacle on the publicstage. Greece had been reduced to sub­jection by Flaminius, Mummius, Agrippa,and Augustus Caesar: and now in her turnshe triumphed over the conqueror. Shesaw the emperor of Rome running fromplace to place in the character of a stroll­ing player, a travelling musician, and afamous coachman. He did not, however,depend altogether on his merit, but prac­tised the underhand arts, by which successis often ensured. He hired a numerous







OCR Output








Of the annals. 193


peror, Was arrived in Italy. Nero was then appen.at Naples, and, in that city, the eastern v-v—*prince was admitted to his presence. The sis. 'spectacle was magnificent. It served at ».once to gratify the pride of a Roman em­peror, and for a time to sooth the afflic­tions of the people. Tiridates was attendedby a long procession of officers and a mili­tary band appointed by Corbulo. He had,besides, not less than three thousand of theParthian nobility in his train, with his wife,and the sons (c) of Vologeses, of Paconis^and Monobazus. His march through theprovinces had no appearance of a princesubdued, and forced to submit to the willof a conqueror. Till he entered the cityof Naples all was grandeur and royal mag­nificence. The act of humiliation still re­mained. He was to pay homage to theemperor on his knees. Mollifying as thatcircumstance was to an oriental king, Tiri­dates submitted to prostrate himself atNero's feet. Vologeses had stipulated withCorbulo, that his brother should not becompelled to deliver up his sword (d); andTiridates called it an ignominious act, be­neath the dignity of the Arsacidceu Nothingvol,, iv. o







OCR Output








62 fHE ANNALS





book thority of historians is on both sides, andwhich preponderates it is not easy to de-1termine* It is, however, certain, that ofall the disasters that ever befel the city ofRome from the rage of fire, this was theworst, the most violent, and destructive.The flame broke out in that part of thecircus which adjoins, on one side, to mountPalatine, and, on the other, to mount Cae-lius. It caught a number of shops storedwith combustible goods, and, gatheringforce from the winds, spread with rapidityfrom one end of the circus to the other.Neither the thick walls of houses, nor theinclosure of temples, nor any other build­ing, could check the rapid progress of theflames. A dreadful conflagration follow­ed. The level parts of the city were de­stroyed. The fire communicated to thehigher buildings, and, again laying hold ofinferior places, spread with a degree ofvelocity that nothing could resist. Theform of the streets, long and narrow, withfrequent windings, and no regular opening,according to the plan of ancient Rome (b),contributed to increase the mischief. Theshrieks and lamentations of women, the







OCR Output








104 THE ANNALS





b o o k " pare to end his days by a voluntary death ?"" He shewed," said the tribune, " no symp-" torn of fear, no token of sorrow, no deject-" ed passion: his words and looks bespoke" a mind serene, erect and firm." " Return,"said Nero, " and tell-him, he must resolve** to die." Silvanus, according to the ac­count of Fabius Rusticus, chose to go backby a different road. He went through aprivate way to Fenius Rufus, to advise withthat officer, whether he should execute theemperor's orders. Rufus told him that hemust obey. Such was the degenerate spiritof the times. A general panic took pos­session of every mind. This very Silvanuswas one of the conspirators, and yet wasbase enough to be an instrument of thecruelty which he had combined to revenge.He had, however, the decency to avoidthe shock of seeing Seneca, and of deliver­ing in person the fatal message. He senta centurion to perform that office for him.
LXII. Seneca heard the message withcalm composure. He called for his will,and being deprived of that right of a Ro­man citizen by the centurion, he turned to







OCR Output













OCR Output








GENEALOGICAL TABLE. 329


70. Drusus CjEsar, son of Tiberius byVipsania Agrippina, who was repudiatedin her pregnancy. He was bom A. U.739; a youth of a towering spirit, impatientof an equal, addicted to liquor, and in thatvice the rival of his father. He marriedLivia, otherwise called Livilla, who wasdebauched by Sejanus, and drawn into aplot against her husband's life. Drusushad been three times consul, and was everyday rising to eminence in the state, whenSejanus put an end to his days by poison,A. U. 776.—Tacit. Annal. book i. s. 55 ;book iii. s. 56; book iv. s. 3 and 8. Pliny,book xiv. s. 22.
Inscriptions on ancient medals: DrususCasar Son of Tiberius, Grandson to thedeified Augustus, Pontiff, Consul, vestedwith Tribunitian Power.
71. Livia, or Livilla, daughter ofNero Claudius Drusus (see No. 79) by hiswife Antonia the younger (see No. 42).She was sister to Germanicus, and alsoClaudius the emperor. Her first husbandwas Caius, the son of Agrippa ; after his







OCR Output








360 INDEX-


No.
Tiberius Claudius, emperor . .. 100
Tiberius Claudius Nero, father of Tiberius 67Torquatus, see Junius Silanus Torquatus.Torquatus, see Lucius Silanus Torquatus.


26


V.
Valeria Messalina, wife of Claudius, em­peror . . .Valerius Messala, husband of Marcella the
elder .23
Valerius Messala Barbatus, husband of
Domitia Lepida . . . .24
Varus, husband of Julia, the daughter of
Germanicus . . ' . . .98Vinicius, husband of Julia, daughter of
Germanicus 99
Vipsania Agrippina, wife of Tiberius, em­peror *. . . . . .69
Vipsanius Agrippa, husband of Julia,
daughter of Augustus . . .47
Vitellius, husband of Julia Calvina . 63
Urgulanilla, see Plautia Urgulanilla.
w:
'Wife of Marcus Junius Silanus; her nameunknown . . . .58







OCR Output








200 APPENDIX TO BOOK XVI.


appen. saying to Nero, in the simplicity of hi*• heart (/'), " You have in Corbulo a most va-


A U C
'sik ' " luable slave." The drift and good senseec.' of the observation made no impression ona frivolous mind like that of Nero. Anemperor, who placed his glory in being ascenic performer, paid no attention to themerit of Corbulo. If he understood thereflection of the eastern prince, he shewedafterwards, that the only use he made of itwas, to nourish a secret jealousy, and planthe ruin of an officer, whose fame in armswas too great for a tyrant to endure.
As soon as the diversions of the theatreand the circus ended, Nero thought fit toopen a more important scene. He pro­ceeded with a grand retinue to the capitol,where he entered with a branch of laureljn his hand; and, as if he had subduedArmenia, the charioteer and player of in*terludes was saluted Imperator. Hisvanity was now amply gratified; but va­nity was not the only spring of his actions.To be an adept in magic arts had been forsome time his predominant passion; and,as Tiridates brought with him in his train a







OCR Output








158 THE ANNALS





book during the whole time with his usual gaiety,never changing his habitual manner, nortalking sentences to shew his contempt ofdeath. He listened to his friends, who en­deavoured to entertain him, not with gravediscourses on the immortality of the soul,or the moral wisdom of philosophers, butwith strains of poetry, and verses of a gayand natural turn. He distributed presentsto some of his servants, and ordered othersto be chastised. He walked out for hisamusement, and even lay down to sleep.In this last* scene of his life he acted withsuch calm tranquillity, that his death,though an act of necessity, seemed nomore than the decline of nature. In hiswill he scorned to follow the example ofothers, who, like himself, died under thetyrant's stroke: he neither flattered theemperor, nor Tigellinus, nor any of thecreatures of the court; but having written,under the fictitious names of profligatemen and women, a narrative of Nero's de­bauchery, and his new modes of vice (a),he had the spirit to send to the emperorthat satirical romance, sealed with his own







OCR Output








158 THE ANNALS


book a general face of mourning, but no realv—v-w' grief. Men remembered her loose incon-8i8. tinence, and, having felt her cruelty, re­ef- jbiced in secret at an event that freed theworld from a woman of a detested cha­racter. Nero laboured under a load ofreproach, and the public resentment rosestill higher, when it was known that, byhis orders, Cassius did not attend thefuneral. That illustrious Roman under­stood the imperial mandate as the signalof his approaching ruin. In fact, his doomwas fixed in a short time after, and SilanusAvas devoted with him. The crime of Cas­sius (a) was the splendid fortune which heinherited from his ancestors, and the au­sterity of his manners. Silanus offendedby the nobility of his birth, and his mo­dest merit. Nero sent a letter to thesenate, stating in strong terms the neces^sity of removing them both from all civiloffices. To Cassius he objected, that,among the images of his ancestors he pre­served, with veneration, the picture of thefamous Caius Cassius, with this inscription:
THE LEADER OF THE PARTY. That CUV
cumstance plainly shewed the sullen spirit







OCR Output








260 APPENDIX TO BOOK XVI.





appen. to the slaves and freedraen of the emperor
B XVl
Claudius. Having recommended himselfby his vices to the favour of Nero, he hadthe ambition to be thought the issue of anintrigue between his mother, Nymphidia,and Caligula. Nymphidius and his col­league Tigellinus acted in concert, andjointly exerted their pernicious talents.They saw the disposition of the soldiers,and, with the ingratitude of men who hadraised themselves by their crimes, thoughtthe opportunity fair to strike a stroke ofperfidy. They began by bribes to insi­nuate themselves into the affections of thepraetorian guards, and, when they had suf­ficiently prepared them for a revolt, whis­pered to the senate, that Nero was de­serted on every side; that he had not afriend left; and that, by consequence, thewhole legislative authority was in the handsof the fathers. That assembly remainedfor some time in suspense; timid, waver­ing, and irresolute. The conjuncture wasdark and gloomy. Nero was alarmed ; hepaused from his pleasures, and saAv thatsome deep design was m agitation. Toprevent it by one bold effort, he formed a







OCR Output








314 GENEALOGICAL TABLE.


44. Clodia, daughter of Publius Clo-dius, by his wife Fulvia, and daughter-in-law to Anthony the triumvir. In order toconciliate terms of peace, Augustus mar­ried her, when she was yet of tender years;but a quarrel taking place with Fulvia, hermother, Augustus repudiated her in hervirgin state.—Suet. Life of Aug;. s. 6'L


o


45. Scribonia, sister of Lucius Scri-bonius Libo, and wife of Augustus. Shehad been married twice before to two menof consular rank, and by one of them,whose name was Scipio, she had a daughternamed Cornelia. Augustus repudiatedScribonia A. U. 715, and Livia, in a few37cars afterwards, succeeded to the em­braces of the emperor of Rome.—Suet. Lifeof Aug. s. 63, 6y. Dio, book xlviii. Pro-pertius, book iv. eleg. 2.
46". J.ulia, daughter of Augustus, byLis wife Scribonia, born A. U. 715. Shewas married, first, to Marcellus; secondly,to Agrippa ; and thirdly, to Tiberius; a'woman of dissolute conduct, libidinouspassions, and abandoned infamy. On ac-







OCR Output








108 THE ANNALS


BooKtipathy to Paulina. If she perished with


XV.


A. V. C


her husband, he began to dread the publicVk~* execration. That he might not multiply«- the horrors of his present cruelty, he sentorders to exempt Paulina from the strokeof death. The slaves and freedmen, bythe direction of the soldiers, bound up herarm, and stopped the effusion of blood.This, it is said, was done without her know*ledge, as she lay in a state of languor. Thefact, however, cannot be known with cer­tainty. Vulgar malignity, which is everready to detract frqm exalted virtue, spreada report, that, as long as she had reason tothink that the rage of Nero was implacable,she had the ambition to share the glory ofher husband's fate; but a milder prospectbeing unexpectedly presented, the charmsof life gained admission to her heart, andtriumphed over her constancy. She liveda few years longer, in fond regret, to theend of her days, revering the memory ofher husband. The weakness of her wholeframe, and the sickly languor of her. coun­tenance, plainly shewed that she had been,reduced to the last extremity.







OCR Output








OF THE ANNALS. 247


fice to speak at once to the eye and the appen.ear. The images of the most illustrious of *^*-Jboth sexes (q), who had fallen a sacrifice to 82i'. 'Nero's cruelty, were ranged in regular or- 68."der round the council-chamber. The silenteloquence of that pathetic scene he knewwould assist the orator, and inflame thepassions of his audience. He began hisharangue without the usual approaches ofa studied introduction. The business wasof the first importance, and he rushed intoit at once, with warmth and vehemence.He painted forth the horrors of Nero'sreign, the acts of oppression that laid wastethe provinces, and the murders that thinnedthe noblest families. If proofs were neces­sary, he looked round the hall, and behold, «he said, <f behold there in glaring colours** the evidence of the worst'iniquity. JudgeM not of Nero by my words; view him with" your own eyes. Those images informM against him. Lo J- there the ghastly fea-" tures of the murdered Caesars ! You see" Nero's mother, brother, and sister ! his*' wife, his aunt, his nearest relations ! his" wretched friends ! all butchered, all de-«' stroyed, by the sword, by famine, by poi-







OCR Output








OF THE ANNALS.' 255


erted himself in every quarter of the field appen.
v X u -v-xrr


B. XVI.


to prevent the massacre: but his effortswere in vain. He saw the slaughter of his 82i.'
. . A. D.
people, and concluded that Virginius had es.betrayed him, and the cause of liberty.His enterprise defeated, and no hopes ofconquest left, he resolved not to survive acalamity so unexpected. He fell upon hissword, and died on the field of battle.


Meanwhile, all Spain was in commotion.Galba was employed in schemes of futuregrandeur. He raised a new legion, mus­tered forces in all quarters, and with hisutmost art and industry allured the differ­ent states to his interest. Cornelius Fus-cus, a young man of illustrious birth, wentover to Galba, and drew with him the pro­vince of which he was governor. But thegreat accession of strength was from Lusi-tania. Otho, who had been the favouriteof Nero, and his constant companion in allhis scenes of riot and debauchery, hadbeen for some years at the head of thatprovince. He was appointed to that sta­tion, as the reader may remember (aa), un­der colour of doing him honour; but, in







OCR Output








66 THE ANNALS


book pifed. The minds of men had scarce be-
XV.
o^rogun to recover from their consternation,'an.' when the fire broke out a second time with
AD .
6*.' no less fury than before. This happened,however, in a more open quarter, wherefewer lives were lost; but the temples ofthe gods, the porticos, and buildings raisedfor the decoration of the city, were levelledto the ground. The popular odium wasnow more inflamed than ever, as this se­cond alarm began in the house of Tigel-linus, formerly the mansion of iEmilius.A suspicion prevailed, that to build a new, city, and give it his own name, was theambition of Nero. Of the fourteen quar­ters, into which Rome was divided, fouronly were left entire, three were reducedto ashes, and the remaining seven pre­sented nothing better than a heap of shat­tered houses, half in ruins.
XLI. The number of houses, temples,and insulated mansions destroyed by thefire cannot be ascertained. But the mostvenerable monuments of antiquity, whichthe worship of ages had rendered sacred,were laid in ruins: amongst these were the







OCR Output








136 THE ANNALS


book row passes (a); and that others, who keptu^-o their seats in the theatre day and night, fell
A.U C.
8i8' ' dangerously ill. The dread of being ab-65. sent from such a performance was more


i


alarming than the worst sickness that couldhappen. Besides the soldiers stationed inthe theatre to superintend the audience,it is well known that a number of spies layin ambush, to take down the names of thespectators, to watch their countenances,and note every symptom of disgust orpleasure. Offenders of mean conditionwere punished on the spot. Men of dis­tinction were overlooked with an air ofcalm neglect, but resentment was onlysmothered for a time, to break out after­wards with deadly hate. We are told, thatVespasian, for the crime of being ready tofall asleep, was obliged to endure the in­sulting language of one Phoebus, an im­perial freedman, and was saved fromharsher treatment by the intercession ofmen of rank and influence. The offence,however, was not entirely forgotten; it re­mained in store for future vengeance; but(Vespasian was reserved, by his superiordestiny, for the highest elevation,







OCR Output








276 APPENDIX TO BOOK XVI.





bTxvi!' streets of Rome, and filled the praetoriancamp with shouts of joy, and the warmestexpressions of zeal and ardour for his ser­vice. The praetorian guards thought of no­thing but the donative promised in hisname ; and Nymphidius, the author of thatmeasurej had no doubt but the soldiers, indue time, would shew themselves devotedto the man, who filled their minds with thedazzling prospect of reward so truly greatand magnificent. The liberality was his,and the difficulty of carrying it into execu­tion would fall on Galba.
Icelus, the favourite freedman of Galba,made it his business to see Nero's deadbody, and, having enabled himself to bean eye-witness of the fact, set out for Clu-nia in Spain (b), to inform his master, thathe was raised to the imperial seat by thevoice of the praetorians, and the concur­rent decree of the senate. Nymphidiusseized the opportunity to figure as the prin­cipal actor on the theatre of public busi­ness. He had accomplished a great andsudden revolution, and, being high in fa­vour with the praetorian guards, found it







OCR Output








ifilrrarg uf





tyxmteian Httiir^r»itgt.







OCR Output











MiUiaria Romano.


'ii& 250 3}5


--..-"


Cock. sculp.







OCR Output








NOTES


ON
THE FIFTEENTH BOOK
OF
THE ANNALS.





Section I.


(a) npiGRANES, descended from the nobility of Cap-padocia, was sent by Nero to ascend the throneof Armenia. Annals, xiv. s. 26.
Section IV.
fa) The walls were fifty cubits high, as we are told byAppian, in his History of the Mithridatic War.(b) For this river, see the Geographical Table.
Section V.
(a) For the city of Nisibis, see the GeographicalTable.
Section X.
fa) Arsamosata, a city of Armenia, near the Euphrates,now Simsat.'
Section XII. •
fa) He is called in the original, Primi Pili Centime,that is, first centurion. He has been mentioned,- bookxiii. s. 36, by the name of Pactius Orphitus.







OCR Output








OF TACITUg. 89


Health, in Etmria, or, as some writers will book
have it, from the temple of Fortune, in ^^Y
the city of Ferentum. This instrument he sis.
. A- °-
earned constantly about him, as a sacred °5-
weapon, dedicated to the cause of liberty.It was further settled, that, during thetumult, Piso was to take his post in thetemple of Ceres, and there remain till suchtime as Fenius and his confederates shouldcall him forth, and conduct him to thecamp. To conciliate the favour of thepeople, Antonia, the daughter of the lateemperor, was to appear in the cavalcade.This last circumstance, since it is relatedby Pliny, must rest upon his authority. Ifit came from a less respectable quarter, Ishould not think myself at liberty to sup­press it; but it may be proper to ask, Is itprobable that Antonia woidd hazard herreputation, and even her life, in a projectso uncertain, and so big with danger ? Isis probable that Piso, distinguished by hisconjugal affection, could agree at once toabandon a wife whom he loved, and marryanother to gratify his own wild ambition ?But it may be said, of all the passions thatinflame the human mind, ambition is the







OCR Output








GENEALOGICAL TABLE. 333


Tiberius the emperor was his elder brother.He was born A. U. 716. A youth, saysVelleius Paterculus, of as many virtues asprudence can acquire, or human naturecan admit. The fine ode of Horace, Qua-km Ministrum fulminis alitem, book iv.ode 4, written in the year of Rome 743,displays his military character in thebrightest colours. He rose to the highestcivil offices, such as praetor, aedile, andconsul. He commanded the Roman armyin Germany, and for his victories obtainedthe name of Germanicus. He was fa-.ther of the famous Germanicus by An-tonia the younger (see No. 42). He diedA. U. 745; the pride of the Claudian fa­mily, and the favourite of the Romanpeople. Augustus spoke his funeral pane­gyric, and in his speech offered up a fer­vent prayer to the gods, that all futureCaesars might resemble him, and that hisown death, whenever it should happen,might be equally honourable and as sin­cerely lamented.—Suet. Life of Claudius,». 1. Life of Tiberius, s. 4. Dio, booklv.Valerius Maximus, book iv. s. 3, No. 3.







OCR Output








254 APPENDIX TO BOOK XVI.


B. XVI.





appen. manders, and an interview at last tookplace. The result was an agreement ofsome kind, but what were the terms it isfruitless now to enquire. History has leftus in the dark. All that can be relatedwith certainty is, that Virginius began towithdraw his forces, and V index with hisarmy made his approach to the walls of thetown. The legions saw the motions of theenemy, and, imagining that they meant tooffer battle, resolved to begin the attack.The armies of the Upper and Lower Rhinewere not enured to discipline. Fierce, anddisdaining all controul, they wanted no or­ders from their general. A desperate en­gagement followed. The Gauls were un­prepared, but their courage braved everydanger. Both sides fought with impetu­ous fury; the Gauls resenting the treacheryof their enemies; the Romans stimulatedby their inveterate animosity. Blood andcarnage covered all the plain. The legionscut their way with dreadful slaughter, tillthe Gauls, having lost no less than twentythousand of their bravest troops, and see­ing inevitable destruction on every side,betook themselves to flight. Vindex ex­







OCR Output








OF THE ANNALS. 259





be loaded with corn, and, therefore, matter appen.
B. XVI.
of joy to the populace, who dreaded adearth of provisions. It may be easilyimagined what a turn their passions took,when it was known that the vessel broughta freight of sand (b) from the banks of theNile, to smooth the arena for wrestlers andgladiators. The disappointment excited,at first, a laugh of scorn and indignation;vulgar wit and scurrilous jests made Neroan object of contempt; and from con­tempt the transition to hatred, rage andfury, is always sure, and often instanta­neous. The public clamour was loud andviolent: the people, with one voice, wishedto be delivered from a monster; they la­mented the loss of Vindex; and the prae­torian guards, who had been the support ofa pernicious reign, began to murmur dis­content, and to shew manifest symptomsof disaffection.
Nymphidius and Tigellinus (c), who hadoften figured in scenes of public iniquity,were joint praefects of the praetorian camp.The former, as has been mentioned, was theson of a woman who prostituted her person


s 2







OCR Output








OF TACITUS. 15





" acquired during a service of £o many book" years.


The fact was, Corbulo, as we have stated,required a new commander for the specialpurpose of defending Armenia, and thenomination of Caesennius Partus was alreadyannounced. That officer arrived in a shorttime- A division of the forces was allot­ted to each commander. The fourth andtwelfth legions, with the fifth lately arrivedfrom Msesia, and a body of auxiliaries fromPbntus, from G alalia and Cappadocia,were put under the command of Paetus.The third, the sixth, and tenth legions, withthe forces of Syria, were assigned to Cor­bulo. Both commanders were to act inconcert, or to push the war in differentquarters, as the occasion might require.But the spirit of Corbulo could not brooka rival, and Paetus, though to be second incommand-sunder such a general would havefteen his highest glory, began to aspireabove himself. lie despised the fame ac­quired by Corbulo, declaring all his bestexploits to be no better than boasted vic­tories, without bloodshed, and without







OCR Output








204 APPENDIX TO BOOK XVI.





appen. the most splendid cities on the continent.Before he entered the confines of Armenia,Corbulo advanced to a meeting. In hisinterview with the Armenian monarch, hestill maintained that superior character,which he had fairly earned by his talentsand his virtues. Finding an extraordinarynumber of artificers in the prince's train,he resolved to act with due attention tothe interest as well as the dignity of theRoman name; and with that view, havingseparated such as were hired, he sufferednone but those who were a donation fromNero, to migrate to a foreign country.This behaviour gave no offence to Thi-dates. He took leave of Corbulo with thehighest esteem for his many virtues; and,though he entertained no kind of personalrespect for Nero, he thought the regal dia­dem claimed a return of gratitude; and,upon that principle, as soon as the capitalof Armenia was rebuilt, instead of callingit Artaxata, he gave it the flattering nameof Neronia.
VI. Rome having no war upon herhands, Nero, with airs of self-congratula*







OCR Output








OF THE ANNALS. 279





the emperor's name, could not be enter-appen.
- . , . , „ TT B.XVI.
tamed with any prospect or success. Heknew by certain intelligence that Vinius,Laco, and Icelus were the men (?) whostood highest in the esteem of Galba. Thescheme of supplanting them was, there­fore, abandoned; but it made way for aproject of the most daring ambition. Hewas resolved to depose the emperor, whomhe himself had created, and, by anotherrevolution, to seize the imperial dignity.To forward this design, he sent dispatchesto Galba (A:), stating the danger of enteringthe city at a time when the whole empirewas in convulsions. Rome, he said, wasin a ferment; Clodius Macer excited a re­bellion in Africa; the German armies weredisaffected, and the legions in Syria andJudaea prepared to dispute with the prae­torian guards the right of creating an em­peror. In the mean time a dark con­spiracy was formed. Nymphidius plannedhis measures with dispatch and vigour, de­termined to seize the supreme power. Hedrew into his league a number of bothsexes, all of great consideration and ex­tensive influence. Claudius Celsus was his







OCR Output
















OCR Output








192 APPENDIX TO BOOK XVI.


appen. fate. Demetrius, the friend of Thrasea,did not escape the notice of Nero. The


B. XVI


A.U.C.


819.' tyrant threatened instant execution. You


A.D


66.' may command it, said Demetrius; youthreaten me with death, and nature threat­ens you (J). The intrepid firmness of apoor philosopher, or perhaps the meannessof his condition, saved his life.
II. Cornutus, another philosopher,who professed the doctrines of the Platonicschool, had the misfortune to be consultedon the subject of a poem, which Nero hadprojected (a). He spoke his mind withhonest freedom, and for that offence wasimmediately banished. Nor was the crueltyof the prince appeased by the number thatfell a .sacrifice; he still thirsted for blood;but happily a scene of splendour, thenready to be displayed, engaged his atten­tion, and gave the people some respitefrom the rage of an insatiate tyrant. Tiri-dates, who, with the consent of his brotherVologeses, the Parthian king, had agreedwith Corbulo to undertake a journey toRome (0), in order there to receive theregal diadem from the hand of the em­







OCR Output








124 THE ANNALS OF TACITUS.


book his opinion, had risen above the condi­tion of human nature, and was, therefore,entitled to religious worship. This motionwas afterwards understood to portend no­thing less than the death of Nero; sinceit was a settled rule, that divine honoursshould never be paid to the emperor, tillhe ceased to be mortal (c).





THE END OF THE FIFTEENTH BOOK.


i







OCR Output













OCR Output








GENEALOGICAL TABLE OF THE CLESARS. 35J


No.
Junius Silanus, husband of ^Emilia Le-
pida 56
Junius Silanus, son of Junius Silanus . 57Junius Silanus Torquatus, son of Junius
Silanus 61 ■
L.
Lepida, see Emilia Lepida.
Lepida, see Domitia Lepida.
Lepida, the wife of Cassius ... 614
Livia, wife of Augustus . 66
Livia, wife of Caius Caesar and Drusus
Cassar ,71
Livia Orestilla, wife of Caligula . . 88Lollia Paulina, wife of Caligula . . 89Lucius Caesar, son of Agrippa . . 49
M.
Marcella the elder, sister of M. Marcellus 20Marcella the younger, sister of M. Mar­cellus . . .... 27
Marcellus, see Claudius Marcellus.
Marcus Marcellus, son of Octavia . . 18
Messala, see Valerius Messala.
Messala, see Valerius Messala Barbatus,
Messalina, see Statilia Messalina.
Messalina, see Valeria Messalina.
Milonia Cassonia, wife of Caligula . . Q0







OCR Output








32101 075725208





J







OCR Output








50 THE ANNALS


book would present to the Roman people a new
unro scene of glory. It was then settled as a
«i6.' preliminary article, that Tiridates should
(is. lay down the regal diadem at the foot of
Nero's statue, and never again resume it,
till delivered to him by the hand of the
emperor. The parties embraced each other,
and the convention ended.


In a few days afterwards the two armieswere drawn out with great military pomp.On one side stood the Parthian cavalry,ranged in battalions, with all the pride ofeastern magnificence. The Roman legionsappeared on the opposite ground, theeagles glittering to the eye, the bannersdisplayed, and the images of the gods, inregular order, forming a kind of temple.In the centre stood a tribunal, and upon ita currule chair supporting the statue ofNero. Tiridates approached. Having im­molated victims with the usual rites, hetook the diadem from his brow, and laid itat the foot of the statue. The spectatorsgazed with earnest ardour, and every bosomheaved with mixed emotions. The placewhere the legions were besieged and forced


-







OCR Output








OF TACITUS. .99


" Let your friends," they said, " assemble book" in a body; let them stand forth in your1


A.U C
cause, and they will be joined by num- sis. *


" bers. The fame of an impending revo-" lution would excite a general spirit; and" fame in great undertakings has been often" known to decide the event. Nero will" be taken by surprise; on his part no" measures are concerted. In sudden" commotions the bravest are often struck" with terror; and if courage may be thus" overpowered, what will be the case of a'* theatrical emperor, a scenic performer, a" vile comedian, assisted by Tigellinus and" his band of harlots ? In all great enter-" prises the attempt appears impracticable" to little minds; but the brave and valiant" know that to dare is to conquer. In a" plot, in which numbers were embarked," the silence of all could not be expected." The mind will waver, and the body will" shrink from pain. There is no secret so" deeply laid but bribery will draw it forth," or cruelty can extort it. The guards in" a short time might seize Piso himself," and drag him to an ignominious death." How much more glorious to fall bravely


A.D.65.


11 2







OCR Output








OF TACITUS. 49


A.U. C,8i6.A.D.


and with him Vivianus Annius, son-in- book
XV.
law to Corbulo, but not yet of senatorianage (Z>), though, in the absence of his su- 8i6perior officer, he was appointed to com- 63inand the fifth legion, arrived in the campof Tiridates, in the character of hostages,chosen, not only to remove from the mindof the prince all suspicion, but at the sametime to do him honour. The Parthian andthe Roman general proceeded to the inter­view, each attended by twenty horsemen.As soon as they drew near, Tiridates leapedfrom his horse. Corbulo returned the com­pliment. They advanced on foot, and tookeach other by the hand.
XXIX. The Roman general addressedthe prince. He praised the judgment of ayoung man, who had the moderation toprefer pacific measures to the calamities ofwar. Tiridates expatiated on the splen­dour of his illustrious line, and then takinga milder tone, agreed to set out on a journeyto Rome. In a juncture when the affairsof Parthia were in a flourishing state, aprince, descended from the Arsacideshumbling himself before the emperor,
VOL. IV. E







OCR Output








228 APPENDIX TO BOOK XVI.


appen. silent fortitude, that no ill consequence*
B.XVI. ' *i ■
v^v^ followed. On the forty-seventh day of the82o- siege, the inhabitants still refusing to ca-<n- pitulate, the signal was given for a generalassault. Titus, at the head of a chosenband, scaled the walls, and was the firstthat entered the town. In that dreadfulcrisis it does not appear that Josephus ei­ther faced the danger, or discharged thefunctions of a general officer. Except thewomen and children, and about twelvehundred prisoners, all who were found inthe town died in one general carnage.Josephus was afterwards found concealedin a cave. Vespasian spaTed his life, andthe historian survived to write an accountof the siege, intermixed, indeed, with someromantic circumstances, but containingvarious matter for the information of pos­terity. The city* of Tarichaea(/), whichhad been the receptacle of a turbulent andseditious rabble from all sides of the coun­try, was compelled, after an obstinate re­sistance, to open her gates to Titus. Ves­pasian ordered twelve hundred of the mostfierce incendiaries to be put to death, as a







OCR Output








HO THE ANNALS


book LXV. A report was at that time cur-


XV.


rent at Rome, that Subrius Flavius and'sis. ' several centurions held a private meeting,«5.' with the knowledge and consent of Seneca,and there resolved to open a new and un­expected scene. The blow for liberty wasto be struck in the name of Piso, andas soon as the world was freed from thetyranny of Nero, Piso was to be the nextvictim, in order to make way for Seneca,who, for his virtues, was to be raised tothe highest elevation, with an air of inno*cence, and of a man unconscious of theplot. The very words of Flavius were re­ported among the people. He is supposedto have said, " What good end will it an-" swer to depose a minstrel, if we placeu a tragedian in his room?" The 'factwas, Nero played on his guitar, and Pisotrod the stage in the buskin of tragedy.
LXVI. The part, which the military menhad taken in the conspiracy, did not longremain a secret. The double game playedby Fenius Rums, at first a confederate inthe plot, and then a judge pronouncingsentence on his accomplices, provoked the







OCR Output








OF TACITUS. 149





Antistius judged that such a concourse bookcould not be without reasons of importantconsequence. lie found that Pammenesreceived an annual pension from Anteius;a man, on account of his attachment toAgrippina, obnoxious to the emperor, andby his riches likely to tempt the avarice ofa prince, who had already cut off some ofthe most opulent and illustrious men inRome.
Antistius kept a watchful eye upon hisnew friend. He intercepted letters fromAnteius, and gained access to other secretpapers, in which was contained a calcula­tion of the nativity of Anteius, with manyparticulars relating to the birth and futurefortune of Ostorius Scapula (6). ArmedAvith these materials, he represented, byletters to Nero, that he had discoveries ofthe first importance, involving even thesafety of the prince, and, if he might revisitRome for a few days, the whole should bebrought to light, with all the machinationsof Anteius and Ostorius Scapula, who,beyond all doubt, were engaged in a trea­sonable design, and had been prying into







OCR Output








THE ANNALS





Arulenus Rusticus (a) assisted at thisconsultation. He was, at that time, a tri­bune of the people; a young man of sen­timent, eager to be in action, and warmwith the love of glory. He offered to in­terpose, by his tribunitian authority, toprevent a decree of the senate. " For-" bear," said Thrasea, " and learn, young" man, to restrain this impetuous ar-" dour. By a rash opposition you cannot" save your friend, and you may bring" down ruin on yourself. For me, I have" lived my days; my course is well nigh" finished; it now remains, that I reach" the goal with undiminished honour. As" to you, my friend, you have but lately" entered the career of civil dignities. Life" is before you, and you have not as yet" pledged yourself to the public. Ere you" take a decided part, it will behove you" to consider well the times upon which" you are fallen, and the principles which4* you mean to avow." Having thus de­clared his sentiments, he gave no opinionconcerning the propriety of appearing inthe senate, but reserved the question forhis own private meditation.







OCR Output








ANNALS
TACITUS.


I. DURING these transactions, VoIo-book
XV*
geses, king of the Parthians, began tov^oraise new commotions in the East. The hi.'success of Corbulo alarmed his jealousy; «e."he saw, with wounded pride, the defeatof his brother, Tiridates; and, in his room,Tigranes, an alien prince (a), seated onthe throne of Armenia. The honour of theArsacides was tarnished by these events,and he was determined to restore its formerlustre. But the struggle was to be with agreat and powerful empire. Treaties ofalliance, long in force and long respectedby the two nations, held him in suspense.By nature anxious and irresolute, he







OCR Output








GENEALOGICAL TABLED 333


62. Junia Calvina, daughter of Ju­nius Silanus and iEmilia Lepida. Shewas married to Vitellius, who was after­wards emperor. Distinguished by herbeauty and illustrious birth, she preservedan; Unblemished character, but" provokedher enemies by a fierce and uncomplyingspirit. By the malice and insidious arts ofAgrippina the younger, she was banishedout of Italy, but recalled by Nero A, U.812. She lived to the time of Vespasian.—Tacit. Annal. xii. s. 4 and 8. Annal. xiv.g. 12. Suet. Life of Vesp. s. 23.
63. Vitellius, son of Lucius Vitelliusthe censor and his wife Sextilia. He mar­ried Junia Calvina, and was consul A. U.801. Upon some dissension between himand his wife, a divorce took place sometime before A. U. 802.—Tacit. Annal. xi.s. 23. Annal. xii. s. 4. Suet. Life of Vi­tellius, s. 3 and 18.
; • ■ • i
64. Lepida, daughter of Junius Silanusand iEmilia Lepida. She was married toCaius Cassius, governor of Syria. An ac­cusation alleging various crimes was sub-


y 2







OCR Output








324 GENEALOGICAL TABLE.


orned against her, but referred to the judg­ment of Nero, A. U. 818.—Tacit. Annal.xvi. s. 8, 9-
65. Caius Cassius, governor of Syria,and husband of Lepida. He was cele­brated for his superior knowledge of thelaws; but being charged with having,among the images of his ancestors, thepicture or statue of the famous Cassius,with an inscription, To the Chief of Party,he was banished to the island of Sardinia,,A. U. 818.—Tacit. Annal. xii. s. 11,12,Annal. xvi. s. 8, 9-
66. Livia, called also Livia Dru-silla, and, after the death of Augustus,Julia Augusta. She was the daughterof Livius Drusus Claudianus. Her firsthusband was Tiberius Claudius Nero;being divorced from him, she married Au­gustus A. U. 716. A woman of illustriousbirth; elegant in her form and manners;of high ambition, and an overbearing spi­rit. She had the skill to manage the gen-He arts of Augustus, and the dark dissi­mulation of Tiberius; a complying and







OCR Output











y







OCR Output








OF THE ANNALS. 2?$


pass without a train of awful prognostics, appen.
B XVI
Rivers were said to have changed their v--v-»Jcourse, and to have flowed in a new direction sai. '
A D
to their fountain head; a tree, that had «8.stood for ages, coeval with the foundationof Rome, fell suddenly to the ground; th#laurel, planted by Livia, which had spreadwith such prodigious increase, that in everytriumph it supplied the Caesars with theirvictorious wreaths, withered at the root; thetemple of the Caesars being struck withlightning, the heads of all the statues tum­bled down at once; and the marble scep­tre fell from the hands of Augustus. Bythese and such like denunciations the willof the gods was supposed to be revealed,and the populace with frantic joy hailedthe auspicious aera of returning liberty.But no public spirit remained; every vir­tue was extinguished. A people who hadbeen taught to crouch under the yoke ofbondage, thought no more of a free con­stitution. With the usual inconstancy ofa fickle multitude, they relapsed into theirhabitual servitude;, and in a strain of fran­tic rapture began to roar for a new master.The name of Galba echoed through thfc


t2







OCR Output








160 THE ANNALS





ook and his patron, who had no concern in thebusiness, was put to death.
XXI. Nero had not yet satiated his vin­dictive fury. He had spilt the best bloodin Rome, and now, in the persons of PectusThrasea and Bareas Soranus, he hoped todestroy virtue itself. His rancour to thosetwo illustrious citizens had been long work­ing in his heart. Thrasea, in particular,was the devoted object, and various mo­tives conspired against him. When thebusiness of Agrippina (a) was brought be­fore the senate, it will be in the memory ofthe reader, that Thrasea withdrew from the .debate. Afterwards, in the youthful sports,called juvenales, he seldom attended,and never with the alacrity which was ex­pected. This cold indifference was themore grating to the prince, as Thrasea, atPadua, his native city, not only assisted atthe games of the c est us, originally insti­tuted by Antenor, the fugitive from Troy,but also performed in the habit of a tra­gedian. It was further remembered, that,when Antistius, the praetor, was in danger







OCR Output








OF THE ANNALS. 2(57


round in wild despair, and asked his re-APPEx.maming companions, Is there no lurking-u-v—>place ? no safe recess, where I may have mi. '
■ AD
time to consider what is to be done ? Phaon, cs."his freedman, proposed to conduct him toan obscure villa (i), which he held in hispossession, at the distance of about fourmiles from Rome.
Nero embraced the offer. There wasno time to be lost. He went forth in allhis wretchedness; without a shoe to hisfeet; nothing on him but his close tunic;no outside garment; and no imperial robe.In order to disguise himself, he snatchedan old rusty cloak, and, throwing it overhis shoulders, covered his head, and helda handkerchief before his face. In thatcondition he mounted his horse, submit­ting with a dastard spirit to an ignomini­ous flight, without any attendants exceptPhaon, the freedman; Epaphroditus, thesecretary; and Sporus, the eunuch, withanother, whose name Aurelius Victor sayswas Neophytus. In this manner Neropassed the last of his nights. At the dawnof day, the praetorian guards deserted their







OCR Output








282 APPENDIX TO BOOK XVI.





appfn. " stage, or driven a curricle in the race ?" And yet, notwithstanding all the flagi­tious deeds of that hardened monster, inspite of all his vices, we supported him," blushing indeed for his follies, and smart-" ing under his tyranny. We adhered to" him with fidelity ; and if, in the end, we" thought fit to create another emperor," Nymphidius was the author of that mea-" sure. By his artifices we were taught" to believe that Nero deserted* us first," and fled to Egypt. We concluded that" he had abdicated, and, by consequence," what we did was an act of necessity." And what is our design at present ? What" do we wish ? What do we aim at ? Must" Galba fall a sacrifice to appease the" manes of Nero ? Shall a descendant from" the family of the Servii; a relation of" Quintus Catulus, and by ties of affinity" connected with Livia (p), the wife of" Augustus ; say, my fellow soldiers, shall" such a man be deposed and murdered, to" make way for the son of Nymphidia ?" It was his treachery, his base ingratitude" that occasioned the death of Nero : let" him suffer the justice due to his crime;







OCR Output








CONTENTS.


BOOK XV. ■ I


I. ARMENIA invaded by Vologeses, king of Parthia.He is repulsed by the spirit and good conduct ofCorbulo. VI. Ctesennius Ptetus sent by Nero with aspecial commission to take upon him the sole commandin Armenia-. His rashness, vanity, and want ofmili-taiy skilL He is besieged with his legions. Corbulomarches to his relief, but too late. Patus obliged tosurrender. XVIII. Trophies of victory decreed atjRome, while the war is still depending. XIX. De­bates in ihe senate concerning fictitious- adoptions.XXIII. Nero has a daughter by Poppaa. His im­moderate jay. Public monuments erected, but in vain.The child dies within four months; is deified, and atemple is built to her. XXIV. A deputation from theParthians, claiming a right to retain Armenia: theambassadors dismissed without success. The conductof the war committed to Corbulo. He enters Armeniaa second time. The Parthians struck with terror.A treaty ensues, arid the Parthians agree to terms ofpeace. Tiridates is to deposit the diadem at the foot ofNero's statue, and never resume it without the consentof Nero. XXXII. The cities on the coast near the'Alps admitted to the privileges of Latium. Nerosings on ihe public stage at Naples. His violent ex­cesses in all kinds of riat and debauchery. XXXV.Torquatus Silanus compelled to put an end to.his life.XXXVIII. Rome set on fire, and Nero suspected ofbeing author of the conflagration. He seizes the ruinsto his own use, and builds a magnificent palace. Thechristians accused of being the incendiaries, and, though


B 2







OCR Output








■284 APPENDIX TO BOOK XVI.





appen. cloak his design. He commended the xeal
T» YV 1 ^
of the praetorians, and assured them thathe, and his followers, were the avowedfriends of Galba. The sentinels openedthe gates. Nymphidius entered with someof his friends: the pass was immediatelysecured; and the soldiers attacked himsword in hand. He endeavoured to savehimself in a tent, but was pursued, andmassacred on the spot. His body, on thefollowing day, was dragged through thecamp, a spectacle for public view. Suchwas the end of a low-born base incendiary,who saw, that, in the general profligacy ofthe times, the weak were the willing dupesof the wicked. By forming a league withthe most abandoned, he flattered himself,that the lowest of mankind, who in bettertimes could not hope to be entrusted withthe rank of a common centurion, mightboldly aspire to make himself master ofthe Roman empire.
XVI. An account of all that passed wasconveyed to Galba with incredible speed.By his order, all, who were suspected oftaking a part in the mad projects of







OCR Output








OF THE ANNALS. 2 65


to him in the hour of distress, except Spo- appkw.
l B.XVI.
rus, the eunuch; Phaon (/'), an enfran- v-n'—>
A. I). C
cliised slave; and Epaphroditus, his secre- »ii.tarj. He gave orders to the soldiers on es.duty, to proceed with all expedition to Os-tia, and prepare a ship, that he might em­bark for Egypt. The men were not willingto obey. One of them asked him in halfa line (g) from Virgil, " Is it then so wretch-" ed a thing to die ?" He went to the Ser-vilian gardens, carrying with him a vial ofswift-speeding poison, which had been pre­pared by the well-known (h) Locusta; buthis resolution failed. He returned to hischamber, and threw himself on his bed.The agitations of his mind allowed no rest.He started up, and called for some friendlyhand to end his wretched being. That of­fice no one was willing to perform, and hehimself wanted fortitude. Driven to thelast despair, and frantic with remorse andfear, he cried out in doleful accents, " My" friends desert me, and I cannot find an" enemy." He rushed forth from his pa­lace, as if with intent to throw himself intothe Tiber. He changed his mind, andthought of flying into Spain, there to sur-







OCR Output








402 NOTES ON THE APPENDIX TO THE


(z) For Vesontium, see the Geographical Table.
(aa) Otho, afterwards emperor, was appointed go­vernor of Lusitania, that Nero might secure Poppaea tohimself. Annals, xiii. s. 46. Plutarch's Life of Galba.
(bb) For Clunia, see the Geographical Table.
Section XIII.
(a) This incident is told by Suetonius, in Nero, s. 4}.
(b) This cargo of sand, with the popular discontentsthat followed, is stated by Suetonius, in Nero, s. 45.See Pliny, lib. xxxv. s. 13.
(c) For Nymphidius, see Annals xv. s. 72. For Ti-gellinus, Annals, xiv. s. 57; and xv. s. 37.
(d) The wild and desperate projects conceived byNero, in his frantic moments, and brought to light by afavourite eunuch, are recorded by Suetonius, in Nero,s. 43.
(e) The line in the OZdipus of Sophocles is,
Oave'v p-.a.vury£ cvyyxpos, pyryg, Tranj.p.
(f) Phaon's fidelity is mentioned by Suetonius, in.Nero, s. 48.
CgJ The passage in Virgil,
Usque adeone mori miserum est ?
^Eneid. xii. ver. 646.
(h) Locusta has been mentioned, Annals, xiii. s. 15.Suetonius says, that Nero received a dose of poison fromLocusta, which he carried with him into the Serviliangardens. Not having courage to use it, he endeavouredto find Spicillus, the gladiator, or some person, to killhim. In that distress he cried out, Nee amicum habeOyliec inimicum. Sueton. in Nero, s. 47.
ft J Suetonius relates this fact, s. 48. Brotier says,Phaon's villa is now called, La Serpentara.







OCR Output








OF TACITUS. 139


of a man brooding mischief; a fierce re- book
. XVI-
publican, who meditated another civil war, wv-*/
and a revolt from the house of Caesar. But sis.
A. D.
to revive the name of a daring factious 65-chief was not sufficient for the purposes ofa turbulent incendiary: he was chargedwith seducing Lucius Silanus, a youth de­scended from an illustrious line, bold, am­bitious, enterprising, and in the hands ofill designing men a fit tool to spread theflame of rebellion.
VIII. Silanus (a) was no less an ob­ject of Nero's hatred. It was urged againsthim, as had been formerly done in the caseof his uncle Torquatus, that he affected thestyle of imperial dignity, and had in hishousehold train his mock-treasurers, hisauditors of accounts, and his secretaries ofstate. Nothing could be more destitute ofall foundation. Silanus saw the tyrannyof those disastrous times, and from the fateof his uncle received a lesson of prudence.Lepida (b), the wife of Cassius, and aunt of•Silanus, was also doomed to fall a sacrificeto the unrelenting fury of the prince. In­formers were suborned to accuse her of in-







OCR Output








GENEALOGICAL TABLE. 313


It was said of him, that he found the cityof Rome made with brick, and he changedit to marble. Though deified, even duringhis life in some parts of the empire, he wastaught by various incidents, that he was nomore than man.—See Suet. Life of Angus-tus. Tacit, book i. of the Annals; bookxiii. s. 6. Florus, book iv. chap. xii. Au-reliusVictor, chap. i. Pliny, book vii. s. 45.Seneca, de Consolatione, 34.
Inscriptions on Ancient Medals z


sms■


Before his elevation to the supremepower, Octavius Casar, Son of the deifiedJulius, Imperator, Triumvir for the Purposeof restoring the Commonwealth, Consul, theAssert or of public Liberty.
After his accession to the empire, Cce­sar, Augustus, Son of the deified Julius Cce­sar, Imperator, Consul, chief Pontiff, and,with the tribunitian Power, Father of hisCountry.
After his death, Divus Augustus, thedeified Augustus.


S







OCR Output













OCR Output








SIXTEENTH BOOK OF THE ANNALS. 393


non limit enim Mi se exptrirt. Seneca de Providentia,cap. iii.
Section II.
(a) Cornutus was the friend and preceptor of Perssusthe poet. '
Teneros tu suscipis annos
Socratico, Cornute, sinu.
Sat. v. ver. 36.
Crevier, in the Lives of the Emperors, tells us, thatNero intended to write the Roman History in verse, andin four hundred books. That will be too many, saidCornutus ; nobody will read them. In answer, he wastold, that Chrysippus had written a great many more.Yes, replied Cornutus, but the difference between theauthors is very great. He escaped with his life, butwas banished. Crevier's Roman Emperors, vol. iv. p.
(b) See Annals, xv. s. 29 and 30.
(c) Vologeses, king of Parthia, and Pacorus king ofMedia, were brothers to Tiridates. Monobazus waskinir of the Adiabenians.
(d) See Annals, xv. s. 31.
(e) See the Geographical Table.
(f) For Patrobius, see Pliny, lib. xxxv. s. xiii.
(g) The skill in archery, which Tiridates displayed onthe occasion, is related by Dio.
Section III.
(a) The appearance of Tiridates before the Romanpeople, and the prodigious magnificence of that publicspectacle, are-described by Suetonius, in Nero, s. 13.
(b) Suetonius, S. 13. See also Dio, lib. Ixiii.





'







OCR Output








OF TACITUS. 107


'** leave behind us an example-of equal B£°*


ait


constancy; but the glory will be all your'
, A. U. C.
own. sis.
a. a.


These words were no sooner uttered, thanthe veins of both their arms were opened.At Seneca's time of life the blood was slowand languid. The decay of nature, andthe impoverishing diet (a) to which he hadused himself, left him in a feeble condition.He ordered the vessels1 of his legs and jointsto be punct red. After that operation, hebegan to labour with excruciating pains.liest his sufferings should overpower theconstancy of his wife, or the sight of herafflictions prove too much for his ownsensibility, he persuaded her to retire intoanother room. His eloquence still con­tinued to flow with its usual purity. Hecalled for his secretaries, and dictated,while life was ebbing away, that farewelldiscourse, which has been published, andis in every body's hands. I will not injurehis last words by giving the substance inanother form.
LXIV. Neeo had conceived no an-







OCR Output








SIXTEENTH BOOK OF THE ANNALS. 385


(b) -This was Scevinus the conspirator, for whom see
Annals, Xv. s. 49, 64, and 56.
. . > t- « }. '• •
Section XIX. /!
(a) This description of Nero and his flagitious courthas been supposed by some critics to be the work calledPctronii Arbitri Satyricon; but this, it is evident, mustbe a gross mistake. The Sutijricon is a long work, andmust have been written at leisure. It contains nothingthat relates to the new modes of vice, or the secret prac­tices of Nero's cotirt. It glances often at the imbecilityof Claudius, and presents a variety of miscellaneous mat­ter, palpably the composition of a«iind at ease. Whatwas sent to Nero must have been a short performance,such as a man of genius might dispatch in a few hours.How should the passages, which have entitled Petroniusto be ranked with the critics of antiquity, find a place inthe narrative of a dying man ?
i Section XXX.
(a) When the death of Agrippina, Nero's mother,was announced to the senate, and the fathers, with theifusual spirit of adulation, Were preparing their decreeson that occasion, Thrasea rose from his seat and left thehouse. Annals xiv. s. 12.
(h) See Annals, xiv. s. 48.
(c) For Cossutiarius Capito, a man of infamous cha­racter, see Annals, xiii. s. 33.
Section XXII.. (a) The oath of fidelity was changed at differenttimes. At first it was a solemn obligation to preservethe laws. Dio relates, that on the kalends of January,A. U. C. 712, the magistrates swore on the acts of Juliusvol. iv. c c







OCR Output













OCR Output








40 THE ANNALS


book gusta, and gave the same title to her mo-v-*-y*»j ther. The child was brought into the world
A.V.C. .
8i6.' at Antiura, where Nero himself was born.
A. D.
ea- The senate, before the birth, had offeredvows to the gods for the safe delivery ofPoppaea. They fulfilled their obligations,and voted additional honours. Days ofsupplication were appointed: a temple wasvoted to the goddess of fecundity; athleticsports were instituted on the model of thereligious games practised at Antium; goldenstatues to the two goddesses of fortune (a)were to be erected on the throne of Ju­piter Capitolinus; and in honour of theClaudian and Domitian families (li) Cir-eensian games were to be celebrated atAntium, in imitation of the public specta­cles exhibited at Bovillae to commemoratethe Julian race. But these honours wereof short duration: the infant died in lessthan four months, and the monuments ofhuman vanity faded away. But- newmodes of flattery were soon displayed: thechild was canonized for a goddess; atemple was decreed to her, with an altar,a bed of state, a priest, and religious cere­monies.







OCR Output








OF TACITUS. 87


he had acquired under the care of CaiussooKCassius (b), who had trained him from his v*-~<**i
. A. U C
youth, and formed his mind to every thing m.'great and honourable. A man thus dis- «.'"tinguished might aspire to the imperial dig­nity. All who stood aloof from the con­spiracy would be ready to second his am­bition, and, most probably, would be join­ed by others, whom the fate of a devotedprince, cut off by treachery, might touchwith compassion. Piso was supposed tohave another secret motive: he knew thegenius and the ardent spirit of Vestinus,the consul. A man of his character mightthink of restoring the old republic, or befor choosing another emperor, to shewmankind that the sovereign power was agift to be disposed of according to his willand pleasure. Vestinus, in fact, had noshare in the conspiracy, though he wasafterwards charged as an accomplice, and,under that pretence, doomed to death bythe unappeasable malice and the crueltyof Nero,
LIII. At length the conspirators fixedtheir day; They chose the time of the







OCR Output








310 GENEALOGICAL TABLE.


A. U. 818.—Suet. Life of Nero, s. 35. Ta­cit. Annal■ xv. s. 68.
40. Domitia, daughter of Antonia the.elder by Lucius iEnobarbus; aunt to Ne-rp, and the wife of Passienus Crispus. Ne­ro destroyed her by poison A. 17. 812.—Tacit. Annal. xiii. s. 19, 21. Quintilian,book vi. s. 1.
For Passienus Crispus, see No. 94.•
41. Caius Appius Junius Silanus.He was governor of Spain. By the desireof Claudius he married Domitia Lepida,the mother of Messalina, and was soonafter put to death by order of that empe­ror, A. U. 795.—Dio Cassius, book lx.
42. Antonia the younger, seconddaughter of Anthony the triumvir by Oc-tavia sister to Augustus. She married Ne­ro Drusus, the brother of Tiberius, and wasthe mother of Germanicus; a woman dis­tinguished by her beauty, and no less byher virtue. She survived Drusus, her hus­band, many years, leading an exemplary










OCR Output








OF TACITUS. 55


in the neighbourhood, nocked together, b oo k


XV.


attracted by the novelty of a spectacle sovery extraordinary. All who followed the 8i7.prince, to pay their court, or as persons «*•belonging to his train, attended on the oc­casion. The menial servants, and even thecommon soldiers, were admitted to enjoythe pleasures of the day.
XXXIV. The theatre, of course, wascrowded. An accident happened, whichmen in general considered as an evil omen:with the emperor it passed for a certainsign of the favour and protection of thegods. As soon as the audience dispersed,the theatre tumbled to pieces. No othermischief followed. Nero seized the op­portunity to compose hymns of gratitude.He sung them himself, celebrating withmelodious airs his happy escape from theruin. Being noAv determined to cross theAdriatic, he stopt at Beneventum. Atthat place Vatinius entertained him with ashew of gladiators. Of all the detestablecharacters that disgraced the court ofNero, this man was the most pernicious.He was bred up in a shoe-maker's stall,







OCR Output











'


GENEALOGICAL TABLE


'


•


OF


THE C^SARS.







OCR Output








FIFTEENTH BOOK OF THE ANNALS. 377


Et patulse nares ; sudor rubet: omnia plenisMembra fluunt venis: totum est pro vulnere corpus.
Pharsal. ix. ver. 811.
Section LXXL
(a) -Laurel is called by Pliny the elder, the door­keeper of the Caesars: Janitrix Casarum. Lib. xv. s. 30.
fbj Virginius was a rhetorician, and the preceptor ofPerseus, the satirist; as may be seen in the Life of Per­seus.
(c) Musonius Rufus was a teacher of philosophy. SeeAnnals, xiv. s. 59.
Section LXXII.
(a) Petronius Turpilianus was consul, as mentioned,book xiv. s. 2.9.
(b) Cocceius Nerva, afterwards emperor.
(c) For Nymphidius, see Appendix to Annals, xvi. 9.13 : and see the History, book i. s. 5.
Section LXXIII.
(a) Seneca, the philosopher, had two brothers;namely, Annseus Mela, the father of Lucan, and An-naeus Novatus, who was afterwards adopted by Gallio,and took that name. For the death of Mela, see Annals,xvi. s. 17.
Section LXXTV.
(a) The month of April was called Neronius, MayClaudius, and June Germanicus. Annals, xvi. s. 12. ,
(b) For an account of Vindex, see the Appendix toAnnals, xvi. p. 241.
(c) Augustus was deified by the poets, and in the pro­vinces ; but no altars were erected to him at Romeduring his life.







OCR Output








404 NOTES ON THE APPENDIX TO THE


that Shakespear is a great moral teacher : let them heartheir own Boileau :
Quoi! ce peuple aveugle en son crime,Qui prenant son roi pour victime,Fit du trone un theatre arFreux;Pense-t-il que le Ciel, compliceD'un si funeste sacrifice,N'a pour lui ni foudre ni feux ?
(I) The particulars of Nero's flight, above related^and those that follow, are told by Suetonius, in Nero,s. 43.
(m) He took some water out of a ditch and drank it,saying, Heec est Neronis decocta. Being taken into thehouse, creeping on his hands and knees through a hole thatwas made for him, he lay on a mean bed, with a tatteredcoverlet thrown over it, and being both hungry andthirsty, he refused some coarse bread that was broughtto him, but drank a little warm water. Quadrupes permi:■ ustias effossiv aaverna rttceptus in proximam cell&m,decubuit super ledum modkelld culcitd et vetere palliostrata instructum. Fameque interim et siti interpellante,panem quidem sordidum oblatum aspernatus est, aquaaiiteni tepida aliquantidum bibit. Suet- in Neron. s. 48.
(n) Suetonius, s. 49.
(o) Qualis artifex pereo ! Suet. s. 49, where the fol­lowing circumstances are related.
CpJ The line in Homer is,
Ivtfwv [j! wxvTfoSwv b[j<$) xAu7ro; a a.<a /3aAAs t.
(q) He said to the centurion, Sero: et htec est fides ?Those were his last words. See the description of his
ghastly figure, Suet. s. 49.







OCR Output








168 THE ANNALS


XVI.





book « lime of virtue. Every sentiment from" the mouth of Thrasea would rise superior" to humanity, and sound to the fathers as-" if some god addressed them. Even the" heart of Nero might for once relent." Should it happen otherwise; should his" obdurate nature still persist; posterity" would crown with immortal glory the un-" daunted citizen, who distinguished him-" self from those unhappy victims, who" bowed their necks to the tyrant's stroke,** and crept in silence to their graves."
XXVI. Others were of a differentopinion, convinced that his best plan wouldbe to wait the issue at his own house.They spoke of Thrasea himself and thedignity of his character in the highestterms, but they dreaded that his adversa­ries would pour forth a torrent of insolenceand opprobrious language. " They desired'* that he would not suffer his ear to be" wounded with scurrility and vile abuse*** Cossutianus and Eprius Marcellus were*' not the only. enemies of virtue: thereM were others, whose brutal rage might in-** cite them to outrage, and even violence







OCR Output








CONTENTS.


THE death of Thrasea, Soranus, and Servilia. Thebanishment of Paconius and Helvidius. II. Tiridatcsarrives at Naples, and thence proceeds with Nero toPuteoli. Nero exposes himsef as a singer. Tiridateskills a wild beast. III. Tiridates and Nero arrive atBorne. The city illuminated the night before thecoronation. The kingdom of Armenia granted to him.IV. The speech of Tiridates. Nero, to gain the ap­plause of the eastern prince, turns coachman, player,and minstrel. He is glad to find a number of theeastern Magi in the train of Tiridates, and endeavoursto become master of their art, but finds the whole tobe an imposture. V. Corbulo meets Tiridates on his■way back to Armenia. VI. Nero shuts the temple ofJanus, but proposes to open it again for four differentwars; but amidst his projects, deputies arrive fromGreece, offering the prize for song and the guitar.Nero gives them a favourable reception. He was onthe point of declaring war against the Jews; but hechanges his purpose, and makes great preparationsagainst the Aithiopians, and the Albanians. Butchanging his mind a second time, he sets out for Greecewith a prodigious retinue. VII. Account of Nerd'sconduct in Greece. He plays a variety of characterson the public stage. He gains eighteen hundred laurelcrowns for his victories in music. The senate returns







OCR Output








OF TACITUS. 121


tended to be of higher origin. He called Boothimself the son of Caligula. His large v-*-vOstature, and the stern cast of his countcn- "tlfa'nce, bore some resemblance to that em- ^*'peror; and, in fact, as Caligula was neverdelicate in the choice of his mistresses, butwas known to share the embraces of com­mon harlots, it is possible that he might,on some occasion, indulge his passion withthe mother of Nymphidius.
LXXIII. The senate being assembled,Nero delivered a speech on the subject ofthe late transactions, and, for the informa­tion of the people, issued a proclamation,with a statement of the evidence. againstthe conspirators, and their own confession.The clamours of the public made this ex­pedient necessary. While the executionswere going on, the public voice was loudand violent against Nero, the insatiatetyrant, who was daily sacrificing to hiscruelty, or his fears, the lives of innocentand illustrious men. That a plot wasactually formed; that it was conductedwith resolution, and in the end was totallydefeated, no man, who made it his business







OCR Output








OF TACITUS. 57


"man name. Protection is due to our book" allies; but let us remember, that, to otnJ
A. C C.
44 adorn our names, we are not to depend on «ii
' A. o.
" the voice of foreign nations. Our fellow- «•44 citizens are the best judges of our con-" duct.


XXI. ** The old republic was not con-
" tent with sending jmetors and consuls to
44 administer the provinces. Men who su-
" stained no public character were often
" commissioned to visit the remotest colo-
" nies, in order to report the condition of
** each, and the temper with which the
" people submitted to the authority of
44 government. By the judgment of indi-
** viduals whole nations were kept in awe.
" What is our practice now ? We pay court
" to the colonies; we flatter tlie provinces,
" and, by the influence of some powerful
44 leader, we receive public thanks for our
44 administration. In like manner, accusa-
44 tions are framed at the "will and pleasure
44 of some overgrown provincial. Let the
44 right of complaining still remain; and, by
44 exercising that right, let the provinces
44 shew their importance; but let them rrot,







OCR Output








300 GENEALOGICAL TABLE.


related to Caesar the dictator, he was al­ways an enemy to his cause.—Suet. Life ofJul. Caes. s. 27.
18. Marcus Marcellus, son of Oc-tavia, the sister of Augustus, and, conse­quently, nephew to Augustus. A youthof great expectation, highly esteemed byhis uncle, and by him intended to be nextin succession to the imperial dignity. Hedied prematurely A. U. 731. Augustuspaid distinguished honours to his memory,and Virgil has made him immortal.—Ta­cit. Annal.ii. s. 41. Annal. hi. s. 64. Virgil,JEneid vi. ver. 883.
19- Pompeia, daughter of Sextus Pom-peius, promised in marriage to MarcusMarcellus, A. U. 715.
Julia, daughter of Augustus by his wifeScribonia, married Marcus Marcellus, A. U.729, two years before his death.—Dio Cas-sius, book xlviii.
20. Marcella the elder, daughter of







OCR Output








270 APPENlMX TO BOOK XVI.


appev. room he threw himself on a meaner bed(w),
B.XVI. , v /J
w^v-<te> and asked for some nourishment. They
A. U. C.
mi. ' offered him bread; but it was so black,
A. D.
68. that his stomach sickened at the sight.The -water was foul, but thirst obliged himto swallow the nauseous draught. Hisfriends saw that no hope was left; theydreaded his impending ruin, and advisedhim to rescue himself by one manly deedfrom an ignominious death. Nero signi­fied his assent; but he studied delay, fondto linger still in life. Preparations for hisfuneral were necessary. He ordered atrench to be dug, suited to the dimensionsof his body (n); a quantity of wood to becollected for the funeral pile; and piecesof marble to be brought to form a decentcovering for his grave. He bewailed hisunhappy lot; tears gushed at intervals; heheaved a piteous sigh, and said to hisfriends (o), " What a musician the world" will lose I"


During this scene of delay and coward­ice, a messenger, according to Phaon's or­ders, arrived with papers from Rome.Nero seized the packet. He read with







OCR Output








iQ THE ANNALS


book b00ty. mere pretended sieges, in which
i*~r**J not a single place was carried by assault.a. v. c. . ° r ^
8i5- For himself, he was resolved to carry on
*2- the war for more substantial purposes. Byimposing tributes and taxes on the van­quished, he meant to reduce them to sub­jection, and, for the shadow of an orientalking, he would establish the rights of con­quest, and the authority of the Romanname. ,
VII. Ix this juncture, the ambassadors,who had been sent by Vologeses to treatwith Nero, returned back to their owncountry. Their negotiation was unsuccess­ful, and the Parthians declared war. Psetusembraced the opportunity to signalise hisvalour. He entered Armenia at the headof two legions; the fourth, commanded byFunisulanus Vettonianus, aud the twelfthby Calavius Sabinus. Hishrst approachWas attended with unpropitious omens. Inr passing over a bridge, which lay across theEuphrates, the horse that carried the con­sular ornaments, taking fright without anyapparent cause, broke from the ranks, andfled at full speed. A victim, likewise, in-


N







OCR Output








GENEALOGICAL TABLE. 337


ment A. U. 786.—Tacit. Annal. book iv.s. 60; book vi. s. 23, 24. Dio, book lviii.
Inscriptions on ancient coins: Nero Ca-sar, Drusus Casar, Duumviri.
84. Emilia Lepida, daughter of Ma-nius Lepidus, and wife of Drusus Caesar(No. 83). She was engaged in an adulter­ous commerce with Sejanus, and subornedby that ambitious upstart to cany a clan­destine charge against her husband to.the ear of Tiberius. Notwithstanding hercrimes, she was protected during her fa­ther's life; but being afterwards prosecutedby the race of informers, she put an end tober days A. U. 789-—Tacit. Annal. bookiy. s, 20; book vi. s. 27, 40.
85. Caius Cesar, son of Germanicusand Agrippina; a youth of engaging man­ners, and a promising disposition. Hedied prematurely in the bloom of life,much regretted by Augustus.—Suet. Lifeof Caligula, s. 7 and 8.
86. Caius Cesar, better known by thevol. iv. z







OCR Output








ANNALS


OF


TACITUS.


I JNERO, in consequence of his own book
XVI.
credulity, became in a short time after-v^v-owards the sport of fortune, and a subject 'sis.'of public derision. He believed the vision- m. 'ary schemes of Cesellius Bassus, a nativeof Carthage, of a crazed, imagination, whorelied on whatever occurred to him in hisdistempered dreams. This man arrived atRome, and, by the influence of moneywell applied, gained admission to the pre­sence of the emperor. The secret, whichhe had to communicate, was, that on hisown estate he had found a cavern of asto­nishing depth, in which were containedimmense stores of gold, not wrought intovol. IV. K







OCR Output








258 APPENDIX TO BOOK XVI.





appen. had no resource left. Half his cavalry1 shewed themselves alienated from his ser­vice, and were retained with difficulty.Dejected, hopeless, and expecting certaindestruction from the assassins employed byNero, he retired to the city of Clunia (bb)yand there relapsed into his former indo­lence.
XIII. Nero was now at the summit ofhis wishes. He triumphed in the pride ofhis imagination over all his enemies. Hehad seen on his way from Naples a monu­mental sculpture, representing a Gaul (a)overcome by a Roman soldier, and draggedalong the ground by the hair of his head.The gods, he said, presented that object tohim as an omen of victory, and their decreewas happily fulfilled. Amidst all his fran­tic joy, his worst enemies were in his ownbreast. His vices were undermining himwith the army as well as the people. Heraised immoderate supplies of money, andsquandered the whole with wild profusion.An occurrence happened, by which thecity was thrown into a violent ferment. Aship arrived from Alexandria, supposed to







OCR Output








OF TH£ ANNALS. 51 j


marched further into the country, to settfef A?w?Ni,, , «.'. / , Axvii
ttie plan of his operations, m order not only' <**&■
to gain, but to secure his victory. Wiflt saci;this view, he issued his public orders', re- e?-quiring that all the games (d), which werecelebrated throughout Greece at statedperiods, and in different years, should beperformed at their respective places, duringhis stay in the country; and not only soybut that each city should wait for lu-s ar­rival. Nor was this all: tile fame of suchas had proved victorious,,: and were then■no more, was to be obliterated from thememory of man, that all preceding merit-might be eclipsed by the lustre: of as newperformer. The statues of the deceasedwere all demolished (e). The; living artistewere-treated with less rigour. They were-required to enter the lists with their impe­rial rival, and, upon that- condition, theirstatues were exempted ftoni the generaldestruction. Nero's love of faille was not-a generous emulation; it atas art impati-eaee of a rival, that turned to envy, ran­cour, and malice. To be pronounced thefirst musician, and-the best tragedian, wasnet enough for his v■ast ambition; he- was


p2







OCR Output








370 NOTES ON THE


Section XLIV.
(a) The beds on which the gods and goddesses wereextended at all public festivals, were called Lectistemia.See Livy, lib. v. 8. 13.
(b) Brotier observes, that the Jews, in that period oftime, were guilty of great enormities ; and the distinc­tion between them and the Christians not being under­stood, all were considered in the same light, despised andhated by the Romans.
(c) This was the first persecution of the Christians.Nero, the declared enemy of human kind, waged waragainst a religion, which has since diffused the light oftruth, and humanised the savages of Europe. It is true,as Suetonius relates, that Claudius banished the Jews,who were raising seditious tumults, at the instigation ofone Chrestus. That name, it is almost needless to ob­serve, cannot, at least ought not to be confounded withJesus Christ ; who, it was well known at Rome, hadsuffered under Pontius Pilate, in the reign of Tiberius.Chrestus, Brotier observes, was not an uncommonname among the Greeks and Romans. When the Jewswere ordered by Claudius to depart from Rome, all ofthat nation, who professed themselves followers ofChrist, were, without distinction, included in the num­ber. The edict of the emperor was not pointed againstthe Christians. Nero appears to be the first that attack­ed them as the professors of a new religion; and whensuch a man as Tacitus calls It a dangerous superstition,exitiubilis superstitio, it must be allowed, that, indirectly,an apology is made for Nero. But for Tacitus, who hadopportunities for a fair enquiry, and ability to know anddecide, what excuse can be offered ? The vices of the







OCR Output








12 THE ANNALS


book themselves with a feeble attack. Ah at-
<-^v~o tempt was made by the Adiabenians to
si*.' carry the works by assault. They ad-
«• variced their scaling ladders' arid other'
military engines, but were soon repulsed,
and, the garrison sallying out, the wholes
corps was cut to pieces.
V. Corbulo was not of a temper to beelated with success. He chose to act withmoderation in prosperity, and, accordingly,dispatched an embassy to expostulate withVologeses on the violence with which hehad invaded a Roman province, and notonly besieged the cohorts of the empire,but also a king in alliance with Rome. Ifthe Parthian prince did not raise the siege,he threatened to advance with the strengthof his army, and encamp in the heart ofthe country. Casperius, a centurion, wascharged with this commission. He metthe king in the city of Nisibis (a), distantabout seven and thirty miles from Tigra-nocerta, and there delivered his orders in atone of firmness. To avoid a war withRome had been for some time the fixedresolution of Vologeses, and the success of







OCR Output








232 APPENDIX TO BOOK XVI.





appen. nii, Rufus and Proculus, who had lived
B XVI
in perfect harmony, with mutual esteem,and true brotherly affection. Their fortuneswere a joint stock. They assisted each otherin the road to honours, and both togetherrose to stations of high authority; one on theUpper, and the other on the Lower Rhine."While they discharged their respective du­ties with integrity, and unwearied zeal forthe public service, Pactius Africanus (/)was their secret enemy. This man had theear of Nero, and knew how to transfuse hisown malignity into the heart of a prince toofatally prone to evil deeds. The virtues ofthe Scribonii were, by his artful misre­presentation, converted into crimes; thehappy concord, in which they lived, was aconspiracy against the state; and theirfame and credit in the German armies werethe means of two ambitious politicians,not the end of their actions. By conciliat­ing the good-will of the soldiers, theyhoped to overturn the government. Nerotook the alarm, and, under a speciouspretence of doing honour to the two bro­thers, invited them to his court. Theypbeyed his orders. As soon as they arrived







OCR Output








OS" TACITUS. 163


"and manners, sullen, gloomy, and dis^-BooK"contented. By the formalities of their*—-yO" rigid discipline they hope to throw dis- sie.'" grace on the gay and elegant manners of ^" their sovereign. Your preservation, Nero," is of no moment to Thrasea: he disre-" gards your safety: he despises your ac-" complishments. Are your affairs in a" train of prosperity ? he is still dejected." Has any untoward event disturbed your" peace of mind ? he enjoys your distress," and in secret pampers himself with your**■ affliction. The same spirit that refused" to swear on the acts of Julius Caesar and^'Augustus, denies the divinity of Pop-" paea. He turns religion to a jest, and" sets the laws at defiance. The journals" of the Roman people (c) were never read** by the provinces and the armies with sow much avidity, as in the present juncture;" and the reason is, the history of the" times is the history of Thrasea's con-" tumacy.


" If the system of this wise philosopher" and profound politician merits attention," let us, at once, embrace his doctrine \' if


*







OCR Output








OF TACITUS. ■ 43


xv.
A. U. C■


rogated concerning the state of Armenia, bo°kThe Romans, he replied, have evacuated thecountry. Nero felt the insulting mockery "sie.of being asked to yield what the Barba- vxrians had seized by force. He summoneda council of the leading men at Rome, todetermine, by their advice, which was mosteligible, a difficult and laborious war, or anignominious peace. All declared for war.The conduct of it was committed to Cor-bulo, who, by the experience of so manyyears, knew both the temper of the Romanarmy, and the genius of the enemy. Themisconduct of Paetus had brought disgraceon the Roman name; and to hazard thesame calamities from the incapacity of an­other officer, was not advisable.
The Parthian deputies received theiranswer, but were dismissed with handsomepresents, leaving them room to infer fromthe mild behaviour of the emperor, thatTiridates, if he made the l'equest in person,might succeed to the extent of his wishes.The civil administration of Syria was com­mitted to Cestius, but the whole militaryauthority was assigned to Corbulo. The







OCR Output








• 38 THE ANNALS


book" by false encomiums, impose upon ouri-^v^j " judgment. The praise, that springs from'sis.'" cabal and faction, is more pernicious62. " than even malice or cruelty. Let both" be suppressed. More mischief is done" by the governor who wishes to oblige," than by him who shews himself not afraid" of offending. It is the misfortune of" certain virtues to provoke ill will. In" that class may be reckoned inflexible" severity, and the firmness that never yieldsi' to intrigue, or the arts of designing men." Hence it happens, that every new go-" vernor opens a promising scene, but the" last act seldom corresponds with the" outset. In the end we see an humble" candidate for the suffrages of the pro-" vince. Remove the evil, and government," in every quarter, will be more upright,■' more just, more uniform. By prosecu-." tions, avarice and rapine have received a" check. Abolish the custom of giving" public thanks, and you suppress the piti-** ful ambition which, for vain applause," can stoop to mean compliances."
XXII. This speech was received with







OCR Output








326. GENEALOGICAL TABLE.


Livia fled from Augustus, her destined hus­band, and Tiberius from his future fatherby adoption. Tiberius Claudius Neromade his peace with Augustus, and resign­ed his wife A. U. 716. He died threeyears after, A. U, 719-—Vell. Pat. bookii. Sf 75. Suet. Life of Tiberius, s. 4, 6.Dio, book xlvii.
68, Tiberius Nero, son of TiberiuaClaudius Nero by Livia his wife, born 16thNovember, A. U. 712; adopted by Au­gustus A. U. 757? and emperor of RomeA. U. 767- He died on the 17th of MarchA. U. 79Q» after a reign of three-and-twenty years. Julius Caesar subdued hiscountry; Augustus cherished the con­quered; and Tiberius made them crouchin bondage. He established slavery, anddespised the servile spirit of the men thatsubmitted with passive obedience. Hehated eminent virtue, and was at the sametime the enemy of vice. Such jarring ele­ments have been rarely mixed in the com­position of one man: fluctuating betweengood and evil, and by turns inclined toeach, he did every thing by fits and sud­







OCR Output








150 THE ANNALS


XVI.





jboio k their own destiny, and that of the imperial1 house. In consequence of these letters, alight galley was dispatched, and Antistiuswas conveyed to Kome. His arrival, andthe busmess on which he came, were nosooner known, than Anteius and Ostoriuswere considered as devoted victims, inso­much that the former could not find afriend bold enough to be a witness to hiswill (c), till Tigeliinus advised him to settlehis affairs without loss of time. Anteiusswallowed a dose of poison; but findingthe operation slow and tedious, he openedhis veins, and put a period to his existence.
XV. Ostorius, at this time, was at adistance from Rome, amusing himself onhis own estate near the confines of Liguria.A centurion was sent with orders to dis­patch him. Nero had his reasons for de­siring this business to be done with expe­dition. He knew the military character ofOstorius, and the high reputation, withwhich he had gained the civic crown inBritain (a). He dreaded a man renownedin arms, remarkable for his bodily vigour,and a thorough master of the art of war.







OCR Output








46 THE ANNALS





book delay, and chose the road formerly travers­ed by Lucullus (a), having first given ordersto his men to open the passes, and removethe obstructions, with which time and longdisuse had choaked up part of the way.He heard that ambassadors from Tiridatesand Vologeses were advancing with over-tures of peace, and having no inclinationto treat them with disdain, he sent forwardsome chosen'centurions, with instructionsneither harsh nor arrogant, in substancestating, " that the misunderstanding be-" tween the two nations might still be com-" promised, without proceeding to the de-" cision of the sword. Both armies had" fought with alternate vicissitudes of for-" tune, in some instances favourable to the" Romans, in others to the Parthians; and" from those events both sides might derive" a lesson against the pride and insolence." of victory. It was the interest of Tiri-*' dates to receive, at the hands of the Ro-" man emperor, a kingdom in a flourishing" state, before hostile armies laid a scene" of desolation; and Vologeses would con-" suit his own advantage, as well as that of" his people, by preferring the friendship







OCR Output








10 THE ANNALS





*££K Bolanus: In their private instructions thoseofficers had it in command, to proceed withcaution, and act on the defensive, withoutpushing on their operations with too muchvigour^ A decisive campaign was notCorbulo's plan. He wished to protract thewar, and, in the mean time, stated, in hisletters to the emperor, the necessity of ap­pointing a commander, with a special com­mission to protect Armenia, as he foresawa storm gathering in the province of Syria.If Vologeses made an irruption in thatquarter, a powerful army would be wantedto repel the invader. With the rest of hislegions he formed a chain of posts alongthe banks of the Euphrates, and, havingmade a powerful levy of provincial forces,he secured all the passes against the in­roads of the enemy. In order to makesure of water in a country not well sup­plied by nature, he erected strong castlesnear the springs and fountains; and, wherethe stations were inconvenient, he choakedup a number of rivulets with heaps of sand,with intent to conceal their source from th^Parthian army.







OCR Output








3j£ GENEALOGICAL TABLE.


his uncouth manners, and stupid ferocity,banished to the island of Planasia. Nokind of guilt could be imputed to him; nodisgraceful or flagitious action was laid toliis charge; and for that reason, Augustus,towards the end of his life, began to relentHe intended to restore him to his rank,and, it is said, made a voyage to the isle ofPlanasia for the purpose of a reconciliation.Augustus, however, did not live to carryhis design into execution. Agrippa Post-humus was cut off by order of Tiberius,who made that murder the first act of hisreign, A. U. 767.—Dio, book liv. VelleiusPaterculus, book ii. s. 104. Tacit. AnnalSjbook i. s. 3, 6. Pliny, book vii. s. 45.
51. Agrippina, daughter of Agrippaand Julia; grand-daughter to Augustus,and wife of Germanicus; a woman of noblequalities, an exalted spirit, and unconquer­able chastity. Elate with the pride of vir­tue, and conscious of her illustrious birth,she scorned to bend to the* arrogance ofLivia, the mother of Tiberius. She wasbanished to the isle of Pandataria, andaftan suffering every barbarous outrage







OCR Output








Q4 THE ANNALS





book much energy, that the information wouldhave fallen to the ground, if the wife ofMilichus had not observed, in the presenceof her husband, that a long and secret in­terview had taken place between the pri­soner and Natalis, both connected in theclosest friendship with Caius Piso.
LVI. Natalis was cited to appear.Scevinus and he were examined apart,touching their late meeting. What wastheir business ? and what was the convers­ation that passed between them? Theiranswers did not agree. Fresh suspicionsarose, and both were loaded with irons.At the sight of the rack, their resolutionfailed. Natalis was the first to confess theguilt. He knew all the particulars of theconspiracy, and was, by consequence, ableto support his information. He namedCaius Piso, and proceeded next to Seneca.He had, probably, been employed as amessenger between Seneca and Piso; or,knowing the inveterate rancour with whichNero sought the destruction of his tutor,he intended by that charge, however false,to make terms for himself. Scevinus, as







OCR Output








72 THE ANNALS





book trons offered their prayers and sacrifices toJuno, first in the capitol, and next on thenearest margin of the sea, where they sup­plied themselves with water, to sprinkle thetemple and the statue of the goddess. Aselect number of women, who had hus­bands actually living, laid the deities ontheir sacred beds (a), and kept midnightvigils with the usual solemnity. Butneither these religious ceremonies, nor theliberal donations of the prince, could ef­face from the minds of men the prevailingopinion, that Rome was set on fire by hisown orders. The infamy of that horribletransaction still adhered to him. In order,if possible, to remove the imputation, hedetermined to transfer the guilt to others.For this purpose he punished, with exqui­site torture, a race of men detested for theirevil practices (b), by vulgar appellationcommonly called Christians,


The name was derived from Christ, who,in the reign of Tiberius, suffered under Pon­tius Pilate, the procurator of Judaea. Bythat event the sect, of which he was thefounder, received a blow, which, for a time,










OCR Output








224 APPENDIX TO BOOK XVI.





appen. on the shore, sung in melodious strains a
B. XVI.
hymn to" Neptune, Amphitrite, and all theinferior gods and goddesses, who allay orheave the waters of the deep. After thisceremony, he struck the first stroke intothe ground, and, with a basket of sand onhis shoulder, marched away in triumph,proud of his Herculean labour. The na­tives of the country saw the frantic enter­prise with mixed emotions of fear, asto­nishment, and religious horror. They ob­served to Nero, that of the three princes,who had conceived the same design, notone died a natural death. They told himfurther, that, in some places, as soon asthe axe pierced the ground, a stream ofblood gushed from the wound; hollowgroans were heard from subterraneouscaverns, and various spectres, emitting afeeble murmur, were seen to glide alongthe coast. These remonstrances made noimpression. Nero ordered his soldiers toexert their utmost vigour; money waslevied in every quarter; cruelty and ex­tortion went hand in hand. In order toprocure a sufficient number of workmen,the jails in all parts of the empire were







OCR Output








OF THE ANNALS. 221





a statue to Nero, not less than a thousand appen.pound weight. By that voluntary obli­gation they were said to have incurred adebt, and were compelled to advance anequivalent sum of money. No rank orstation was safe from plunder and oppres­sion. Roman knights and senators fell asacrifice, and their estates were confiscated.Sulpicius Camerinus (b), a man descendedfrom an illustrious family, was put to deathfor an extraordinary reason. The surnameof Pythicus had been for ages annexed tohis ancestors, and was, consequently, anhereditary honour. By the fertile inven­tion of Helius this was construed into aczime. The name might imply a victor inthe Pythian games; and when Nero, withthe consenting voice of Greece, was de­clared universal conqueror, to usurp thattitle was a crime of violated majesty, andan impious sacrilege. Sulpicius and hisson were put to death, and their effectswere forfeited to the state. Wealth, inwhatever rank, was sure to provoke thehand of rapacity, and Rome, under thegovernment of a presuming and arrogantfreedman, was a scene of plunder, blood,and cruelty. And yet all that could be







OCR Output








74 THE ANNALS


book spectacle, the emperor lent his own gai~t-^v^o dens. He added the sports of the circus,en.' and assisted in person, sometimes driving aw. curricle, and occasionally mixing with therabble in his coachman's dress. At lengththe cruelty of these proceedings filled everybreast with compassion. Humanity re­lented in favour of the Christians. Themanners of that people were, no doubt, ofa pernicious tendency, and their crimescalled for the hand of justice: but it wasevident, that they fell a sacrifice, not forthe public good, but to glut the rage andcruelty of one man only.
x XLV. Meanwhile, to supply the un­bounded prodigality of the prince, all Italywas ravaged; the provinces were plunder­ed ; and the allies of Rome, with the severalplaces that enjoyed the title of free cities,were put under contribution. The verygods were taxed. Their temples in the citywere rifled of their treasures, and heaps ofmassy gold, which, through a series of ages,the virtue of the Roman people, either re­turning thanks for victories, or, performingtheir vows made in the hour of distress, had







OCR Output








248 APPENDIX TO BOOK XVI.


APPEN.B. XVI.
A.U.C.
821.
A. D.
68.


son, by every villany! Direct your eyesto yonder wall; you there behold Burrhus,Lateranus, Vestinus, Cassius, and LuciusVetus, with a long train of the first menin Rome.! They suffered for their talentsand their virtues. Nor is this all : thinkof your own native genius; call to mindthe men, born in Spain, who were theornaments of Roman literature, and anhonour to their country. There lies Se­neca (r), the enlightened philosopher:he bleeds in a bath, and with his lastbreath teaches the precepts of wisdom !Your great poet, Lucan, whose bosomglowed with the love of freedom, repeatshis own immortal verses, and expires;his father, Annseus Mela, falls a victim,because he was the brother of your greatphilosopher, and the father of such ason. Survey that group ; you have therePaetus Thrasea, and Bareas Soranus, Avhowere virtue itself. See that train of il­lustrious women: Sextia, Pollutia, andServilia, all led to execution. That boyis Rufinus Crispinus (*), the son of Pop-paea by her first husband; and notwith­standing his tender age and innocence,







OCR Output








82 THE ANNALS


book taste for riot and debauchery, so ingratiat-u*~vO ed himself, that he was able to supplantsis. ' the praetorian praefect, and by secret accu-€5.' sations to endanger his life. He represent­ed him to Nero as the favoured lover ofAgrippina (b), still cherishing a regard forher memory, and lying in wait for an op­portunity to revenge her wrongs..
Rufus inclined to the discontented party,and, at length, declared himself willing toassist their enterprise. Encouraged bythis accession of strength, the conspiratorsbegan to think of the decisive blow, andto deliberate about the time and place.We are told that Subrius Flavius resolvedto take to himself the glory of the deed.Two different schemes occurred to him.One was, while the prince was singing onthe stage, to dispatch him in sight of thewhole theatre. His second project was,while Nero was rambling abroad in hismidnight frolics, to set fire to the palace,and, in the tumult, to take him by sur­prise, unattended by his guards. The lastseemed to be the safest measure. Thetyrant, unseen and unassisted, would fall a


^


i







OCR Output








OF TACITUS. ' 17


tended for sacrifice,-standing near the un-BooKfinished fortifications of the winter camp, ^-vO
A O C
escaped out of the entrenchments. Nor sis.'was this all: the javelins, in the hands &■'of the soldiers, emitted sudden flashes offire; and this prodigy was the more alarm­ing as the Parthians brandished the sameweapon.
VIII. Portents and prodigies had noeffect on Paetus. Without waiting to fortifyhis winter encampment, and without pro­viding a sufficient store of grain, he march­ed his army over Mount Taurus, determined,as he gave out, to recover Tigranocerta, andlay waste the country through which Cor-bulo had passed with vain parade. In hisprogress some forts and castles were storm­ed, and it is certain that his share of gloryand of booty would have been consider­able, if to enjoy the former with modera­tion, and to secure the latter, had been histalent. He over-ran by rapid marches vasttracts of country, where no conquest couldhe maintained. His provisions, in the meantime, went to decay, and, the winter seasonapproaching^ fast, he was obliged to returnVOL. iv. c







OCR Output








22 THE ANNALS


book soldiers, in like manner, abandoned their


XV.


^^r^j post. A tower, commanded by Tarquitius81^- Crescus, a centurion, was the only- place62- that held out. That officer made severalsallies with success, routing such of theenemy as dared to approach the walls, andpursuing the run-aways with great slaugh­ter; till by a volley of combustibles, thrownin by the besiegers, the works were set onfire. The gallant centurion perished in theflames. Some of the garrison escaped un­hurt, and made the best of their Avay todistant wilds. The wounded returned tothe camp, and there related wonders, mag­nifying, beyond all bounds, the valour ofthe Parthian king, the number of his troops,and their ferocity in battle. A panic per­vaded the army. Men, who feared forthemselyes, swallowed all that was saidwith easy credulity. Paetus felt the pressureof his misfortunes. He seemed to resignthe command, unable to struggle with ad­versity. He sent again to Corbulo, withearnest prayers entreating him to save theRoman eagles, with the standards of anunfortunate army, and the army itself, from







OCR Output








202 APPENDIX TO BOOK XVI.





appen. fidential ministers, and the instruments of
B.XVI.
every villany.
V. It is certain that Nero's passion forthe guitar, and stage-music, was not greaterthan his ambition to excel in magic incan­tations ; but though his hopes were frus­trated, he did not cease to entertain Tiri-dates with the most lavish profusion. Anenormous sum (a) was issued every day tothe Armenian king, for the support of hisown grandeur, and the courtiers in his train.At his departure a still larger sum wasordered, as a present from the emperor;and, that he might rebuild the city of Ar-taxata (Z>), which had been levelled to theground, a number of artificers were addSd,at a vast cxpence, to the retinue of the Par­thian prince, who also engaged a numberof others to attend him, for stipulatedwages, to his own country. The conse*--quence of Nero's generosity was, that thefixing of a king on the throne of Armenia,was a heavier burthen to the Romans thaiaany of their most expensive Avars.
There is reason to think, that the A\;ant







OCR Output








GENEALOGICAL TABLE. 309


burnt, but filled with spices, and depositedin the monument of the Caesars. Threeyears after her death, Nero dedicated atemple to her memory, with an inscription,To Sabina the Goddess Venus—Sabina "DeaVeneri.—Tacit. Annal. xiii. s. 45; Annal.xvi. s. 6. Suet. Life of Nero, s. 35. DioCassius, book lxiii.
38. Claudia Augusta, daughter ofNero and Poppaea, born at Antium A. U,816. She was soon after her birth dignifiedwith the title of Augusta. She died withinfour months, to the great grief of Nero.She was canonized a goddess by a decree ofthe senate. Tacit. Annal. xv. s. 23. Suet.Life of Nero, s. 35.
Her inscription on medals is, DivaClaudia Neronis Filia; The GoddessClaudia, Daughter of Nero.
39. Statilia Messalina, who drewher lineage through several descents fromStatilius Taurus. She was the third wifeof Nero, who, to possess her person, mur­dered her first husband Atticus Vestinus







OCR Output








70 THE ANNALS


book and adorn the front. The expence of the
XV.
u^-v-o porticos Nero undertook to defray out of817. ' his own revenue. He promised, besides,64.' as soon as the work was finished, to clearthe ground, and leave a clear space to everyhouse, without any charge to the occupier.In order to excite a spirit of industry andemulation, he held forth rewards propor­tioned to the rank of each individual, pro­vided the buildings were finished in alimited time. The rubbish, by his order,was removed to the marshes of Ostia, andthe ships that brought corn up the riverwere to return loaded with the refuse of theworkmen. Add to all this, the severalhouses, built on a new principle, were to beraised to a certain elevation, without beams>or wood work, on arches of stone from thequarries of (c) Alba or Gabii; those ma­terials being impervious, and of a nature to-resist the force of fire. The springs of wa­ter, which had been before that time inter­cepted by individuals for their separate use,were no longer suffered to be divertedFrom their channel, but left to the care ofcommissioners, that the public might beproperly supplied, and, in case of fire, have







OCR Output








OF THE ANNALS. 21|


a:Such a career of rapid success made the 1


Rome a regular account of all his victories, appex.
b. XVI.


people stand at gaze. The senate passed A82o.°"a vote of thanks to the gods for such signal ct.*events, and, by their decrees, so loadedthe calendar, that the year could scarcefind room for so many rejoicing days.
VIII. Nero now conceived that he hadtriumphed over the arts, and, in the prideof his heart, resolved to make a progressthrough the conquered country. He tookcare, however, not to visit Athens or Lace-daemon. In the former, he dreaded toapproach the temple of the Eumenidae. Amind lashed and goaded by the whips andstings of a guilty conscience wished toavoid those avenging deities (a). He wasdeterred from Lacedasmon by the form ofgovernment, and the sanctity of the lawsestablished by Lycurgus. The place wherethe Eleusinian mysteries (b) were cele­brated, was also forbidden ground. Mur­derers and parricides were excluded fromthose religious ceremonies. Nero wasseized with a fit of remorse. Busy reflec­tion brought to light the iniquities of his







OCR Output








OF TACITUS. 39





the unanimous assent of the fathers. The book
XV.
proposition, notwithstanding, could not be'formed into a decree, the consuls refusingto make their report. The prince inter­posed in the business, and, with his autho­rity, a law was passed, forbidding any per­son whatever to move in a provincial as­sembly (a) for a vote of thanks to the pro­consul or pnetor, or to send a deputationto Rome for that purpose. During thesame consulship, the gymnasium, or placeof athletic exercises, was struck with light­ning, and burnt to the ground. The statueof Nero was found in the ruins, melteddown to a shapeless mass. The celebratedcity of Pompeii (b) in Campania was over­thrown by an earthquake, and well nighdemolished. Ladia, the vestal virgin, de­parted this life; and Cornelia, descendedfrom the family of the Cossi, succeeded tothe vacant office.
XXIII. During the consulship ofA.u.c.Memmius Regulus and Verginius Rufus, ad.Poppaea was delivered of a daughter. Theexultation of Nero was be\ond all mortaljoy. He called the new-born infant Air







OCR Output








252 APPENDIX TO BOOK XVI.





appen. in Gaul. Whether that officer aspired toB. XVL . .■... ,
the imperial dignity, seems to be a pro­blem not solved by any of the historians.It is certain that the legions, seeing the mi­series occasioned by Nero's tyranny, andat length disgusted by the contemptiblefrolics of an emperor, who rendered it ridi­culous to obey him, made a tender of theempire to their own general, whom theyrespected for his military talents, and thevirtues of moderation. Virginius declinedthe offer. If he nourished ambition in hisheart, he thought it best to suppress it inthat juncture, and wait for future events.It belonged, he said, to the senate, and thesenate only, not to the legions, to disposeof the sovereignty. Whatever were hisviews, he still retained a true Roman spi­rit, and, with indignation, saw a rebelchieftain and his conquered countrymenjoined in a league to give an emperor tothe mistress of the world. He resolved tocollect his forces, and march in quest ofthe enemy. Gaul was far from actingwith a spirit of union. Internal dissen­sions divided the states into contendingfactions. The Sequani (y), the iEdui, and







OCR Output








U4 nW ANNALS


book".ous deed*." He was instantly put to
u-v»*> death. The. rest of the centurions under-
;8i8.' went their fate, and all died worthy of
A. P. .
65.' their characters. Fenius Rufus had notequal constancy. He betrayed an abjectspirit, and even in his will was weak enoughto bewail his' unhappy fate. Nero livedin hopes of seeing Vestinus, the consul,charged as a criminal. He knew the cha­racter of the man; an intrepid dating spirit,ambitious, and suspected of disaffection.The conspirators, however, had no com­munication of counsels with that activemagistrate. Some declined him on accountof former animosities, and others, becausetkey thought him rash and impetuous.Njer-o's rancour grew out of a close andUltimate friendship. In that familiar inter­course Vestinus saw into the very heart ofthe prince, and despised him for his vices,Nero shrunk from a man^ who had thespirit to speak his mind with freedom, and,in :fois sarcastic vein, had often made theprince the subject of his raillery; andraillery, when seasoned with truth, neverfails to leave a sting that festers in thememory,, A recent incident gave an edge







OCR Output








OF THE ANNALS. 233


B. XVI.





in Greece, a new scene was opened. An appen.audience was refused; they were forbid toappear in the emperor's presence ; suborn­ed accusations were presented in form;and the unhappy brothers found them­selves in the sad condition of state-crimi­nals. They desired to be heard in theirdefence. That act of justice was denied.They knew, that, under a despotic prince,the interval between the opening of anaccusation and the catastrophe is alwaysshort. They resolved not to wait the ty­rant's pleasure, but to deliver themselveswith Roman fortitude from an ignominiousdeath. They opened their veins, and ex­pired together.
The fate of Crassus (g), who derived anillustrious lineage from Pompey the Great,and Crassus the Triumvir, may be mention­ed in this place. Historians have not fixedthe time of his death with precision; but it iscertain that he fell a victim to the crueltyof Nero. Crassus, his father, with Scri-bonia, his mother, and a brother, who wasnamed Cneius Pompeius Magnus, had beencut off by the emperor Claudius (%)? But







OCR Output








240 APPENDIX TO BOOK XVf.


atpen. veal all he knew. The merit of a disco-
B-XVL ...
«—*-~» very, made m time, would not only secure
8si. his life, but lead on to fortune. He de-A. d. y
6S- sired to be conducted to the prince. Theconspirator was immediately seized andput to the torture. His courage was forsome time undaunted, unsubdued. Hedenied the whole of the charge. But pro-Li tracted misery was too much to bear.His resolution failed. The names of hisaccomplices were extorted by the violenceof pain, and all were condemned to suffer.A scene of blood was laid, and Nero's su­perstition ascribed the discovery of theplot to the miraculous interposition of thegods.
Having conquered his enemies, and se­cured the future tranquillity of his reign,he thought it time to give a loose to his li­bidinous passions, and pursue his theatri­cal amusements. For this purpose he re­moved to Naples, the place of perfect se­curity, and the seat of pleasure. His hal­cyon days were soon interrupted. A stormhad been for some time gathering in Gaul,and threatened at length to shake the em­







OCR Output








OF TACITUS. 181


819.A l>.


attention. Their conversation, as was in- book
XVI.
ferred from looks of earnest meaning, and <——ifrom some expressions distinctly heard,turned upon the immortality of the soul, w"and its separation from the body. Thraseahad not heard of the decree that passed thesenate, when his intimate friend, DomitiusCaecilianus, arrived with the unhappy tid­ings. The company melted into tears.Thrasea saw their generous sympathy; heheard their lamentations: but fearing thatthe interest, which they took in the lot ofa man doomed to destruction, might in­volve them in future danger, he conjuredthem to retire. Arria (c), his wife, inspiredby the memorable example of her mother,resolved to share her husband's fate. Thra­sea entreated her to continue longer in life,and not deprive their daughter of the onlycomfort and support of her tender years.
XXXV. He then walked his portico,and there received the consular quaestor.An air of satisfaction was visible in hiscountenance. He had been informed thatHelvidius, his son-in-laAv, had met withnothing harsher than a sentence of banish­







OCR Output








" c9







OCR Output








32 THE ANNALS


book the Pafthians would make their next ate
XV.
v^w tempt, he was determined to return into
A IT C
sis. Syria with his army; and if his infantry,«a. harassed out with fatiguing marches, couldkeep pace with the Parthian cavalry, whowith their usual velocity could traverse theopen plains, he should hold himself indebt­ed to his own good fortune for so signal anevent. Partus fixed his winter-quarters inCappadocia. Vologeses sent dispatches toCorbulo, requiring, that the strong holdsand fortresses on the banks of the Eu­phrates should be rased to the ground, andthe river left, as heretofore, the commonboundary of the two empires. Corbulohad no objection, provided both partieswithdrew their garrisons, and left Armeniaa free and independant country. The Par­thian monarch, after some hesitation, ac­ceded to the terms. The castles erect­ed, by Corbulo's order, on the banks ofthe Euphrates, were all demolished,, andthe Armenians were left to their naturalliberty.
XVIII. Meanwhile trophies of vic­tory were erected at Rome, and triumphal







OCR Output








Si ''■'i-yv .• ■«•:


:


.' V


v V


■"ft'
>£j ''!:>,. I
^'•''',ifii^U^i
I
■• -' '■
»r«^';'""
• ■ >:'
'■<"$! '


':>i/: ••■■:a"


;r■■■ i*


flY*«l


•■■■^■■■'^; *£> bit
V'v:■ t •_>


Km


-







OCR Output








OE THE ANNALS. 287


lution to establish for himself a new appe^.province independent of Rome. Their u^voscheme, for that purpose, was to lay an isi.embargo on all ships loaded with corn, in it.'order to afflict the city of Rome with allthe miseries of famine. A legion was alsoraised : and Macer, at the head of a consi­derable army, was on the eve of renouncingall subjection to Rome, when Papirius, acenturion sent by order of Galba, gainedaccess to his presence, and stabbed him tothe heart.


Fonteius Capito (g), who commanded thelegions on the Lower Rhine, was put todeath about the same time. It was thisofficer that sent Julius Civilis (h) a prisonerto Rome, during the reign of Nero. Thecharge was without foundation, and, intime, was the fatal cause of the destruc­tive war, in which Rome was involved bythe fierce resentment of that warlike chief.Avarice was the vice of Capito. He wasin haste to grow rich, and felt no scrupleabout the means. Ambition was laid tohis charge, but an unguarded expressionwas the only evidence against him. It







OCR Output








SIXTEENTH BOOK OF THE ANNALS. , 383


Section XII.
(a) ForFenius Rufus, see Annals, xv. s. 66 and 68.fbj See Annals, xv. s. 74.
(c) The two Torquati were, Silanus Torquatus, An­nals, xv. s. 35 ; and Lucius Torquatus, this book, s. 9.
Section XIII.
(a) This was a dreadful fire, by which in one nightLugdunum (now the city of Lyons) was reduced toashes. Seneca says, Una nox fuit inter urban maxi­mum et nullam. See his Reflections on this Misfortune,epist. 91.
(b) The time when the people of Lyons granted a _supply to the Romans cannot be ascertained. It wasprobably in the reign of Caligula.
Section XIV.
(a) Antistius Sosianus was banished on account of hissatirical verses, A. U. 815. Annals, xiv. s. 48, 49.
(b) For Ostorius Scapula, see Annals, xii. s. 31 ; An­nals, xiv. s. 48. He had commanded in Britain withgreat reputation.
(c) To give validity to a will, seven witnesses werenecessary. Digest- lib. xxxvii. tit, De Bonorum Posses-sione. -
Section XV.(a) Annals, xii. s. 31.
Section XVII.
(a) Crispinus commanded the praetorians, Annals, xi.s. 1. He was banished to Sardinia, Annals, xv. s.71.







OCR Output








OF THE ANNALS. 277





easy to overawe the senate, and make that appen.
B VVL
tame and pliant assembly bend to his willand pleasure. The consuls, without con­sulting the arrogant minister, sent theirdispatches to Galba, with the decree bywhich he was declared emperor. This wasconsidered by this new man as a mark ofdisrespect (c), and it was with difficultythat the magistrates appeased his indigna­tion. Flushed with success, and proud ofhis exploits, he began to enlarge his views,and preposterously to form schemes of vastambition. Under an emperor of the ageof seventy-three (d), worn out with cares,and weary of public business, he flatteredhimself that he should be able, under theappearance of being the second in thestate, to wrest into his own hands the su­preme authority; and, should Galba's in­firmities sink under the fatigue of a longjourney, he had the hardiness to aspire tothe succession. Having conceived thismad project, he resolved to remove everyobstacle, and, with that view, compelledTigellinus to resign his commission (e) ofpraetorian praefect. A colleague, actingwith himself in joint authority, might re­







OCR Output








JQ THE ANNALS


book escaped the snare. He lived at that very


XV.


time on the most simple diet: wild apples,sVr1" that grew in the woods, were his food; and


A. u. c.


A. D.


«4.' water from the clear purling stream servedto quench his thirst,
XLVI. About the same time a bodyof gladiators, detained in custody at Prae-neste (a), made an attempt to recover theirliberty. The military guard was calledout, and the tumult died away. The in­cident, notwithstanding, revived the me­mory of Spartacus (b). The calamities,that followed the daring enterprise of thatadventurer, became the general topic, andfilled the minds of all with dreadful ap­prehensions. Such is the genius of thepopulace, ever prone to sudden innova­tions, yet terrified at the approach ofdanger. In a few days after, advice wasreceived, that the fleet had suffered by aviolent storm. This was not an event ofwar, for there never was a period of suchprofound tranquillity; but Nero had order­ed the ships, on a stated day, to assembleon the coast of Campania. The dangersof the sea never entered into his considera-







OCR Output








250 APPENDIX TO BOOK XVI.


the genpeople.


appen. the general of the senate and the Roman
b. xvr.


A. U. C.
82i.A. D.
68. During these transactions, Nero remain­ed at Naples, still addicted to his favouriteamusements, enchanting himself and thepublic with his harp, and chiefly intenton bringing to perfection an hydraulic or­gan (w), on a new construction, which hepromised to produce on the stage. Butthat gay serenity was soon overcast. Ad­vices arrived from Spain and Gaul. In theformer, Galba had thrown off the mask;in the latter, Vindex was at the head of apowerful army. Nero shuddered at thenews; indignation soon succeeded; hethreatened to punish the rebels with death;his frivolous passions took their turn; hewent to see the athletic exercises, and tunedhis guitar. In that manner he passed eightor ten days; no orders given; no letter tothe senate; not a word escaped from him;he smothered all in sullen- silence. Freshtidings arrived from Gaul; the proclama­tions, which Vindex published in everyquarter, were delivered to him; he found







OCR Output








OF TACITUS. £3





infirmities of age, and the weakness of the bookyoung and tender, added misery to thedreadful scene. Some endeavoured to pro­vide for themselves, others to save theirfriends, in one part dragging along the lameand impotent, in another waiting to receivethe tardy, or expecting relief themselves;they hurried, they lingered, they obstructedone another; they looked behind, and thefire broke out in front; they escaped fromthe flames, and in their place of refugefound no safety; 4he fire raged in everyquarter; all were involved in one generalconflagration.
The unhappy wretches fled to placesremote, and thought themselves secure, butsoon perceived the flames raging roundthem. Which way to turn, what to avoid,or what to seek, no one could tell. Theycrowded the streets; they fell prostrate onthe ground; they lay stretched in the fields,in consternation and dismay resigned totheir fate. Numbers lost their whole sub­stance, even the tools and implements bywhich they gained their livelihood,^ and, inthat distress, did not wish to survive. Others,







OCR Output








48 THE ANNALS


book held in high esteem, and, by consequence,


his advice had great weight with the Bar-
A U C
816.' barians. Vologeses did not wish for a gene-
A.D. .
63. ral war. He desired a truce in favour ofsome particular provinces. Tiridates pro­posed an interview with the Roman gene­ral. An early day was appointed. Theplace for the congress was chosen by theprince on the very spot were Paetus andhis legions were invested. The scene oftheir late victory flattered the pride ofthe Barbarians. Corbulo did not declinethe meeting. The face of things he knewwas changed, and the reverse of fortunewas glorious to himself. The disgrace ofPaetus gave him no anxiety. Having re­solved to pay the last funeral rites to theslaughtered soldiers, whose bodies" layweltering on the field, he chose, for thatpurpose, the sou of the vanquished gene­ral, then a military tribune, and orderedhim to march at the head of the companiesappointed to perform that melancholyduty. On the day fixed for the conven­tion (a), Tiberius Alexander, a Romanknight, Avho had been sent by Nero bosuperintend the operations of the campaign,







OCR Output








THE ANNALS


book calamity to the present they found the in­terval of time precisely the same.


A. U. C.
817.
A. D.
** XLII. Nero did not blush to convert tohis own use the public ruins of his country.He built a magnificent palace (a), in which- the objects that excited admiration wereneither gold nor precious stones. Thosedecorations, long since introduced by lux­ury, were grown stale, and hackneyed tothe eye. A different species of magnifi­cence was now consulted: expansive lakesand fields of vast extent were intermixed.with pleasing variety; woods and forestsstretched to an immeasurable length, pre­senting gloom and solitude amidst scenesof open space, where the eye wanderedwith surprize over an unbounded prospect.This prodigious plan was carried on underthe direction of two surveyors, whose nameswere Severus and Celer. Bold and origi­nal in their projects, these men undertookto conquer nature, and to perform wonderseven beyond the imagination and the richesof the prince. They promised to form anavigable canal from the lake Avernus (b)°to the mouth of the Tiber. The expert-







OCR Output








54 THE ANNALS


book Laecanius and Marcus Licinius, Nero's
XV.
u^vo passion for theatrical fame broke out with8i7.' a degree of vehemence not to be resisted.
A. D. &
64.' He had hitherto performed in privateonly, during the sports of the Roman youth,called the juvenalia; but, upon thoseoccasions, he was confined to his ownpalace or his gardens; a sphere too limitedfor such bright ambition, and so fine avoice. He glowed with impatience to pre­sent himself before the public eye, buthad not yet the courage to make his firstappearance at Rome. Naples was deemeda Greek city, and, for that reason, a properplace to begin his career of glory. Withthe laurels, which he was there to acquire,he might pass over into Greece, and aftergaining, by victory in song, the gloriouscrown which antiquity considered as asacred prize, he might return to Rome,with his honours blooming round him, andby his celebrity inflame the curiosity of thepopulace. With this idea he pursued hisplan. The theatre at Naples was crowdedwith spectators. Not only the inhabitantsof the city, but a prodigious multitudefrom all the municipal towns and colonies







OCR Output








3(56 NOTES ON THE


mained for Nero to take care of the equestrian order.Suet. in Neron. s. 11.
(c) Suetonius says, Nero engaged four hundred sena­tors, and six hundred Roman knights, some of them offair fortune and character, to enter the lists as gladiators,and encounter the wild beasts. He also invited the vestalvirgins to see the wrestlers, because, as he said, atOlympia the priestesses of Ceres were allowed the pri­vilege of seeing that diversion. Sueu in Neron. s. 12.See Annals, xiv. 8. 15 ; and notes (a) and (b). SeeJuvenal, sat. vi. ver. 215 ; sat. viii. ver. 194.
Section XXXV.
(a) For Silanus Torquatus, see the Genealogical Ta­ble, No. 61.
Section XXXVII.
(a) Suetonius tells us, that Nero frequently supped inpublic, either in the Field of Mars, or the Circus, at­tended at table by the common harlots of the city, orfrom Syria. When he went down the Tiber to Ostia, orcoasted along the bay of Baix, booths, with all conve­niences for drinking and debauchery, were ranged on themargin of the sea, while ladies of pleasure stood likesirens, to invite the passengers from their ships. Suet. inNeron. s. 27.
(b) The lake of Agrippa was in the gardens adjoiningto his house, near the Pantheon.
(c) This platform was constructed by a great numberof timbers fastened together, and left to float on the water.Lucan has described such a platform with a tower on it.Pharsal. lib. iv. ver. 17.
(d) Dio has given an account of Nero's marriage with







OCR Output








OF%HE ANNALS. 191


Nero intended, by the same blow, to de- appes.


B. XVI.


stroy virtue itself. All praise is summed
. , , ' . A. U. C.
up in that short encomium. si»
x An


A. D.
66.


Soranus, and his daughter Servilia, diedwith equal virtue, and equal glory. Hel-vidius Priscus (c) as already mentioned,was condemned to exile. Paconius Agrip-pinus (d) met with the same severity. Likehis friend Ilelvidius, he was a man of dis­tinguished virtue, and undaunted resolu­tion. Being informed that his trial, thoughhe was not cited to appear, was actuallydepending before the senate, May the godsgrant me their protection! said he; but itis now the fifth hour, and that is the timewhen I usually bathe. His cause was notlong in suspense. Being informed thatjudgment was pronounced against him, hecalmly asked, What is the sentence ? Deathor banishment ? Being told that it was thelatter, And what have they done with myeffects? You are left in possession of them.Well then, said he, I can dine at Aricia (e).He accepted his life, and, by his calm in­difference, gained as much glory as othersby the fortitude with which they met their







OCR Output








154 THE ANNALS


book the shortest road to immoderate riches. He
XVI. '
\^r^> was the father of Lucan, the poet, and from
A. U. C. ' L
8i»- such a son (c) derived additional lustre.
*6- When Lucan was no more, Mela en­deavoured to recover the whole of hisproperty (d); but proceeding with toomuch eagerness, he provoked the enmityof Fabius Romanus, one of the poet's inti­mate friends. This man framed a chargeagainst the father. He accused him ofbeing engaged with his son in the lateconspiracy, and, for that purpose, forgedseveral letters in the name of Lucan.
Nero was eager to seize his prey: hepanted for his riches, and with that viewsent the letters as evidence of his guilt.Mela had recourse to the mode of death,at that time deemed the easiest, and, forthat reason, most in vogue. He openedhis veins, and expired. By his will he be­queathed a large sum to Tigellinus, and tohis son-in-law, Cossutianus Capito, hopingby that bequest to secure the remainder forhis family. A clause, it has been said, wasadded to the will, asserting the innocenceof the deceased, and the flagrant injustice







OCR Output








OF THE ANNALS. 281


', \


of Antonius Honoratus(n), a tribune inAPPE*.the camp, who had acquired a great mili- *^~r~*Jtary character, and was, besides, respected as'-for his unblemished honour, and unshaken 68-fidelity. Towards the close of day hecalled a meeting of the praetorians, and,after laying open, in detail, all the cir­cumstances of the plot, delivered a speechin substance as follows (o): " How long, my" fellow soldiers, shall our folly, our mad-" ness, or our evil genius, hurry us on" from one treason to another ? A few days" only have elapsed, since you deposed** Nero. In that business you behaved likefi men, who felt for the public good. You" had every provocation, and the crimesM of that flagitious tyrant justified the act." You are recent from that revolution, and■' wherefore do you want another ? You•" declared for Galba, and why now aban-(i don him ? Why with unheard of trea-" chery betray the emperor, whom you" yourselves created ? Has he been guilty" of parricide ? Has he murdered his mother" and destroyed his wife ? Has he exposed" the imperial dignity to contempt and ri-M dicule ? Has he tuned his harp on the







OCR Output








"'''" 'yii'■r':•'•'■' *i•{


', ■■ '? ,-i'


nA■ hub (IJ-''I'J■
,r,HkO 'v''I '/■!'■-^


' •t''t: ikwifcos'■"i" A';■"ton


y&r'i ,?!i■'fi■,■!■■/!■''! •?' '1 ■■•; -J
■rvu; ,rb, ;';■ I;;'


■•







OCR Output








OF TACITUS. - •*





neighbouring states, if not reinforced by *^Kthe Parthians, niust be all involved hi thesame calamity, perhaps, with the consentof the people, as Rome, it was well known,made a distinction between the nations'that fell by conquest, and those that sub­mitted at discretion. Tiridates, by his be­haviour, added force to these complaints.Driven from his throne, he appeared withall the silent dignity of distress, or, if hespoke occasionally, his words were few,short, and sententious. " Mighty king-" doms," he said, " are not supported by" inactivity. Men and arms, and warlike" preparations, are necessary. The con-" queror has always justice on his side." In a private station, to defend their pro-" perty is the virtue of individuals; but" to invade the possessions of others is the" prerogative and the glory of kings."
II. Roused by these incentives, Volo-geses summoned^ council, and, seatingTiridates next himself, spoke in substanceas follows: " You see before you a prince"descended from the same father with" myself. Acknowledging the right of pri-







OCR Output








OF TACITUS. 'liy


words he uttered. Senecio, Quinctianus, bookand Scevinus, suffered in a short time after- v-^v-oThe dissolute softness of their lives did not 6is."disgrace them in their end. They met their &•fate with resolution. The rest of the con­spirators were led to execution. In theirdeaths there was nothing that merits par­ticular notice. ■ .


LXXL While the city presented ascene of blood, and funerals darkened allthe streets, the altars of the capitol smokedwith victims slaughtered on the occasion.One had lost a son; another was deprivedof his brother, his friend, or his near rela­tion; and yet, stifling every sentiment ofthe heart, all concurred in offering thanksto the gods; they adorned the prince'shouse with laurel (a); they fell at the ty-.rant's feet; they clasped his knees, andprinted kisses on his hand. Nero receivedthis vile adulation as the token of real joy.In order to make sure of the people, heshewed his clemency to Antonius Natalisand Cervarius Proculus, whose merit con­sisted altogether in their treachery to theirfriends. To Milichus he granted a rich and







OCR Output








OF* THE ANNALS.' SOp*1


greatest pomp. Preparations were accord- appeV.*ingly made. The emperor seemed to be <-^-ogoing to an important war (e). Tigellinus sii.''put himself at the head of the companions «<>.'of the Augustan order, in number not lessthan five thousand. To these were addedan incredible multitude of abandoned har­lots, and the most debauched young menof the time. The whole train went forth,not in warlike array, with swords, and.pikes, and javelins, but with softer instru­ments ; with the sock and buskin; withmusic, lutes and guitars. The retinue. wassuited to the dignity of the enterprise. Anidea of the splendour and magnificencedisplayed on this occasion may be easilyformed,^ when we are told that Nero never'travelled with less than a thousand bag-.gage-waggons (/); the mules all shod withsilver, and the drivers dressed in scarlet;his African slaves .adorned with braceletson their arms; and the horses decoratedwith the richest trappings.
VII. The consuls for this year were a. u.c.ionteius Capito and Julius Rufus; but ^.d.their authority was superseded"by Helius,' '


vol. IV. p







OCR Output








OF THE ANNALS. 24S


safety, by sending to Rome the letters appen.
J J & . ' B. XVI.
which they had received from Vindex. <—y-«jGalba suppressed his in silence. Nero re- A8^i.c*ceived the news with joy and exultation. 68."His finances, he said, were well nigh ex­hausted, and the forfeited estates of theinsurgents would be ways and means, bywhich he intended to fill his treasury. Heconsidered Galba's silence as a proof ofguilt. Without further enquiry, he con­fiscated all his property at Rome, and dis­patched assassins, with orders to put himto death.
Vindex, in the mean time, exerted him­self with unremitting vigour to rouse thepeople of Gaul. He went to the variouscities, and lighted up the flame of war inevery quarter. He called a public con­vention of the states, and harangued theassembly, in substance as follows (o): "We" live, he said, not under laws, and civil" government, but under the will of a" single tyrant. Vice and cruelty lord it" over mankind. The provinces groan un-" der the yoke of oppression; our houses" are pillaged; our wives and daughters


r2







OCR Output








304 GENEALOGICAL TABLE..


30. Lucius Antonius, son of M. Ju­lius Antonius by Marcella the younger.On account of his father's guilt with Julia,he was sent in his infancy to Marseilles,under a pretence of education, but, in fact,to a place of exile. He died A. U. 778.—Tacit. Annal. iv. s. 44.
1
31. Marc Anthony, the triumvir, sonof Marcus Antonius the celebrated orator.He was the second husband of Octavia,sister to Augustus, A. U. 714; but beingin love with Cleopatra, he repudiated Oc­tavia A.U. 722. After the assassinationof Julius Caesar, he seized the public trea­sure, which was deposited in the temple ofOps. He was at all times a turbulent anddangerous citizen; during the triumvirate,headlong, furious, and oppressive. Therage, with which he pushed on the pro­scription, rendered him detestable. Thesupreme power was often within his reach,but all his actions proved him unworthy ofthat elevation. He was defeated at Ac-tium A.U. 724. The murder of Ciceroconsigned his name to eternal infamy. Bythe manner of his death he effaced much







OCR Output








322 GENEALOGICAL TABLE,


modesty of his youth, he was put todeath by Nero, A. U. 818—Tacit. Annal.xvi. s. 7, 8;9-
60. Lucius Junius Silanus, son ofJunius Silanus and JEinilia Lepida (seeNo. 55 and 56). The emperor Claudiushad. promised him his daughter Octavia inmarriage, A. U. 794, but soon after brokeoft' the match, and left Silanus to choosehis mode of death, A. U. 802.—Dio, booklx. Tacit. Annal. xii. s. 3, 8.
61. Junius Silanus Torquatus, sonof Junius Silanus and iEmilia Lepida, Avhowas great grand-daughter to Augustus.A pedigree derived from the Junian family,and rendered still more illustrious by his.relation to Augustus, made him obnoxiousto the jealousy of Nero. He died by thatemperors order, A. U. 817. Both he andLucius Silanus Torquatus were cut off inthe month of June, for which reason thename was changed to that of Germanicus.—Tacit. Annal. xv. s. 35. Annal. xvi. s«8 and 12. Dio, book Ixii.







OCR Output








OF THE ANNALS. £<33


the plan of a revolution, he did not as yet appei*.
, . . . B.xvr.
think it time to throw off the mask, but, to <-—=*
. ' A. U. C.
complete his work, chose to proceed by sai.fraud and dissimulation. Pie went with &•Tigellinus to the palace, and, with an airof deep affliction, informed Nero of hisdanger. " All," he said, " is lost; the" people, assembled in seditious tumults," call aloud for vengeance; the praetorian" guards abandon your cause; and the se-" nate is ready to pronounce a dreadful" judgment. You have only one expe-" dient left, and that is, to make your" escape, and seek a retreat in Eg^pt." Inthis manner the two men, who had beenraised from the dregs of the people, lefttheir benefactor. In all his scenes of viceand cruelty they had been his chief abet­tors, and they now abandoned him at hisutmost need.
Nero saw the sad reverse of his affairs.From his armies he could expect no sup­port. The troops on their march towardsthe Caspian sea had been recalled, but along repose was necessary to revive theSpirits of men well nigh exhausted by in­







OCR Output








GENEALOGICAL TABLE. 31 g


"from the cruelty of Tiberius, died in miseryA. U. 786.—Tacit. Annal. iv. s. 12. An-nal. vi. s. 25. Annal. xiv. s. 63. See sup­plement to book v. of the Annals, s- 5.
For Germanicus, her husband, secNo. 81.
52. Julia, daughter of Agrippa andJulia; sister to Agrippina, and grand­daughter to Augustus. She married Lu­cius iEmilius Paulus, and, in all kinds ofexcess and vicious debauchery, distinguish­ed herself as the rival of her mother. Inthe reign of Augustus, she was condemnedfor her adulterous practices, and banishedto the isle of Trimetus, A. U. 761. Shedied in exile A. U. 781.—Tacit. Annal. iv.s. 71. ■, '
53. Lucius .ZEmilius Paulus, son ofPaulus iEmilius Lepidus and his wife Cor­nelia. The father was censor A. U. 732.Lucius the son married Julia, the daughterof Agrippa and Julia.—'Suet. Life of Au­gustus, s. 64. Dio, book liv.







OCR Output








50 THE ANNALS


book point of raising the siege, at the very time


XV.


when he was within three days march of(5i5.' the place. Upon the same authority itw.' may be averred as a fact, that Paetus, underthe sanction of a solemn oath, sworn underthe eagles, and in the presence of wit­nesses sent by Vologeses, took upon him toengage, that no Roman should set his footwithin the territories of Armenia, till Nero'spleasure touching the terms of the treatyshould arrive from Rome. These asser­tions* it may be said, were suggested bymalignity, to aggravate the infamy of antmwarlike officer; but it is now known*beyond the possibility of a doubt, thatPaetus made a forced march of no less thanforty miles in one day; leaving behind himthe sick and wounded, and flying, with asmuch disorder and confusion, as if he hadbeen routed in the field of battle. Corbulomet the fugitives on the banks of the Eu­phrates. He received them without pa­rade, and without that display of militaryppmp which might seem a triumph overthe fate of the vanquished. His menbeheld with regret the disgrace of theirfellow-soldiers, and tears gushed from every







OCR Output








S42 GENEALOGICAL TABLE.


father carried her to the temples of all thegoddesses, and dedicated her to Minerva,as to the patroness of her education. Shediscovered in her infancy strong indica­tions of the cruelty that branded both herparents. She suffered death with her mo­ther (see No. 90).—Suet. Life of Caligula,s. 25 and 59- Dio, book lix.
92. Two sons of Germanicus and Agrip-pina, who died in their infancy. Theirnames not recorded.—Suet. Life of Ca­ligula, s. 7 and 8.
93. Agrtppina, daughter of Germani­cus and Agrippina, born A. U. 769. Shewas married three times; first, to CneiusDomitius iEnobarbus* A. U.781 ; second­ly, to Passienus Crispus; thirdly, to theemperor Claudius, A. U. 801. She was awoman of violent passions, unbounded am­bition, and at the same time distinguish­ed by her literary accomplishments. ByiEnobarbus, her first husband, she was themother of Nero, whose name is now an­other word for the most savage cruelty.Nero was bom A. U. 790 (No.35). By that







OCR Output








OF TACITUS. 85


agreed, that a tyrant, who overturned the booklaws and constitution of his country, ought«—v^»to fall a sacrifice to an injured people, sis'.She added, that Proculus would do well to «•co-operate with the friends of liberty. Ifhe kindled the same spirit in the minds ofthe soldiers, a sure reward would wait him.In the fervour of her zeal, she had the prud­ence to conceal the names of the conspira­tors. That precaution served to screenher afterwards, when the marine officerturned informer, and betrayed the wholeto Nero. She was cited to answer, andconfronted with her accuser; but thecharge, resting entirely on the evidence ofone man, without a circumstance to sup­port it, was easily eluded. Epicharis, not­withstanding, was detained in custody.Nero's suspicions were not to be removed.The accusation was destitute of proof, buthe was not the less inclined to believe theworst.
LII. The undaunted firmness of Epi­charis did not quiet the apprehensions ofthe conspirators. Dreading a discovery,they determined to execute their purpose







OCR Output








OF TACITUS. Jl


son in a castle, called Arsamosata (a), and bookleft a cohort to defend the place. In this wv-J
, . , i. •. A.U.C.
manner he contrived to divide an army, «u.
which, acting with united force, would have «*•
been able to repel the attack of a wild and
desultory enemy. When pressed by Volo-
geses, we are told it was with difficulty that
he could submit to acquaint Corbulo with
his situation. That officer did not hurry
to his assistance. To augment the glory
of delivering him, he was willing to let the
danger increase. In the mean time, he
ordered a detachment of a thousand men,
drafted from each of his three legions, and a
body of eight hundred horse, with an equal
number from the cohorts, to hold themselves
in readiness for a sudden enterprise.
XI. Vologeses knew from his scoutsthat his passage over Mount Taurus wasobstructed by the Roman infantry, andthat the plain was occupied by the Pan-nonian horse; but the news did not deterhim from pursuing his march. He fellwith impetuous fury on the cavalry, whofled with precipitation. The legionary







OCR Output








!32 . The annals





III. With such immoderate riches inview, no wonder- that Nero launched outinto greater profusion than ever. Deludedby his hopes, and sure of a supply for yearsto come, he exhausted his treasury (a), andbegan to anticipate his imaginary funds.He made assignments on the property,and granted with generosity what was notin his possession. The expectation ofenormous wealth made him the bubble of amadman, and impoverished the public. Inthe mean time Bassus, the grand projector,arrived at Carthage. In the presence of anumber of soldiers, and a large body ofpeasants employed as labourers, he dug uphis grounds, and made his experiment inthe adjacent fields, disappointed in oneplace, sure of success in another, still con­fident, and still miscarrying; till at length,finding no subterraneous cave, and wearyof the fruitless search, he abandoned hischimerical hopes, coming gradually to hissenses, yet wondering, that, of all hisdreams, the last should be the only onethat deceived him. Covered with shame,and dreading the resentment of the em­peror, he delivered himself from all his







OCR Output








OF TACITUS. 41





Nero's grief, like his joy at the birth, was bookwithout bounds or measure. At the timewhen the senate went in crowds to Antium,to congratulate the prince on the deliveryof Poppaea, a circumstance occurred worthyof notice. Paetus Thrasca was ordered byNero not to appear upon that occasion.The affront was deemed a prelude to theruin of that eminent citizen. He receivedthe mandate with his usual firmness, calmand undismayed. A report prevailed soonafter, that Nero, in conversation with Se­neca, made it his boast, that he was recon­ciled to Thrasca, and in return the philoso­pher wished him joy. In consequence ofthis incident the glory of those excellentmen rose to the highest pitch; but theirdanger kept pace with their glory.
XXIV. In the beginning of the springambassadors from Vologeses arrived atRome,■ Avith letters from the king, theirroaster, in substance declaring, " that he** would not revive the question of right,*' so often urged and fully discussed, since*' the gods, the sovereign arbiters of nations," had; delivered Armenia into the hands of







OCR Output








17§ THE ANNALS


book/" are, and what they profess. The name" of the prince was never mentioned by me" but with that respect, which I pay to the" gods. What I did was my own act: that" miserable man, my unhappy father, knew" nothing of it. If any crime has been" committed, he is innocent: I, and 1 alone" am guilty."
XXXII. Soranus could no longer re­strain himself. He interrupted his daugh­ter, crying aloud, " She was not with me in" Asia; she is too young to have any" knowledge of Rubellius Plautus. In the** accusation against her husband she was" not involved; her filial piety is her only" crime. Distinguish her case from mine;" respect the cause of innocence, and on" my head let your worst vengeance fall." I am ready to meet my fate." With thesewords, he rushed to embrace his child; sheadvanced. to meet him, but the lictors in­terposed to prevent the pathetic scene.The witnesses were called in. The fathershad hitherto listened to all that passed,with emotions of pity; but pity was soonconverted into a stronger passion. The







OCR Output








GENEALOGICAL TABLE.


thing of him can be said with certainty;but it is probable that he was the MarcusSilanus who was joint consul with LuciusNorbanus Flaccus, A. U. 772.—Tacit. An-xial. ii. s. 59-
57. Marcus Junius Silanus, son ofJunius Silanus and iEmilia Lepida, bornin the year in which Augustus died, A. U.767-—Pliny, book vii. s. 13. He was aman of an unblemished character, but soinactive, that Caligula called him the TheGolden Calf. He was proconsul of Asia,and, by Nero's order, taken off by poison,A* U. 807.-—Tacit. Annal. xiii. s. 1.
58. The wife of Marcus Junius Silanus,and the mother of Lucius Silanus Torqua-tus. The name is not to be found in anyHistorian.
59. Lucius Silanus Torquatus, sonof Marcus Junius Silanus, who was great-grandson to Augustus. Without beingcharged with any crime, obnoxious only onaccount of his illustrious birth and the
vol. it.■ X


321







OCR Output








SIXTEENTH BOOK OF THE ANNALS. 401


at Corduba, in Spain. Lucan, the poet, was a native ofthe same country.
(s) Rufinus Crispinus, the son of Poppsea,fcy her firsthusband. He was used, among his play-fellows, to actthe patt of a general, or an emperor, and for that boyishamusement was ordered to' be drowned in the sea.Sueton. in Nero, s. 35.
(t) Suetonius says, Galba, holding a general conven­tion at New Carthage, in Spain, under pretence of pre- -siding at "the manumission of slaves, placed around thecourt the statues or images of several who had fallen vic-■ tims to Nero's cruelty ; and in the midst of bis harangue,presented to the assembly a noble youth, who had beenbanished to the next Balearic island (now Majorca),and was brought from his place of exile to be exhibitedas an dbject of compassion. Sueton. in Galba, s. 10.
(uj Nero called a council of his favourites, and, aftera short conference on the state of affairs, passed the restof the day in shewing some musical instruments, which,'on a new construction, were kept in play by the operationof water. He explained the principles of that ingeniouspiece of mechanism, declaring his resolution to exhibit iton the stage, if Vindex would give him leave. Sueton.in Nero, s. 41. Dio, lib. lxiii.
(w) Nero was the son of Domitius vEnobarbus. See>the Genealogical Table. He thought it a disparagementto be called by his paternal name ; but nothing enragedhim so much, as to find himself railed at as a comedianand harper. Sueton. in Nero, s. 41.
(x) See Crevier, vol. iv. All that follows concerningVirginius Rufus, and the defeat of Vindex, is there re­lated at large. ' ■
(y) For the Sequani, the iEdui, Arvcrni, and Lin-gones, see the Geographical Table.
VOL. IV. D D







OCR Output








GENEALOGICAL TABLE. 349


he ordered her to be left naked at hermothers door.—Suet. Life of Claudius,s.27.
104. iEi-iA Peti n a, daughter of Quin-tus iElius Tubero, who was consul A. IL743. She was the second wife of Clau­dius, but on some frivolous occasionsoon repudiated.—Suet. Life of Claudius,s. 26.
105. Antoni a, daughter of the emperorClaudius and iElia Petina. Claudius gaveher away in marriage to Cneius Pompeius(see No. 106), and afterwards to CorneliusSylla (see No. 107). Nero, after the deathof Poppaea, proposed to marry her; andhis offer being rejected, he condemned herto suffer death, on a pretended charge ofplotting against the state.—Suet. Life ofClaudius, s. 27. Life of Nero, s. 35. Ta­cit, Annal. xii. s. 68.
106. Cneius Pompeius, a youth ofnoble descent, married to Antonia (No.105) A, U. 794. He was some time after







OCR Output








FIFTEENTH BOOK OF THE ANNALS. 371


Jews were imputed to the Christians without discrimina­tion, and Tacitus suffered himself to be hurried away bythe torrent of popular prejudice. And yet we find thathis friend Pliny, during his administration in the pro­vince of Bithynia, thought and acted with moderation.The Christians were under a prosecution; Pliny, in hischaracter of proconsular governor, was in doubt how toproceed. He wrote to the emperor Trajan on the sub­ject; and after stating that the real Christians were notto be forced. by any means whatever, to renounce the ar­ticles of their belief, he proceeds to the sum total of theirguilt, which he found to be as follows: They met on astated day before it was light, and addressed themselvesin a prayer or hymn to Christ, as to a God, bindingthemselves by a solemn oath, not for any wicked purpose,but never to commit any fraud, theft, or adultery; neverto falsify their word, nor deny a trust reposed in them;after which it was their custom to separate, and then re­assemble to eat their meal together, in a manner per­fectly harmless and inoffensive. They desisted, saysPliny, from this custom, after my edict, issued accordingto your order, against the holding of any assemblies what­ever. Affirmabant hanc fuissc summam vel culpa: sua-,vel erroris, quod essent solifi stato die ante lucem conve-nire, carmenque Christo, quasi Deo, dicere secum invicem;seque sacramento rum in scelus aliquod, obstringere, sedne furta, ne latrocinia, ne adulteria coynmitterent; nefidemfallcrent, ne depositum appellati abnegarent: qui-bus peractis morem sibi discedendi fuisse, rursusquetoeundi ad capiendum cibum, promiscuum tamen, etnnoxium ; quod ipsumfacere desiisse post edidum mcum,quo secundum mandata (ua lietarias esse vctueram. Plin.lib. x. ep. 91. Such is the account of the religion, which
B b 2 •







OCR Output








308 GENEALOGICAL TABLE.


gustus, Germanicus, Pontifex Maximus, Im-perator, Tribunitid Potestate Pater Patria.
36. Octavia, daughter of the emperorClaudius by Messalina. She was born A. U.795. Britannicus was her brother. Shewas contracted to Lucius Silanus, but mar­ried to Nero A. U. 806; worthy of bettertimes, and a better husband. Nero repu­diated her for the sake of Poppaea. Shewas banished to the island of Pandataria,and there put to death, A. U. 815.—Tacit.Annal. xii. s. 3, 25 ; and Annal. xiv. s. 60,64. Dio Cassius, book lxi.
For Britannicus, her brother, see No.108.
37. Poppjea Sabina, daughter of TitusOllius by Poppaea Sabina. She was mar­ried first to Rufius Crispinus: 2dly, to Mar­cus Salvius Otho, afterwards emperor; andat length to Nero, A.U. 815. The vicesof her character resembled those of theemperor. He loved her tenderly, yet killedher by a kick on her womb when she waswith child, A.U. 818. Her body was not







OCR Output








OF TACITUS. $3


pride of despotism, knew but little of the bookRomans. He was not informed, that it is v^-v<o
AUG
the character and policy of that people to sii.'maintain, with zeal, the substantial interests »•of the empire, without any regard to pettyformalities, the mere shadow of dominion.
XXXII. In the course of the year Nerogranted the rights and privileges of Latiumto the maritime nations (a) at the foot ofthe Alps. He likewise assigned to theRoman knights distinct seats in the circus,advancing them before the space allottedto the populace. Till this regulation tookplace, the knights were mixed indiscri­minately with the multitude, the Roscianlaw (b) extending to no more than fourteenrows of the theatre. A spectacle of gladi­ators was exhibited this year, in nothinginferior to the magnificence displayed onformer occasions; but a number of sena­tors, and women of illustrious rank, de­scended into the arena (c), and, by exhibit­ing their persons in the lists, brought dis­grace on themselves and their families.
XXXIII. In the consulship of Caius A-^c-
A.D.
64.







OCR Output








H8 THE ANNALS





book ample recompense, and moreover addedthe honourable appellation of a Greekname, importing the conservator. Gra-nius Silvanus, one of the tribunes engagedin the conspiracy, received a free pardon;but, disdaining to enjoy it, he died by hisown hand. Statius Proxinius had the vanityto follow his example. Pompeius, Corne­lius Martialis, Flavius Nepos, and StatiusDomitius were all degraded from their tri-bunitian rank, not as men condemned, butsuspected of disaffection, Novius Priscus,Glitius Gallus, and Annius Pollio Avereordered into exile; the first on account ofhis known intimacy with Seneca; and thetwo last, to disgrace them, though not con­victed of any crime. Antonia Flaccilla,the wife of Novius Priscus, followed herhusband into banishment, Egnatia Maxi-milla, at that time possessed of great wealth,had the spirit, in like manner, to adhere toGlitius Gallus, Her fortune was soonafter taken from her by the hand of power,Her conduct, both in affluence and poverty,did honour to her character,
Rufius Crispinus was likewise banished;







OCR Output








s







OCR Output








242 APPENDIX TO BOOK XVI.





appen. dred and eighty. He commanded in Ger-many in the reign of Caligula, and, after­wards, under Claudius was proconsul ofAfrica. His illustrious birth, his militaryfame, and high credit with the legions inevery army, pointed him out as the properperson to depose a prince, whose crueltymade him detestable, and whose folly ren­dered even tyranny itself ridiculous. Galbareceived the dispatches sent by Vindex withthe frigid caution of a man far advancedin life. He was more than seventy yearsold, and that age is not the season of am­bition. To slide in quiet through the re­mainder of his days, seemed to be all thathe desired from fortune; but, under thatoutward calm, the sparks of a dying pas­sion were rekindled. And yet the enter­prise proposed to him was big with danger,and the issue doubtful. Prudence con­spired with indolence, and he remainedsilent and inactive. The governors of allthe other provinces had been, in like man­ner, solicited to enter into the Gallicleague: they hated Nero ; but instead ofdeclaring open hostility, they thought itmere advisable to provide for their own







OCR Output








GENEALOGICAL TABLE. 341


Pliny adds, that this enormous display wasnot a present from the emperor, but all ofit the wealth of her grand-father MarcusLollius, accumulated from the spoil ofplundered provinces.—Pliny, book ix. cap.35, s. 57. Suet. Life of Caligula, 25. Dio,book lix.
90. Milonia C.&SONIA, daughter ofVestilia, whom Caligula married when shewas advanced in her pregnancy, A. U. 792.In thirty days after she was delivered ofher child. She was the wife of the worstof men, and her own vices made her worthyof such a connexion. Caligula was killedA. U. 794; and in a few days after Che-rea, who dispatched the tyrant, orderedCaesonia and her daughter to be put todeath, that no remains of the tyrant's fa­mily should be suffered to exist. She diedwith a degree of fortitude that would havedone honour to a better character. Suet.Life of Caligula, s. 25, 59« Dio, book lix.Pliny, book vii. s. 5.
91. Julia Drusilla, daughter of Ca- -ligula and Milonia Caesonia. Her frantic







OCR Output








OF THE ANNz\LS. 21$





they heard the sound of a voice neither appen.
... B. XVI.
loud nor clear, and saw the singer risingon his toes, in a vain endeavour to expandthe notes, and straining his organs, till aface, naturally red, was so inflamed as tovie with the deepest scarlet. Not contentwith the fame of an enchanting singer, heresolved to prove himself a great tragedian.The parts, in which he chose to distinguishhimself (g), were Hercules Furens ;GEdipus, who murdered his father, andtore out his own eyes; Orestes, poi*gnarding his mother; and sometimes abavished Sabine, or a Matron itflabour, on the point of being delivered.When he arrived at Olympia, he found,that the celebrated games of that placeconsisted altogether of chariot races, andathletic exercises, and by consequencethat no theatre had been erected. Washis darling music to be excluded ? Ratherthan suffer such an indignity, he orderedpreparations to be made for interludes, andother dramatic performances. Not con­tent with being -blinded on the stage; withraving like a madman, and being broughtto bed like a woman; he was still to figure







OCR Output








OF THE ANNALS. 269


" Nero in the city ?" As they drew near appen.
J r J B.XVL
to Phaon's house, Nero was alarmed by a w-y^
sudden accident. His horse started at a s«i.
A. i>.dead carcass that lay on the side of the **•
road; and the veil, in consequence of theviolent motion, falling from his face, aveteran, who had been dismissed from theservice, knew his master, and saluted himby his name. The fear of being detectedmade the fugitive prince and his followerspush forward with their utmost speed. Be­ing arrived at a small distance from thehouse, they did not think it safe to enterit in a public manner. Nero dismounted,and crossed a field overgrown with reeds (/).Phaon advised him to lie concealed in asand-pit, till he prepared a subterraneouspassage into the house.. That, said Nero,were to bury myself alive. He scoopedup some water out of a muddy ditch, and,having allayed his thirst, asked in a dole-'ful tone, " Is that the beverage to which" Nero has been used ?" An opening wasmade in the wall on one side of the man­sion, and Nero crept through it. He wasconducted to a chamber, where he sawnothing but wretchedness. In that mean







OCR Output








qQ THE ANNALS


book be baffled by a woman, could subdue a.
XV.
v-^-0 mind like hers, firm, constant, and un-
A. U. C.
sis.' daunted to the last. Not a word was ex-
-A.D.
«. torted from her. Her misery ended forthat day. On the next, the same crueltywas prepared. Epicharis had no strengthleft. Her limbs were rent and dislocated.The executioners provided a chair to con­vey her to the place of torture. While theywere conducting her, she took from herbreast the girdle that braced her garment,and, having fastened one end of it to thetop of the chair, made a noose for he*neck, and, throwing herself from her seat,hung suspended with the whole weight ofher body. In her mangled condition theremains of life were soon extinguished.
Such was the fate of this magnanimouswoman. She left behind her a glorious ex­ample of truth and constancy, the morestriking, as this generous part was actedby an enfranchised slave, to save the livesof men, in no degree related to her, andalmost unknown. With heroic fortitudeshe endured the worst that malice couldinflict, at a time when men of illustrious







OCR Output








OF TACITUS. qj


** That he must wait for his two brothers, BOOK" Pacorus and Tiridates: when they ar-^j^j" rived, a convention might be held, and ^3°"" there the rights of Armenia would be A<^-v adjusted. The gods would then decide" the fate of the Roman legions." Paetussent another embassy, requesting an inter^view. The king sent Vasaces, his generalof the cavalry, to act in the royal name.At that meeting Paetus cited a number ofancient precedents. He talked of Lucul-.Jus, Pompey, and the emperors of Rome,who had dealt out the sceptre of Armenia.Vasaces coolly answered, that some shadowof right must be allowed to have beenclaimed by the Romans; but the substan­tial power was always vested in the Par-rthian kings. After much debate, it wasagreed, that on the next day, Monobazus,the Adiabenian, should attend as a witnessto the compact. In his presence it wasagreed that, the siege being raised, the Ro­man legions should forthwith evacuate Ar- /menia; that the strong holds-, with thehyJ*stores and magazines, should be deliveredup to the Parthians; and, these conditionsduly performed, Vologeses was to be at







OCR Output








354 • NOTES ON THE


scruples of Tiridates, see the Appendix to the Annals,
xvi.
•
Section XXV.
(a) Pompey was employed as commander in chief inthe Piratic war, with a commission giving to him supremeauthority in every province to the extent of fifty milesfrom the sea coast. By the decree of the senate on thatoccasion, Velleius Paterculus observes, almost the wholeRoman world was subjected to the will of one man. 2uosenatus considto ptene totius orbis terrarum imperiumuniviro deftrebatur. Veil. Paterc lib. ii. s. 31. SeePlutarch, Life of Pompey.
• Section XXVI.
fa J See the Geographical Table.
(b) This superstitious ceremony is described by Livy.The soldiers were drawn out on an open plain, andcrowned with laurel wreaths, while victims were sacri­ficed to the god of war. The general harangued bis menupon the occasion. Livy, lib. i. s. 28.
Section XXVII.
(a) Lucullus commanded the legions in Armenia,A. U. C. 685. See Plutarch, Life of Lucullus.
Section XXVIII.
(a) Tiberius Alexander was by birth one of the Jewishnation, but an apostate from the religion of his country.Joseph. Jewish Antiq. lib. xx. s. 5. The emperors fre­quently sent their chosen favourites to attend the general,but, in fact, to be spies upon his conduct.
(b) Not yet five-and-twenty.





-







OCR Output








280 APPENDIX TO BOOK XVI.





appfn.intimate friend; but he saw the folly of
B. XVI.
the enterprise, and with freedom and sin­cerity advised Nymphidius to desist from awild attempt, in which he could not ex­pect the support of the people or the se­nate. There is not, he said, a single fa­mily in Rome, willing to give the name ofCaesar (I) to the son of Nymphidia. Thatremonstrance had no effect on a mind in­flamed with the fever of wild ambition.Nymphidius called a meeting of his par­ty. All agreed that no time was to be lost.They resolved to strike the blow that verynight, and to conduct Nymphidius to thepraetorian camp, where they had no doubtbut with one voice he would be declaredemperor of Rome. On such an occasionit was necessary that the person raised tothat elevation should be prepared to ad­dress the soldiers, in a suitable style. Cin-gonius Varro (m), a corrupt and venal ora^tor, composed a speech for that purpose,and the illiterate emperor was to gracehimself with borrowed eloquence.
The design of the conspirators was notso well concealed, but it reached the ear







OCR Output








GENEALOGICAL TABLE. 351


27. Tacit. Annal. xii. s. 25; xiii. s. 15and 16.
For Octavia, the sister of Britannicus,see No. 36.
For Agrippina, the mother of Nero byDomitius iEnobarbus, and afterwards thewife of Claudius, see No. 93.







OCR Output








OF TACITUS. 93


" mestics; nor was it now for the first time book
XV.
" that he had given freedom to some, and


" to others liberal donations. If in the last sis." instance his bounty exceeded the former 65."" measure, the reason was, that being re-" duced in his circumstances, and pressed" by his debts, he was afraid that his will" would be declared void in favour of his" creditors. With regard to his table, it" was well known that his style of living" had ever been elegant, and even profuse," to a degree that drew upon him the cen-" sure of rigid moralists. To the prepara-" tion of bandages and styptics he was an" utter stranger. None were made by his" order. The whole was the invention of a" vile informer, who found himself desti-" tute of proof, and, to prop his infamous" calumny, dared to fabricate a new charge," at once the author and the witness of a" lie." This defence was uttered by Sce*vinus in a tone of firmness, and the intre­pidity of his manner gave it strength andcredit. He pronounced the informer anotorious profligate, and, by consequence,an incompetent witness. This he urgedw4th such an air of confidence, and with so







OCR Output








OF TACITUS. £3


impending ruin. In the mean time, he and book
his men would hold out to the last, deter- v—■*.—'
a.v. c.
mined to live or die in the service of their w-
i.q,
country. «•


XII. Corbulo, as usual, firm and col­lected in the moment of danger, preparedfor the expedition. Having left a suffici­ent force to guard his posts on the banksof the Euphrates, he moved forward to?wards Armenia, taking the shortest routethrough Commagena, and next throughCappadocia, both fertile countries, andcapable of furnishing supplies for hisarmy. Besides the usual train attendingon a march, he took with him a number ofcamels, loaded with grain, to answer thedouble purpose of preventing the want ofprovisions, and of striking the enemy withthe terror of an unusual appearance. Pac-tius, a centurion of principal rank (a), wa£the first from the vanquished army thatencountered Corbulo on his march. Thecommon men came up soon after, all en­deavouring by various excuses to palliatetheir disgrace. The general ordered themto join their colours, and try to gain their







OCR Output








18 THE ANNALS


■\


book with his army; His dispatches to Nero^w were in a style as grand as if he had ended
A. U. C. . °
8i5- the Mar, high sounding, pompous; full of'••'-?• vain glory, but without any solid ad­vantage.


a


IX. In the mean time Corbulo neverneglected the banks of the Euphrates. Tohis former chain of posts he added newstations; and lest the enemy, who shewedthemselves in detached parties on the op*posite plains, should be able to obstructthe building of a bridge over the river, heordered a number of vessels of large size tobe braced together with great beams, andon that foundation raised a superstructureof towers armed with slings and warlikeengines. From this floating battery heannoyed the enemy with a discharge ofstones and javelins, thrown to such alengthy that the Parthians could not re­taliate with their darts. Under this shelterthe bridge was finished. The allied cohortspassed over to the opposite hills. Thelegions followed, and pitched their camp.The whole of these operations was executedwith- such rapidity, and so formidable a


^







OCR Output








ft) THE ANNALS


book a description of this celebrated entertain-
XV. r
v-^-o merit, that the reader, from one example,8'i- may form his idea of the prodigality of the64- times, and that history may not be en­cumbered with a repetition of the sameenormities. Tigellinus gave his banqueton the lake of Agrippa (b), on a platformof prodigious size (c), built for the receptionof the guests.
To move this magnificent edifice to andfro on the water, he prepared a number ofboats superbly decorated with gold andivory. The rowers were a. band of Pathics.Each had his station, according to his age,or his skill in the science of debauchery.The country round was ransacked for gameand animals of the chase. Fish wasbrought from every sea, and even from theocean (b). On the borders of the lakebrothels were erected, and filled with wo­men of illustrious rank. On the oppositebank was seen a band of harlots, who madeno secret of their vices, or their persons.In wanton dance and lascivious attitudesthey displayed their naked charms. Whennight came on, a sudden illumination from







OCR Output








§8 THE ANNALS


XV.





b 09 k summoned before him. In regular suc­cession they were admitted to an audience,and every trifle was magnified into a crime.A smile, a look, a whisper, a casual meet­ing at a convivial party, or a public show,was evidence of treason. Nor was it suf­ficient that Nero and Tigellinus were keenand vehement in their enquiries: Fenius-Rufus took an active part. Having hithertoescaped detection, he thought that violenceagainst his accomplices would be the bestway to skreen himself. While he waseagerly pressing them with questions, Sub-rius Flavius,the praetorian tribune, by signsand tokens, signified to him his intentionto cut off the tyrant in the midst of theexamination. He had his hand on the hiltof his sword, when Rufus checked the bravedesign.
LIX. On the first detection of the plot,while Milichus was giving his evidence,and Scevinus was still wavering and irre­solute, some of the conspirators exhortedPiso to shew himself in the camp, or tomount the public rostra, in order to gainthe affections of the army and the people.







OCR Output








OF TACITUS; Up





the conspiracy furnished a pretext, but his scr<sx.having been married to Poppaea was thecrime that brought on his ruin. Ver-ginius (/;) and Musonius Rufus (c) owedtheir banishment to the celebrity of theirnames: the former trained the Romanyouth to eloquence, and the latter formedtheir minds by his lectures on wisdom andphilosophy. At one sweep* ChividienusQuietus, Julius Agrippa, Blitius Catulinus,Petronius Priscus, and Julius Altinus, likea colony of criminals, were sent to islandsin the iEgean sea. Cadicia, the wife ofScevinus, and Ctesonius Maximus wereordered out of Italy, without being heardin their defence. The sentence of eon*-demnation was the first notice of any crimealleged against them. Acilia, the motherof Lucan, was neither pardoned, nor eon*demned. She was suffered to live in! silentobscurity. ' <:i . ;
LXXII. Having performed thesedreadful exploits, Nero called an assemblyof the soldiers, and, after a speciousharangue, ordered a largess of a thousandsesterces to he paid to eaeh man, and the







OCR Output








GENEALOGICAL TABLE* 299


bus, by his wife Julia, the sister of J. Cae­sar. She married Caius Octavius, and byhim was mother of Augustus.—Suet. Life ofAug. s. 4. Tacit. Dialogue of Orators, s. 28.
15. Caius Octavius, husband of Atia,the daughter of M. Atius Balbus, by Ju­lia, sister of Julius Caesar. Octavius, af­terwards the emperor Augustus, was, ofcourse, grand nephew to Julius Caesar.—Suet. Life of Aug. s. 3, 4, 5.
16. Octavia, daughter of Atia andCaius Octavius, and sister to Augustus.She was promised in marriage to FaustusSylla, but married Claudius Marcellus.After his death she married Marc An­thony. She was a woman of exemplaryvirtue, and great literary accomplishments.She died A. U. 743. Augustus deliveredher funeral panegyric.—Suet. Life of Jul.Caes. s. 27.
17. Claudius Marcellus,husband ofOctavia, and brother-in-law to Augustus,He was consul A. U. 704. Though nearly







OCR Output








196 APPENDIX TO BOOK XVL


00.


appen. -nras exhibited with lavish expencc. The
'—-—' people, dressed in white robes, crowned with
8is- laurels, and ranked in their several tribes,
A,'D. •
walked in procession to their respectiveseats. The praetorian guards, with theirstandards ranged in order, and their co­lours flying, displayed their glittering arms.Nero entered the forum in his triumphalhabit. The whole body of the senatefollowed in his train. He took his seat ona curnle chair, amidst the standards andthe eagles. In a short time after, Tiridatesmade his appearance. The soldiers openedtheir lines; he advanced through the ranks,with his eastern nobility in his train. Heapproached the rostrum, and on his kneesoffered homage to Nero. The people werenot able to contain their joy. They sawthe pride of an oriental king humbled at"the feet of the emperor. The majesty offRome filled every imagination. A shoutburst forth from the enraptured multitude."Tifidatefc was astonished at the sound: hestood at gaze, and his heart shrunk withinhim. Nero raised him from the ground,and, having clasped him in his arms, placed







OCR Output








OF TACITUS. 75


dedicated to religious uses, were now pror bookduced to answer the dernands of riot and u<-r>jextravagance. Jn Greece and Asia ra-Asn.C"
A D
parity was not content with seizing the <*.'votive offerings that adorned the temples,but even the very statues of the gods weredeemed lawful prey. To carry this im­pious robbery into execution, Acratus andSecundus Carinas were sent with a specialcommission: the former, one of Nero'sfreedmen, of a genius ready for any blackdesign: the latter, a man of literature, withthe Greek philosophy fluent in his mouth,and not one virtue at his heart. It was areport current at the time, that Seneca,wishing to throw from himself all responsi­bility for these impious acts, desired leaveto retire to some part of Italy. Not beingable to succeed in his request, he feigned anervous disorder, and never stirred out ofhis room. If credit be due to some writers,a dose of poison was prepared for him byCleonicus, one of his freedmen, by the in­stigation of Nero. The philosopher, how­ever, warned by the same servant, whosecourage failed him, or, perhaps, shieldedfrom danger by his own wary disposition,







OCR Output








312 GENEALOGICAL TABLE.


During the whole course of his reign,pacific measures were the object of his po­licy. Letters flourished, and men of ge­nius met with encouragement. By his po­pular acts he gained the affections of thepeople, with the title of Augustus, theFather of his Country. Scythia, Sar-matia, the Garamantes and Bactrians, In­dia, and the people called the Seres, sub­mitted to his authority, and sent their am­bassadors to settle the terms of a generalpeace. At Rome, and the capital cities ofthe provinces, temples, orders of priest­hood, sacerdotal colleges, were dedicatedto him, not only after his death, but, inmany places, during his life. He died atNola on the 18th of August, A.U. 767.His character, strictly examined, was moresplendid for his policy than his virtues.He owed his elevation to the vices of Le-pidus and Anthony, and the abilities ofVipsanius Agrippa; but it redounds to hispraise, that, what he gained by the prud­ence and valour of others he was able tosupport, by a well-judged system of po­licy, during a space of four-and-forty years







OCR Output








56 THE ANNALS


xv.





book Deformed in his person, he possessed avein of ribaldry and vulgar humour, whichqualified him to succeed as buffoon. Inthe character of a jester he recommendedhimself to notice, but soon forsook hisscurrility for the trade of an informer; andhaving by the ruin of the worthiest citizensarrived at eminence in guilt, he rose towealth and power, the most dangerousmiscreant of that evil period!
XXXV. Nero was a constant spectatorof the sports exhibited at Beneventum;but even amidst his diversions his heartknew no pause from cruelty. He com­pelled Torquatus Silanus to put an end tohis life, for no other reason, than because heunited to the splendor of the Junian familythe honour of being great grandson toAugustus (a). The prosecutors, subornedfor the business, alleged against him, that,having prodigally wasted his fortune ingifts and largesses, he had no resource leftbut war and civil commotion. With thatdesign he retained about his person menof rank and distinction, employed in variousoffices: he had his secretaries, his treasurers,







OCR Output








SIXTEENTH BOOK OF THE ANNALS. 405


(-r) Suetonius gives the same account of his age.-Obiit sccundo et trigessimo atatis anno, die quo quondamOctaviam interemerat. In Neron. s. 57.
(s) The public joy was so great, that the people ranfo and fro, with caps upon their heads. Tantumquegaudium publice prabuit, ut plebs pileata tola urbe dis-curreret. Suet- in Neron. s. 57«
(t) See Suetonius, 8. 50.
(u) Suetonius says, Non defuerunt 'qui per longumtempus vernis testivisque floribus tumulum ejus ornarent.S. 57. < *- • •
(w) The readiness of the Parthians to assist a pre­tended Nero, is mentioned by Suetonius, in Nero, s.-57; and also by Tacitus, Histdry, i. s. 2.
Section XV.
(a) A number of prodigies mentioned by Suetonius,in Galba, s. i. Dio, lxiii. Pliny, ii. s. 83 and 103.
(b) Plutarch says he arrived in Spain on the seventhJay after Nero's death. See the Life of Galba.
(c) Plutarch, Life of Galba.
(d) Galba was born in the consulship of Valerius Mes-salinus and Cneius Lentulus, A. U. C. 751, on the ninthof the kalends of January, in a villa near Terracina.Suet- in Galba, s. 4.
(e) See Plutarch, Life of Galba.
(f) Plutarch, in Galba, gives the same account.
(g) See Plutarch, Life of Galba.
(h) Plutarch relates this saying of Mauricus ; for moreof whom see History, iv. s. 40; and Life of Agricola,s. 45.
(i) We read in Suetonius, that Galba was governedby three favourites; Titus Vinius, his lieutenant inSpain ; Cornelius Laco, who was advanced to the com­







OCR Output








190 APPENDIX TO BOOK XVI.





appen. to-day, than be to-morrow banished to an
B. XVI. ,
island. That sentiment was applauded bythe philosophers (o) of the age. With thesame spirit he was used to declare his mindin conversation with his friends. If, hesaid, Nero intended to destroy no one butme, I could excuse his flatterers; but flat­tery will not save their lives. Since deathis a debt that all must pay, it is better todie in freedom, than live an ignominiousslave. All that Nero can do, is to shortenmy days: my memory will subsist, andmen will continue to talk of me. But forthe tribe of abject sycophants, they willperish, and be mentioned no more. Thraseawas not more distinguished by his un­shaken fortitude, than by the virtues ofhumanity. Pliny the consul celebrateshim for an apothegm, which shews in thefairest light the amiable tenderness of hisnature. An unforgiving disposition was inhis eyes not only ungenerous, but immoral;it was, therefore, his maxim (b), that he,who suffers himself to hate vice, will hatemankind. It were superfluous to add anyfurther particulars of a man so truly emin­ent. Tacitus says, that by destroying him,







OCR Output













OCR Output








FIFTEENTH BOOK OF THE ANNALS. 36a


Calpurnius Piso, de pecumis repetundis, to compel re­stitution4 from such as were convicted of extortionA. U. C. 605, in the beginning of the third Punic war.It was followed from time to time by new decrees, but allproved ineffectual.
Section XXIL
fa J It was a frequent practice of the provinces, to senda deputation to the senate, with an address of thanks tothe proconsuls or praetors, who were returned to Rome,for the blessings enjoyed by the people under their admi­nistration; and this contrivance served to advance thefame of the men who condescended to intrigue for ap­plause, and thereby open their road to the highest honoursof the state. See the Panegyric of Trajan, by Pliny theconsul, s. 70.
(b) Seneca gives an account of this earthquake, but heplaces it in the following year. See Qusest. Natural,quest- vi. s. 1. Pompeii is now called Torre dclV Annun-ciata. It was afterwards totally overwhelmed by theeruption of Mount Vesuvius, A. U. C. 832.
Section XXIII.
(a) The worship paid to Fortune as a goddess is wellknown from Horace, lib. i. ode 35. 0 Diva, gratumqute regis Antium. There were two goddesses of for­tune adored in that city; one, the ffappy; the other,the Equestrian.
(b) Nero by his father was of the Domitian family,and by adoption of the Claudian. See the GenealogicalTable, No. 35.
Section XXIV.(a) For more of the Parthian superstition, and the










OCR Output








OF THE ANNALS. 199


broidered, the figure of Nero in the act of appen.driving a curricle. To the exhibitions of v^-v^-»
A. U. C.
the theatre the pleasures of the table sue- 8i9.
r A. D.
ceeded. The banquet (d) was the most «•sumptuous that taste and luxury couldcontrive. When the appetite of the guestswas satisfied, the public diversions wereonce more resumed. Nero seized the op­portunity to display his talents; and he,who a little before was master of the uni­verse, appeared in the characters of cha­rioteer, comedian, singer, and buffoon.He sung on the stage, and drove round the-circus in his green livery (e). The king ofArmenia saw the prince, who talked ofdealing out crowns and sceptres, warblinga tune, and managing the reins for theentertainment of his subjects- Such de­spicable talents, he knew, could neitherform a warrior, nor a legislator. His glory,it now was evident, depended on the virtueand the genius of men very different fromhimself. How he found a people tameenough to obey, and general officers will*mg to command his armies, was matter ofwonder to the Parthian prince. Struckvith that idea, he could not refrain from







OCR Output








58 THE ANNALS


book his absence would be of short duration,
XV.
vvv and, in the interval, the peace and goodan.' order of the commonwealth would be in64.' no kind of danger. For the success of hisvoyage he went to offer up prayers in thecapitol. He proceeded thence to thetemple of Vesta. Being there seized witha sudden tremor in every joint, arisingeither from a superstitious fear of the god­dess, or from a troubled conscience, whichnever ceased to goad and persecute him,he renounced his enterprise altogether,artfully pretending that the love of hiscountry, which he felt warm at his heart,was dearer to him than all other consider­ations, " I have seen," he said, *♦ the de-" jected looks of the people; I have heard** the murmurs of complaint: the idea of" so long a voyage afflicts.the citizens; and," indeed, how should it be otherwise, when" the shortest excursion I could make was" always sure to depress their spirits?" The sight of their prince has, at all times," been their comfort and their best sup-:" port. In private families the pledges of" natural affection can soften the resolu-r" tions of a father, and mould him to their







OCR Output








CONTENTS.


BOOK XVI.


' I. NERO is amused with hopes of finding great stores ofhidden treasure in Africa. One Cesellius Bassus,deluded by his dreams, communicated t/ie secret, andthence the wildpiodigality of the prince. IV. Thequinquennial games. Nero contends for the victory insong and eloquence. He mou?Us the public doge.Vespasian (afterwards emperor) in danger fromNerd's spies stationed in the playhouse. VI. Thedeath of Poppcca; her funeral: Nero deliws herpanegyric. VII. C. Cassias and L. Silanus sent intoexile. Lepida left to the judgme?it of the prince.X. L.Vetus, Scxtia, and Pollutiaput to death. XII.The months of May and June called by the names sfClaudius and Germanicus. XIII. An uncommon tem­pest in Campania, and epidemic disorders at Rome.XIV. Anteius and Ostorius compelled to put an end tvtheir lives. XVII. Annans Mela (the father ofLucan the poet) and Cerealis Anieius, Rufius Cris-pinus, and Petronius, ordered to die. XVIII. Cha­racter of Petronius. XIX. His behaviour in his lastmoments. XX. Silia banished on suspicion of beingthe person that discove?*ed Nero's secret vices. XT.Nero bent on the destruction of Patus Thrasea,a)id Bareas Soramis. XXII. Cossutianus accusesThrasea. XXIII. Ostorius Sabinus undertakes thecharge against Bareas Soramis. Nero fixes the destruc­







OCR Output








244 APPENDIX TO BOOK XVI.


appen." are violated, and our relations basely
B. XVI.
v«-y~> " murdered. Of all our misery Nero is-82i. " the author. What crime so great that he
. A. D. 0
*8- " has not dared to perpetrate ? His mother" died by his murderous hand. That hor-** rible parricide makes the heart recoil;" but Agrippina deserved her fate. She" brought a monster into the world. At** length the measure of his guilt is full." The east is up in arms; Britain inw commotion; and the legions in Spain" and Germany are on the eve of a revolt;** and shall the nations of Gaul stand lin-" gering in suspence ? What consideration" is there to restrain your ardour? Shall" the titles of Caesar, of Augustus, of" Prince, and Imperator throw a false" lustre round a man, Avho has disgraced" his rank, and made majesty ridiculous?" These eyes, my friends, these eyes have" seen him a fidler, a mountebank, and a" pantomime actor. Instead of his impe-" rial titles, call him Thyestes, Qidipus,"Alcmseon, and Orestes. Those names" are suited to his crimes. How long are" we to submit to such a master ? Our" forefathers took the city of Rome by







OCR Output








SIXTEENTH BOOK OF THE ANNALS. 407


(f) For an account of Calvia Crispinilla, see History,i. s. 72.
(g) Fonteius Capito, History, i. s. 7, 8, and 58.
(h) His name was Julius Paulus Claudius Civilis.For more of this famous Batavian chief, see History,book i. s. 59; book iv. s. 13, 14 ; and throughout thewar which he waged against the Romans, to the closeof book v. s. 26.
(i) Fabius Valens contrived the murder of-FonteiusCapito, in the Lower Germany, History, i. s. 7- He ismentioned often as the partisan of Vitellius. He was atlast taken prisoner by Vespasian's party. History, iii.s. 43.
(k) This man murdered Fonteius Capito by order ofFabius Valens, and was afterwards given up by Vitelliusto the resentment of the soldiers. History, i. s. 58.
(I) See Plutarch, Life of Galba.
(m) Suetonius, in Galba, s. 11.
(n) After a reign of luxury and dissipation, the rigidparsimony of Galba was unseasonable, and, by conse­quence, rendered him unpopular. Suetonius relates se­veral instances of his avarice beneath the dignity of aprince. He adds, that soon after Galba's arrival inRome, when he attended the performance of an AttelaneFable, as soon as the actors began the first verse of afavourite song,
Venit Io ! Simus a villa,Here's Farmer Flatnose come from his villa, the wholeaudience, with one voice, sung the song, repeating thefirst verse several times. Suet- in Galba, s. 13.
(o) This cruel slaughter is told by Plutarch, Life ofGalba.
(f) See Suetonius in Galba, s. 14 : and History, i. s.6 and 13.
END OF THE FOURTH VOLUME.







OCR Output








GENEALOGICAL TABLE. 347


among the gods. His deification wastreated with contempt and ridicule by Se­neca, in a tract still extant, entitled, Clau-dii Casari Apocololcintosis. The generaldesign of the piece is not ill imagined; butthe humour is often coarse, and, upon thewhole, inferior to what might have beenexpected from the lively genius of that en­tertaining writer. Claudius, with all theappearance of inert faculties and an im­passive mind, devoted his time, in reposeand indolence, to literature and the politearts. He was not entirely void of taste.His compositions in Greek, as well as La­tin, were written with purity and even ele­gance. Two pieces of a brass table havebeen found at Lyons, on which is engrav­ed a speech of Claudius, in characters soplainly legible, that Dotteville (in his edi­tion of Tacitus) has given an exact copy,-faithfully compared with the original (seeat the end of his Notes to Annals, bookxii.).—Suet. Life of Claudius, s. 2, 10,41,42. Tacit. Annal. xii. s. 69- Seneca, Apo-colokintosis. Pliny, book xxxvi. c. 15,«. 24.







OCR Output








OF THE ANNALS. 291


considered as slaves in the service of appen.
B. XVI.
Rome; and fourthly, the gladiators, who v^i-v-owere to shed their blood in battle, if the sai.'occasion required, or in the circus, for the 68.'diversion of the populace. The marines,classed, as above, in the third division,were called forth by Nero, when he pro­jected a war on the borders of the Caspiansea, to be formed into a new legion. Themen collected upon that occasion amount­ed to a prodigious number, and all werequartered in the city. Being informedthat Galba was near at hand, they rushedforth in a tumultuous body to the Milvianbridge, about three miles from Rome,where they beset the road, obstructed theemperor's train, and, with violent clamour,demanded a confirmation of their militaryrank, with an eagle to distinguish theirJegion, and an alotment of winter quar­ters (o). Their application, they were told,was out of season, but might be renewedat a more convenient time and place. Theanswer was deemed evasive, and nothingshort of an absolute refusal. The menwere fired with indignation ; a mutiny en­sued ; they advanced sword in hand, deter-


u 2







OCR Output








148 THE ANNALS


book tance of forty thousand sesterces, being the'amount of what that city granted (b) to the


a. u. c'


sis'. " treasury of Rome in a period of detraction


A. D.


«5. and public distress.A.u.c. XIV. Caius Suetonius and Lucius


8i9.


a- d. Telesinus entered on the consulship. Dur­ing their administration, Antistius Sosi-anus, formerly banished («), as has beenmentioned, for a satirical poem againstNero, began to think of regaining his li­berty. He heard of the high estimation inwhich informers were held at Rome, andthe bias of Nero's nature to acts of cruelty.A bold and restless spirit like his was readyfor any project, and he possessed a promp­titude of mind that quickly saw how toseize his opportunity. There was, at thattime, an exile in the same place, famousfor his skill in the arts of Chaldean astro­logy, and, on that account, intimate withseveral families. His name was Pammenes.Antistius entered into a league of friend­ship with him. Their mutual sufferings en­deared them to each other. The astrologerhad frequent consultations, and messengerswere every' day crowding to his house..







OCR Output








OF TACITUS. 69


ment, like the genius of the men, was bold bookand grand; but it was to be carried over a


XV.


1 c 1 11 1 - A.U.C
long tract or barren land, and, in some w-places, through opposing mountains. The 6+-country round was parched and dry, wittaout one humid spot, except the Pomptinianmarsh (c), from which water could be ex­pected. A scheme so vast could not beaccomplished without immoderate labour,and, if practicable, the end was in no pro­portion to the expence and labour. Butthe prodigious and almost impossible hadcharms for the enterprising spirit of Nero.He began to hew a passage through thehills that surround the lake A vermis, andsome traces of his deluded hopes are visibleat this day. ■ 1
XLIII. The ground, which, after mark­ing out his own domain, Nero left to thepublic, was not laid out for the new city ina hurry and without judgment, as was thecase after the irruption of the Gauls. Aregular plan was formed; the streets weremade wide and long; the elevation (a) ofthe houses was defined, with an open areabefore the doors, and porticos (b) to secure







OCR Output








140 THE ANNALS





book cest with her nephew; and, to swell thexvi. . r ;
charge, they imputed to her impious sacri­fices, magic rites, and horrible incanta­tions. Vulcatius Tullinus, and MarcellusCornelius (c), of senatorian rank, with Cal-purnius Fabatus, a Roman knight, were in­volved in the prosecution. They appealedto the tribunal of the emperor, and, by re­moving the cause, prevented a final sen­tence. Nero was, at that time, broodingover crimes of the deepest dye, andhaving nobler game in view, he disdainedto stoop to an inferior quarry. Thethree last were saved by their want ofimportance.
IX. C a s s i u s and Silanus were banishedby a decree of the senate. The case ofLepida was referred to the prince. Cas-slus, in a short time after, was transportedto the island of Sardinia, where Nero wascontent to leave him to old age and thedecay of nature. Silanus was conveyed toOstia, there, as Was pretended, to embarkfor the isle of Naxos. He never reachedthat place. Barium (a), a municipal cityof Apulia, was the last stage of his jour­







OCR Output








OF THE ANNALS. 24!


pire to its foundation. There was in that appen.
B XVI
part of the empire, a native of the coun- C^r^jtry, descended from the kings of Aqui- m?'tain, by name (m) Julius Vindex. His fa- 68.'ther had been raised by Claudius to thedignity of a senator, and the son was madegovernor of a province with the rank andpowers of a Roman propraetor. This man,without an army under his command, andwithout any resources, except what hefound in his own personal courage, and thegenerous ardour of an independent spirit,undertook to free the world from bondage.He knew that an enterprise so bold anddaring required the co-operation of theprovinces of Gaul and the Roman legions.With that view, he sent dispatches to G al­ba (w), at that time governor of the nether­most Spain, and made him a tender of theimperial dignity. Galba deduced his pe­digree from the ancient family of the Sul-picii: his mother, by her paternal line, wasdescended from Mummius, the conquerorof Corinth, and by her mother's side, fromQuintus Catulus, the pride and ornamentof the old republic. He was consul underTiberius, in the year of Rome seven hun- _
VOL. IV. R







OCR Output








OF TACITUS. 57


and paymasters, all in the style of imperial book


Al


dignity, even then anticipating what hisambition aimed at. This charge being "in.*made in form, such of his freedmen as were **.known to be in the confidence of theirmaster were seized, and loaded with fetters.Silanus saw that his doom was impending,and, to prevent the sentence of condemna­tion, opened the veins of both his arms.Nero, according to his custom, expressedhimself in terms of lenity. " The guilt of" Silanus," he said, ** was manifest; and," though, by an act of despair, he shewed" that his crimes admitted no defence, his" life would have been spared, had he" thought proper to trust to the clemency" of his judge."
XXXVI. In a short time after, Nero, forreasons not sufficiently explained, resolvedto defer his expedition into Greece. Hereturned to Rome, cherishing in imagina­tion a new design to visit the eastern na­tions, and Egypt in particular. This pro­ject had been for some time settled in hismind. He announced it by a proclama­tion, in which he assured the people, that







OCR Output








25 THE ANNALS





book liberty, by his ambassadors, to negooiatewith Nero.


XV. These preliminaries being settled,Paetus ordered a bridge to be built over
O
the Arsanias («), a river that flowed by theside of his camp. For this work his pre­text was, that it would be convenient tohis army, when the march began: but thefact was, the Parthians, knowing the utilityof a bridge, had made it an article of thetreaty, intending, at the same time, that itshould remain a monument of their victory.The Roman troops, instead of using thebridge, filed off- another way. A report (b)was spread abroad, that the legions hadpassed under the yoke, and, in addition tothat disgrace, suffered all the humiliatingcircumstances, which usually attend theoverthrow of an army. The Armeniansgave some colour to the report. Beforethe Romans marched out, they entered theentrenchments, and formed a line on eachside, in order to fix on the slaves and beastsof burthen that formerly belonged to them­selves. Not content with seizing whatthey called their own property, they laict







OCR Output








gO THE ANNALS


XV.





book most fierce and ardent, of power to ex­tinguish every other sentiment.
LIV. In a conspiracy like the present,so widely diffused among persons of differ­ent ages, rank, sex, and condition, some ofthem poor, and others rich, it may well bematter of wonder, that nothing transpired,till the discovery burst out at once fromthe house of Scevinus., This active partisan,on the day preceding the intended execu­tion of the plot, had a long conference withAntonius Natalis; after which he returnedhome, and having sealed his will, unsheath­ed his sacred dagger, already mentioned.Finding it blunted by long disuse, he gaveit to Milichus, his freedman, to be wellwhetted, and sharpened at the point. Inthe mean time, he went to his meal, moresumptuously served than had been hiscustom. To his favourite slaves he grantedtheir freedom, and among the rest distri­buted sums of money. He affected an airof gaiety; he talked of indifferent things,with counterfeited cheerfulness; but acloud hung over him, and too plainlyshewed, that some grand design was la-







OCR Output








84 THE ANNALS


book an officer who had under his command a
XV.
i thousand marines. He was one of the as-


sis.' sassins employed in the tragic catastrophe65.' of Nero's mother. His reward, he thought,was in no proportion to the magnitude ofthe crime. Being known to Epicharis, orhaving then contracted a recent friendship,he began to disclose the secrets of his heart.He enumerated his exploits in Nero's serv­ice, and complained of the ingratitude withwhich he was ill requited; avowing, at thesame time, a fixed resolution to revengehimself, whenever an opportunity offered;The woman, from this discourse, conceivedhopes of gaining a proselyte, and by hismeans a number of others. She saw thata revolt in the fleet would be of the greatestmoment. Nero was fond of sailing partieson the coast of Misenum and Puteoli, andwould, by consequence, put himself in thepower of the mariners.
Epicharis entered into close conferencewith Proculus; she recapitulated the va­rious acts of cruelty committed by Nero.The fathers, she said, had no doubt re­maining; they were of one mind; all







OCR Output








OF TACITUS. I75


A. U. C.
8i9.


" sacerdotal dignitary offering up vows for book** the emperor; I want to see the citizen'* taking the oaths of fidelity. Perhaps" that haughty spirit towers above the laws %£'** and the religion of our ancestors; per-" haps he means to throw off the mask," and own himself a traitor and an enemy" to his county. Let him appear in this" assembly; let the patriot come; let the** leader of faction shew himself; the man" who so often played the orator in this" assembly, and took under his patronage" the inveterate enemies of the prince." Let us hear his plan of government: what" does he wish to change ? What abuses" does he mean to reform ? If he came" every day with objections, the cavilling" spirit of the man might tease, perplex,■* and embarrass us; but now his sullen" silence is worse; it condemns every thing" in the gross. And why all this discon-■" tent ? A settled peace prevails in every" quarter of the empire: does that afflict" him ? Our armies, without the effusion of" Roman blood, have been victorious: is" that the cause of his disaffection ? He" sickens in the midst of prosperity; he



