


OCR Output








384 THE DECLINE AND FALL


motives, was justified by very specious considerations of policy.Jencelr ^ne court of the emperor of the West was, for the most part,Milan established at Milan, whose situation, at the foot of the Alps, ap­peared far more convenient than that of Rome, for the importantpurpose of watching the motions of the barbarians of Germany.Milan soon assumed the splendour of an imperial city. The housesare described as numerous and well built; the manners of thepeople as polished and liberal. A circus, a theatre, a mint, a palace,baths, which bore the name of their founder Maximian j porticosadorned with statues, and a double circumference of walls, con­tributed to the beauty of the new capital; nor did it seem op­pressed even by the proximity of Rome 9°. To rival the majestyd^NiCOmC" °f Rome was the ambition likewise of Diocletian, who employedhis leisure, and the wealth of the East, in the embellishment ofNicomedia, a city placed on the verge of Europe and Asia, almostat an equal distance between the Danube and the Euphrates. Bythe taste of the monarch, and at the expence of the people, Ni-•comedia acquired, in the space of a few years, a degree of magnificencewhich might appear to have required the labour of ages, and becameinferior only to Rome, Alexandria, and Antioch, in extent or populous-ness 9% The life of Diocletian and Maximian was a life of action, anda considerable portion of it was spent in camps, or in their long and•frequent marches ; but whenever the public business allowed them anyrelaxation, they seem to have retired with pleasure to their favourite re­sidences of Nicomedia and Milan. Till Diocletian, in the twentiethyear ef his reign, celebrated his Roman triumph, it is extremelydoubtful whether he ever visited the ancient capital of the empire.Even on that memorable occasion his stay did not exceed twomonths. Disgusted with the licentious familiarity of the people,he quitted Rome with precipitation thirteen days before it wasexpected that he should have appeared in tbe senate, invested withthe ensigns of the consular dignity 9\
The







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN! EMPIRE.-


those princes were shackled by the forms of a commonwealth, anddisappointed by the repeated failure of their posterity ', it was im­possible that any idea of hereditary succession should have takenroot in the minds of their subjects. The right to the throne, whichnone could claim from birth, every one assumed from merit. Thedaring hopes of ambition were set loose from the salutary restraintsof law and prejudice; and the last of mankind might, without folly,entertain a hope of being raised by valour and fortune to a rankin the army, in which a single crime would enable him to wrestthe scepter of the world from his feeble and unpopular master.After the murder of Alexander Severus, and the elevation ofMaximin, no emperor could think himself safe upon the throne,and every barbarian peasant of the frontier might aspire to' thataugust, but dangerous station.
About thirty-two years before that event, the emperor Severus, Birth andreturning from an eastern expedition, halted in Thrace, to cele- Maximin!brate, with military games, the birth-day of his younger son, Geta.The country flocked in crowds to behold their sovereign, and ayoung barbarian of gigantic stature earnestly solicited, in his rudedialect, that he might be allowed to contend for the prize of wrest­ling. As the pride of discipline would have been disgraced in theoverthrow of a Roman soldier by a Thracian peasant, he was.matched with the stoutest followers of the camp, sixteen of whomhe successively laid on the ground. His victory was rewarded bysome trifling gifts, and a permission to insist in the troops. Thenext day, the happy barbarian was distinguished above a crowd ofrecruits, dancing and exulting after the fashion of his country.As soon as he perceived that he had attracted the emperor's notice,he instantly ran up to his horse, and followed him on foot, withoutthe least appearance of fatigue, in a long and rapid career. "Thra-«' cian," said Severus, with astonishment, " art thou disposed to"wrestle after thy race?" Most willingly, Sir, replied the un­wearied







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE,


by the abilities of Cyprian, and adorned by the eloquence of Lac-tantius. But if, on the contrary, we turn our eyes towards Gaul,we can only discern, in the time of Marcus Antoninus, the feeble andunited congregations of Lyons and Vienna; and even as late as thereign of Decius, we are assured, that in a few cities, Aries, Nar-bonne, Thoulouse, Limoges, Clermont, Tours, and Paris, some'scattered churches were supported by the devotion of a small num­ber of Christians '7'. Silence is indeed very consistent with devotion,but as it is seldom compatible with zeal, we may perceive and la­ment the languid state of Christianity in those provinces which had.exchanged the Celtic for the Latin tongue, since they did not,during the three first centuries, give birth to a single ecclesiasticalwriter. From Gaul, which claimed a just pre-eminence of learningand authority over all the countries on this fide of the Alps, the-light of the gospel was more faintly reflected on the remote pro-vinces of Spain and Britain; and if we may credit the vehementassertions of Tertullian, they had already received the first rays ofthe faith, when he addressed his apology to the magistrates of the.emperor Severus ,?\ But the obscure and imperfect origin of the,western churches of Europe has been so negligently recorded, thatif we would relate the time and manner of their foundation, we.must supply the silence of antiquity by those legends which avarice,or superstition long afterwards dictated to the monks in the lazygloom of their convents Of these holy romances, that of theapostle St. James can alone, by its singular extravagance, deserve tobe mentioned. From a peaceful fisherman of the lake of Gennesa-reth, he was transformed into a valorous knight, who charged at-the head of the Spanish chivalry in their battles against the Moors.The gravest historians have celebrated his exploits; the miracu­lous flirine of Compostella displayed his power; and the sword of a.military order, assisted by the terrors of the Inquisition, were suffi­cient to remove every objection of profane criticism.''*;.
i Thee







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 5G7


scarcely be expected that any government should suffer the actionof Marcellus the Centurion to pass with impunity. On the day ofa public festival, that officer threw away his belt, his arms, and theensigns of his office, and exclaimed with a loud voice, that he wouldobey none but Jesus Christ the eternal King, and that he renouncedfor ever the use of carnal weapons, and the service of an idolatrousmaster. The soldiers, as soon as they recovered from their asto­nishment, secured the person of Marcellus. He was examined inthe city of Tingi by the president of that part of Mauritania; andas he was convicted by his own confession, he was condemned andbeheaded for the crime of desertion ,4S. Examples of such a nature*savour much less of religious persecution than of martial or evencivil law: but they served to alienate the mind of the emperors, tojustify the severity of Galerius, who dismissed a great number ofChristian officers from their employments; and to authorize theopinion, that a sect of enthusiasts, which avowed principles so re­pugnant to the public safety, must either remain useless, or wouldsoon become dangerous subjects of the empire.
After the success of the Persian war had raised the hope* and the Galerius pre*-reputation of Galerius, he passed a winter with Diocletian in the cietlan^obelpalace of Nicomedia, and the fate of Christianity was the object of ^"^"Jn"1their secret consultations M6. The experienced emperor was still in­clined to pursue measures of lenity; and though he readily con­sented to exclude the Christians from holding any employments inthe household or the army, he urged in the strongest terms the dan­ger as well as cruelty of shedding the blood of those deluded fana^tics. Galerius at length extorted from him the permission of sum­moning a council, composed of a few persons the most distinguished:in the civil and military departments of the state. The importantquestion was agitated in their presence, and those ambitious cour­tiers easily discerned, that it was incumbent on them to second, bytheir eloquence, the importunate violence of the Cæsar. It may bo:
presumed^,







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE,


Operation, the particular effects of which are felt in every society,acted with much more diffusive energy in the Roman world. Theprovinces would-soon have been exhausted of their wealth if themanufactures and commerce of luxury had not insensibly restoredto the industrious subjects, the sums which were exacted fromthem by the arms and authority of Rome. As long as the circu­lation was confined within the bounds of the empire, it impressedthe political machine with a new, degree of activity, and its conse­quences, sometimes beneficial, could never become pernicious.
But it is no easy task to confine luxury within the limits of an Foempire. The most remote countries of the ancient world wereransacked to supply the pomp and delicacy of Rome. The forestsof Scythia afforded some valuable furs. Amber was brought overland from the shores of the Baltic to the Danube; and the bar­barians were astonished at the price which they received in exchangefor so useless a commodity ,0'. There was. a considerable demandfpr Babylonian carpets, and other manufactures of the east; butthe most important and unpopular branch of foreign trade wascarried on with Arabia and India. Every year, about the time of;tbe. summer solstice, a fleet of an hundred and twenty vessels failedfrom Myos-hormos,' a port of Egypt; on the Red Sea. By the.periodical assistance of the Monsoons, they traversed the ocean inabout forty days. The coast of Malabar, or the island of Ceylon,,ot, was the usual term of their navigation, and it was in'thosemarkets that the merchants from the more remote countries ofAsia expected their arrival. The return of the fleet of Egypt wasfixed to the months of December or January; and as soon as theirrich cargo had been transported on the backs of camels, fromthe Red Sea to the Nile, and had descended that river as far asAlexandria, it was poured, without delay, into the capital of theempire"". The objects of oriental traffic were splendid and trifling:silk, a pound of which was esteemed not inferior in value to a
., • > pound







OCR Output








OF. TH £ ; ROMAN EMPIRE. 487


likewise, the situation of the first Christians coincided very happilywith their religious scruples, and that their aversion to an active.life contributed rather to excuse them from the service, than to.exclude them from the honours, of the state and army.
V. But the human character, however it may be exalted The fifthor depressed by a temporary enthusiasm, will return by degrees to The Chris-its proper and natural level*and will resume those passions that seem f,ansactlve
* r 9 in thegovern-
the most adapted to its present condition. The primitive Christians ment os tl>e
church.
were dead to the business and pleasures of the world; but theirlove of action, which could never be entirely extinguished, soonrevived, and found a new occupation in the government of thechurch. A separate society, which attacked the established religion4)£ the empire, was obliged to adopt some form of internal policy,and to appoint a sufficient, number of ministers, intrusted not onlyrwith the spiritual functions, but even with the temporal directionof the Christian commonwealth. The safety of that society, itshonour, its aggrandisement, were; productive, even in the mostpious minds, of a spirit of patriotism, such as the first of theRomans had felt for the republic, and sometimes, of a similarindifference, in the use of whatever means might probably conduceto so desirable an end. The ambition of raising themselves or theirfriends to the honours and offices of the church, was disguised bythe laudable intention of devoting to the public benefit, the powerAnd consideration, which, for that purpose only, it became theirduty to solicit. In the exercise of their functions, they were fre­quently called upon to detect the. errors of heresy, or the arts offaction, to oppose the designs of perfidious brethren, to stigmatizetheir characters with deserved infamy, and to expel them from thebosom of a society, whose peace and happiness they had attempted.to disturb. The spiritual guides of Christianity were taught tounite the wisdom of the serpent with the innocence of the dove;but as the former was refined, so the latter was insensibly cor-.• : .1 4 rupted,







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


the populace, were perhaps the only order of priests,+s who derivedtheir whole support and credit from their sacerdotal profession*and who were very deeply affected by a personal concern for thesafety or prosperity of their tutelar deities. The ministersof polytheism, both in Rome and in the principal provinces,were, for the most part, men of a noble birth, and of an affluentfortune, who received, as an honourable distinction, the care of acelebrated temple, or of a public sacrifice, exhibited, very fre­quently at their own expence, the sacred games *49, and withcold indifference performed the ancient rites, according to thelaws and fashion of their country. Engaged in the ordinaryoccupations of life, their zeal and devotion were seldom animatedby a sense of interest, or by the habits of an ecclesiastical character.Confined to their respective temples and cities, they remainedwithout any connexion of discipline or government; and whilst theyacknowledged the supreme jurisdiction of the senate, of the collegeof pontiffs, and of the emperor, those civil magistrates contentedthemselves with the easy task of maintaining, in peace and dignity,the established worship of mankind. We have already seen howvarious, how loose, and how uncertain were the religious senti­ments of Polytheists. They were abandoned, almost withoutcontroul, to the natural workings of a superstitious fancy. Theaccidental circumstances of their life and situation determinedthe object as well as the degree of their devotion; and as longas their adoration was successively prostituted to a thousand deities,it was scarcely possible that their hearts could be susceptible of avery sincere or lively passion for any of them.When Christianity appeared in the world, even these faint and The sceP~
'ticism of the-
imperfect impressions had been insensibly obliterated. Human Pagan worldreason, which by its unassisted strength is incapable of perceiving vourabietothe mysteries of faith, had already obtained an easy triumph over religion*the folly of Paganism; and when Tertullian or Lactantius employ
S s s 4 their







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 509


and the number was increased to twenty by his successor Hera-clas ,6\ The body of the natives, a people distinguished by a sulleninflexibility of temper ,6', entertained the new doctrine with cold­ness and reluctance; and even in the time of Origen, it was rareto meet with an Egyptian who had surmounted his early prejudicesin favour of the sacred animals of his country ,s*. As soon, indeed,as Christianity ascended the throne, the zeal of those barbariansobeyed the prevailing impulsion; the cities of Egypt were filledwith bishops, and the deserts of Thebais swarmed with hermits.
A perpetual stream of strangers and provincials flowed into the In Rome;capacious bosom of Rome^ Whatever was strange or odious, who­ever wa« guilty or suspected, might hope, in the obscurity of thatimmense capital, to elude the vigilance of the law. In such a variousconflux of nations, every teacher, either of truth or of falsehood,every founder, whether of a virtuous or a criminal association, mighteasily multiply his disciples or accomplices. The Christians ofRome, at the time of the accidental persecution of Nero, are repre­sented by Tacitus as already amounting to a very great multitude ***,,and the language of that great historian is almost similar to the style-employed by Livy, when he relates the introduction and the sup­pression of the rites of Bacahus. After the Bacchanals had awa­kened the severity of the senate, it was likewise apprehended that avery great multitude, as it were another people, had been initiatedinto those abhorred mysteries. A more careful inquiry soon demon­strated, that the offenders did not exceed seven thousand; a num­ber indeed sufficiently alarming, when considered as the object ofpublic justice166. It is with the fame candid allowance that weshould interpret the vague expressions of Tacitus, and in a formerinstance of Pliny, when they exaggerate the crowds of deludedfanatics who had forsaken the established worship of the gods. Thechurch of Rome was undoubtedly the first and most populous ofthe empire; and we are possessed of an authentic record which at­tests-







OCR Output








X NOTES ON THE THIRD CHAPTER.


melpur, in Bengal, which is described in the Voy«ages de Tavernier, torn, ii, p. 2S1.
[ic6] Tacit. Annal. iii. 52. In a speech, ofTiberius.
[107] Plin. Hist. Natur. xii. 18. In anotherplace he computes half that sum; Quingenties H. S.for India exclusive of Arabia.
[108] The proportion which was 1 to 10, andIts rose to 14s, the legal regulation of Constantine.See Arbuthnot's Tables of ancient Coins, c. v.
[109] Among many other passages, fee Pliny,(Hist. Natur. iii. $ ) Aristides, (de Urbe Roma)and Tertullian (de Anima, c. 30.).
[no] Herodes Atticus gave the sophist Polemoabove eight thousand pounds for three declamations.See Philostrat. 1. i. p. 558. The Antonines found­


ed a school at Athens, in which professors of gram>-mar, rhetoric, politics, and the four great sects ofphilosophy, were maintained at the public expencefor the instruction of youth. The salary of a philo­sopher was ten thousand drachmae, between threeand four hundred pounds a year. Similar establish­ments were formed in the other great cities of theempire. See Lucian in Eunuch, torn. ii. p. 353.edit. Reitz. Philostrat. 1. ii. p. 566. Hist. Au­gust, p. 21. Dion Caffiua, 1. lxxi. p. 1195.
[in] Longin. do Sublim. c. 43. p. 229. edit.Toll. Here too wemayYayof Longinus, " his ownexample strengthens all his laws." Instead of pro­posing his sentiments with a manly boldness, he in­sinuates them with the most guarded caution, putsthem into the mouth of a friend; and as far as wecan collect from a corrupted text, makes a sliew ofrefuting them himself.


NOTES ON THE THIRD CHAPTER.


[1] WROS1US, vi. 18.
[2] Julius Cæsar introduced soldiers, strangersand half-barbarians, into the senate (Sueton, inCæsar, c. 77. 80.). The abuse became still morescandalous after his death.
[3] Dion Cassius, I. Iii. p. 693. Suetonius inAugust, c. 55. ,
[4] Dion (1. liii. p. 698) gives as a prolix andbombast speech on this great occasion. I have bor­rowed from Suetonius and Tacitus the general lan­guage of Augustus.
[5] Imperator (from which we have derived em­peror) signified under the republic no more thangeneral, and was emphatically bestowed by thesoldiers, when on the field of battle they proclaimedtheir victorious leader worthy of that title. Wheathe Roman emperors assumed it in that fense, theyplaced it after their name, and marked how often theyhad taken it.
[6] Dion, 1. liii, p. 703, &c.


[7] Livy Epitom. 1. xiv. Valer. Maxim, vi. jt
[8] See in the viiith book of Livy, the conductof Manlius Torquatus and Papirius Cnrfor. Theyviolated the laws 6f nature and humanity, but theyasserted those of military discipline; and the people,who abhorred the action, was obliged to respect theprinciple.
[9] By the lavish but unconstrained suffrages ofthe people, Pompey had obtained a military com­mand scarcely inferior to that of Augustas. Amongthe extraordinary acts of power executed by the for­mer, we may remark the foundation of twenty ninecities, and the distribution of three or four millionssterling to his troops. The ratification of his acts-met with some opposition and delays in the senate.See Plutarch, Appian, Dion CaffiuSj and the firstbook of the epistles to Atticus.
[10] Under the commonwealth, a triumph couldonly be claimed by the general, who was authorised'to take the Auspices in the name of the people.By an exact consequence drawn frpm this principleof policy and religion, the triumph was reserved


7 to.







OCR Output








lxviii NOTES ON THE FIFTEENTH CHAPTER.


[33] Tertullian (Apolog. c. 23.) alleges the con­fession of the Demons themselves as often as theywere tormented by the Christian exorcists.
[39] Tertullian has written a most severe treatiseagainst idolatry, to caution his brethren againstthe hourly danger of incurring that guilt. Re-cogita sylvam, et quanta; latitant spinæ. De ldo-latria, c. 10.
[40] The Roman senate was always held in atemple or consecrated place (Aulus Gellius, xiv. 7.).Before they entered on business, every senator droptsome wine and frankincense on the altar. Sueton.in August, c. 3 j.
[41] See Tertullian, De Spcctaculis. This se­vere reformer shews no more indulgence to a tra­gedy of Euripides, than to a combat of gladiators.The dress of the actors particularly offends him. Bythe use of the lofty buskin, they impiously strive toadd a cubit to their stature, c. 23.
'[42] The ancient practice of concluding the en­tertainment with libations, may be found in everyclastic. Socrates and Seneca, in their last moments,made a noble application of this custom. Postquamslagnum calidæ aquae introiit, respergens proximo*servorum, addita voce, libare se liquorem iliumJovi Liberatori. Tacit. Annal. xv. 64.
[43] See the elegant but idolatrous hymn ofCatullus, on the nuptials of Manlius and Julia.O Hymen, Hymensce lo! Quis huic Deo comparierausit?
[44] The ancient funerals (in those of Misenusand Pallas) are no less accurately described byVirgil, than they are illustrated by his commen­tator Servius. The pile itself was an altar, theflames were fed with the blood of victims, and allthe assistants were sprinkled with lustral water.
[45] Tertullian de Idolatria, c. 11.
[46] See every part of Montsaucon's Anti­quities. Even the reverses of the Greek and Ro-man coins were frequently of an idolatrous nature.Here indeed the scruples of the Christian were sus­pended by a stronger passion.
[47] Tertullian de Idolatria, c. 2c, 21, jz. Ifa Pagan friend (on the occasion perhaps of sneez­ing) used the familiar expression of " Jupiter bless"you," the Christian was obliged to protest againstthe divinity of Jupiter.


[48] Consult the most laboured work of Ovid, hisimperfect Fasti. He finished no more than the firstsix months of the year. The compilation ofMacrobins is called the Saturnalia, but it is only asmall part of the first book that bears any relationto the title.
[49] Tertullian has composed a defence, or ratherpanegyric, of the rash action of a Christian soldier,who, by throwing away his crown of laurel, had ex­posed himself and his brethren to the most imminentdanger. By the mention of the emperors (Severusand Caracalla) it is evident, notwithstanding thewishes of M. de Tillemont, that Tertullian com­posed his treatise De Corona, long before he was en­gaged in the errors of the Montanists. See MemoiresEcclesiastiqucs, torn. iii. p. 384.
[50] In particular, the first book of the TusculanQuestions, and the treatise De Senectute, and theSomnium Scipionis, contain, in the most beautifullanguage, every thing that Grecian philosophy,or Roman good sense, could possibly suggest on thisdark but important subject.
[51] The pre-existence of human souls, so far atleast as that doctrine is compatible with religion,was adopted by many of the Greek and Latin fa-thers. See Beausobre, Hist, du Manicheisme, 1. vi,c. 4.
[52] See Cicero pro Cluent. c. 6:. C-rsir ap.Sallust de Bell. Catilin. c. 50. Juvenal Saiir. ii.
Esse aliquos manes, et subterranea regna, •
i '• t'"
Nec pueri credunt, nisi qui nondum ære lavantur. -
[53] The xith book of the Odyssey gives a verydreary and incoherent account of the infernalshades. Pindar and Virgil have embellished thepicture; but even those poets, though more correitthan their great model, are guilty of very strangeinconsistencies. See Bayle, Reponscs au questionsd' un Provincial, part iii. c. 22.
[54] See the xvith Epistle of the first Book ofHorace, the xiiith Satire of Juvenal, and the iidSatire of l:ersius: these popular discourses expressthe sentiment and language of the muhitude.
[55] The Druids borrowed sums of money onbonds made payable to the creditor in.the other
world.


3







OCR Output








5^3 THE DECLINE AND FALL


an annual present from the churches within their jurisdiction, as theprice, or as the reward, of their moderation ,0\ The controversyconcerning the precise time of the celebration of Easter armed thebishops of Asia and Italy against each other, and was considered asthe most important business of this period of leisure and tranquil­lity '°9. Nor was the peace of the church interrupted, till the ir>creasing numbers of proselytes seem at length to have attracted' theA.D. 198. attention, and to have alienated the mind, of Severus. With thedesign of restraining the progress of Christianity, he published anedict, which, though it seemed to affect only the new converts, couldnot be carried into strict execution, without exposing to danger andpunishment the most zealous of their teachers and missionaries. Iathi6 mitigated persecution, we may still discover the indulgent spiritof Rome and of Polytheism, which so readily admitted every excusein-favour of those who practised the religious-ceremonies of their fa­thers'*0.
0/the succes- But. the laws which Severus had enacted soon expired with
sors cfSeve- , , „ •. . • , ^_ . . „
rus. the authority or that emperor j and5 the' Christians, after this
249° 2M_ accidental tempest, enjoyed a calm of thirty-eight* years-"*. Tiflthis period they had usually held their assemblies in private housesand sequestered places. They were now permitted to erect and con^sccrate convenient edifices for the purpose of religious worfliip;to purchase lands, even at Rome itself, for the use of the commu­nity; and' to conduct the elections of1 their ecclesiastical ministers inso public, but at the same time in so exemplary, a manner, as todeserve the respectful attention of the Gentiles '". This long reposeof the church was accompanied with dignity. The reigns of thoseprinces, who derived: their extraction from the Asiatic provincesproved, the most: favourable to the Christians; the. eminent per­sons of the sect, instead of being reduced, t0; implore the pro­tection of a slave or concubine,, were admitted,into the;palace inthe honourable characters of priests and philosophers; and their
mys­







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


lifhed, instead of being condemned as the effect of jealous tyranny, ^e0^freJedeserves to be applauded as an act of prudence.and humanity. He chymy.caused a diligent inquiry to be made "for all the ancient booksu which treated of the admirable art of making gold and silver,"and without pity committed them to the flames; apprehensive,«* as we are assured, lest the opulence of the Egyptians should in-"spire them with confidence to rebel against the empire SV Butif Diocletian had been convinced of the reality of that valuableart, far from extinguishing the memory, he would have convertedthe operation of it to the benefit of the public revenue. It is muchmore likely that his good fense discovered to him the folly of suchmagnificent pretensions, and that he was desirous of preserving thereason and fortunes of his subjects from the mischievous pursuit.It may be remarked, that these ancient books, so liberally ascribed Novelty andto Pythagoras, to Solomon, or to Hermes, were the pious frauds [hafart.of more recent adepts. The Greeks were inattentive either to theuse or to the abuse of chymistry. In that immense register, wherePliny has deposited the discoveries, the arts, and the errors of man­kind, there is not the least mention of the transmutation of metals;and the persecution of Diocletian is the first authentic event in thehistory of alchymy. The conquest of Egypt by the Arabs diffusedthat vain science over the globe. Congenial to the avarice of thehuman heart, it was studied in China as in Europe, with equaleagerness, and with equal success. The darkness of the middleages ensured a favourable reception to every tale of wonder, andthe revival of learning gave new vigour to hope, and suggestedmore specious arts of deception. Philosophy, with the aid of expe­rience, has at length banished the study of alchymy; and the pre­sent age, however desirous of riches, is content to seek them by thehumbler means of commerce and industry
The reduction of Egypt was immediately followed by the Persian The Persia*war. It was reserved for the reign of Diocletian to vanquish that **r"
B b b 2, powerful







OCR Output








552 THE DECLINE AND FALL


A.D. 284..September 12,


Return ofNumerianwith the armyfrom Persia.


pleasure of the spectators. They were protected from the fun andrain by an ample canopy, occasionally drawn over their heads. Theair wa9 continually refreshed by the playing of fountains, and pro­fusely impregnated by the grateful scent of aromatics. In the cen­ter of the edifice, the arena, or stage, was strewed with the finestsand, and successively afTumed the most different forms. At onemoment it seemed to rise out of the earth, like the garden of theHefperides, and was afterwards broken into the rocks and caverns ofThrace. The subterraneous pipes conveyed an inexhaustible supplyof water; and what had just before appeared a level plain, mightbe suddenly converted into a wide lake, covered with armed vessels,and replenished with the monsters of the deep95. In the decorationof these scenes, the Roman empefors displayed their wealth andliberality; and we read on various occasions, that the whole furni­ture of the amphitheatre consisted either of silver, or of gold, or ofamber 9<s. The poet who describes the games of Carinus, in the cha­racter of a shepherd attracted to the capital by the fame of theirmagnificence, affirms, that the nets designed as a defence against thewild beasts, were of gold wire; that the porticos were gilded, and thatthe belt or circle which divided the several ranks of spectators fromeach other, was studded with a precious Mosaic of beautiful stones 97.
In the midst of this glittering pageantry, the emperor Carinus,secure of his fortune, enjoyed the acclamations of the people, theflattery of his courtiers, and the songs of the poets, who, for wantof a more essential merit, were reduced to celebrate the divinegraces of his person 9*. In the same hour, but at the distance ofnine hundred miles from Rome, his brother expired; and a suddenrevolution transferred into the hands of a stranger the scepter of thehouse of Carus
The sons of Carus never saw each other after their father's death.The arrangements which their new situation required, were proba-
6 bly







OCR Output








l62 THE DECLINE AND FALL


sordid result of avarice, and will naturally be illustrated by some, observations on the finances of that state, from the victorious ages ofthe commonwealth to the reign of Alexander Severus.Establishment The siege of Veii in Tuscany, the first considerable enterprise ofthe Romans, was protracted to the tenth year, much less by thestrength of the place than by the unfkilfulneso of the besiegers.The unaccustomed hardships of so many winter campaigns, at thedistance of near twenty miles from home 8l, required more thancommon encouragements; and the senate wisely prevented the cla­mours of the people, by the institution of a regular pay for thesoldiers, which was levied by a general tribute, assessed according toan equitable proportion on the property of the citizens *\ During:more than two hundred years after the conquest of Veii, the victo­ries of the republic added less to the wealth than to the power ofRome. The states of Italy paid their tribute in military serviceonly, and the vast force both by sea and land, which was exerted inthe Punic wars, was maintained at the expence of the Romans them­selves. That high-spirited people (such is often the generous en­thusiasm of freedom) cheerfully submitted to the most excessive butvoluntary burdens, in the just confidence that they should speedilyenjoy the rich harvest of their labours. Their expectations werenot disappointed. In the course of a few years, the riches of Syra­cuse, of Carthage, of Macedonia, and of Asia, were brought in tri-and abolition umph to Rome. The treasures of Perseus alone amounted to nearon RomantC two millions sterling, and the Roman people, the sovereign of socmzens. many nations, was for ever delivered from the weight of taxes 85.
The increasing revenue of the provinces was found sufficient todefray the ordinary establishment of war and government, and thesuperfluous mass of gold and silver was deposited in the temple ofSaturn, and reserved for any unforeseen emergency of the state *4.Tributes of History has never perhaps suffered a greater or more irreparablethe provinces mjurVj fa&J1 [n fa iQf8 0f t^at curious register bequeathed by Au­gustus­







OCR Output








N 61E § 6n f it E


[ty] l5!bn,l. hxiv. p. 1443.
[68] One of his most daring and wanton acts ofpower, was the castration of an hundred free Ro­mans, some of them married men, and even fatherso'Ffamilies ; merely that his daughter, on her mar­riage with the young emperor might be attended bya trairi of eunuchs worthy of an Eastern queen.Dion; 1. lxxvi. p. 1271.
f/o] Dio, I. lxxvi. p. 1174. Herodian, 1. iii.p. 122. 129. The grammarian of Alexandria seems,


as is not unusual, much better aCqfllltllted with this.
mysterious transaction, and more assured of the guilt'osPlautknus, than the Roman sciatorventures to be.
t7~J Appia'n Isi Profcm.
[71] Dion Caffius Æcms to have Written with noother View, than to form these opinions into an his*torical system. The Pandects will {hew how assidu­ously the lawyers, on their side, laboured in thecause of prerogative.


NOTES ON THfc'SIXTH CHAPTER.


[1] TjslST. August, p. 71. "Omnk fui, etsi nihil expedit."
[2] Dion Caffius, 1. lxxvi. p. 1284.
{5] About the year 186, M. de Tilhimont ismiserably embarrassed with a passage of Dion, inwhich the empress Faustina, who died in the year1-5, is introduced as having contributed to the rhar-riage ofSeverus and Julia (I. lxxiv. p. 124.3.). Thelearned compiler forgot, that Dion is relating, not areal fact, but a dream of Severus; and dreams arecircumscribed to no limits of rime or space. DidM. de Tillemont imagine that marriages were cm-JWiimbiiii in the temple of Venus at Rome? Hist,des Empereurs, torn. iii. p. 389. Note 6.
[4] Hist. August, p. 65.
[5] Hist. August, p. 85.
[6] Dion Caffius,!, Ixxvii. p. 13C4. 1314.
[7] See a Dissertation of Menage, at the end ofhis edition of Diogenes Laertins, de Faminis Phi-losophis.
[8] Dicn, 1. lxxvi. p. 1285. Aurelius Victor.
[9] Baffianus was his first name, as it had beenthat of his maternal grandfather. During hisreign he assumed the appellation of Antoninus, whichis employed by lawyers and ancient historians. Af­


ter his death, the public indignation loaded himwith the nick-names of Tarantus and Caracalla.The first was borrowed from a celebrated Gladiator,,the second from a long Gallic gown which he dis­tributed to the people os Rome.
[10] The elevation of Caracalla is fixed by theaccurate M. de Tillemont to the year 198; the asso­ciation of Geta, to the year 208.
[liij Herodian, 1. iii. p. 130. The lives of Ca*racalla and Geta, in the Augustan History.
[12] Dion, 1. lxxvi. p. 1280, &c. Herodian, 1. iii.
p. I3J»&C»
[13] Osiian's Poems, vol. i. p. 175,
[14] That the Caracul of Cffian, is the Caracallaof the Roman history, is, perhaps, the only pointof British antiquity, in which Mr. Macpherson andMr. Whitaker are of the same opinion; and yet theopinion is not without difficulty. In theCalcdoaiaawar, the son of Severus was known only by the ap­pellation of Antoninus; and it may seem strange,that the Highland bard should describe him by anick-name, invented four years afterwards, scarcelynsed by the Romans till after the death of that em­peror, and seldom employed by the most ancienthistorians. See Dion, 1. Ixxvii. p. 1317. Hist.August, p. 89. Aurel. Victor. Euse'b. in Chron. adami. 214.
[15] Dion,







OCR Output








i48 THE DECLINE AND FALL


Picture of As the attention of the new emperor was diverted by the most tri-
Elagabalus. * *
A. d. 219. fling amusements, he wasted many months in his luxurious progressfrom Syria to Italy, passed at Nicomedia the first winter after his vie-tory, and deferred till the ensuing summer his triumphal entry intothe capital. A faithful picture, however, which preceded his arrival,and was placed by his immediate order over the altar of Victory inthe senate-house, conveyed to the Romans the just but unworthyresemblance of his person and manners. He was drawn in hissacerdotal robes of silk and gold, after the loose flowing fashion ofthe Medes and Phœnicians; his head was covered with a lofty tiara,his numerous collars and bracelets were adorned with gems of aninestimable value. His eye-brows were tinged with black, and hischeeks painted with an artificial red and white 5V The grave sena­tors confessed with a sigh, that after having long experienced thestern tyranny of their own countrymen, Rome was at length hum­bled beneath the effeminate luxury of Oriental despotism.
H» soperstL- The Sun was worshipped at Emesa, under the name of Elaga-balus 5i, and under the form of a black conical stone, which, as kwas universally believed, had fallen from heaven on that sacredplace. To this protecting deity, Antoninus, not without somereason, ascribed his elevation to the throne. The display of supersti­tious gratitude, was the only serious business of his reign. Thetriumph of the god of Emesa over all the religions of the earth,was the great object of his zeal and vanity; and the appellation ofElagabalus (for he presumed as pontiff and favourite to adopt thatsacred name) was dearer to him than all the titles of Imperial great­ness. In a solemn procession through the streets of Rome, the waywas strewed with gold dust; the black stone, set in precious gems,was placed on a chariot drawn by six milk-white horses richly ca­parisoned. The pious emperor held the reins, and supported by hisministers, moved (lowly backwards, that he might perpetually enjoythe felicity of the divine presence. In a magnificent temple raisedon the Palatine Mount, the sacrifices ofj the god Elagabalus were cele­brated







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


debased their sentiments, enervated their courage, and depressedtheir talents. "In the fame manner, fays he, as some children al-"ways remain pygmies, whose infant limbs have been too closely"confined, thus our tender minds, fettered by the prejudices and"habits of a just servitude, are unable to expand themselves, or to"attain that well-proportioned greatness which we admire in the"ancients; who living under a popular government, wrote with the*' fame freedom as they acted This diminutive stature of
mankind, if we pursue the metaphor, was daily sinking below theold standard, and the Roman world was indeed peopled by a raceof pygmies; when the fierce giants of the north broke in, andmended the puny breed. They restored a manly spirit of freedom;and after the revolution of ten centuries, freedom became the happyparent of taste and science.


1 2 CHAP.







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 4%S


by divorce or by death. The practice of second nuptialsbranded with the name of a legal adultery; and the persons whowere guilty of so scandalous an offence against Christian purity,were soon excluded from the honours, and even from the alms, ofthe church ',. Since desire was imputed as a crime, and marriagewas tolerated as a defect, it was confident with the fame principlesto consider a state of celibacy as the nearest approach to the Divineperfection. It was with the utmost difficulty that ancient Romecould support the institution of six vestals 9*; but the primitivechurch was filled with a great number of persons of either sex, whohad devoted themselves to the profession of perpetual chastity 9i. Afew of these, among whom we may reckon the learned Origen, judgedit the most prudent to disarm the tempter 9*. Some were insensibleand some were invincible against the assaults of the flesh. Disdainingan ignominious flight, the virgins of the warm climate of Africaencountered the enemy in the closest engagement; they permittedpriests and deacons to share their bed, and gloried amidst the flamesin their unsullied purity. But insulted Nature sometimes vindicatedher rights, and this new species of martyrdom served only to in­troduce a new scandal into the church 9S. Among the Christianascetics, however, (a name which they soon acquired from theirpainful exercise) many, as they were less presumptuous, were pro­bably more successful. The loss of sensual pleasure was suppliedand compensated by spiritual pride. Even the multitude of Paganswere inclined to estimate the merit of the sacrifice by its apparentdifficulty; and it was in the praise of these chaste spouses of Christthat the fathers have poured forth the troubled stream of theireloquence a<5. Such are the early traces of monastic principles andinstitutions, which, in a subsequent age, have counterbalanced allthe temporal advantages of Christianity
The Christians were not less averse to the business than to the Their aw.pleasures of this world. The defence of our persons and property bofiaefiof
war and*"ey governor, ut







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


dox Christians, who not only excluded their Judaizing brethrenfrom the hope of salvation, but who declined any intercourse withthem in the common offices of friendship, hospitality, and sociallife *\ The more rigorous opinion prevailed, as it was natural toexpect, over the milder; and an eternal bar of separation was fixedbetween the disciples of Moses and those of Christ. The unfor­tunate Ebionites, rejected from one religion as apostates, and fromthe other as heretics, found themselves compelled to assume a moredecided character; and although some traces of that obsolete sectmay be discovered as late as the fourth century, they insensiblymelted away either into the church or the synagogue
While the orthodox church preserved a just medium between The Gnostic*,excessive veneration and improper contempt for the law of Moses,the various heretics deviated into equal but opposite extremes oferror and extravagance. From the acknowledged truth of theJewish religion, the Ebionites had concluded that it could never beabolished. From its supposed imperfections the Gnostics as hastilyinferred that it never was instituted by the wisdom of the Deity.There are some objections against the authority of Moses and theprophets, which too readily present themselves to the sceptical mind;though they can only be derived from our ignorance of remote anti­quity, and from our incapacity to form an adequate judgment of thedivine œconomy. These objections were eagerly embraced and aspetulantly urged by the vain science of the Gnostics %s. As thoseheretics were, for the most part, averse to the pleasures of fense,they morosely arraigned the polygamy of the patriarchs, the gal­lantries of David, and the seraglio of Solomon. The conquest ofthe land of Canaan, and the extirpation of the unsuspecting natives,they were at a loss how to reconcile with the common notions of hu­manity and justice. But when they recollected the sanguinary listof murders, of executions, and of massacres, which stain almostevery page of the Jewish annals, they acknowledged that the bar-
N n n 2 bariaas







OCR Output








360 THE DECLINE AND FALL


acquired the denomination of Chlorus were the two personainvested with the second honours of the imperial purple. Indescribing the country, extraction, and manners of Herculius, wehave already delineated those of Galerius, who was often, and notimproperly, styled the younger Maximian, though, in many in­stances both of virtue and ability, he appears superior to the elder*The birth of Constantius was less obscure than that of his colleagues.Eutropius, his father, was one of the most considerable nobles ofDardania, and his mother was the niece of the emperor ClaudiusAlthough the youth of Constantius had been spent in arms, hepossessed a mild and amiable disposition, and the popular voice hadlong since acknowledged him worthy of the rank which he at lastattained. To strengthen the bonds of political, by those of domesticunion, each of the emperors assumed the character of a father toone of the Cæsars, Diocletian to Galerius, and Maximian to Con­stantius; and each obliging them to repudiate their former wives,bestowed his daughter in marriage on his adopted son'5. Thesefour princes distributed among themselves the wide extent of theDepartments Roman empire. The defence of Gaul, Spain ,+, and Britain, wasofdthearfour"y entrusted to Constantius: Galerius was stationed on the banks ofprinces. ^ jjanubej as the safeguard of the Illyrian provinces. Italy andAfrica were considered as the department of Maximian, and for hispeculiar portion, Diocletian reserved Thrace, Egypt, and the richcountries of Asia. Every one was sovereign within his own juris­diction; but their united authority extended over the whole mo­narchy; and each of them was prepared to assist his colleagues withhis counsels or presence. The Cæsars, in their exalted rank, reveredthe majesty of the emperors, and the three younger princes in­variably acknowledged, by their gratitude and obedience, the com­mon parent of their fortunes. The suspicious jealousy of powerfound not any place among them; and the singular happiness oftheir union, has been compared to a chorus of music, whose har­


4 mony







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 501


Galatian, who after his baptism had repeatedly sacrificed to idols*might obtain his pardon by a penance of seven years, and-ifhe had seduced others to imitate his example, only three yearsmore were added to the term of his exile. But the unhappySpaniard, who had committed the fame offence, was deprived ofthe hope of reconciliation, even in the article of death; and hisidolatry was placed at the head of a list of seventeen other crimes^against which a sentence no less terrible was pronounced. Among,these we may distinguish the inexpiable guilt of calumniating abishop, a presbyter, or even a deacon '*6.
The well tempered mixture of liberality and rigour, the judicious The dignity-dispensation of rewards and punishments, according to the maxims of eP:koPa ,
r . - . . government..
of policy as well as justice, constituted the human strength of thechurch. The bishops, whose paternal care extended itself to thegovernment of both worlds, were sensible of the importance ofthese prerogatives, and covering their ambition with the fair pre­tence of the love of order, they were jealous of any rival in theexercise of a discipline so necessary to prevent the desertion ofthose troops which had inlisted themselves under the banner of thecross, and whose numbers every day became more considerable.From the imperious declamations of Cyprian, we should naturallyconclude, that the doctrines of excommunication and penanceformed the most essential part of religion; and that it was muchless dangerous for the disciples of Christ to neglect the observance ofthe moral duties, than to despise the censures and authority oftheir bishops. Sometimes we might imagine that we were listeningto the voice of Moses, when he commanded the earth to open,and to swallow up,, in consuming flames, the rebellious race whichrefused obedience to the priesthood of Aaron; and we should some­times suppose that we heard a Roman consul asserting the majesty©f the republic, and declaring his inflexible resolution to enforcethe rigour of the laws. ** If such irregularities are suffered with.
• * impunity







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 5*9


CHAP. XVI.
The conduB of the Roman Government towards the Chri­stians > from the reign of Nero to that of Constantine.
IF we seriously consider the purity of the Christian religion, the Christianitysanctity of its moral precepts, and the innocent as well as austere thesRomanKVes of the greater number of those, who during the first ages emPerors*embraced the faith of the gospel, we should naturally suppose, thatso benevolent a doctrine would have been received with due re­verence, even by the unbelieving world j that the learned andthe polite, however they might deride the miracles, wouldhave esteemed the virtues of the new sect; and that the ma­gistrates, instead of persecuting, would have protected an orderof men who yielded the most passive obedience to the laws, thoughthey declined the active cares of war and government. If on theother hand we recollect the universal toleration of Polytheism, asit was invariably maintained by the faith of the people, the in­credulity of philosophers, and the policy of the Roman senate and'emperors, we are at a loss to discover what new offence the Chri­stians had committed, what new provocation could exasperate themild indifference of antiquity, and what new motives could urgethe Roman princes, who beheld without concern a thousand formsof religion subsisting in peace under their gentle sway, to inflicta severe punishment on any part of their subjects, who had chosenfor themselves a singular but an inoffensive mode of faith andworst) ip.
The religious policy of the ancient world seems to haveassumed a more stern and intolerant character, to oppose the2 progress







OCR Output








NOTES ON THE FIFTH CHAPTER. xix


{43] Herodian, 1. ii. p. 85.
[44] While Severus was very dangerously ill, itwas industriously given out, that he intended to ap­point Niger and Albinus his successors. As hecould not be sincere with respect to both, he mightnot be so with regard to either. Yet Severuscarried his hypocrisy so far, as to profess that in­tention in the memoirs of his own life.
[4;] Hist. August, p. 65.
[46] This practice, invented by Commodus,proved very useful to Severus. He found, at Rome,the children of many of the principal adherents ofhis rivals; and he employed (hem more than onceto intimidate, or seduce the parents.
[47] Herodian, 1. iii. p. 96. Hist. August,p. 67, 68.
[48] Hist. August, p. 84. Spartianus has insertedthis curious letter at full length.
[49] Consult the third book of Herodian, artdthe seventy-fourth of Dion Caffius.
[50] Dion, 1. lxxv. p. 126c.
[51] Dion, 1. lxxv. p. 1261. Herodian, 1. iii.p. 110. Hist. August, p. 68. The battle wasfought in the plain of Trevoux, three or four leaguesfrom Lyons. See Tillemont, torn. iii. p. 406.Note 18.
[52] Montesquieu Considerations fur la Gran­deur, et la Decadence des Romains, c. xii.
[$3] Most of these, as may be supposed, weresmall open vessels, some, however, were gallies oftwo, and a few of three ranks of oars.
[54] The engineer's name was Priscus. Hisskill saved his life, and he was taken into the servicecf the conqueror. For the particular facts of thesiege, consult Dion Cassius, (1. lxxv. p. 1251) andHerodian (1. iii. p. 9;.): for the theory of it, thefanciful chevalier de Folard may be looked into. SeePolybe, torn. i. p. 76.
[55] Notwithstanding the authority of Sparti­anus and some modern Greeks, we may be assured,


from Dion and Herodian, that Byzantium, manyyears after the death of Severus, lay in ruins.
[56] Dion, 1. lxxiv. p. 1250.
[57] Dion (1. lxxv. p. 1264.) only 29 senators arementioned by him, but 41 are named in the Augus­tan History, p. 69. among whom were six of thename of Pescennius. Herodian (1. iii. p. 115.)speaks in general of the cruelties of Severus.
[58] Aurelius Victor.
[59] Dion, 1. Ixxvi. p. 1272. Hist. August, p. 67.Severus celebrated the secular games with extra­ordinary magnificence, and he left in the publicgranaries a provision of corn for seven years, at therateof75,oco modii, or about 2500 quarters perday. I am persuaded, that the granaries of Severuswere supplied for a long term, but I am not lesspersuaded, that policy on one hand, and admirationon the other, magnified the hoard far beyond itstrue contents,
[60] See Spanheim's treatise of ancient medals,the inscriptions, and our learned travellers Sponand Wheeler, Shaw, Pocock, &c. who, in Africa,Greece, and Asia, have found more monuments ofSeverus, than of any other Roman emperor what*soever.
[61] He carried his victorious arms to Seleuciaand Ctesiphon, the capitals of the Parthian mo-narchy. I (hall have occasion to mention this warin its proper place.
[62] Et tarn in Britannit, was his own just andemphatic expression. Hist. August. 73.
[63] Herodian, 1. iii. p. 115. Hist. August,p. 68.
[64] Upon the insolence and privileges of the sol­diers, the 16th satire, falsely ascribed to Juvenal,may be consulted; the style and circumstances of itwould induce me to believe, that it was composedunder the reign of Severus or that of his son.
[65] Hist. August, p. 73.
[66] Herodian, 1. iii. p. 131.
c 2 [67] Dion,







OCR Output








3i* THE DECLINE AND FALL


Persian monarch. The triumphal car of Aurelian, (it had formerly-been used by a Gothic king) was drawn, on this memorable occasion,either by four stags or by four elephantst0. The most illustrious of thesenate, the people, and the army, closed the solemn procession. Un­feigned joy, wonder and gratitude, swelled the acclamations of themultitude; but the satisfaction of the senate was clouded by theappearance of Tetricus; nor could they suppress a rising murmur,that the haughty emperor mould thus expose to public ignominythe person of a Roman and a magistrateHis treat- But however, in the treatment of his unfortunate rivals, Aure-uicus and lian might indulge his pride, he behaved towards them with a ge-1 1' nerous clemency, which was seldom exercised by the ancient con­querors. Princes who, without success, had defended their throneor freedom, were frequently strangled in prison, as soon as the tri­umphal pomp ascended the capitol. These usurpers, whom their defeathad convicted of the crime of treason, were permitted to spend theirlives in affluence and honourable repose. The emperor presented Ze-nobia with an elegant villa at Tibur, or Tivoli, about twenty milesfrom the capital; the Syrian queen insensibly sunk into a Romanmatron, her daughters married into noble families, and her racewas not yet extinct in the fifth century 8\ Tetricus and his sonwere reinstated in their rank and fortunes. They erected on theCælian hill a magnificent palace, and as soon as it was finished, in­vited Aurelian to supper. On his entrance, he was agreeably sur­


prised with a picture which represented their singular history.They were delineated offering to the emperor a civic crown and thescepter of Gaul, and again receiving at bis hands the ornamentsof the senatorial dignity. The father was afterwards investedwith the government of Lucania 8}, and Aurelian, who soon admit­ted the abdicated monarch to his friendship and conversation, fami­liarly alked him, Whether it were not more desirable to administera province of Italy, than to reign beyond the Alps? The son long
continued


 







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 73


mined republican; and the Romans who revered the memory ofBrutus 17, would applaud the imitation of his virtue. Cæsar hadprovoked his fate, as much by the ostentation of his power, as byhis power itself. The consul or the tribune might have reigned inpeace. The title of King had armed the Romans against his life.Augustus was sensible that mankind is governed by names, nor washe deceived in his expectation, that the senate and people wouldsubmit to flavery, provided they were respectfully assured, that theystill enjoyed their ancient freedom. A feeble senate and enervatedpeople cheerfully acquiesced in the pleasing illusion, as long as itwas supported by the virtue, or by even the prudence, of the suc­cessors of Augustus. It was a motive of self-preservation, not aprinciple of liberty, that animated the. conspirators against Cali­gula, Nero, and Domitian. They, attacked the person of thetyrant, without aiming their blow at the authority of the em­peror. . .
There appears, indeed, one memorable occasion, in which the Attempt ofsenate, after seventy-years of patience, made an ineffectual attempt after theto reassume its long forgotten rights. When the throne was va- jjgui^.°f C*cant by the murder of Caligula, the consuls convoked that assembly,in the Capitol, condemned the memory of the Cæsars, gave thewatch word liberty to the few cohorts who faintly adhered to theirstandard, and during eight and forty hours, acted as the independ­ent chiefs of a free commonwealth. But while they deliberated,the prætorian guards had resolved. The stupid Claudius, brotherof Germanicus, was already in their camp, invested with the Im­perial purple, and prepared to support his election by arms. Thedream of liberty was at an end; and the senate awoke to all thehorrors of inevitable servitude. Deserted by the people, and threat­ened by a military force, that feeble assembly was compelled to ratifythe choice of the prætorians, and to embrace the benefit of an
Vol. I. L amnesty,







OCR Output








O.F THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


"by the victory, so the latter was disappointed by the clemencyof Probus. That amiable prince attempted even to save the un­happy Saturninus from the fury of the soldiers. He had more thanonce solicited the usurper himself, to place some confidence inthe mercy of a sovereign who so highly esteemed his character, that A-D* 27*he had punished, as a malicious informer, the first who related theimprobable news of his defection *\ Saturninus might, perhaps,have embraced the generous offer, had he not been restrained bythe obstinate distrust of his adherents. Their guilt was deeper, andtheir hopes more sanguine, than those of their experienced leader.
The revolt of Saturninus was scarcely extinguished in the East, A. d. 280.
, r " of Bonosus
before new troubles were excited in the West, by the rebellion andProcuiusof Bonosus and Proculus, in Gaul. The most distinguished meritof those two officers was their respective prowess, of the one in thecombats of Bacchus, of the other in those of Venus "•; yet neitherof them were destitute of courage and capacity, and both sustained,with honour, the august character which the fear of punishment hadengaged them to assume, till they sunk at length beneath thesuperior genius of Probus. He used the victory with his accus­tomed moderation, and spared the fortunes as well as the lives oftheir innocent families 5V
The arms of Probus had now suppressed all the foreign and do- A.D. 281.
". . . . . Triumph of
mestic enemies of the state. His mild but steady administration the emperorconfirmed the re-establishment of the public tranquillity; nor wasthere left in the provinces a hostile barbarian, a tyrant, or even a,robber, to revive the memory of past disorders. It was time thatthe emperor should revisit Rome, and celebrate his own glory andthe general happiness. The triumph due to the valour of Probuswas conducted with a magnificence suitable to his fortune, and thepeople who had so lately admired the trophies of Aurelian, gazedwith equal pleasure on those of his heroic successor 5S. We caniiott<na.this occasion, forget the desperate courage of about fourscore
Gladiators»







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


Under the successors of Alexander, Syria was the feat of the sr\3' p,'œ-
* nitia, and
Seleucidæ, who reigned over Upper Asia, till the successful revolt Palestine,of the Parthians confined their dominions between the Euphratesand the Mediterranean. When Syria became subject to the Romans,it formed the eastern frontier of their empire, nor did that province,in its utmost latitude, know any other bounds than the moun­tains of Cappadocia to the north, and towards the south, the con-sines of Egypt, and the Red Sea. Phœnicia and Palestine weresometimes annexed to, and sometimes separated from, the jurisdictionof Syria. The former of these was a narrow and rocky coast; thelatter was a territory scarcely superior to Wales, either in fertilityor extent. Yet Phœnicia and Palestine will for ever live in thememory of mankind; since America, as well as Europe, has receivedletters from the one, and religion from the other8'. A sandydesert skirted along the doubtful confine of Syria, from the Eu­phrates to the Red Sea. The wandering life of the Arabs was in­separably connected with their independence, and wherever, onsome spots less barren than the rest, they ventured to form anysettled habitations, they soon became subjects of the Romanempire 8+.
The geographers of anticmity have sometimes hesitated to what Egypt,portion of the globe they should ascribe Egypt8J. Its situation isincluded within the immense peninsula of Africa, but it is accessibleonly on the side of Asia, whose revolutions, in almost every periodof history, Egypt has humbly obeyed. A Roman præfect wasseated on the splendid throne of the Ptolemies; and the iron sceptreof the Mamalukes is now in the hands of a Turkish pastia. TheNile flows down the country, above five hundred miles from thetropic of Cancer to the Mediterranean, and marks, on either side,the extent of fertility by the measure of its inundations. Cyrene,situate towards the west, and along the sea-coast, was first a Greek
Vol. I. E colony,







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE..


flourishing cities oppressed by the barbarians of Germa'ny, who,si-nce the death of Aurelian, had ravaged that great province withimpunity 3+. Among, the various multitude of those fierce invaders,-we may distinguish, with some degree of clearness, three great armies,,or rather nations, successively vanquished by the valour of Probus.He drove back the Franks into their morasses; a descriptive cir­cumstance from whence we may infer, that the confederacy knownby the manly appellation of Free, already occupied the flat maritimecountry, intersected and almost overflown1 by the stagnating water*of the Rhine, and that several tribes of the Frisians and Batavianshad acceded to their alliance. He vanquished the Burgundians, aconsiderable people of the Vandalic race. They had wandered inquest of booty from the banks of the Oder to those of the Seine.They esteemed themselves sufficiently fortunate to purchase, by therestitution of all their booty, the permission of an undisturbed retreat.They attempted to elude that article of the treaty. Their punish­ment was immediate and terrible ,5. But of all the invaders of Gaul
»
the most formidable were the Lygians, a distant people who reigned •over a wide domain on the frontiers of Poland and Silesia IntheLygian nation, the Arii held the first rank by their numbers-and fierceness* "The Arii (it is thus that they are described by the** energy of Tacitus) study to improve by art and circumstances the"innate terrors of their barbarism. Their shields are black, their'** bodies are painted black. They chuse for the-combat the darkest"hour of the night. Their host advances, covered as it were with"a funereal shade 57; nor do they often find an enemy capable of** sustaining so strange and infernal an aspect. Of all our senses,,44 the eyes are the first vanquished in battle'Yet the arms-and discipline of the Remans easily discomfited these horrid phan- -toms. The Tygii were defeated in a general engagement, and SemnO, .the most renowned of their chiefs, fell alive into the hands of Probus.That prudent emperor, unwilling to reduce a brave people to despair,..
granted







OCR Output








lvi "NOTES ON THE THI ITEENTH CHAPTER.


[87] Eutropius (ix. 27.) mentions them as apart of the triumph. As the persons had been re­stored to Narses, nothing more than their imagescould be exhibited.
[88] Livy gives us a speech of Camillus on thatsubject (v. 51—5s,), full of eloquence and sensibi­lity, in opposition to a design of removing the seat•of government from Rome to the neighbouring cityofVeii.
[89] Julius Cæsar was reproached with the in­tention of removing the empire to Ilium or Alex­andria. See Sueton. in Cæsar, c. 79. Accordingto the ingenious conjecture of Le Fevre and Dacier,the third ode of the third book of Horace wasintended to divert Augustus from the execution ofa similar design.
[90] See Aurelius Victor, who likewise men­tions the buildings erected by Maximian at Car­thage, probably duiing the Moorish war. Westall insert some verses of Ausonius de Clar. urb. v.Et Mediolani mira omnia : copia rerum;lnnumeræ cultæque domus; fecunda virorumIngenia, et mores læti, turn duplice muroAmplificata loci species; populique voluptas"" Circus; et inclusi moles cuneata Theatri
Templa, Palatinacque arces, opulensque Moneta,Et regio Herculei Celebris sub honorc lavacri.Cunctaque marmoreis ornata Perystyla signis;Mœniaque in valli form am circumdata labro,Omnia quæ magnis operum velut æmula formisExcellunt: nec junctæ premit vicinia Romæ.
[91] Lactant. de M. P. c. 7. Libanius Orat.viii. p. 203.
[92] Lactant. de M. P. c. 17. On a similar occa­sion Ammianus mentions the dhacitaspltbis, as not. very agreeable to an imperial ear. (See 1. xvi.c. 10.)
[513] Lactantius accuses Maximian of destroyingfictis criminationibus lumina senatus. (De M. P.c. 8.) Aurelius Victor speaks very doubtfully ofthe faith of Diocletian towards his friends.
[94] Truncatæ vires urbis, imminuto prætori-arum cohortium atque in armis vulgi numcro. Au­relius Victor. Lactantius attributes to Galeriusthe prosecution of the same plan, (c, 26.)
(55] They were old corps stationed in illyricum;and according to the ancient establishment, they


each consisted os six thousand men. They had ac­quired much reputation by the use of the plumlatte,or darts loaded with lead. Each soldier carriedfive of these, which he darted from a considerabledistance, with great strength and dexterity. SeeVegetius, i. 17.
[96] See the Theodosian Code, 1. vi. Tit. ii.with Godefroy's commentary.
[97] See the 12th dissertation in Spanheim'sexcellent work De usu Numismatum. From medals,inscriptions, and historians, he examines every titleseparately, and traces it from Augustus to themoment of its disappearing.
[98] Pliny (in Panegyr. c. 3. 55, &c.) speaks of,Dcminus with execration, as synonymous to Tyrant,and opposite to Prince. And the fame Pliny regu­larly gives that title (in the tenth book of theepistles) to his friend rather than master, the virtu­ous Trajan. This strange expression puzzles thecommentators, who think, and the translators, whocan write.
[99] Synesius de Regno, Edit. Petav. p. 15. I amindebted for this quotation to the Abbe de la Ble-terie.
[ico] See Vandale de Confecratione, p. 354,&c. It wai customary for the emperors to mention(in the preamble of laws) their numtn, saertd majesty,divine orecles, (Jc. According to Tillemont, Gre­gory of Nazianzen complains most bitterly of theprofanation, especially when it was practised by anArian emperor.
[101] See Spanheim de Usu Numismat. Dissert,xii.
[102] Aurelius Victor. Eutropius, ix. 26. Itappears by the Panegyrists, that the Romans weresoon reconciled to the name and ceremony of ado­ration.
[103] The innovations introduced by Diocletian,are chiefly deduced,—1st, from some very strong pas­sages in Lactantius; and, 2dly, from the new andvarious offices, which, in the Theodosian code,appear already establislied in the beginning of thereign of Conllantine..
[104] Lactant. de M. P. c. 7.
[io;1] Indicta lex nova, quæ fane illorum tempo-rum modestia tolerabilis, in perniciem proceffir.
Aurel.







OCR Output








NOTES ON THE FOURTH CHAPTER.


[1] £EE the complaints of Avidius Caflius, Hist.
O August, p. 4;. These are, it is true, thecomplaints of faction; but even faction exaggerates,rather than invents.
[2] Faustinam satis constat apud Cayetam, con-diiior.es sibi et nauticas et gladiatorias elegisse.HiR. August, p. 30. 1 ampridius explains the fortof merit which Faustina chose, and the conditionswhich she exacted. Hist. August, p. icz.
[3] Hist. August, p. 34.
[4] Meditat. 1. i. The world has laughed at thecredulity of Marcus; but Madam Dacier assuresus (and we may credit a lady), that the husband willalways be deceived, if the wife condescends to dis­semble.
[5] Dion Caflius, 1. lxxi. p. 119;. Hist. August,p. 33. Commentaire de Spanheim fur les Ctsarsde.Julien, p. 289. The deification of Faustina isthe only defect which Julian's criticism is able todiscover in the all-accomplislicd character ofMarcus.
[6] Commodus was the first Porphyrogenetut(born since his father's accession to the throne). Bya new strain of flattery, the Egyptian medals dateby the years of his life; as if they were synony­mous to those of his reign. Tillement. Hist, desEmpereurs, torn. ii. p. 752.
[7] Hist. August, p. 46.
[8] Dion Caflius, 1. lxxii. p. 1203.
[9] According to Tertullian (Apolog. c. 25.) hedied at Sirmium. Bat the situation of Vindobonaor Vienna, where both the Victors place his death,is better adapted to the operations of the war againstthe Marcomanni and Quadi.
[10] Herodian, 1. i. p. 12.
[11] Herodian, 1. i. p. 16,


fi2] This universal joy is well described (fromthe medals as well as historians.) by Mr. Wotton.Hist, of Rome, p. 192, 193.
[13] Manilius the confidential secretary of Avi-dios Caflius was discovered after he had lain con­cealed several years. The emperor nobly relievedthe public anxiety by refusing to see him, andburning his papers without opening them. DioCaflius, 1. lxxii. p. 1209.
{14] See Maffei degli Amphitheatri, p. 126.
[15] Dio, 1. lxxii. p. 1205. Herodian, 1. i.p. 16. Hist. August, p. 46.
[16] In a note upon the Augustan History, Ca-saubon has collected a number of particulars con­cerning these celebrated brothers. See p. 96 of hislearned commentary.
[17] Dio, 1. lxxii. p. 1210. Herodian, 1. i. p. 22.Hist. August, p. 48. Dion gives a much less odiouscharacter of Perennis, than the other historians.His moderation is almost a pledge of his veracity.
[iS] During the second Punic war, the Romansimported from Asia the worship of the mother ofthe gods. Her festival, the Mtgalefia, began on thefourth of April, and lasted six days. The streetswere crowded with mad processions, the theatreswith spectators; and the public tables with un­bidden guests. Order and police were suspended,and pleasure was the only serious business of thecity. See Ovid de Fastis, 1. iv. 189, &c.
[19] Herodian, 1. i. p. 23. 28.[20] Cicero pro Flacco, c. 27.
[2 1] One of these dear-bought promotions occa­sioned a current bon root, that Julius Solon wasbanijhid into the senate.
[22] Dio (1. lxxii. p. 12, 13.) observes, that nofreedman had possessed riches equal to those ofCleander. The fortune of Pallas amounted, how­


ever,







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 1&3


for a civilwar.


They executed the order with equal boldness and success; and withtheir bloody daggers in their hands, ran through the streets, pro­claiming to the people and the soldiers, the news of the happy re­volution. The enthusiasm of liberty was seconded by the promiseof a large donative, in lands and money; the statues of Maximinwere thrown doWnj the capital of the empire acknowledged, withtransport, the authority of the two Gordians and the senate1'; andthe example of Rome was followed by the rest of Italy.
A new spirit had arisen in that assembly, whose long patience had and prepare*been insulted by wanton despotism and military licence. Thesenate assumed the reins of government, and, with a calm intre­pidity, prepared to vindicate by arms the cause of freedom. Amongthe consular senators recommended by their merit and services to thefavour of the emperor Alexander, it was easy to select twenty,not unequal to the command of an army, and the conduct of awar. To these was the defence of Italy intrusted. Each was ap­pointed to act in his respective department, authorized to enrol anddiscipline the Italian youth; and instructed to fortify the ports andhighways, against the impending invasion of Maximin. A numberof deputies, chosen from the most illustrious of the scnatorian andequestrian orders, were dispatched at the same time to the governorsof the several provinces, earnestly conjuring them to fly to theassistance of their country, and to remind the nations of theirancient ties of friendship with the Roman senate and people. Thegeneral respect with which these deputies were received, and thezeal of Italy and the provinces in favour of the senate, sufficientlyprove that the subjects of Maximin were reduced to that uncommondistress, in which the body of the people has more to fear fromoppression than from resistance. The consciousness of that melan­choly truth, inspires a degree of persevering fury, seldom to befound in thpse civil wars artificially supported for the benefit of a fewfactious and designing leaders *4. ....
But







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AND FALL


1dnd. The seven hills of Rome had been surrounded by the suc­cessors of Romulus, with an ancient wall of more than thirteenmiles 4\ The vast inclosure may seem disproportioned to thestrength and numbers of the infant state. But it was necessary tosecure an ample extent of pasture and arable land, against the fre­quent and sudden incursions of the tribes of Latium, the perpetualenemies of the republic. With the progress of Roman greatness,the city and its inhabitants gradually increased, filled up the vacantspace, pierced through the useless walls, covered the field of Mars,and, on every, fide, followed the public highways in long andbeautiful suburbs 4'. The extent of the new walls, erected by Au-relian, and finished in the reign of Probus, was magnified by popu­lar estimation to near fifty 41; but is reduced by accurate measure­ment to about twenty-one miles 4J. It wasa great but a mela'ncholylabour, since the defence of the capital betrayed the decline of themonarchy. The Romans of a more prosperous age, who trusted tothe arms of the legions the safety of the frontier camps 44, were veryfar from entertaining a.suspicion, that it would ever become necessaryto fortify the seat of empire against the inroads of the barbarians 4S.^urdian sup- ^ne victory or" Claudius* over the Goths, and the success ofloesses the Aurelian against the Alemanni, had already restored to the arms of
;wo usurpers. ...
Rome their ancient superiority over the barbarous nations of theNorth. To chastise domestic tyrants, and to reunite the dismem­bered parts of the empire, was a task reserved for the latter of those- warlike emperors. Though he was acknowledged by the senate andpeople, the frontiers of Italy, Africa, IHyricum, and Thrace, confinedthe limits of his reign. Gaul, Spain, and Britain, Egypt, Syria, andAsia minor, were still possessed by two rebels, who alone, out of sonumerous a list, had hitherto escaped the dangers of their situation jand to complete the ignominy of Rome, these rival thrones had been.usurped by women.
A rapid







OCR Output








S5° THE DECLINE AND FALL


peror Philip,, acknowledged that they were all surpassed by the su­perior magnificence of Carinus 8\Spectacles of The spectacles of Carinus may therefore be best illustrated by the1 nu" .observation of some particulars, which history has condescended torelate concerning those of his predecessors. If we confine ourselves-solely to the hunting of wild beasts, however we may censure thevanity of the design or the cruelty of the execution, we are obligedto confess, that neither before nor since the time of the Romans,so much art and expence have ever been lavished for the amuse­ment of the people8J. By the order of Probus, a great quantityof large trees, torn up by the roots, were transplanted into the midstof the circus. The spacious and shady forest was immediately filledwith a thousand ostriches, a thousand stags, a thousand fallow deer, anda thousand wild boars; and all this variety of game was abandonedto the riotous impetuosity of the multitude. The tragedy of the suc­ceeding day consisted in the massacre of an hundred lions, an equalnumber of lionesses, two hundred leopards, and three hundredbears8S. The collection prepared by the younger Gordian for histriumph, and which his successor exhibited in the secular games,was less remarkable by the number than by the singularity of theanimals. Twenty zebras displayed their elegant forms and varie­gated beauty to the eyes of the Roman people s\ Ten elks, and asmany camelopards, the loftiest and most harmless creatures thatwander over the plains of Sarmatia and Æthiopia, were contrastedwith thirty African hyænas, and ten Indian tygers, the most im­placable savages of the torrid zone. The unoffending strength withwhich Nature has endowed the greater quadrupedes, was admiredin the rhinoceros, the hippopotamus of the Nile 88, and a majestictroop of thirty-two elephants 8'. While the populace gazed withstupid wonder on the splendid show, the naturalist might indeed ob­serve the figure and properties of so many different species, tran­sported from every part of the ancient world into the amphitheatre
of







OCR Output








132 THE DECLINE AND FALL


on both the rank of Augustus, with the revered name of Antoninus,Three cmpe- ant* for the first time the Roman world beheld three emperors,0. Yetlor'* even this equal conduct served only to inflame the contest, whilst the
fierce Caracalla asserted the right of primogeniture, and the milderGeta courted the affections of the people and the soldiers. In theanguish of a disappointed father, Severus foretold, that the weakerof his sons would fall a sacrifice to the stronger; who, in his turn,would be ruined by his own vices ".The Caledo- In these circumstances the intelligence of a war in Britain, and ofA. D. 208. an invasion of the province by the barbarians of the North, was re­ceived with pleasure by Severus. Though the vigilance of hislieutenants might have been sufficient to repel the distant enemy,he resolved to embrace the honourable pretext of withdrawinghis sons from the luxury of Rome, which enervated their mindsand irritated their passions, and of inuring their youth to thetoils of war and government. Notwithstanding his advanced age(for he was above three-score), and his gout, which obligedhim to be carried in a litter, he transported himself in personinto that remote island, attended by his two sons, his wholecourt, and a formidable army. He immediately passed the wallsof Hadrian and Antoninus, and entered the enemy's country,with the design of completing the long attempted conquest ofBritain. He penetrated to the northern extremity of the island,without meeting an enemy. But the concealed ambuscades of theCaledonians, who hung unseen on the rear and flanks of his army,the coldness of the climate, and the severity of a winter march acrossthe hills and morasses of Scotland, are reported to have cost theRomans above fifty thousand men. The Caledonians at lengthyielded to the powerful and obstinate attack, sued for peace, and sur­rendered a part of their arms, and a large tract of territory. Buttheir apparent submission lasted no longer than the present terror.As soon as the Roman legions had retired, they resumed their hostile


inde-







OCR Output








128 THE DECLINE AND FALL


policy instituted by Augustus. But the youth of Severus had beentrained in the implicit obedience of camps, and his riper years spentin the despotism of military command. His haughty and inflexiblespirit could not discover, or would not acknowledge, the advantageof preserving an intermediate power, however imaginary, betweenthe emperor and the army. He disdained to profess himself theservant of an assembly that detested his person and trembled at hisfrown; he issued his commands, where his request would haveproved as effectual; assumed the conduct and style of a sovereign anda conqueror, and exercised, without disguise, the whole legislative aswell as the executive power.N«w maxims The victory over the senate was easy and inglorious. Every eyer^/preroga* ant* ever7 passion were directed to the supreme magistrate, who pos-tive* sessed the arms and treasure of the state; whilst the senate, neither
elected by the people, nor guarded by the military force, nor ani­mated by public spirit, rested its declining authority on the frail andcrumbling basis of ancient opinion. The sine theory of a republicinsensibly vanished, and made way for the more natural and sub­stantial feelings of monarchy. As the freedom and honours of Romewere successively communicated to the provinces, in which the oldgovernment had been either unknown, or was remembered withabhorrence, the tradition of republican maxims was gradually obli­terated. The Greek historians of the age of the Antonines 70 ob­serve, with a malicious pleasure, that although the sovereign of Rome,in compliance with an obsolete prejudice, abstained from the nameof king, he possessed the full measure of regal power. In the reignof Severus, the senate was silled with polished and eloquent slavesfrom the eastern provinces, who justified personal flattery by specu­lative principles of servitude. These new advocates of prerogativewere heard with pleasure by the court, and with patience by thepeople, when they inculcated the duty of passive obedience, and des­canted on the inevitable mischiefs of freedom. The lawvers and
the







OCR Output








Of THE ROMAN EMPIRE, *7i


CHAR VII.
77je elevation and tyranny of Maximin.—Rebellion inAfrica and Italy, under the authority of the Senate.—Civil Wars and Seditions.—Violent Deaths of Max-imin and his Son, of Maximus and Balbinus, and of.the three Gordians.—Usurpation and secular Games ofPhilip.
OF the various forms of government, which have prevailed in the Theappa.world, an hereditary monarchy seems to present the fairest KB " ICUscope for ridicule. Is it possible to relate, without an indignantsmile, that on the father's decease, the property of a nation,like that of a drove of oxen, descends to his infant son, aa yetunknown to mankind and to himself; and that the bravest war­riors and the wisest statesmen, relinquishing their natural right toempire, approach the royal cradle with bended knees and pro­testations of inviolable fidelity? Satire and declamation maypaint these obvious topics in the most dazzling colours, but ourmore serious thoughts will respect a useful prejudice, that esta.-blishes a rule of succession, independent of the passions of man­kind; and we shall cheerfully acquiesce in any expedient thatdeprives the multitude of the dangerous, and indeed, the ideal powerof giving themselves a master.
In the cool shade of retirement, we may easily devise imaginary and soIid ad.forms of government, in which the scepter shall be constantly be- h«edftaryfstowed on the most worthy, by the free and incorrupt suffrage of focceffion.the whole community. Experience overturns these airy fabrics,
Z 2 and







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


tyrant, and converted the free gift into a perpetual tax. Thesenators, according to the declaration which was required of theirproperty, were divided into several classes. The most opulent paidannually eight pounds of gold, the next class paid four, the lasttwo, and those whose poverty might have claimed an exemption,were assessed however at seven pieces of gold. Besides the propermembers of the senate, their sons, their descendants, and even theirrelations, enjoyed the vain privileges, and supported the heavyburdens, of the senatorial order; nor will it any longer exciteour surprise, that Constantine should be attentive to increase thenumber of persons who were included under so useful a descrip­tion :S. After the defeat of Maxentius, the victorious emperorpassed no more than two or three months in Rome, which hevisited twice during the remainder of his life, to celebrate the solemnfestivals of the tenth and of the twentieth years of his reign*.Constantine was almost perpetually in motion to exercise the legions,or to inspect the state of the provinces. Treves, Milan, Aquileia,Sirmium, Naissus and Thessalonica, were the occasional places ofhis residence, till he founded a new Rome on the confines ofEurope and Asia
Before Constantine marched into Italy, he had secured the friend- His alliancestiip or at least the neutrality of Licinius, the Illyrian emperor, a.D.'"iu*"He had promised his sister Constantia in marriage to that prince; Marcb-but the celebration of the nuptials was deferred till after the con­clusion of the war, and the interview of the two emperors atMilan, which was appointed for that purpose, seemed to unitetheir families and interests ?8. In the midst of the public festivitythey were suddenly obliged to take leave of each other. An inroadof the Franks summoned Constantine to the Rhine, and the hostileapproach of the sovereign of Asia, demanded the immediate pre­sence of Licinius. Maximin had been the secret ally of Maxentius, War between
Maxitnin and
and without being discouraged by his fate, he resolved to try the Licinius.
A. D. 313-
fortune







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 387


Dominus, or Lord, in its primitive signification, was expressive,not of the authority of a prince over his subjects, or of a comman­der over his soldiers, but of the despotic power of a master over hisdomestic staves9*. Viewing it in that odious light, it had been re­jected with abhorrence by the first Cæsars. Their resistance insen­sibly became more feeble, and the name less odious; till at lengththe style of our Lord and Emperor was not only bestowed by flat­tery, but was regularly admitted into the laws and public monu­ments. Such lofty epithets were sufficient to elate and satisfy themost excessive vanity; and if the successors of Diocletian still de­clined the title of King, it seems to have been the effect not so muchof their moderation as of their delicacy. Wherever the Latintongue was in use, (and it was the language of government through­out the empire) the imperial title, as it was peculiar to themselves,conveyed a more respectable idea than the name of king, whichthey must have shared with an hundred barbarian chieftains; orwhich, at the best, they could derive only from Romulus or fromTarquin. But the sentiments of the East were very different fromthose of the West. From the earliest period of history, the sove­reigns of Asia had been celebrated in the Greek language by thetitle of Basileus, or King; and since it was considered as thefirst distinction among men, it was soon employed by the servileprovincials of the East in their humble addresses to the Romanthrone". Even the attributes, or at least the titles of the Divinity,were usurped by Diocletian and Maximian, who transmitted themto a succession of Christian emperors ,0°. Such extravagant compli­ments, however, soon lose their impiety by losing their meaning;and when the ear is once accustomed to the sound, they are" heardwith indifference as vague though excessive professions of respect.
From the time of Augustus to that of Diocletian, the Roman Diocletian as-pnnces, convening in a iamiliar manner among their fellow-citi- "lem, and in-zens, were saluted only with the same respect that was usually paid t'ersian cere-
dd 2 to







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


exhausted every refinement of cruelty, without being able to subduehis patience, or to alter the steady and insulting smile which in hisdying agonies he still preserved in his countenance. The Christians,though they confessed that his conduct had not been strictly con­formable to the laws of prudence, admired the divine fervour of hiszeal; and the excess^ commendations which they lavished on thememory of their hero and martyr, contributed to fix a deep im-prefllon of terror and hatred in the mind of Diocletian
His fears were soon alarmed by the view of a danger from which Fire of the p>
'0 lace of Nico-
he very narrowly escaped. Within fifteen days the palace of Nico- media impu:.
t. . ed to the
media, and even the bedchamber of Diocletian, were twice in flames 5 Christians,and though both times they were extinguished without any materialdamage, the singular repetition of the fire was justly considered asan evident proof that it had not been the effect of chance or ne­gligence, The suspicion naturally fell on the Christians; and itwas suggested, with some degree of probability, that those despe­rate fanatics, provoked by their present sufferings, and apprehensiveof impending calamities, had entered into a conspiracy with theirfaithful brethren, the eunuchs of the palace, against the lives oftwo emperors, whom they detested as the irreconcilable enemies ofthe church of God. Jealousy and resentment prevailed in everybreast, but especially in that of Diocletian. A great number ofpersons, distinguished either by the offices which they had silled,or by the favour which they had enjoyed, were thrown into prison.Every mode of torture was put in practice, and the court, as wellas city, was polluted with many bloody executions M\ But as itwas found impossible to extort any discovery of this mysterioustransaction, it seems incumbent on us either to presume the inno­cence or to admire the resolution of the sufferers. A few days after­wards Galerius hastily withdrew himself from Nicomedia, declaring,that if he delayed his departure from that devoted palace, he shouldfall a sacrifice to the rage of the Christians. The ecclesiastical his-
4 D 3 torians,







OCR Output








NOTES ON THE SECOND CHAPTER. ix


an oration which is still extant to recommend con­cord to the rival cities.
[84] The inhabitant! of Egypt, exclusive ofAlexandria, amounted to seven millions and a half(Joseph, de Bell. Jud. ii. 16.). Under the militarygovernment os the Mamalukes, Syria was supposedto contain sixty thousand villages. (Histoire deTimor Bee, 1. v. c. 20.)
[8;] The following Itinerary may serve to con­vey some idea of the direction of the road, and ofthe distance between the principal towns. I. Fromthe wall of Antoninus to York 222 Roman miles. II.London 227. III. Rhutupixor Sandwich 67. IV. Thenavigation to Boulogne 4;. V. Rheims 174. VI.Lyons 330. VII. Milan 324. VIII. Rome 426.IX. Brundusium 360. X. The navigation toDyrrachium 40. XI. Byzantium 711. XII. Aneyra383. XIII. Tarsus 30.. XIV. Antioch 141. XV.Tyre 252. XVI. Jerusalem 168. In all 4080Roman, or 3740 English miles. See the Itinerariespublished by Wesseiing, his annotations; Gale andStukeley for Britain, and M. Danville for Gaul andItaly.
[86] Montfaucon, l'Antiquite Expliquee, torn,iv, p. 2. 1. i. c. 5 ) has described the bridges ofKami, Alcantara, Nismes, &c.
[87] Bergier. Histoire des grands Chemins del'Empire Romain, 1. ii. c. 1—28.
[88] Procopius in Hist. Arcana, c. 30. BergierHist, des grands Chemins, l.iv. Codex Theodosian.1. viii. tit. v. vol. ii. p. 506—563. with Godefroy'slearned commentary.
[89] In the time of Tbeodosius, Cæsarius a mawgistrate of high rank went post from Antioch toConstantinople. He began his journey at night,was in Cappadocia (165 miles from Antioch) the.ensuing evening, and arrived at Constantinople thesixth day about noon. The whole distance was725 Roman, or 66; English miles. See Libaniu*Or at. xxii. and the Itineraria, p. 572—581.
[90] Pliny, though a favourite and a minister,made an apology for granting post horses to his wise-on the most urgent business. Epist. x. 121, 122.
[91] Bergier Hist, des grands Chemins, I. iv.c. 49.Vol. I.


f 927 PJin. Hist. Natur. xix. 1,
[93] It is not improbable that the Greeks andPhœnicians introduced some new arts and pro­ductions into the neighbourhood of Marseilles andGades.
[94] See Homer Odyss. f. ix. v. 358.
[95] Plin. Hist. Natur. I. xiv.
[96] Strab. Geograph. 1. iv. p. 223. The intensecold of a Gallic winter was almost proverbial amongthe ancients.
[97] In the beginning of the ivth century, theorator Eumenius (Panegyric. Veter. viii. 6. edit.Delphin.) speaks of the vines in the territory ofAutun, which were decayed through age, and thefirst plantation of which was totally unknown. ThePagus Arebrignus is supposed by M. Danville to bethe district of Beaune, celebrated, even at present,for one of the first growths of Burgundy.
[98] Plin. Hist. Natur. I. xv.
• [99] Plin. Hist. Natur. I. xix.
[100] See the agreeable Estays on Agricultureby Mr. Harte, in which he has collected all that theancients and moderns have said of lucerne.
f 101] Tacit. Germania, c. 45. Plin. Hist. Natur.xxxviii. 11. The latter observed, with some humour,that even fashion had not yet found out the use of am­ber. Nero sent a Roman knight, to purchase greatquantities on the spot, where it was produced; thecoast of modern Prussia.
[102] Called Taprobana by the Romans, andScrendib by the Arabs. It was discovered underthe reign of Claudius, and gradually became theprincipal mart of the east.
[103J Plin. Hist. Natur. 1. vi. Strabo, 1. xvii.
[104] Hist. August, p. 224. A silk garment wasconsidered as an ornament to a woman, but as adisgrace to a man.
[105] The two great pearl fisheries were the fameas at present, Ormuz and cape Comerin. As well as wecan compare ancient with modern geography, Romewas supplied with diamonds from the mine of fu-b melpor,







OCR Output








NOTES ON THE THIRD CHAPTER,


umbra*, is the indignant expression of Locan, butit is a patriotic, rather than a devout indignation.
[25] Dion Cassias, 1. liii. p. 710, with the cu­rious annotations of Reymar.
[26] As Octavianus advanced to the banquet ofthe Cæsars, his colour changed like that of thecamelion; pale at first, then red, afterwards black,he at last assumed the mild livery of Venus andthe Graces (Cæsares, p. 309). This image employedby Julian, in his ingenious fiction, is just and ele­gant: but when he .considers this change of cha­racter as real, and ascribes it to the power of phi­losophy; he does too much honour to philosophy,and to Octavianus.
[27] Two centuries after the establishment ofmonarchy, the emperor Marcus Antoninns recom­mends the character of Brutus as a perfect model ofRoman virtue.
[28] It is much to be regretted, that we havelost the part of Tacitus, which treated of that trans­action. We are forced to content ourselves withthe popular rumours of Josephus, and the imperfecthints of Dion and Suetonius.
[29] Augustus restored the ancient severity ofdiscipline. After the civil wars, he dropped theendearing name of Fellow-Soldiers, and called themonly Soldiers (Sueton. in August c. 2;.). See theuse Tiberius made of the senate in the mutiny ofthe Pannonian legions (Tacit Annal. i.).
[30] These words seem to have been the constitu­tional language. See Tacit. Annal. xiii. 4.
[31] The first was Camillus Scribonianus, whotook up arms in Dalmatia against Claudius, andwas deserted by his own troops in five days. Thesecond, L. Antonius, in Germany, who rebelledagainst Domitian; and the third, Avidius Cassius,in the reign of M. Antoninus. The two lastreigned but a few months, and were cut off by theirown adherents. We may observe, that both Ca­millus and Cassius coloured their ambition withthe design of restoring the republic; a task, saidCassius, peculiarly reserved for his name and fa­mily.
[32] Velleius Faterculus, 1. U. c. 121. Sueton.in Tiber, c. zd.


[33] Sueton. in Tit. c. 6. Plin. in Prafat. Hist,Natur.
[34] This idea is frequently and strongly in­culcated by Tacitus. See Hist. i. 5. 16. ii. 76.
[35] The emperor Vespasian, with his usual goodsense, laughed at the Genealogists, who deduced hisfamily from Flavius, the founder of Reate (his na­tive country), and one of the companions of Her-,cules. Sueton. in Vespasian, i. 12.
[36] Dio, 1. lxviii. p. 1121. Plin. Secund. inPanegyric.
[37] Felicior Augusto, melior Trajano. Eu-trop. viii. 5.
[383 Dio (1. Ixix. p. 1249.) affirms the wholeto have been a fiction, on the authority of his fa­ther, who being governor of the province whereTrajan died, had very good opportunities of siftingthis mysterious transaction. Yet Dodwell (Prælect.Camden. xvii.) has maintained, that Hadrian wascalled to the certain hope of the empire, during thelife-time of Trajan.
[39] Dio (1. Ixx. p. 1171.). Aurel. Victor.
[40] The deification of Antinous, his medals,statues, temples, city, oracles, and constellation,are well known, and still dishonour the memory ofHadrian. Yet we may remark, that of the firstfifteen emperors, Claudius was the only one whosetaste in love was entirely correct. For the honoursof Antinous, fee Spanheim, Commentaires fur lesCæsars de Julien, p. 80.
[41] Hist. August, p. 13. Aurelius Victor inBpitom.
[42] Without the help of medals and inscrip­tions, we should be ignorant of this fact, so ho­nourable to the memory of Pins.
[43] During the twenty-th'ree years of Pius'sreign, Marcus was only two nights absent from thepalace, and even those were at different times. Hist.August, p. 25.
[44] He was fond of the theatre and not insen­sible to the charms of the fail sex. Marcus Anto­


ninus,







OCR Output








lii NOTES ON THE THIRTEENTH CHAPTER.


500—525.) whohas weighed the several reasons anddifficulties with his scrupulous accuracy.
[7] In an oration delivered before him, (Pa-negyr. Vet. ii. 8.) Mamertinus expresses a doubtwhether his hero, in imitating the conduct ofHannibal and Scipio, had ever heard of their names.From thence we may fairly infer, that Maximianwas more desirous of being considered as a soldier,than as a man of letters: and it is in this mannerthat we can often translate the language of flatteryinto that of truth.
[8] Lactantius de M. P". c. 8. Aurelius Victor.As among the Panegyrics, we find orations pro­nounced in praise of Maximian, and others whichflatter his adversaries at his expence, we derivesome knowledge from the contrast.
[9] See the second and third Panegyrics, parti­cularly iii. 3. 10. 14. but it would be tedious tocopy the diffuse and affected expressions of theirfalse eloquence. With regard to the titles, consultAurel. Victor, Lactantius de M. P. c. 52. Span-heim de Usu Numismatum, &c. Dissertat. xii. 8.
[10] Aurelius Victor. Victor in Epitome.Eutrop. ix. 22. Lactant. dcM. P. C; 8. Hieronym.in Chron.
[11] It is only among the modern Greeks thatTillemont can discover his appellation of Chlorus.Any remarkable degree of paleness seems incon­sistent with the rubar mentioned in Panegyric,v. 19.
[12] Julian, the grandson of Constantius, boaststhat his family was derived from the warlikeMæsians. Misopogon, p. 34.8. The Dardaniansdwelt on the edge of Mæsia.
[13] Galerius married Valeria, the daughter ofDiocletian; if we speak with strictness, Theodora;the wife of Constantius, was daughter only to thewife of Maximian. Spanheim Dissertat. xi. 2.
[14] This division agrees with that of the fourprefectures; yet there is some reason to doubt whe­ther Spain was not a province of Maximian. SeeTillemont, torn. iv. p. 517.
[15] Julian in Csesarib. p. 315. Spanheim'snotes to the French translation, p. 122.


[16] The general name of Bagauda, (in the signi­fication of Rebels) continued till the fifth centuryin Gaul. Some critics derive it from a Celtic wordBagad, a tumultuous assembly. Scaliger ad Euseb,Du Cange Glossar.
[17] Chronique de Froissart, vol. i. c. 1S2. ii.73—79. The naivete of his story is lost in our bestmodern writers.
[18] Cæsar de Bell. Gallic. vL 13. Orgetorix,the Helvetian, could arm for his defence a body often thousand slaves.
[ 19] Their oppression and misery are acknow­ledged by Eumenius, (Panegyr. vi. 8.) Gallias effe»ratas injuriis.
[20] Panegyr. Vet. ii. 4. Aurelius Victor.
[21] Ælianus and Amandus. We have medals
coined by them. Goltzius in Thes. R. A. p.117. 121.
[22] Levibus præliis domuit. Eutrop. ix. 20.
[23] The fact rests indeed on very slight autho­rity, a life of St. Babolinus, which is probably ot"the seventh century. See Duchesne ScriptoresRer. Francicar. torn. i. p. 662.
[24] Aurelius Victor calls them Germans. Eu­tropius (ix. 2 1.) gives them the name of Saxons.But Eutropius lived in the ensuing century, and-seems to use the language os his time.
[25] The three expressions of Eutropius, AureliusVictor, and Eumenius, " vilissime natus," "Bata-viæ alumnus," and "Menapiæ civis," give us avery doubtful account of the birth of Carausius. Dr.Stukely, however, (Hist, of Carausius, p. 62 ) chusesto make him a native of St.. David's, and a princeof the blood royal of Britain. The former idea hehad found in Richard of Cirencester, p. 44.
[26] Panegyr. v. 12. Britain at this time wassecure, and slightly guarded.
[27] Panegyr. Vet. v. tl. vii. r. The oratorEumenius wilhed to exalt the glory of the hero(Constantius), with the importance of the conquell*Notwithllanding our laudable partiality for our na­tive country, it is difficult to conceive, that in thebeginning of the fourth century, England deservedall these commendations. A century and half be­fore







OCR Output








2<l8 THE DECLINE AND FALL


an oracle of the Gods, or the eloquence of a daring leader, weresufficient to impel the Gothic arms on the milder climates of thesouth. Besides the influence of a martial religion, the numbersand spirit of the Goths were equal to the most dangerous adven­tures. The use of round bucklers and fliort swords, renderedthem formidable in a close engagement; the manly obediencewhich they yielded to hereditary kings gave uncommon unioaand stability to their councils and the renowned Amala, the heroof that age and the tenth ancestor of Theodoric, king of Italy,enforced by the ascendant of personal merit, the prerogative ofhis birth, which he derived from the Anses^ or demigods of theGothic nation
The Gothic The fame of a great enterprise excited the bravest warriors from
nation in- 0 r
ZTnh iW a^ ^an^a^c states of Germany, many of whom are seen a fewyears afterwards combating under the common standard of theGoths **. The first motions of the emigrants carried them to thebanks of the Prypec, a river universally conceived by the ancients, tobe the southern branch of the Borysthenes 1}. The windings of thatgreat stream through the plains of Poland and Russia, gave adirection to their line of march, and a constant supply of fresh wa­ter and pasturage to their numerous herds of cattle. They followedthe unknown course of the river, confident in their valour, andcareless of whatever power might oppose their progress. TheBastarnæ and the Venedi were the first who presented themselves;and the flower of their youth, either from choice or compulsion,increased the Gothic army. The Bastarnæ dwelt on the northernside of the Carpathian mountains; the immense tract of land thatscperated the Bastarnæ from the savages of Finland, was silled,or rather wasted, by the Venedi,+: we have some reason to believethat the first cf these nations, which distinguistied itself in theMacedonian war1!, and was afterwards divided into the formidable


tribes







OCR Output








NOTES ON THE EIGHTH CHAPTER.


(Hist. August, p. 165.); but the tumulus or moundof earth which forms d the sepulchre, still subsisted inthe time of Julian. See A'mmian. Marcellin. xxiii. 5.
[51] Aurelius Victor. Eutrop. ix. 2. Orosius,vii. 20. Ammianus Marcellinus, xxiii. 5. Zosimus,1. i. p. 19. Philip, who was a native of Bosira, wasabout forty years of age.
[52] Can the epithet of Aristocracy be applied,with any propriety, to the government of Algiers?Every military government floats between the ex­tremes of absolute monarchy and wild democracy.
[53] The military republic os the Mimalokei inEgypt, would have afforded M. deMontesquieu (seeConsiderations fur la Grandeur et la Decadence desRoirains, c. if.) a juster and more noble parallel.
[54] The Augustan History (p. 16:, i6f.) carr-not, in this instance, be reconciled with itself or withprobability. How could Philip condemn his pre­decessor, and yet consecrate his memory? Howcould he order his public execution, and yet, in*his letters to the senate, exculpate himself from theguilt of his death? Philip, though an ambitioususurper, was by. no means a mad tyrant. Somechronological difficulties have likewise been dis­


covered by the nice eyes of Tillemont and Muratori,in this supposed association of Philip to the empire.
[55] The account of the last supposed celebra­tion, though in an enlightened period of history,was so very doubtful and obscure, that the alterna­tive seems not doubtful. When the popisn jubilees,the copy of the secular games, were invented byBoniface VIII, the crafty pope pretended, that heonly revived an ancient institution. See M. leChais Lettres fur les JubilCs.
[56] Either of a hundred, ora hundred and tenyears. Varro and Livy adopted the former opinion,but the infallible authority of the Sybil consecratedthe latter (Censorinus de Die Natal, c. 17.). Theemperors Claudius and Philip, however, did nottreat the oracle with implicit respect.
[57] The idea of the secular games is best under­stood from the p^m of Horace, and the descriptionof Zosimus, 1. ii. p. 167, &c.
[58] The received calculation of Varro, assignsto the foundation of Rome, an æra that correspondswith the 754th year before Christ. But so little isthe chronology of Rome to be depended on, in themore early ages, that Sir Isaac Newton has broughtthe fame even* as low as the year 6*7:


NOTES ON THE E
[1] A N ancient chionologist quoted by Velleiusil Paterculus (1. i c. 6.) observes, that theAssyrians, the Medes, the Persians, and the Mace­donians, reigned over Asia one thousand ninehundred and ninety-five years, from the accession ofNinus to the defeat of Antiocbus by the Romans.As the latter of these great events happened 189years before Christ, the former may be placed2184 years before the fame a:ra. The Astronomicalobservations, found at Babylon by Alexander, wentfifty, years higher.
[2] In the five hundred and thirty-eighth year ofthe æra of Seleucus. See Agathias, 1. ii. p. 67.This great event (such is the carelessness of the Ori­entals) is placed by Eutychius, as high as the tenthyear of Commodus, and by Moses of Chorene, aslow as the reign of Philip. Ammianus Marcellinushas so servilely copied (xxiii. 6.) hit ancient ma-


I.GHTH CHAPTER.
terials, which are indeed very good, that he de­scribes the family of the Arsacides, as still seatedon the Persian throne in the middle of the fourthcentury.
[3] The tanner's name wtjs Babec; the soldier's,Sassan : from the former Artaxerxes obtained the sur­name of Babegan ; from the latter all his descend­ants have been styled Sajsa»iitt.
[4] D'Herbelot. Bibliotheque Orientate. Jrdjbir.
[0 Dion Cassius, 1. Ixxx. Herodian, 1. vi. p. 207.Abulpharagius Dynast, p.- 80.
[6] See Moses Chorenensis, 1. ii. c. 65—71.
[ ] Hyde and Prideaux, working up the Per­sian legend's and their own conjectures into a veryagreeable story, represent Zoroaster ai a con­temporary of Dariot Hystafpes, But it is'sufficient
to­







OCR Output








59S THE DECLINE AND FALL


ruins of Spalatro are not less expressive of the decline of the arts,than of the greatness of the Roman empire in the time of Diocle­tian '". If such was indeed the state of architecture, we must na­turally believe that painting and sculpture had experienced a stillmore sensible decay. The practice of architecture is directed by afew general and even mechanical rules. But sculpture, and aboveall, painting, propose to themselves the imitation not only of theforms of nature, but of the characters and passions of the humanfoul. In those sublime arts, the dexterity of the hand is of littleavail, unless it is animated by fancy, and guided by the most cor­rect taste and observation.Of letters. It is almost unnecessary to remark, that the civil distractions ofthe empire, the license of the soldiers, the inroads of the barbari­ans, and the progress of despotism, had proved very unfavourableto genius and even to learning. The succession of Illyrian princesrestored the empire, without restoring the sciences. Their mili­tary education was not calculated to inspire them with the love ofletters; and even the mind of Diocletian, however active andcapacious in business, was totally uninformed by study or specu­lation. The professions of law and physic are of such commonuse and certain prosit, that they will always secure a sufficientnumber of practitioners, endowed with a reasonable degree of abili­ties and knowledge; but it does not appear that the students inthose two faculties appeal to any celebrated masters who flourishedwithin that period. The voice of poetry was silent. History wasreduced to dry and confused abridgments, alike destitute of amuse­ment and instruction. A languid and affected eloquence was stillretained in the <pay and service of the emperors, who encouragednot any arts except those which contributed to the gratification oftheir pride, or the defence of their powerThenewPla- The declining age of learning and of mankind, is marked,w'"° however, by the rife and rapid progress of the new Platonicians.
The school of Alexandria silenced those of Athens; and the ancient
sects







OCR Output








'NOTiES ON THE NINTH CHAP.W


many the gods of Greece and Rome. The latteris positive, fh.it, under the emblems of the fun, themoon, and the sire, his pious ancestors worshippedthe Trinity in unity,
[63] The sacred wood, described with such sub­lime horror by Lucan, was in the neighbourhood ofMarseilles; but there were many of the fame kindin Germany.
[64] Tacit. Germania, c. 7.[65J Id. c. 40.
£66] See Pr. Robertson's Hjstory of sharks, V.vol. i. note 10.
[67] Tacit. Germ. c. 7. These standards wereonly the heads of wild beasts.
[68] See an instance of this custom, Tacit.Annal. xiii. 57.
[69] Cæsar, Diodorus, and Lucan, seem to ascribethis doctrine to the Gauls, but M. Pelloutier(Histoire des Ccltes, 1. iii. c. 18 ) labours to reducetheir expressions to a more orthqdox fense.
[70] Concerning this gross but alluring doctrineof the EJda, fee Fable xx in the curious versionof that book, published by M. Mallet, in his intro­duction to the History of Denmark.
[71] See Tacit. Germ. c. 3. Dipdor. Sicul.1., v. Stra,bo, 1. iv. p. 197. The classical readermay remember the rank of Demodocus in thePhæacian court, ^nd the ardpur infused by Tyr-txus into idie fainting Spartans, Yet there is littleprobability that the Greeks and the Germans werethe fame people. Much learned trifling might bespared, if our antiquarians would condescend toreflect, that similar manners will naturally be pro­duced by similar situations.
[72] Miffilia spargunt, Tacit. Germ. c. 6.Either that Historian used a vague expression, orhe meant that they were thrown at random.
[73J I' was tne'r principal distinction from theSarmatians, who generally fought on horseback.
[74] The relation of this enterprise occupies agreat part of the fourth and fifth books of the Historyof Tacitus, and is more remarkable for its elo­


quence than perspicuity. Sir .Henry Saville hasobserved several inaccuracies.
[75] Tacit. Hist. iv. 13. Like them he had lostan eye.
[76] It was contained between the two branchesof the old Rhine, as they subsisted before the faceof the country was changed by art and nature.See Cluver. German. Amiq. 1. ii. c. 30. 37.
[77] Cæsar de Bell. Gall. 1. vi. 23.
[78] They are mentioned however in the ivthand vth centuries by Nazarius. Ammianus, Clau-dian, &c. as a tribe of Franks. See C'uver. Germ.Antiq. 1. iii. c. 13.
[79] Urgentibttt is the common reading, but goodfense; Lipsius, and some MSS. declare for PergtH-tibus.
[80] Tacit. Germania, c. 33. The pious Abbe"de la Bleterie is very angry wiih Tacitus, talksof the devil who was a murderer from the begin­ning, Sec. ice.
[81] Many traces of this policy miy be cis-eovered in Tacitus and Dion; and many moremay be inferred from the principles of humannature.
[82] Hist. August, p. 31. Ammian. Marcellin.1. xxxi. c. 5. Aurel. Victor. The emperor Marcuswas reduced to fell the rich furniture of the palace,^nd to inlist staves and robbers.
[83] The Marcomanni, a colony, who, from thebanks of the Rhine, occupied Bohemia and Mo­ravia, had once erected a great and formidablemonarchy under their king Maroboduus. SeeStrabo, 1. vii. Veil. Pat. 11. 105. Tacit. Annal.ii. 63.
[84] Mr. Wofton (History of Rome, p. 166.)increases the prohibition to ten times the distance.His reasoning is specious but not conclusive.Five miles were sufficient for a sortiiied barrier.
[85] Dion, 1. Ixxi and lxxii.
[86] See an excellent dissertation On the originand migrations of nations, in the Mernoires dee 2 r.Acadcmie







OCR Output








 







OCR Output








ADVERTISEMENT


DILIGENCE and accuracy are the only merits which anhistorical writer may ascribe to himself; if any merit indeedcan be assumed from the performance of an indispensable duty. Imay therefore be allowed to say, that I have carefully examinedall the original materials that could illustrate the subject whichI had undertaken to treat. Should I ever complete the extensivedesign which has been flcetched out in the preface, I might per­haps conclude it with a critical account of the authors consultedduring the progress of the whole work j and however such anattempt might incur the censure of ostentation, I am persuaded,that it would be susceptible of entertainment as well as information.
At present I shall content myself with a single observation. TheBiographers, who, under the reigns of Diocletian and Constantine,composed, or rather compiled, the lives of the emperors, fromHadrian to the sons of Carus, are usually mentioned under thenames of Ælius Spartianus, Julius Capitolinus, Ælius Lampridius,Vulcatius Gallicanus, Trebellius Pollio, and Flavius Vopiscus.But there is so much perplexity in the titles of the MSS; and so manydisputes have arisen among the critics (fee Fabricius Biblioth. Latin.I. iii. c. 6.) concerning their number, their names, and their re­spective property, that for the most part I have quoted them with­out distinction, under the general and well known title of theAugustan History.







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


knew how to deliver themselves and their children, with their ownhands, from an insulting victor Heroines of such a cast mayclaim our admiration; but they were, most assuredly, neither lovelytnor very susceptible of love. Whilst they affected to emulate thestern virtues of many they must have resigned that attractive softnessin which principally consist the charm and weakness of woman.Conscious pride taught the German females to suppress every tenderemotion that stood in competition with honour, and the first honourof the sex has ever been that of chastity. The sentiments andconduct of these high-spirited matrons may, at once, be consideredas a cause, as an effect, and as a proof of the general character ofthe nation. Female courage, however it may be raised by fanaticism,or confirmed by habit, can be only a faint and imperfect imitationof the manly valour that distinguishes the age or country in whichit may be found.
The religious system of the Germans (if the wild opinions of fa- ReFgion.vages can deserve that name) was dictated by their wants, their fears,and their ignorance 6\ They adored the great visible objects andagents of Nature, the Sun and the Moon, the Fire and the Earth;together with those imaginary deities, who were supposed to pre­side over the most important occupations of human life. They werepersuaded, that, by some ridiculous arts of divination, they coulddiscover the will of the superior beings, and that human sacrificeswere the most precious and acceptable offering to their altars. Someapplause has been hastily bestowed on the sublime notion, enter-"tained by that people, of the Deity, whom they neither confinedwithin the walls of a temple, nor represented by any human figure •but when we recollect, that the Germans were unskilled in archi­tecture, and totally unacquainted with the art of sculpture, we shallreadily assign the true reason of a scruple, which arose not so muchfrom a superiority of reason, as from a want of ingenuity. Theonly temples in Germany were dark and ancient groves, consc-
Vo l. I. H h crated







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


superiority of his genius and military power, he determined, with­out any previous injury, to exert them for the destruction of Licinius,whose advanced age and unpopular vices seemed tt> offer a veryeasy conquest ,0J. But the old emperor, awakened by the approach­ing danger, deceived the expectations of his friends as well asof his enemies. Calling forth that spirit and those abilities by whichhe had deserved the friendship of Galerius and the imperial purple,he prepared himself for the contest, collected the forces of theEast, and soon filled the plains of Hadrianople with his troops,and the Streights of the Hellespont with his fleet. The army con­sisted of one hundred and fifty thousand foot, and fifteen thousandhorse; and as the cavalry was drawn, for the most part, fromPhrygia and Cappadocia, we may conceive a more favourable opinionof the beauty of the horses than of the courage and dexterity of theirriders. The fleet was composed of three hundred and fifty gallies pof three ranks of oars. An hundred and thirty of these were fur­nished by Egypt, and the adjacent coast of Africa. An hundredand ten sailed from the ports of Phœnicia and the ifle of Cyprus;and the maritime countries of Bithynia, Ionia, and Caria, werelikewise obliged to provide an hundred and ten gallies. Thetroops of Constantine were ordered to rendezvous at Theflalonica;they amounted to above an hundred and twenty thousand horseand foot '°4. Their emperor was satisfied with their martial ap­pearance, and his army contained more soldiers, though fewer menthan that of his eastern competitor. The legions of Constantinewere levied in the warlike provinces of Europe; action hadconfirmed their discipline, victory had elevated their hopes, andthere were among them a great number of veterans, who, afterseventeen glorious campaigns under the fame leader, prepared them­selves to deserve an honourable dismission by a last effort of theirvalour "". But the naval preparations of Constantine were in every
L 1 1 2 respect







OCR Output








27'8 THE DECLINE'AND FALL


telligence of his misfortunes with secret pleasure, and avowedindifference. "I knew that my father was a mortal," said he,■ and since he has acted as becomes a brave man, I am satisfied."Whilst Rome lamented the fate of her sovereign, the savage cold­ness of his son was extolled by the servile courtiers, as the perfectfirmness of a hero and a stoic ,s\ It is diffiicult to paint the light,the various* the inconstant character of Gallienus, which he dis­played without constraint, as soon as he became sole possessor of theempire. In every art that he attempted, his lively genius enabledhim to succeed; and as his genius was destitute of judgment, heattempted every art, except the important ones of war and govern­ment. He was a master of several curious but useless sciences,a rteady orator, an elegant poet a skilful gardener, an excellentcook, and most contemptible prince. When the great emergences ofthe state required his presence and attention, he was engaged in con­versation with the philosopher Plotinus ,s+, wasting his time in triflingdr KtetttidttB pleasures, preparing his initiation to the Grecian mys­teries, or soliciting a place in the Areopagus of Athens. His profusemagnificence insulted the general poverty; the solemn ridicule of histriumphs impressed a deeper fense of the public disgrace. The re­peated intelligence of invasions, defeats, and rebellions, he receivedwith a careless smile; and singling out, with affected contempt,some particular production of the lost province, he carelessly asked,whether Rome must be ruined, unless it was supplied with linenfrom Egypt and Arras cloth from Gaul? There were, however,a few short moments-, in the life of Gallienus, when, exasperated bysome recent injury, he suddenly appeared the intrepid soldier, andthe cruel tyrant; till satiated with blood, or fatigued by resistance,he insensibly sunk into the natural mildness and indolence of hischaracter
The thirty At a time when the reins of government were held with so loosetyrants. & hand, it is not surprising, that a crowd of usurpers should start up


in







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


gustus to the senate, in which that experienced prince so accuratelybalanced the revenues and expences of the Roman empire Ss. De­prived of this clear and comprehensive estimate, we are reduced tocollect a few imperfect hints from such of the ancients as have acci­dentally turned aside from the splendid to the more useful parts ofhistory. We are informed, that by the conquests of Pompey, thetributes of Asia were raised from fifty to one hundred and thirty- of Ada,five millions of drachms; or about four millions and a half ster­ling 8S. Under the last and most indolent of the Ptolemies, the re- of Egypt,venue of Egypt is said to have amounted to twelve thousand fivehundred talents; a sum far inferior to what was afterwards pro­duced by the more exact ceconomy of the Romans, and the increaseof the trade of Æthiopia and India "7. Gaul was enriched by rapine, of Gaul,as Egypt was by commerce, and the tributes of those two great pro­vinces have been compared as nearly equal to each other in valueThe ten thousand Euboic or Phœnician talents, about four millions of Africa,sterling which vanquished Carthage was condemned to pay withinthe term of fifty years, were a flight acknowledgment of the supe­riority of Rome 9°, and cannot bear the least proportion with thetaxes afterwards raised both on the lands and on the persons of theinhabitants, when the fertile coast of Africa was reduced into aprovince
Spain, by a very singular fatality, was the Peru and Mexico of of Spain,the old world. The discovery of the rich western continent by thePhœnicians, and the oppression of the simple natives, who werecompelled to labour in their own mines for the benefit of strangers,form an exact type of the more recent history of Spanish America 9\The Phœnicians were acquainted only with the sea-coast of Spain;avarice, as well as ambition, carried the arms of Rome and Carthageinto the heart of the country, and almost every part of the soil wasfound pregnant with copper, silver, and gold. Mention is made of amine near Carthagena which yielded every day twenty-five thousand
Y 2 drachms







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 439


feats of Licinius had ruined his forces, but they had displayed hiscourage and abilities. His situation was almost desperate, but theefforts of despair are sometimes formidable; and the good fense ofConstantine preferred a great and certain advantage to a third trial ofthe chance of arms. He consented to leave his rival, or, as he again Treaty of
..... . peace.
styled Licinius, his friend and brother, in the possession of Thrace, December.Asia Minor, Syria, and Egypt; but the provinces of Pannonia, Dal-matia, Dacia, Macedonia, and Greece, were yielded to the westernempire, and the dominions of Constantine extended from the confinesof Caledonia to the extremity of Peloponnesus. It was stipulated by thefame treaty, that three royal youths, the sons of the emperors, shouldbe called to the hopes of the succession. Crispus and the youngerConstantine, were soon afterwards declared Cæsars in the West,while the younger Licinius was invested with the fame dignity in theEast. In this double proportion of honours, the conqueror assertedthe superiority of his arms and power '*.
The reconciliation of Constantine and Licinius, though it was General peaceembittered by resentment and jealousy, by the remembrance of re— Constantine.cent injuries, and by the apprehension of future dangers, main- 3*3. 3'S~~tained, however, above eight years, the tranquillity of the Romanworld. Asa very regular series of the imperial laws commencesabout this period, it would not be difficult to transcribe the civil re­gulations which employed the leisure of Constantine. But the mostimportant of his institutions are intimately connected with the newsystem of policy and religion, which was not perfectly cstablisiHed tillthe last and peaceful years of his reign. There are many of hislaws, which, as far as they concern the rights and property of indi­viduals, and the practice of the bar, are more properly referred tothe private than to the public jurisprudence of the empire; and he •published many edicts of so local and temporary a nature, that theywould ill deserve the notice of a general history. Two laws, how­ever, may be selected from the crowd; the one, for its importance,
the







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AND FALL


pound of gold "4; precious stones, among which the pearl claimedthe first rank after the diamond ,0J; and a variety of aromatics,that were consumed in religious worship and the pomp of funerals.The labour and rislc of the voyage was rewarded with almost in­credible profit 5 but the profit was made upon Roman subjects, and aGold and few individuals were enriched at the expence of the Public. As thesllvcr" natives of Arabia and India were contented with-'the productionsand manufactures of their own country, silver, on;the fide of theRomans, was the principal, if not the only instrument of com­merce. It was a complaint worthy of the gravity of the senate,that, in the purchase of female ornaments, the wealth of the statewas irrecoverably given away to foreign and hostile nationsThe annual loss is computed, by a writer of an inquisitive but cen­sorious temper, at upwards of eight hundred thousand poundssterling 107. Such was the style of discontent, brooding over thedark prospect of approaching poverty. And yet, if we comparethe proportion between gold and silver, as it stood in the time ofPliny, and as it was fixed in the reign of Constantine, we mail dis­cover within that period a very considerable increase laS. Thereis not the least reason to suppose that gold was become more scarce;it is therefore evident that silver was grown more common; thatwhatever might be the amount of the Indian and Arabian exports,they were far from exhausting the wealth of the Roman world;and that the produce of the mines abundantly supplied the demandsof commerce.. .1Notwithstanding the propensity of mankind to exalt the past,and to depreciate the present, the tranquil and prosperous state ofthe empire was warmly felt, and honestly confessed, by the pro-General fe- vincia^s as we^ as Romans. c< They acknowledged that the trtrelicity. « principles of social life, laws, agriculture, and science, which had<{ been first invented by the wisdom of Athens, were now firmly** establiihed by the power of Rome, under whose auspicious
"influence







OCR Output








BO* THE DECLINE AND FALL


groaned above five centuries since the death of Dariu6. The Par-thians were defeated in three great battles. In the last of thesetheir king Artaban was flain, and the spirit of the nation wa6 forever brokenJ. The authority of Artaxerxes was solemnly acknow­ledged in a great assembly held at Balch in Khorasan. Twoyounger branches of the royal house of Arsaces were confoundedamong the prostrate satraps. A third, more mindful of ancientgrandeur than of present necessity, attempted to retire, with anumerous train of vassals, towards their kiniftnan, the king ofArmenia j but this little army of deserters was intercepted, and cutoff, by the vigilance of the conqueror 6, who boldly assumed thedouble diadem, and the title of King of Kings, which had beenenjoyed by his predecessor. But these pompous titles, instead ofgratifying the vanity of the Persian, served only to admonisli himof his duty, and to inflame in his foul, the ambition of restoring, intheir full splendour, the religion and empire of Cyrus.Reformation j# During the long servitude of Persia under the Macedonian
•f ihe Magian °"
religion. and the Parthian yoke, the nations of Europe and Asia had mu­tually adopted aud corrupted each other's superstitions. TheArsacides, indeed, practised the worship of the Magi ; but theydisgraced and polluted it with a various mixture of foreign idolatry.The memory of Zoroaster, the ancient prophet and philosopherof the Persians 7, was still revered in the East ; but the obsolete andmysterious language, in which the Zendavesta was composed %opened a field of dispute to seventy sects, which had arisen in.his religion, and were all equally derided by a crowd of infi­dels, who rejected the divine mission and miracles of the prophet.To suppress the idolaters, reunite the schismatics, and confute theunbelievers, by the infallible decision of a general council, thepious Artaxerxes summoned the Magi from all parts of his dominions.These priests, who had so long sighed in contempt and obscurity,obeyed the welcome summons j and on the appointed day appeared,


i to







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AND FALL


and destroying their feeble enemy, continued inactive in those nar­row streights where its superiority of numbers was of little use oradvantage. Crispus, the emperor's eldest son, was intrusted withthe execution of this daring enterprise, which he performed withso much courage and success, that he deserved the esteem, and mostprobably excited the jealousy of his father. The engagementlasted two days, and, in the evening of the first, the contendingfleets, after a considerable and mutual loss, retired into theirrespective harbours of Europe and Asia. The second day aboutnoon a strong south wind ,08 sprang up, which carried the vesselsof Crispus against the enemy, and as the casual advantage was im­proved by his stcilful intrepidity he soon obtained a complete"victory. An hundred and thirty vessels were destroyed, five thou­sand men were slain, and Amandus, the admiral of the Asiaticfleet, escaped with the utmost difficulty to the mores of Chalcedon.As soon as the Hellespont was open, a plentiful convoy of pro­visions flowed into the camp of Constantine, who had alreadyadvanced the operations of the siege. He constructed artificialmounds of earth of an equal height with the ramparts of Byzan­tium. The lofty towers which were erected on that foundation,galled the besieged with large stones and darts from the militaryengines, and the battering rams had shaken the walls in severalplaces. If Licinius persisted much longer in the defence, he ex­posed himself to be involved in the ruin of the place. Before hewras surrounded he prudently removed his person and treasures toChalcedon in Asia; and as he was always desirous of associatingcompanions to the hopes and dangers of his fortune, he now be­stowed the title of Cæsar on Martinianus, who exercised one of themost important offices of the empire„. , , Such were still the resources, and such the abilities, of Licinius,
Battle of
Chrysopoiis. that, after so many successive defeats, he collected in Bithynia a


4 new







OCR Output








+8o THE DECLINE AND FALL


•of baptism, the guilt of their past conduct, for which the templesof the gods refused to grant them any expiation. But this reproach,when it is cleared from misrepresentation, contributes as much tothe honour as it did to the increase of the church 8|. The friendsof Christianity may acknowledge without a blush, that many ofthe -most eminent saints had been before their baptism the mostabandoned of sinners. Those persons, who in the world hadfollowed, though in an imperfect manner, the dictates of bene­volence and propriety, derived such a calm satisfaction from theopinion of their own rectitude, as rendered them much less sus­ceptible of the sudden emotions of shame, of grief, and of terror,which have given birth to so many wonderful conversions. Afterthe example of their Divine Master, the missionaries of the gospeladdressed themselves to men, and especially to women oppressed bythe consciousness, and very often by the effects, of their vices. Asthey emerged from sin and superstition to the glorious hope ofimmortality, they resolved to devote themselves to a life, not onlyof virtue, but of penitence. The desire of perfection became theruling passion of their foul; and, it is well known, that while reasonembraces a cold mediocrity, our passions hurry us, with rapid-violence, over the space which lies between the most oppositeextremes.
Care of their When the new converts had been enrolled in the number of thefaithful, and were admitted to the sacraments of the church, theyfound themselves restrained from relapsing into their past disordersby another consideration of a less spiritual, but of a very innocentand respectable nature. Any particular society that has departedfrom the great body of the nation, or the religion to which itbelonged, immediately becomes the object of universal as well asinvidious observation. In proportion to the smallness of its num­bers, the character of the society may be affected by the virtuesand vices of the persons who compose it; and every member is en-7 gage^


■f.'puution.







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 249


1


tribes of the Peucini, the Borani, the Carpi, &c. derived its originfrom the Germans. With better authority, a Sarmatian extractionmay be assigned to the Venedi, who rendered themselves so famousin the middle ages l6. But the confusion of blood and manners on Dislinafcmof
Germans and
that doubtful frontier, often perplexed the most accurate ob- Sarmatians.servers *7. As the Goths advanced nearer the Euxine sea, theyencountered a purer race of Sarmatians, the Jazyges, the Alani,and the Roxolani; and they were probably the first Germans whosaw the mouths of the Borysthenes, and of the Tanais. If weinquire into the characteristic marks of the people of Germany andof Sarmatia, we shall discover that those two great portions of humankind were principally distinguished by fixed huts or moveabletents, by a close dress, or flowing garments, by the marriage ofone or of several wives, by a military force, consisting, for the mostpart, either of infantry or of cavalry; and above all by the use ofthe Teutonic, or of the Sclavonian language; the last of which hasbeen diffused by conquest, from the confines of Italy to the neigh­bourhood of Japan.
The Goths were now in possession of the Ukraine, a country of Description ofconsiderable extent and uncommon fertility, intersected with navi- tbe kraine*gable rivers, which, from either side, discharge themselves into theBorysthenes; and interspersed with large and lofty forests ofoaks. The plenty of game and fish, the innumerable bee-hives,deposited in the hollow of old trees, and in the cavities of rocks, andforming, even in that rude age, a valuable branch of commerce,the size of the cattle, the temperature of the air, the aptness of thesoil for every species of grain, and the luxuriancy of the vegetation,all displayed the liberality of Nature, and tempted the industry ofman l8. But the Goths withstood all these temptations, and stilladhered to a life of idleness, of poverty, and of rapine.
The Scythian hords, which, towards the east, bordered on the new TheGotlusettlements of the Goths, presented nothing to their arms, except the roœm p'o-
Vol. I. K k doubtful viDCes'







OCR Output








4io THE DECLINE AND FALL


accustomed to obey his commands. Rome, according to the expressionof an orator, recalled her armies, and the unfortunate Severus, destituteof force and of counsel, retired, or rather fled, with precipitationto Ravenna. Here he might for some time have been safe. Thefortifications of Ravenna were able to resist the attempts, and themorasses that surrounded the town, were sufficient to prevent theapproach, of the Italian army. The sea, which Severus commandedwith a powerful fleet, secured him an inexhaustible supply of pro­visions, and gave a free entrance to the legions, which, on the re­turn of spring, would advance to his assistance from Illyricum andthe East. Maximian, who conducted the siege in person, wassoon convinced that he might waste his time and his army in thefruitless enterprise, and that he had nothing to hope either fromforce or famine. With an art more suitable to the character ofDiocletian than to his own, he directed his attack, not so muchagainst the walls of Ravenna, as against the mind of Severus. Thetreachery which he had experienced, disposed that unhappy princeto distrust the most sincere of his friends and adherents. The emis­saries of Maximian easily persuaded his credulity, that a conspiracywas formed to betray the town, and prevailed upon his fears notto expose himself to the discretion of an irritated conqueror, but toaccept the faith of an honourable capitulation. He was.at first re­ceived with humanity, and treated with respect. Maximian con­ducted the captive emperor to Rome, and gave him the most solemnassurances that he had secured his life by the resignation of thepurple. But Severus could obtain only an easy death and an impe-A. D. 307. rial funeral. When the sentence was signified to him, the mannere ruary. ^ executing it was left to his own choice ; he preferred the favour­ite mode of the ancients, that of opening his veins: and as soon ashe expired, his body was carried to the sepulchre which had beenconstructed for the family of Gallienus ,J.
Though







OCR Output








OF tfrfE ROMAN EMPIRE.


sects enrolled themselves under the banners of the more fashionableteachers, who recommended their system by a new method, and bytheir manners. Several of these masters, Ammonius, Plotinus, Ame-lius, and Porphyry were men of profound thoughtand intense ap­plication; but by mistaking the true object of philosophy, their la­bours contributed much less- to improve than to corrupt the humanunderstanding. The knowledge that is suited to our situation andpowers, the whole compass of moral, natural, and mathematical science,was neglected by thtf new Platonicians; whilst they exhausted theirstrength in the verbal disputes of metaphysics, attempted to explorethe secrets of the invisible world, and studied to reconcile Aristotlewith Plato, on subjects of which both these philosophers were asignorant as the rest of mankind. Consuming their reason in thesedeep but unsubstantial meditations, their minds were exposed toillusions of fancy. They flattered themselves that they possessed thesecreb of disengaging the soul from its corporeal prison; claimed afamiliar intercourse with dæmons and spirits, and, by a very singularrevolution, converted the study of philosophy into that of magic.The ancient sages had derided the popular superstition j after dis­guising its extravagance by the thin pretence of allegory, the dis­ciples of Plotinus and Porphyry became its most zealous defenders.As they agreed with the Christians in a few mysterious points offaith, they attacked the remainder of their theological system withall the fury of civil war. The new Platonicians would scarcely de­serve a place in the history of science, but in that of the church themention of them will very frequently occur.


CHAP.







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


setting fire to this funeral pile of Grecian learning, had not one oftheir chiefs, of more refined policy than his brethren, dissuadedthem from the design; by the profound observation, that as longas the Greeks were addicted to the study of books, they would neverapply themselves to the exercise of arms "'. The sagacious coun­sellor (should the truth of the fact be admitted) reasoned like an ig­norant barbarian. In the most polite and powerful nations, geniusof every kind has displayed itself about the same period; and theage of science has generally been the age of military virtue andsuccess.
IV. The new sovereigns of Persia, Artaxerxes and his son Sapor, Conquest ofhad triumphed (as we have already seen) over the house of Arsaces. the Persians.Of the many princes of that ancient race, Chosroes, king of Arme­nia, had alone preserved both his life and his independence. Hedefended himself by the natural strength of his country; by theperpetual resort of fugitives and malcontents; by the alliance of theRomans, and, above all, by his own courage. Invincible in arms,during a thirty years war, he was assassinated by the emissaries ofSapor king of Persia. The patriotic satraps of Armenia, who as­serted the freedom and dignity of the crown, implored the protec­tion of Rome in favour of Tiridates the lawful heir. But the sonof Chosroes was an infant, the allies were at a distance, and thePersian monarch advanced towards the frontier at the head of anirresistible force. Young Tiridates, the future hope of his country,was saved by the fidelity of a servant; and Armenia continuedabove twenty-seven years a reluctant province of the great monarchyof Persia "\ Elated with this easy conquest, and presuming on thedistresses or the degeneracy of the Romans, Sapor obliged the stronggarrisons of Carrhæ and Nisibis to surrender, and spread devasta­tion and terror on either side of the Euphrates.
The loss of an important frontier, the ruin of a faithful and Valeriannatural ally, and the rapid success of Sapor's ambition, affected the East. 0'0
Vol. I. N n Rome







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


mand, with despotic sway, ten millions of subjects; and a body often or fifteen thousand guards will strike terror into the most nume­rous populace that ever crowded the streets of an immense capital.
The Praetorian bands, whose licentious fury was the first symptom The Præto-and cause of the decline of the Roman empire, scarcely amounted to mn gu" S*the last mentioned number They derived their institution from The!r inst!*
tutioo.
Augustus. That crafty tyrant, sensible that laws might colour, butthat arms alone could maintain, his usurped dominion, had gra­dually formed this powerful body of guards in constant readiness toprotect his person, to awe the senate, and either to prevent or tocrush the first motions of rebellion. He distinguished these favouredtroops by a double pay, and superior privileges; but, as their for­midable aspect would at once have alarmed and irritated the Romanpeople, three cohorts only were stationed in the capital; whilst theremainder was dispersed in the adjacent towns of Italy V But after Their camp. ,fifty years of peace and servitude, Tiberius ventured on a decisivemeasure, which for ever rivetted the fetters of his country. Underthe fair pretences of relieving Italy from the heavy burden of mi­litary quarters, and of introducing a stricter discipline among theguards, he assembled them at Rome, in a permanent campwhich wasfortified with stcilful care *, and placed on a commanding situation 5.
Such formidable servants are always necessary, but often fatal to Theirthe throne of despotism. By thus introducing the Prætorian guards, confidences,as it were, into the palace and the senate, the emperors taught themto perceive their own strength, and the weakness of the civil go­vernment; to view the vices of their masters with familiar con­tempt, and to lay aside that reverential awe, which distance only,and mystery, can preserve, towards an imaginary power. In theluxurious idleness of an opulent city, their pride was nourished bythe fense of their irresistible weight; nor was it possible to concealfrom them, that the person of the sovereign, the authority of thesenate, the public treasure, and the seat of empire, were all in their
P 2 hands.







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE,


the historians concurred in teaching, that the Imperial authority washeld, not by the delegated commission, but by the irrevocable resig­nation of the senate; that the emperor was freed from the restraintof civil laws, could command by his arbitrary will the lives and for­tunes of his subjects, and might dispose of the empire as of his pri­vate patrimony7'. The most eminent of the civil lawyers, and par­ticularly Papinian, Paulus, and Ulpian, flourished under the houseof Severus; and the Roman jurisprudence having closely uniteditself with the system of monarchy, wa& supposed to have attainedits full maturity and perfection.
The contemporaries of Severus, in the enjoyment of the peace andglory of his reign, forgave the cruelties by which it had been intro­duced. Posterity, who experienced the fatal effects of his maximsand example, justly considered him as the principal author of thedecline of the Roman Empire.


& CHAP.







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


inculcated with more diligence as well as success in India, in ?m°ng.the
barbarians;
Assyria, in Egypt, and in Gaul; and since we cannot attributesuch a difference to the superior knowledge of the barbarians, wemust ascribe it to the influence of an established priesthood, whichemployed the motives of virtue as the instrument of ambition JJ.
We might naturally expect, that a principle so essential to imons 'he
Jews;
religion, would have been revealed in the clearest terms to thechosen people os Palestine, and that it might safely have been en­trusted to the hereditary priesthood of Aaron. It is incumbent onus to adore the mysterious dispensations of providence s&, when wediscover, that the doctrine of the immortality of the soul is omittedin the law of Moses j it is darkly insinuated by the prophets, andduring the long period which elapsed between the Egyptian and theBabylonian servitudes, the hopes as well as fears of the Jewsappear to have been confined within the narrow compass of thepresent life After Cyrus had permitted the exiled nation toreturn into the promised land, and after Ezra had restored theancient records of their religion, two celebrated sects, the Saduceesand the Pharisees insensibly arose at Jerusalem 5\ The formerwho claimed the most opulent and distinguished part of the society,were strictly attached to the literal sense of the Mosaic law, andthey pioufly rejected the immortality of the soul, as an opinion thatreceived no countenance from the divine book, which they reveredas the only rule of their faith. To the authority of scripture thePharisees added that of tradition, and they accepted, under thename of traditions, several speculative tenets from the philosophyor religion of the Eastern nations. The doctrines of fate or pre­destination, of angels and spirits, and of a future state of rewardsand punishments, were in the number of these new articles of.belief; and as the Pharisees, by the austerity of their manners, haddrawn into their party the body of the Jewish people, the immor­tality of the soul became the prevailing sentiment of the synagogue,,
I. under.







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 447


new army of fifty or sixty thousand men, while the activity of Coa-stantine was employed in the siege of Byzantium. The vigilantemperor did not however neglect the last struggles of his antagonist.A considerable part of his victorious army was transported overthe Bosphorus in small vessels, and the decisive engagement wasfought soon after their landing on the heights of Chrysopolis, or,as it is now called, of Scutari. The troops of Licinius, though ,they were lately raised, ill armed, and worse disciplined, made headagainst their conquerors with fruitless but desperate valour, tilla. total defeat and the slaughter of five and twenty thousand menirretrievably determined the fate of their leader He retired toNicomedia, rather with ihe view of gaining some time for nego- fnddewhofciation, than with -the hope of any effectual defence. Constantia, L,cimo'-his wife and the sister of Constantine, interceded with her brother infavour of her husband, and obtained from his policy rather than fromhiss compassion, a solemn promise, confirmed by an oath, that after thesacrifice of Martinianus, and the resignation of the purple, Liciniushimself should be permitted to pass the remainder of his life in peaceand affluence. The behaviour of Constantia, and her relation to thecontending parties, naturally recalls the remembrance of that vir­tuous matron who was the sister of Augustus and the wife of An­tony. But the temper of mankind was altered, and it was nolonger esteemed infamous for a Roman to survive his honour andindependence. Licinius solicited and accepted the pardon of hisoffences, laid himself and his purple at the feet of his lord and mq/lerywas raised from the ground with insulting pity, was admitted the fameday to the imperial banquet, and soon afterwards was sent away toTheffalonica, which had been chosen for the place of his confinement11'.His confinement was soon terminated by death, and it is doubtfulwhether a tumult of the soldiers, or a decree of the senate, was sug­gested as the motive for his execution. According to the rules oftyranny he was accused of forming a conspiracy, and of holding a
treasonable







OCR Output








lxi«r NOTES ON THE FOU RTEENTH CHAPTER.


pute between the sovereigns of Italy and of IUy-ricum.
[88] Cibalis or Cibalse (whose name is ftil 1 pre­served in the obscure ruins of Swilei) was situatedabout fifty miles from Sirmium, the capital of illy-ricum, and about one hundred from Taurunum, orBelgrade, and the conflux of the Danube and theSave. The Roman garrisons and cities on thoserivers are finely illustrated by M. Danville, in amemoir inserted in l'Academie des Inscriptions,torn, xxviii.
[S9] Zosimus; 1. ii p. go, 91.) gives a very parti­cular account of this battle; but the descriptionsof Zosimus are rhetorical rather than military.
[90] Zosimus, 1 ii. p. 92, 93. Anonym Va-lelian, p. 713. The Epitomes furnish some cir­cumstances; but they frequently confound the twowars between Licinius and Constantine.
[9;] Petrus Patricius in Excerpt. Legat. p. 27.If it should be thought that y^jJfot signifies moreproperly a son-in-law than a kinsman, we mightcoijecture, that Constantine, assuming the name aswell as the duties of a father, had adopted hisyounger brothers and sisters, the children of Tbe-pdora.
[92] Zosimus, I ii p. ey. Anonym. Valesian,p. 713. Eutropius, x. 5. Aurelins Victor. Euseb. inChron. Sozomen. 1. i.e. 2. Fourofthese writers affirmthat the promotion of the Cæsars was an article ofthe treaty. It is however certain, that the youngerConstantine and Licinius were not yet born; and itif high'y probable that the promotion was made thel it of March, A. D. 317. The treaty had probablystipulated that two might be created by the western,and one only by the eastern emperor; but each ofthem reserved to himself the choice of the persons.
[93] Codex Theodosian, 1. xi. tit. 27. torn,iv. p. 188, with Godefroy's observations. Seelikewise, 1. v. tit. 7—8.
[94] Omniaforis placita, domi prospera, annonaeubertate, fructuum copi.i, &c. Panepyr. Vet. x. 38.This oration of Nazarius was pronounced on theday cf the Q^iiiquennaiia of the Cæsars, the 1st ofMarch, A. L>. 321.
[o;] See the edict of Constantine, addressed tothe Roman people in the slieodosian Code, 1. ix.tit. 24. torn, iii p 189.


[96] His son very fairly assigns the true reason ofthe repeal, "Ne sub specie atrocioris judieii ali-qua in ulciseendo crimine diiatio uafeeretur." Cod.Theod. torn. iii. p. 193.
[97] Eufebius (in Vita Constant. 1. iii. c. 1.)chooses to affirm, that in the reign of his hero, thesword of justice hung idle in the hands of the ma­gistrates. Eufebius himself, (I. iv. c. 29. 54.) andthe Theodosian Code, will inform us, that this ex­cessive lenity was not owing to the want either ofatrocious criminals or of penal laws.
[98] Nazarius in Panegyr. Vet. x. The victoryof Crispus over the Alemanni, is expressed on fumemedals.
[99] See Zosimus, 1. ii. p. 93, 94. Though thenarrative of that Historian is neither clear nor con­sistent. The Panegyric ofOptatianus (c. 23.) men­tions the alliance of the Sarmatiaos with the Carpsand Gctæ, and points out the several fields of battle.It is supposed, ch t the Sarmatian games, celebratedin the month of November, derived their origin froathe success of this war.
[100] In the C.tsars of Julian (p. 329 Commen-taire de Spanhcim, p. 252 ) Constantine boasts,that he had recovered the province (Dacia), whichTrajan had subdued. But it is insinuated by Silenus,that the conquests of Constantine were like thegardens of Adonis, which fade and wither almostthe moment they appear.
[toi] Jornandes de Rebus Geticis, c. 21. I knownot whether we may entirely depend on his authority.Such an alliance has a very recent air, and scarcelyis suited to the maxims of the beginning of ;hefourth century.
[102] Eufebius in Vit. Constantine, I, i. c. 8.This passage, however, is taken from a general de­clamation on the greatness of Constantine, and notfrom any particular account of the Gothic war.
[103] Constantinus tamen vir ingens, et omniaefficere nitens quæ animo præparasict; simul prin-cipatum totius orbis affectans Licinio bellum intulic.Eutropius, x. 5. Zosimus, 1. ii. p. 89. The reasonswhich they have assigned for the first civil war may,with more propriety, be applied to the second.
[1C4] Zosimus, 1. ii, p. 94, 95,
[105] Con-







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


CHAP. II.
Of the Union and internal Prosperity of the Roman Empire,in the Age of the Antonines.


I


T is not alone by the rapidity, or extent of conquest, that we Principles of
government.
should estimate the greatness of Rome. The sovereign ofthe Ruffian deserts commands a larger portion of the globe.In the seventh summer after his passage of the Hellespont'Alexander erected the Macedonian trophies on the banks of theHyphasis'. Within less than a century, the irresistible Zingis, andthe Mogul princes of his race, spread their cruel devastations andtransient empire, from the sea of China, to the confines of Egyptand Germany \ But the firm edifice of Roman power was raisedand preserved by the wisdom of ages. The obedient provincesof Trajan and the Antonines were united by laws, and adorned byarts. They might occasionally suffer from the partial abuse ofdelegated authority; but the general principle of government waswife, simple, and beneficent. They enjoyed the religion of theirancestors, whilst in civil honours and advantages they were exalted)by just degrees, to an equality with their conquerors.
I. The policy of the emperors and the senate, as far as it con- Universalcemed religion, was happily seconded by the reflections of the lfrarion.'°enlightened, and by the habits of the superstitious part of their sub­jects. The various modes of worship, which prevailed in theRoman world, were all considered by the people, as equally true;by the philosopher, as equally false } and by the magistrate, asequally useful. And thus toleration produced not only mutualindulgence, but even religious concord.
2: The.*







OCR Output








Uxxviii' NOTES ON THE SIXTEENTH CHAPTER.


of his viiith book, which relates to the province ofThebais in Egypt, may seem to contradict our mo­derate computation; but it will only lead us to ad­mire the artful management of the historian.Chusing for the scene of the most exquisite cruelty,the most remote and sequestered country of the Ro­man empire, he relates that in Thebais, from tento one hundred persons had frequently sufferedmartyrdom in the same day. But when he pro­ceeds to mention his own journey into Egypt, hislanguage insensibly becomes more cautious and mo­derate. Instead of a large, but definite number,he speaks of many christians ;and most
artfully selects two ambiguous words (..-.^jaus, andpœo/MiKuroj) which may signify either what he hadseen, or what he had heard, either the expectationor the execution of the punilhmedt. Having thusprovided a secure evasion, he commits the equivo­cal passage to his readers and translators; justly con­ceiving that their piety would induce them to preferthe most favourable fense. There was perhaps somemalice in the remark of Theodorus Metochita, thatall who, like Eufebius, had been conversant with


the Egyptians, delighted in an obscure and intri­cate style. (See Valesius ad loc )
[182] When Palestine was divided into three, theprefecture of the east contained/orty eight, pro­vinces. As the ancient distinctions of nations werelong since abolished, the Romans distributed theprovinces, according to a general proportion oftheir extent and opulence.
[183] Ut gloriari poffint nullum fe innocentiumperemisse, nam et ipfe audivi aliquos gloriantes,quia administratio sua, in hac pane, fuerit incru-enta. Lactant. Institut. Divin. v. 11.
[184] Grot. Annal. de Rebus Belgicis, 1. i. p.12. Edit. so!.
[185] Fra-Paolo (Istoria del Concilio Tridentino,1. iii.) reduces the number of Belgic martyrs to50,000. In learning and moderation, Fra-Paolowas not inferior to Grotius. The priority of timegives some advantage to the evidence of the former,which he loses by the distance of Venice from theNetherlands.


END OF THE FIRST VOLUME,







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.. y


ministers of death. Two officers of rank, who were intrusted withthat commission, placed Cyprian between them in a chariot, and as theproconsul was not then at leisure, they conducted him not to a pri­son, but to a private house in Carthage, which belonged to one ofthem. An elegant supper was provided for the entertainment of thebishop, and his Christian friends were permitted for the last timeto enjoy his society, whilst the streets were filled with a multitudeof the faithful, anxious and alarmed for the approaching fate oftheir spiritual father *5. In the morning he appeared before the tri­bunal of the proconsul, who, after informing himself of the nameand situation of Cyprian, commanded him to offer sacrifice, andpressed him to reflect on the consequences of his disobedience. Therefusal of Cyprian was firm and decisive; and the magistrate, whenhe had taken the opinion of his council, pronounced with somereluctance the sentence of death. It was conceived in the followingterms: "That Thascius Cyprianus should be immediately beheaded,"as the enemy of the gods of Rome, and as the chief and ring-"leader of a criminal association, which he had seduced into an"impious resistance against the laws of the most holy emperor6,"Valerian and Gallienus 86." The manner of his execution wasthe mildest and least painful that could be inflicted on a person con­victed of any capital offence: nor was the use of torture admitted toobtain from the Bishop of Carthage either the recantation of hisprinciples, or the discovery of his accomplices.
As soon as the sentence was proclaimed, a general cry of " We His martyr-"will die with him," arose at once among the listening multitude dom'of Christians who waited before the palace gates. The generouseffusions of their zeal and affection were neither serviceable toCyprian nor dangerous to themselves. He was led away under aguard of tribunes and centurions, without resistance and withoutinsult to the place of his execution, a spacious and level plain nearthe city, which was already filled with great numbers of specta-







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 57


"influence, the fiercest barbarians were united by an equal govern-"ment and common language. They affirm, that with the im>"provement of arts, the human species was visibly multiplied."They celebrate the increasing splendor of the cities, the beau-"tiful face of the country, cultivated and adorned like an im-"mense garden; and the long festival of peace, which was en-** joyed by so many nations, forgetful of their ancient animosities,"and delivered from the apprehension of future danger '°9."Whatever suspicions may be suggested by the air of rhetoric anddeclamation, which seems to prevail in these passages, the substanceof them is perfectly agreeable to historic truth.
It was scarcely possible that the eyes of contemporaries should Decline ofdiscover in the public felicity the latent causes of decay and cor- coura£c*■ ruption. This long peace, and the uniform government of theRomans, introduced a flow and secret poison into the vitals of theempire. The minds of men were gradually reduced to the famelevel, the fire of genius was extinguished, and even the militaryspirit evaporated. The natives of Europe were brave and robust^Spain, Gaul, Britain, and Illyricum supplied the legions with ex­cellent soldiers, and constituted the real strength of the monarchy.Their personal valour remained, but they no longer possessed thatpublic courage which is nourished by the love of independence, thefense of national honour, the presence of danger, and the habit ofcommand. They received laws and governors from the will oftheir sovereign, and trusted for their defence to a mercenary army. .The posterity of their boldest leaders was contented With the rankof citizens and subjects. The most aspiring spirits resorted to the:court oi; standard of the emperors; and the deserted provinces,deprived of political strength or union, insensibly sunk into the lan­guid indisserence of private life.
, The love of letters, almost inseparable from peace and re- ~, .
* r OfgeniM.
sinement, was fashionable among the subjects of Hadrian andVol. I. I the







OCR Output








20f5 THE DECLINE AND FALL


The attemptand sail ot'.Quintilius.


April.
Origin andservices ofAurelian.


snatched Claudius from the earth, rewarded his merit and piety bythe perpetual establishmenfof the empire in his family
Notwithstanding these oracles, the greatness of the Flavian family (aname which it had pleased them to assume) was deferred above twentyyears, and the elevation of Claudius occasioned the immediate ruinof his brother Quintilius, who possessed not sufficient mpderationor courage to descend into the private station to which the patriot­ism of the late emperor had condemned him. Without delay or re­flection, he assumed the purple at Aquileia, where he commandeda considerable force; and though his reign lasted only seventeendays, he had time to obtain the sanction of the senate, and to ex­perience a mutiny of the troops. As soon as he was informed thatthe great army of the Danube had invested the well known valourof Aurelian with imperial power, he funk under the fame and meritof his rival; and ordering his veins to be opened, prudently with­drew himself from the unequal contest ,si.
The general design of this work will not permit us minutely torelate the actions of every emperor after he ascended the throne,much less to deduce the various fortunes of his private life. Weshall only observe, that the father of Aurelian was a peasant of theterritory of Sirmium, who occupied a small farm, the property ofAurelius, a rich senator. His warlike son inlisted in the troops as acommon soldier, successively rose to the rank of a centurion, a tri­bune, the præfect of a legion, the inspector of the camp, the gene­ral, or as it was then called, the duke of a frontier; and at length,during the Gothic war, exercised the important office of commanderin chief of the cavalry. In every station he distinguished himselfby matchless valour '7, rigid discipline, and successful conduct. Hewas invested with the consulffiip by the emperor Valerian, who styleshim, in the pompous language of that age, the deliverer of Illyri-cum, the restorer of Gaul, and the rival of the Scipios. At the re­commendation of Valerian, a senator of the highest rank and merit,


Ulpius







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 237


helmets. Though the horses of Germany were neither beautiful,swift, nor practised in the skilful evolutions of the Roman manage,several of the nations obtained renown by their cavalry; but, ingeneral, the principal strength of the Germans consisted in their in­fantry 7I, -which was drawn up in several deep columns, according andofdisci-to the distinction of tribes and families. Impatient of fatigue or plmc*delay, these half-armed warriors rushed to battle with dissonantshouts and disordered ranks; and sometimes by the effort of nativevalour, prevailed over the constrained and more artificial bravery ofthe Roman mercenaries. But as the barbarians poured forth theirwhole fouls on the first- onset; they knew not how to rally or toretire. A repulse was a- sure defeat; and a defeat was most com­monly total destruction. When we recollect the complete armourof the Roman soldiers, their discipline, exercises, evolutions, fortifiedcamps, and military engines, it appears a just matter of surprisehow the naked and unassisted valour of the barbarians could dare toencounter in the field, the strength of the legions, and the varioustroops of the auxiliaries, which seconded their operations. Thecontest was too unequal, till the introduction of luxury had ener­vated the vigour, and a spirit of disobedience and sedition hadrelaxed the discipline, of the Roman armies. The introduction-ofbarbarian auxiliaries into those armies, was a measure attendedwith very obvious danger?, as it might gradually instruct the Ger­mans in the arts of war and of policy. Although they wereadmitted in small numbers and with the strictest precaution, theexample of Civilis might convince the Romans, that the danger wasnot imaginary, and that their precautions were not always suffi­cient '*. During the civil wars- that followed the death of Nero,,that artful and intrepid Batavian, whom his enemies condescendedto compare with Hannibal and Sertorius formed a great design offreedom and ambition. Eight Batavian cohorts, renowned in thewars of Britain and Italy, repaired to his standard.. He introduced 1
an







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AND FALL


«u«, to deduce the most important circumstances of its decline andfall; a revolution which will ever be remembered, and is still feltby the nations of the earth.Moderation The principal conquests of the Romans were atchieved under the
of Augustas. * * * ,
republic; and the emperors, for the most part, were satisfied withpreserving those dominions which had been acquired by the policyof the senate, the active emulation of the consuls, and the martialenthusiasm of die people. The seven first centuries were filled witha rapid succeflion of triumphs; but it was reserved for Augustus,to relinquish the ambitious design of subduing the whole earth, andto introduce a spirit of moderation into the public councils. In­clined to peace by his temper and situation, it was easy for him todiscover, that Rome, in her present exalted situation, had muchless to hope than to fear from the chance of arms j and that, in theprosecution of remote wars, the undertaking became every daymore difficult, the event more doubtful, and the possession moreprecarious, and less beneficial. The experience of Augustus addedweight to these salutary reflections. Instead of exposing his personand his legions to the arrows of the Parthians, he satisfied himselfwith the restitution of tbe standards and prisoners which were takenin the defeat of Crassus *. .
His generals, in the early part of his reign, attempted the re­duction of Æthiopia and Arabia Felix. They marched near athousand miles to the south of the tropic; but the heat of the climateloon repelled the invaders, and protected the unwarlike natives 'ofthose sequestered regions*. The northern countries of Europescarcely deserved the expence and labour of the conquest. The forestsand morasses of Germany were filled with a hardy race of barbari­ans, who despised life when it was separated from freedom; andthough, on the first attack, they seemed to yield to the weightof the Roman power, they soon, ty a signal act of despair, re-»gained their independence, and reminded Augustus of the vicis-
4 , situde







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 43


an independent and increasing state in the heart of the Romanempire.
I. We have already described the religious harmony of the ancient The Firstworld, and the facility with which the most different and even hos- Zealof'thetile nations embraced, or at least respected, each other's superstitions. ^ews'A single people refused to join in the common intercourse of man­kind. The Jews, who, under the Assyrian and Persian monarchies,had languished for many ages the most despised portion of theirslaves emerged from'obscurity under the successors of Alexander;and as they multiplied to a surprising degree in the-East, and after­wards in the West, they soon excited the curiosity and wonderof other nations \ The sullen obstinacy with which they main­tained their peculiar rites and unsocial manners, seemed to markthem out a distinct species of men who boldly professed, or whofaintly disguised, their implacable hatred to the rest of human-kindNeither the violence of Antiochus, nor the arts of Herod, nor theexample of the circumjacent nations, could ever persuade the Jewsto associate with the institutions of Moses the elegant mythology'of the Greeks+. According to the maxims of universal toleration,the Romans protected a superstition which they despiseds. Thepolite Augustus condescended to give orders, that sacrifices shouldbe offered for his prosperity in the temple of Jerusalem6; whilethe meanest of the posterity of Abraham, who should have paid thesame homage to the Jupiter of the capitol, would have been anobject of abhorrence to himself and to his brethren. The mode­ration of the conquerors was insufficient to appease the jealous pre­judices of their subjects, who were alarmed and scandalized at theensigns of paganism, which necessarily introduced themselves intoa Roman province 7. The mad attempt of Caligula to place hisown statue in the temple of Jerusalem, was defeated by the unani­mous resolution of a people who dreaded death much less than suchan idolatrous profanation 8. Their attachment to the law of Moses
M m m 2 was







OCR Output








NOTES ON THE SEVENTH CHAPTER. xxvii


ing, were chiefly bears, boars, bulls, stags, elks,wild asses, &c. Elephants and lions seem to havebeen appropriated to imperial magnificence.
[17] See the original letter, in the AugustanHistory, p. 152, which at once Ihews Alexander'srespect for the authority of the senate, and hisesteem for the proconsul appointed by it.
[18] By each of his concubines, the younger
Gordian left three or four children. His literary
productions, though less numerous, were by nomeans contemptible.
[19] Herodian, 1. vii. p. 243. Hist. August,p. 144.
[20] Quod tamen patres dum periculosum ex-ifiimant; inermes armato resistere approbaverunt.durelius ViSor.
[21] Even the servants of the house, the scribes,&c. were excluded, and their office was filled by thesenators themselves. We are obliged to the Au­gustine History, p. 159, for preserving this curiousexample of the old discipline of the commonwealth.
[22] This spirited speech, tranflated from the Au­gustan historian, p. 156, seems transcribed by himfrom the original registers of the senate.
[23] Herodian, 1. vii. p. 244,
[24] Herodian, 1. vii. p. 247. 1. viii. p. 277.Hist-August, p. 156—158.
[25] Herodian, 1. vii. p. 254. Hist. August,p. 158—160. We may observe, that one monthand six days, for the reign of Gordian, is a just cor­rection of Cafaubon and Panvinius, instead of theabsurd reading of one year and six months. SeeCommentar. p. 193. Zosimus relates, 1. i. p. 17.that the two Gordians peristied by a tempest in themidst of their navigation. A strange ignorance ofhistory, or a strange abuse of metaphors!
[26] See the Augustan History, p. 166, fromthe registers of the senate; the date is confessedlyfaulty, but the coincidence of the Apollinariangames enables us to correct it.
[27] He was descended from Cornelius Balbus,a noble Spaniard, and the adopted son of The-ophanes the Greek historian. Balbus obtained thefreedom of Rome by the favour of Pompey, and


preserved it by the eloquence of Cicero (see Orat.pro Cornel. Balbo). The friendship of Cæsar,(to whom he rendered the most important secret ser­vices in the civil war) raised him to the consulshipand the potificate, honours never yet possessed by astranger. The nephew of this Balbus triumphedover the Garamantes. See Dictionnaire de Bayle aumot Balbus, where he distinguishes the several per­sons of that name, and rectifies, with his usual ac­curacy, the mistakes of former writers concerningthem.
[28] Zonaras, 1. xii. p. 622. But little depend-ance is to be had on the authority of a moderateGreek, so grossly ignorant of the history of the thirdcentury, that he creates several imaginary emperors,and confounds those who really existed.
[29] Herodian, I. vii. p. 256, supposes that thesenate was at first convoked in the capitol, and isvery eloquent on the occasion. The Augustan His­tory, p. 1 (6, seems much more authentic.
[30] In Herodian, I. vii. p. 249, and in the Au­gustan History, we have three several orations ofMaximin to his army, on the rebellion of Africa andRome: M. de Tillemont has very justly observed,that they neither agree with each other, nor withtruth. Histoire des Empereurs, torn. iii. p. 799.
[31] The carelessness of the writers of that ageleaves us in a singular perplexity. 1. We knowthat Maximus and Balbinus were killed during thecapitoline games. Herodian, 1. viii. p. 285. Theauthority of Censorious (de Die Natali, c. 18.) en­ables us to fix those games with certainty to theyear 238, but leaves us in ignorance of the month orday. 2. The election of Gordian by the senate,is sixt, with equal certainty, to the 27th of May;but we are at a loss to discover, whether it was in.the fame or the preceding year. Tillemont andMuratori, who maintain the two opposite opinions,bring into the field a desultory troop of authorities,conjectures, and probabilities. The one seems todraw out, the other to contract the series of events,between those periods, more than can be well re­conciled to reason and history. Yet it is necessaryto chuse between them.
[32] Velleius Paterculus, 1. ii. c.n. The pre­sident de Montesquieu (in his dialogue betweenSylla and Eucrates) expresses the sentiments of thedictator, in a spirited and even a sublime manner,d 2 [33] Muratori







OCR Output








368 THE DECLINE AND FALL


of barbarians on the Roman territory 15. The brave and activeConstantius delivered Gaul from a very furious inroad of theAlemanni; and his victories of Langres and Vindonissa appearto have been actions of considerable danger and merit. As he tra­versed the open country with a feeble guard, he was encompassedon a sudden by the superior multitude of the enemy. He retreatedwith difficulty towards Langres; but, in the general consternation,the citizens refused to open their gates, and the wounded princewas drawn up the wall by the means of a rope. But on thenews of his distress, the Roman troops hastened from all fides tohis relief, and before the evening he had satisfied his honour andrevenge by the slaughter of six thousand Alemanni '6. From themonuments of those times, the memory of several other victoriesover the barbarians of Sarmatia and Germany might possibly becollected; but the tedious search would not be rewarded either withamusement or with instruction.Treatment os The conduct which the emperor Probus had adopted in the dis-
tne barba- x *
liant, pofal of the vanquistied, was imitated by Diocletian and his asso­
ciates. The captive barbarians, exchanging death for flavery,were distributed among the provincials, and assigned to those districts(in Gaul, the territories of Amiens, Beauvais, Cambray, Treves,Langres, and Troy es, are particularly specified '7) which had beendepopulated by the calamities of war. They were usefully em­ployed as shepherds and husbandmen, but were denied the exercise ofarms, except when it was found expedient to enrol them in themilitary service. Nor did the emperors refuse the property of lands,. with a less servile tenure, to such of the barbarians as solicitedthe protection of Rome. They granted a settlement to severalcolonies of the Carpi, the Bastarnae, and the Sarmatians; and, by adangerous indulgence, permitted them in some measure to retaintheir national manners and independence 5S. Among the pro­vincials, it was a subject of flattering exultation, that the barbarian,
so







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.'' 4%


Christians were desirous of making themselves either agreeableor useful. • . i .');.'.. 1 .:
The acquisition of knowledge, the exercise of our reason or fancy, Theprimi-and the cheerful flow of unguarded conversation, may employ condem"the leisure of a liberal mind. They were rejected however with flTur""ndabhorrence, or admitted with the utmost caution, by the severity ofthe fathers, who despised all knowledge that was not useful to sal­vation, and who considered all levity of discourse as a criminalabuse of the gift of speech. In our present state of existence, thebody is so inseparably connected with the soul, that it seems tobe our interest to taste, with innocence and moderation, the enjoy­ments of which that faithful companion is susceptible. Verydifferent was the reasoning of our devout predecessors; vainlyaspiring to imitate the perfection of angels, they disdained, or theyaffected to disdain, every earthly and corporeal delight ,<S. Someof our fenses indeed are necessary for our preservation, others forour subsistence, and others again for our information, and thusfar it was impossible to reject the use of them. The first sensationof pleasure was marked as the first moment of their abuse. Theunfeeling candidate for Heaven was instructed, not only to resistthe grosser allurements of the taste or smell, but even to shut hisears against the profane harmony of sounds, and to view withindifference the most finished productions of human art; gayapparel, magnificent houses, and elegant furniture, were supposedto unite the double guilt of pride and of sensuality. A simpleand mortified appearance was more suitable to the Christian whowas certain of his sins and doubtful of his salvation. In theircensures of luxury, the fathers are extremely minute and cir­cumstantial 87; and among the various articles which excite theirpious indignation, we may enumerate false hair, garments of anycolour except white, instruments of music, vases of gold or silver,downy pillows (as Jacob reposed his head on a stone), white bread/
Qji q 2 foreign







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE/ 69


the-immediate jurisdiction of the senate. With regard to civil obi.jects, it was the supreme court of appeal; with regard to criminalmatters, a tribunal, constituted for the trial of all offences that werecommitted by men in any public station, or that affected the peaceand majesty of the Roman people. The exercise of the judicialpower became the most frequent and serious occupation of the senate;and the important causes that were pleaded before them, affordeda last refuge to the spirit of ancient eloquence. As a council ofstate, and as a court of justice, the senate possessed very considerablyprerogatives; but in its legislative capacity, in which it was sup­posed virtually to represent the people, the rights of sovereigntywere acknowledged to reside in that assembly. Every power wasderived from their authority, every law was ratified by their sanc­tion. Their regular meetings were held on three stated days inevery month, the Calends, the Nones, and the Ides. The de­bates were conducted with decent freedom; and the emperorsthemselves, who gloried in the name of senators, fat, voted, anddivided with their equals- . . * •
To resume, in a few words, the system of the Imperial govern- General ideament; as it was instituted by Augustus, and maintained by those rial system?princes who understood their own interest and that of thepeople,, it may be defined an absolute monarchy disguisedby the forms of a commonwealth. The masters of the Romanworld surrounded their throne with darkness, concealed their irre­sistible strength, and humbly professed themselves the accountableministers of the senate, whose supreme decrees they dictated and


'9


The face of the court corresponded with the forms of the admini- Court of thestration. The emperors, if we except those tyrants whose capricious eropero"'folly violated every law of nature and decency, disdained that pompand ceremony which might offend their countrymen, but couldadd nothing to their real power. In all the offices of life, they af-
• • • - fectedi







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 461.


It has been remarked with more ingenuity than truth, that the The!r {5ct'»
0 ■ 4 progress, and
virgin purity of the church was never violated by schism or herely influence,before the reign of Trajan or Hadrian, about one hundred years afterthe death of Christ !o. We may observe with much more propriety,that, during that period, the disciples of the Messiah were indulgedin a freer latitude both of faith and practice, than has ever beenallowed in succeeding ages. As the terms of communion wereinsensibly narrowed, and. the spiritual authority of the prevailingparty was exercised with increasing severity, many of its mostrespectable adherents, who were called upon to renounce, wereprovoked to assert, their private opinions, to pursue the consequencesof their mistaken principles, and openly to erect the standard ofrebellion against the unity of the church. The Gnostics were dis­tinguished as the most polite, the most learned, and the mostwealthy of the Christian name, and that general appellation whichexpressed a superiority of knowledge, was either assumed by theirown pride, or ironically bestowed by the envy of their adversaries^They were almost without exception of the race of the Gentiles,and their principal founders seem to have been natives of Syriaor Egypt> where the warmth of the climate disposes both the mindand the body to contemplative devotion. The Gnostics blendedwith the faith of Christ many sublime but obscure tenets, whichthey derived from oriental philosophy, and even from the religionof Zoroaster, concerning the eternity of matter, the existence oftwo principles, and the mysterious hierarchy of the invisible worldAs soon as they launched out into that vast abyss, they deliveredthemselves to the guidance of a disordered imagination; and asthe paths of error are various and infinite, the Gnostics wereimperceptibly divided into more than fifty particular sects '% ofwhom the most celebrated appear to have been the Basilidians^the Yalentinians, the Marcionites, and, in a still later period, the
% Manichæans*.







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AND FALL


She revenges After a successful expedition against the Gothic plunderers of Asia,
her husband's x
death, the Palmyrenian prince returned to the city of Emesa in Syria. Invin­cible in war, he was there cut off by domestic treason, and his favouriteamusement of hunting was the cause, or at least the occasion, of hisdeath s&. His nephew, Mæonius, presumed to dart his javelin beforethat of his uncle; and though admonished of his error, repeated thefame insolence. As a monarch and as a sportsman, Odenathus wasprovoked: took away his horse, a mark of ignominy among the bar­barians, and chastised the rash youth by a short confinement. Theoffence was soon forgot, but the punishment was remembered j and
jfc.D. 267. Mæonius, with a few daring associates, assassinated his uncle in themidst of a great entertainment. Herod, the son of Odenathus,though not of Zenobia, a young man of a soft and effeminatetemper S7, was killed with his father. But Mæonius obtained onlythe pleasure of revenge by this bloody deed. He had scarcely timeto assume the title of Augustus, before he was sacrificed by Zenobiato the memory of her husband SS.
and reigns With the assistance of his most faithful friends, she immediately
over the East , J
and Egypt, filled the vacant throne, and governed with manly counsels Palmyra,Syria, and the East, above five years. By the death of Odenathus,that authority was at an end which the senate had granted him onlyas a personal distinction j but his martial widow, disdaining both thesenate and Gallienus, obliged one of the Roman generals, who was sentagainst her, to retreat into Europe, with the loss of his army and hisreputationS9. Instead of the little passions which so frequently perplexa female reign, the steady administration of Zenobia was guided by themost judicious maxims of policy. If it was expedient to pardon, shecovdd calm her resentment: if it was necessary topunifh, she could im­pose silence on the voice of pity. Her strict ceconomy was accusedof avarice; yet on every proper occasion (he appeared magnificentand liberal. The neighbouring states of Arabia, Armenia, andPersia, dreaded her enmity, and solicited her alliance. To the do­minions







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


relieved her distresses by a liberal contribution of alms. But whennumerous and opulent societies were established in the great citiesof the empire, in Antioch, Alexandria, Ephesus, Corinth, and Rome,the reverence which Jerusalem had inspired to all the Christian co­lonies insensibly diminished. The Jewish converts, or as they wereafterwards called, the Nazarenes, who had laid the foundations of thechurch, soon found themselves overwhelmed by the increasing mul­titudes, that from all the various religions of polytheism inlistedunder the banner of Christ: and the Gentiles, who, with the ap­probation of their peculiar apostle, had rejected the intolerableweight of Mosaic ceremonies, were gradually tempted to refuse totheir more scrupulous brethren the fame toleration which at firstthey had humbly solicited for their own practice. The ruin of thetemple, of the city, and of the public religion of the Jews, wasseverely felt by the Nazarenes, as in their manners, though not intheir faith, they maintained so intimate a connexion with their im­pious countrymen, whose misfortunes were attributed by the Pagansto the contempt, and more justly ascribed by the Christians, to thewrath of the supreme deity. The Nazarenes retired from the ruinsof Jerusalem to the little town of Pella beyond the Jordan, wherethat ancient church languished above sixty years in solitude andobscurity ,8. They still enjoyed the comfort of making frequentand devout visits to the Holy City, and the hope of being one dayrestored to those seats which both nature and religion taught themto sove as well as to revere. But at length, under the reign of Ha­drian, the desperate fanaticism of the Jews filled up the measureof their calamities; and the Romans, exasperated by their re­peated rebellions, exercised the rights of victory with rigour.The emperor founded, under the name of Ælia Capitolina, a newcity on Mount Sion '', to which he gave the privileges of a colony;and denouncing the severest penalties against any of the Jewishpeople who should dare to approach its precincts^ he fixed a vigilantVol. I. Nnn garrison







OCR Output








fi2 THE DECLINE AND FALL


favour, will have no. attachment, except to the person of theirbenefactor. Cleander, the successor of Perennis, was a Phrygianby birth j of a nation, over whose stubborn, but servile temper,blows only could prevail M« He had been sent from his nativecountry to Rome, in the capacity of a slave. As a slave he en­tered the Imperial palace, rendered himself useful to his masterspassions, and rapidly ascended to the most exalted station which asubject could enjoy. His influence over the mind of Commodus*was much greater than that of his predecessor; for Cleander was.devoid of any ability or virtue which could inspire the emperorHis avarice with envy or distrust. Avarice was the reigning passion of his soul,ajidcrueky. ^ great principle of his administration, 'she rank of Consul,.
of Patrician, of Senator, was exposed to publk sale j and it wouldhave been considered as disaffection, if any one had refused to pur­chase these empty and disgraceful honours with the greatest part ofhis fortune v. In the lucrative provincial employments, the mi­nister shared with the governor the spoils of the people. Theexecution of the laws was venal and arbitrary. A wealthy crimi­nal might obtain, not only the reversal of the sentence by which he-was justly condemned; but might likewise inflict whatever punish*roent he pleased on- the accuser, the witnesses, and the judge.
By these means, Cleander, in the space of three years, had accumulated more wealth than had ever yet been possessed by any-freedman '*. CotamoduSr was perfectly satisfied with the magni­ficent presents, which the artful courtier laid at hie feet in the mostseasonable moments. To divert the public envy, Cleander, underthe emperor's name, erected baths, porticos, and places of exer­cise, fop the use of the people He flattered himself that theRomans, dazzled and amused by this apparent liberality, wouldbe less affected by the bloody scenes which, were daily exhibited;that they would forget the death of Byrrhus, a senator on whose su­perior merit, the late emperor had bestowed one of his daughters ;.


2 and







OCR Output








.£?<5 THE DECLINE AND FALL


The provinces of Gaul (under which we may probably include thoseof Britain) were indebted for the singular tranquillity which they•enjoyed, to the gentle interposition of their sovereign ,6\ BatDatianus, the president or governor of Spain, actuated either byZeal or policy, chose rather to execute the public edicts of the emperorsthan to understand the secret intentions of Constantius; and it canfcaicely be doubted, that his provincial administration was stainedw'.th the blood of a few martyrs ,65. The eleva.tion, of Constantius-to the supreme and independent dignity of Augustus, gave a freescope to the exercise of his virtues, and the shortness of his reigndid not prevent him from establisliing a system of toleration, ofwhich he left the precept and the example to his son Constantine.His fortunate son, who, from the first moment of his accession,declared himself the protector of the church, at length deserved theappellation of the first emperor, who publickly professed and establishedthe Christian religion. The motives of his conversion, as they may.variously be deduced from faith, from virtue, from policy, or fromremorse; and the progress of the revolution, which, under hispowerful influence and that of his sons, rendered Christianity thereigning religion of the Roman empire, will form a very interestingand important chapter in the second volume of this history. Atpresent it may be sufficient to observe, that every victory of Con­stantine was productive of some relief or benefit to the church,in Italy and The provinces of Italy and Africa experienced a short but vio-Maximun l?nt persecution. The rigorous edicts of Diocletian were strictlyand cheerfully executed by his associate Maximian, who had longhated the Christians, and who delighted in acts of blood andviolence. 1st the autumn of the first year of the persecution, thetwo'emperors met at Rome to celebrate their triumph; severalpppressive.laws appear to have issued.from their secret consultations,and the diligence of the magistrates'was animated by the presenceof their sovereigns. After Diocletian had divested himself of the... i purple,


and aeveru







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AND FALL


longer afford subsistence for the remaining multitude of licentiousbarbarians. Reduced to this extremity, the Goths would gladlyhave purchased, by the surrender of all their booty and prisoners,the permission of an undisturbed retreat. But the emperor, confidentof victory, and resolving, by the chastisement of these invaders, tostrike a salutary terror into the nations of the North, refused tolisten to any terms of accommodation. The high-spirited barbarianspreferred death to slavery. An obscure town of Mæsia, calledForum Terebronii44, was the scene of the battle. The Gothic armywas drawn up in three lines, and, either from choice or accident,the front of the third line was covered by a morass. In the begin­ning of the action, the son of Decius, a youth of the fairest hopes,and already associated to the honours of the purple, was slain by anarrow, in the sight of his afflicted father; who summoning all hisfortitude, admonished the dismayed troops, that the loss of a singlesoldier was of little importance to the republic45. The conflict wasterrible; it was the combat of despair against grief and rage. Thefirst line of the Goths at length gave way in disorder; the second,advancing to sustain it, ihared its fate; and the third only remainedentire, prepared to dispute the passage of the morass, which wasimprudently attempted by the presumption of the enemy. "Here"the fortune of the day turned, and all things became adverse to the"Romans: the place deep with ooze, sinking under those who stood,** slippery to such as advanced; their armour heavy, the waters deep;"nor could they wield in that uneasy situation their weighty jave-"lins. The barbarians, on the contrary, were enured to encounters"in the bogs, their persons tall, their spears long, such as could** wound at a distance +V In this morass the Roman army, after anineffectual struggle, was irrecoverably lost; nor could the body ofthe emperor ever be found47. Such was the fate of Decius, in thefiftieth year of his age; an accomplished prince, active in war, andaffable in peace48; who, together with his son, has deserved to be
compared,







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AND FALL


142


Election andcharacter ofMacr.nui.


A.D. 217-March U.


Discontentos the senate,


having rivalled his valour and magnanimity: but in no one action ofhis life did Caracalla express the faintest resemblance of the Mace­donian hero, except in the murder of a great number of his own andof hi3 father's friends *\
After the extinction of the house of Severus, the Roman worldremained three days without a master. The choice ot" the army (forthe authority of a distant and feeble senate was little regarded) hungin anxious suspense; as no candidate presented himself whose distin­guished birth and merit could engage their attachment and unitetheir suffrages. The decisive weight of the Prætorian guards ele­vated the hopes of their prefects, and these powerful ministers be*gan to assert their legal claim to fill, the vacancy of the Imperialthrone. Adventus, however, the senior praefect, conscious of hisage and infirmities, of his small reputation, and his smaller abili­ties, resigned the dangerous honour to the crafty ambition of hisColleague Macrinus, whose well dissembled grief removed all sus­picion of his being accessary to his master's death *'. The troopsneither loved nor esteemed his character. They cast their eyesaround in search of a competitor, and at last yielded with reluctanceto his promises of unbounded liberality and indulgence. A shorttime after his accession, he conferred on his son Diadumenianus, atthe age of only ten years, the Imperial title and the popular nameof Antoninus. The beautiful figure of the youth, assisted by anadditional donative, for which the ceremony furnished a pretext,might attract, it was hoped, the favour of the army, and securethe doubtful throne of Macrinus.
The authority of the new sovereign had been ratified by the cheer­ful submission of the senate and provinces. They exulted in theirunexpected deliverance from a hated tyrant, and it seemed of littleconsequence to weigh the virtues of the successor of Caracalla. Butas soon as the first transports of joy and surprise had subsided, theybegan to scrutinize the merits of Macrinus with a critical severity,


2 and







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 9


naia


preparation for war; and while justice regulated their conduct, they ^n0Jv^ar.announced to the nations on their confines, that they were as little cas Aatoni-,disposed to endure as to offer an injury. The military strength,which it had been sufficient for Hadrian and the elder Antoninusto display, was exerted against the Parthians and the Germans, bythe emperor Marcus. The hostilities of the barbarians provokedthe resentment of that philosophic monarch, and in the prosecutionof a just defence, Marcus and his generals obtained many signalvictories, both on the Euphrates, and on the DanubeThe mi­litary establishment of the Roman empire, which thus assured eitherits tranquillity or success, will now become the proper and importantobject of our attention.
In the purer ages of the commonwealth, the use of arms Military esta-
r 0 blithment of
was reserved for those ranks of citizen's who had a country to love, the Roman
i ., • > emperors.
a property to defend, and some share in enacting those laws, whichit Was their interest, as well as duty, to maintain. But in pro­portion as the publ;c freedom was lost in extent of conquest, WarWas gradually improved into an art, And degraded into a trade !°.The legions themselves, even at the time when they were recruitedin the most distant provinces, consisted of Roman citizens. Thatdistinction was generally considered, either as a legal qualification,-or as a proper recompence for the soldier; but a more serious regardwas paid to the essential merit of age, strength, and militarystature". In all leviesi a just preference was given to the climatesof the North over those of the South ^ the race of men born to theexercise of arms, was sought for in the country rather than in cities;and it was very reasonably presumed, that the hardy occupations ofsmiths, carpenters, and huntsmen, would supply more vigour and re­solution, than the sedentary trades vVhich are employed in the serviceof luxury J\ After every qualification of property had been laid aside,the armies of the Roman emperors Were still commanded, for themost part, by officers of a liberal birth and education j but the com-Vol. I. C mon







OCR Output








5i8 THE DECLINE AND FALL


was confirmed by innumerable prodigies. The,lame walked, theblind saw, the sick were healed, the dead were raised, dæmons wereexpelled, and the laws of Nature were perpetually suspended forGeneral the benefit of the church. But the sages of Greece and Rome turned
silence con­cerning the aside from the awful spectacle, and pursuing the ordinary occupa-
th" Passion, tions of life and study, appeared unconscious of any alterations inthe moral or physical government of the world. Under the reignof Tiberius, the whole earth "9\ or at least a celebrated province ofthe Roman empirewas involved in a preternatural darkness ofthree hours. Even this miraculous event, which ought to have ex­cited the wonder, the curiosity, and the devotion of mankind, passedwithout notice in an age of science and history '9+. It happenedduring the lifetime of Seneca and the elder Pliny, who must haveexperienced the immediate effects, or received the earliest intelli­gence of the prodigy. Each of these philosophers, in a laboriouswork, has recorded all the great phenomena of Nature, earth­quakes, meteors, comets, and eclipses, which his indefatigable curi­osity could collect Both the one and the other have omitted tomention the greatest phenomenon to which the mortal eye has beenwitness since the creation of the globe. A distinct chapter ofPliny 196 is devoted to eclipses of an extraordinary nature and un­usual duration; but he contents himself with describing the singulardefect of light which followed the murder of Cæsar, when, duringthe greatest part of a year, the orb of the fun appeared pale andwithout splendor. This season of obscurity, which cannot surelybe compared with the preternatural darkness of the Passion, had beenalready celebrated by most of the poets'97 and historians of thatmemorable age '9\


CHAP.







OCR Output








324 THE DECLINE AND FALL


and the public peace was guarded in the fame manner, by the union ofthe several orders of the state. But, in the the time of Numa and Ro­mulus, the arms of the people were controuled by the authority of the"Patricians; and the balance of freedom was easily preserved in a smalland virtuous community '. The decline of the Roman state, far differentfrom its infancy, was attended with every circumstance that couldbanish from an interregnum the prospect of obedience and harmony,an immense and tumultuous capital, a wide extent of empire, the ser­vile equality of despotism, an army of four hundred thousand mer­cenaries, and the experience of frequent revolution. Yet, notwith­standing all these temptations, the discipline and memory of Aure-lian still restrained the seditious temper of the troops, as well as the'fatal ambition of their leaders-. The flower of the legions main­tained their station on the banks of the Bosphorus, and the imperialstandard awed the less powerful camps of Rome and of the pro­vinces. A generous though transient enthusiasm diffused itself?among the military order; and we may hope that a few real pa­triots cultivated the returning friendship of the army and the se­nate, as the only expedient capable of restoring the republic to itsiancient beauty and vigour.A.TT. 17;. On the twenty-fifth of September, near eight"months1 after • the"The'cmis"5' murder of Aurelian, the consul convoked an assembly of the senate^senate!*" ant* rePorte(* tne doubtful and dangerous situation of' the empire. •He slightly insinuated, that the precarious loyalty of the soldiers-depended on the chance of every hour; and of every accident; but*he represented, with the most convincing eloquence, the various?dangers that might attend any farther delay in the choice of anemperor. Intelligence, he said, was already received, that the Ger­mans had passed the Rhine, and occupied some of the strongest andmost opulent cities of. Gaul. The ambition-of the Persian king-kept the East in perpetual alarms; Egypt, Africa, and lllyricum,were exposed to foreign and domestic arms, and the levity of Syria3 would







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


can, however, fill up their time by the pursuits of interest or glory,by the improvement of their estate or of their understanding, bythe duties, the pleasures, and even the follies of social life. TheGermans were not possessed of these varied resources. The care ofthe house and family, the management of the land and cattle, weredelegated to the old and the infirm, to women and slaves. Thelazy warrior, destitute of every art that might employ his leisurehours, consumed his days and nights in the animal gratifications offleep and food. And yet, by a wonderful diversity of Nature, (ac­cording to the remark of a writer who had pierced into its darkestrecesses) the fame barbarians are by turns the most indolent and themost restless of mankind. They delight in floth, they detest tran­quillity 5°. The languid foul, oppressed with its own weight, anxi­ously required some new and powerful sensation; and war and dan­ger were the only amusements adequate to its fierce temper. Thefound that summoned the German to arms was grateful to his ear.It roused him from his uncomfortable lethargy, gave him an activepursuit, and, by strong exercise of the body, and violent emotions ofthe mind, restored him to a more lively fense of his existence. Inthe dull intervals of peace, these barbarians were immoderately ad­dicted to deep gaming and excessive drinking; both of which, bydifferent means, the one by inflaming their passions, the other byextinguishing their reason, alike relieved them from the pain ofthinking. They gloried in passing whole days and nights at table;and the blood of friends and relations often stained their numerousand drunken assemblies3'. Their debts of honour (for in that lightthey have transmitted to us those of play) they discharged withthe most romantic fidelity. The desperate gamester, who had stakedhis person and liberty on a last throw of the dice, patiently submittedto the decision of fortune, and suffered himself to be bound, chas­tised, and sold into remote flavery, by his weaker but more luckyantagonist
Vol. I. G g Strong







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


a monarch no less powerful than Hadrian or Augustus. The formwas still the fame, but the animating health and vigour were fled.The industry of the people was discouraged and exhausted by along series of oppression. The discipline of the legions, whichalone, after the extinction of every other virtue, had propped thegreatness of the state, was corrupted by the ambition, or relaxedby the weakness of the emperors. The strength of the frontiers,which had always consisted in arms rather than in fortifications,was insensibly undermined; and the fairest provinces were left ex­posed to the rapaciousness or ambition of the barbarians, who sooadiscovered the decline of the Roman power.


 


CHAP,







OCR Output








NOTES ON THE SIXTEENTH CHAPTER. lxxxiii


[103] See Mostieim, p. 97. Sulpicius Severuswas the first author of this computation ; thoughhe seemed desirous of reserving the tenth and greatestpersecution for the coming of the Antichrist.
[104] The testimony given by Pontius Pilate isfirst mentioned by Justin. The successive improve­ments which the story has acquired, (as it passedthrough the hands of Tertullian, Eusebius, Epi-phaniu9, Chrysostom, Orosius, Gregory of Tours,and the authors of the several editions of the acts ofPilate) are very fairly stated by Dom Calmet, Disser­tations fur 1 Ecriture, torn. iii. p. 651, Sec.
[105] On this miracle, as it is commonly called,of the thundering legion, see the admirable criti­cism of Mr. Moyle, in his Works, vol. ii. p.81—£90.
[106] Dion Cassias, or rather his abbreviatorXiphilin, 1. lxxii. p.. 1206. Mr. Moyle (p. 266)has explained the condition of the church under thereign of Commodus.
[107] Compare the life of Caracalla in the Au­gustan History, with the Epistle of Tertullian toScapula. Dr. Jortin (Remarks on EcclesiasticalHistory, vol. ii. p. j, 4ec.) considers the cure of Seve­rus, by the means of holy oil, with a strong desireto convert it into a miracle,
[108] Tertullian de Faga, c. 13. The presentwas made during the feast of the Saturnalia; andit is a matter of serious concern to Tertullian, thatthe faithful should be confounded with the most in­famous professions which purchased the connivanceof the government.
[109] Euseb. 1. v. c. 23, 24. Mostieim, p.435—447-
[no] Jud.-eos fieri sub gravi pœna vetuit. Idemetiam de Christianis sanxit. Hist. August, p. 70.
[111] Sulpicius Severus, 1. ii, p. 384. This com­putation (allowing for a single exception) is con­firmed by the history of Eusebius, and by thewritings of Cyprian.
'[112] The antiquity of Christian churches is dis­cussed by Tillemont (Memoires Ecclefiastiques, torn,iii. Part ii. p. 68—72.), and by Mr. Moyle (vol.i.p. 378—39S). The former refers the first con­


struction of them to the peace of Alexander Severus;the latter, to the peace of Gallienus.
[113] Seethe Augustan History, p. 130. TheEmperor Alexander adopted their method of public­ly proposing the names of those persons who werecandidates for ordination. It is true, that the ho­nour of this practice is likewise attributed to theJews.
[114] Euseb. Hist. Ecclesiast. 1. vi. c. 21. Hiero-nym. de Script. Eccles. c. 54. Mamæa was styleda holy and pious woman, both by the Christians andthe Pagans. From the former, therefore, it was im­possible that she should deserve that honourableepithet.
[115] See the Augustan History, p. 123. Mo­stieim (p. 46;) seems to refine too much on thedomestic religion of Alexander. His design ofbuilding a public temple to Christ (Hist. August, p.129.), and the objection which was suggested either tohim, or in similar circumstances to Hadrian, appearsto be an improbable report, invented by the Christi­ans, and credulously adopted by an historian of theage of Constantine,
[116] Euseb. 1. vi. c. 98.
[117] Orosius, 1. vii, c. 19, mentions Origen asthe object of Maximin's resentment; and Firmili-anus, a Cappadocian bishop of that age, gives a justand confined idea of this persecution (apud Cyprian.Epist. 75.)
[118] The mention of those princes who werepublicly supposed to be Christians, as we find it in anepistle of Dionysius of Alexandria (ap. Euseb. 1.vii. c. 10.), evidently alludes to Philip and his fa­mily; and forms a contemporary evidence, thatsuch a report had prevailed; but the Egyptianbishop, who lived at an humble distance from thecourt of Rome, expresses himself with a becomingdiffidence, concerning the truth of the fact. Theepistles of Origen (which were extant in the time ofEusebius, see 1. vi.e. 36,) would most probably de­cide this curious, rather than important question.
[119] Euseb. I, vj. c. 34.; The story, as is usual,has been embellished by succeeding writers, and isconfuted, with much superfluous learning, by Fre?derick Spanheim (Opera Varia, torn. ii. p. 490, &c.)
1 2 [no] Lac-







OCR Output








xviii NOTES ON THE FIFTH CHAPTER.


[22] Herod. 1. ii. p. 68. The chronicle of JohnMalala, of Antioch, fliews the zealous attachmentof his countrymen to these festivals, which at oncegratified their superstition, and their love of pleasure.
[23] A king of Thebes, in Egypt, is mentionedin the Augustan History, as an ally, and, indeed,as a personal friend ofNiger. If Spartianus is not,as I strongly suspect, mistaken, he has brought tolight a dynasty of tributary princes totally unknowato history.
[24] Dion, I. Ixxiii, p. 1*38. Herod. U ii p..67.A veise in every one's mouth at that time, seems toexpress the general opinion of the three rivals;Optimus est Niger,, bonus Afer, peffimus Albus.Hist. August, p. 75.
[25] Herodian, 1. ii. p. 7-1.
[26] See an account of that memorable war inVelleius Patercnlus, ii. 110, &c. who served in thearmy of Tiberius.
[27] Such is the reflection of Herodian, 1: ii.p. 74. Will the modern Austrians allow the in­fluence?
[28] In the letter to Albinus, already mentioned,Commodus accuses Severus, as one of the ambitiousgenerals who censured his conduct, and wished tooccupy his place. Hist. August, p. 80.
[29] Pannonia was too poor to supply such a sura.It was probably promised in the camp, and paid atRome, aster the victory.^ In fixing the sum, I haveadopted the conjecture os Casaubon. See Hist.August, p. 66. Comment, p. 115.
[3s] Herodian, 1, ii. p. 78. Severus was declaredemperor on the banks of the Danube, either atCarnuntum, according to Spartianus (Hist August,p. 6^ ), or else at Sabaria, according to Victor.Mr Hume, in supposing that the birth and dignityof Severus were too much inferior to the imperialcrown, and that he marched into Italy as generalonly, has not considered this transaction with hisusual accuracy (Essay on t.he original contract).
[31] Velleius Paterculus, Lit. c. iii. We mustreckon the march from the nearest verge of Pan­nonia, and extend the fight of the city, as far attwo hundred miles.


[32] This is not a puerile figure of rhetoric, butan allusion to a real fact recorded by Dion, 1. lxxi..p. 1181. It probably happened more than once.
[33] Dion, 1. Ixxiii. p. 1233. Herodian, I. ii.,p. 81. There is no surer proof of the militaryskill of the Romans, than their first surmounting theidle terror, and afterwards disdaining the dangeroususe of elephants in war.
[34] Hill. August, p. 62, 63..
[35] Victor and Eutropius, viii. 17. mention a.combat near the fViilviao Bridge, the Ponte Moile,unknown to the better and more ancient writers.
[36] Dion, 1. Ixxiii. p» 1740.. Herodian, 1. ii.p. 83. Hist. August, p. 631
[37] From these sixty-six days, we must first da-duct sixteen, as Pertinax was murdered on the 28th-of March, and Severus most probably elected onthe 13th of April (see Hist. August, p. 65. andJTillemont Hist, des Empereurs, torn. iii. p. 393.Note 7.). We cannot allow less than ten days afterhis election, to put a. numerous army in motion.Forty days remain for this rapid march, and as wemay compute, about eight hundred miles fromRome to the neighbourhood of Vienna, the army,of Severus marched twenty miles every day, with*-out halt or intermission.
[38] Dion (1. Ixxiv. p. 1241.). Herodian, 1. iu
p. 84.
[39] Dion (1. Ixxiv. p. 1244.), who assisted at theceremony as a senator, gives a most pompous de­scription of it.
[40] Herodian, I. iii. p. M2»
[41] Though it is not, most assuredly, the inter*tion of Lucan, to exalt the character of Cæsar, yetthe idea he gives of that hero, in the tenth bookof the Pharfalia, where he describes him, at thefame time, making love to Cleopatra, sustaining i,fiege against the power of Egypt, and conversingwith the sages of the country, is, in reality, thenoblest panegyric.
[42] Reckoning from his election, April 13,193, to the death of Albinus, February 19, 197.See Tillemont's Chronology.
[43] Herodian,







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


too much taste to relinquish their language, and too much vanity toadopt any foreign institutions. Still preserving the prejudices, afterthey had lost the virtues, of their ancestors, they affected todespise the unpolished manners of the Roman conquerors,whilst they were compelled to respect their superior wisdom andpower **. Nor was the influence of the Grecian language andsentiments confined to the narrow limits of that once celebratedcountry. Their empire, by the progress of colonies and con­quest, had been diffused from the Hadriatic to the Euphrates andthe Nile. Asia was covered with Greek cities, and the long reignof the Macedonian kings had introduced a silent revolution into-Syria aud Egypt. In their pompous courts those princes united theelegance of Athens with the luxury of the East, and the example ofthe court was imitated, at an humble distance, by the higher ranks oftheir subjects. Such was the general division of the Roman empireinto the Latin and Greek languages. To these we may add a thirddistinction for the body of the natives irt Syria and especially in Egypt*The use of their ancient dialects, by secluding them from the com­merce of mankind, checked the improvements of those barbarians 4\.The slothful effeminacy of the former, exposed them to the contempt *the sullen ferociousness of the lattei, excited the aversion of theRoman conquerors They seldom desired or deserved the- free*dom of the city; and it was remarked that more than two hund<rediand. thirty years elapsed after the ruin of the Ptolemies, before anative Egyptian was admitted into the senate of Rome *K . .•:
H is a j*uft though trite observation, that victorious Rome was her- G
eneral use
fcl£ subdued by the arts of Greece. Those immortal writers whe* g2'g«.L'n*still command the admiration of modern Europe, soon became thefavourite object of study and imitation- in Italy and the western pro­vinces. But the elegant amusements of the Romans were notsuffered to interfere with their found maxims of policy. Whilst theyacknowledged the charms of the Greek, they asserted the dignity of■Sv- js.t the*







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.' 427


under the banners of Maximian, were at length compelled to in­form his effeminate son of the imminent danger to which he wasreduced; and, with a freedom that at once surprised and convincedhim, to urge the necessity of preventing his ruin, by a vigorous ex­ertion of his remaining power. The resources of Maxentius, bothof men and money, were still considerable. The Prætorian guardsfelt how strongly their own interest and safety were connected withhis cause; and a third army was soon collected, more numerousthan those which had been lost in the battles of Turin and Verona.It was far from the intention of the emperor to lead his troops inperson. A stranger to the exercises of war, he trembled at the ap­prehension of so dangerous a contest; and as fear is commonly su­perstitious, he gave a melancholy attention to the rumours of omensand presages which seemed to menace his life and empire. Shameat length supplied the place of courage, and forced him to take thefield. He was unable to sustain the contempt of the Roman people.The circus resounded with their indignant clamours, and they tu-multuoufly besieged the gates of the palace, reproaching the pusilla­nimity of their indolent sovereign, and celebrating the heroic spiritof Constantine65. Before Maxentius left Rome, he consulted .theSibylline books. The guardians of these ancient oracles were aswell versed in the arts of this world, as they were ignorant of thesecrets of fate; and they returned him a very prudent answer,which might adopt itself to the event, and secure their reputationwhatever should be the chance of arms %, ■ , .:'
The celerity of Constantine's march has been compared to the Vl'ct<*y °f
"• n c r n r Constantine
rapid conquest of Italy by the first of the Cæsars; nor is the flatter- near Rome,ing parallel repugnant to the truth of history, since no more than fs'th October,fifty-eight days elapsed between the surrender of Verona and thefinal decision of the war. Constantine had always apprehended thatthe tyrant would listen to the dictates of fear, and perhaps of pru­dence; and that, instead of risking his last hopes in a general en-
I i i 2 gagement,







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 1*3


Yet in the contest between Niger and Severus, one city deserves an sie2e of
Byzantium.
honourable exception. As Byzantium was one of the greatest passagesfrom Europe into Asia, it had been provided with a strong garrison,and a fleet of five hundred vessels anchored in the harbour Theimpetuosity of Severus disappointed this prudent scheme of defence;he left to his generals the siege of Byzantium, forced the less guardedpassage of the Hellespont, and impatient of a meaner enemy, pressedforward to encounter his rival. Byzantium, attacked by a numerousand increasing army, and afterwards by the whole naval power ofthe empire, sustained a siege of three years, and remained faithfulto the name and memory of Niger. The citizens and soldiers (weknow not from what cause) were animated with equal fury; se­veral of the principal officers of Niger, who despaired of, or whodisdained a pardon, had' thrown themselves into this last refuge:the fortifications were esteemed impregnable, and, in the defence ofthe place, a celebrated engineer displayed all the mechanic powersknown to the ancients s*. Byzantium, at length, surrendered tofamine. The magistrates and soldiers were put to the sword, thewalls demolished, the privileges suppressed, and the destined capitalof the east subsisted only as an open village, subject to the insultingjurisdiction of Perinthus. The historian Dion, who had admiredthe, flourishing, and lamented the desolate state of Byzantium, ac­cused the revenge of Severus, for depriving the Roman people ofthe strongest bulwark against the barbarians of Pontus and Asia 5!.The truth of this observation was but too well justified in thesucceeding age, when the Gothic fleets covered the Euxine, andpassed through the undefended Bosphorus into the center of the Me­diterranean.
Both Niger and Albinus were discovered and put to death in Deaths oftheir flight from the field of battle. Their fate excited neither Jgdsurprise nor compassion. They had staked their lives against the Cruel conse_
* ^ ° quenccs of
chance of empire, and suffered what they would have inflicted; the civil wars.
R 2 nor







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AND FALL


long before the age prescribed by the military regulations. Thetribune soon justified his choice, by a victory over a great body ofSarmatians, in which he saved the life of a near relation of Vale­rian; and deserved to receive from the emperor's hand the collars,bracelets, spears, and banners, the mural and the civic crown, andall the honourable rewards reserved by ancient Rome for successfulvalour. The third, and afterwards the tenth, legion were entrusted tothe command of Probus, who, in every step of his promotion, shewedhimself superior to the station which he filled. Africa- and Pontus,the Rhine, the Danube, the Euphrates, and the Nile, by turns affordedhim the most splendid occasions of displaying his personal prowess andmilitary knowledge. Aurelian was indebted to him for the conquestof Egypt, and still more indebted for the honest courage with which heoften checked the cruelty of his master. Tacitus, who desired by theabilities of his generals to supply his own deficiency of military ta­lents, named him commander in chief of all the eastern provinces,with five times the usual salary, the promise of the consulsliip, and thehope of a triumph. When Probus ascended the imperial throne, hewas about forty-four years of age 1+; in the full possession of his fame,of the love of the army, and of a mature vigour of mind and body.
His acknowledged merit, and the success of his arms againstFlorianus, left him without an enemy or a competitor. Yet if wemay credit his own professions, very far from being desirous of theempire, he had accepted it with the most sincere reluctance. "But*' it is no longer in my power," fays Probus, in a private letter,"to lay down a title so full of envy and of danger. I must con-"tinue to personate the character which the soldiers have imposed14 upon me *V His dutiful address to the senate displayed thesentiments, or at least the language, of a Roman patriot: "When*« you elected one of your order, conscript fathers! to succeed the-*• emperor Aurelian, you acted in a manner suitable to your justice." and wisdom. For you are the legal sovereigns of the world,
M and


8







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AND FAIL


voluntary offering for the use of the common fund "9. Nothing,however inconsiderable, was refused; but it was diligently incul­cated, that in the article of Tythes, the Mosaic law was still of di­vine obligation, and that since the Jews, under a less perfect disci­pline, had been commanded to pay a tenth part of all that theypossessed, it would become the disciples of Christ to distinguisti them­selves by a superior degree of liberality ,}0, and to acquire some meritby resigning a superfluous treasure, which must so soon be anni­hilated with the world itself "\ It is almost unnecessary to observe,that the revenue of each particular church, which was of so uncer­tain and fluctuating a nature, must have varied with the poverty orthe opulence of the faithful, as they were dispersed in obscure villages,or collected in the great cities of the empire. In the time of the em­peror Decius, it was the opinion of the magistrates that the Christiansof Rome were possessed of very considerable wealth; that vessels ofgold and silver were used in their religious worship, and that manyamong their proselytes had fold their lands and houses to increasethe public riches of the sect, at the expence, indeed, of their un­fortunate children, who found themsclvs beggars, because theirparents had been saints ,s\ We should listen with distrust tothe suspicions of strangers and enemies; on this occasion, how­ever, they receive a very specious and probable colour from thetwo following circumstances, the only ones that have reached ourknowledge, which define any precise sums, or convey any distinctidea. Almost at the fame period, the; bishop of Carthage, from asociety less opulent than that of Rome, collected an hundred thou­sand sesterces (above eight hundred and fifty pounds sterling) on asudden call of charity to redeem the brethren of Numidia, who hadbeen carried away captives by the barbarians of the desert"?.About an hundred years before the reign of Decius, the Roman•church had received, in a single donation, the sum of two hundred•thousand sesterces from a stranger of Pontus, who proposed to fix<> ■ his







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


for the difference of manners, might well deserve the imitation ofmodern princes. Alexander rose early: the first moments of the daywere consecrated to private devotion, and his domestic chapel wasfilled with the. images of those heroes, who, by improving or reforn*-irig human life, had deserved the grateful reverence of posterity.But, as he deemed the service of mankind the most acceptableworship of the gods, the greatest part of his morning hours waSemployed in his council, where he discussed public affairs, anddetermined private causes, with a patience and discretion above hisyears. The dryness of business was relieved by the charms ofliterature; and a portion of time was always set apart for his fa­vourite studies of poetry, history, and philosophy. The works ofVirgil and Horace, the republics of Plato and Cicero, formed histaste, enlarged his understanding, and gave him the noblest ideas ofman and government. The exercises of the body succeeded tothose of the mind; and Alexander, who was tall, active, and ro­bust, surpassed most of his equals in the gymnastic arts. Refreshedby the use of the bath and a flight dinner, he resumed, with newvigour, the business of the day, and, till the hour of supper, theprincipal meal of the Romans, he was attended by his secretaries,with whom he read and answered the multitude of letters, memo­rials, and petitions, that must have been addressed to the master ofthe greatest part of the world. His table was served with the mostfrugal simplicity; and whenever he was at liberty to consult hisown inclination, the company consisted of a few select friends,men of learning and virtue, amongst whom Ulpian was con­stantly invited. Their conversation was familiar and instructive;and the pauses were occasionally enlivened by the recital of some pleas­ing composition, which supplied the place of the dancers, come­dians, and even gladiators, so frequently summoned to the tablesof the rich and luxurious Romans 7". The dress of Alexander wasplain and modest, his demeanor courteous and affable: at the-
X 2 proper







OCR Output








THE


HISTORY
OF THE
DECLINE AND FALL
OF THE
ROMAN EMPIRE.
By EDWARD GIBBON, Esq-,VOLUME THE FIRST.


Jam provides) ammo, velut qui, pradmif littori radii inducti, mare pedibui ingredi-untur, quicquid progredior, in vastiorem me altitudinem, ac velut profundum invehi; etcrescere pene opus, quod prima quxque perficiendo minui videbatur.


LONDON:
PRINTED FOR W. STRAHAN; AND T. CADELL, IN THE STRAND,


MDCCLXXVI.







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 315


<


the principles of commerce were so imperfectly understood, themost desirable end might perhaps be effected by harsh and injudi­cious means; but a temporary grievance of such a nature canscarcely excite and support a serious civil war. The repeti­tion of intolerable taxes, imposed either on the land or on thenecessaries of life, may at last provoke those who will not, or whocannot, relinquish their country. But the case is far otherwise inevery operation which, by whatsoever expedients, restores the justvalue of money. The transient evil is soon obliterated by the per­manent benefit, the loss is divided among multitudes; and if a fewwealthy individuals experience a sensible diminution of treasure, withtheir riches they at the fame time lose the importance. HoweverAurelian might chuse to disguise the real cause of the insurrection*his reformation of the coin could furnish only a faint pre­tence to a party already powerful and discontented. Rome, thoughdeprived of freedom, was distracted by faction. The people, to­wards whom the emperor, himserf a plebeian, always expressed apeculiar fondness, lived in perpetual dissension with the senate, theequestrian order, and the Prætorian guards''. Nothing less thanthe firm though secret conspiracy of those orders, of the authorityof the first, the wealth of the second, and the arms of the third,could have displayed a strength capable of contending in battle withthe veteran legions of the Danube, which, under the conduct of amartial sovereign, had atchieved the conquest of the West and ofthe East.
Whatever was the cause or the object of this rebellion, imputed Cruelty ofwith so little probability to the workmen of the mint, Aurelian usedbia victory with unrelenting rigour 9\ He was naturally of asevere'disposition. A peaiant and a soldier, his nerves yielded noteasily to the impressions of sympathy, and he could sustain withoutemotion the sight of tortures and death. Trained from his earliestyouth in the exercise of arms, he set too siaall a value 00 the life
of


Aurelian.







OCR Output








THE EECilNE AND TALL


emperorTacitus.


Mveretl the provinces of Asia from the terror of the Scythian wr*-vafion ,?.
Beatlvof the But the glory and life of Tacitus were of short duration; Trans­ported, in'the depth of winter, front the soft retirement of Cam­pania, to the foot of mount Caucasus-, he funk under the unaccus­tomed hardships of a military life. The fatigues of the body wereaggravated by those of the mind. For a while, the angry and selfish-,paffiohs of the- soldiers had been suspended' by the enthusiasm ofpublic virtue. They soon broke out with redoubled violence, and.raged in the camp, and even in the tent, of the aged emperor. Htfc -mild and amiable character served only to inspire contempt, and he.was incessantly tormented by factions which he couki not aflvvage*.and by demands which it was impossible to satisfy. "Whatever flat­tering expectations he had conceived of reconciling the publicdisorders^ Tacitus soon was convinced, that the licentiousness of thearmy disdained the feeble restraint of laws, and his last hour washastened by anguisti and disappointment. It may be- doubtfulwhether the soldiers imbrued their hands in the blood, of this inno­cent pftBce ,s. It is certain, that their insolence was the cause of his-death. He expired at Tyane in Cappadocia, after a reign of onlyvsix months and about twenty days '9.
The eyes of Tacitus were scarcely closed, before his brotherFlorianus shewed himself unworthy to reign, by the hasty usurpationof the purple, without expecting the approbation of the senate.The reverence for the Roman constitution, which yet influencedthe camp, and the provinces, was sufficiently strong to dispose them-to censure, but not to provoke them to oppose, the precipitate am­bition of Florianus. The discontent would have evaporated inidle murmurs, had not the general of the East, the heroic Probus,boldly declared, himself the avenger of the senate. The contest,however, was .still unequal i aor could the most able leader, at the
head


-April 12.
Usurpationand death ofhis brother
llOslJIlUS.







OCR Output








442 THE DECLINE AND FALL


grandson of Constantius 9\ The emperor himself had assumed themore difficult and important province of the Danube. The Goths,who in the time of Claudius and Aurelian had felt the weightof the Roman arms, respected the power of the empire, even in themidst of its intestine divisions. But the strength of that warlikenation was now restored by a peace of near fifty years; a newgeneration had arisen, who no longer remembered the misfortunesof ancient days: the Sarmatians of the lake Maeotis followed theGothic standard either as subjects or as allies, and their unitedforce was poured upon the countries of Illyricum. Campona,Margus, and Bononia, appear to have been the scenes of severalmemorable sieges and battles"; and though Constantine en­countered a very obstinate resistance, he prevailed at length in the, contest, and the Goths were compelled to purchase an ignominiousretreat by restoring the booty aad prisoners which they had taken.Nor was this advantage sufficient to satisfy the indignation of theemperor. He resolved to chastise as well as to repulse the insolent barba­rians who had dared to invade the territories of Rome. At the headof his legions he passed the Danube, on the bridge which had beenconstructed by Trajan, penetrated into the strongest recestes ofDacia *co, and when he had inflicted a severe revenge, condescendedi to give peace to the suppliant Goths, on condition that, as oftenas they were required, they mould supply his armies with a bodyof forty thousand soldiers "". Exploits like these were no doubthonourable to Constantine and beneficial to the state; but it maysurely be questioned whether they can justify the exaggerated as­sertion of Eusebius, that all Scythia, as far as the extremity ofthe North, divided as it was into so many names and nations of themost various and savage manners, had been added by bis victoriousarms to the Roman empire ,c\Second civil In this exalted state of glory it was impossible that Constantineconstantine" *h°uld any longer endure a partner in the empire. Confiding in theand^Licinius. superiority







OCR Output








PREFACE.


word, deserves the epithet of imperfect, I eon<-fider myself as contracting an engagement to finish,most probably in a second volume, the first of thesememorable periods; and to deliver to the Public, thecomplete history of the Decline and Fall of Rome,from the age of the Antonines, to the subversion ofthe Western Empire. With regard to the subsequentperiods, though I may entertain some hopes, I darenot presume to give any assurances. The executionof such an extensive plan, as I have traced out, andwhich might perhaps be comprehended in about fourvolumes, would fill up the long interval betweenancient and modern history; but it would requiremany years of health, of leisure, and of perseve­rance.
Bentinck-Street,Feb. i, 1776^







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


He deserved his fate; but we should find more reason to applaudthe humanity of Constantine, if he had spared an old man, thebenefactor of his father, and the father of his wife. During thewhole of this melancholy transaction, it appears that Fausta sa­crificed the sentiments of nature to her conjugal duties SJ.
The last years of Galerius were less shameful and unfortunate, Death ofand though he had filled with more glory the subordinate station of a. d. 31Cæsar, than the superior rank of Augustus, he preserved, till the y"moment of his death, the first place among the princes of the Romanworld. He survived his retreat from Italy about four years, and wifelyrelinquishing his views of universal empire, he devoted his time tothe enjoyment of pleasure, and to the execution of some works ofpublic utility, among which we may distinguish the discharginginto the Danube the superfluous waters of the lake Pelso, and thecutting down the immense forests that encompassed it; an opera­tion which restored an extensive country to the use of his Pannoniansubjects 5<s. His death was occasioned by a very painful and lingeringdisorder. His body, swelled by an intemperant course of life to anunwieldy corpulence, was covered with ulcers, and devoured byinnumerable swarms of those insects, who have given their nameto a most loathsome disease5 7; but as Galerius had offended a very zeal­ous and powerful party among his subjects, his sufferings, instead ofexciting their compassion, have been celebrated as the visible effects ofdivine justice}8. He had no sooner expired in his palace of Nicomedia, Hfa domi-than the two emperors who were indebted for their purple to his favour between Mbegan to collect their forces, with the intention either of disputing or ™c',nJ^dof dividing the dominions which he had left without a master. Theywere persuaded however to desist from the former design, and toagree in the latter. The provinces of Asia fell to the share ofMaximin, aud those of Europe augmented the portion of Licinius.The Hellespont and the Thracian Bosphorus formed their mu­tual boundary, and the banks of those narrow seas, which flowed
Vol. L Hhh ia







OCR Output








212 THE DECLINE AND FALL


A. D. 216.


Artaxerxesclaimi theprovinces ofAsia, and de­clares waragainst theRomans.A. D. 230.


a mixed race of Greeks, Arabs, Syrians, and Armenians*'. Thefeeble sovereigns of Osrhoene, placed on the dangerous verge oftwo contending empires, were attached from inclination to the Par­thian cause; but the superior power of Rome exacted from them areluctant homage, which is still attested by their medals. After theconclusion of the Parthian war under Marcus, it was judged pru­dent to secure some substantial pledges of their doubtful fidelity.Forts were constructed in several parts of the country, and a, Romangarrison was fixed in the strong town of Nisibis. During the trou­bles that followed the death of Commodus, the princes of Osrhoeneattempted to shake off the yoke: but the stern policy of Severusconfirmed their dependence44, and the perfidy of Caracalla com­pleted the easy conquest. Abgarus, the last king of Edessa, was sentin chains to Rome, his dominions reduced into a province, and hiscapital dignified with the rank of colony; and thus the Romans,about ten years before the fall of the Parthian monarchy, obtaineda firm and permanent establishment beyond the Euphrates45.
Prudence as well as glory might have justified a war on the side ofArtaxerxes, had his. views been confined to the defence or the acqui­sition of a useful frontier. But the ambitious Persian openly avowed afar more extensive design of conquest; and he thought himself ableto support his lofty pretensions by the arms of reason as well as bythose of power. Cyrus, he alleged, had first subdued, and his suc­cessors had for a long time possessed, the whole extent of Asia, asfar as the Propontis and the Ægaean sea; the provinces of Cariaand Ionia, under their empire, had been governed by Persian satraps,and all Egypt, to the confines of Æthiopia, had acknowledged theirsovereignty46. Their rights had been suspended, but not destroyed,by a long usurpation j and as soon as he received the Persian dia­dem, which birth and successful valour had placed upon his head,the first great duty of his station called upon him to restore the an­cient limits and splendour of the monarchy. The Great King, there­fore,







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


tants. When the return of famine severely admonished them of theimportance of the arts, the national distress was sometimes allevi­ated by the emigration of a third, perhaps, or a fourth part of theiryouth'7. The possession and the enjoyment of property, are thepledges which bind a civilized people to an improved country. Butthe Germans, who carried with them what they most valued, theirarms, their cattle, and their women, cheerfully abandoned the vastsilence of their woods for the unbounded hopes of plunder and con­quest. The innumerable swarms that issued, or seemed to issue-,from the great storehouse of nations, were multiplied by the fearsof the vanquished, and by the credulity of succeeding ages. Andfrom facts thus exaggerated, an opinion was gradually established,and has been supported by writers of distinguished reputation, that,in the age of Cæsar and Tacitus, the inhabitants of the North werefar more numerous than they are in our days3*. A more seriousinquiry into the causes of population, seems to have convinced mo­dern philosophers of the falsehood, and indeed the impossibility,of the supposition. To the names of Mariana and of Machiavel'%we can oppose the equal names of Robertson and of Hume *°.
A warlike nation like the Germans, without either cities, letters, Germanarts, or money, found some compensation for this savage state in freedom'the enjoyment of liberty. Their poverty secured their freedom*since our desires and our possessions are the strongest fetters of des­potism. "Among the Suiones, (fays Tacitus) riches are held in*' honour. They are therefore subject to an absolute monarch, who,"instead of intrusting his people with the free use of arms, as i6"practised in the rest of Germany, commits them to the safe cus-M tody not of a citizen, or even of a freedman, but of a stave."The neighbours of the Suiones, the Sitones, are funk even below"servitude; they obey a woman In the mention of these ex­ceptions, the great historian sufficiently acknowledges the generaltheory of government. We are only at a loss to conceive by what
G g 2 mean*







OCR Output








j86 THE DECLINE AND FALL


and the other seventy-four years old lS, they had both attained thefull maturity of age and experience.Tumult at After the senate had conferred on Maximus and Balbinus anyounger Gcr- equal portion of the consular and trihunitian powers, the title of Fa-ci«edC*Cir. triers °^ t'ie^r Country and the joint office of Supreme Pontiff, theyascended to the Capitol, to return thanks to the gods, protectors ofRome The solemn rites of sacrifice were disturbed by a sedi­tion of the people. The licentious multitude neither loved the rigid.Maximus, nor did they sufficiently fear the mild and humane Balbinus.Their increasing numbers surrounded the temple of Jupiter; with ob­stinate clamours they asserted their inherent right of consenting to>the election of their sovereign, and demanded^ with an apparentmoderation, that besides the two emperors chosen by the senate, athird, should be added of the family of the Gordians, as a just re—turn of gratitude to those princes who had sacrificed their lives forth,e republic. At the head of the city guards, and the youth of theequestrian, order, Maximus and Balbinus attempted to cut their waythrough the seditious multitude. The multitude, armed with sticks,and stories, drove them back into the Capitol. It is prudent to yield,,•when the contest, whatever may be the issue of it, must be fatal:to both parties. A boyt only thirteen years of age, the grandson-of the elder, and nephew of the younger, Gordian, was produced tothe people, invested with the ornaments and title of Cæsar. The-tuinujt was appeased by this easy condescension; and the twoemperors, when they were peaceably acknowledged in Rome, pre­pared to defend Italy against the common enemy.Maximin p e- Whilst, in Rome and Africa revolutions succeeded each other with,uc"the se" inconceivable, rapidity, the mind of Maximin was agitated by thenae and their moA furious passions. He is said to have received the news of the
emperors. ir _ ^m 1 ■
rebellion of the GordianSa. apd of the decree of the senate against-hjm, not with the terpper of a man, but the rage of a wild beast jwhich, as it could, not discharge itself on the distant senate, threat­


enedi







OCR Output








• * OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. i$9


cipline. Their brethren of Rome, embracing the common cause ofmilitary licence, demanded the head of the reformer. Alexander,however, instead of yielding to their seditious clamours, shewed ajust fense of his merit and services, by appointing him his colleague'in the consulship* and defraying from his own treasury the expenceof that vain dignity: but as rt was justly apprehended that if thesoldiers beheld him with the ensigns of his office, they would re­venge the insult in his blood, the nominal first magistrate of thestate retired, by the emperor's advice, from the city, and spent thegreatest part of his consulship at his villas in Campania7!.. The lenity of the emperor confirmed the insolence of the troops; Tumults ofthe legions imitated the example of the guards, and defended their thc leg:on**prerogative of licentiousness with the fame furious obstinacy. Theadministration of Alexander was an unavailing struggle against thecorruption of his age. In Illyricum, in Mauritania, in Armenia, inMesopotamia, in Germany, fresh mutinies perpetually broke out ;,his officers were murdered, his authority was insulted, and his lifeat last sacrificed to the fierce discontents of the army '6. One par­ticular fact well deserves to be recorded, as it illustrates the manners Se^^of the troops, and exhibits a singular instance of their return to afense of duty and obedience. Whilst the emperor lay at Antioch,in his Persian expedition, the punishment of some soldiers, who hadbeen discovered in the baths of women, excited a sedition in the «legion to which they belonged. Alexander ascended his tribunal,,and with a modest firmness represented to the armed multitude, theabsolute necessity as well as his inflexible resolution of correctingthe vices introduced by his impure predecessor, and of maintaining.-the discipline, which could not be relaxed without the ruin of theRoman name and empire. Their clamours interrupted his mild ex­postulation. "Reserve your shouts," said the undaunted emperor,"till you take the field against the Persians, the Germans, and the«■ Sarmatians. Be silent in the presence of your sovereign and be-. ^ M ne factor,.







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AND FALL


he once more turned his face towards Syria. Antioch was alarmedby his rapid approach, and the helpless city of Palmyra felt the irre­sistible weight of his resentment. We have a letter of Aurelianhimself, in which he acknowledges that old men, women, chil­dren, and peasants, had been involved in that dreadful execution,which should have been confined to armed rebellion; and althoughhis principal concern seems directed to the restoration of a templeof the Sun, he discovers some pity for the remnant of the Palmy-xenians, to whom he grants the permission of rebuilding and inha­biting their city. But it is easier to destroy than to revive. Thefeat of commerce, of arts, and of Zenobia, gradually funk into anobscure town, a trifling fortress, and at length a miserable vilfage.The present citizens of Palmyra, consisting of thirty or forty fami­lies, have erected their mud cottages within the spacious court of amagnificent temple.
Aurelian sup- Another and a last labour still awaited the indefatigable Aurelian;beilion of Fir- to suppress a dangerous though obscure rebel, who, during the re-auiftio gypt. ^ pajmvra) ha(j arifen on the banks of the Nile. Firmus,
the friend and ally, as he proudly styled himself, of Odenathus andZenobia, was no more than a wealthy merchant of Egypt. In thecourse of his trade to India, he had formed very intimate connectionswith the Saracens and the Blemmyes, whose situation on either coastof the Red Sea, gave them an easy introduction into the UpperEgypt. The Egyptians he inflamed with the hope of freedom,and, at the head of their furious multitude, broke into the city ofAlexandria, where he assumed the imperial purple, coined money,,published edicts, and raised an army, which, as he, vainly boasted,he was capable of maintaining from the sole profits of his papertrade. Such troops were a feeble defence against the approach ofAurelian; and it seems almost unnecessary to relate, that Firmuswas routed, taken, tortured, and put to death. Aurelian might nowcongratulate the senate,, the people, and himself, that in little more
than







OCR Output








OFTHEROMANEMPIRE. 373


adorned their new conquest with magnificent buildings; but those ^au^t°sthcmonuments were raised at the expence of the people, and abhorredas badges of slavery. The apprehension of a revolt had inspiredthe most rigorous precautions: oppression had been aggravated byinsult, and the consciousness of the public hatred had been produc­tive of every measure that could render it still more implacable.We have already remarked the intolerant spirit of the Magian re-rligion. The statue6 of the deified kings of Armenia, and the sacredimages of the fun and moon, Were broke in pieces by the zeal of theconqueror; and the perpetual fire of Ormuzd was kindled and pre­served upon an altar erected on the summit of mount BagavanSJ. Itwas natural, thata people exasperated by so many injuries, should arm Revolt os thewith zeal in the cause of their independence, their religion, and their nobles.*1"1hereditary sovereign. The torrent bore down every obstacle, and thePersian garrison retreated before its fury. The nobles of Armeniaflew to the standard of Tiridates, all alleging their past merit,offering their future service, and soliciting from the new king thosehonours and rewards from which they had been excluded with dis­dain under the foreign governments6. The command of the armywas bestowed on Artavasdes, whose father had saved the infancy ofTiridates, and whose family had been massacred for that generousaction. The brother of Artavasdes obtained the government of aprovince. One of the first military dignities was conferred on theSatrap Otas, a man of singular temperance and fortitude, who pre­sented to the king his sister 57 and a considerable treasure, both ofwhich, in a sequestered fortress, Otas had preserved from violation:Among the Armenian nobles appeared an ally, whose fortunes are Story oftoo remarkable to pass unnoticed. His name was Mamgo, his origin Mamg0,was Scythian, and the horde which acknowledged his authority, hadencamped a very few years before on the skirts of the Chinese em­pire S8, which at that time extended as far as the neighbourhoodof Sogdiana59. Having incurred the displeasure of his master,
Mamgo,,







OCR Output








S8 THE DECLINE AND FALL


person and dignity. Notwithstanding his manly resolution, Pom-peianus escaped the resentment of the tyrant, and, with his honour,had the good fortune to preserve his life *\
Commodus had now attained the summit of vice and infamy.Amidst the acclamations of a flattering court, he was unable to dis­guise, from himself, that he had deserved the contempt and hatredof every man of sense and virtue in his empire. His ferociousspirit was irritated by the consciousness of that hatred, by the envyof every kind of merit, by the just apprehension of danger, and-by the habit of slaughter, which he contracted in his daily amufe-
Conspiracy of ments. History has preserved a long list of consular senators sacri­ficed to his wanton suspicion, which sought out, with peculiaranxiety, those unfortunate persons connected, however remotely,with the family of the Antonines, without sparing, even the ministerof his crimes or pleasures His cruelty proved at last fatal to>himself. He had shed with impunity the noblest blood of Rome:he perished as soon as he was dreaded by his own domestics. Marcia,his favourite concubine, Eclectus his chamberlain, and Lætus hispraetorian præfect, alarmed by the fate of their companions andpredecessors, resolved to prevent the destruction which every hourhung over their heads, either from the mad caprice of the tyrant,or the sudden indignation of the people. Marcia seized the occasionof presenting a draught of wine to her lover, after he had fatigued
Deaili os himself with hunting some wild beasts. Commodus retired to steep;.
A°Dmi92! but whilst he was labouring with the effects of poison and drunken-
^istDecem- nefS> a roDust youth, by profession a wrestler, entered his chamber,and strangled him without resistance. The body was secretly con­veyed out of the palace, before the least suspicion was entertainedin the city, or even in the court, of the emperor's death. Suchwas the fate of the son of Marcus, and so easy was it to destroy ahated tyrant, who by the artificial powers of government had op­pressed, during thirteen years, so many millions of subjects, every
one







OCR Output








xxxi» NOTES ON THE NINTH CHASTEk.


[56] The Helvetian nation which issued fromthe country called Switzerland, contained, of everyage and sex, 368,^00 persons (Caesar de Bell.Call. i. 29.). At present, the number of peoplein the Pays de Vaud (a small district on the bankscf the Leman Lake, much more distinguished forpoliteness than for industry) amounts to 112,591.See an excellent Tract of M. Muret, in the Me-jnoires de la Societie de Berne.
[57] Paul Diaconus, c. 1, 2, 3. Machiavel,Davila, and the reft of Paul's follower?, representthese emigrations too much as regular and con­certed measures.
[38] Sir William Temple and Montesquieu haveindulged, on this subject, the usual liveliness oftheir fancy.
[39] Machiavel Hist, di Firenze, 1. i, Marianariill. Hispan.l. v. c. 1.
[40] Robertson's Charles V. Hume's Political
Essays.
[41] Tacit. G^-rm. 4f, 45.. Frenlhemius (whodedicated his supplement to Livy, to Christina ofSweden) thinks proper to be very angry with theRoman who expressed so very little reverence forNorthern queens.
[42] May we not suspect that superstition wasthe parent of despotism? The descendants of Odin(whose race was not extinct till the year 1060) aresaid to have reigned in Sweden above a thousandyears. The temple of Upsal was the ancient feat ofreligion and empire. In the year 1153 I find asingular law prohibiting the use and posseffion ofarras to any, except the king's guards. Is it notprobable that it was coloured by the pretence ofreviving an old institution? See Dalin's Historyof Sweden in the Bibliotheque Raisonnee, torn,xl. and xlv.
£43] Tacit. Germ. C. 43.[44] Id. c. ii, 12, 13, &c.
[4.5] Grotius changes an expression of Tacitus,ptrlraliantur into pr<stra3aiitur. The correctionis equally j'jst and ingenious.
[46] Even in our ancient parliament, the baronsoften carried a question, not so much by the


number of votes as by that of their anfied fol­lowers.
[47] CæTar de Bell. Gall. vi. 23.
[48] Minuunt controversias, is a very happyexpression of Cæsar's.
[49] Reges ex nobilifate, duces ex virtutesumunt. Tacit. Germ. 7.
[50] Cluver. Germ. Ant. 1. i. c. 38.
[51] Cæsar, vi. 22. Tacit. Germ. 26.
[52] Tacit. Germ. 7.
[53] M. 13, l+.
[54] Esprit des Loix, I. xxx. c. 3. The bril­liant imagination of Montesquieu is corrected,however, by the dry cold reason of the Abbs deMably. Observations fur l'Histoire de France,torn. i. p. 35*.
[5 5] Gaudent muneribas, fed nee data imputant,nec acceptis obligantur. Tacit. Germ. c. 21.
[56] The adulteress was whipped through the-village. Neither wealth nor beauty could inspirecompaslion, or procure her a second hulband, 18, 19.
(57] Ovid employs two hundred lines in theresearch of places the most favourable to love.Above all he considers the theatre as the best adaptedto collect the beauties of Rome, and to melt theminto tenderness and sensuality.
[58] Tacit. Hist. iv. 61. 65.
[59] The marriage present was a yoke of oxen,horses, and arms. See Germ. c. 18. Tacitus issomewhat too florid on the subject.
[60] The change of txigtrt into exugere is a mostexcellent correction.
[61] Tacit. Germ. c. 7. Plutarch in Mario.Before the wives of the Teutones destroyed them­selves and their children, they had offered to sur­render, on condition that they should be receivedas the staves of the vestal virgins.
[62] Tacitus has employed a few lines, andCluverius one hundred and twenty-four pages, onthis obscure subject. The former discovers in Ger­many







OCR Output








82 • THE DECLINE AND FALL


insensibility j,, "When Persia was governed hy the descendants of Sesi, a raceof the onen-'
tals. of princes, whose wanton cruelty often stained their divan, their
table, and their bed, with the blood of their favourites, there is asaying recorded of a young nobleman, that he never departed fromthe sultan's presence, without satisfying himself whether his headwas still on his shoulders. The experience of every day almostjustified the scepticism of Rustan 5\ Yet the fatal sword suspendedabove him by a single thread, seems not to have disturbed the slum­bers, or interrupted the tranquillity of the Persian. The monarch'sfrown, he well knew, could level him with the dust; but thestroke of lightning or apoplexy might be equally destructive jand it was the part of a wife man, to forget the inevitable calamitiesof human life in the enjoyment of the fleeting hour. He wasdignified with the appellation of the king's slave; had, perhaps,been purchased from obscure parents, in a country which he hadnever known; and was trained up from his infancy, in the severediscipline of the seraglio His name, his wealth, his honours, werethe gift of a master, who might, without injustice, resume whathe had bestowed. Rustan's knowledge, if he possessed any,could only serve to confirm his habits by prejudices. His lan­guage afforded not words for any form of government, exceptabsolute monarchy. The history of the east informed him, thatsuch had ever been the condition of mankind The Koran, and theinterpreters of that divine book, inculcated to him, that the sultanwas the descendant of the prophet,, and the vicegerent of Heaven;that patience was the first virtue of a Mussulman, and unlimitedobedience the great duty of a subject.Knowledge ^e minds of the Romans were very differently prepared forand free spi- slavery. Oppressed beneath the weight of their own corruption
lit of the .... c ...
Romans. and of military violence, they for a long while preserved the sen­timents, or at least the ideas of their freeborn ancestors. Theeducation of Helvidius and Thrasea, of Tacitus and Pliny, was the
fame







OCR Output








140 THE DECLINE AND FALL


cc


Murder ofCaracalla.A. D. 217.8 th March.


army, and to esteem the rest of his subjects as of little moment,7."But the liberality of the father had been restrained by prudence,and his indulgence to the troops tempered by firmness and autho­rity. The careless profusion of the son was the policy of one reign,and the inevitable ruin both of the army and of the empire. The vi­gour of the soldiers, instead of being confirmed by the severe disci­pline of camps, melted away in the luxury of cities. The exces­sive increase of their pay and donatives58 exhausted the state toenrich the military order, whose modesty in peace, and service inwar, is best secured by an honourable poverty. The demeanor ofCaracalla was haughty and full of pride; but with the troops lieforgot even the proper dignity of his rank, encouraged their inso­lent familiarity, and neglecting the essential duties of a general, af­fected to imitate the dress and manners of a common soldier.
It was impossible that such a character, and such a conduct aathat of Caracalla, could inspire either love or efleem; but as longas his vices were beneficial to the armies, he was secure from thedanger of rebellion. A secret conspiracy, provoked by his own jea­lousy, was fatal to the tyrant. The Prætorian præfecture was di­vided between two ministers. The military department was in­trusted to Adventus, an experienced rather than an able soldier; andthe civil affairs were transacted by Opilius Macrinus, who, by hisdexterity in business, had raised himself, with a fair character, tothat high office. But his favour varied with the caprice of the emrperor, and his life might depend on the slightest suspicion, or themost casual circumstance. Malice or fanaticism had suggested to anAfrican, deeply skilled in the knowledge of futurity, a very dan­gerous prediction, that Macrinus and his son were destined to reignover,the empire. The report was soon diffused through the pro­vince; and when the man was sent in chains to Rome, he stillasserted, in the presence of the præfect of the city, the faith of hisprophecy. That magistrate, who had received the most pressing
instructions







OCR Output








NOTES ON THE THIRTEENTH CHAPTER, H


Martial, (see his first book) was a poet, but whenthey described the amphitheatre, they both wrotefrom their own senses, and to those of the Romans.
[96] Consult Plin. Hist. Natur. xxxiii. 16.xxxvii. 11.
[97] Baltcus en gemmis, en inlita porticus auroccrtatim radiant, Sec. Calphurn. vii.
[98] Et Martis vultus et Apollinis esse putavi,fays Calphurnius; but John Malela, who had per­haps seen pictures of Carinus, describes him asthick, ihort, and white, torn. i. p. 403.
[99] With regard to the time when these Romangames were celebrated, Scaliger, Salmasius, andCuper, have given themselves a great deal of trou­ble to perplex a very clear subject.
[100] Nemesianus (in the Cynegeticons) seemsto anticipate in his fancy that auspicious day.
[101] He won all the crowns from Nemesianus,with whom he vied in didactic poetry. The senateerected a statue to the son of Carus, with a veryambiguous inscription, "To the most powerful oforators." See Vopiscus in Hist. August, p. 251.
[102] A more natural cause at least, than thatassigned by Vopiscus, (Hist. August, p. 251.) in-ceslan: weeping for his father's death.


[103] In the Persian war, Aper was suspected ofa design to betray Carus. Hist. August, p. 250.
[104] We are obliged to the Alexandrian Chro­nicle, p. 274, for the knowledge of the time andplace where Diocletian was elected emperor.
[ie;] Hist. August, p. 251. Eutrop. ix. 18.Hieronym, in Chron. According to these judiciontwriters, the death of Nuoerian was discovered bythe stench of his dead body. Could no aromatic*be found in the Imperial household i
[106] Aurel. Victor. Eutropius, ix. 20. Hiero­nym. in Chron. • .
[107] Vopiscus in Hist. August, p. 252. Th«reason why Diocletian killed Aptr, (a wiid boar)was sounded on a prophecy and a pun, as foolish asthey are well known.


[108] Eutropius marks itsrately; it was between the Mons Aureus and Vi-miniacum. M. Danville, (Geographic Ancienne,torn. i. p. 304.) places Margus at Kastolatz inServia, a little below Belgrade and Semendria.
{109] Hist. August, p. 254. Eutropius, ix. 29.Aurelius Victor. Victor in Epitome.


NOTES ON THE THIRTEENTH CHAPTER.


[1] |7 UTROP. ix. 19. Victor in Epitom.
JlL The town seems to have been properlyDoclia, from a small tribe of Illyrians; (fee Cella-rius, Geograph. Antiqua, torn. i. p. 393.) and theoriginal same of the fortunate flave was probablyDocles; he first lengthened it to the Grecian har­mony of Diocles, and at length to the Roman ma­jesty of Diocletianus. He likewise assumed thePatrician name of Valerius, and it is usually givenhim by Aurelius Victor.
[2] See Dacier on the sixth satire of the secondbook of Horace. Cornel. Nepos, in Vit. Eumen.c. 1.
[3] Lactantius (or whoever was the author ofthe little treatise De Mort.ibus Persccutorum,) ac­cuses Diocletian of timidity in two places, c. 7, 8,


In Chap. 9, he fays of him, "erat in omni tu-snuliu meticulofus et animi disjectus."
[4] In this encomium, Aurelius Victor seems toconvey a just, though indirect censure of the crueltyof Consiantius. It appears from the Fasti, (thatArislobulus remained præsect of the city, and thathe ended with Diocletian, the consulship which hehad commenced with Carinus.
[c] Aurelius Victor styles Diocletian, " Parentempotius quam Dominum. See Hist. August, p. 30.
[6] The question of the time when Maximian re­ceived the honours of Cæsar and Augustus has di­vided modern critics, and given occasion to a greatdeal of learned wrangling. I have followed M. deTiilemont, (Histoire des Empereurs, torn. iv. p.
£ 2 5°«—5°S )







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. i


with the public discontent, and he was easily persuaded to unite hispersonal injury and pretensions with the cause of the Roman peo­ple. Two Prætorian tribunes and a commissary of provisions under­took the management of the conspiracy; and as every order ofmen was actuated by the fame spirit, the immediate event was nei­ther doubtful not difficult. The præfect of the city, and a fewmagistrates, who maintained their fidelity to Severus, were massa­cred by the guards; and Maxentius, invested with the imperialornaments, was acknowledged by the applauding senate and peopleas the protector of the Roman freedom and dignity. It is uncer­tain whether Maximian was previously acquainted with the conspi­racy; but as soon as the standard of rebellion was erected at Rome, Maximianthe old emperor broke from the retirement where the authority of purple.Diocletian had condemned him to pass a life of melancholy soli­tude, and concealed his returning ambition under the disguise of pa­ternal tenderness. At the request of his son and of the senate, hecondescended to reassume the purple. His ancient dignity, his ex­perience, and his fame in arms, added strength as well as reputationto the party of Maxentius "*.
According to the advice, or rather the orders, of his colleague, Defeat and
ri r death of
the emperor Severus immediately hastened to Rome, in the full Severus.confidence, that, by his unexpected celerity, he should easily sup­press the tumult of an unwarlike populace, commanded by a licen­tious youth. But he found on his arrival the gates of the city shutagainst him, the walls filled with men and arms, an experiencedgeneral at the head of the rebels, and his own troops withoutspirit or affection. A large body of Moors deserted to the enemy,allured by the promise of a large donative; and, if it be true thatthey had been levied by Maximian in his African war, preferringthe natural feelings of gratitude to the artificial ties of allegiance.Anulinus, the Prætorian præfect, declared himself in favour of Max­entius, and drew after him the most considerable part of the troops,Vol. I. G g g accustomed







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AND FALL


his flight he bestowed the precarious title of Cæsar on Valens, hisgeneral of the Illyrian frontier 8'.
The plain of Mardia in Thrace was the theatre of a secondbattle no less obstinate and bloody than the former. The troops onboth sides displayed the same valour and discipline; and the victorywas once more decided by the superior abilities of Constantine,who directed a body of five thousand men to gain an advantage­ous height, from whence, during the heat of the action, they at­tacked the rear of the enemy, and made a very considerable slaugh­ter. The troops of Licinius, however, presenting a double front,still maintained their ground, till the approach of night put an endto the combat, and secured their retreat towards the mountains ofMacedonia 9°. The loss of two battles, and of his bravest veterans,reduced the fierce spirit of Licinius to sue for peace. His ambas­sador Mistrianus was admitted to the audience of Constantine; heexpatiated on the common topics of moderation aud humanity,which are so familiar to the eloquence of the vanquished; repre­sented, in the most insinuating language, that the event of thewar was still doubtful, whilst its inevitable calamities were alikepernicious to both the contending parties; and declared, that hewas authorised to propose a lasting and honourable peace in thename of the two emperors his masters. Constantine received themention of Valens with indignation and contempt. "It was notM for such a purpose," he sternly replied, "that we have advancedu from the banks of the western ocean in an uninterrupted course"of combats and victories, that, after rejecting an ungrateful kins-*' man, we should accept for our colleague a contemptible slave.<*> The abdication of Valens, is the first article of the treaty Itwas necessary to accept this humiliating condition, and the unhappyValens, after a reign of a few days, was deprived of the purpleand of his life. As soon as this obstacle was removed, the tran­quillity of the Roman world was easily restored. The successive de­feat*







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. J27


Severus, that from all the legions of the frontiers, the soldiers mostdistinguished for strength, valour, and fidelity, should be occasionallydraughted and promoted, as an honour and reward, into the moreeligible service of the guards 67. By this new institution, the Italianyouth were diverted from the exercise of arms, and the capital wasterrified by the strange aspect and manners of a multitude of bar­barians. But Severus flattered himself, that the legions would con­sider the chosen Prætorians as the representatives of the whole mili­tary order; and that the present aid of fifty thousand men, superiorin arms and appointments to any force that could be brought intothe field against them, would for ever crush the hopes of rebellion,and secure the empire to himself and his posterity.
The command of these favoured and formidable troops soon be- The office ofcame the first office of the empire. As the government degene- præfect.rated into military despotism, the Prætorian præfect, who in his originhad been a simple captain of the guards, was placed, not only at thehead of the army, but of the finances, and even of the law. Inevery department of administration, he represented the person,and exercised the authority, of the emperor. The first præfect whoenjoyed and abused this immense power was Plautianus, the favou­rite minister of Severus. His reign lasted above ten years, till themarriage of his daughter with the eldest son of the emperor, whichseemed to assure his fortune, proved the occasion of his ruin68. Theanimosities of the palace, by irritating the ambition and alarmingthe fears of Plautianus, threatened to produce a revolution, andobliged the emperor, who still loved him, to consent with reluctanceto his death 69. After the fall of Plautianus, an eminent lawyer,the celebrated Papinian, was appointed to execute the motley officeof Prætorian præfect.
Till the reign of Severus, the virtue and even the good fense of The scnatethe emperors had been distinguished by their zeal or affected reve- oppressed by
military d«s-
rence for the senate, and by a tender regard to the nice frame of civil potism.


policy







OCR Output








NOTES. ON THE ELEVENTH CHAPTER.


the throne by Augustus (Tacit. Ann«J. i. 13.).A second headed a formidable conspiracy againstNero; and a third was adopted, and declaredCæsar by Galba.
[162] Hist. August, p. 199. The senate, in amoment of enthusiasm, seems to have presumed onthe approbation of Gallienus.
[163] Hist. August, p. 196.
[164] The association of the brave Palmyrenianwas the most popular act of the whole reign of Gal­lienus, Hist. August, p. 180.
[ 165] Gallienus had given the titles of Cæsar andAugustus to his son Saloninus, flain at Cologn bythe usurper Polthumus. A second son of Gallienussucceeded to the name and rank of his elder bro­ther. Valerian, the brother of Gallienus, was alsoassociated to the empire, several other brothers,sisters, nephews, and nieces of the emperor, formeda very numerous royal family. See Tillemont,torn. iii. and M. de Breguigny in the Memoires de1'Academic, tom.xxxii. p. 262.
[166] Hist. August, p. 188.
[167] Regillianus had some bands of Roxolaniin his service. Posthumus a body of Franks. Itwas perhaps in the character of auxiliaries that thelatter introduced themselves into Spain.
[168] The Augustan History, p. 177, calls itfirvilt htllam. See Diodor. Sicul. 1. xxxiv.
[169] Plin. Hist. Natur. v. 10.
[170] Diodor. Sicul. 1. xvii. p. 590. Edit.Wesseliug.


[171] See a very curious letter of Hadrian in the
Augustan History, p. 245.
[172] Such as the sacrilegious murder of a di­vine cat. Sec Diodor. Sicul. 1. i.
[173] Hist. August, p. 19;. This long and ter­rible sedition was first occasioned by a dispute be­tween a soldier and a townsman about a pair ofshoes.
[174] Dionysius apud Euseb, Hist. Ecclef.vol. vii. p. 21. Ammian. xxii. 16.
[175] Scaliger Animadver. ad Euseb. Chron.p. 258. Three dissertations of M. Bonamy, in theMem. de l'Academie, torn. ix.
[176] Strabo, 1. xii. p. 569.
[177] Hist. August, pv 197.
[178] See Cellarius, Geog. Antiq. torn. U. p.137, upon the limits oflsauria.
[179] Hist. August, p. 177.
[180] Hist. August, p. 177. Zosimus, I. L p. 24.Zonaras, I. xii. p. 623. Euseb. Chronicon. Victorin Epitom. Victor in Cæsar. Eutropius, ix. 5.Orosius, vii. 21.
[i8»] Enseb. Hist.Eccles. vii. 21. The fact istaken from the Letters of Dionysius, who, in thetime of those troubles, was bilhop of Alexandria.
[182] In|a great number of parishes 11000 per­sons were found between fourteen and eighty -y5365 between forty and seventy. Oee BufFon,Histoire Naturelle, torn. ii. p. 590.


NOTES ON THE ELEVENTH CHAPTER.


[1] pONS Aurttli, thirteen miles from Ber­gamo, and thirty-two from Milan. SeeCluver. Italia Antiq. torn. i. p. 245. Near thisplace, in the year 1703, the obstinate battle ofCassano was fought between the French and Au­


strians. The excellent relation of the Chevalier deFolard who was present gives a very distinct idea ofthe ground. See Folybe de Folard. torn. iii. p.223—248.
OJ On


O







OCR Output








THfi DECLINE AND FALL


doubtful chance of an unprofitable victory. But the prospect ofthe Roman territories was far more alluring ; and the fields- ofDacia were covered with rich harvests, sown by the hands of an in­dustrious, and exposed to be gathered by those of a warlike, people.It is probable, that the conquests of Trajan, maintained by his suc­cessors, less for any real advantage, than for ideal dignity, hadcontributed to weaken the empire on that side. The new and un­settled province of Dacia, was neither strong enough to resist, norrich enough to satiate, the rapaciousness of the barbarians. Aslong as the remote banks of the Niester were considered as theboundary of the Roman power, the fortifications of the Lower Da­nube were more carelessly guarded, and the inhabitants of Mæsialived in supine security, fondly conceiving themselves at an inac­cessible distance from any barbarian invaders. The irruptions ofthe Goths, under the reign of Philip, fatally convinced them oftheir mistake. The king or leader of that fierce nation, traversedwith contempt the province of Dacia, and passed both the Niesterand the Danube without encountering any opposition capable ofretarding his progress. The relaxed discipline of the Roman troops,betrayed the most important posts, where they were stationed, and thefear of deserved punishment induced great numbers of them toinlist under the Gothic standard. The various multitude of barba­rians appeared, at length, under the walls of Marcianopolis, acity built by Trajan in honour of his sister, and at that time diecapital of the second Mæsia The inhabitants were glad to ran­som their lives and property, by the payment of a large sum ofmoney, and the invaders retreated back into their deserts, animated,rather than satisfied, with the first success of their arms againstan opulent but feeble country. Intelligence was soon transmitted tothe emperor Decius, that Cniva, king of the Goths, bad passedthe Danube a second time, with more considerable forces; thathis numerous detachments scattered devastation over the province
of







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 411


Though the characters of Constantine and Maxentiua had very Maximianlittle affinity with each other, their situation and interest were the daughtersame; and prudence seemed to require that they should unite their the tit'e offorces against the common enemy. Notwithstanding the superiority °o constan-'of his age and dignity, the indefatigable Maximian passed the ^"'^ 307>Alps, and courting a personal interview with the sovereign of Gaul, 3lstMarch-carried with him his daughter Fausta as the pledge of the newalliance. The marriage was celebrated at Aries with every circum­stance of magnificence; and the ancient colleague of Diocletian,who again asserted his claim to the western empire, conferred onhis son-in-law and ally the title of Augustus. By consenting toreceive that honour from Maximian, Constantine seemed to embracethe cause of Rome and of the senate; but his professions were am­biguous, and his assistance flow and ineffectual. He consideredwith attention the approaching contest between the masters of Italyand the emperor of the East, and was prepared to consult his ownsafety or ambition in the event of the war *\
The importance of the occasion called for the presence and abi- Galerius in-lities of Galerius. At the head of a powerful army collected from vadeslul,r*Illyricum and the East, he entered Italy, resolved to revenge thedeath of Severus, and to chastise the rebellious Romans; or, as heexpressed his intentions, in the furious language of a barbarian, toextirpate the senate, and to destroy the people by the sword. Butthe skill of Maximian had concerted a prudent system of defence.The invader found every place, hostile, fortified, and inaccessible;and though he forced his way as far as Narni, within sixty milesof Rome, his dominion in Italy was confined to the narrowlimits of his camp. Sensible of the increasing difficulties of hisenterprise, the haughty Galerius made the first advances towards areconciliation, and dispatched two of his most considerable officersto tempt the Roman princes by the offer of a conference and the
G g g 2 declaration







OCR Output








 







OCR Output








xx'ti NOTES ON THE SIXTH CHAPTER.


rant by their railleries, and perhaps by their tu­mults.
[36] Dion, 1. lxxvii.p. 1296.
[37] Dion. l. lxxvi p. 1284. Mr. Wotton (Hist,-of Rome, p. 330) suspects that this maxim was in-rented by Caracalla himself and attributed to hisfather.
{38] Dion (1. Ixxviii. p. 13.13.) informs us thatthe extraordinary gifts of Caracalla to the armyamounted annually to seventy milions of drachma:(about two millions -three hundred and fifty thou­sand pounds}. There is .another passage in Dion,concerning the military pay, infinitely curious;were it not obscure, imperfect, and probably cor­rupt. The best fense seems to be, that the Præ­torian guards received twelve hundred and fiftydrachma: (fort-y pounds) a year. (Dion, 1. Ixxvii.p. 1307 ) Under the reign of Augustus, they werepaid at the rate of two drachmæ, or denarii, perday-, 720a year (Tacit Annal. i. 17.). Domitian,who increased the soldier's pay one fourth, mullhave raised the Prætorians to 960 drachmæ (Gro-novius de Pecunia Veteri, 1. iii. c. 2.). These suecostive augmentations ruined the empire, for withthe soldier's pay, their numbers too were increased."We have seen the Prætorians alone increased from10,000 to 50,000 men.
[39] Dion, 1. Ixxviii. p. 1312. Herodian, 1. iv.p. 168.
[40] The fondness of Caracalla for the nameand ensigns of Alexander, is still preserved on themedals of that emperor. See Spanheim, de UfuNumifmatum. Dissertat. xii. Herodian (1. iv.p. 154.) had seen very ridiculous pictures, in whicha figure was drawn, with one side of the face likeAlexander, and the other like Caracalla.
[41] Herodian, 1. iv. p. 169. Hist. August,p. 94.
[42] Dion, 1. Ixxxvin. p. 13C0. Elagabalus re­proached his predecessor, with daring to seat him­self on the throne; though, as Prætorian præfect,he could not have been admitted into the senateafter the voice of the cryer had cleared the house.The personal favour of Piautianus and Sejanus had


broke through the established rule. They rose in­deed from the equestrian order ; but they preservedthe prefecture with the rank of senator, and evenwith the consulship.
[43J He was a native of Cæsarea, in Numidia,and began his fortune by serving in the household ofPlautian, from whose ruin he narrowly escaped.His enemies asserted, that he was born a slave, andhad exercised, among other infamous professions,that of Gladiator. The fashion of aspersing thebirth and condition of an adversary, seems to havelasted from the time of the Greek orators, to thelearned grammarians of the last age.
[44] Both Dion and Herodian speak of the vir­tues and vices of Macrinus, with candour and impar­tiality; but the author of his life, in the AugustasHistory, seems to have implicitly copied some ofthe venal writers, employed by Elagabalus, toblacken the memory of his predecessor.
[4;] Dion, 1. Ixxxiii. p. 1336. The sense ofthe author is as clear as the intention of the em­peror, but M. Wotton has mistaken both, by under­standing the distinction, not of veteran and re­cruits, but of old and new legions. History ofRome, p. 347-
[46] Dion, 1. Ixxviii. p. 1330. The abridge­ment of Xiphilin, though less particular, is in thisplace clearer than the original.
[47] According to Lampridius (Hist. August, p.135 ) Alexander Severus lived twenty-nine years,three months, and seven days. As he was killedMarch 19, 231;, he was born December 12, 20$,and was consequently about this time thirteenyears old, as his elder cousin might be about seven­teen This computation suits much better thehistory of the young princes than that, of Herodian,(1. v. p. 181.) who represents them as three yearsyounger ; whilst, by an opposite error of chronology,he lengthens the reign of Elagabalus two years be­yond its real duration. For the particulars of theconspiracy, see Dion, 1. Ixxviii. p. 1339. Hero­dian, 1. v. p. 184.
[48] By a most dangerous proclamation of thepretended Antoninus, every soldier who brought in


hit







OCR Output








NOTES ON THE TENTH CHAPTER. xli


[136] Zosimus, 1. i. p. 33.
[137] Hist. August, p. 174.
[138] Victor n Cæsar. Eutropius, ix. 7.
[139] Zosimus, 1. i. p. 33. Zonaras, I. xii. p.630. Peter Pacricius in the Excerpta Legat. p. 29.
[140] Hist. August, p. 185. The reign of Cy-riades appears in that collection prior to the deathof Valerian; but I have preferred a probable seriesof events to the doubtful chronology of a most in­accurate writer.
[141] The sack of Antioch, anticipated by somehistorians, is assigned, by the decisive testimony ofAmmianus Marcellinus, to the reign of Gallienus,xxiii. 5.
[142] Zosimus, 1. i. p. 3;.
[143] John Malala, torn. i. p. 391. He cor­rupts this probable event by some fabulous circum­stances.
[144] Zonaras, 1. xii. p. 630. Deep rallies werefilled up with the stain. Crowds of prisoners weredriven to water like beasts, and many perished forwant of food.
[14;] Zosimus, 1. i. p. 2;, asserts, that Sapor,had he not preferred spoil to conquest, might haveremained master of Asia.
[146] Peter Patricius in Excerpt. Leg. p. 29.
£147] Syrorum Agrestium manu. Sextus Rasas,c 23. Rufus, Victor, the Augustan History (p. 192.),and several inscriptions agree in making Odenathusa citizen of Palmyra.
[148] He possessed so powerful an interest amongthe wandering tribes, that Procopius (Bell. Persic.1. ii. c. 5.) and John Malala (torn. i. p. 391.) stylehim Prince of the Saracens.
[149] Peter Patricius, p. 25.
[150] The Pagan writers lament, the Christianinsult, the misfortunes of Valerian. Their varioustestimonies are accurately collected by Tillemont,torn. iii. p. 739, &c. So little has been preservedof Eastern history before Mahomet, that the mo­dern Persians are totally ignorant of the victory of
Vol. I.


Sapor, an event so glorious to their nation. SeeBibliotheque Orient ale.
[151] Cne of these epistles is from Artavasdes,king of Armenia: since Armenia was then a pro­vince to Persia, the king, the kingdom, and theepistle, must be fictitious.
[152] See his life in the Augustan History.
[153] There is still extant a very pretty Epitha-lamium, composed by Gallienus, for the nuptials ofhis nephews.
Ite ait, O Juvenes, pariter fudate medullisOmnibus, inter vos ; non murmura vestra columbæBrachia non Hederae, non vincant oscula Conchæ.
[154] He was on the point of giving Plotinus aruined city of Campania, to try the experiment ofrealizing Plato's Republic. See the Life of Ploti-inus, by Porphyry, in Fabricius's Biblioth. Grxc.1. iv.
[ 15 j] This singular character has, I believe, beenfairly transmitted to us. The reign of his imme­diate siiccessor was short and busy; and the histo­rians who wrote before the elevation of the familyof Constantine, could not have the most remoteinterest to misrepresent the character of Gallienas.
[156] Pollio expresses the most minute anxietyto complete the number.
[157] The place of his reign is somewhat doubt­ful; but there no as a tyrant in Pontus, and we areacquainted with the feat of all the others.
[158] Tillemont, torn. iii. p. 1163, reekons themsomewhat differently.
[159] See the speech of Marius, in the AugustanHistory, p. 197. The accidental identity of nameswas the only circumstance that could tempt Pollioto imitate Sallust,
[160] Vos O Fompilius fanguis ! is Horace's ad­dress to the Pisos. See Art. Poet. v. 292, withDacier's and Sanadon's notes.
[161] Tacit. Annal. xv. 48. Hist i. 15. In theformer of these passages we may venture to changefattrna into materna. In every generation fromAugustus to Alexander Severus, one or more Pisosappear as consuls. A Piso was deemed worthy off the







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 577


purple, Italy and Africa were administered under the name ofSeverus, and were exposed, without defence, to the implacableresentment of his master Galerius. Among the martyrs of Rome,Adauctus deserves the notice of posterity. He was of a noblefamily in Italy, and had raised himself, through the successivehonours of the palace, to the important office of treasurer of theprivate demesnes. Adauctus is the more remarkable for being theonly person of rank and distinction who appears to have suffereddeath, during the whole course of this general persecution "6.
The revolt of Maxentius immediately restored peace to the underchurches of Italy and Africa; and the fame tyrant who oppressedevery other class of his subjects, mewed himself just, humane, andeven partial, towards the afflicted Christians. He depended ontheir gratitude and affection, and very naturally presumed, that theiajuries which they had suffered, and the dangers which they stillapprehended from his most inveterate enemy, would secure thefidelity of a party already considerable by. their numbers and opu­lence ,67. Even the conduct of Maxentius towards the bissiops ofRome and Carthage, may be considered as the proof of his tolera­tion, since it is probable that the most orthodox princes would adoptthe fame measures with regard to their establissied clergy. Mar-cellus, the former of those prelates, had thrown the capital intoconfusion, by the severe pennance which he imposed on a greatnumber of Christians, who, during the late persecution, had re­nounced or dissembled their religion. The rage of faction brokeout in frequent and violent seditions; the blood of the faithful wasshed by each other's hands, and the exile of Marcellus, whose pru­dence seems to have been less eminent than his zeal, was found tobe the only measure capable of restoring peace to the distractedchurch of Rome ,6\ The behaviour of Mensurius, bishop of Car­thage, appears to have been still more reprehensible. A deacon ofthat city had publissied a libel against the emperor. The offender-Vol. I. 4 E took







OCR Output








45j THE DECLINE AND FALL


Preparations. The enterprise was as full of danger as of glory; and the un-1 successful event of two former invasions was sufficient to inspire
the most serious apprehensions. The veteran troops who reveredthe name of Maximian, had embraced in both those wars the partyof his son, and were now restrained by a sense of honour, as well asof interest, from entertaining an idea of a second desertion. Max-entius, who considered the Prætorian guards as the firmest defenceof his throne, had increased them to their ancient establishment;and they composed, including the rest of the Italians who were in-listed into his service, a formidable body of fourscore thousand men.Forty thousand Moors and Carthaginians had been raised since thereduction of Africa. Even Sicily furnished its proportion of troops;and the army of Maxentius amounted to no less than one hundredand seventy thousand foot, and eighteen thousand horse. Thewealth of Italy supplied the expences of the war; and the adjacentprovinces were exhausted to form immense magazines of corn andevery other kind of provisions. The whole force of Constantineconsisted of ninety thousand foot and eight thousand horse51; andas the defence of the Rhine required a more than common atten­tion during the absence of the emperor, it was not in his power toemploy above half his troops in the Italian expedition, unless hesacrificed the public safety to his private quarrel 5\ At the head ofabout forty thousand soldiers, he marched to encounter an enemywhose numbers were at least four times superior to his own. Butthe armies of Italy, placed at a secure distance from danger, were•enervated by indulgence and luxury. Habituated to the,baths andtheatres of Rome, they took the field with reluctance, and werechiefly composed of veterans who had almost forgotten, or of newlevies who had never acquired, the use of arms and the practiceof war. The hardy legions of Gaul had long defended the fron­tiers of the e'nipire against the barbarians of the North; and in theperformance of that laborious service, their valour was exercised
and


■







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


expected, the most lavish rewards. The provinces long oppressedby the ministers of the republic, sighed for the government of asingle person, who would be the master, not the accomplice, ofthose petty tyrants. The people of Rome, viewing, with a secretpleasure, the humiliation of the aristocracy, demanded only breadand public shows; and were supplied with both by the liberal handof Augustus. The rich and polite Italians, who had almost univer­sally embraced the philosophy of Epicurus, enjoyed the presentblessings of ease and tranquillity, and suffered not the pleasing dreamto be interrupted by the memory of their old tumultuous freedom.With its power, the senate had lost its dignity; many of the mostnoble families were extinct. The republicans of spirit and abilityhad perished in the field of battle, or in the proscription. The doorof the assembly had been designedly left open, for a mixed multi­tude of more than a thousand persons, who reflected disgrace upontheir rank, instead of deriving honour from it \
The reformation of the senate, was one of the first steps in which *?« fero;ms
r the senate.
Augustus laid aside the tyrant, and professed himself the father ofhis country. He was elected censor; and, in concert with hisfaithful Agrippa, he examined the list of the senators, expelled afew members, whose vices or whose obstinacy required a publicexample, persuaded near two hundred to prevent the shame of anexpulsion by a voluntary retreat, raised the qualification of a sena­tor to about ten thousand pounds, created a sufficient number ofPatrician families, and accepted for himself, the honourable titleof Prince of the Senate, which had always been bestowed, by thecensors, on the citizen the most eminent for his honours and services \But whilst he thus restored the dignity, he destroyed the independ­ence of the senate. The principles of a free constitution are irre­coverably lost, when the legislative power is appointed by the ex­ecutive.
6 Before







OCR Output








iid. THE DECLINE AND FALL


tained humanity enough to stipulate that he should pardon and for­get the competition of Sulpicianus.Julian is ac- It was now incumbent on the Prætorians to fulfil the conditionsbytheftaul of the sale. They placed their new sovereign, whom they servedand despised, in the center of their ranks, surrounded him on everyfide with their shields, and conducted him in close order of battlethrough the deserted streets of the city. The senate was commandedto assemble, and those who had been the distinguished friends ofPertinax, or the personal enemies of Julian, found it necessary toaffect a more than common share of satisfaction at this happy revo­lution '*. After Julian had filled the senate-house with armed sol­diers, he expatiated on the freedom of his election, his own emi­nent virtues, and his full assurance of the affections of the senate.The obsequious assembly congratulated their own and the public fe­licity, engaged their allegiance, and conferred on him all the se-reral branches of the Imperial power". From the senate Julian
I 3KCS pOU€t>
swn of the was conducted by the fame military procession, to take possession ofthe palace. The first objects which struck his eyes, were the aban­doned trunk of Pertinax, and the frugal entertainment prepared forhis supper. The one he viewed with indifference; the other withcontempt A magnificent feast was prepared by his order, and heamused himself till a very late hour, with dice, and the performancesof Pylades, a celebrated dancer. Yet it was observed, that afterthe crowd of flatterers dispersed, and left him to darkness, solitude,and terrible reflection, he passed a sleepless night; revolving mostprobably in his mind his own rash folly, the fate of his virtuouspredecessor, and the doubtful and dangerous tenure of an empire,which had not been deserved by merit, but purchased by money"*.The public He had reason to tremble. On the throne of the world he founddiscontent. jjjmfe}f without a friend, and even without an adherent. Theguards themselves were ashamed of the prince whom their avarice


X had







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE 143


and to arraign the hasty choice of the army. It had hitherto beenconsidered as a fundamental maxim of the constitution, that theemperor must be always chosen in the senate, and the sovereignpower, no longer exercised by the whole body, was always delegatedto one of its members. But Macrinus was not a senator **. Thesudden elevation of the Prætorian prefects betrayed the meannessof their origin; and the equestrian order was still in possession ofthat great office, which commanded with arbitrary sway the lives andfortunes of the senate. A murmur of indignation was heard, thata man whose obscure 41 extraction had never been illustrated by anysignal service, should dare to invest himself with the purple, insteadof bestowing it on some distinguished senator, equal in birth anddignity to the splendour of the Imperial station. As soon a6 the cha­racter of Macrinus was surveyed by the sharp eye of discontent,some vices, and many defects, were easily discovered. The choiceof his ministers was in several instances justly censured, and the dis­satisfied people, with their usual candor, accused at once his indolenttameness and his excessive severity 44.
His rash ambition had climbed a height where it was difficult to and thearmy.stand with firmness, and impossible to fall without instant destruc­tion. Trained in the arts of courts and the forms of civil business,he trembled in the presence of the fierce and undisciplined multitude>over whom be had assumed the command: his military talents weredespised, and his personal courage suspected: a whisper that circu­lated in the camp, disclosed the fatal secret of the conspiracy againstthe late emperor, aggravated the guilt of murder by the baseness ofhypocrisy, and heightened contempt by detestation. To alienate thesoldiers, and to provoke inevitable destruction, the character of areformer was only wanting: and such was the peculiar hardship ofhis fate, that Macrinus was compelled to exercise that odious office.The prodigality of Caracalla had left behind it a long train of ruinand disorder j and if that worthless tyrant had been capable of re­flecting







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AND FALL


Principles ofhuman na


mode of interpretation. :Ambitious to exalt the perfection of thegospel above the wisdom of philosophy,, the zealous fathers havecarried the duties of self-mortification, of purity, and of patience*to a height which it is scarcely possible to attain, and much lessto preserve, in our present state of weakness and corruption. Adoctrine so extraordinary and so sublime must inevitably commandthe veneration of the people; but it was ill calculated to obtainthe suffrage of those worldly philosophers, who, in the conduct ofthis transitory life, consult the feelings of nature and the interest ofsociety ts. ■-
There are two very natural propensities which we may dis-twe. tinguifh in the most virtuous and liberal dispositions, the love of
pleasure and the love of action. If the former is refined by art andlearning, improved by the charms of social intercourse, and cor­rected by a just regard to œconomy, to health, and to reputation,it is productive of the greatest part of the happiness of private fife*The love of action is a principle of a much stronger and moccdoubtful nature.. It often leads- to anger, to ambition, and torevenge; but when it is guided by the fense of propriety and bene­volence, it becomes the parent of every virtue; and if those virtuesare accompanied with equal abilities, a family, a state, or anempire, may be indebted for their safety and prosperity to theundaunted courage of a single man. To the love of pleasure- wemay therefore ascribe most of the agreeable, to the love of actionwe may attribute most of the useful and respectable, qualifications-The character in which both the one and the other should beunited and harmonised, would seem to constitute the most perfectidea of human nature. The insensible and inactive disposition,which should be supposed alike destitute of both, would be rejectedby the common consent of mankind, as utterly incapable of pro­curing any happiness to the individual, or any public benefit tothe world. But it was not in this world that the primitive
Christians







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 87


perious and unsociable nature, since the pride of one man requiresthe submission of the multitude. In the tumult of civil discord,the laws of society lose their force, and their place is seldom sup*plied by those of humanity. The ardor of contention, the pride ofvictory, the despair of success, the memory of past injuries, andthe fear of future dangers, all contribute to inflame the mind, and tosilence the voice of pity. From such motives almost every page ofhistory has been stained with civil blood; but these motives willnot account for the unprovoked cruelties of Commodus, who hadnothing to wish, and every thing to enjoy. The beloved son of a. D. 18a.Marcus succeeded to his father, amidst the acclamations of the se­nate and armies 6, and when he ascended the throne, the happyyouth saw round him neither competitor to remove, nor enemies topunish. In this calm elevated station, it was surely natural, that heshould prefer the love of mankind to their detestation, the mildglories of his five predecessors, to the ignominious fate of Nero andDomitian.
Yet Commodus was not, as he has been represented, a tiger born character ofwith an insatiate thirst of human blood, and capable, from his Commodau-infancy, of the most, inhuman actions 7. Nature had formed himof a weak, rather than a wicked disposition. His simplicity andtimidity rendered him the slave of his attendants, who graduallycorrupted his mind. His cruelty, which at first obeyed the dictatesof others, degenerated into habit, and at length became the rulingpassion of the foul8.
Upon the death of his father, Commodus found himself em- He returns tan*barrassed with the command.of a great army, and the conduct of a Romf''difficult war9. The servile and profligate youth's whom Marcus hadbanished, soon regained their station and influence about the newemperor. They exaggerated the hardships and dangers of a cam­paign in the wild countries beyond the Danube; and they assuredthe indolent prince, that the terror of his name and the arms of his6 lieutenants*.







OCR Output








NOTES ON THE FOURTEENTH CHAPTER. bait


[72] See the two Panegyrics, and the laws t>f thisand the ensuing year, in the Theodofian code.
[73] Panegyr. Vet. ix. 20. Lactantius dc M. P.c. 44. Maximin, who was confessedly the eldestCæsar, claimed, with some Ihew of reason, the firstrank among the Auguili.
[74] Adhuc cuncta opera qua: magnifice construx-erat, urbis fanum, atque bafilicam, Flavii meritispatrei sacravere. Aurelius Victor. With regardto the theft of Trajan's trophies, consult FlaminiusVacca, apud Montfaucon, Diarium Italicum, p.2,9, and l'Antiquice Expliquce of the latter, torn,iv. p. 17 k.
[75] Prætoriæ legiones ac subsidia factionibusaptiora quam urbi Komi, sublata penitus; simularma atque usus indumenti militaris. AureliusVictor. Zosimus (1. ii. p. 89.) mentions this fastas an historian; and it is very pompously cele­brated in the ninth Panegyric.
[76] Ex omnibus provinciis optimates virosCuria; tun pigneraveris; ut Senatsis dignitas ... extotius Orbis store consisteret. Nazarius in Panegyr.Vet. x. 35. The word pigntrcrveris might almostseem malicioufly chosen. Concerning the senatorialtax, seeZosimus, 1. ii. p. 115, the second title of thesixth book of the Theodofian Code, with Gode-froy's Commentary, and Memoires de l'Academiedes Inscriptions, torn, xxviii. p. 726.
[77] From the Theodofian Code, we may nowbegin to trace the motions of the emperors; but thedates both of time and place have frequently beenaltered by the carelessness of transcribers.
[73] Zosimus (1. ii. p. 89) observes, that, beforethe war, the sister of Constantine had been be­trothed to Licinius. According to the youngerVictor, Diocletian was invited to the nuptials; buthaving ventured to plead his age and infirmities, hereceived a second letter filled with reproaches forhis supposed partiality to the cause of Maxentiusand Maximin.
[-9] Zosimus mentions the defeat and death ofMaximin as ordinary events; but Lactantius expa­tiates on them, (de M. P. c. 4^—50.) ascribingthem to the miraculous interposition of Heaven.Licinius at that time was one of the protectors ofthe church,


[80] Lactantius de M, P. c. 50. Aurelius Victortouches on the different conduct of Licinius, and ofConstantine, in the use of victory.
[81] The sensual appetites of Maximin were gra­tified at the expence of his subjects. His eunuchs,who forced away wives and virgins, examined theifnaked charms with anxious curiosity, lest any partof their body should be found unworthy of the royalembraces. Coyness and disdain were considered astreason, and the obstinate fair one was condemnedto be drowned. A custom was gradually intro­duced, that no person Ihould marry a wife withoutthe permission of the emperor, *' ut ipse in omni­bus nuptiis prægustatoresset." Lactantius de M. P.c 38.
[82] Lactantius de M. P. c. 39.
[83] Diocletian at last sent cognatum suum,quendam militaremac potentem virum, to intercedein favour of his daughter (Lactantius de M. P. c.41). We are not sufficiently acquainted with thehistory of these times, to point out the person whowas employed.
[84] Valeria quoque per varias provincias quin-decim menfibus plebeio cultu pervagata. Lactan­tius de M. P. c. 51. There is some doubt whetherwe should compute the fifteen months from the mo­ment of her exile, or from that of her escape. Theexpression of pervagata seems to denote the latter;but in that case we must suppose, that the'treatiseof Lactantius was written after the first civil warbetween Licinius and Constantine. See Cuper,p. 254.
[8;J Ita illis pudicitia et conditio exitio suit.Lactantius de M. P. c. 51. He relates the misfor­tunes of the innocent wise and daughter of Diocle­tian with a very natural mixture of pity and ex­ultation.
[86] Thecurious reader, who consultsthe Valesianfragment, p. 713, will perhaps accuse me of givinga bold and licentious paraphrase; but if he con­siders it with attention, he will acknowledge thatmy interpretation is probable and consistent.
[87] The situation of Æmona, or as it is nowcalled, Laybach, in Carniola, (Danville GeographieAncienne, torn. i. p. 187.) may suggest a conjecture.As it lay to the north east of the Julian Alps, thatimportant territory became a natural object of dis-4 pute







OCR Output








NOTES ON THE TWELFTH CHAPTER. xlix


Maniac!, constructed in the neighbourhood ofFrancfort against the Catti.
[45] He distributed about fifty or sixty Barbarians toa Numerus, as it was then called, a corps with whoseestablished number we are not exactly acquainted.
[46] Camden's Britannia, Introduction, p. 136;but he speaks from a very doubtful conjecture.
£47] Zosimus, I. i. p. 62. According to Vo-piscus, another body of Vandals was less faithful.
[48] Hist. August, p. 240. They were probablyexpelled by the Goths. Zosim. 1. i. p. 66.
[49] Hist. August, p. 240.
[50] Panegyr. Vet. v. 18. Zosimus, 1. i. p. 66.
[51] Vopifcus in Hist. August, p. 245, 246.The unfortunate orator had studied rhetoric at Car­thage, and was therefore more probably a Moor(Zosim. 1. i. p. 60.) than a Gaul, as Vopifcus call*him.
[52] Zonaras, 1. xii. p. 638.
[53] A very surprising instance is recorded of theprowess of Proculus. He had taken one hundredSarmatian virgins. The Best of the story he mustrelate in his own language; Ex his una nocte de­cent inivi: omnes tamen, quod in me erat, muli-eres incra dies quindecim reddidi. Vopifcus in Hist.August, p. 246.
[54] Proculus, who was a native of Albengue onthe Genoese coast, armed two thousand of his ownslaves. His riches were great, but they were ac­quired by robbery. It was afterwards a saying ofhis family, Nec latrones esse, nec principes fibiplacere. Vopifcus in Hist. August p. 247.
[55] Hist. August, p. 240.
[56] Zosim. 1. i. p. 66.
[57] Hist. August, p. 2316.
[58] Aurel. Victor in Prob. But the policy of
Hannibal, unnoticed by any more ancient writes,
is irreconcilable with the history of his life. He
left Africa when he was nine years old; returned
to it when he was forty-five, and immediately lostVot. I.


his army in the decisive battle of Zama. Livius,xxx. 37.
[59] Hist. August, p. 240. Eutrop. ix. 17.Aurel. Victor in Prob. Victor Junior. He revokedthe prohibition of Domitian, and granted a generalpermission of planting vines to the Gauls, theBritons, and the Pannonians.
[60] Julian bestows a severe, and indeed exces­sive censure on the rigour of Probus, who, as hethinks, almost deserved his fate.
[61] Vopifcus in Hist. August, p. 241. He la­vishes on this idle hope a large stock of very foolilheloquence.
[62] Turris ferrata. It seems to have been amove able tower, and cased with iron.
[63] Probus, et vereprobus situs est: Victor omni­um gentium Barbararum; victor etiam tyrannorum.
[64] Yet all this may be conciliated. He was boraat Narbonne, in Illyricum, confounded by Eutro-pius with the more famous city of that name inGaul. His father might be an African, and hitmother a noble Roman. Cams himself was edu­cated in the Capital. See Scaliger Animadversion,ad Eufeb. Chron. p. 241.
[65] Probus had requested of the senate an eques­trian statue, and a marble palace, at the public ex-pence, as a just recompense of the singular merit osCarus. Vopifcus in Hist. August, p. 249.
[66] Vopifcus in Hist. August, p. 242. 249.Julian excludes the emperor Carus and both hissens from the banquet of the Cæsars.
[67] John Malela, torn. i. p. 401. But the au­thority of that ignorant Greek is very slight.He ridiculously derives from Carus, the city ofCarrhæ, and the province of Caria, the latter ofwhich is mentioned by Homer.
[68] Hist. Aug. p. 249. Carus congratulatedthe senate, that one of their own order was madeemperor.
[69] Hist. Aug. p. 242. t
[70] See the first eclogue of Calphurnius. Thedesign of it is preferred by Fontenelle, to that ofVirgil's Pollio. See torn. iii. p. 148.
g [71] Hist.







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 375


Sea 6l. The civil war was, however, soon terminated, either by a vic­tory or by a reconciliation; and Narscs, who was universally acknow­ledged a king of Persia, directed his whole force against the foreignenemy. The contest then became too unequal; nor was the valour ofthe hero able to withstand the power of the monarch. Tiridates, asecond time expelled from the throne of Armenia, once more tookrefuge in the court of the emperors. Narses soon re-established hisauthority in the revolted province; and loudly complaining of theprotection afforded by the Romans to rebels and fugitives, aspiredto the conquest of the East 6\
Neither prudence nor honour could permit the emperors to desert War betweenthe cause of the Armenian king, and it was resolved to exert the and'the Ro-force of the empire in the Persian war. Diocletian, with the calm T"™' rdignity which he uniformly affected, fixed his own station in thecity of Antioch, from whence he prepared and directed the militaryoperations 6!. The conduct of the legions was intrusted to the in­trepid valour of Galerius, who, for that important purpose, was re­moved from the banks of the Danube to those of the Euphrates.The armies soon encountered each other in the plains of Mesopo- Defeat of
c r Galerius.
tamia, and two battles were fought with various and doubtful suc­cess: but the third engagement was of a more decisive nature ; andthe Roman army received a total overthrow, which is attributed tothe rashness of Galerius, who, with an inconsiderable body of troops,attacked the innumerable host of the Persians 6+. But the consider­ation of the country that was the scene of action, may suggest ano­ther reason for his defeat. The fame ground on which Galerius.was vanquished, had been rendered memorable by the death ofCrassus, and the slaughter of ten legions. It was a plain of morethan sixty miles, which extended from the hills of Carræ- to theEuphrates; a smooth and barren surface of sandy desert, without a.hillock, without a tree, and without a spring of fresh water 6>. Thesteady infantry of the Romans, fainting with, heat and thirst, could
neither.


■







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


would only serve to oppress the memory and perplex the attentionof the reader.
I. As the posterity of the Franks compose one of the greatest and Origin and
, confo leracv
most enlightened nations of Europe, the powers of learning and oftheFiank*.ingenuity have been exhausted in the discovery of their unletteredancestors. To the tales of credulity, have succeeded the systems offancy. Every passage has been fisted, every spot has been surveyed,that might possibly reveal some faint traces of their origin. It hasbeen supposed, that Pannonia 6?, that Gaul, that the northern partsof Germany6S, gave birth to that celebrated colony of warriors.At length the most rational critics, rejecting the fictitious emigra­tions of ideal conquerors, have acquiesced in a sentiment whose sim­plicity persuades us of its truth 69. They suppose, that about the yeartwo hundred and forty 7% a new confederacy was formed under thename of Franks, by the old inhabitants of the Lower Rhine and theWeser. The present circle of Westphalia, the Landgraviate ofHesse, and the dutchies of Brunswick and Luneburgh, were theancient seat of the Chauci, who, in their inaccessible morassea,defied the Roman arms 71; of the Cherusci, proud of the fameof Arminius j of the Catti, formidable by their firm and intrepidinfantry, and of several other tribes of inferior power and re­nown 7\ The love of liberty was the ruling passion of theseGermans; the enjoyment of it their best treasure; the word thatexpressed that enjoyment, the most pleasing to their ear. Theydeserved, they assumed, they maintained the honourable epithet ofFranks or Freemen; which concealed, though it did not extinguish,the peculiar names of the several states of the confederacy7S. Tacitconsent, and mutual advantage, dictated the first laws of the union;it was gradually cemented by habit and experience. The league ofthe Franks may admit of some comparison with the Helvetic body;in which every canton, retaining its independent sovereignty, con­sults with its brethren in the common cause, without acknow-
L 1 2 ledging







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 117


he vainly tried to interrogate, or to appease the fates, by magic ce­remonies, and unlawful sacrifices '*.
Severus, who dreaded neither his arms nor his enchantments, Is deserted byguarded himself from the only danger of secret conspiracy, by the ans,faithful attendance of fix hundred chosen men, who never quittedhis person or their cuirasses, either by night or by day, duringthe whole march. Advancing with a steady and rapid course,he passed, without difficulty, the defiles of the Apennine, receivedinto his party the troops and ambassadors sent to retard his progress>and made a short halt at Interamnia about seventy miles fromRome. His victory was already secure; but the despair of thePrætorians might have rendered it bloody; and Severus had thelaudable ambition of ascending the throne without drawing thesword '5. His emissaries, dispersed in the capital, assured theguards, that provided they would abandon their worthless prince,and the perpetrators of the murder of Pertinax, to the justice of theconqueror, he would no longer consider that melancholy eventas the act of the whole body. The faithless Prætorians, whose re^sistance was supported only by sullen obstinacy, gladly compliedwith the easy conditions, seized the greatest part of the assassins,and signified to the senate, that they no longer defended the causeof Julian. That assembly, convoked by the consul, unanimouslyacknowledged Severus as lawful emperor, decreed divine honours toPertinax, and pronounced a sentence of deposition and death against
his unfortunate successor. Julian was conducted into a private apart- and con­demned and
ment of the baths of the palace, and beheaded as a common criminal, executed by-after having purchased, with an immense treasure, an anxious and senate? ''precarious reign of only sixty six days'6. The almost incredible June's!*expedition of Severus, who, in so short a space of time, conducteda numerous army from the banks of the Danube to those of theTyber, proves at once the plenty of provisions produced by agri-6 culture.







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


Palestine may be considered as the sixteenth part of the Easternempire ,Sx; and since there were some governors, who from a realor affected clemency had preserved their hands unstained with theblood of the faithful,,J, it is reasonable to believe, that the countrywhich had given birth to Christianity produced at least the sixteenthpart of the martyrs who suffered death within the dominions of Ga-leriusand Maximin; the whole might consequently amount to aboutfifteen hundred, a number which, if it is equally divided betweenthe ten years of the persecution, will allow an annual consumption ofone hundred and fifty martyrs. Allotting the fame proportion tothe provinces of Italy, Africa, and perhaps Spain, where, at theend of two or three years the rigour of the penal laws was eithersuspended or abolished, the multitude of Christians in the Romanempire on whom a capital punishment was inflicted by a judicialsentence will be reduced to somewhat less than two thousand persons.Since it cannot be doubted that the Ghristians were more numerous,and their enemies more exasperated, in the time of Diocletian thanthey had ever been in any former persecution, this probable andmoderate computation may teach us to estimate the number of pri­mitive saints and martyrs who sacrificed their lives for the importantpurpose of introducing Christianity into the world.
We (hall conclude this chapter by a melancholy truth, which ob- Conclusion,trudes ijself on the reluctant mind; that even admitting, withouthesitation or inquiry, all that history has recorded, or'devotion hasfeigned, on the subject of martyrdoms, it must still be acknowledged,that the Christians, in the course of their intestine dissensions, have•inflicted far greater severities on each other, than they had expe­rienced from the zeal of infidels. During the ages of ignorance• which followed the subversion of the Roman empire in the West,the bishops of the imperial city extended their dominion over thelaity as well as clergy of the Latin church. The fabric of super­stition which they had erected, and which might long have defied
Vol. I. 4 ^ *he







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AND FALL


Toleration ofthe Jewish


of heaven with the empire of the earth. It was by announcinghimself as their long-expected deliverer, and by calling on all the de­scendants of Abraham to assert the hope of Israel, that the famousBarchochebas collected a formidable army, with which he resistedduring two years the power of the Emperor Hadrian '.
Notwithstanding these repeated provocations, the resentment ofreligion. the Roman Princes expired after the victory; nor were their appre­hensions continued beyond the period of war and danger. By thegeneral indulgence of polytheism, and by the mild temper of Anto­ninus Pius, the Jews were restored to their ancient privileges, andonce more obtained the permission of circumcising their children,with the easy restraint, that they should never confer on any foreignproselyte that distinguishing mark of the Hebrew race *. The nume­rous remains of that people, though they were still excluded fromthe precincts of Jerusalem, were permitted to form and to maintainconsiderable establishments both in Italy and in the provinces, toacquire the freedom of Rome, to enjoy municipal honours, and toobtain at the fame time an exemption from the burdensome andexpensive offices of society. The moderation or the contempt of theRomans gave a legal sanction to the form of ecclesiastical policywhich was instituted by the vanquished sect. The patriarch, whohad fixed his residence at Tiberias, was empowered to appoint hissubordinate ministers and apostles, to exercise a domestic jurisdiction*and to receive from his dispersed brethren an annual contributionNew synagogues were frequently erected in the principal cities ofthe Empire; and the sabbaths, the fasts, and the festivals, whichwere either commanded by the Mosaic law, or enjoined by the tra­ditions of the Rabbis, were celebrated in the most solemn and publicmanner6. Such gentle treatment insensibly asswaged the stern"temper of the Jews. Awakening from their dream of prophecy andconquest, they assumed the behaviour of peaceable and industrioussubjects. Their irreconcilable hatred of mankind, instead of fla­ming out in acts of blood and violence, evaporated in less dangerous
gratifications.


3







OCR Output








64 THE DECLINE AND FALL


that they expected the honours of a triumph. In the use of victory,especially after they were no longer controlled by the commissionersof the senate, they exercised the most unbounded despotism. WhenPompey commanded in the east, he rewarded his soldiers andallies, dethroned princes, divided kingdoms, founded colonies, anddistributed the treasures of Mithridates. On his return to Romehe obtained, by a single act of the senate and people, the universalratification of all his proceedings 9. Such was the power over thesoldiers, and over the enemies of Rome, which was either grantedto, or assumed by, the generals of the republic. They were, atthe fame time, the governors, or rather monarchs of the conqueredprovinces, united the civil with the military character, administeredjustice as well as the finances, and exercised both the executiveand legislative power of the state.Lieutenants From what has been already observed in the first chapter of thisperor.Cm work, some notion may be formed of the armies and provincesthus intrusted to the ruling hand of Augustus. But as it was im­possible that he could personally command the legions of so manydistant frontiers, he was indulged by the senate as Pompey hadalready been, in the permission of devolving the execution of hisgreat office on a sufficient number of lieutenants. In rank andauthority these officers seemed not inferior to the ancient proconsuls;but their station was dependent and precarious. They received andheld their commissions, at the will of a superior, to whose auspiciousinfluence the merit of their actions was legally attributed '°. Theywere the representatives of the emperor. The emperor alone wasthe general of the republic, and his jurisdiction, civil as well asmilitary, extended over all the conquests of Rome. It was someSatisfaction, however, to the senate, that he always delegated hispower to the members of their body. The Imperial lieutenantswere of consular or prætorian dignity; the legions were com­manded.







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. i$$


I


independence. Their restless spirit provoked Severus to fend a newarmy into Caledonia, with the most bloody orders, not to subduebut to extirpate the natives. They were saved by the death of theirhaughty enemy '*.
This Caledonian war, neither marked by decisive events, nor at- Fingal andtended with any important consequences, would ill deserve our at­tention; but it is supposed, not without a considerable degree ofprobability, that the invasion of Severus is connected with the mostshining period of the British history or fable. Fingal, whose fame,with that of his heroes and bards, has been revived in our languageby a recent publication, is said to have commanded the Caledonians atthat memorable juncture, to have eluded the power of Severus, andto have obtained a signal victory on the banks of the Carun, in whichthe son of the King of the World, Caracul, fled from his arms along thefields of his pride Something of a doubtful mist still hangs overthese Highland traditions; nor can it be entirely dispelled by the mostingenious researches of modern criticism '*: but if we could, with Contrast ofsafety, indulge the pleasing supposition that Fingal lived, and that Oslian niau and thesung, the striking contrast of the situation and manners of the con- Romans*tending nations might amuse a philosophic mind. The parallel wouldbe little to the advantage of the more civilized people, if we comparedthe unrelenting revenge of Severus with the generous clemency ofFingal; the timid and brutal cruelty of Caracalla, with the bravery,the tenderness, the elegant genius of Oslian; the mercenary chiefswho, from motives of fear or interest, served under the Imperial stand­ard, with the freeborn warriors who started to arms at the voice of theking of Morven; if, in a word, we contemplated the untutored Cale­donians, glowing with the warm virtues of nature, and the dege­nerate Romans, polluted with the mean vices of wealth and slavery.
The declining health and last illness of Severus inflamed the wild Ambition ofambition and black passions of Caracalla's foul. Impatient of any CaracaUa*delay or division of empire, he attempted, more than once, to
shorten







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


gravest of the ecclesiastical historians, Eusebius himself, very franklyconfesses, that he has related whatever might redound to the glory,and that he has suppressed all that could tend to the disgrace of reli­gion "7. Such an acknowledgment will naturally excite a suspicion,that a writer who has so openly violated one of the fundamentallaws of history, has not paid a very strict regard to the observanceof the other: and the suspicion will derive additional credit fromthe character of Eusebius, which was less tinctured with credulity,and more practised in the arts of courts than that of almost any ofhis contemporaries. On some particular occasions, when the ma­gistrates were exasperated by some personal motives of interest orresentment, when the zeal of the martyrs urged them to forget therules-of prudence and perhaps of decency, to overturn the altars^ topdur out imprecations against the emperors, ot to strike the judgeas he fit on his tribunal, it maybe presumed that every mode oftOrttire; which cruelty could invent or constancy could endure, wasexhausted on those devoted victims '78. Two'circumstances, how­ever, have been unwarily mentioned, which insinuate that the ge­neral treatment of the Christians who had been apprehended by theofficers of justicewas less, intolerable than it is usually imagined tohare been. r. The confessors who were condemned to work in themines, were permitted; by the hurtianity or the negligence of theirkeepers, to build'chapels, and freely to profess their religion in the'midst0 of those dreary habitations ,7'. 2. The Bishops were obligedto'check and to censure the forward zeal of the Christians, who vo­luntarily threwthemsclves' into'th'e tiaffdVof tHemagiffrates. Softie of'these were persons oppressed by poverty/and'debtfc', who blindly foughtto terminate a miserable existence by a glorious death. Others were1allured by the hope, that a short'eonsinernent would'expiate the sins-'of a whole life; and others again were actuated by the less'honour­able motive of deriving a plentiful-subsistence,, arfdJ perhaps? a cOftsi**drrable profit,, from the alms which the charity of the faithful bei.
z stowed:







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 2$


pellation, is a province of the Venetian state, and the feat of thelittle republic of Ragusa. The inland parts have assumed the Scia-vonian names of Bosnia and Croatia; the latter obeys an Austriangovernor, the former a Turkisti pasha; but the whole country isstill infested by tribes of barbarians, whose savage independencedescribes the doubtful limit of the Christian and Mahometanpower '*.
After the Danube had received the waters of the Teyss and the ^æfiaand;Save, it acquired, at least, among the Greeks, the name of Ister '\It formerly divided Mæsia and Dacia, the latter of which, as wehave already seen, was a conquest of Trajan, and the only pro­vince beyond the river. If we inquire into the present state of thosecountries, we shall find that, on the left hand of the Danube,Temeswar and Transylvania are annexed, after many revolutions,to the crown of Hungary; whilst the principalities of Moldavia andWalachia acknowledge the supremacy of the Ottoman Porte. Onthe right hand of the Danube, Mæsia, which, during the middleages, was broken into the barbarian kingdoms of Servia and Bul­garia, is again united in Turkish flavery.
The appellation of Roumelia, which is still bestowed by the Thrace, Ma-Turks on the extensive countries of Thrace, Macedonia, and Greece* «doniaand
'Greece.
preserves the memory of their ancient state under the Romanempire. In the time of the Antonines, the martial Thrace,from the mountains of Haemus and Rhodope, to the Bosphorus andthe Hellespont, had assumed the form of a province. Notwith­standing the change of masters and of religion, the new city of.Rome, which Gonstantine founded on the banks of the Bosphorus,has ever since remained the capital of a great monarchy. TheKingdom of Macedonia, that, under the reign of Alexander, had.given laws to Asia, derived more solid advantages from the policyof the two Philips; and with its dependencies of Epirus aod;Theffaly, extended from the Ægean to the Ionian sea. Whem


1 war







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRL i


to the number of about eighty thousand. But as neither reason*nor enthusiasm could have guided so tumultuary- an aflembly, itwas reduced, by successive operations, to forty thousand;, to fourthousand, to four hundred, to forty, and at last to seven Magi,the most respected for their learning and piety. One of these,Erdaviraph, a young but holy prelate, received from the handsof his brethren, three cups of soporiferous wine. He drank themoff, and instantly fell into a long and profound sleep. As soonas he waked, he related to the king and to the believing multi­tude, his journey to Heaven, and his intimate conferences with theDeity. Every doubt was silenced by this supernatural evidence»and the articles of the faith of Zoroaster were fixed with equalauthority and precision 9. A short delineation of that celebratedsystem will be found useful, not only to display the character of thePersian nation, but to illustrate many of their most important trans­actions, both in peace and war, with the Roman empire io.
The ereat and fundamental article of the system, was the ce- P,ersian **■lebrated doctrine of the two principles, a bold and injudicious principles,attempt of Eastern philosophy to reconcile the existence of moraland physical evil, with the attributes of a beneficent Creator andgovernor of the world. The first and original Being, in whom, orby whom, the universe exists, is denominated in the writingsof Zoroaster, Time without bounds; but it must be confessed, thatthis infinite substance seems rather a metaphysical abstraction of themind, than a real object endowed with self-consciousness, or possessedof moral perfections. From either the blind, or the intelligentoperation of this infinite Time, which bears but too near an affinitywith the chaos of the Greeks, the two secondary but active prin­ciples of the universe, were from all eternity produced, Ormusdand Ahriman, each of them possessed of the powers of creation, buteach disposed, by his invariable nature, to exercise them with dif­ferent designs. The principle of good is eternally absorbed in light;
D d z the







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


tine. The ideas of inheritance and succession are so very familiar,that the generality of mankind consider them as founded, not only inreason, but in nature itself. Our imagination readily transfers the fameprinciples from private property to public dominion : and whenever avirtuous father leaves behind him a son whose merit seems to justifythe esteem, or even the hopes, of the people, the joint influence ofprejudice and of affection operates with irresistible weight. Theflower of the western armies had followed Constantius into Britain,,and the national troops were reinforced by a numerous body ofAlemanni, who obeyed the orders of Crocus, one of their hereditarychieftains IS. The opinion of their own importance, and the as­surance that Britain, Gaul, and Spain would acquiesce in their no­mination, were diligently inculcated to the legions by the adherentsof Constantine. The soldiers were asked, Whether they could hesi­tate a moment between the honour of placing at their head theworthy son of their beloved emperor, and the ignominy of tamelyexpecting the arrival of some obscure stranger on whom it mightplease the sovereign of Asia to bestow the armies and provinces ofthe West. It was insinuated to them, that gratitude and liberalityheld a distinguished place among the virtues of Constantine; nordid that artful prince shew himself to the troops, till they wereprepared to salute him with the names of Augustus and Emperor.The throne was the object of his desires; and had he been less ac­tuated by ambition, it was his only means of safety. He was wellacquainted with the character and sentiments of Galerius, and suffi­ciently apprized, that if he wished to live he must determine toreign. The decent and even obstinate resistance which he chose toaffect l6, was contrived to justify his usurpation; nor did he yieldto the acclamations of the army, till he had provided the propermaterials for a letter, which he immediately dispatched to the em­peror of the East. Constantine informed him of the melancholyevent of his father's death, modestly asserted his natural claim to
the







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE, 4-


■


"beasts in the amphitheatre. The virgin's declaration that she"had been carried away with her own consent, instead of saving"her lover, exposed her to share his fate. The duty of a public"prosecution was intrusted to the parents of the guilty or unfor-w tunate maid; and if the sentiments of Nature prevailed on them** to dissemble the injury, and to repair by a subsequent marriage theu honour of their family, they were themselves punished by exile and"confiscation. The slaves, whether male or female, who were con-** victed of having been accessary to the rape or seduction, were burnt** alive, or put to death by the ingenious torture of pouring down their"throats a quantity of melted lead. As the crime was of a public"species, the accusation was permitted even to strangers. The"commencement of the action was not limited to any term of"years, and the consequences of the sentence were extended to the"innocent offspring of such an irregular union 9S." But wheneverthe offence inspires less horror than the punishment, the rigour ofpenal law is obliged to give way to the common feelings of man­kind. The most odious parts of this edict were softened or re­pealed in the subsequent reigns 96; and even Constantine himselfvery frequently alleviated by partial acts of mercy the stern tem­per of his general institutions. Such, indeed, was the singular hu­mour of that emperor, who shewed himself as indulgent, and evenremiss, in the execution of his laws, as he was severe, and evencruel, in the enacting of them. • It is scarcely possible to observe a.more decisive symptom of weakness, either in the character of theprince, or in the constitution of the government97.
The civil administration was sometimes interrupted by the mili- The Gothictary defence of the empire. Crispus, a youth of the most amiable A.b. 322.character, who had received with the title of Cæsar the commandof the Rhine, distinguished his conduct, as well as valour, in severalvictories over the Franks and Alemanni; and taught the barbariansof that frontier to dread the eldest son of Constantine, and the
Vol. I. L 1 1 grandson







OCR Output








NOTES ON THE X7 FOURTH CHAPTER.


ever, to upwards of five and twenty hundred thou*sand pounds; Ter millics.
[23] Dio, 1. Ixxii. p. 12, 13. Herodian, 1. i.p. 29. Hist. August, p. ;z. These baths weresituated near the Pcrta Capena. See Nardini RomaAntica, p. 79.
[24] Hist. August, p. 48.
[25] Herodian, I. i. p. z8. Dio, I. Ixxii. p.iz 15. The latter says, that two thousand personsdied every day at Rome, during a considerablelength of time.
[26] Tuncque primum tres pnefecti prætoriofuere: inter quos libertinus. From some remainsof modesty, Cleander declined the title, whilst heassumed the powers,, of Prætorian Præfect. As theother freedmen were styled, from their several de­partments a rationibni, ab epistolis; Cleandercalled himself a pugione, as intrusted with the de­fence of his master's person. Salmasius and Cafau-bon seem to have talked very idly upon this passage.
[27] or tm; tto?wii){ w/foi rfanwrai. Herodian,1, i. p. 31. It is doubtful whether he means theprætorian infantry, or the cohortes urbanæ, a bodyof six thousand men, but whose rank and disciplinewere not equal to their numbers. Neither Tille-ment nor Wotton. chuse to decide this question.
[2a] Dion Caflius, 1. Ixxii. p. 1*1.5. Herodian,1. i. p. 32. Hist. August, p. 48..
[29] Sororibus fuis constapratis. Ipfas concu-binas suas sub occulis fuis stuprari jubebat. Necirruentium in fe juvenum carebat infamia, omni-parte corporis atque ore in sexum utrumque pol-lutus. Hist. Aug. p. 47.
[30] The African lions, when pressed by hun­ger, infested the open villages and cultivated,country; and they infested them with impunity.The Royal beast was reserved for the pleasures of theemperor and the capital; and the unfortunatepeasant, who killed one of them, though in his own-defence, incurred a very heavy penalty. Thisextraordinary game law was mitigated by Honorius,and finally repealed by Justinian. Theodof. torn,v. p. 92, et Comment. Gothofred.
[31] Spanheim de Numisinat. Dissert, xii. torn.iL p. 493.


[32] Dio, I. Ixxii. p. 1216. Hist. August.
p. 49. '. <j
[33l The ostrich's neck is three feet long, andcomposed of seventeen vertebra;. See Buffon Hist.Naturelle.
[34] Commodus killed a camelopardalis orGiraffe, (Dio, 1 Ixxii. p. iati.) the tallest, the mostgentle, and the most useless of the large qusdrtr-peds. This singular animal, a native only of theinterior parts of Africa, has not been seen in Eu­rope since the revival of letters, and though M.de Buffon (Hist. Naturelle, torn, jtiii ) has endearvoured to describe, he has not ventured to delineate,
the Giraffe.
■ ,.VjVi .<:-.nmt 'J £ '< '«» .1
[35] Herodian, 1. V. p. 37. Hist. August, p. 5 o.
[36] The virtuous, and even the wife princes;forbade the senators and knights to embrace thisscandalous profession, under pain of infamy, orwhat was more dreaded by those profligate wrttchesjof exile. The tyrants allured them to dishonourby threats and rewards. Nero once produced, inthe Arena, forty senators and sixty knights. Lip-sius Saturnalia, 1. ii. c. 2. He has happily cor­rected a passage of Suetonius, in Nerone, c. 1 2.
[37] Lipsius, 1. ii. c. 7, 8. Juvenal in the eighthsatire gives a picturesque description of this com-,bat. i
[38] Hist. August, p. 50. Dio, 1. hxii. p. I2zcHe received, for each time, duiesy about 8coc 1.sterling.
[39] Victor tells us that Commodus only allowedhis antagonists a leaden weapon, dreading most pro­bably the consequences cf their despair.
[40] They were obliged to repeat six hundredand twenty-six times, Panto sirft of the Secutors, Sec,.
[41] Dio, 1. Ixxii. p. 1221. He speaks of his.own baseness and danger.
[42] He mixed however some prudence with his-courage, and passed the greatest part of his time in acountry retirement; alleging his advanced age,and the weakness of his eyes. "1 never saw himin the senate, says Dio, except during the shortreign of Pertinax." All his infirmities had sud­


deni/.







OCR Output








OF T.HE ROMAN EMPIRE. 215


1


he had every where opposed the invaders in person; and in citherfortune, had united with the ablest conduct the most undauntedresolution. But in several obstinate engagements against the vete­ran legions of Rome, the Persian monarch had lost the flower of histroops. Even his victories had weakened his power. The favour­able opportunities of the absence of Alexander, and of the confu­sions that followed that emperor's death, presented themselves irevain to his ambition. Instead of expelling the Romans, as he pre­tended, from the continent of Asia, he found himself unable towrest from their hands the little province of Mesopotamia S*.
The reign of Artaxerxes, which from the last defeat of the Par- Character and
. maxims of
thians lasted only fourteen years, forms a memorable æra in the Artaxerxes.history of the East and even in that of Rome. His character seems- A' D* 2+°"to have been marked by those bold and commanding features, tha*generally distinguish the princes who conquer, from those whoinherit, an empire. Till the last period of the Persian monarchy,,his code of laws was respected as the ground-work of their civil andreligious policy53. Several of his sayings are preserved. One ofthem in particular discovers a deep insight into the constitution ofgovernment. " The authority of the prince,'' said Artaxerxes, " must'* be defended by a military force; that force can only be main-u tained by taxes; all taxes must, at last, fall upon agriculture; and'* agriculture can never flourish except under the protection of"justice and moderation JV Artaxerxes bequeathed his new em­pire, and his ambitious designs against the Romans, to Sapor, a sonnot unworthy of his great father; but those designs were tooextensive for the power of Persia, and served only to involve bothnations in a long series of destructive wars and reciprocal calamities.
The Persians, long since civilized and corrupted, were very far Militaryfrom possessing the martial independence, and the intrepid hardi-ness, both of mind and body, which have rendered the northernbarbarians masters of the world. The science of war, that con­stituted the more rational force of Greece and Rome, as it now does8 of







OCR Output








526 TI*E DECLINE AND FALL


gratitude for temporal benefits alone, rejected the inestimable presentof life and immortality, which was offered to mankind by Jesus ofNazareth. His mild constancy in the midst of cruel and voluntarysufferings, his universal benevolence, and the sublime simplicity of hisactions and character, were insufficient, in the opinion of thosecarnal men, to compensate for the want of fame, of empire, andof success; and whilst they refused to acknowledge his stupen­dous triumph over the powers of darkness and of the grave, theymisrepresented, or they insulted, the equivocal birth, wanderinglife, and ignominious death, of the divine Author of Christianity "."andafkm1 The personal guilt which every Christian had contracted, in thuspre-biies of the ferring his private sentiment to the national religion, was aggravated in
Christians ox
considered as a very high degree by the number and union or the criminals. It is wellconspiracy!" known, and has been already observed, that Roman policy viewedwith the utmost jealousy and distrust any association among its sub-:jects; and that the privileges of private corporations, though formedfor the most harmless or beneficial purposes, were bestowed with avery sparing hand The religious assemblies of the Christians,who had separated themselves from the public worstiip, appeared ofa much less innocent nature: they were illegal in their principle,and in their consequences might become dangerous; nor were theemperors conscious that they violated the laws of justice, when, forthe peace of society, they prohibited those secret and sometimes noc­turnal meetings The pious disobedience of the Christians madetheir conduct, or perhaps their designs, appear in a much moreserious and criminal light; and the Roman princes, who might per­haps have suffered themselves to be disarmed by a ready submission,deeming their honour concerned in the execution of their com­mands, sometimes attempted, by rigorous punishments, to sub­due this independent spirit, which boldly acknowledged an au­thority superiour to that of the magistrate. The extent and du­ration of this spiritual conspiracy seemed to render it every daymore deserving of his animadversion. We have already seen that
the







OCR Output








NOTES ON THE THIRD CHAPTER. xiii


ninus, i. 16, Hist. August, p. 20. 21. Julianin Cæsar.
[45] The enemies of Marcus charged him withhypocrisy, and with a want of that simplicitywhich distinguished Pius and even Verus (Hist.Aug. 6. 34J. This suspicion, unjust as it was, mayserve to account for the superior applause bestowedupon personal qualifications, in preference to thesocial virtues. Even Marcus Antoninus has beencalled a hypocrite; but the wildest scepticism neverinsinuated that Cæsar might poslibly be a coward,or Tully a fool. Wit and valour are qualificationsmore easily ascertained, than humanity or the loveof justice,
[46] Tacitus has characterized, in a few words, theprinciple of the portico: Doctores sapientiæ secutusest, qui sola bona qux honesta, mala tantum quæturpia; potentiam nobiliratem cæteraque extra ani-mum neque bonis neque malis adnumerant. Tacit.Hist. iv. j.
[47] Before he went on the second expeditionagainst the Germans, he read lectures of philosophyto the Roman people, during three days. He hadalready done the fame in the cities of Greece andAsia. Hist. August, in Caflio, c. 3.
[48] Dio, 1. lxxi. p. 1190. Hist. August, inAvid. Caflio.
[49] Hist. August, in Marc. Antonin. c. 18.
[50] Vitellius consumed in mere eating, at leastfix millions of our money, in about seven months.It is not easy to express his vices with dignity, oreven decency. Tacitus fairly calls him a hog; butit is by substituting to a coarse word a very fineimage. "At Vitellius, nrnbraculis hortorum ab-"ditus, ut igt&va stimuli a, qui bus si cibum sug-*' gerasjaceattorpentque, præterita, instantia, fu-"tura, pari oblivione dimiserat. Atque ilium"nemore Aricino dcsidem et marcentem, &c."Tacit. Hist. iii. 36. ii. 95-. Sueton. in Vitell. c. 13.Dio Caflius^ L lxv.' p.. 1062.
[51] The execution of Helvidius Priscus, andof the virtuous Eponina, disgraced the reign osVespasian.
[52] Voyage de Chardin en Perse, voL iii.p. 293.
6


[5 3 J The practice of raising slaves to the greatoffices of state is still more common among theTurks than among the Persians. The miserablecountries of Georgia and Circaffia supply rulers tothe greatest part of the east.
[54] Chardin fays, that European travellers havediffused among the Persians some ideas of the free­dom and mildness of our government. Theyhave done them a very ill office.
[55] They alleged the example of Scipio andCato. (Tacit. Annal. iii. 66.) Marcellus Epriusand Crifpus Vibius had acquired two millions anda half under Nero. Their wealth, which aggravatedtheir crimes, protected them under Vespasian. SecTacit. Hist. iv. 43. Dialog, de Orator, c. 8.For one accusation, Regulus, the just object ofPliny's satire, received from the senate the consularornaments, and a present of sixty thousand pounds.
[56] The crime of majtsty was formerly a trea­sonable offence against the Roman people. As tri­bunes of the people, Augustus and Tiberius ap­plied it to their own persons, and extended it to aninfinite latitude.
[57] After the virtuous and unfortunate widowof Germanicus had been put to death, Tiberius-received the thanks of the senate for his clemency.She had not been publickly strangled; nor was thebody drawn with a hook to the Gemoniæ, wherethose of common malefactors were exposed. SeeTacit. Annal. vi. 25. Sueton. in Tiberio, c. 53,
[58] Seriphus was a small rocky island in theÆgean Sea, the inhabitants of which were despisedfor their ignorance and obscurity. The place ofOvid's exile is well known, by his just, but un­manly lamentations. It should seem, that he onlyreceived an order to leave Rome in so many days,and to transport himself to TOmi. Guards andgaolers were unnecessary.
[59] Under Tiberius, a Roman knight at­tempted to fly to the Parthians. He was stopt inthe Streights of t>icily;. but so little danger didthere appear in the example, that the most jealousof tyrants disdained to punisli it. Tacit. Annal.vi. 14.
[60] Cicero ad Familiares, iv. 7.
NOTES.







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. i$?


nation the name of Geta was mentioned with decency, and he re­ceived the funeral honours of a Roman emperor *+. Posterity, inpity to his misfortune, has cast a veil over his vices. We considerthat young prince as the innocent victim of his brother's ambition,without recollecting that he himself wanted power rather than in­clination to consummate the same attempts of revenge and murder.
The crime went not unpunished. Neither business, nor pleasure, Remorse and
cruelty of
nor flattery, could defend Caracalla from the stings of a guilty con- Caracalia.science; and he confessed, in the anguish of a tortured mind, thathis disordered fancy often beheld the angry forms of his fatherand his brother rising into life, to threaten and upbraid him,s.The consciousness of his crime should have induced him to convincemankind, by the virtues of his reign, that the bloody deed had beenthe involuntary effect of fatal necessity. But the repentance of Cara-calla only prompted him to remove from the world whatever couldremind him of his guilt, or recall the memory of his murdered bro­ther. On his return from the senate to the palace, he found hismother in the company of several noble matrons, weeping over theuntimely fate of her younger son. The jealous emperor threatenedthem with instant death; the sentence was executed against Fadilla,the last remaining daughter of the emperor Marcus; and even theafflicted Julia was obliged to silence her lamentations, to suppressher sighs, and to receive the assassin with smiles of joy and appro­bation. It was computed that, under the vague appellation of thefriends of Geta, above twenty thousand persons of both sexes suf-.fered death. His guards and freedmen, the ministers of his seri­ous business, and the companions of his looser hours, those who byhis interest had been promoted to any commands in the army orprovinces, with the long-connected chain of their dependants, wereincluded in the proscription; which endeavoured to reach every onewho had maintained the smallest correspondence with Geta, wholamented his death, or who even mentioned his name HelviusVol. I. T Pertinax,







OCR Output








0:F THE ROMAN EMPIRE. $0$.


adorned' with all that could attract the curiosity, the wonder* andthe veneration of the people. In their actual disposition, as' theywere almost disengaged from their artificial prejudices, but equallysusceptible and desirous of a devout attachment; an object fftucfo'less deserving would have- been sufficient to fill the vacant place intheir hearts, and to gratify the uncertain eagerness of their passions.Those who are inclined to pursue this reflection, instead of viewingWith astonishment the rapid progress' of Christianity, will perhapsbe surprised that its success was1 not still more rapid and' still moreuniversal.
It has been observed, with truth as well as- propriety, that the as well as the
... peace and
conquests of Rome prepared and facilitated those of Christianity, union of theIn the second chapter of this work we have attempted to explain pire?3"Cmin what manner the most civilized provinces of Europe, Asia,and Africa, were united under the dominion of one sovereign,and gradually connected by the most intimate ties of laws, of man­ners, and of language. The Jews of Palestine, who had fondlyexpected a temporal deliverer, gave so cold a reception .to the mi­racles of the divine prophet, that it was found unnecessary topublish, or at least to preserve, any Hebrew gospel '5°. The au­thentic histories of the actions of Christ were composed in theGreek language, at a considerable distance from Jerusalem, andafter the Gentile converts were grown extremely numerous"'.As soon as those histories were translated into the Latin tongue,they were perfectly intelligible to all the subjects of Rome, exceptingonly to the peasants of Syria and Egypt, for whose benefit par­ticular versions were afterwards made. The public highways,which had been- constructed for the use of the legions, opened aneasy passage for the Christian missionaries from Damascus to Corinth,and from Italy to the extremity of Spain or Britain] nor did thosespiritual conquerors encounter any of the obstacles which usuallyretard or prevent the introduction of a foreign religion-into aVol. L T t t distant







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AND FALL


to the throne, and his abilities were employed to supplant, not toserve, his indulgent master. The minds of the soldiers were irri­tated by an artificial scarcity, created by bis contrivance in thecamp; and the distress of the army was attributed to the youth andincapacity of the prince. It is not in our power to trace the suc­cessive steps of the secret conspiracy and open sedition, which wereat length fatal to Gordian. A sepulchral monument was erected
Murder of 6 r
Gordian. to his memory on the spot where he was killed, near the confluxMarch. °f tne Euphrates with the little river Aboras 5*. The fortunatePhilip, raised to the empire by the votes of the soldiers, found aready obedience from the senate and the provinces "'.Form of ^e cannot f°tD€ar transcribing the ingenious, though somewhat
military re. fanciful description, which a celebrated writer of our own times
public. .
has traced of the military government of the Roman empire.*< What ist that age was called the Roman empire, was only ann irregular republic, not unHke the Aristocracy51 of Algiers", where"the militia, possessed of the sovereignty, creates and deposes a
magistrate, who is styled a Dey. Perhaps, indeed, it may be laid"* down as a general rule, that a military government is, in some*' respects, more republican than monarchical. Nor can it be said**■ that the soldiers only partook of the government by their dis-41 obedience and rebellions. The speeches made to them by the"emperors, were they not at length of the fame nature as those4* formerly pronounced to the people by the consuls and" the tri-*■ bunes? And although the armies had no regular place or forms**■ of assembly; though their debates were short, their action sudden,** and their resolves seldom the result of cool reflection, did they not*• dispose, with absolute sway, of the public fortune? What was
the emperor, except the minister of a violent government elected44 for the private benefit of the soldiers?
"When the army had elected Philip, who was Prætorian** prefect* to the third Gordian j the latter demanded, that he6 «■ might







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


All these cities wire connected with each other, and with thecapital by- the -public highways, which issuing from the forum ofRome, traversed Italy, pervaded the provinces, and were termi-mated only by the frontiers of the empire/ If-we carefully tracethe distance from the wall of Antoninus to Rome, and from thenceto Jerusalem, it will be found that the great chain of communi­cation, from the north-west to the south-east point of the empire,was drawn out to the length of four thousand and eighty Romanmiles 8J. The public roads were accurately divided by mile-stones,and ran in a direct line from one city to another, with very littlerespect for the obstacles either of nature or private property.Mountains were perforated, and bold arches thrown over the broad­est and most rapid streams 86. The middle part of the road wasraised into a terrace which commanded the adjacent country, con­sisted of several strata of sand, gravel, and cement, and was pavedwith large stones, or in some places, near the capital, with mar­ble *7. Such was the solid construction of the Roman highways,whose firmness has not entirely yielded to the effort of fifteencenturies. They united the subjects of the most distant provincesby an easy and familiar intercourse; but their primary object hadbeen to facilitate the marches of the legions; nor was any countryconsidered as completely subdued, till it had been rendered, in all itsparts, pervious to the arms and authority of the conqueror.The advantage of receiving the earliest intelligence, and of con­veying their orders with celerity, induced the emperors to establishthroughout their extensive dominions, the regular institution ofposts 88: Houses were every where erected at the distance only offive or six miles; each of them was constantly provided with fortyhorses, and by the help of these relays, it was easy to travel adhundred miles in a day along the .Roman roads 8*. The use ofthe; posts uwas allowed .to those who claimed ;it by an Imiperial mandate; but though originally intended for the public
H 2 service,







OCR Output








282 THE DECLINE AND FALL


tiom


tion, by the respectful conduct which he always maintained to­wards the son of Valerian. With the general applause of theRomans and the consent of Gallienus, the senate conferred thetitle of Augustus on the brave Palmyrenian; and seemed to intrusthim with the government of the East, which he already possessed,in so independent a manner, that, like a private succession, he be­queathed it to his illustrious widow Zcnobia164.Fatal conse- The rapiJ and perpetual transitions from the cottage to the
quences of t a * o
tUese usurpa- throne, and from the throne to the grave, might have amused anindifferent philosopher j were it possible for a philosopher to remainindifferent amidst the general calamities of human kind. Theelection of these precarious emperors, their power and their death,were equally destructive to their subjects and adherents. The priceof their fatal elevation was instantly discharged to the troops, by animmense donative, drawn from the bowels of the exhausted people-However virtuous was their character, however pure their inten­tions, they found themselves reduced to the hard necessity of support­ing their usurpation by frequent acts of rapine and cruelty. Whenthey fell, they involved armies and provinces in their fall. There isstill extant a most savage mandate from Gallienus to one of hisministers, after the suppression of Ingenuus, who had assumed thepurple in Illyricum. "It is not enough," fays that soft but in­human prince, " that you exterminate such, as have appeared inM arms : the chance of battle might have served me as effectually..** The male sex of every age must be extirpated; provided that, in"the execution of the children and old men, you can contrive*' means to save our reputation. Let every one die who has droptu an expression, who has entertained a thought against me, against"me, the son of Valerian, the father and brother of so many"princes l6s. Remember that Ingenuus was made emperor: tear,"kill, hew in pieces. I write to you with my own hand, and«' would inspire you with my own feelings •66."' Whilst the public
4 forces







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 455


of God. By his, expiatory sacrifice, the imperfect sacrifices of thetemple were at once consummated and abolished. The ceremoniallaw, which consisted only of types and figures, was succeeded by apure and spiritual worship, equally adapted to all climates as wellas,to every condition of mankind; and to the initiation of blood,was substituted a more harmless initiation of water. The promise ofdivine favour, instead of being partially confined to the posterity ofAbraham, was universally proposed to the freeman and to the slave,to the Greek and to the barbarian, to the Jew and to the Gentile.Every privilege that could raise the proselyte from earth to Heaven,that could exalt his devotion, secure his happiness, or even gratifythat secret pride, which, under the semblance of devotion, insinuatesitself into the human heart, was still reserved for the members ofthe Christian church; but at the fame time all mankind was per­mitted, and even solicited, to accept the glorious distinction, whichwas not only proffered as a favour, but imposed as an obligation.It became the most sacred duty of a new convert to diffuse among .his friends and relations the inestimable blefling which he had re­ceived, and to warn them against a refusal that would be severelypuniflied as a criminal disobedience to the will of a benevolent butall-powerful deity.
The enfranchisement of the church from the bonds of the syna- Obstinacyandgogue, was a work however of some time and of some difficulty. beteWnjfThe Jewish converts, who acknowledged Jesus in the character of Jews*the Messiah foretold by their ancient oracles, respected him as aprophetic teacher of virtue and religion; but they obstinately ad­hered to the ceremonies of their ancestors, and were desirous ofimposing them on the Gentiles, who continually augmented thenumber of believers. These Judaismg Christians seem to have ar­gued with some degree of plausibility from the divine origin of theMosaic law, and from the immutable perfections of its great author.They affirmed, that if the Being, who is the fame through all
eternity.







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AND FALL


the other, for its singularity; the former for its singular benevo­lence, the latter for its excessive severity, i. 1 he horrid practice,so familiar to the ancients, of exposing or murdering their new­born infants, was become every day more frequent in the provinces,and especially in Italy. It was the effect of distress; and the dis­tress was principally occasioned by the intolerable burden of taxes,and by the vexatious as well as cruel prosecutions of the officers ofthe revenue against their insolvent debtors. The less opulent or lessindustrious part of mankind, instead of rejoicing in an increase offamily, deemed it an act of paternal tenderness to release their chil­dren from the impending miseries of a life which they themselveswere unable to support. The humanity of Constantine, moved,perhaps, by some recent and remarkable instances of despair, en­gaged him to address an edict to all the cities of Italy, and after­wards of Africa, directing immediate and sufficient relief to be givento those parents who should produce, before the magistrates, thechildren whom their own poverty would not allow them to educate.But the promise was too liberal, and the provision too vague, toeffect any general or permanent benefit9I. The law, though itmay merit some praise, served rather to display than to alleviate thepublic distress. It still remains an authentic monument to contradictand confound those venal orators, who were too well satisfied withtheir own situation to discover either vice or misery under the govern­ment of a generous sovereign 9\ 2. The laws of Constantineagainst rapes were dictated with very little indulgence, for the mostamiable weaknesses of human nature; since the description of thatcrime was applied not only to the brutal violence which compelled,but even to the gentle seduction which might persuade, an un­married woman, under the age of twenty-five, to leave the houseof her parents. "The successful ravisher was punished with*' death; and as if simple death was inadequate to the enormity** of his guilt, he was either burnt alive, or torn in pieces by wild
"beasts







OCR Output








ii NOTES ON THE FIRST CHAPTER.


[15] Herodotoi, 1. iv. c 94. Julian in theCesars, with Spanheim's observations.
[16] Plin. Epist. viii. 9.
[17] Dion Caflius, 1. lxviii. p. 1123. IIJI. Ju­lian in Cassaribus. Eutropius, viii. 2. 6. Aurclin*Victor, and Victor in Epitome.
[18] See a Memoir of M Danville, on the Pro­vince of Dacia, in the Academic des Inscriptions,torn, xxviii. p. 444—,}63.
[19] Trajan's sentiments are represented in a veryjust and lively manner in the Cæsars of Julian.
[2©] Eutropius and SextusRufus have endeavour­ed to perpetuate the illusion. See a very sensibledissertation of M. Freret in the Academic des In­scriptions, torn, xxi- p. 5 5.
[21] Dion Caflius, L lxviii; and the Abbrevia-tors.
[22] OviJ Fast. 1. ii. ver. 667. See Livy and Di-onysius of Halicarnassus, under the reign of Tar-quin.
[23] St. Augustine is highly delighted with theproof of the weakness of Terminus, and the vanityof the Augurs. See De Civitate Dei, iv. 29.
[24] See the Augustan History, p. 5. Jerome'sChronicle, and all the Epitomizers It is some­what surprifirg, that this memorable event (houldbe omitted by Dion, or rather by Xephilin.
[2;] Dion, 1. Kix. p. 1158. Hist. August,p. 5. i. If all our historians were lost, medals, in­scriptions, and other monuments, would be suffi­cient to record the travels of Hadrian,
[26] See the Augustan History and the Epitomes.
[27] We must, however, remember, that, in thetime of Hadrian, a rebellion of the Jews raged withreligious fury, though only in a single province:Pausanhs (1. viii, c. 43.) mentions two necessaryand successful wars, conducted by the generals ofPius. 1st, Against the wandering Moors, who weredriven into the solitudes of Atlas. 2d, Againstthe Brigantrs of Britain, who had invaded theRoman province, Both these wars (with severalother hostilities) are mentioned in the AugustanHistory, p. 19.


[28] Appian of Alexandria, in the preface tohis History of the Roman Wars.
[29] Dion, 1. Ixxi. Hist. August, in Mar­co. The Parthian victories gave birth to acrowd of contemptible historians, whose memoryhas been rescued from oblivion, and exposed to ri­dicule, in a very lively piece of criticism of Lucian.
[30] The poorest rank of soldiers possessed aboveforty pounds sterling, (Dionyf Halicarn. iv. 17.)a very high qualification, at a time when moneywas so scarce, that an ounce of silver was equivalentto seventy pound weight of brass. The populace,excluded by the ancient constitution, were indiscri­minately admitted by Marius. See Sallust. de Bell.Jugurth. c. 91.
[31] Cæsar formed his legion Alauda, of Gaulsand strangers: but it was during the licence ofcivil war; and after the victory he gave them thefreedom of the city, for their reward.
[32] See Vegetius de Re Militari, I. i. c. 2—7.
[33] The oath of service and fidelity to theemperor, was annually renewed by the troops, 00the first of January.
1
[14] Tacitus calls the Roman Eagles, BellorumDeos. They were placed in a chapel in the camp,and with the other deities received the religiousworlhip of the troops.
. [3;] See Gronovins de Pecunia vetere, 1. iii.p. 120, Sec. The emperor Domitian raised theannual stipend of the legionaries, to twelve pieces ofgold, which, in his time, was equivalent to abou:ten of our guineas. This pay, somewhat higherthan our own, had been, and was afterwards gra­dually increased, according to the progress ofwealth and military government. After twentyyears service, the veteran received three thousanddenarii (about one hundred pounds sterling), or aproportionable allowance of land. The pay andadvantages of the guard were, in general, aboutdouble those of the legions.
[36] Exercitus ab Exercitande, Varo de LinguaLatina, 1. iv. Cicero in Tuscuian. 1. ii. 37. There isroom for a very interesting work, which might examinethe connexion between the languages and mannersof nations.
[37] Vegetius,







OCR Output








C O N T E N T S.


A. D. Page
Agreeable, but uncertain, -Hypothesis
concerning Odin - 294
Emigration of the Goths from Scandinavia
into Prussia - - ib.
■ from Prussia to the Ukraine 29;
The Gothic Nation increases in its March 296
Distinction of the Germans and Sarmatians 297
Description of the Ukraine - 298
The Goths invade the Roman Provinces ib.
150 Various Events of the Gothic War 299
25 i Decius revives the Office of Censor in the
Person of Valerius - 301
The Design impracticable, and without
Effect - - 302
Defeat and Death of Decius and his Son 303
251 Election of Gallus - - 304
252 Retreat of the Goth3 - 305
Gallus purchases Peace by the Payment
of an annual tribute - ib.
Popular Discontent - - ib.
Zj3 Victory and Revolt of Æmilianus 306
Gallus abandoned and stain - 307
Valerius revenges the Death of Gallus,
and is acknowledged Emperor ib.
Character of Valerian - - 308
2.53—268 General Misfortunes of the Reigns
of Valerian and Gallienus - ib.
Inroads of the Barbarians - 309
Origin and Confederacy of the Franks ib.
They invade Gaul, and ravage Spain 311
They pass over into Africa - 312
Origin and Renown of the Suevi ib.
A mixed Body of Suevi assume the Name
of Alemanni - - 313
Invade Gaul and Italy - - ib.
Are repulsed from Rome by the Senate
and People - - 314
The Senators excluded by Gallienus from
the military Service - ib.
Gallienus contracts an Alliance with the
Alemanni - - 315
Inroads of the Goths - ib.
Conquest of the Bosphorus by the Goths 316
The Goths acquire a naval Force 317
First naval Expedition of the Goths 3 1 8
The Goths besiege and take Trebizond ib.
The second Expeditiou of the Goths 319
3


A.D. Page
They plunder the Cities of Bythinia 320
Retreat of the Goths - 321
Third naval Expedition of the Goths ib.They pass the Bosphorus and the Hel­
lespont - - 322
Ravage Greece, and threaten Italy 313
Their Divisions and Retreat - ibs
Ruin of the Temple of Ephesus 324
Conduct of the Goths at Athens 325
Conquest of Armenia by the Persians 326
Valerian marches into the East 327
260 Is defeated and taken Prisoner by Sapor
King of Persia - - ib.
Sapor overruns Syria, Cilicia, and Cap-
padocia - - 328
Boldness and Success of Odenathus a-
gainst Sapor - - 330
Treatment of Valerian - 331'
Character and Administration of Gal­
lienus - - 332
The thirty Tyrants - - 333.
Their real Number was no more than
nineteen - - 334'
Character and Merit of the Tyrants ib.
Their obscure Birth - - 335
The Causes of their Rebellion - ib.
Their violent Deaths - - 336
Fatal Consequences of these Usurpations 337
Disorders of Sicily - - 338
Tumults of Alexandria - 339
Rebellion of the Isaurians - 340
Famine and Pestilence - 341.
Diminution of the human Species ib.


CHAP. XI.
Reign of Claudius.—Defeat of the Goths.—Victories, Triumphand Death of Aure-


lian.
A. D. Page
268 Aureolus invades Italy, is defeated and
besieged at Milan - 343
Death of Gallienus - - 345
Character and Elevation of the Emperor
Claudius - - ib.
268 Death of Aureolus - - 347


Clemency







OCR Output








NOTES ON THE ELEVENTH CHAPTER.


[j] On the death-of Gallienus, see TrebcHiusPollio in Hist. August, p. i2i. Zosimus, 1. i.^3. 37. Zonaras, I. xii. p. 634. Eutropius, ix. 1 f.Aareiius Victor in Bpicom. Victor in Cæsar. Ihave compared and blended them all, but havechiefly followed Aurelius Victor, who seems to havehad the best memoirs.
[3] Some supposed him -oddly enough to be rtbastard of the younger Gordian. Others took ad-vant?ge of the province of Dardania, to deduce hisorigin from Dardanas, and the ancient kings ofTroy.
[4] Noterta, a periodical and official dispatch■which the Emperors received from the frvmentariior agents dispersed through the provincts. Of thesewe may speak hereafter.
^5] Hist. August, p. 208. Gallienus describes theplate, vestments, &c. like a man, who loved and■understood those splendid trifles.
[6] Julian (Orat. i. p. 6 ) affirms that Claudiusacquired the empire in a just and even holy manner.But we may distrust the partiality of a kinsman.
[7] Hist. August, p. 203. There are some triflingdifferences concerning the circumstances of the lastdefeat and death of Aureolus.
[8] Aurelius Victor in Gallien. The peopleloudly prayed for the damnation of Gallienus. 1 hesenate decreed that his relations and servants shouldbe thrown down headlong from the Gemonianstairs. An obnoxious officer of the revenue had hiteyes torn out whilst under examination.
[9] Zonaras, I. xii. p. 137.
[10] Zonaras on this occasion mentions Posthu-mus; but the registers of the senate (Hist. August,p. 203.) prove that Tetricus was already emperorof the western provinces.
[11] The Augustan History mentions the smaller,Zonaras the larger, number; the lively fancy ofMontesquieu induced him to prefer the latter.
[12] Trebell. Pollio in Hist. August, p. 204.
[13] Hist. August, in Claod. Aurelian, et Prob.Zosimus, l.i. p. 38—42. Zonaras, 1. xii p. 638.


Aurel. Victor in Epitom. Victor Junior in Cæsar,Eutrop. ix. 11. Euseb. in Chron.
[14] According to Zonarai (L xii. p. 638.),Claudius, before his death, invested him with tbepurple; but this singular fact is rather contradictedthan confirmed by otiier writers.
[15] See the life of Claudius by Pollio, and theorations of Mamcrtinus, Eumenius, and Julian,See likewise the Cæsars ofjulian, p. 313. In Julian,it was not adulation, but superstition and ranity.
[16] Zosimus, 1. i. p. 42. Pollio (Hist. August,p. 207.) allows him virtues, and fays, that like Per-tinax he was killed by the licentious soldiers.According to Dexappus he died of a disease.
[17] Theoclius (as quoted in the AugustanHistory, p. 211.) affirms, that in one day he killed,with his own hand, forty-eight Sarmatians, and inseveral subsequent engagements nine hundred andfifty. This heroic valour was admired by the sol­diers, and celebrated in their rude songs, the bur­den of which was milk, mille, milk occidit.
[18] Acholius (ap. Hist. August, p. 213.) de­scribes the ceremony of the adoption, as it was per­formed at Byzantium, in the presence of the em­peror and his great Officers.
[19] Hist. August, p. 211. This laconic epistleis truly the work of a soldier; it abounds withmilitary phrases and words, some of which can­not be understood without difficulty. Ferra-mintasamiata is well explained by Salmasiot, Theformer of the words means all weapons of offence,and is contrasted with Anna, defensive armour.The latter signifies keen and well sharpened.'
[20] Zofim. I. i. p. 45.
[21] Dexippus (ap. Excerpta Legat. p. 12.) re­lates the whole transaction under the name of Van­dals. Aurelian married one of the Gothic ladiesto his general Bonosus, who was able to drink withthe Goths and discover their secrets. Hist. August,p. 247.
[22] Hist. August, p. 222. Eutrop. ix. 1;. SextusRufuks, c. 9. Lactantius de mortibus Pcrsccu-torura,. c. 9.
( 2 . t*3J The







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AND FALL


proper hours his palace was open to all his subjects, but the voiceof a crier was heard, as in the Eleufinian mysteries, pronouncing thefame salutary admonition; f Let none enter these holy walls, un-«* less he is conscious of a pUre and innocent mind 7VGeneral hap- Such an uniform tenour of life, which left not a moment for vice
"inels or the


Ionianworld.


or folly, is a better proof of the wisdom and justice of Alexander'sA. D. 222— government, than all the trifling details preserved in the compila-tion of Lampridius. Since the accession of Commodus the Romanworld had experienced, during a term of forty years, the successiveand various vices of four tyrants. From the death of Elagabalusit enjoyed an auspicious calm of thirteen years. The provinces,relieved from the oppressive taxes, invented by Caracalla and hispretended son, flourished in peace and prosperity, under the ad­ministration of magistrates, who were convinced by experience, thatto deserve the love of the subjects, was their best and only methodof obtaining the favour of their sovereign. While some gentlerestraints were imposed on the insolent luxury of the Roman peo-ple, the price of provisions, and the interest of money, were re­duced, by the paternal care of Alexander, whose prudent liberality,without distressing the industrious, supplied the wants and amuse­ments of the populace. The dignity, the freedom, the authorityof the senate was restored; and every virtuous senator might ap­proach the person of the emperor, without a fear, and without ablush.
Alexander re- The name of Antoninus, ennobled by the virtues of Pius andofsAntoninu* Marcus, had been communicated by adoption to the dissolute Ve-rus, and by descent to the cruel Commodus. It became the ho­nourable appellation of the sons of Severus, was bestowed on youngDiadumenianus, and at length prostituted to the infamy of thehigh priest of Emesa. Alexander, though pressed by the studied,and perhaps, sincere importunity of the senate, nobly refused theborrowed lustre of a name; whilst in his whole conduct he laboured.
to







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AND FALL


a great number of spectators; the patient was relieved by the poweror (kill of the exorcist, and the vanquished dæmon was heard toconfess, that he was one of the fabled gods of antiquity, who hadimpiously usurped the adoration of mankind 7\ But the miracu­lous cure of diseases of the most inveterate or even preternaturalkind, can no longer occasion any surprise, when we recollect, thatin the days of Irenæus, about the end of the second century, theresurrection of the dead was very far from being esteemed an un­common event; that the miracle was frequently performed on neces­sary occasions, by great fasting and the joint supplication of thechurch of the place, and that the persons thus restored to theirprayers, had lived afterwards among them many years "i. At sucha period, when faith could boast of so many wonderful victoriesover death, it seems difficult to account for the scepticism of thosephilosophers, who still rejected and derided the doctrine of the re­surrection. A noble Grecian had rested on this important groundthe whole controversy, and promised Theophilus, bishop of Antiochjthat if he could be gratified with the sight of a single person whohad been actually raised from the dead, he would immediately em­brace the Christian religion. It is somewhat remarkable, that theprelate of the first eastern church, however anxious for the con­version of his friend, thought proper to decline this fair and rea­sonable challenge ~6.
The miracles of the primitive church, after obtaining the sanc­tion of ages, have been lately attacked in a very free and in­genious inquiry77; which, though it has met with the mostfavourable reception from the Public, appears to have excited ageneral scandal among the divines of our own as well as of theother protestant churches of Europe7*. Our different sentiments ofthis controversy will be much less influenced by any particular argu­ments, than by our habits of study and reflection; and above all, bythe degree of the evidence which we have accustomed ourselves to re­


quire







OCR Output








NOTES ON THE Si: TEENTH CHAPTER. Ixxxi


F.mong the more learned catholics. They now re­quire, as a proof of sanctity and martyrdom, theletters B M, a viol full of red liquor, supposed tobe blood, or the figure of a palm-tree. But thetwo former signs are of little weight, and with re­gard to the last, it is observed by the critics, i. Thatthe figare, as it is called, of a palm, is perhaps acypress, and perhaps only a stop, the flourish of acomma used in the monumental inscriptions.2. That the palm was the symbol of victory amongthe Pagans. 3. That among the christians it servedas the emblem, not only of martyrdom, but in ge­neral of a joyful resurrection. See the epistle ofP. Mabillon, on the worship of unknown saints,and Muratori sopra le Antichita ltaliane, Dissertat.lviii.
[7?] As a specimen os these legends, we may besatisfied with io.coo christian soldiers crucified inone day, either by Trajan or Hadrian, on mountArarat. See Baronius ad Martyrologium Roma-num. Tillemont, Mem. Ecclesiast. torn. ii. partii. p. 438. and Geddes's Miscellanies, vol. ii. p.203. The abbreviation of Mil. which may sig­nify either soldiers or thousands, is said to have oc­casioned some extraordinary mistakes.
[74] Dionysius ap. Euseb. I. vi. c. 41, One ofthe seventeen was likewise accused of robbery.
[7;] The letters of Cyprian exhibit a very ca­rious and original picture, both of the man and ofthe times. See likewise the two lives of Cyprian,composed with equal accuracy, though with verydifferent views; the one by Le Clerc, (Bibliothe-que Universelle, torn. xii. p. 208—378.) the otherby Tillemont, Memoires Ecclesiastiqnes, torn. iv.part i. p. 76—459.
[76] See the polite but severe epistle of the clergyof Rome, to the bishop of Carthage (Cyprian Epist.8, 9.). Pontius labours with the greatest care anddiligence to justify his master against the generalcensure.
[77] In particular those of Dionysius of Alex­andria, and Gregory Thaumaturgus of Neo-Caesa-rea. See Euseb. Hist. Ecclesiast. 1. vi. c. 40. andMemoires de Tillemont, torn. iv. part ii. p. 685.
[78] See Cyprian, Epist. 16. and his life byPontius.Vol. I.


[79] We have an original life of Cyprian by thedeacon Pontius, the companion of his exile, andthe spectator of his death; and we likewise possessthe ancient proconsular acts of his martyrdom.These two relations are consistent with each other,, and with probability; and what is somewhat re­markable, they are both unsullied by any miracu­lous circumstances.
[80] It should seem that these were circular or­ders, sent at the same time to all the governors.Dionysius (ap. Euseb. I. vii. c. 11.) relates the historyof his own banishment from Alexandria, almost inthe same manner. But as he escaped and survivedthe persecution, we must account him either more, oras he considered it himself, lesj fortunate thanCyprian.
[Si] See Plin. Hist. Natur. v. 3. Cellarius, Geo-graph. Antiq. part iii. p. 96. Shaw's Travels, p.90.; and for the adjacent country, (which is ter­minated by Cape Bona, or the promontory of Mer­cury) l'Afrique de Marmot, torn. ii. p. 474. Thereare the remains of an aqueduct, near Curubis, orCurbis, at present altered into Gurbes; and Dr.Shaw read an inscription, which styles that city,Colonia Fulvia. The deacon Pontius (in Vit. Cy­prian, c. 12.) calls it " ApricUm et competententlocum, hofpitium pro voluntate secretum, et quic-quid apponi eis ante promissum est, qui regnum etjullitiam Dei quærunt."
[82] See Cyprian. Epistol. 77. Edit. Fell.
[83] Upon his conversion he had fold those gar­dens for the benefit of the poor. The indulgenceof God (most probably the liberality of some chris­tian friend) restored them to Cyprian. See Pontius,c. 15.
[84] When Cyprian, a twelvemonth before, wassent into exile, he dreamt that he mould be put todeath the next day. The event made it necessary toexplain that word, as signifying a year. Pontius,c. iz.
[85] Pontius (c. 15.) acknowledges that Cy­prian, with whom he supped, passed the nightcustodiu delicata. The Bishop exercised a last andvery proper act os jurisdiction, by [directing thatthe younger females, who watched in the street,should be removed from the dangers and tempta-1 tions







OCR Output








xg8 THE DECLINE AND FALL


chorus of twenty-seven youths, and as many virgins of noble fa­milies, and whose parents were both alive, implored the propitiousgods in the favour of the present, and the hope of the rising gene­ration; requesting, in religious hymns, that* according to the faithof their astcient oracled, they would still maintain the virtue, thefelicity, and the empire of the Roman people The magnificenceof Philip's shows and entertainments dazzled the eyes of the mul­titude. The devout were employed in the rites of superstition,whilst the reflecting few revolved in their anxious minds the pasthistory and the future fate of the empire.Decline ofthe Since Romulus, with a small band of shepherds and outlaws, for-Roman cm- jjggj himself Qn the hills near the Tyber, ten centuries had alreadyelapsed5*. During the four first ages, the Romans, in the laboriousschool of poverty, had acquired the virtues of war and government.By the vigorous exertion of those virtues, and by the assistance offortune, they had obtained, in the course of the three succeedingcenturies, an absolute empire over many countries of Europe, Asia,and Africa. The last three hundred years had been consumed inapparent prosperity and internal decline. The nation of soldiers,magistrates, and legiflators, who composed the thirty-five tribesof the Roman people, was dissolved into the common mass ofmankind, and confounded with the millions of servile provin­cials, who had received the name, without adopting the spiritof Romans. A mercenary army, levied among the subjects andbarbarians of the frontier, was the only order of men who pre­served and abused their independence. By their tumultuary elec­tion, a Syrian, a Goth, or an Arab, was exalted to the throne ofRome, and invested with despotic power over the conquests and overthe country of the Scipios. ""
The limits of the Roman empire still extended from the WesternOcean to the Tigris, and from Mount Atlas to the Rhine and theDanube. To th£ undiscerning eye of the vulgar, Philip appeared
a monarch







OCR Output








244 THE DECLINE AND FALL


by the senate and provinces. It is reported, that immediately afterhis reluctant acceptance of the title of Augustus, he had assuredPhilip by a private message, of his innocence and loyalty, solemnlyprotesting, that on his arrival in Italy, he would resign the imperialornaments and return to the condition of an obedient subject.His professions might be sincere. But in the situation where for­tune had placed him, it was scarcely possible that he could eitherforgive or be forgiven 3.^■"st'the" ^e emPeror L>ecius had employed a few months in the worksGoths. of peace and the administration of justice, when he was summoned'to the banks of the Danube by the invasion of the Goths. Thisis the first considerable occasion, in which history mentions thatgreat people, who afterwards broke the Roman power, sacked thecapitol, and reigned in Gaul, Spain, and Italy. So memorable wasthe part which they acted in the subversion of the Western empire,that the name of Goths, is frequently but inproperly used as ageneral appellation of rude and warlike barbarism.^hin of the jn the beginning of the sixth century, and after the conquest ofScandinavia. Italy, the Goths, in possession of present greatness, very naturallyindulged themselves in the prospect of past and of future glory. Theywished to preserve the memory of their ancestors, and to transmitto posterity their own atchievements. The principal minister of thecourt of Ravenna, the learned Cassiodorus, gratified the inclinationof the conquerors in a Gothic history, which consisted of twelvebooks, now reduced to the inperfect abridgment of Jornandes +.These writers passed with the most artful conciseness over the mis­fortunes of the nation, celebrated its successful valour, and adornedthe triumph with many Asiatic trophies, that more properly belongedto the people of Scythia. On the faith of ancient songs, theuncertain, but the only, memorials of barbarians, they deduced thefirst origin of the Goths, from the vast island, or peninsula, of Scan­dinavia 5. That extreme country of the North was not unknown
to­







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN. EMPIRE. i3i


I


obtained her hand*. Julia Domna (for that was her name) deservedall that the stars could promise her. She preserved to an advancedage the beauties of her person \ and united to a lively imagination,a firmness of mind, and strength of judgment, seldom bestowed onher sex. Her amiable qualities never made any deep impression onthe dark and jealous temper of her husband; but in her son's reign,me administered the principal, affairs of the empire, with a pru­dence, that supported his authority ; and with a moderation, thatsometimes corrected his wild extravagancies6. Julia applied herselfto letters and philosophy, with some success, and great reputation.She was the patroness of every art, and the friend of every man ofgenius 7. -The grateful flattery of the learned has celebrated hermerit j but if we may credit the scandal of ancient history, chastitywas not the favourite virtue of the empress Julia 8. . .'
Two sons, Caracalla 9 and Geta, were the fruit of this marriage, Their twoand the destined heirs of the empire. The fond hopes of the father, Genu*"*and of the Roman world, were soon disappointed by these vainyouths, who displayed the indolent security of hereditary princes %.and a presumption that fortune would supply the place of merit andapplication. Without any emulation of virtue or talents, they dis­covered, almost from their infancy, a fixed and implacable antipa­thy for each other. Their aversion, confirmed by years, and so- Their mutual,mented by their interested favourites, broke out in childish, and «ch other-gradually in more serious competitions ; and at length divided thetheatre, the circus, and the court, into two factions; actuated bythe hopes and fears of their respective leaders. The prudent em­peror endeavoured, by every expedient of advice and authority, to>allay this growing animosity. The unhappy discord of his sonsclouded all his prospects, and threatened to overturn a throne raisedwith so much labour, cemented with so much blood, and guarded:with every defence of arms and treasure. With an impartial hand,he maintained between them an exact balance of favour, conferred;
S z on







OCR Output








490 THE DECLINE AND FALL


were so obvious, and so important for the future greatness, as wellas the present peace of Christianity, that it was adopted withoutdelay by all the societies which were already scattered over the em­pire, had acquired in a very early period the sanction of anti­quity ,0% and is still revered by the most powerful churches, bothof the East and of the West, as a primitive and even as a divineestablishment "°. It is needless to observe, that the pious and hum­ble presbyters, who were first dignified with the episcopal title, couldnot possess, and would probably have rejected, the power and pompwhich now encircles the tiara of the Roman pontiff, or the mitreof a German prelate. But we may define, in a few words, thenarrow limits of their original jurisdiction, which was chiefly of aspiritual but in some instances of a temporal nature'". It con­sisted in the administration of the sacraments and discipline of thechurch, the superintendency of religious ceremonies, which imper­ceptibly increased in number and variety, the consecration of eccle­siastical ministers, to whom the bishop assigned their respective func­tions, the management of the public fund, and the determinationof all such differences as the faithful were unwilling to expose be­fore the tribunal of an idolatrous judge. These powers, during aIhort period, were exercised according to the advice of the presby-teral college, and with the consent and approbation of the assembly©f Christians. The primitive bishops were considered only as thefirst of their equals, and the honourable servants of a free people-Whenever the episcopal chair became vacant by death, a new presi­dent was chosen among the presbyters by the suffrage of the whole.congregation, every member of which supposed himself investedwith a sacred and sacerdotal character "\Provincial Such was the mild and equal constitution by which the Christianscouncils. were governed more than an hundred years after the death of theapostles. Every society formed within itself a separate and inde­pendent republic: and although the most distant of these little states
1 : •* maintained







OCR Output








NOTES ON THE SECOND CHAPTER.


[37] See Plin. Hist. Natur. iii 5. Augustin. deCivitate Dei, xix. 7. Lipfiui de pronunciaiioueLingua; Latin*, c. 3.
[;8j Apuleius and Augustin will answer forAfrica; Strabo for Spain and Gaul; Tacitus, inthe life of Agric: la, for Britain; and Velleius Pa-terculus, for Pannonia. To them we may add thelanguage of the Inscriptions.
[39] The Celtic was preserved in the mountainsof Wale , Cornwall, and Armorica. We may ob­serve that Apuleius reproaches an African youth,who lived among the vilest of the populace, withthe use of the Punic; whilst he had almost forgotGreek, and neither could nor would speak Latin(Apolog. p. 596.). The greater part of St. Austin'scongregations were strangers to the Punic.
[40] Spain alone produced Columella, the Sene-cas, Lucan, Martial, and Quintilian.
[41] There is not, I believe, from Dionysius toLibanius, a single Greek critic who mentions Virgilor Horace. 1'hey seem ignorant that the Romanshad any good writers.
[42] The curious reader may fee in Dupin (Bi-bliotheque Kcclesiastique, torn. xix. p. i.e. 8.) howmuch the use of the Syriac and Egyptian languageswas still preserved.
[43] See Juvenal, Sat. iii. and xv. Ammian.Marcellin. xxii. 16.
[44] Dion Cassius, 1. Ixxvii. p. 1275. The firstinstance happened under the reign of SeptimiusSeverus.
[45] See Valerius Maximus, 1. ii. C< 2. n. 2.The emperor Claudius disfranchised an eminentGrecian for not understanding Latin. He wasprobably in some public office. Suetonius in Claud,c. 16.
[46] In the camp of, Lucullus, an ox fold for adrachma, and a slave for four drachma-, or aboutthree (hillings. Plutarch, in Lucull. p. 580.
[4?] Diodorus Siculus in Eclog. Hist. 1. xxxiv.and xxxvi. Florus, iii. 19, 2c.
[48] See a remarkable instance of severity, inCicero in Verrem, v. 3.


[49] See in Gruter, and the other collectors, agreat number of inscriptions addressed by staves totheir wives, children, fellow-servants, mailers, &c.They are all most probably of the Imperial age.
[<,o] See the Augu.lan History, and a Disserta­tion of M. de Burigny, in the xxxvth volume of theAcademy of Inscriptions, upon the Roman staves.
[51] Sec another dissertation of M. de Burignyin the xxxviith volume, on the Roman freedmen.
[52] Spanheim, Orbis Roman. L i. c. lS.p 124, &c,
[55] Seneca de Clementia, I. i. c. 24. Theoriginal is much stronger, " Quantum periculumimmineret si servi nostri numerare nos cospissent."
[54] See Pliny (Hist. Natur. 1. xxxiii.) and Athe-næus (Deipnosophist. 1. vi. p. 272). The latterboldly asserts, that he knew very many (irapTrov*,)Romans who possessed, not for use, but ostentation,ten and even twenty thousand slaves.
[55] In Paris there are not more than 43,700 do­mestics of every sort, not a twelfth part of the in­habitants. Messange Rccherches fur la Population,p. 186.
[56] A learned slave fold for many hundredpounds sterling; Atticus always bred and taughtthem himself, Cornel, fsepos in Vit. C 13.
[57] Many of the Roman physicians were slaves*See Dr. Middleton's Dissertation and Defence.
[58] Their ranks and offices are very copiouslyenumerated by 1 ignorius de Servis.
[59] Tacit. Annal. xiv. 43. They all wereexecuted for not preventing their master's murder.
[Co] Apuleius in Apolog. p. 548. Edit. Dei-phin.
[61] Plin. Hist. Natur. L xxxiii. 47.
[62] Compute twenty millions in France,twenty two in Germany, four in Hungary, ten inItaly with its Islands, eight in Great Britain andIreland, eight in Spain and Portugal, ten or twelvein the European Russia, six in Poland, fix in Greeceand Turkey, four in Sweden, three in Denmark
and







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


only architects of their dominions. Their example was universallyimitated by their principal subjects, who were not afraid of declar­ing that they had spirit to conceive, and wealth to accomplish, thenoblest undertakings. Scarcely had the proud structure of theColiseum been dedicated at Rome, before edifices of a smaller scaleindeed, but of the same design and materials, were erected forthe use, and at the expence, of the cities of Capua and Verona 6'.The inscription of the stupendous bridge of Alcantara, attests thatit was thrown over the Tagus by the contribution of a few Lusi-tanian communities. When Pliny was intrusted with the govern­ment of Bithynia and Pontus, provinces by no means the richest ormost considerable of the empire, he found the cities within his juris­diction striving with each other in every useful and ornamentalwork, that might deserve the curiosity of strangers, or the gratitudeof their citizens. It was the duty of the Proconsul to supply theirdeficiencies, to direct their taste, and sometimes to moderate theiremulation 66. The opulent senators of Rome and1 the provincesesteemed it an honour, and almost an obligation, to adorn thesplendour of their age and country; and the influence of fashionvery frequently supplied the want of taste or generosity. Amonga crowd of these private benefactors, we may select Herodes At"ticus, an Athenian citizen, who lived in the-age of the An-tonines. Whatever might be the motive of his conduct, his mag­nificence would have been worthy of the greatest kings.
The family of Herod, at least after it had been favoured by Examplefortune, was lineally descended from Cimon and Miltiades, Theseus Atticu"and Cecrops, Æacus and Jupiter. But the posterity of so many godsand heroes was fallen into the most abject state. His grandfatherhad suffered by the hands of justice, and Julius Atticus, his father,must have ended his life in poverty and contempt, had he not dis­covered an immense treasure buried under an old house, the lastremains of his patrimony. According to the rigour of law, the
emperor.







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


other to the cares and pleasures of private life. In hereditary mo­narchies, however, and especially in those of modern Europe, thegallant spirit of chivalry, and the law of succession, have accustomedus to allow a singular exception; and a woman is often acknow­ledged the absolute sovereign of a great kingdom, in which shewould be deemed incapable of exercising the smallest employment,civil or military. But as the Roman emperors were still consideredas the generals and magistrates of the republic, their wives andmothers, although distinguished by the name of Augusta, were neverassociated to their personal honours; and a female reign would have ap­peared an inexplicable prodigy in the eyes of those primitive Romans,who married without love, or loved without delicacy and respect64The haughty Agrippina aspired, indeed, to share the honours of theempire, which she had conferred on her son; but her mad am­bition, detested by every citizen who felt for the dignity of Rome,was disappointed by the artful firmness of Seneca and Burrhus 6*.The good fense, or the indifference of succeeding princes, restrainedthem from offending the prejudices of their subjects; and it wasreserved for the profligate Elagabalus, to disgrace the acts of thesenate, with the name of his mother Sosemias, who was placed bythe fide of the consuls, and subscribed, as a regular member, thedecrees of the legislative assembly. Her more prudent sister, Ma-mæa, declined the useless and odious prerogative, and a solemn lawwas enacted, excluding women for ever from the senate, and de­voting to the infernal gods, the head of the wretch by whom thissanction should be violated6S. The substance, not the pageantryof power was the object of Mamæa's manly ambition. She main­tained an absolute and lasting empire over the mind of her son, and
in his affection the mother could not brook a rival. Alexander
• if
with her consent, married the daughter of a Patrician; but hisrespect for his father-in-law, and love for the empress, were incon­sistent with the tenderness or interest of Mamæa. The Patrician wasVol. I. X executed







OCR Output








NOTES ON THE TENTH CHAPTER, xxxix


[69] See Cluvep. Germania Antiqua, 1. iii. c. 20.M. Freret, in the Memoires de l'Academie desInscriptions, torn, xviii.
[70] Most probably under the reign of Gordian,from an accidental circumstance fully canvassed byTHJemont, torn. iii. p. 710. n8r.
[71] Plin. Hist. Natur. xvi. 1. The panegy­rists frequently allude to the morasses of the Franks.
[72] Tacit, Germania, c 30. 37.
[73] In a subsequent period, most of those oldnames are occasionally mentioned. See some ves­tiges of them in Cluver. Germ. Antiq. 1. iii.
[74] Siroler de Republica Helvet. cum noti*Fuselin. •
[75] Zosimus, I. i. p. 27V
[76] M. de Brequigny (in the Memoires dePAcad'emie, torn. Xxx.) has given us a very curiouslife of Posthumus. A series of the Augustan Historyfrom Medals and Inscriptions hat been more thanonce planned, and is still ranch wanted.
[77] Aurel. Victor, c. 33. Instead of Panedirefto, both the fense and the expression requiredeltto, though indeed, for different reasons, it isalike difficult to correct the text of the best and ofthe worst writers.
[78^ In the time of Ansonius (the end of thefourth century) Ilerda or Lerida was in a veryruinous state, (Auson. Episi. xxv. 58.) which pro­bably was the consequence of this invasion.
[79] Valesius is therefore mistaken in supposingthat the Franks had invaded Spain by sea.
[80] Aurel. Victor. Eutrop. ix. 6.
£81] Tacit. Germania, 38.
[82] Cluver. German. Antiq. iii. 25.
[83] Sic Suevi a ceteris Germairis, sic Suevorumingenui a servis separantur. A proud separation!
[84] Cæsar in Bello Gallico, iv. 7.
[85] Victor in Caracal. Dion Caffius, lxvii. p.>35°-


[86] This etymology" (far different from thosew hich amuse thc> sincy of the leamrd)) is preservedby Asinius Quadratus, an original historian, quotedby Agathiasi i. c. 5.
[87] The Suevi engaged Csesar in this manner,and the manœuvre deserved the approbation of theconqueror (in Bello Gallico, i. 48.).
[88] Hist. August. p» 2Lg, zi6. Dexippiis in theExcerpta Legationum, p. 8. Hieronym. Chrqn.Orosiusj vll. 22.
[89] Zosimus, 1. i. p. 34.
[90] Aurel. Victor in Gallicno et Proho. Hitcomplaints breathe an uncommon spirit of freedom.
[91] Zonaras, 1. xii. p. 631.
[92] One of the Victors calls him King of theMarcomanni, the other of the Germans.
[93] See Tillemont, Hist, des Empereurs, torn,iii. p. 398, &c /
[94] See the lives of Claudius, Aurelian, andProbus, in the Augustan History.
[95] It is about half a league in breadth. Gene­alogical History of the Tartars, p. 998.
[96] M. de Peyssonel, who had been Frenchconsul at Caffa, in his Observations fur les PeuplesBarbares, qui ont habite les bords du Danube..
[97] Euripides in Iphigenia in Taurid.
[98] Strabo, 1. vii. p. 309. The first kings ofBosphorus were the allies of Athens.
[99] Appian in Mithridat.
[100] It was reduced by the arms of Agrippa..Orosius, vi. 2i. Eutropios, vii. 9, The Ronjansonce advanced within three days march of tha.Tanais. Tacit. Annal. xii. 17.
[101 ] See the Toxaris of Lucian, if we credit thesincerity and the virtues of the Scythian, who re­lates a great war of his nation against the kings ofBosphorus.
[102] Zosimus, 1. i. p. 38.
[103] Strabo, 1. xi. Tacit. Hist. iii. 47. Theywere called Camar*.
5 [104] See;







OCR Output








I I ri


.'!' 1:. s i MI'i . f -; ; : .


/'







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE 345


noontide heat, retire into the cave of Faunus. On a spreadingbeech they discover some recent characters. The rural deity haddescribed, in prophetic verses, the felicity promised to the empire,under the reign of so great a prince. Faunus hails the approach ofthat hero, who, receiving on his moulders the sinking weight of theRoman world, shall extinguish war and faction, and once againrestore the innocence and security of the golden age 7°.
It is more than probable that these elegant trifles never reached Cams defeatithe ears of a Veteran general, who, with the consent of the legions, [j]^3™"was preparing to execute the long suspended design of the Persian jj^Eart-'"'*war. Before his departure for this distant expedition, Carus con­ferred on his two sons, Carinus and Numerian, the title of Cæsar,and investing the former with almost an equal share of the im­perial power, directed the young prince, first to suppress sometroubles which had arisen in Gaul, and afterwards to fix the featof his residence at Rome, and to assume the government of thewestern provinces 7'. The safety of Illyricum was confirmed bya memorable defeat of the Sarmatians; sixteen thousand of thosebarbarians remained on the field of battle, and the number of captivesamounted to twenty thousand. The old emperor, animated with thefame and prospect of victory, pursued his march, in the midst of winter,through the countries of Thrace and Asia Minor, and at length, withhis younger son Numerian, arrived on the confines of the Persian mo­narchy. There, encamping on the summit of a lofty mountain, hepointed out to his troops the opulence and luxury of the enemywhom they were about to invade.
The successor of Artaxerxes, Varanes or Bahram, though he had A. d. 283.subdued the Segestans, one of the most warlike nations of Upper dience^the
P C
Asia '\ was alarmed at the approach of the Romans, and endea- basladors."1voured to retard their progress by a negociation of peace. Hisambassadors entered the camp about sunset, at the time when thetroops were satisfying their hunger with a frugal repast. TheVol. I. Y y Persians







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AND FALL


barians of Palestine had exercised as much compassion towards theiridolatrous enemies as they had ever shewn to their friends orcountrymen l6. Passing from the sectaries of the law to the lawitself, they asserted that it was impossible that a religion whichconsisted only of bloody sacrifices and trifling ceremonies, andwhose rewards as well as punishments were all of a carnal andtemporal nature, could inspire the love of virtue, or restrain theimpetuosity of passion. The Mosaic account of the creation andfall of man was treated with profane derision by the Gnostics, whowould not listen with patience to the repose of the deity aftersix days labour, to the rib of Adam, the garden of Eden, thetrees of life and of knowledge, the speaking serpent, the forbiddenfruit, and the eternal condemnation pronounced against humankind for the venial offence of their first progenitorsa7. TheGod of Israel was impiously represented by the Gnostics, as a beingliable to passion and to error, capricious in his favour, implacable inhis resentment, meanly jealous of his superstitious worship, and con­fining his partial providence to a single people, and to this transitoryUse. In- such a character they could discover none of the features ofthe wife and omnipotent father of the universe l*. They allowedthat the religion of the Jews was somewhat less criminal than theidolatry of the Gentiles; but it was their fundamental doctrine, thatthe Christ whom they adored as the first and brightest emanation ofthe deity, appeared upon earth to rescue mankind from their va­rious errors, and to reveal a neiv system of truth and perfection.The most learned of the fathers, by a very singular condescension1,have imprudently admitted the sophistry of the Gnostics. Ac­knowledging that the literal fense is repugnant to every principleof faith as well as reason, they deem themselves secure and in-vulnerable behind the ample veil of allegory, which they carefullyspread over every tender part of the Mosaic dispensatioa


It







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


tors; and the imperial camp was usually pitched in the plain ofCtefiphon, on the eastern bank of the Tigris, at the distance of onlythree miles from Seleucia The innumerable attendants on luxuryand despotism resorted to the court, and the little village of Ctefi­phon insensibly swelled into a great city 40. Under the reign ofMarcus, the Roman generals penetrated as far as Ctefiphon and Se­leucia. They were received as friends by the Greek colony; they A. D. 165.attacked as enemies the feat of the Parthian kings ; yet both citiesexperienced the fame treatment. The sack and conflagration ofSeleucia, with the massacre of three hundred thousand of the inha­bitants, tarnished the glory of the Roman triumph Seleucia,already exhausted by the neighbourhood of a too powerful rival,sunk under the fatal blow; but Ctefiphon, in about thirty-three A.D. 198; .years, had sufficiently recovered its strength to maintain an obsti­nate siege against the emperor Severus. The city was, however,taken by assault; the king, who defended it in person, escaped withprecipitation; an hundred thousand captives, and a rich booty, re­warded the fatigues of the Roman soldiers 41. Notwithstanding thesemisfortunes, Ctefiphon succeeded to Babylon and to Seleucia, as oneof the great capitals of the East. In summer, the monarch of Persiaenjoyed at Ecbatana the cool breezes of the mountains of Media;but the mildness of the climate engaged him to prefer Ctefiphon forhis winter residence.
From these successful inroads, the Romans derived no real or Conquest of
Oirhoene by
lasting benefit; nor did they attempt to preserve such distant con- the Romans,quests, separated from the provinces of the empire by a large tract ofintermediate desert. The reduction of the kingdom of Osrhoene,was an acquisition of less splendour indeed, but of a far more solidadvantage. That little state occupied the northern and most fertilepart of Mesopotamia, between the Euphrates and the Tigris. Edessa,its capital, was situated about twenty miles beyond the former ofthose rivers; and the inhabitants, since the time of Alexander, were1 E e 2 a mixed







OCR Output








Ot'THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 135


sword. Their rapid journey through Gaul and Italy, during whichthey never eat at the same table, or slept in the same house, dis­played to the provinces the odious spectacle of fraternal discord.On their arrival at Rome, they immediately divided the vast ex­tent of the Imperial palace ,S. No communication was allowed •between their apartments; the doors and passages were diligentlyfortified, and guards posted and relieved with the fame strictness asin a besieged place. The emperors met only in public, in the pre­sence of their afflicted mother; and each surrounded by a numeroustrain of armed followers. Even on these occasions of ceremony,the dissimulation of courts could ill disguise the rancour of theirhearts 19. . .
This latent civil war already distracted the whole government, Fruitless ne-•when a scheme was suggested that seemed of mutual benefit to the firidm^hehostile brothers. It was proposed, that since it was impossible to emPire }*~
* 4 r tween them.
xeconcile their minds, they should separate their interest, and dividethe empire between them* The conditions of the treaty were al­ready drawn with some accuracy. It was agreed, that Caracalla, as theelder brother, should remain in possession of Europe and the westernAfrica; and that he should relinquish the sovereignty of Asia andEgypt to Geta, who might six his residence at Alexandria or Anti-och, cities little inferior to Rome itself in wealth and greatness;that numerous armies should be constantly encamped on either sideof the Thracian Bosphorus, to guard the frontiers of the rivalmonarchies; and that the senators of European extraction should ac­knowledge the sovereign of Rome, whilst the natives of Asia fol­lowed the emperor of the East. The tears of the empress Juliainterrupted the negociation, the first idea of which had filled everyRoman breast with surprise and indignation. The mighty mass ofconquest was so intimately united by the hand of time and policy1,that it required the most forcible violence to rend it asunder. TheRomans had reason to dread, that the disjointed members would soon
be


■







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. IOI


fate of his brother-in-law, and lamented still more that he had de­served it *7.
These effusions of impotent raere against a dead emperor, whom the Legal juris-
r o o * diction of th
senate had flattered when alive with the most abject servility, betrayed senate over
/-../- 11 • n • i r the emperor*
a spirit of revenge, more agreeable to justice than to generouty..The legality of these decrees was however supported by the prin­ciples of the Imperial constitution. To censure, to depose, or topunisli with death, the first magistrate of the republic, who hadabused his delegated trust, was the ancient and undoubted preroga­tive of the Roman senate but that feeble assembly was obliged tocontent itself with inflicting on a fallen tyrant that public justice^from which, during his life and reign, he had been shielded by thestrong arm of military despotism.
Pertinax found a nobler way of condemning his predecessor's virtues ofmemory; by the contrast of his own virtues, with the vices of Pertinax-Commodus. On the day of his accession, he resigned over to hiswife and son his whole private fortune; that they might have nopretence to solicit favours at the expence of the state. He refusedto flatter the vanity of the former with the title of Augusta; or tocorrupt the inexperienced youth of the latter by the rank of Cæsar.Accurately distinguishing between the duties of a parent, and thoseof a sovereign, he educated his son with a severe simplicity, which,while it gave him no assured prospect of the throne, might in timehave rendered him worthy of it. In public, the behaviour of Pertinaxwas grave and affable. He lived with the virtuous part of the senate(and in a private station, he had-been acquainted with the true cha­racter of each individual), without either pride or jealousy; con­sidered them as friends and companions, with whom he had sharedthe dangers of the tyranny, and with whom he wished to enjoy thesecurity of the present time. He very frequently invited them tofamiliar entertainments, the frugality of which was ridiculed by
those,,







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


situde of fortune *. On the death of that emperor, his testamentwas publickly read in the senate. He bequeathed, as a valuablelegacy to his successors, the advice of confining the empire withinthose limits, which Nature seemed to have placed as its permanentbulwarks and boundaries; on the west the Atlantic ocean; theRhine and Danube on the north; the Euphrates on the east; andtowards the south, the sandy deserts of Arabia and Africa 4.
Happily for the repose of mankind, the moderate system recom- imitated bymended by the wisdom of Augustus, was adopted by the fears andvices of his immediate successors. Engaged in the pursuit of pleasure,or in the exercise of tyranny, the first Cæsars seldom shewedthemselves to the armies, or to the provinces; nor were they dis­posed to suffer, that those triumphs which their indolence neglected,should be usurped by the conduct and valour of their lieutenants.The military fame of a subject was considered as an insolent in­vasion of the Imperial prerogative; and it became the duty, as wellas interest of every Roman general, to guard the frontiers entrustedto his care, without aspiring to conquests which might have provedno less fatal to himself than to the vanquished barbarians5.
The only accession which the Roman empire received, during Conquest ofthe first century of the Christian Æra, wa6 the province of Britain, she first ex!In this single instance the successors of Cæsar and Augustus were "P11011 M *persuaded to follow the example of the former, rather than theprecept of the latter. The proximity of its situation to the coast ofGaul seemed to invite their arms; the pleasing, though doubtfulintelligence of a pearl fishery, attracted their avarice6; and asBritain was viewed in the light of a distinct and insulated world,the conquest scarcely formed any exception to the general system ofcontinental measures. After a war of about forty years, under­taken by the most stupid7, maintained by the most dissolute,and terminated by the most timid of all the emperors, the fargreater part of the island submitted to the Roman yoke8. The
B 2 various







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AND FALL


power, did not exceed a fifth part of that great city. How differ­ent a proportion must we adopt when we compare the persecutedwith the triumphant church, the West with the East, remote vil­lages with populous towns, and countries recently converted to. thefaith, with the place where the believers first received the appellafloa,of Christians. It must not, however, be disenabled, that* ia anotherpassage, Chrysostom, to whon\ we are indebted, for t'nis useful in­formation, computes the multitude of the faithful $» pv$% superiorto that of the jews and Pagans ,5?. But the solution o£ this a;ppirlent difficulty is easy and obvious. The eloquent preacher draws a-parallel between the civil and the ecclesiastical constitution of An*-tioch; between the list of Christiana who had acquired Heaven bybaptism, and the list of citizens who had a right to stwe the publicliberality. Slaves, strangers, and infants were comprised in theformer; they were excluded from the latter,Egypt. she extensive commerce of Alexandria, and its- proximity* tr>Palestine, gave an easy entrance to the new religion. It was at firstembraced by great numbers of the Therapeutae, or Esseniaos of thelake Mareotis, a Jæwiih sect: which had abated much of its reverencefor the Mosaic ceremonies* The austere life of the Eflenians, theirfests and excommunications, the community of goods, the love ofcelibacy, their zeal for martyrdom, and the warmth though not thepurity of their faith, already offered a very lively image of theprimitive discipline l6°. It was in the school of Alexandria that theChristian theology appears to have assumed a regular and scientifical.form; and when Hadrian visited Egypt, he found a church com­posed of Jews and of Greeks, sufficiently important to attract the no­tice of that inquisitive prince But the progress of Christianitywas for a long time confined within the limits of a single city, whichwas itself a foreign colony, and till the close of the second century,the predecessors of Demetrius were the only prelates of the Egyptianchurch. Three bishops were consecrated by the hands of Demetrius*


4 and







OCR Output








xxvi NOTES ON THE SEVENTH CHAPTER.


an aureus, and proportional pieces of gold were [i 16] See the lives of Agricola, Vespasian,coined by Alexander's order. Hist. August, p. 127, Trajan, Severus, and his three competitors ; andwith the commentary of Salmasius. indeed of all the eminent men of those times.


NOTES ON THE SEVENTH CHAPTER.


11] r I x HERE had beenno example of three suc-JL cefsive generations on the throne; onlythree instances of sons who succeeded their fathers.The marriages of the Cæsars (notwithstanding thepermillion, and the frequent practice of divorces)were generally unfruitful.
[2] Hist. August, p. 138.
[3] Hist. August, p. 140. Herodian, L vi.p. 223. Aurelius .Victor. By comparing these au­thors, it mould seem, that Maximin had the parti­cular command of the Triballian horse, with thegeneral commission of disciplining the recruits of thewhole army. His Biographer ought to have marked,with more care, his exploits, and the successivesteps of his military promotions.
[4] See the original letter of Alexander Severus,Hist. August, p. 149.
[5] Hist. August, p. 135. I have softened someof the most improbable circumstances of thiswretched biographer. From this ijl-worded narra­tion, it mould seem, that the prince's buffoon hav-ing accidentally entered the tent, and awakened thellumbering monarch, the fear of punishment urgedhim to persuade the disaffected soldiers to committhe murder.
[6] Herodian, 1. vi. p. 223—227.
[7] Caligula, the eldest of the four, was onlytwenty-five years of age when he ascended thethrone; Caracalla was twenty-three, Commodusnineteen, and Nero no more than seventeen.
[8] It appears that he was totally ignorant of theGreek language; which, from its universal use inconversation and letters, was an essential part ofevery liberal education.
[9] Hist. August, p. 141. Herodian, I. vii.p. 237. The latter of these historians hat been


most unjustly censured for sparing the vices of■ Maximin.
[10] He was compared to Spartacus and Athenio.Hist. August, p. 141.
[11] Herodian, 1. vii. p. 238. Zosimus, I. up. 1;.
[12] In the fertile territory of Byzacium, onehundred and fifty miles to the south of Carthage.This city was decorated, probably by the Gordians,with the title of colony, and with a fine amphithe­atre, which is still in a very perfect state. SeeItinerar. Wesseling. p. 59, and Shaw's travels,p. 117.
[13] Herodian,!, vii. p. 239. Hist. August, p. 153.
[14] Hist. August, p. 1J2. The celebrated houseof Pompey in carinis, was usurped by Marc Antony,and consequently became, after the Triumvir'sdeath, a part of the imperial domain. The em­peror Trajan allowed and even encouraged therich senators to purchase those magnificent anduseless palaces (Plin. Panegyric, c. 5c.) ; and it mayseem probable, that on this occasion, Pompey'shouse came into the possession of Gordian's greatgrandfather.
[ijl The Claudian.tbe Numidian, theCarystian,and the Synnadian. The colours of Roman mar­bles have been faintly described and imperfectlydistinguished. It appears, however, that the Ca-rystian was a sea green, and that the marble ofSynnada was white mixed with oval spots of purple.See Salmasius ad Hist. August, p. 164.
[16] Hist.- August, p. 1,51, 152. He sometimesgave five hundred pair of Gladiators, never less than,one hundred and fifty. He once gave for the use of'the Circus one-hundred Sicilian, and as many Cap-padocian horses. The animals designed for hont-


*







OCR Output













OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. ir9


193—197,


empire; he left Rome at the end of thirty days, and, withoutsuffering himself to be elated by this easy victory, prepared to en­counter his more formidable rivals.
The uncommon abilities and fortune of Severus have induced an Success of
oeverus
elegant historian to compare him with the first and greatest of the against Ni-
0 ger, and a-
Cæsars *\ The parallel is, at least, imperfect. Where shall we gainst Aibi-find, in the character of Severus, the commanding superiority ofsoul, the generous clemency, and the various genius, which couldreconcile and unite the love of pleasure, the thirst of knowledge,and the fire of ambition +1? In one instance only, they may be com­pared, with some degree of propriety, in the celerity of their mo­tions, and their civil victories. In less than four years **, Severu6 A. D.subdued the riches of the east, and the valour of the west. Hevanquished two competitors of reputation and ability, and defeatednumerous armies, provided with weapons and discipline equal tohis own. In that age, the art of fortification, and the principles oftactics, were well understood by all the Roman generals; and theconstant superiority of Severus was that of an artist, who usesthe fame instruments with more skill and industry than his rivals.I fliall not, however, enter into a minute narrative, of these mili­tary operations; but as the two civil wars against Niger andagainst Albinus, were almost the fame in their conduct, event,and consequences, I shall collect into one point of view, the moststriking circumstances, tending to develope the character of the con­queror, and the state of the empire.
Falsehood and insincerity, unsuitable as they seem to the dignityof public transactions, offend us with a less degrading idea of mean­ness, than when they are found in the intercourse of private life.In the latter, they discover a want of courage; in the other, only adefect of power; and, as it is impossible for the most able statesmen-to subdue millions of followers and enemies by their own personalstrength, the world, under the name of policy, seems to have
granted.


Conduct ofthe two civilwars, Ar;sof Several







OCR Output








NOTES ON THE THIRTEENTH CHAPTER;


Chroa. Paschal, p. 276. Procop. Hist. Arcan.c. 26.
[50] John Antioch in Excerp. Valcfian, p. 834.Suidas in Diocletian.
[51] See a short history and confutation ofAlchy-niy, in the works of that philosophical compiler,La Mothele Vaye, torn. i. p. 3Z7—353.
set] Seethe education and strength of Tiridatesin the Armenian history of Moses of Chorene, 1. ii.c. 76. He could seize two wild bulls by the horns,and break them off with his hands.
[53] If we give credit to the younger Victor,who supposes that, in the year 323, Licinius wasonly sixty years of age, he could scarcely be the sameperson, as the patron of Tiridates; but we knowfrom much better authority (Euseb. Hist. Ecclefiast.1. x. c 8.), that Licinius was at that time in thelast period of old age: sixteen years before, he is re­presented with grey hairs, and as the contemporaryof Galerius. See Lactant, c. 32. Licinius wasprobably born about the year 250.
[54] See the sixty-second and sixty-third booksof Dion Caffius.
[55] Moses of Chorene, Hist. Armen. 1. ii. c.74. The statues had been erected by Valarsaces,who reigned in Armenia about 130 years beforeChrist; was the first king of the family of Arsaces(see Moses Hist. Armen. 1. ii. 2, 3.). The deificationof the Arsacides is mentioned by Justin (xli. ;.) andby Ammianus Marcellinus (xxiii, 6.).
[56] The Armenian nobility was numerous andpowerful. Moses mentions many families which weredistinguished under the reign of Valarsaces (1. ii. 7.)and which still subsisted in his own time, about themiddle of the fifth century. See the Preface of hisEditors.
{57] She was named Chosroiduchta, and hadnot the ot patulvm like other women. (Hist. Armen.1. ii. c. 79.) I do not understand the expreflion.
[58] Ib the Armenianiiistory (1. ii. 7S.), as wellas in the Geography (p. 367. J, China is called Zenia,or Zenastan. It is characterized by the productionof silk, by the opulence of the natives, and by theirlove of peace, above ajl the other nations of theearth-


[59] Vou-ti, the first emperor of the seventhdynasty, who then reigned in China, had politicaltransactions with Fergana, a province of Sogdiana,and is said to have received a Roman embassy.(Histoire des Huns, torn. i. p. 38.) In those ageithe Chinese kept a garrison at Kathgar, and one oftheir generals, about the time of Trajan, marchedas far as the Caspian sea. With regard to the inter*course between China and the Western countries, acurious memoir of M. de Guignes may be con­sulted in the Academic des Inscriptions, torn. xxxiLP-35S*
[60] See Hist. Armen. 1. ii. c. 81.
[61] Ipsos PersasipfumqueRegera ascitis Saccis, etRuffis, et Gellis, petit frater Ormies. Panegyric.Vet. iii. 1. The Sacæ were a nation of wanderingScythians, who encamped towards the sources ofthe Oxus and the Jaxartes. The Gelli were the in­habitants of Ghilan along the Caspian sea, andwho so long, under the name of Dilemites, infestedthe Persian Monarchy. See d'Herbelot BibliotheqaeOrientate.
[62] Moses of Chorene takes no notice of thissecond revolution, which I have been obliged to col­lect from a passage of Ammianus Marcellinus(I. xxiii. 5.). Lactantius speaks of the ambition ofNarses, " Concitatus domesticis exemplis avi suiSaporis ad occupandum orientem magnis copiis in-hiabat." De Mort. Persecut. c. 9.
[63] We may readily believe, that Lactantiusascribes to cowardice the conduct of Diocletian.Julian, in his oration, fays, that he remained withall the forces of the empire; a very hyperbolicalexpression.
[64] Our five abbreviates, Eutropius, Festns,the two Victors, and Orosius, all relate the last andgreat battle; but Orosius is the only one who speaksof the two former.
[65] The nature of the country is finely describedby Plutarch, in the life of Crassus, and by Xeno-phon, in the first book of the Anabasis.
[66] See Foster's Dissertation in the second Yolumeof the translation of the Anabasis by Spclman; which







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 367


©f the Rhine to that of the Danube, the ancient camps, towns,and citadels, were diligently re-established, and in the most exposedplaces, new ones were skilfully constructed; the strictest vigilancewas introduced among the garrisons of the frontier, and everyexpedient was practised that could render the long chain of for­tifications firm and impenetrable A barrier so respectable wasseldom violated, and the barbarians often turned against each othertheir disappointed rape. The Goths, the Vandals, the Gepidæ, Dissensions-of
u * the barba-
the Burgundians, the Alemanni, wasted each other's strength bydestructive hostilities, and whosoever vanquimed, they vanquishedthe enemies of Rome. The subjects of Diocletian enjoyed thebloody spectacle, and congratulated each other, that the mischiefsof civil war were now experienced only by the barbarians
Notwithstanding the policy of Diocletian, it was impossible to Conduaofmaintain an equal and undisturbed tranquillity during a reign of cmPer0M-twenty years, and along a frontier of many hundred miles. Some­times the barbarians suspended their domestic animosities, and thevigilance of the garrisons sometimes gave a passage to their strengthor dexterity. Whenever the provinces were invaded, Diocletianconducted himself with that calm dignity which he always affectedor possessed; reserved his presence for such occasions as were worthyof his interposition, never exposed his person or reputation to anyunnecessary danger, ensured his success by every means that pru­dence could suggest, and displayed, with ostentation, the conse*quences of his victory. In wars of a more difficult nature, andmore doubtful event, he employed the rough valour of Maximian,and that faithful soldier was content to ascribe his own victories tothe wife counsels and auspicious influence of his benefactor. But ^'?"sr ofthtafter the adoption of the two Cæsars, the emperors themselves, re­tiring to a lese laborious scene of action, devolved on their adoptedsons the defence of the Danube and of the Rhine. The vigilantGalerius was never reduced to the necessity of vanquishing an army
of;







OCR Output








3<*4 THE DECLINE AND FALL


Power ofCvaufiaia


A.D. »8a,acknowledg­ed by theother empe.iors.


become the seat of an independent monarchy *7. During the spaceof seven years, it was possessed by Caraufius j and fortune con­tinued propitious to a rebellion, supported with courage and ability.The British emperor defended the frontiers of his dominions againstthe Caledonians of the North, invited, from the continent, a greatnumber of skilful artists, and displayed, on a variety of coinsthat are still extant, his taste and opulence. Born on the confinesof the Franks, he courted the friendship of that formidable people,by the flattering imitation of their dress and manners. Thebravest of their youth he enlisted among his land or sea forces;and in return for their useful alliance, he communicated to thebarbarians the dangerous knowledge of military and naval arts.Caraufius still preserved the possession of Boulogne and the ad­jacent country. His fleets rode triumphant in the "channel, com­manded the mouths of the Seine and of the Rhine, ravaged thecoasts of the ocean, and diffused beyond the columns of Hercules theterror of his name. Under his command, Britain, destined in afuture age, to obtain the empire of the sea, already assumed itsnatural and respectable station of a maritime power *8.
By seizing the fleet of Boulogne, Caraufius had deprived hismaster of the means of pursuit and revenge. And when, after avast expence of time and labour, a new armament was launchedinto the water*9, the imperial troops, unaccustomed to that eleiv.ent,were easily baffled and defeated by the veteran sailors of. theusurper. This disappointed effort was soon productive of atreaty of peace. Diocletian and his colleague, who justly dreadedthe enterprising spirit of Caraufius, resigned to him the sovereigntyof Britain, and reluctantly admitted their perfidious servant to aparticipation of the imperial honours'0. But the adoption of thetwo Cæsars restored new vigour to the Roman arms; and while theRhine was guarded by the presence of Maximian, his brave as­sociate Constantius, assumed the conduct of the British war. His
z first,







OCR Output








I'm NOTES ON THE S lCOND chapter.


and Norway, four in the Low Countries. The wholewould amount to one hundred and five, or onehundred and seven millions. See Voltaire, deHistoire Generate.
. [63] Joseph, dc Bell. Judaico, I. ii. c 16. Theoration of Agrippa, or rather of the historian, is afine picture of the Roman empire.
[64] Sueton. in August, c. 28. Augustus built inRome the temple and forum of Mars the Avenger:the temple of Jupiter Tonans in the capitol; thatof Apollo Palatine, with public libraries; the por­tico and basilica of Caius and Lucius, the porticoes'of Livia and Octavia. and the theatre of Marcellus.The example of the sovereign was imitated byhis ministers and generals; and his friend Agrippaleft behind him the immortal monument of thePantheon.
[6j] See Maffei, Verona illustrata, 1. iv. p. 68.
[66] See the xth book of Pliny's Epistles. Hementions the following works, carried on at theexpence of the cities. At Nicomedia, a new forum,an aqueduct, and a canal, left unfinistied by a King;at Nice, a Gymnasium, and a theatre which hadalready cost near ninety thousand pounds; bathsat Prusa and Claudiopolis; and an aqueduct ofsixteen miles in length for the use of Sinope.
[67] Hadrian afterwards made a very equitableregulation, which divided all treasure trove be­tween the right of property and that of discovery,Hist. August, p. 9.
[63] Philostrat. in Vit. Sophist. 1. ii. p. 548.
[69] Aulus GelliiKj in Noct. Attic, i. z. ix. z.xviii. 10. xix. 12. Philostrat. p. 564.
[70] See Philoftrat. 1 ii. p. 548. e£6. Pansawias, •1. i. and vii. 10. The life as Herodes, in.the xxxthvolume of the Memoirs of the Academy of In­scriptions.
[71] It is particularly remarked of Athens byDicaarchus, de Statu Grxciæ, p. 8> Inter Geo­grapher Minores. edit. Hudson.
[72] Donatus dc Roma Vetere, 1. iii. c. 4, 5, 6,Nardini Roma Antica, 1. iii. 11, 12, 13. and aMS- Description of ancient Rome, by BernardusOricellarius, or Rucellas, of which I obtained a


copy from the library of the Canon Ricardi atFlorence. Two celebrated pictures of Timanthesand of Protogenes, are mentioned by Pliny, as iathe temple of Peace; and the Laocoon was foundin the baths of Titus.
[73] Montfaucon l'Antiquite'e Expliquee, torn,iv. p. 2. I. i. c. y. Fabretti has composed a verylearned treatise on the aqueducts of Rome.
[74] Ælian Hist. Var. 1. ix. c. 16. He livedin the time of Alexander Severus. See Fabricius,Biblioth. Græca, 1. iv. c. it.
[75] Joseph, de Bell. Jud. ii. 16. The number,however, is mentioned, and should be receivedwith a degree of latitude.
[76] Plin. Hist. Natur. iii. 5.
[77] Plin. Hist, Natur. iii. 3, 4. iv. 3;. Thelist seems authentic ami accurate: the division ofthe provinces and the different condition of thecities, are minutely distinguished.
[78] Strabon. Geograph. I. xyii, p. 1189.
[79] Joseph, de Bell. Jud. ii. 16. Philostrat. iaVit. Sophist. 1. ii. p. 548. Edit. Olear.
[80] Tacit. Annal. iv. jc. I have taken somepains in consulting and comparing modern travel­lers, with regard to the fate of those eleven cities ofAsia; seven or eight are totally destroyed, Hypæpe,Tralles, Laodicea, Ilium, HalicarnafTus, Miletus,Ephefus, and we may add Sardes. Of the remain­ing three, Pergamus is a straggling village of twoor three thousand inhabitants. Magnesia, underthe name of Guzel hisiar, a town of some conse­quence; and Smyrna, a great city, peopled by amhundred thousand souls. But even at Smyrnawhile the Franks have maintained commerce, theTurks have ruined the arts.
- [81] See a very exact and pleasing descriptionof the ruins of Laodicea, in Chandler's Travelsthrough Asia Minor, p. 225, &c.
[82] Strabo, 1. xii. p. 866. He had studied at
Tralles. • _ S
[83] Sec a Dissertation of M. de Bozc, Mem.de PAcademic, torn, xviii. Aristides pronounced
an







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


a general distinguished by his valour and ability, had under hiscommand the city of Verona, and all the troops that were stationedin the province of Venetia. As soon as he was informed that Con­stantine was advancing towards him, he detached a large body ofcavalry, which was defeated in an engagement near Brescia, andpursued by the Gallic legions as far as the gates of Verona. Thenecessity, the importance, and the difficulties of the siege of Verona,immediately presented themselves to the sagacious mind of Con-stantine ". The city was accessible only by a narrow peninsula to­wards the west, as the other three sides were surrounded by theAdige, a rapid river which covered the province of Venetia, fromwhence the besieged derive'd an inexhaustible supply of men andprovisions. It was not without great difficulty, and after severalfruitless attempts, that Constantine found means to pass the riverat some distance above the city, and in a place where the torrentwas less violent. He then encompassed Verona with strong lines,pushed his attacks with a prudent vigour, and repelled a desperatesally of Pompeianus. That intrepid general, when he had usedevery means of defence that the strength of the place or that of thegarrison could afford, secretly escaped from Verona, anxious not forhis own but for the public safety. With indefatigable diligence hesoon collected an army sufficient either to meet Constantine in thefield, or to attack him if he obstinately remained within his lines.The emperor, attentive to the motions, and informed of the ap­proach of so formidable an enemy, left a part of his legionsto continue the operations of the siege, whilst, at the head ofthose troops on whose valour and fidelity he more particularly de­pended, he advanced in person to engage the general of Maxen-tius. The army of Gaul was drawn up in two lines, according tothe usual practice of war; but their experienced leader, perceivingthat the numbers of the Italians far exceeded his own, suddenlychanged his disposition, and reducing the second, extended the frontof his first line to a just proportion with that of the enemy. SuchVol. I. I i i evolutions,







OCR Output








192 THE DECLINE AND FALL


made desperate sallies into the city, set fire to a great number ofhouses, and filled the streets with the blood of the inhabitants. Theemperor Balbinus attempted, by ineffectual edicts and precarioustruces, to reconcile the factions at Rome. But their animosity,though smothered for a while, burnt with redoubled violence. Thesoldiers, detesting the senate and the people, despised the weaknessof a prince who wanted either the spirit or the power to commandthe obedience of his subjects19.Discontent of After the tyrant's death, his formidable army had acknowledged,guards!"0"2" from necessity rather than from choice, the authority of Maximus,whotransported himself without delay to the camp before Aquileia. Assoon as he had received their oath of fidelity, he addressed them interms full of mildness and moderation; lamented, rather thanarraigned, the wild disorders of the times, and assured the soldiers,that of all their past conduct, the senate would remember only theirgenerous desertion of the tyrant, and their voluntary return to theirduty. Maximus enforced his exhortations by a liberal donative,purified the camp by a solemn sacrifice of expiation, and then dis­missed the legions to their several provinces, impressed, as he hoped,with a lively fense of gratitude and obedience 4°. But nothing couldreconcile the haughty spirit of the Prætorians. They attended theemperors on the memorable day of their public entry into Rome;but amidst the general acclamations, the sullen dejected countenanceof the guards, sufficiently declared that they considered themselvesas the object, rather than the partners of the triumph. When thewhole body was united in their camp, those who had served underMaximin, and those who had remained at Rome, began to mingletheir complaints and apprehensions. The emperors chosen by thearmy had perished with ignominy; those elected by the senatewere seated on the throne 41. The long discord between the civiland military powers was decided by a war, in which the formerhad obtained a complete victory. The soldiers must now learn a
new







OCR Output








33« THE DECLINE AND FALL


lity into the heart of the empire. But the experience of the worldfrom China to Britain, has exposed the rain attempt of fortifyingany extensive tract of country **. An active enemy, who can selectand vary his points of attack, must, in the end, discover some feeblespot or some unguarded moment. The strength, as well as the at­tention, of the defenders is divided; and such are the blind effectsof terror on the firmest troops, that a line broken in a single place,is almost instantly deserted. The fate of the wall which Probuserected, may confirm the general observation. Within a few yearsafter his death, it was overthrown by the Alemanni. Its scatteredruins, universally ascribed to the power of the Dæmon, now serveonly to excite the wonder of the Swabian peasant.Jntroduaion Among the useful conditions of peace imposed by Probus on theoflhe ba™Wt vanquished nations of Germany, was the obligation of supplyingbarUM- the Roman army with sixteen thousand recruit*, the bravest andmost robust of their youth. The emperor dispersed them throughall the provinces, and distributed this dangerous reinforcement ininall bands, of fifty or sixty each, among the national troops;judiciously observing, that the aid which the republic derived fromthe barbarians, slvould be felt but not seen Their aid was nowbecome necefiary. The feeble elegance of Italy and the internalprovinces, could no longer support the weight of arms. The hardyfrontier of the Rhine and Danube still produced minds and bodiesequal to the labours of the camp; but a perpetual series of wars hadgradually diminimed their numbers. The infrequency of marriage,and the ruin of agriculture, affected the principles of population, andnot only destroyed the strength of the present, but intercepted thehope of future generations. The wisdom of Probus embraced a greatand beneficial plan of replenifliing the exhausted frontiers, by new co­lonies of captive or fugitive barbarians, on whom he bestowed lands,cattle, instruments of husbandry, and every encouragement thatmight engage them to educate a race of soldiers for the service of


6 the







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AND FALL


foreign wines, public salutations, the use of warm baths, and thepractice of shaving the beard, which, according to the expressionof Tertullian, is a lie against our own faces, and an impiousattempt to improve the works of the Creator "When Christianitywas introduced among the rich and the polite, the observationof these singular laws was left, as it would be at present, to the fewwho were ambitious of superior sanctity. But it is always easy aswell as agreeable for the inferior ranks of mankind to claim am/erit from the contempt of that pomp and pleasure, which fortunehas placed beyond their reach. The virtue of the primitiveChristians, like that of the first Romans, was very frequentlyguarded by poverty and ignorance.
The chaste severity of the fathers, in whatever related to the com­merce of the two sexes, flowed from the fame principle j theirabhorrence of every enjoyment, which might gratify the sensual,and degrade the spiritual nature of man. It was their favouriteopinion, that if Adam had preserved hi* obedience to the Creator,he would have lived and died in a state of virgin purity, and thatsome harmless mode of vegetation might have peopled paradisewith a Face of innocent and immortal beings *9. The use of mar­riage was permitted only to his fallen posterity, as a necessary ex­pedient to continue the human species, and as a restraint, howeverimperfect, on the natural licentiousness of desire. The hesitationof the orthodox casuists on this interesting subject* betrays the per­plexity of men, unwilling to approve an institution, which they werecompelled to tolerate so. The enumeration of the very whimsicallaws, which they most circumstantially imposed on the marriage-bed, would force a smile from the young and a blush from thefair. It was their unanimous sentiment, that a 6rst marriage wasadequate to all the purposes of nature and of society. The sensualconnexion was refined into a resemblance of the mystic union ofChrist with hja church, and was pronounced to be indissoluble5 either







OCR Output








202 THE DECLINE AND FALL


of subsistence: that the danger of each individual had increasedwith the despotism of the military order, since princes who trembleon the throne, will guard their safety by the instant sacrifice ofevery obnoxious subject. The emperor expatiated on the mischiefsof a lawless caprice which the soldiers could only gratify at the ex-pence of their own blood; as their seditious elections had so fre­quently been followed by civil wars, which consumed the flower ofthe legions either in the field of battle or in the cruel abuse of vic­tory. He painted in the most lively colours the exhausted state ofthe treasury, the desolation of the provinces, the disgrace of theRoman name, and the insolent triumph of rapacious barbarians. Itwas against those barbarians, he declared, that he intended to pointthe first effort of their arms. Tetricus might reign for a while overthe West, and even Zenobia might preserve the dominion of theEast,0. These usurpers were his personal adversaries; nor couldhe think of indulging any private resentment till he had saved anempire, whose impending ruin would, unless it was timely pre-* vented, crufli both the army and the people.A.D. 269. The various nations of Germany and Sarmatia, who fought underinvLtethe' tne Gothic standard, had already collected an armament more for-empire. midable than any which had yet issued from the Euxina On thebanks of the Niester, one of the great rivers that discharge them­selves into it, they constructed a fleet of two thousand, or even ofsix thousand vessels"; numbers which, however incredible theymay seem, would have been insufficient to transport their pretendedarmy of three hundred and twenty thousand barbarians. Whatevermight be the real strength of the Goths, the vigour and success ofthe expedition were not adequate to the greatness of the prepara­tions. In their passage through the Bosphorus, the unskilful pilotswere overpowered by the violence of the current; and while themultitude of their ships were crowded in a narrow channel, manywere dashed against each other, or against the shore. The barba­


rians







OCR Output








xxxii NOTES ON THE NINTH CHAPTER.


exploits of Chosroes have been magnified; and heacted as a dependent ally to the Romans.
[52] For the account of this war, fee Herodian,'1. vi. p. 209 21 z. The old abbreviators and moderncompilers have blindly followed the AugustanHistory.
[53] Eutychius, torn. ii. p. 180, vers. Pocock.The great Chosroes Noulhirwan sent the Code ofArtaxcrxes to all his Satraps, as the invariable ruleof their conduct.
[{4] D'Hcrbelot Bibliotheque Orientale, aumot Ardjhir. We may observe, that aster an-ancient period of fables,' and a long interval ofdarkness, the modern histories of Persia begin to


assume an air of truth with the dynasty of the SaT-sanides.
[55] Herodian, 1. vi. p. 214. Ammianus Mar-cellinus, I. xxiii. c. 6. Some differences may beobserved between the two historians, the naturaleffects of the changes produced by a century anda half.
[56] The Persians arcftill the most skilful horse­men, and their horses the finest in the East.
£57] From Herodotus, Xenophon, Herodian,Ammianus, Chardin, &c. 1 have extracted suchprobable accounts of the Persian nobility, as seemeither common to every age, or particular to that ofthe Saslanides.


NOTES ON THE NINTH CHAPTER.


£,-] qpHE modern philosophers of Sweden seemX. agreed that the waters of the Balticgradually sink in a regular proportion, which theyhave ventured to estimate at half an inch everyyear. Twenty centuries ago, the flat country ofScandinavia must have been covered by the sea;while the high lands rose above the waters, as somany islands of various forms and dimensions.Such indeed is the notion given us by Mela, Pliny,and Tacitus, of the vast countries round the Baltic.See in the Bibliotheque Raisonnee, torn, xl and xlv,a large abstract of Dalin's History of Sweden, com­posed in the Swedish language.
[2] In particular, Mr, Hume, the Abbe du Eos,and M. Pelloutier, Hist, des Celtes, torn. i.
[3] Diodorus Siculus, 1. v. p. 349. Edit. Wessel.Herodian, 1. vi. p ail. Jornandes, c. 55. Onthe banks of the Danube, the wine, when broughtto table, was frequently frozen into great lumps,frusta vint. Ovid Epist, ex Ponto, 1. iv. 7. 9. 10.Virgil Georgic. 1. ni. 355. The fact is confirmed,by a soldier and a philosopher, who had experiencedthe intense cold of Thrace. See Xenophon, Ana-.balis, 1. vii. p. 560. Edit. Hutchinson."


[4] BufFon Histoire Naturelle, torn. xii. p.79. 116.
[5] Cæsar de Bell. Gallic, vi. 2j. Sec. The•most inquisitive of the Germans were ignorant ofits utmost limits, although some of them had tra­velled in it more than sixty days journey.
£6] Cluverins (Germania Antiqua, 1. iii. c. 47.)investigates the small and scattered remains of theHercynian Wood.
[7] Charlevoix Histoire du Canada.
[8J Olaus Rudbeck asserts that the Swedish wo­men often bear ten or twelve children, and not un­commonly twenty or thirty; but the authority ofRudbeck is much to be suspected.
[9] Inhos artus, in h*c corpora, qua: miramur,excrescunt. Tacit. Germania, 3. 20. Cluver,1. i. c. 14.
[10] Plutarch, in Mario. The Cimbri, by way ofamusement, often slid down mountains of snow ontheir broad shields.
In] The







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 4cj


absolutely devoted to the commands of his benefactor Galerius, who,reserving to himself the intermediate countries from the confines ofItaly to those of Syria, firmly established his power over threefourths of the monarchy. In the full confidence, that the ap­proaching death of Constantius would leave him sole master of theRoman world, we are assured that he had arranged in his minda long succession of future princes, and that he meditated his ownretreat from public life, after he should have accomplistied a gloriousreign of about twenty years 7.
But within less than eighteen months, two unexpected revolutions Ambition of
> Galerius dis-
overturned the ambitious schemes of Galerius. The hopes of unit- appointed bying the weflern provinces to his empire, were disappointed by the tions.elevation of Constantine, whilst Italy and Africa were lost by thesuccessful revolt of Maxentius.
I. The fame of Constantine has rendered posterity attentive to the Birth> educa-
tion, and es-
most minute circumstances of his life and actions. The place of cape of Con-his birth, as well as the condition of his mother Helena, have been a!d°%^,the subject not only of literary but of national disputes. Notwith­standing the recent tradition, which assigns for her father, aBritish king, we are obliged to confess, that Helena was thedaughter of an innkeeper 8; but at the fame time we may defendthe legality of her marriage, against those who have represented heras the concubine of Gonstantius 9. The great Constantine was mostprobably born at Naissus, in Dacia '% and it is not surprising,that in a family and province distinguished only by the profession ofarms, the youth should discover very little inclination to improve hismind by the acquisition of knowledge". He was about eigh- A.'D.291.teen years of age when his father was promoted to the rank of Cæsar;but that fortunate event was attended with his mother's divorce;and the splendor of an imperial alliance reduced the son of Helenato a state of disgrace and humiliation. Instead of following Con-stantius into the West, he remained in the service of Diocletian,
F f f 2 signalised







OCR Output








 







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AND FALL


various tribes of Britons possessed valour without conduct, and thelove of freedom, without the spirit of union. They took up armswith savage fierceness; they laid them down, or turned themagainst each other with wild inconstancy; and while they foughtsingly, they were successively subdued. Neither the fortitude ofCaractacus, nor the despair of Boadicea, nor the fanaticism of theDruids could avert the slavery of their country, or relist the steadyprogress of the Imperial generals, who maintained the nationalglory, when the throne was disgraced by the weakest, or the mostvicious of mankind. At the very time when Domitian, confined tohis palace, felt the terrors which he inspired; his legions, under thecommand of the virtuous Agricola, defeated the collected forceof the Caledonians, at the foot of the Grampian hills; and his fleets,venturing to explore an unknown and dangerous navigation,displayed the Roman arms round every part of the island. Theconquest of Britain was considered as already atchieved; and it wasthe design of Agricola to complete and ensure his success, by theeasy reduction of Ireland, for which, in his opinion, one legion anda few auxiliaries were sufficient9. The western ifle might beimproved into a valuable possession, and the Britons would weartheir chains with the less reluctance, if the prospect and example offreedom was on every side removed from before their eyes.
But the superior merit of Agricola soon occasioned his removalfrom tha-government of Britain; and for ever disappointed thisrational, though extensive scheme of conquest. Before his depar­ture, the prudent general had provided for security as well as fordominion. He had observed, that the island is almost divided intotwo unequal parts, by the opposite gulfs, or as they are now called*the Firths of Scotland. Across the narrow interval of about fortymiles, he had drawn a line of military stations, which was after­wards fortified in the reign of Antoninus Pius, by a turf ramparterected on foundations of stone *°. This wall of Antoninus, at a
small







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 5*7


But we are still assured by monuments of brass and marble, by theimperial medals, and by the Antonine column, that neither theprince nor the people entertained any fense of this signal obligation,since they unanimously attribute their deliverance to the providenceof Jupiter, and to tlie interposition of Mercury. During the wholecourse of his reign, Marcus despised the Christians as a philosopher,•and punished them as a sovereign >"'.
By a singular fatality, the hardships which they had endured un- c^Ufi^firder the government of a virtuous prince,, immediately ceased on the ^ommodus^accession of a tyrant, and as none except themselves had experien- •nd-Severus..
A. D. 180..
ced the injustice of Marcus, so they alone were protected by thelenity of Commodus. The celebrated Marcia, the most favoured ofhis concubines, and who at length contrived the murder of her im­perial lover, entertained a singular affection for the oppressedchurch; and though it was impossible that she could reconcile thepractice of vice with the precepts of the Gospel, she might hope taatone for the frailties of her sex and profession, by declaring herselfthe patroness of the Christians ,c6. Under the gracious protectionof Marcia, they passed in safety the thirteen years of a cruel ty­ranny; and when the empire was established in the house of Severrus, they formed a domestic but more honourable connexion withthe new court.. : The emperor was persuaded, that, in a dangeroussickness, he had derived some benefit, either spiritual or physical,from the holy oil, with which one of his slaves had anointed him.He always treated with peculiar distinction several persons of bothsexes who had embraced the new religion. The nurse, as well asthe preceptor, of Caracalla, were Christians; and if that young princeever betrayed a sentiment of humanity, it was occasioned by an in­cident, which, however trifling, bore some relation to the cause ofChristianity ,C7. Under the reign of Severus, the fury of the popu­lace was checked, the rigour of ancient laws was for some time sus­pended j and the provincial governors were satisfied with receiving







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


of the Christians, who were spared by the excessive lenity of thegovernment, had at length provoked the Divine Justice? It wasnot among a licentious and exasperated populace, that the forms oflegal proceedings could be observed; it was not in an amphitheatrestained with the blood of wild beasts and gladiators, that the voiceof compassion could be heard. The impatient clamours of themultitude denounced the Christians as the enemies of gods andmen, doomed them to the severest tortures, and venturing to accuse-by name some of the most distinguished of the new sectaries, re­quired with irresistible vehemence, that they should be instantlyapprehended and cast |to the lions \ The provincial governors-and magistrates who presided in the public spectacles were usuallyinclined to gratify the inclinations, and to appease the rage of thepeople, by the sacrifice of a few obnoxious victims. But the wisdomof the emperors protected the church from the danger of thesetumultuous clamours and irregular accusations, which they justlycensured as repugnant both to the firmness and to the equity of theiradministration. The edicts of Hadrian and of Antoninus Pius ex­pressly declared that the voice of the multitude should never be ad~mitted as legal evidence to convict or to punish those unfortunate per­sons who had embraced the enthusiasm of the Christians 6'.
III. Punishment was not the inevitable consequence of conviction, Trials os the-,and the Christians, whose guilt was the most clearly proved by Ck"*1"***-tbje testimony of witnesses, or even by their voluntary confession,,still retained in their own power the alternative of life or death*Lt was not so much the past offence, as the actual, resistance, which,excited the indignation of the magistrate. An easy pardon wasgranted to repentance, and if they consented to cast a few grains* o£incense upon the altar, they were dismissed from the tribunal in:safety and with applause. It was esteemed the duty of a humane-judge to endeavour to reclaim, rather than to punissi, those deludedenthusiasts. Varying his tone according to the age, the sex, or the-
situation.







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 435


Salona, and to close the eyes of her afflicted father 8'. He entreated,but as he could no longer threaten, his prayers were received withcoldness and disdain; and the pride of Maximin was gratified,in treating Diocletian as a suppliant, and his daughter as a criminal.The death of Maximin seemed to assure the empresses of a favour­able alteration in their fortune. The public disorders relaxed thevigilance of their guard, and they easily found means to escapefrom the place of their exile, and to repair, though with someprecaution, and in disguise, to the court of Licinius. His be­haviour, in the first days of his reign, and the honourable re­ception which he gave to young Candidianus, inspired Valeriawith a secret satisfaction, both on her own account, and on that ofher adopted son. But these grateful prospects were soon succeededby horrour and astonishment, and the bloody executions whichstained the palace of Nicomedia, sufficiently convinced her, that thethrone of Maximin was filled by a tyrant more inhuman thanhimself. Valeria consulted her safety by a hasty flight, and, stiljaccompanied by her mother Prisca, they wandered above fifteenmonths ** through the provinces, concealed in the disguise of.plebeian habits. They were at length discovered at Thessalonica;and as the sentence of their death was already pronounced, theywere immediately beheaded, and their bodies thrown into the sea.The people gazed on the melancholy spectacle; but their griefand indignation were suppressed by the terrors of a military guard.Such was the unworthy fate of the wife and daughter of Diocletian.We lament their misfortunes, we cannot discover their crimes, andwhatever idea we may justly entertain of the cruelty of Licinius, itremains a matter of surprise, that he was not contented withsome more secret and decent method of revenge 8J.
The Roman world was now divided between Constantine and QUnre! he.Licinius, the former of whom was master of the West, and the fanti°e«>dlatter of the East. It might perhaps have been expected that the i,ll~iu5'
K k k 2 conquerors,







OCR Output








NOTES ON THE TENTH CHAPTER. xxxvii


'. conversion of Prussia were completed by those ad­venturers in the xiiith century.
[17] Pliny (Hist. Natur. iv. 14.), and Procopius(in Bell. Vandal. 1. i. c. 1.) agree in this opinion.They lived in distant ages, and possessed differentmeans of investigating the truth.
[18] The Ojlro and Visi, the eastern and westernGoths obtained those denominations from theiroriginal feats in Scandinavia. In all their futuremarches and settlements they preserved, with theirnames, the fame relative situation. When theyfirst departed from Sweden, the infant colony wascontained in three'vessels. The third being aheavy sailor lagged behind, and the crew, whichafterwards swelled into a nation, received fromthat circumstance the appellation of Gepidæ orLoiterers. Jornandes, c. 17*
[19] See a fragment of Peter Patricius in theExcerpta Legationum, and with regard to itsprobable date, fee Tillemont, Hist, des Empe-reurs, torn. iii. p. 346.
[zo] Omnium harum gentium insigne, rotundascuta, breves gladii, et erga reges obsequium.Tacit. Germania, c. 45. The Goths probablyacquired their Iron by the commerce of amber.
[21] Jornandes, c. 13: 14.
[22] The Heruli, and the Uregundi or Bur-gundi, are particularly mentioned. See Mascou'sHistory of the Germans, 1. v. A passage in theAugustan History, p. 28, seems to allude to thisgreat emigration. The Marcomannic war waspartly occasioned by the pressure of barbaroustribes, who fled before the arms of more northernbarbarians.
[23] Danville, Geographie Ancienne, and thethird part of his incomparable map of Europe.
[24] Tacit. Germania, c. 46.
[25] Cluver. Germ. Antiqua, 1. iii. c. 43.
[26] TheVenedi, the Slavi, and the Antes, werethe three great tribes of the fame people. Jor­nandes, c. 24.
[27] Tacitus most assuredly deserves that title,and even his cautious suspense is a proof, of his,diligent inquiries.


[28] Genealogical History of the Tartars, p. 593.Mr. Bell (vol. ii. p. 379.) traversed the Ukraine in-his journey from Peterlburgh to Constantinople.1 he modern, face of the country is a just represent­ation of the ancient, since, in the hands of theCossacks, it still remains in a state of nature.
[29] In the sixteenth chapter of Jornandes, in­stead of stcundo Mcesiam, we may venture to sub­stitute secundam, the second Mjesia, of which Mar-cianopolis was certainly the capital (fee Hierocle*de Provinuis, and Wesseling ad locum, p. 636Itinera). It is surprising how this palpable errorof the scribe could escape the judicious correctionof Grotius.
[30] The place is still called N icop. The littlestream, on whose banks it flood, falls into the Da­nube. Danville Geographie Ancienne, torn. i.P» 3°7-
[31J Stephan. Byzant, de Urbibus, p. 740.Wesseling Itinerar. p. 136. Zonaras, by an oddmistake, ascribes the foundation pf Philippopolls tothe immediate predecessor of Deciu3..
[32] Ammian. xxxi. 5.
[33] Aurel. Victor, c. 29.
[34] ViSoria: Carpic* on some medals of Deciusinsinuate these advantages.
[3;] Claudius (who afterwards reigned with so'much glory) was posted in the pass of Thermopylæwith 200 Dardanians, i-oo heavy and 160 lighthorse, 60' Cretan archers, and 1000 well armed,recruits. See an original letter from the emperorto his officer in the Augustan History, p. 200.
[36] Jornandes, c. 16—18. Zosimus, I. i. p. 22.In the general account of this war, it is easy to dis­cover the opposite prejudices of the Gothic and theGrecian writer. In carelessness alone they are alike.
[37] Montesquieu, Grandeur et Decadence desRomains.
[38] Vespasian and Titus were the last censors(Pliny Hist. Natur. vii. tg. Censorinus de DieNatali). The modesty of Trajan refused an honourwhich he deserved, and his example was a law tothe Antonines. See Pliny's Panegyric, c. 45 and 60.
[392







OCR Output








OF. THE. ROMAN EMPIRE.


Roman people acknowledged in the features of the younger Gordianthe resemblance of Scipio Africanus, recollected with pleasure thathis mother was the granddaughter of Antoninus Pius, and rested thepublic hope on those latent virtues which had hitherto, as they fondlyimagined, lain concealed in the luxurious indolence of a private life.
As soon as the Gordians had appeased the first tumult of a popu- They solicit
.' theconfirma-
lar election, they removed their court to Carthage. They were re- tion of theirceived with the acclamations of the Africans, who honoured their aut,onty'virtues, and who, since the visit of Hadrian, had never beheld themajesty of a Roman emperor. But these vain acclamations neitherstrengthened nor confirmed the title of the Gordians. They wereinduced by principle, as well as interest, to solicit the approbationof the senate; and a deputation of the noblest provincials was sent,without delay, to Rome, to relate and justify the conduct of theircountrymen, who, having long suffered with patience, were at lengthresolved to act with vigour. The letters of the new princes weremodest and respectful, excusing the necessity which had obliged*them to accept the Imperial title j but submitting their election andtheir fate to the supreme judgment of the senate'9. •'
The inclinations of the senate were neither doubtful nor divided. Thesemte
ratifies their
The birth and noble alliances of the Gordians, had intimately election osthe
Gordian 5,
connected them with the most illustrious houses of Rome. Theirfortune had created many dependants in that assembly, their merithad acquired many friends. Their mild administration opened theflattering prospect of the restoration, not only of the civil but evenof the republican government* The terror of military vio­lence, which had first obliged the senate to forget the murder ofAlexander, and to ratify the election of a barbarian peasant *°, nowproduced a contrary effect, and provoked them to assert the injuredrights of freedom and humanity. The hatred of Maximin towardsthe senate was declared and implacable; the tamest submission hadnot appeased his fury, the most cautious innocence would not re­


7 move







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AND FALL


presence and example; and we are informed that Hadrian, as wellas Trajan, frequently condescended to instruct the unexperiencedsoldiers, to reward the diligent, and sometimes to dispute with;them the prize of superior strength or dexterity40, Under thereigns of those princes, the science of tactics was cultivated with suc­cess; and as long as the empire retained any vigour, their militaryinstructions were respected, as the most perfect model of Romandiscipline.
The legions Nine centuries of war had gradually introduced into the serviceperoT*. n^any alterations and improvements. The legions described byPolybius*', and commanded by the Scipios, differed very materiallyfrom those which atchieved the victories of Caesar, or defended themonarchy of Hadrian and the Antonines. The constitution of theImperial legion may be described in a few words 4\ The heavy-armed infantry, which composed its principal strength 4J, was di­vided into ten cohorts, and fifty-five companies, under the ordersof a correspondent number of tribunes and centurions. The firstcohort, which always claimed the post of honour and the custody ofthe eagle, was formed of eleven hundred and five soldiers, themost approved for valour and fidelity. The remaining nine cohortsconsisted each of five hundred and fifty-five; and the whole bodyof legionary infantry amounted to six thousand one hundred men.Arms. Their arms were uniform, and admirably adapted to the nature oftheir service: an open helmet, with a lofty crest; a breast-plate, orcoat of mail j greaves on their legs, and an ample buckler on theirleft arm. The buckler was of an oblong and concave figure, four sectin length, and two and a half in breadth, framed of a light wood,covered with a bull's hide, and strongly guarded with plates ofbrass. Besides a lighter spear, the legionary soldier grasped in hisright hand the formidable pilumt a ponderous javelin, whose utmostlength was about six feet, and which was terminated by a massytriangular point of steel of eighteen inches4*. This instrument
was







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AND FALL


The superstition of the people was not embittered by any mixtureof theological rancour; nor was it confined by the chains of anyspeculative system. The devout polytheist, though fondly attachedto his national rites, admitted with implicit faith the different reli­gions of the earthFear, gratitude, and curiosity, a dream or anomen, a singular disorder, or a distant journey, perpetually disposedhim to multiply the articles of his belief, and to enlarge the listof his protectors. The thin texture of the Pagan mythology wasinterwoven with various, but not discordant materials* As soon asit was allowed that sages and heroes, who had lived, or who haddied for the benefit of their country, were exalted to a state ofpower and immortality, it was universally confessed, that theydeserved, if not the adoration, at least the reverence of all mankind.The deities of a thousand groves arid a thousand streams possessed,in peace, their local and respective influence; nor could the Romanwho deprecated the wrath of the Tiber, deride the Egyptian whopresented his offering to the beneficent genius of the Nile. Thevisible powers of Nature, the planets, and the elements, were thefame throughout the universe. The invisible governors of the mo­ral world were inevitably cast in a similar mould of fiction andallegory. Every virtue, and even vice, acquired its divine repre­sentative; every art and profession its patron, whose attributes, inthe most distant ages and countries, were uniformly derived fromthe character of their peculiar votaries. A republic of gods of suchopposite tempers and interests required, in every system, the mode­rating hand of a supreme magistrate, who was gradually invested, byflattery and knowledge, with the sublime perfections of an EternalParent, and an Omnipotent Monarch +. Such was the mildspirit of antiquity, that the nations were less attentive to thedifference, than to the resemblance, of their religious worship.The Greek, die-Roman, and the barbarian, as they met before their1respective altars, easily persuaded themselves, that under various
names,







OCR Output








456 THE DECLINE AND FALL


eternity, had designed to abolish those sacred rites which had servedto distinguish his chosen people, the repeal of them would havebeen no less clear and solemn than their first promulgation: that,instead of those frequent declarations, which either suppose or assertthe perpetuity of the Mosaic religion, it would have been re­presented as a provisionary scheme intended to last only till thecoming of the Messiah, who should instruct mankind in a moreperfect mode of faith and of worship ,+: that the Messiah him­self, and his disciples who conversed with him on earth, instead ofauthorizing by their example the most minute observances of theMosaic law "5, would have published to the world the abolition ofthose useless and obsolete ceremonies, without suffering Christianityto remain during so many years obscurely confounded among thesects of the Jewish church. Arguments like these appear to havebeen used in the defence of the expiring cause of the Mosaic law;but the industry of our learned divines has abundantly explainedthe ambiguous language of the Old Testament, and the ambiguousconduct of the apostolic teachers. It was proper gradually to un­fold the system of the Gospel, and to pronounce with the utmostcaution and tenderness a sentence of condemnation so repugnant tothe inclination and prejudices of the believing Jews.TheNaza- The history of the church of Jerusalem affords a lively proofofjerusaiem. of the necessity of those precautions, and of the deep impressionwhich the Jewish religion had made on the minds of its sectaries.The first fifteen bishops of Jerusalem were all circumcised Jews;and the congregation over which they presided, united the law ofMoses with the doctrine of Christ ,s. It was natural that the pri­mitive tradition of a church which was founded only forty days- after the death of Christ, and was governed almost as many yearsunder the immediate inspection of his apostles, should be receivedas the standard of orthodoxy ,?. The distant churches very fre­quently appealed to the authority of their venerable Parent, and
relieved







OCR Output








OF THE ROM AM EMPIRE. 393


dignity. The former required indulgence and relaxation, the latter
compelled him to direct, from the bed of sickness, the administration
of a great empire. He resolved to pass the remainder of his days
in honourable repose, to place his glory beyond the reach of
fortune, and to relinquish the theatre of the world to his younger
and more active associates
The ceremony of his abdication was performed in a spacious
plain, about three miles from Nicomedia. The emperor ascended a
lofty throne, and in a speech, full of reason and dignity, declared his
intention, both to the people and to the soldiers who were assembled
on this extraordinary occasion. As soon as he had divested himself of 3°S*
the purple, he withdrew from the gazing multitude; and traversing
the city in a covered chariot, proceeded, without delay, to the favourite
retirement which he had chosen in his native country of Dalmatia.
On the fame day, which was the first of May "", Maximian, as it had
been previously concerted, made his resignation of the imperial
dignity at Milan. Even in the splendour of the Roman triumph, Compliance
. .. r of Maximian.
Diocletian had meditated his design of abdicating the government.
As he wished to secure the obedience of Maximian, he exacted fromhim either a general assurance that he would submit his actions to theauthority of his benefactor, or a particular promise that he woulddescend from the throne, whenever he should receive the adviceand the example. This engagement, though it was confirmedby the solemnity of an oath before- the altar of the CapitolineJupiter "°, would have proved a feeble restraint on the fierce tem­per of Maximian, whose passion was the love of power, and whoneither desired present tranquillity nor future reputation. Butunable in one moment to surmount the habits of twenty years,he submitted, however reluctantly, to the ascendant which hiswiser colleague had acquired over him, and retired, immediatelyafter his abdication, to a villa in Lucania, where it was almost im-Vol. I. E e e possible







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


CHAP. IV.
The crueltyt follies, and murder of Commodus,—^EleEiionof Pertinax—his. attempts to reform the State—»hisajsajfination by the Prætorian Guards,
THE mildness of Marcus, which the rigid discipline of the indulgencestoics was unable to eradicate, formed, at the fame time,the most amiable, and the only defective part of his character.His excellent understanding was often deceived by the unsuspecting'goodness of his heart. Artful men, who study the passions of princes,and conceal their own, approached his person in the disguise ofphilosophic sanctity, and acquired riches and honours by affectingto despise them *. His excessive indulgence to his brother, his wife,and his son, passed the bounds of private virtue, and became a*'public injury, by the example and consequences of their vices.
Faustina, the daughter of Pius and the wife of Marcus, has been To his wifeas much celebrated for her gallantries as for her beauty. The Faustm*grave simplicity of the philosopher,, was ill-calculated to engage herwanton levity, or to fix that unbounded passion for variety, which*often discovered personal merit in the meanest of mankind *. TheCupid of the, ancients, was, in general, a very sensual deity; andthe amours of an empress, as they exact on her fide the plainestadvances, are seldom susceptible of much sentimental delicacy.Marcus was the only man in the empire who seemed ignorant orinsensible of the: irregularities of Faustina; which, according" tothe prejudices of every age, reflected some disgrace on the injured1husband. He promoted several of her lover6 to posts-of honour andprofit', and during a connexion of.thirty years, invariably gave


2 her







OCR Output








S6z THE DECLINE AND FALL


sophist, while the cathedral resounded with the loudest and most ex­travagant acclamations in the praise os his divine eloquence. Againstthose who resisted his power, or refused to flatter his vanity, theprelate of Antioch was arrogant, rigid, and inexorable; but he re­laxed the discipline, and lavished the treasures of the church on hisdependent clergy, who were permitted to imitate their master inthe gratification of every sensual appetite. For Paul indulged him­self very freely in the pleasures of the table, and he had receivedinto the episcopal palace two young and beautiful women, as theconstant companions of his leisure momentaHeisdcgrad- Notwithstanding these scandalous vices, if Paul of SamosatafceofAn-h° **ad preserved the purity of the orthodox faith, his reign over theaTo capital of Syria would have ended only with his life; and had a
seasonable persecution intervened, an effort of courage might perhapshave placed him in the rank of saints and martyrs. Some nice andsubtle errors, which he imprudently adopted and obstinately main­tained, concerning the doctrine of the Trinity, excited the zeal andindignation of the eastern churches ll8. From Egypt to the Euxinesea, the bishops were in arms and in motion. Several councilswere held, confutations were published, excommunications werepronounced, ambiguous explanations were by turns accepted andrefused, treaties were concluded and violated, and at length Paul ofSamosata was degraded from his episcopal character, by the sentenceof seventy or eighty bishops, who assembled for that purpose atAntioch, and who, without consulting the rights of the clergy orpeople, appointed a successor by their own authority. The manifestirregularity of this proceeding increased the numbers of the discon­tented faction; and as Paul, who was no stranger to the arts ofcourts, had insinuated himself into the favour of Zenobia, he main­tained above four years the posteffion of the episcopal house andoffice. The victory of Aurelian changed the face of the East, andthe two contending parties, who applied to each other the epithet*
of


I







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE: 5:3


mysterious doctrines which were already diffused among the people,insensibly attracted the curiosity of <their sovereigns. When the em- a. d. us.press Mammæa passed through Antiooh, she expressed a desire ofconversing with the celebrated OrigEn, the fame of whose piety andlearning was spread over the East. Origen obeyed so flattering aninvitation, and though lie could not expect to succeed in the con­version of an artful and ambitious woman, she listened with pleasureto his eloquent exhortations, and honourably dismissed him to hisretirement in Palestine "+. The sentiments of Mammæa were adoptedby her son Alexander, and the philosophic devotion of that emperorwas marked by a singular but injudicious regard for the Christianreligion. In his domestic chapel he placed the statues of Abraham,of Orpheus, Apollonius, and of Christ, as of the most respectablesoges who had instructed mankind in the various modes of addres­sing their homage to the supreme and universal deity "s. A purerfaith, as well as worship, was openly professed and practised amonghis household. Bishops, perhaps for the first time, were seen atcourt; and, after the death of Alexander, when the inhuman Maxi- A nmin discharged his fury on the favourites and servants of his un­fortunate benefactor, a great number of Christians, of every rankand of both sexes, were involved in the promiscuous mastacre, which,,r account, has improperly received the name of Persccu-
the cruel disposition of Maximin, the effects of . .
r Of Maximin,.
his resentment against the Christians were of a very local and tem- Philip, and
f . # Decius.
porary nature, arid the piou6 Origen, who had been proscribed as &devoted victim, was still reserved to convey the truths of the Gospelto the ear Of monarchs4'7. He addressed several edifying letters a.D. 344^to the emperor Philip, to his wife, and to his mother; and as soonas that prince, who was born in the neighbourhood of Palestine,had usurped the imperial sceptre, the Christians acquired a friendand a protector. The public and evea partial favour of Philip to-
5. wards


tion"6.







OCR Output








320 THE DECLINE AND FALL


He marchesinto the East,and is assassi­nated.


A. D. 274.Oaober.


of a citizen, chastised by military execution the flighted offences,and transferred the stern discipline of the camp into the civil admi­nistration of the laws. His love of justice often became a blindand furious passion; and whenever he deemed his own or thepublic safety endangered, he disregarded the rules of evidence, andthe proportion of punishments. The unprovoked rebellion withwhich the Romans rewarded his services, exasperated his haughty spirit.The noblest families of the capital were involved in the guilt orsuspicion of this dark conspiracy. A hasty spirit of revenge urgedthe bloody prosecution, and it proved fatal to one of the nephews .of the emperor. The executioners were fatigued, the prisonscrowded, and the unhappy senate lamented the death or absence ofits most illustrious members 9!. Nor was the pride of Aurelian lessoffensive to that assembly than his cruelty. Ignorant or impatientof the restraints of civil institutions, he disdained to hold his powerby any other title than that of the sword, and governed by right ofconquest an empire which he had saved and subdued 9+.
It was observed by one of the most sagacious of the Romanprinces, that the talents of his predecessor Aurelian, were bettersuited to the command of an army, than to the government of anempire95. Conscious of the character in which Nature and expe­rience had enabled him to excel, he again took the field a fewmonths after his triumph. It was expedient to exercise the restlesstemper of the legions in some foreign war, and the Persian monarch,exulting in the shame of Valerian, still braved with impunity theoffended majesty of Rome. At the head of an army, less formidableby its numbers than by its discipline and valour, the emperor ad­vanced as far as the Streights which divide Europe from Asia. Hethere experienced, that the most absolute power is a weak defence a-gainst the effects of despair. He had threatened one of his secretaries whowas accused of extortion; and it was known that he seldom threat­ened in vain. The last hope which remained for the criminal, was
to







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AND FALL


Prætorian guards, who trembled for their wives and children in thecamp of Alba, near Rome, executed the sentence of the senate.Maximin, abandoned by his guards, was flain in his tent, with hisson, whom he had associated to the honours of. the purple, Anu-linus the præfect, and the principal ministers of hi3 tyranny }fc.Their heads, borne on the point of spears, convinced the citizens ofAquileia, that the siege was at an end; the gates of the city werethrown open, a liberal market was provided for the hungrytroops of Maximin, and the whole army joined in solemn protesta­tions of fidelity to the senate and people of Rome, and to theirportrait. iawfui emperors Maximus and Balbinus. Such was the deserved-fate of a brutal savage, destitute, as he has generally been re-*presented, of every sentiment that distinguishes a civilized oreven a human being. The body was suited to the foul. The sta­ture of Maximin exceeded the measure of eight feet, and circum­stances almost incredible are related of his matchless strength andappetite ,6. Had he lived in a less enlightened age, tradition andpoetry might well have described him as one of those monstrousgiants, whose supernatural power was constantly exerted for thedestruction of mankind,the It is easier to conceive than to describe the universal joy of theRoman world on the fall of the tyrant, the news of which is saidto have been carried in four days from Aquileia to Rome. The re­turn of Maximus was a triumphal procession, his colleague and youngGordian went out to meet him, and the three princes entered the capi­tal attended by the ambassadors of almost all the cities of Italy, salutedwith the splendid offerings of gratitude and superstition, and re­ceived with the unfeigned acclamations of the senate and people, whopersuaded themselves that a golden age would succeed to an age ofiron57. The conduct of the two emperors corresponded with theseexpectations. They administered justice in person; and the rigourof the one was tempered by the other's clemency. The oppressive
2 taxes







OCR Output








326 THE DECLINE AND FALL


honour, and to express his wonder, that they should elect his ageand infirmities to succeed the martial vigour of Aurelian. "Are"these limbs, conscript fathers! fitted to sustain the weight of ar-"mour, or to practise the exercises of the camp? The variety of"climates, and the hardships of a military life, would soon op-'* press a feeble constitution, which subsists only by the most tender"management. My exhausted strength scarcely enables me to"discharge the duty of a senator; how insufficient would it prove*' to the arduous labours of war and government. Can you fup-"pose, that the legions will respect a weak old man, whose days'* have been spent in the shade of peace and retirement? Canu you desire that I should ever find reason to regret the favourable"opinion of the senate 10?"and accepts The reluctance of Tacitus, and it might possibly be sincere, was
the purple. t .er
encountered by the affectionate obstinacy of the senate. Five hun­dred voices repeated at once, in eloquent confusion,' that the greases}of the Roman princes, Numa, Trajan, Hadrian, and the Antonines,had ascended the throne in a very advanced season of life; that themind, not the body, a sovereign, not a soldier, was the object oftheir choice; and that they expected from him no more than toguide by his wisdom the valour of the legions. These preslingthough tumultuary instances, were seconded by a more regularoration of Metius Falconius, the next on the consular bench toTacitus himself. He reminded the assembly of the evils whichRome had endured from the vices of headstrong and capriciousyouths, congratulated them on the election of a virtuous and ex­perienced senator, and, with a manly, though perhaps a selfish,freedom, exhorted Tacitus to remember the reasons of his elevation,and to seek a successor, not in his own family, but in the republic.The speech of Falconius was enforced by a general acclamation.The emperor elect submitted to the authority of his country, andreceived the voluntary homage of his equals. The judgment of the
senate







OCR Output








OFTHEROMANEMPIRE. 475


task to convince him that it was the safest and most prudent partythat he could possibly embrace.
III. The supernatural gifts, which even in this life were ascribed TheTH:gDto the Christians above the rest of mankind, must have conduced to Miracuioustheir own comfort, and very frequently to the conviction of infidels, p^rive*theBesides the occasional prodigies, which might sometimes be effected church-by the immediate interposition of the Deity when he suspended thelaws of Nature for the service of religion, the Christian church,from the time of the apostles and their first disciples7', has claimedan uninterrupted succession of miraculous powers, the gift oftongues, of vision and of prophecy, the power of expelling dæ­mons, of healing the sick, and of raising the dead. The know­ledge of foreign languages was frequently communicated to the con­temporaries of Irenæus, though Irenæus himself was left to strugglewith the difficulties of a barbarous dialect whilst he preached thegospel to the natives of Gaul 7\ The divine inspiration, whetherit was conveyed in the form of a waking or of a sleeping vision, isdescribed as a favour very liberally bestowed on all ranks of thefaithful, on women as on elders, on boys as well as upon bishops.When their devout minds were sufficiently prepared by a course ofprayer, of fasting, and of vigils, to receive the extraordinary im­pulse, they were transported out of their senses, and delivered inextasy what was inspired, being mere organs of the holy spirit, justas a pipe or flute is of him who blows into it7S. "We may add,that the design of these visions was, for the most part, either to dis­close the future history, or to guide the present administration ofthe church. The expulsion of the dæmons from the bodies ofthose unhappy persons whom they had been permitted to torment,was considered as a signal though ordinary triumph of religion,and is repeatedly alleged by the ancient apologists, as the most con­vincing evidence of the truth of Christianity. The awful ceremonywas usually performed in a public manner, and in the presence of
P p p 2 a great







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AND FALL


wearied youth, and, almost ia a breath, overthrew seven of thestrongest soldiers in the army. A gold collar was the prize ofhis matchless vigour and activity, and he was immediately ap­pointed to serve in the horse-guards who always attended on theperson of the sovereign \
Maximin, for that was his name, though born on the territoriesHis military t
service and of the empire, descended from a mixed race of barbarians. Hisfather was a Goth, and his mother, of the nation of the Alani.He displayed, on every occasion, a valour equal to his strength;and his native fierceness was soon tempered or disguised by theknowledge of the world. Under the reign of Severus and his son,he obtained the rank of centurion, with the favour and esteemof both those princes-, the former of whom was an excellent judgeof merit. Gratitude forbade Maximin to serve under the assassin ofCaracalla. Honour taught him to decline the effeminate insults ofElagabalus. On the accession of Alexander he returned to court,and was placed by that prince, in a station useful to the service;and honourable to himself. The fourth legion, to which he wasappointed tribune, soon became, under his care, the best disciplinedof the whole army. With the general applause of the soldiers*who bestowed on their favourite hero the names of Ajax andHercules, he was successively promoted to the first military' com­mandand had not he still retained too much of his savage origin,the emperor might perhaps have given his sister in marriage to theson of Maximift +.
Conspiracy of Instead of securing his fidelity, these favours served only to in-'Maximin. flame the ambition of the Thracian peasant, who deemed hisfortune inadequate to his merit, as long as he was constrained toacknowledge a superior. Though a stranger to real wisdom, hewas not devoid of a selfish cunning, which shewed him, -that theemperor had lost the affection of the army, and taught him toimprove their discontent to his own advantage. It is easy for faction'
and







OCR Output








3o6 THE DECLINE AND FALL


respondence reached the ears of the soldiers, it would most pro­bably have cost Tetricus his life; nor could he resign the scepterof the West, without committing an act of treason against himself.He affected the appearances of a civil war, led his forces into thefield against Aurelian, posted them in the most disadvantageousmanner, betrayed his own counsels to the enemy, and with a fewchosen friends deserted in the beginning of the action. The rebellegions, though disordered and dismayed by the unexpected trea­chery of their chief, defended themselves with a desperate valour,till they were cut in pieces almost to a man, in this bloody and me­morable battle, which was fought near Chalons in Champagne 5°.The retreat of the irregular auxiliaries, Franks and Batavianswhom the conqueror compelled or persuaded to repass the Rhine,,restored the general tranquillity, and the power of Aurelian was ac­knowledged from the wall of Antoninus to the columns of Hercules.
As early as the reign of Claudius, the city of Autun, alone andunassisted, had ventured to declare against the legions of Gaul.After a siege of seven months, they stormed and plundered thatunfortunate city, already wasted by famine s\ Lyons, oh the con­trary, had resisted with obstinate disaffection the arms of Aurelian.We read of the punishment of Lyons but there is not any men­tion of the rewards of Autun. Such, indeed, is the policy of civilwar; severely to remember injuries, and to forget the most import*ant services. Revenge is profitable, gratitude is expensive.A.D. 273. Aurelian had no sooner secured the person and provinces of Tetri-Zenobfa i °f cus» than he turned his arms against Zenobia, the celebrated queenof Palmyra and the East. Modern Europe has produced severalillustrious women who have sustained with glory the weight of em­pire; nor is our own age destitute of such distinguished characters.But Zenobia is perhaps the only female, whose superior geniusbroke through the servile indolence imposed on her sex by the cli­mate and manners of Asia'*. She claimed her descent from the
Macedonian







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AND FALL


peculiarly miserable; and they experienced at once the complicatedtyranny of their masters, of the barbarians, of the soldiers, and ofthe officers of the revenue
Their rebel- Their patience was at last provoked into despair. On every sidethey rose in multitudes, armed with rustic weapons, and with;irresistible fury. The ploughman became a foot soldier, the shep­herd mounted on horseback, the deserted villages and open townswere abandoned to the flames, and the ravages of the peasantsequalled those of the fiercest barbarians ". They asserted the naturalrights of men, but they asserted those rights with, the most savagecruelty- The Gallic nobles justly dreading their revenge, eithertook refuge in the fortified cities, or fled from the wild scene of"anarchy. The peasants reigned without controul; and two of theirmost daring leaders had the folly and rashness to assume the im­perial ornaments Their power soon expired at the approach ofthe legions. The strength of union and discipline obtained an easy
and chastise- victory over a licentious and divided multitude ".. A severe re­taliation was inflicted on the peasants who were found in arms;the affrighted remnant returned to their respective habitations, andtheir unsuccessful effort for freedom served only to confirm theirslavery. So strong and uniform is the current of popular passions,that we may venture, from very scanty materials, to relate the par­ticulars of this war; but we are not disposed to believe that theprincipal leaders Ælianus and Amandus were Christiansor toinsinuate, that the rebellion, as it happened in the time ofLuther, was occasioned, by the abuse of those benevolent principlesof Christianity, which inculcate the natural freedom of mankind.
A. D- 287. Maximian had no sooner recovered Gaul from the hands of the
Revolt of Ca-
raufiusio peasants, than he lost Britain by the usurpation of Carausius.
Ever since the successful rashness of the franks under the reign ofProbus, their daring countrymen had constructed squadrons of lightbrigantines, in which they incessantly ravaged the provinces
i- adjacent







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


was indeed much inferior to our modern fire-arms; since it was ex­hausted by a single discharge, at the distance of only ten or twelvepaces. Yet when it was launched by a firm and skilful hand, therewas not any cavalry that durst venture within its reach, nor anyshield or corslet that could sustain the impetuosity of its weight. Assoon as the Roman had darted his pilum, he drew his sword, andrushed forwards to close with the enemy. It was a short well-tempered Spanish blade, that carried a double edge, and was alikesuited to the purpose of striking, or of pushing; but the soldier wasalways instructed to prefer the latter use of his weapon, as his ownbody remained less exposed, whilst he inflicted a more dangerouswound on his adversary 4V The legion was* usually drawn up eightdeep; and the regular distance of three feet was left between thefiles as well as ranks *6. A body of troops, habituated to preservethis open order, in a long front and a rapid charge, found them*selves prepared to execute every disposition which the circumstancesof war, or the skill of their leader might suggest. The soldierpossessed a free space for hip arms and motions, and sufficient inter*-vals were allowed, through which seasonable reinforcements mightbe introduced to the relief of the exhausted combatants 47. Thetactics of the Greeks and Macedonians were formed on very differ­ent principles. The strength of the phalanx depended on sixteenranks of long pikes, wedged together in the closest array+!. Butit was soon discovered by reflection, as well as by the event, that thestrength of the phalanx was unable to contend with the activity ofthe legion *
The cavalry, without which the force of the legion would haveremained imperfect, was divided into ten troops or squadrons; thefirst, as the companion of the first cohort, consisted of an hun­dred and thirty-two men; whilst each of the other nine amountedonly to sixty-six. The entire establishment formed a regiment, ifwe may use the modern expression, of seven hundred and twenty-six horse, naturally connected with its respective legion, but occa­sionally







OCR Output








Ixxiv NOTES ON THE FIFTEENTH CHAPTER.


ously described by Apuleius, in the eighth book ofhis Metamorphoses.
[149] The office of Asiarch was of this nature,and it is frequently mentioned in Aristides, the in­scriptions, &c. It was annual and elective. None butthe vainest citizens could desire the honour; nonebut the most wealthy could support the expence.See in the Patres Apostol. torn. ii. p. 200. withhow much indifference Philip the Asiarch conduct­ed himself in the martyrdom of Polycarp. Therewere likewise Bithyniarcba., Lyciarchs, &c.
[150] The modern critics are not disposed to be­lieve what the fathers almost unanimously assert,that St. Matthew composed a Hebrew gospel, ofwhich only the Greek translation is extant. Itseems, however, dangerous to reject their testimony.
[ 1 51 ] Under the reigns of Nero and Domitian, andin the cities of Alexandria, Antioch, Rome, and Eph-esus. See Mill. Prolegomena ad Nov. Testament, andDr. Lardner's fair and extensive collection, vol. xv.
[152] The Alogians (Epiphanius de Ha:rcs. 51.}disputed the genuineness of the Apocalypse, becausethe church of Thyatira was not yet sounded. Epi­phanius,, who allows the fact, extricates himselffrom the difficulty, by ingeniously supposing, thatit. John wrote in the spirit of prophecy. See Abau-zit Discours for l'Apocalypse.
[153] The epistles of Ignatius and Dionysius (ap«Euscb. iv. 23.) point out many churches in Asia andGreece. That of Athens seems to have been oneof the least flourishing-.
{154] Lucian in Alexandro, c 25. Christianity?however must have been very unequally diffusedoverPontus; since in the middle of the third cen?-icry there were no more than seventeen believers in.•he extensive diocese of Neo-Caesarea. Sec M. deTillemont, Memoires Ecclesiast. torn. iv. p. 675,from Basil and Gregory of Nyssa, who were themrselves natives of Cappadocia.
[155] According to the ancients-, Jesus Christ-suffered under the consulship of the two Gemini, inthe year 29 os our present :era. Pliny was sentinto Bithynia (according to Pagi) in the year 110.
[156] Plin. Eplst. x. 97.


[157] Chrysostom. Opera, torn. vii. p. 6j8, 8io»Edit. Savil.
[icjfl John Malela, torn. ii. p. 144. He draws-the fame conclusion with regard to, the populouscessof Antioch.
[159] Chrysostom. torn. i. p. 592. I am indebtedfor these passages, though not for my inference,to the learned Dr. Lardner. Credibility of theGospel History, vol. xii. p. 370.
[160] Basnage, Histoire des Juifs, L ii. c. 20,41,22, 23. has examined with the most critical accura­cy, the curious treatise of Philo, which describesthe Therapeutae. By proving that it was composed asearly as the time of Augustus, Basnage has demon*strated, in spite of Eusebius (1. ii. c. 17.), and a crowdof modern Catholics, that the Therapeutae were nei­ther Christians nor monks. It still remains pro­bable that they changed their name, preserved theirmanners, adopted some new articles of faith, andgradually became the fathers of the Egyptian As­cetics.
[161] See a letter of Hadrian in the AugustanHistory, p. 245.
[162] For the succession of Alexandrian bishops,consult Renaudot's History, p. 24, &c. This curi­ous fact is preserved by the patriarch Eutychius(Annal. torn. i. p. 334. Vers. Pocock), and its inter­nal evidence would alone be a sufficient answer to allthe objections which Bishop Pearson has urged int he Vindiciae Ignatianæ.
[163] Ammian. Marcellin. xxii. 16.[164] Origen contra Celfum, Lr, p. 40.
[165] Ingens multitudo is the expression of Taci­tus, xv. 44.
[i65] T. Liv. xxxix. 13. 15, 16, 17. Nothing-could exceed the horror and consternation of thesenate on the appearance of the Bacchanalians,whose depravity is described, and perhaps exagge-rated by Livy.
[167] Eusebius, I. vi. c. 43. The Latin trans­lator (M. de Valois) has thought proper to reducethe number of presbyters to forty-four.
[168] This proportion of the presbyters and ofthe poor, to the rest of the people,, was originallyS fixed







OCR Output








574 THE DECLINE AND FALL


la a small town in Phrygia, of whose name as well as situationwe are left ignorant, it should seern, that the magistrates and thebody of the people had embraced the Christian faith; and as someresistance might be apprehended to the execution of the edict, thegovernor of the province was supported by a nuraeroua detach­ment of legionaries. On their approach the citizens threw them­selves into the church, with the resolution either of defendingby arms that sacred edifice, or of perishing in its ruins. Theyindignantly rejected the notice and permission which was giventhem, to retire, till the soldiers, provoked by their obstinate refusal*set fire to the building on all sides, and consumed, by this extra­ordinary kind of martyrdom, a great number of Phrygians withtheir wives and children'6o.Subsequent Some flight disturbances, though they were suppressed almost assoon as excited, in Syria and the frontiers of Armenia, afforded theenemies of the church a very plausible occasion to insinuate, that thosetroubles had been secretly fomented by the intrigues of the bisliops,who had already forgotten their ostentatious professions of passiveand unlimited obedience "5,. The resentment, or the fears, ofDiocletian, at length transported him beyond the bounds of mode­ration, which he had hitherto preserved, and he declared, in a scriesof cruel edicts, his intention of abolishing the Christian name. Bythe first of these edicts, the governors of the provinces were directedto apprehend all persons of the ecclesiastical order; and the prisons,destined for the vilest criminals, were soon filled with a multi_tude of bissiops, presbyters, deacons, readers, and exorcists. Bya second edict, the magistrates were commanded to employ everymethod of severity, which might reclaim them from their odioussuperstition, and oblige them to return to the established worshipof the gods. This rigorous order was extended, by a subsequentedict, to the whole body of Christians, who were exposed to a vio-lent and general persecution ,6\ Instead of those salutary restraints,


which







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.. 547


bition is always prepared to encounter in the pursuit of honours.Four Roman emperors, with their families, their favourites, andtheir adherents, perished by the sword in the space of ten years,during which, the bishop of Carthage guided by his authorityand eloquence the counsels of the African church. It was onlyin the third year of his administration, that he had reason, during afew months, to apprehend the severe edicts of Decius, the vigilance Hi]£,n8er
r . ° and night f
of the magistrate, and the clamours of the multitude, who loudlydemanded, that Cyprian, the leader of the Christians, mould bethrown to the lions. Prudence suggested the necessity of a tem­porary retreat, and the voice of prudence was obeyed. He with­drew himself into an obscure solitude, from whence he couldmaintain a constant correspondence with the clergy and peo­ple of Carthage; and concealing himself till the tempest waspast, he preserved his life without relinquishing either his poweror his reputation. His extreme caution did not however escapethe censure of the more rigid Christians who lamented, or thereproaches of his personal enemies who insulted, a conduct whichthey considered as a pusillanimous and criminal desertion of themost sacred duty ?6. >The propriety of reserving himself for thefuture exigencies of the church, the example of several holybishops 77, and the divine admonitions which, as he declares him­self, he frequently received in visions, and extafies, were the reasonsalleged in his justification 7 *. But his best apology may be foundin the cheerful resolution, with which, about eight years afterwards>"he suffered death in the cause of religion. The authentic historyof his martyrdom has been recorded with unusual candour andimpartiality. A short abstract therefore of its most important cir­cumstances will convey the clearest information of the spirit, and ofthe forms, of the Roman persecutions 7'.
When Valerian was consul for the third, and Gallienus for the A. D. 2;^fourth time; Paternus, proconsul of Africa, summoned Cyprian
4 A 2 to







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


Macedonian kings of Egypt, equalled in beauty her ancestor Cleo­patra, and far surpassed that princess in chastity55 and valour.Zenobia was esteemed the most lovely as well as the greatest of hersex. She was of a dark complexion (for in speaking of a lady, her beauty
1 x * , and learnin
these trifles become important). Her teeth were of a pearly white­ness, and her large black eyes sparkled with uncommon fire, tem­pered by the most attractive sweetness. Her voice wa3 strong andharmonious. Her manly understanding was strengthened andadorned by study. She was not ignorant of the Latin tongue, butpossessed in equal perfection the Greek, the Syriac, and the Egyp­tian languages. She had drawn up for her own use an epitome oforiental history, and familiarly compared the beauties of Homer andPlato under the tuition of the sublime Longinus.
This accomplished woman gave her hand to Odenathus, who from her valour,a private station raised himself to the dominion of the Eatst. Shesoon became the friend and companion of a hero. In the intervalsof war, Odenathus passionately delighted in the exercise of hunt­ing; he pursued with ardour the wild beasts of the desert, lions,panthers, and bears; and the ardour of Zenobia in that dangerousamusement was not inferior to his own. She had inured her con­stitution to fatigue, disdained the use of a covered carriage, gene­rally appeared on horseback in a military habit, and sometimesmarched several miles on foot at the head of the troops. The suc­cess of Odenathus, was in a great measure ascribed to her incom­parable prudence and fortitude. Their splendid victories over theGreat King, whom they twice pursued as far as the gates of Ctesi-phon, laid the foundations of their united fame and power. Thearmies which they commanded, and the provinces which they hadsaved, acknowledged not any other sovereigns than their invinciblechiefs. The senate and people of Rome revered a stranger who hadavenged their captive emperor, and even the insensible son of Vale­rian accepted Odenathus for his legitimate colleague.
'R r 2 After







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


to involve some of the principal officers of the army in his danger,or at least in his fears. Artfully counterfeiting his master's hand, heshewed them, in a long and bloody list, their own names devotedto death. Without suspecting or examining the fraud, they resolvedto secure their lives by the murder of the emperor. On his march,between Byzantium and Heraclea, Aurelian was suddenly attackedby the conspirators, whose stations gave them a right to surroundhis person ; and, after a short resistance, fell by the hand of Mucapor,a general whom he had always loved and trusted. He died regret- Ated by the army, detested by the senate, but universally acknow­ledged as a warlike and fortunate prince, the useful though severereformer of a degenerate state 9\


Vol. I.


CHAP.







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


It plight therefore be expected, that they would unite with justindignation against any sect or people which should separate itselffrom the communion of mankind, and claiming the exclusive pos­session of divine knowledge, should disdain, as impious and idola­trous, every form of worshipbut its own. The rights of tolerationwere held by mutual indulgence: they were naturally forfeited bya refusal of the accustomed tribute. As the payment of this tributewas inflexibly refused by the Jews, and by them alone, the consi­deration of the treatment which they experienced from the Romanmagistrates, will serve to explain how far these speculations are justi­fied by facts, and will lead us to discover the true causes of thepersecution of Christianity.
Without repeating what has been already mentioned, of the Rebelliousreverence of the Roman Princes and governors for the Temple of jew"0 Ch<Jerusalem, we shall only observe, that the destruction of the templeand city was accompanied and followed by every circumstance thatcould exasperate the minds of the conquerors, and authorize reli­gious persecution by the most specious arguments of political justiceand the public safety. From the reign of Nero to that of Arito-ninus Pius, the Jews discovered a fierce impatience of the dominionof Rome, which repeatedly broke out in the most furious massacresand insurrections. Humanity is shocked at the recital of the hor­rid cruelties which they committed in the cities of Egypt, of Cyprus,and of Cyrene, where they dwelt in treacherous friendship withthe unsuspecting natives '; and we are tempted to applaud thesevereretaliation which was exercised by the arms of the legions against arace of fanatics, whose dire and credulous superstition seemed torender them the implacable enemies not only of the Roman govern­ment, but of humankind \ The enthusiasm of the jews was sup­ported by the opinion, that it was unlawful for them to pay taxesto an idolatrous master; and by the flattering promise which theyderived from their ancient oracles, that a conquering Messiah wouldsoon arise, destined to break their fetters, and to invest the favourites
Vol. I. "X x x of







OCR Output








240 "THE DECLINE AND FALL


important province on the Upper Danube. After a long and doubt­ful.conflict, the spirit of the barbarians was subdued. TheQuadiand the MarcomanniS', who had taken the lead in the war, werethe most severely punished in its catastrophe. They were com­manded to retire five miles s* from their own banks of the Danube,and to deliver up the flower of the youth, who were immediatelysent into Britain, a remote island, where they might be secure ashostages, and useful as soldiers Ss. On the frequent rebellions ofthe Quadi and Marcomanni, the irritated emperor resolved to reducetheir country into the form of a province. His designs were dis­appointed by death. This formidable league, however, the onlyone that appears in the two first centuries of the imperial history,was entirely dissipated, without leaving any traces behind iaGermany.
Distinction of In the course of this introductory chapter, we have confined our-tribes. selves to the general outlines of the manners of Germany, without
attempting to describe or to distinguish the various tribes whichsilled that great country in the time of Cæsar, of Tacitus, or ofPtolemy. As she ancient, or as new tribes successively present them­selves in the series of this history, we shall concisely mention theirorigin, their "situation, and their particular character. Modern na­tions are fixed and permanent societies, connected among themselvesby laws and government, bound to their native foil by arts andagriculture. The German tribes were voluntary and fluctuatingassociations of soldiers, almost of savages. The fame territory oftenchanged its inhabitants in the tide of conquest and emigration. Thefame communities, uniting in a plan of defence or invasion, be­stowed a new title on their new confederacy. The dissolution of anancient confederacy, restored to the independent tribes their pecu­liar but long forgotten appellations. A victorious state often com­municated its own name to a vanquistied people. Sometimes crowdsof voluntiers flocked from all parts to the standard of a favourite
leader;







OCR Output













OCR Output








THE DECLINE AND FALL


the merit or fortune of their sons, they likewise were esteemedunworthy of a seat in the senate; nor were the traces of a servileorigin allowed to be completely obliterated till the third or fourthgeneration 5\ Without destroying the distinction of ranks, a dis­tant prospect of freedom and honours was presented, even to thosewhom pride and prejudice almost disdained to number among thehuman species.
It was once proposed to discriminate the slaves by a peculiar habit jbut it was justly apprehended that there might be some danger inacquainting them with their own numbers Without interpret­ing, in their utmost strictness, the liberal appellations of legions andmyriads 54; we may venture to pronounce, that the proportion ofstaves, who were valued as property, was more considerable thanthat of servants, who can be computed only as an expence ss. Theyouths of a promising genius were instructed in the arts and sciences,and their price was ascertained by the degree of their skill andtalents s<s. Almost every profession, either liberal57 or mechanical,might be found in the household of an opulent senator. The mi­nisters of pomp and sensuality were multiplied beyond the con­ception of modern luxury 58. It was more for the interest of themerchant or manufacturer to purchase, than to hire his workmen;and in the country, slaves were employed as the cheapest and mostlaborious instruments of agriculture. To confirm the general ob­servation, and to display the multitude of slaves, we might allege avariety of particular instances. It was discovered, on a very me­lancholy occasion, that four hundred slaves were maintained ina single palace of Rome S9. The fame number of four hundredbelonged to an estate, which an African widow, of a very privatecondition, resigned to her son, whilst she reserved for herself amuch larger sliare of her property 6o. A freedman, under the reignof Augustus, though his fortune had suffered great losses in thecivil wars, left behind him three thousand six hundred yoke ofoxen, two hundred and fifty thousand head of smaller cattle, and
what







OCR Output








58 THE DECLINE AND FALL


the Antonines, who were themselves men of learning and cu­riosity. It was diffused over the whole extent of their em­pire; the most northern tribes of Britons had acquired a taste forrhetoric: Homer as well as Virgil were transcribed and studied onthe banks of the Rhine and Danuhe j and the most liberal rewardssought out the faintest glimmerings of literary .merit "°» Thesciences of physic and astronomy were cultivated with some degreeof reputation: but if we except the inimitable Lucian, an age ofindolence passed away without producing a single writer of geniuswho deserved the attention of posterity. The authority of Platoand Aristotle, of Zeno and Epicurus, still reigned in the schools,and their systems, transmitted with blind deference from one gene­ration of disciples to another, precluded every generous attempt tocorrect the errors, or enlarge the bounds, of the human mind.The beauties of the poets and orators, instead of kindling a fire liketheir own, inspired only cold and servile imitations: or if anyventured to deviate from those models, they deviated at the fametime from good fense and propriety. On the revival of letters,the youthful vigour of the imagination, after a long repose, nationalemulation, a new religion, new languages, and a new world,called forth the genius of Europe. The provincials of Rome,trained by a uniform artificial foreign education, were engaged in avery unequal competition with those bold ancients, who, by ex­pressing their genuine feelings in their native tongue, had alreadyoccupied every place of honour. The name of Poet was almostforgotten; that of Orator was usurped by the sophists. A cloud ofcritics, of compilers, of commentators, darkened the face of learn­ing, and the decline of genius was soon followed by the corruptionof taste.
. Degeneracy. The sublime Longinus, who in somewhat a later period, and inthe court of a Syrian queen, preserved the spirit of ancient Athens,observes and laments this degeneracy of his contemporaries, which
debased







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 141


instructions to inform himself of the successors of Caracalla, imme­diately communicated the examination of the African to the Impe­rial court, which at that time resided in Syria. But notwithstand­ing the diligence of the public messengers, a friend of Macrinusfound means to apprize him of the approaching danger. The em­peror received the letters from Rome; and as he was then engagedin the conduct of a chariot race, he delivered them unopened to thePrætorian praefect, directing him, to dispatch the ordinary affairs,and to report the more important business that might be containedin them. Macrinus read his fate, and resolved to prevent it. Heinflamed the discontents of some inferior officers, and employed thehand of Martialis, a desperate soldier, who had been refused therank of centurion. The devotion of Caracalla had prompted himto make a pilgrimage from Edessa to the celebrated temple of theMoon at Carrhæ. He was attended by a body of cavalry; buthaving stopped on the road for some necessary occasion, his guardspreserved a respectful distance, and Martialis approaching his personunder a pretence of duty, stabbed him with a dagger. The boldassassin was instantly killed by a Scythian archer of the Imperialguard. Such was the end of a monster whose life disgraced humannature, and whose reign accused the patience of the Romans ". Thegrateful soldiers forgot his vices, remembered only his partial libe­rality, and obliged the senate to prostitute their own dignity and thatof religion by granting him a place among the gods. Whilst he Imitation ofwas upon earth, Alexander the Great was the only hero whom this Alexander'god deemed worthy his admiration. He assumed the name and en-iigns of Alexander, formed a Macedonian phalanx of guards, per­secuted the disciples of Aristotle, and displayed with a puerile en­thusiasm the only sentiment that discovered any regard for virtue orglory. We can easily conceive, that after the battle of Narva, and theconquest of Poland, Charles the Twelfth (though he still wanted themore elegant accomplishments of the son of Philip) might boast of
having;







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AND FALL


D.feat and But while the cause of the Gordians was embraced with such
death of the
twoGordian». diffusive ardour, the Gordians themselves were no more. The
A D. 237.
3d July. feeble court of Carthage was alarmed with the rapid approach ofCapelianus, governor of Mauritania, who, with a small band ofVeterans, and a fierce host of barbarians, attacked a faithful, butunwarlike province. The younger Gordian sallied out to meet theenemy at the head of a few guards, and a numerous undisciplinedmultitude, educated in the peaceful luxury of Carthage. His use­less valour served only to procure him an honourable death, in thefield of battle. His aged father, whose reign had not exceededthirty six days, put an end to his life on the first news of the de­feat. Carthage, destitute of defence, opened her gates to the con­queror, and Africa was exposed to the rapacious cruelty of a slave,obliged to satisfy his unrelenting master with a large account ofblood and treasure 15.Election of The fate of the Gordians filled Rome with just, but unexpected^bl'nug by terror. The senate, convoked in the temple of Concord, affected tothe senate. transact the common business of the day ; and seemed to decline*
9thJuly. ''
with trembling anxiety, the consideration of their own, and thepublic danger. A silent consternation prevailed on the assembly,till a senator, of the name and family of Trajan, awakened hisbrethren from their fatal lethargy. He represented to them, thatthe choice of cautious dilatory measures had been long since out oftheir power; that Maximin, implacable by nature, and exasperatedby injuries, was advancing towards Italy, at the head of the militaryforce of the empire; and that their only remaining alternative,was either to meet him bravely in the field, or tamely to expectthe tortures and ignominious death reserved for unsuccessful re­bellion. "We have lost, continued he, two excellent princes; but"unless we desert ourselves, the hopes of the republic have not*' perished with the Gordians. Many are the senators, whose vir-** tues have deserved, and whose abilities would sustain, the Imperial
41 dignity.







OCR Output








PREFACE.


IT is not my intention to detain the reader by ex­patiating on the variety, or the importance of thesubject, which I have undertaken to treat: firtce themerit of the choice would serve to render the weak­ness of the execution still more apparent, and stillless excusable. But as I have presumed to lay beforethe Public a first volume only of the History of theDecline and Fall of the Roman Empire, it will per­haps be expected that I mould explain, in a fewwords, the nature and limits of my general plan.
The memorable series of revolutions, which, inthe course of about thirteen centuries, gradually un­dermined, and at length destroyed, the solid fabric ofRoman greatness, may, with some propriety, be dividedinto the three following periods.
►
Vol. I. A L The







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AND FALL


former distinguished by its antiquity, the latter enriched by the passageof the Indian trade, were utterly destroyed by the arms and by thesevere order of Diocletian4S. The character of the Egyptian nation,insensible to kindness, but extremely susceptible of fear, could alonejustify this excessive rigour. The seditions of Alexandria had oftenaffected the tranquillity and subsistence of Rome itself. Since theusurpation of Firmus, the province of Upper Egypt, incessantlyrelapsing into rebellion, had embraced the alliance of the savagesof Æthiopia. The numbers of the Blemmyes, scattered between theisland of Meroe and the Red Sea, was very inconsiderable, theirdisposition was unwarlike, their weapons rude and inoffensive46.Yet in the public disorders these barbarians, whom antiquity, shockedwith the deformity of their figure, had almost excluded from thehuman species, presumed to rank themselves among the enemies ofRome *7. Such had been the unworthy allies of the Egyptians;and while the attention of the state was engaged in more seriouswars, their vexatious inroads might again harass the repose of theprovince. With a view of opposing to the Blemmyes a suitableadversary, Diocletian persuaded the Nobatæ, or people of Nubia,to remove from their ancient habitations in the deserts of Lybia,and resigned to them an extensive but unprofitable territory aboveSyene and the cataracts of the Nile, with the stipulation, that theyshould ever respect and guard the frontier of the empire. Thetreaty long subsisted; and till the establishment of Christianity in­troduced stricter notions of religious worship, it was annually ra­tified by a solemn sacrifice in the ifle of Elephantine, in whichthe Romans, as well as the barbarians, adored the fame visible orinvisible powers of the universe *8.
At the same time that Diocletian chastised the past crimes of theEgyptians, he provided for their future safety and happiness bymany wife regulations which were confirmed and enforced under thesucceeding reigns49. One very remarkable edict, which he pub­lished,







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 5^9


were obliged to content themselves with committing to the flamesthe volumes of holy scripture. The ministers of Diocletian werefollowed by a numerous body of guards and pioneers, who marchedin order of battle, and were provided with all the instruments usedin the destruction of fortified cities. By their incessant labour, asacred edifice, which towered above the imperial palace, and hadlong excited the indignation and envy of the Gentiles, was in afew hours levelled with the ground ,5°.
.;> The next day the general edict of persecution was published 151; The first edictand though Diocletian, still averse to the effusion of blood, had TOO- Christians,derated the fury of Galerius, who proposed, that every one refusing bruary. °-to offer sacrifice, should immediately be burnt alive, the penaltiesinflicted on the obstinacy of the Christians, might be deemed suffi­ciently rigorous and effectual. It was enacted, that their churches,in all the provinces of the empire, should be demolished to theirfoundations; and the punishment of death was denounced againstall who should presume to hold any secret assemblies for the pur­pose of religious worship. The philosophers, who now assumed theunworthy office of directing the blind zeal of persecution, had di­ligently studied the nature and genius of the Christian religion;■and ' as they were not ignorant that the speculative doctrines of thefaith were supposed to be contained in the writings of the prophets,the evangelists, and the apostles, they most probably suggested theorder that the bishops and presbyters should deliver all theirsacred books into the hands of the magistrates, who were com--manded, under the-severest penalties, to burn them in a pub-lib and . solemn manner. By the> fame edict, the property of thechurch.was at once confiscated-} and the several parts of which itmight consist, were either fold-to the highest bidder, united to thfeimperial domain,.bestowed on the citie? and corporations, or granted-tathe solicitations of rapacious -courtiers. After taking such effect,tual measures to abolish thei worship, and- to- dissolve the goverrr"-j,;.\to.t*I. 4 D ment,







OCR Output








I


I • ■


I


 







OCR Output








SI4 THE DECLINE AND FALL


Some excep­tions withregard tolearning j


These obscure teachers (such was the charge of malice and infidelity)are as mute in public as they are loquacious and dogmatical inprivate. Whilst they cautiously avoid the dangerous encounter ofphilosophers, they mingle with the rude and illiterate crowd,' andinsinuate themselves into those minds, whom their age, their sex, ortheir education, has the best disposed to receive the impression ofsuperstitious terrors '**.
This unfavourable picture, though not devoid of a faint resem­blance, betrays, by its dark colouring and distorted features, thepencil of an enemy. As the humble faith of Christ diffused itselfthrough the world, it was embraced by several persons who derivedsome importance from the advantages of nature or fortune. Ariftides,who presented an eloquent apology to the emperor Hadrian, wasan Athenian philosopher '". Justin Martyr had sought divineknowledge in the schools of Zeno, of Aristotle, of Pythagoras, andof Plato, before he fortunately was accosted by the bid man, or ratherthe angel, who turned his attention to the study of the Jewiflxprophets ,8\ Clemens of Alexandria had acquired much variousreading in the Greek, and Tertullian in the Latin language. Julius,Africanus, and Origen possessed a very considerable share of thelearning of their times; and although the style of Cyprian is verydifferent from that of Lactantius, we might almost discover thatboth those writers had been public teachers of rhetoric. Even thestudy of philosophy was at length introduced among the Christians,hut it was not always productive of the most salutary effects;knowledge was as often the parent of heresy as of devotion, andthe description which was designed for the followers of Artemon,may, with equal propriety, be applied to the various sects thatresisted the successors of ths apostles. "They presume to alter"the holy scriptures, to abandon the ancient rule of faith, and to"form their opinions according to the subtile precepts of logic."The science of the church is neglected for the study of geometry,
"and







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 5/1


so fortunate as to. shed their blood in the cause of religion Theyinculcated with becoming diligence, that the fire of martyrdom sup­plied every defect and expiated every fin; that while the souls ofordinary Christians were obliged to pass through a flow and painfulpurification, the triumphant sufferers entered into .the immediatefruition of eternal bliss, where, in the society of the patriarchs, theapostles, and the prophets, they reigned with Christ, and acted ashis assessors in the universal judgment of mankind. The assuranceof a lasting reputation upon earth, a motive so congenial to the ta-nity of human nature, often served to animate the courage of themartyrs. The honours which Rome or Athens bestowed on thosecitizens who had fallen in the cause of theif country were cold and,unmeaning demonstrations of respect, when compared with theardent gratitude and devotion which the primitive church expressedtowards the victorious champions of the faith. The annual com­memoration of their virtues and sufferings was observed as a sacredceremony, and at length terminated in religious worship. Amongthe Christians who had publickly confessed their religious principles,those, who, (as it very frequently happened) had been dismissed fromthe tribunal or the prisons of the pagan magistrates, obtained suchhonours as were justly due to their imperfect martyrdom and theirgenerous resolution. The most pious females courted the permissionof imprinting kisses on the fetters which they had worn, and on thewounds which they had received. Their persons were esteemedholy, their decisions were admitted with deference, and they toooften abused, by their spiritual pride and licentious manners, thepre-eminence which their zeal and intrepidity had acquired 9o. Di­stinctions like these, whilst they display the exalted merit, betraythe inconsiderable number of those who suffered* and of those whodied for the profession of Christianity.
The sober discretion of the present age will more readily censure A rdour of &ethan admire, but can more easily admire than imitate, the fervour ^irstCh^lstlan5•'J r of







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 75


unstnined with civil blood, and undisturbed by revolutions. Theernperor was elected by the authority of the senate and the consentos the soldiers *\ The legions respected their oath of fidelity, andit requires a minute inspection of the Roman annals to discoverthree inconsiderable rebellions, which were all suppressed in a fewmonths, and without even the hazard of a battle 5'.
In elective monarchies, the vacancy of the throne is a moment Designation
.. . _ r of a successor.
big with danger and mischief. The Roman emperors desirous tospare the legions thai interval of suspense, and the temptation of anirregular choice, invested their designed successor with so large a shareof present power, as should enable him, after their decease, toassume the remainder, without suffering the empire to perceive thechange of masters. Thus Augustus, after all his fairer prospects Of Tiberius,had been snatched from him by untimely deaths, rested his lasthopes on Tiberius, obtained for his adopted son the censorial andtribunitian powers, and dictated a law, by which the future princewas invested with an authority equal to his own, over the provincesand the armies 5\ Thus Vespasian subdued the generous mind of Of Titus,his eldest son. Titus was adored by the eastern legions, which,under his command, had just finished the conquest of Judæa. Hispower was dreaded, and, as his virtues were clouded by the intem­perance of youth, his designs were suspected. Instead of listeningto such unworthy suspicions, the prudent monarch associated Titusto the full powers of the Imperial dignity; and the grateful son everapproved himself the humble and faithful minister of so indul­gent a father
The good sense of Vespasian engaged him indeed to embrace every The race ofmeasure that might confirm his recent and precarious elevation, and the^a-The military oath, and the fidelity of the troops, had been conse- vian family'crated by the habits of an hundred years, to the name and familyof the Cæsars: and although that family had been continued onlyby the fictitious rite of adoption, they still revered, in the person


L 2 of







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. .8^


peror's sister, and widow of Lucius Verus, impatient of the secondrank, and jealous of the reigning empress, had armed the mur­derer against her brother's life. She had not ventured to commu­nicate the black design to her second husband Claudius Pompeianus,a senator of distinguished merit and unfliaken loyalty; but amongthe crowd of her lovers (for she imitated the manners of Faustina)she found men of desperate fortunes and wild ambition, who wereprepared to serve her more violent, as well as her tender passions*The conspirators experienced the rigor of justice, and the aban­doned princes was punished first with exile, and afterwards withdeath
But the words of the assassin funk deep into the mind of Com- Hatl"ed 4n<*
* cruelty of
modus, and left an indelible impression of fear and hatred against Commodus
towards the
the whole body of the senate. Those whom he had dreaded as im- senate,portunate ministers, he now suspected as secret enemies. The De­lators, a race of men discouraged, and almost extinguished underthe former reigns, again became formidable, as soon as they dis­covered that the emperor was desirous of finding disaffection andtreason in the senate. That assembly, whom Marcus had everconsidered as the great council of the nation, was composed of themost distinguished of the Romans; and distinction soon became cri­minal. The possession of wealth stimulated the diligence of theinformers; rigid virtue implied a tacit censure of the irregularitiesof Commodus; important services implied a dangerous superiorityof merit, and the friendship of the father always ensured the aver­sion of the son. Suspicion was equivalent to proof. Trial tocondemnation. The execution of a considerable senator, was at­tended with the death of all who might lament or revenge his fate;and when Commodus had once tasted human blood, he becameincapable of pity or remorse.
Of these innocent victims of tyranny, none died more lamented The Qyimi-
. . . . lian brothers.
than the two brothers of the Quintilian family, Maximus andVol. I. N Condi-







OCR Output








268 THE DECLINE AND FALL


temple of Jupiter Urius, on a promontory that commanded theentrance of the Strait: and, so inconsiderable were the dreaded in­vasions of the barbarians, that this body of troops surpassed in num-the'citFes of" ^er tne Gothic army. But it was in numbers alone that they fur-Bitbyma. passed it. They deserted with precipitation their advantageouspost, and abandoned the town of Chalcedon, most plentifully storedwith arms and money, to the discretion of the conquerors. Whilstthey hesitated whether they should prefer the sea or land, Europeor Asia, for the scene of their hostilities, a perfidious fugitive pointedout Nicomedia, once the capital of the kings of Bithynia, as arich and easy conquest. He guided the march, which was onlysixty miles from the camp of Chalcedon "*, directed the resistlessattack, and partook of the booty; for the Goths had learned sufficientpolicy to reward the traitor, whom they detested. Nice, Prusa,Apaemæa, Cius, cities that had sometimes rivalled, or imitated, thesplendor of Nicomedia, were involved in the fame calamity, which,in a few weeks, raged without controul through the whole provinceof Bithynia. Three hundred years of peace, enjoyed by the softinhabitants of Asia, had abolished the exercise of arms, and removedthe apprehension of danger. The ancient walls were suffered tomoulder away, and all the revenue of the most opulent cities wasreserved for the construction of baths, temples, and theatres '".Retreat of When the city of Cyzicus withstood the utmost effort of MithrU
the Goths* 'J
dates "+, it was distinguished by wise laws, a naval power of twohundred galKes, and three arsenals; of arms, of military engines, andof corn It was still the feat of wealth and luxury; but of itsancient strength, nothing remained except the situation, in a littleisland of the Propontis, connected with the continent of Asia onlyby two bridges. From the recent sack of Prusa, the Goths ad­vanced within eighteen miles"6 of this city, which they had de­moted to destruction; but the ruin of Cyzicus was delayed by a for­tunate accident. The season was rainy, and the lake Apolloniates,
the







OCR Output








NOTES ON THE FIFTEENTH CHAPTER, IxJx


world. The success of such a trade is one of thestrongest' instances of sacerdotal art and popularcredulity.
[56] The right reverend author of the Divine-Legation of Moses asligns a very curious reason forthe omitfion, and most ingeniously retorts it on theunbelievers.
[57] See Le Clerc (Prolegomena ad Hist. Ec-clesiast. c. 1. sect. 8.)- His authority seems to carrythe greater weight, as he has written a learned andjudicious commentary on the books of the OldTestament.
[jSj Joseph. Antiquiut. 1. xili. c. 10. Accord­ing to the most natural interpretation of his words,the Saducees admitted only the Pentateuch; but ithas pleased some modern critics to add the prophetsto their c;eed, and to suppose, that they contentedthemselves with rejecting the traditions of thePharisees.; Dr. Jortin has argued that point in hisRemarks on Ecclesiastical History, vol. ii. p. 103.
[,-9] This expectation was countenanced by thetwenty-fourth chapter of Sr. Matthew, and by thefirst epistle of St. Paul to the Thessalonians. Eras­mus removes the difficulty by the help of alle­gory and metaphor; and the learned Grotius venrtures to insinuate, that, for wife purposes, the piousdeception was permitted to take place.
[60] See Burnct's Sacred Theory, part iii. c. 5.T his tradition may be traced as high as the authorof the Epistle of Barnabas, who wrote in the firstcentury, and who seems to have been half a Jew.
[61 ] The primitive church of Antioch, computedalmost 6oco years from the creation of the worldto the birth of Christ. Africanus, Lactantius, andthe Greek church, have reduced that number to'55:0, and Euscbius has contented himself with5200 years. These calculations were formed onthe Septuagint, which was universally receivedduring the six first centuries. The authority ofthe Vulgate and of the Hebrew text has deter­mined the moderns, Protestants as well as Catho­lics, to prefer a period of about 4000 years; though,in the study of profane antiquity, they often findthemselves streightened by those narrow limits.
[61] Most of these pictures were borrowed froma misinterpretation of Isaiah,. Daniel, and the


Apocalypse. One of the grossest images may be foundin Irentus (I. v. p. 4.55.), the disciple of Papias,who had seen the apostle St. John.
[63] See the second dialogue os Justin withTryphon, and the seventh book of Lactantius. Itis unnecessary to allege all the intermediate fathers,as the fact is not disputed.
[64] Dupin, Bibliotheque Ecclesiastique, torn. i.p. 223. torn. ii. p. 36s1. and Mosheim, p. 720;though the latter of these learned divines is notaltogether candid oh this occasion.
[6;] In the council of Laodicea (about the year360.) the Apocalypse was tacitly excluded from thesacred canon by the same churches of Asia towhich it is addressed ; and we may learn from thecomplaint of Sulpicius Scverus, that their sentencehad been ratified by the greater number of Chri­stians of his time. From what causes then is theApocalypse at present so generally received by theGreek, the Roman, and the Protestant churches IThe following ones may be assigned. 1. TheGreeks were subdued by the authority of an im­postor, who, in the sixth century, assumed thecharacter of Dionysius the Areopagite. 2. Ajust apprehension, that the grammarians mightbecome more important than the theologians,engaged the council of Trent to fix the seal oftheir infallibility on all the books of Scripture,contained in the Latin Vulgate, in the numberof which the Apocalypse was fortunately included.(Fra Paolo, llloria del Concilio Tridentino, 1. ii.)3. The advantage of turning those mysterious pro­phecies against the See of Rome, inspired the Pro­testants with uncommon veneration for so usefulan ally. See the ingenious and elegant discoursesof the present biihop of Litchfield on that un­promising subject.
[66] Lactantius (Institut. Divin,. vii.. if, &c.^relates the dismal tale of futurity with great spiritand eloquence. ..... -ii .•
[6/] On this subject every reader os taste willbe entertained with the third part ofBurnet's SacredTheory. He blends philosophy, scripture, and tra­dition, into one magnificent system; in the descrip­tion of which, he displays a strength of fancy notinferior to that of Milton himself. . .
[63] And.







OCR Output








OFTHEROMANEMPIRE. 113


Commodus, maintained towards Pertinax a stately ambiguous reserve,and instantly declared against the usurpation of Julian. The convul­sions of the capital added new weight to his sentiments, or rather tohis professions of patriotism. A regard to decency induced him todecline the lofty titles of Augustus and Emperor; and he imitatedperhaps the example of Galba, who, on a similar occasion, had styledhimself the Lieutenant of the senate and people
Personal merit alone had raised Pescennius Niger from an obscure Pescenniusbirth and station, to the government of Syria; a lucrative and im- sy'fj" mportant command, which in times of civil confusion gave him anear prospect of the throne. Yet his parts seem to have been bettersuited to the second than to the first rank;'he was an unequal rivalthough he might have approved himself an excellent lieutenant toSeverus, who had sufficient greatness of mind to adopt severaluseful institutions from a vanquished enemy In his government,Niger acquired the esteem of the soldiers and the love of the pro­vincials. His rigid discipline fortified the valour and confirmed theobedience of the former, whilst the voluptuous Syrians were lessdelighted with the mild firmness of his administration than withthe affability of his manners, and the apparent pleasure with whichhe attended their frequent and pompous festivals ". As soon as theintelligence of the atrocious murder of Pertinax had reached Antioch,the wishes of Asia invited Niger to assume the Imperial purple andrevenge his death. The legions of the eastern frontier embracedhis cause; the opulent but unarmed provinces from the frontiers ofÆthiopia *' to the Hadriatic, cheerfully submitted to his power; andthe kings beyond the Tigris and the Euphrates congratulated hiselection, and offered him their homage and services. The mind ofNiger was not capable of receiving this sudden tide of fortune; heflattered himself that his accession would be undisturbed by compe­tition, and unstained by civil blood; and whilst he enjoyed the vainpomp of triumph, he neglected to secure the means of victory. In-Vol. I. stead







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


the rage of the barbarians 78. When the exhausted country no ?nn£j2jover
longer supplied a variety of plunder, the Franks seized on some
vessels in the ports of Spain79, and transported themselves into
Mauritania. The distant province was astonished with the fury of
these barbarians, who seemed to fall from a new world, as their
name, manners, and complexion, were equally unknown on the
coast of Africa 8°.
II. In that part of Upper Saxony beyond the Elbe, which is at °ri8'n and
renown of
present called the Marquisate of Lusace, there existed, in ancient the Suevi..times, a sacred wood, the awful seat of the superstition of theSuevi. None were permitted to enter the holy precincts, withoutconfessing, by their servile bonds and suppliant posture, the imme­diate presence of the sovereign Deity Patriotism contributed aawell as devotion to consecrate the Sonnenwald, or wood of the Sem-nones '*. It was universally believed, that the nation had receivedits first existence on that sacred spot. At stated periods, thenumerous tribes who gloried in the Suevic blood, resorted thitherby their ambassadors ;. and the memory of their common extractionwas perpetuated by Barbaric rites and human sacrifices. The wideextended name of Suevi filled the interior countries of Germany,from the banks of the Oder to those of the Danube. They weredistinguished from the other Germans by their peculiar mode ofdressing their long hair, which they gathered into a rude knot onthe crown of the head; and they delighted in an ornament thatfliewed their ranks more lofty and terrible in the eyes of the ene­my 8'. Jealous, as the Germans were, of military renown, theyall confessed the superior valour of the Suevi; and the tribes of theUsipetes and Tencteri, who with a vast army encountered the dictatorCæsar, declared that they esteemed it not a disgrace to have fled:before a people,, to whose arms the immortal gods themselves were,unequal.8*..
Iru







OCR Output








5a4 THE DECLINE AND FALL


of Athens or Carthage. Every Christian rejected with contempt thesuperstitions of his family, his city, and his province. The wholebody of Christians unanimously refused to hold any communion withthe gods of Rome, of the empire, and of mankind. It was in vain■ that the oppressed believer asserted the inalienable rights of con­science and private judgment. Though his situation might excitethe pity, his arguments could never reach the understanding, eitherof the philosophic or of the believing part of the Pagan world.To their apprehensions, it was no less a matter of surprise, that anyindividuals should entertain scruples against complying with theestablished mode of worship, than if they had conceived a suddenabhorrence to the manners, the dress, or the language of their na­tive country 8.
Christianity The surprise of the Pagans was soon succeeded by resentment;atheism, and and the most pious of men were exposed to the unjust but danger-Jhestpfopiey ous imputation of impiety. Malice and prejudice concurred insophers'10" representing the Christians as a society of atheists, who, by the mostdaring attack on the religious constitution of the empire, had me­rited the severest animadversion of the civil magistrate. They hadseparated themselves (they gloried in the confession) from everymode of superstition which had been adopted in any part of theglobe by the various temper of polytheism: but it was not altogetherso evident what deity, or what form of worship they had substitutedto the gods and temples of antiquity. The pure and sublime ideawhich they entertained of the Supreme Being escaped the grossconception of the Pagan multitude, who were at a loss to discovera spiritual and solitary God, that was neither represented under anycorporeal figure or visible symbol, nor was adored with the accus­tomed pomp of libations and festivals, of altars and sacrifices '. Thesages of Greece and Rome, who had elevated their minds to thecontemplation of the existence and attributes of the First Cause, wereinduced by reason or by vanity to reserve for themselves and theirchosen disciples the privilege of this philosophical devotion ,0. They
were


i







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 90


one of whom was equal to their master in personal strength and per­sonal abilities 4*.
The measures of the conspirators were conducted with the deliberate Choice ofcoolness and celerity, which the greatness of the occasion required, emperor.They resolved instantly to fill the' vacant throne with aft emperdf;whose character would justify and maintain the action that had beencommitted. They fixed on Pertinax, præfectof the city, an ancientsenator of consular sank, whose singular merit had broke through theobscurity of hi& birth, and raised him to the first honours of the state.He had successively governed most of the provinces of the empire; andin all his great employments, military and civil, he had ever dis­tinguished rrrmself by prudence, integrity, and honourable poverty,"IHe now remained almost alone of the friends and ministers ofMarcus; and when, at a late hour of the night, he was awakenedwith the news, that the chamberlain and the praefect were at hisdoor, he received1 them with intrepid resignation, and desired theywould" execute their master's orders. Instead of death, they offeredhim the throne of the Roman world. He* was urtable to credittheir assurances. Convinced at length of the death of Commodus,he accepted' the empire with the sincere reluctance of a man who■deserved to reign4*.
Moments were precious-; and ILzetus conducted without delay his He is 10-new emperor to the-camp-of the Prætorians-, diffusing-at the fame byThJp^-time through the city a seasonable report that Goramodusdied sod* torian guards,denly of an apoplexy; and that the virtuous Pertinax had aiiradysucceeded to the throne; The' guards were rather surprised thanpleased with the suspicious-death of a-prince, whose indulgence andliberality they alone had' experienced; bus tHe emergency of theoccasion, the authority of their-'praerect^ the reputation of Pertinax;and the clamour&'of the people', obliged them to stifle their secretdifcontente, to accept the donative promised of the new emperor, toswear allegiance to him, and with joyful acclamations and laurels in
O 2 their







OCR Output








S72 THE DECLINE AND FALL


torians, from whom alone we derive a partial and imperfect know­ledge of this persecution, are at a loss how to account for the fearsand danger of the emperors. Two of these writers, a Prince and aRhetorician, weie eye-witnesses of the fire of Nico.media. The oneascribes it to lightning, and the divine wrath ; the other affirms,that it was kindled by the malice of Galeriusjiimself,5S. .. .Executori of ^ t^e aprajnst trie Christians was designed for a general law
the first edict. ° o r- o
of the whole empire, and as Diocletian and Galerius, though theymight not wait for the consent, were assured of the concurrenceof the western princes, it would appear more consonant to our ideasof policy, that the governors of all the provinces should havereceived secret instructions to publish, on one and the same day,this declaration of war within their respective departments. Itwas at least to be expected, that the convenience of the public high^ways and established posts would have enabled the emperors totransmit their orders with the utmost dispatch from the palace of Nico-media to the extremities of the Roman world; and that they wouldnot have suffered fifty days to elapse, before the edict was publishedin Syria, and near four months before it was signified to the citiesof Africa ,s6. This delay may perhaps be imputed to the cautioustemper of Diocletian, who had yielded a reluctant consent to themeasures of persecution, and who was desirous of trying the ex­periment under his more immediate eye, before he gave way tothe disorders and discontent which it must inevitably occasion inthe distant provinces. At first, indeed, the magistrates were re­strained from the effusion of blood; but the use of every otherseverity was permitted and even recommended to their zeal; norcould the Christians, though they cheerfully resigned the ornamentsof their churches, resolve to interrupt their religious assemblies,or to deliver their sacred books to the flames. The pious obstinacyof Felix, an African bishop, appears to have embarrassed the sub­ordinate ministers of the government. The curator of the city sent


7 him







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


himself to the discretion of the conqueror. The judgment of thearmy pronounced him worthy of death, and Claudius, after a feebleresistance, consented to the execution of the sentence. Nor was thezeal of the senate less ardent in the cause of their aew sovereiga.They ratified, perhaps with a sincere transport of zeal, the electionof Claudius; and as his predecessor had shewn himself the personalenemy of their order, they exercised under the name of justice asevere revenge against his friends and family. The senate was per­mitted to discharge the ungrateful office of punishment, and the em­peror reserved for himself the pleasure and merit of obtaining byhis intercession a general act of indemnity \
Such ostentatious clemency discovers less of the real character of Clemency and
* justice ot
Claudius, than a trifling circumstance in which he seems to have Claudius,obeyed the dictates of his heart. The frequent rebellions of theprovinces had involved almost every person in the guilt of treason,almost every estate in the case of confiscation; and Gallienus oftendisplayed his liberality, by distributing among his officers the pro­perty of his subjects. On the accession of Claudius, an old womanthrew herself at his feet, and complained that a general of the lateemperor had obtained an arbitrary grant of her patrimony. The gene­ral was Claudius himself, who had not entirely escaped the contagionof the times. The emperor blushed at the reproach, but deserved theconfidence which she had reposed in his equity. The confession ofhis fault was accompanied with immediate and ample restitution
In the arduous talk which Claudius had undertaken,of restoring the He under-empire to its ancient splendor, it was first necessary to revive among formation'ofhis troops a fense of order and obedience. With the authority of thcarnjy-a veteran commander, he represented to them, that the relaxationof discipline had introduced a long train of disorders, the effects ofwhich were at length experienced by the soldiers themselves; thata people ruined by oppression, and indolent from despair, could no'longer supply a numerous army with the means of luxury, Or even
P p 2 of







OCR Output








160 THE DECLINE AND FALL"


"nefactor, who bestows upon you the corn, the cloathing, and the"money of the provinces. Be silent, or I shall no longer style you"soldiers, bnt citizens77, if those indeed who disclaim the laws of"Rome deserve to be ranked among the meanest of the people.*'His menaces inflamed the fury of the legion, and their brandishedarms already threatened his person. "Your courage," resumed theintrepid Alexander, " would be more nobly displayed in a field of"battle; me you may destroy, you cannot intimidate; and the"severe justice of the republic would punisli your crime and revenge"my death." The legion still persisted in clamorous sedition, whenthe emperor pronounced, with a loud voice, the decisive sentence,"Citizens! lay down your arms, and depart in peace to your re-"spective habitations.'' The tempest was instantly appeased; thesoldiers, filled with grief and shame, silently confessed the justice oftheir punishment and the power of discipline, yielded up their armsand military ensigns, and retired in confusion, not to their camp,but to the several inns of the city. Alexander enjoyed, duringthirty days, the edifying spectacle of their repentance; nor did herestore them to their former rank in the army, till he had punishedwith death those tribunes whose connivance had occasioned themutiny. The grateful legion served the emperor whilst living, andrevenged him when dead 7i.Defects of h'» The resolutions of the multitude generally depend on a moment;character. and the caprice of passion might equally determine the seditiouslegion to lay down their arms at the emperor's feet, or to plungethem into his breast. Perhaps if the singular transaction had beeninvestigated by the penetration of a philosopher, we should discoverthe secret causes that authorized the boldness of the prince and com­manded the obedience of the troops; and perhaps if it had beenrelated by a judicious historian, we should find this action, worthyof Cæsar himself, reduced nearer to the level of probability and thecommon standard of the character of Alexander Severus. The abi­


lities







OCR Output








Ixii NOTES ON THE FOURTEENTH CHAPTER.


Ceni« are supported in a specious, not to fay a con­vincing, manner by M. Grosley. Observations furl'ltalie, torn. i. p. 40, &c.
[54] La Brunette near Suse, Demont, ExilesFenestrelles, Coni, &c.
[5;] See Ammian. Marcellin. xv. 10. His de­scription of the roads over the Alps, is clear, lively,and accurate.
[56] Zosimus as well as Eusebius hasten from tbepassage of the Alps, to the decisive action nearRome. We must apply to the two Panegyrics, forthe intermediate actions of Constantiae.
[57] The Marquis Masse! has examined the siegeand battle of Verona, with that degree of attentionand accuracy, which was due to a memorable actionthat happened in his native country. The fortifi­cations of that city, constructed by Gallienus, wereless extensive than the modern walls, and the Am­phitheatre was not included within their circum­ference. See Verona Ulustrata, Part i p. 142. 150.
[58] They wanted chains for so great a multi­tude of captives; and the whole council was at aloss; but the sagacious conqueror imagined the hap­py expedient of converting into fetters the swordsof the vanquished. Panegyr. Vet. ix. 11.
[59] Panegyr, Vet. ix. 10.
[60] Litcras calamitacum fuarum indices fup-primebat. Panegyr. Vet. ix. 15.
[61] Remedia malorum potius quam mala disse-rebat, is the fine censure which Tacitus passes onthe supine indolence of Vitelliui.
[62] The Marquis Massei has made it extremelyprobable that Constantine was still at Verona, the1st of September, A. D. 312, and that the memo­rable æra of the indictions was dated from his con-quell of the Cisalpine Gaul.
[63] See Panegyr. Vet. xi. 16. Lactantius deM. P. c. 44.
[64] Illo die hostem Romanorum esse peri'.arum.The vanquished prince became of course the enemyof Rome.
[65J See Panegyr. Vet. ix. 16. x. 27. The for­mer of these orators magnifies the hoards of corn.


which Maxentius had collected from Africa and theIslands. And yet, if there is any truth in the scarcitymentioned by Eusebius, (in Vit. Constantin, 1. i. c.36.} the Imperial granaries must, have been openonly to the soldiers.
[66] Maxentius . .. tandem urbe in Saxa mlra,millia ferme novem segerrime progressus. Aure-lius Victor. See Cellarius Geograph. Antiq. torn.
i. p. 463. Saxa Rubra was in the neighbourhoodof the Cremera, a trifling rivulet, illustrated by thevalour and glorious death of the three hundredFabii.
[67] The post which Maxentius had taken, withthe Tyber in his rear, is very clearly described bythe two Panegyrists, ix. 16. x. 28.
[68] Exceptis latrocinii illius primis auctoribus,qui desperata venia, locum quern pugnæ sumpseranttexere corporibus. Panegyr. Vet. ix. 17.
[69] A very idle rumour soon prevailed, thatMaxentius, who had not taken any precaution forhis own retreat, had contrived a very artful snare todestroy the army of the pursuers; but that tbewooden bridge which was to have been loosened onthe approach of Constantine, unluckily broke downunder the weight of the flying Italians. M. deTillemont (Hist, des Empereurs, torn. iv. part i.p. 576.) very seriously examines whether in contra­diction to common fense, the testimony of Eusebiusand Zosimus ought to prevail over the silence ofLactantius, Nazarius, and the anonymous, but con­temporary orator, who composed the ninth pa­negyric.
[70] Zosimus, 1. ii. p. £6—83, and the two Pa­negyrics, the former of which was pronounced afew months afterwards, afford the clearest notion ofthis great battle. Lactantius, Eusebius, and eventhe Epitomes, supply several useful hints.
[71] Zosimus, the enemy of Constantine, allows,(1. ii. p. 88.) that only a few of the friends ofMaxentius were put to death; but we may remarkthe expressive passage of Nazarius (Panegyr. Vet. x.6), Omnibus qui labefactari statum ejus poterantcum stirpe deJetis. The other orator (Panegyr.Vet ix. 2c, 21.) content's himself with observing,that Constantine, when he entered Rome, did notimitate the cruel massacres of Cinna, of Marius, orof Sylla.
[72] See







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 437


statues of Constantine, became the signal of discord between the twoprinces 8?.
The first battle was fought near Cibalis, a city of Pannonia, F.'rst civil «ar-
° J between them*
situated on the river Save, about fifty miles above Sirmium 88. From Battle of Ci-
c ■ r balis-
the inconsiderable forces which in this important contest two such A. n. 314.powerful monarchs brought into the field, it may be inferred, that 5 0 er'the one was suddenly provoked, and that the other was unexpect­edly surprised. The emperor of the West had only twenty thou-'sand, and the sovereign of the East no more than five and thirtythousand men. The inferiority of number was, however, com­pensated by the advantage of the ground. Constantine had takenpost in a defile about half a mile in breadth, between a steep hilland a deep morass, and in that situation he steadily expected andrepulsed the first attack of the enemy. He pursued his success,and advanced into the plain. But the veteran legions of Illyricumrallied under the standard of a leader who had been trained to armsin the school of Probus and Diocletian. The missile weapons onboth sides were soon exhausted'; the two armies, with equal valour,rushed to a closer engagement of swords and spears, and the doubt­ful contest had already lasted from the dawn of day to a late hourof the evening, when the right wing, which Constantine led inperson, made a vigorous and decisive charge. The judicious retreatof Licinius saved the remainder of his troops from a total defeat;but when he computed his loss, which amounted to more thantwenty thousand men, he thought it unsafe to pass the night in thepresence of an active and victorious enemy. Abandoning his campand magazines, he marched away with secrecy and diligence at thehead of the greatest part of his cavalry, and was soon removed be­yond the danger of a pursuit. His diligence preserved his wife,his son, and his treasures, which he had deposited at Sirmium.Licinius passed through that city, and breaking down the bridge onthe Save, hastened to collect a new army in Dacia and Thrace. In
his







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 295


rians made descents on various coasts both of Europe and Asia; butthe open country was already plundered, and they were repulsedwith shame and loss from several of the fortified cities. A spiritof discouragement and division arose in the fleet, and some of theirchiefs sailed away towards the islands of Crete and Cyprus; butthe main body pursuing a more steady course, anchored at lengthnear the foot of mount Athos, and assaulted the city of Thessalonica,the wealthy capital of all the Macedonian provinces. Their attacks,in which they displayed a fierce but artless bravery, were soon in­terrupted by the rapid approach of Claudius, hastening to a sceneof action that deserved the presence of a warlike prince at the headof the remaining powers of the empire. Impatient for battle, theGoths immediately broke up their camp, relinquished the siege ofThessalonica, left their navy at the foot of mount Athos, tra­versed the hills of Macedonia, and pressed forwards to engage thelast defence of Italy.
We still possess an original letter addressed by Claudius to the Distress andsenate and people on this memorable occasion. "Conscript fathers," Claudius,fays the emperor, "know that three hundred and twenty thousand*' Goths have invaded the Roman territory. If I vanquish them,"your gratitude will reward my services. Should I fall, remember"that I am the successor of Gallienus. The whole republic is fa-"tigued. We shall fight after Valerian, after Ingenuus, Regilli-"anus, Lolliænus, Posthumus, Celsus, and a thousand others, whom"a just contempt for Gallienus provoked into rebellion. We are0 in want of darts, of spears, and of shields. The strength of the'* empire, Gaul, and Spain, are usurped by Tetricus, and we blush"to acknowledge that the archers of the East serve under the ban-'* ners of Zenobia. Whatever we shall perform, will be sufficiently"great11." The melancholy firmness of this epistle, announces ahero careless of his fate, conscious of his danger, but still derivinga well grounded hope from the resources of his own mind.
The







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


gaged to watch with the most vigilant attention over his ownbehaviour, and over that of his brethren, since, as he must expectto incur a part of the common disgraee, he may hope to enjoya share of the common reputation. When the Christians of Bi-thynia were brought before the tribunal of the younger Pliny, theyassured the proconsul, that far from being engaged in any unlawfulconspiracy, they were bound by a solemn obligation to abstain fromthe commission of those crimes which disturb the private or publicpeace of society, from theft, robbery, adultery, perjury, and frauds-Near a century afterwards, Tertullian, with an honest pride, couldboast, that very few Christians had suffered by the hand of theexecutioner except on account of their religion Their seriousand sequestered Use, averse to the gay luxury of the age, inured themto chastity, temperance, œconomy, and all the sober and domesticvirtues. As the greater number were of some trade or profession,it was incumbent on them, by the strictest integrity and the fairestdealing, to remove the suspicions which the prophane are too aptto conceive against the appearances of sanctity. The contemptof the world exercised them in the habits of humility, meekness,and patience. The more they were persecuted the more closelythey adhered to each other. Their mutual charity and unsuspectingconfidence has been remarked by infidels, and was too often abusedby perfidious friends 8*.
It is a very honourable circumstance for the morals of the primi- Morality oftive Christians, that even their faults, or rather errors, were derived the sather5*from an excess of virtue. The bishops and doctors of the church,whose evidence attests, and whose authority might influence, theprofessions, the principles, and even the practice, of their con­temporaries, had studied the scriptures with less skill than devo­tion, and they often received, in the most literal sense, those rigidprecepts of Christ and the apostles, to which the prudence ofsucceeding commentators has applied a looser and more figurative
Vol. I. Q^q q mode







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. in


had created; nor was there a citizen who did not consider his eleva­tion with horror, as the last insult on the Roman name. The nobi­lity, whose conspicuous station and ample possessions exacted thestrictest caution, dissembled their sentiments, and met the affectedcivility of the emperor with smiles of complacency and professionsof duty. But the people, secure in their numbers and obscurity,gave a free vent to their paffions. The streets and public places ofRome resounded with clamours and imprecations. The enragedmultitude affronted the person of Julian, rejected his liberality, and,conscious of the impotence of their own resentment, they calledaloud on the legions of the frontiers to assert the violated majesty ofthe Roman empire.
The public discontent was soon diffused from the center to the The armies offrontiers of the empire. The armies of Britain, of Syria, and of andVannonfaIllyricum, lamented the death of Pertinax, in whose company, or jeJ-l***iua*under whose command, they had so often fought and conquered.They received with surprise, with indignation, and perhaps withenvy, the extraordinary intelligence, that the Prætorians had dis­posed of the Empire by public auction ; and they unanimously re­fused to ratify the ignominious bargain. Their consent was fatal toJulian, but it was fatal at the fame time to the public peace j as thegenerals of the respective armies, Clodius Albinus, Pescennius Niger,and Septimius Severus, were still more anxious to succeed than torevenge the murdered Pertinax. Their forces were exactly balanced.Each of them was at the head of three legions '% with a numeroustrain of auxiliaries; and however different in their characters, theywere all soldiers of experience and capacity.
Clodius Albinus, governor of Britain, surpassed both his compe- ciodius Al.titors in the nobility of his extraction, which he derived from some bi.0US in Bri*
'tain.
of the most illustrious names of the old republic ,6. But the branch,from whence he claimed his descent, was funk into mean circum­stances, and transplanted into a remote province. It is difficult to
form







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 391


cletlan, or Constantine, or Valens, or Theodofius, for the object ofhis invectives; but they unanimously agree in representing the bur­den of the public impositions, and particularly the land-tax andcapitation, as the intolerable and increasing grievance of their owntimes. From such a concurrence, an impartial historian, who isobliged to extract truth from satire as well as from panegyric, willbe inclined to divide the blame among the princes whom they ac­cuse, and to ascribe their exactions much less to their personal vices,than to the uniform system of their administration. The emperorDiocletian was indeed the author of that system; but during hisreign, the growing evil was confined within the bounds of modestyand discretion, and he deserves the reproach of establishing pennVcious precedents, rather than of exercising actual oppression I0J. Itmay be added, that his revenues were managed with prudent ceco-nomy; and that after all the current expences were discharged*there still remained in the imperial treasury an ample provision ei­ther for judicious liberality or for any emergency of the state.
It was in the twenty-first year of his reign that Diocletian exe- Abdication ofcuted his memorable resolution of abdicating the empire; an action and mIxU


more naturally to have been expected from the elder or the youngerAntoninus, than from a prince who had never practised the lessonsof philosophy either in the attainment or in the use of supremepower. Diocletian acquired the glory of giving to the world thefirst example of a resignation,cS, which has not been very fre­quently imitated by succeeding monarchs. The parallel of Charles Resemblancethe Fifth, however, will naturally offer itself to our mind, not only ^Fisih!*since the eloquence of a modern historian has rendered that nameso familiar to an English reader, but from the very striking resem­blance between the characters of the two emperors, whose politicalabilities were superior to their military genius, and whose speciousvirtues were much less the effect of nature than of art. The abdi-cation of Charles appears to have been hastened by the vicissitude
of







OCR Output








io4 THE DECLINE AND FALL


A conspiracyprevented.


"Mil der oftcitinax bythe Piæto-rim«.
A. s>. ig?.March 281I1.


grctted the licence of the former reign. Their discontents were se­cretly fomented by Laetus their præfect, who found, when it wastoo late, that his new emperor would reward a servant, but wouldnot be ruled by a favourite. On the third day of his reign, the sol­diers seized on a noble senator, with a design to carry him to thecamp, and to invest him with the Imperial purple. Instead of be­ing dazzled by the dangerous honour, the affrighted victim escapedfrom their violence, and took refuge at the feet of Pertinax. Ashort time afterwards Sosius Falco, one of the consuls of the year,a rash youth 54, but of an ancient and opulent family, listened to thevoice of ambition; and a conspiracy was formed during a fliortabsence of Pertinax, which was .crushed by his sudden return toRome, and his resolute behaviour. Falco was on the point of be­ing justly condemned to death, as a public enemy, had he not beensaved by the earnest and sincere entreaties of the injured emperor;who conjured the senate, that the purity of his reign might not bestained by the blood even of a guilty senator.
These disappointments served only to irritate the rage of the Prae­torian guards. On the twenty-eighth of March, eighty-six daysonly after the death of Commodus, a general sedition broke out in thecamp, which the officers wanted either power or inclination to sup­press. Two or three hundred of the most desperate soldiers marchedat noon-day, with arms in their hands, and fury in their looks, to­wards the Imperial palace. The gates were thrown open by theircompanions upon guard; and by the domestics of the -old court,who had already formed a secret conspiracy against the life of thetoo virtuous emperor. On the news of their approach, Pertinaxdisdaining either flight or concealment advanced to meet his assassins;and recalled to their minds his own innocence, and the sanctity oftheir recent oath. For a few moments they stood in silent suspence,astiamed of their atrocious design, and awed by the venerable aspectand majestic firmness of their sovereign, till at length the despair
of







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRfe." $6$


of schism and heresy, were either commanded or permitted to pleadtheir cause -before the tribunal of the conqueror. This public aridvery singular trial affords a convincing proof, that the existence*the property, the privileges, and the internal policy of the Christianswere acknowledged, if not by the laws, at least by the magistratesof the empire. As a pagan and as a soldier, it could scarcely beexpected that Aurelian should enter into the discussion, whether thesentiments of Paul or those of his adversaries were most agreeable tothe true standard of the orthodox faith. His determination, however) The sentence
_ is executed by
was founded on the general principles of equity and reason. He Aurelian.considered the bishops of Italy as the most impartial and respectable A*D'*74-judges among the Christians, and as soon as he was informed, thatthey had unanimously approved the sentence of the council, he ac­quiesced in their opinion, and immediately gave orders that Paulshould be compelled to relinquish the temporal possessions belongingto an office, of which, in the judgment of his brethren, he hadbeen justly deprived. But while we applaud the justice, we shouldnot overlook the policy, of Aurelian; who was desirous of restoringand cementing the dependance of provinces on the capital, by everymeans which could bind the interest or prejudices of any part of hissubjects "9.
Amidst the frequent revolutions of the empire, the Christians still Peace and
. -in- prosperity of
flourished in peace and prosperity; and notwithstanding a cele- the churchbrated aera of martyrs has been deduced from the accession of Dio-cletian '!°, the new system of policy, introduced and maintained by z84~~the wisdom of that prince, continued, during more than eighteenyears, to breathe the mildest and most liberal spirit of religious tole­ration. The mind of Diocletian himself was less adapted indeed tospeculative inquiries, than to the active labours of war and govern­ment. His prudence rendered him averse to any great innovation,and though his temper was not very susceptible of zeal or enthu­siasm, he always maintained an habitual regard for the ancient
4 C 2 , deities







OCR Output








NOTES ON THE SIXTEENTH CHAPTER.


and those of Apollo, ac Claros and Miletus (Lucian.torn. ii. p. 236. Edit. Reitz). The last of these,whose singular history would furnish a very curiousepisode, was consulted by Diocletian before hepublished his edicts of persecution (Lactantius, deM. P. c. u.).
[137] Besides the ancient stories of Pythagarasand Aristeas; the cures performed at the shrine ofÆsculapius, and the sables related of ApolloniusofTyana, were frequently opposed to the miraclesof Christ; though I agree with Dr. Lardner (feeTestimonies, vol. iii. p. 252. 352.), tnat whenPhilostratus composed the life of Apollonius, hehad no such intention.
[138] It is seriously to be lamented, that theChristian fathers, by acknowledging the super­natural, or, as they deem it, the infernal part ofPaganism, destroy with their own hands the greatadvantage which we might otherwise derive fromthe liberal concessions of our adversaries.
[139] Julian (p. 301. Edit. Spanheim) expressesa pious joy, that the- providence of the gods hadextinguished the impious sects, and for the most part,destroyed the books of the Pyrrhonians and Epi­cureans, which had been very numerous, since Epi­curus himself composed no less than 300 volumes.See Diogenes Laertius, I. x. c. 26.
[140] Cumquc alios audiam mussitare indignan-ter, et dicere opportere statui per Senatum, abole-antur ut hæc scripta, quibus Christiana Religiocomprobetur, et vetustatis opprimatur auflorius.Arnobius adversus Gcntes, 1. iii. p. 103, 104. Headds very properly, Erroris convincite Ciceronem . .nam intercipere scripta, et publicatam velle sub-mergere lectionem,_ non est Deum defendere fedveritatis testisicationem timerc.
[141] Lactantius (Divin. Institut. 1. v. c. 2, 3.)gives a very clear and spirited account of two ofthese philosophic adversaries of the faith. Thelarge treatise of Porphyry against the Christians-consisted of thirty books, and wa composcu inSicily about the year 270.
[142] See Socrates Hist. Ecc.'esiast. 1. i. c. 9,and Codex Theodosian. 1. i. tit. i. 1. 3,
[143] Euscbius, 1. viii. c. 4, c. 17. He limitsthe number of military martyrs,, by a remarkable


expression (orcuiw; rtvrm »; vu *xi hvrtftt) of whichneither his Latin nor French translator have renderedthe energy. Notwithstanding the authority ofEusebius, and the silence of Lactantius, Ambrose,.Sulpicias, Orosius, &c. it has been long believed,that the Thebasan legion, consisting of 6000 Chri­stians, suffered martyrdom, by the order of Max-imian, in the Valley of the Penine Alps. The story-was first published about the middle of the vthcentury, by Eucherius, bishop of Lyons, who re­ceived it from certain persons, who received it fromIsaac Bishop of Geneva, who is said to have receivedit from Theodore bishop of Octodurum. The-Abbey of St. Maurice still subsists, a rich monu­ment of the credulity of Sigifmond, king of Bur­gundy. See an excellent Dissertation in thexxxvith volume of the Bibliotheque Raifonnee,.p. 427—454.
[144] Seethe Acta Sincera, p. 299. The ac­counts of his martyrdom and of that of Marcellus-bear every mark of truth and authenticity.
[143] Acta Sincera, p. 30?.
[146] De M. P. c. 11. Lactantius (or whoeverwas the author of this little treatise) was, at thattime, an inhabitant of Nicomedia; but it seemsdifficult to conceive how he could acquire so ac­curate a knowledge of what passed in the imperial-cabinet.
[147] The only circumstance which we can dis.cover, is the devotion and jealousy of the mother,os Galerius. She is described by Lactantius, asDeorum montium cultrix; mulier admodum fup-erititiosa. She had a great influence over her son,and was offended by the disregard of some of herChristian servants.
[14&] The worstn'p and festival of the GodTerminus are elegantly illustrated by M. de Boze.Mem. de l'Academie des Inscriptions, torn. i. p. 50..
[149] In oar only MS. of Lactantius, we readprofeBtts 5 but reason, and the authority of all the.critics, allow us, instead of that word, which destroys,the sense of the passage, to substitute praft3us.
[150] Lactantius de M. P. c. 12. gives a very,lively picture of the destruction of the church.
[151] Mosheimi







OCR Output








lxxii NOTES ON THE FIFTEENTH'CHAPTER.


Republican genius of the Swiss and German re­formers.
[in] See Molheim in the first and second cen­turies. Ignatius (ad Smyrnæos, c. 3, &c.) is fondof exalting the episcopal dignity. Le Clerc (Hist.Ecclesiast. p. 569.) very bluntly censures his con­duct. Mosheim, with a more critical judgment,(p. 161.) suspects the purity even of the smallerepistles.
[112] Nonne et Laici sacerdotes sumus? Ter-tullian, Exhort, ad Castitat. c. 7. As the humanheart is still the si me, several of the observationswhich Mr. Hurr.e has made on Enthusiasm, (Essays,vol. i. p. 76, quarto edit.) may be applied even toreal inspiration.
[11'] Acta Cor.cil. Carthag. apud Cyprian, Edit.Fell, p. 15S. This council was composed of eighty-seven bishops from the provinces of Mauritania, Nu-midia, and Africa; some presbyters and deacons assist­ed at the assembly; præsente pit bis maxima pane.
[114] Aguntur præterea per Græcias illas, certisin locis concilia, &c. Tertullian, de Jejuniis, c,13. The African mentions it as a recent and so-reign institution. The coalition of the christianchurches is very ably explained by Molheim, p.164—170* .
[115] Cyprian, in his admired treatise De Unita-te Ecclesire, p. 75—86. ,
[116] We may appeal to the whole tenor of Cy­prian's conduct, of his doctrine, and of his Epistles.Le Clerc, in a short life of Cyprian (BibliothequeUniverselle, torn. xii. p. 207—378.), has laid himopen with great freedom and accuracy.
[117] If Novatus, Felicislimus, &c. whom the bi­shop of Carthage expelled from his church, andfrom Africa, were not the moll detestable monstersof wickedness, the zeal of Cyprian must occasion­ally have prevailed over his veracity. For a veryjust account of these obscure quarrels, fee Mo­sheim, p. 497—S,z*
[118] Mosheim, p. zCg. 574. Dupin AntiqueEccles. Disciplin. p. 19, 20.
'[119] Tertullian, in a distinct treatise, has pleadedagainst the heretics, the right of prescription, as itwas held by the apostolic churches.


[ 120] The journey of St. Peter to Rome is men­tioned by most of the ancients, (fee £usebius, ii.25.) maintained by all the catholics, allowed bysome protestants, (fee Pearson and Dodwell de Suc­cess. Episcop. Reman.) but has been vigorouslyattacked by Spanhcim (Miscellanea Sacra, iii. 3.).According to father Hardouin, the monks of thethirteenth century, who composed the Æneid, re­presented St. Peter under the allegorical characterof the Trojan hero,
[121] It is in French only, that the famous allu­sion to St. Peter's name is exact. Tu es Pierre etfur cette fierre.—The fame is imperfect in Greek,Latin, Italian, &c. and totally unintelligible in ourTeutonic languages.
[122] Ircnæusadv. H-xreses, iii. 3. Tertulliande Prescription, c. 36, and Cyprian Epillol. 27. 5c.71. 75. Le Clerc (Hist. Eccles. p. 764.) and Mo-slieim (p. 258. 578.) labour in the interpretationos these passages. But the loose and rhetorical styleof the fathers often appears favourable to the pre­tensions of Rome.
[123] See the sharp epistle from Firmilianus bi­shop of Cassarea, to Stephen bishop of Rome, ap.Cyprian, Fpistol. 75.
[124] Concerning this dispute of there-baptismof heretics; fee the epistles of Cyprian, and theseventh book of Eusebius.
[125] For the origin of those words, see Mo­sheim, p. 141. Spanheim, Hist. Ecclesiastic, p.633. The distinction of Clerus and Laicui wa3established before the time of Tertullian.
[126] The community instituted by Plato, ismore perfect than that which Sir Thomas More hadimagined for his Utopia, The community of wo­men, and that of temporal goods, may be consi­dered as inseparable parts of the fame system.
[127] Joseph. Antiquitat. xviii. 2. Philo, deVit. Contemplativ.
[128] See the Acts of the Apostles, c. 2. 4, 5,with Grotius's Commentary. Molheim, in a parti­cular dissertation, attacks the common opinion withvery inconclusive arguments. . I .
[129] Justin Martyr. Apolog. Major, c. 89.Tertullian, Apolog. c. 39. t
[130J Irenscos







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AND FALL


limed by the emperor Hadrian, was inflicted on those who falselyattributed to their fellow-citizens the crime of Christianity. Theviolence of personal or superstitious animosity might sometimes pre­vail over the most natural apprehensions of disgrace and danger;but it cannot surely be imagined, that accusations of so unpromisingan appearance were either lightly or frequently undertaken by thePagan subjects of the Roman empire 59.
The expedient which was employed to elude the prudence of thelaws, affords a sufficient proof how effectually they disappoint­ed the mischievous designs of private malice or superstitiouszeal. In a large and tumultuous assembly the restraints offear and shame, so forcible on the minds of individuals, are de­prived of the greatest part of their influence. The pious Christian,as he was desirous to obtain or to escape the glory of martyrdom,■expected, either with impatience or with terror, the stated returns•of the public games and festivals. On those occasions, the in­habitants of the great cities of the empire were collected in thecircus or the theatre, where every circumstance of the place aswell as of the ceremony, contributed to kindle their devotion, andto extinguish their humanity. Whilst the numerous spectators,crowned with garlands, perfumed with incense, purified with theblood of victims, and surrounded with the altars and statues of theirtutelar deities, resigned themselves to the enjoyment of pleasures,which they considered as an essential part of their religious worship;they recollected that the Christians alone ahhorred the gods ofmankind, and by their absence and melancholy on these solemnfestivals, seemed to insult or to lament the public felicity. If theempire had been afflicted by any recent calamity, by a plague,a famine, or an unsuccessful war; if the Tiber had, or if the Nilehad not, risen beyond its banks; if the earth had shaken, or, if thetemperate order of the seasons had been interrupted, the super­stitious Pagans were convinced, that the crimes and the impiety... i of







OCR Output








4i6 THE DECLINE AND FALL


seized the treasure, and scattering it with his accustomed profusionamong the soldiers, endeavoured to awake in their minds thememory of his ancient dignity and exploits. Before he couldestablish his authority, or finish the negociation which he appearsto have entered into with his son Maxentius, the celerity of Con-stantine defeated all his hopes. On the first news of his perfidy andingratitude, that prince returned by rapid marches from the Rhine tothe Saone, embarked on the last mentioned river at Chalons,and at Lyons, trusting himself to the rapidity of the Rhone, arrivedat the gates of Aries, with a military force which it was im­possible for Maximian to resist, and which scarcely permitted him totake refuge in the neighbouring city of Marseilles. The narrow neckof land which joined that place to the continent was fortified againstthe besiegers, whilst the sea was open, either for the escape ofMaximian, or for the succours of Maxentius, if the latter shouldchuse to disguise his invasion of Gaul, under the honourablepretence of defending a distressed, or as he might allege, aninjured father. Apprehensive of the fatal consequences of delay,Constantine gave orders for an immediate assault; but the scalingladders were found too short for the height of the walls, andMarseilles might have sustained as long a siege as it formerly didagainst the arms of Cæsar, if the garrison, conscious either of theirfault or of their danger, had not purchased their pardon by de-His death. livering up the city and the person of Maximian. A secret butFebruary.0' irrevocable sentence of death was pronounced against the usurper,he obtained only the same favour which he had indulged to Se-verus, and it was published to the world, that, oppressed by theremorse of his repeated crimes, he strangled himself with hisown hands. After he had lost the assistance, and disdained themoderate counsels, of Diocletian, the second period of his active lifewas a series of public calamities and personal mortifications, whichwere terminated, in about three years, by an ignominious death.
He







OCR Output








NOTES ON THE ELEVENTH CHAPTER.


[23] The Walachians still preserve many tracesof the Latin language, and have boasted in everyage of the Roman descent. They are surroundedby, but not mixed with, the barbarians. See aMemoire of M. Danville on ancient Dacia, in theAcademy of Inscriptions, torn. xxx.
[24] See the first chapter of Jornandes. TheVandals however {c. 22.) maintained a short in­dependence between the rivers Marisia and Crislia(Maros and Keres) which fell into the Teiss.
[25] Dexippus, p. 7—12. Zosimus, I. i. g. 43.Vopiscus in Aurelian in Hist. August. Howeverthese historians differ innames (Alemanni, Juthungi,and Marcomanni) it is evident that they mean thefame people, and the fame war, but it requires somecare to conciliate and explain them.
[26] Cantoclarus, with his usual accuracy,chuses to translate three hundred thousand; hisversion is equally repugnant to fense and to gram­mar.
[27] We may remark, as an instance of bad taste,that Dexippus applies to the light infantry of theAlemanni the technical terms proper only to theGrecian Phalanx.
[28] In Dexippus. we at present read Khodanus,M. da Valois very judicioufly alters the word toEridanus.
[29] The emperor Claudius was certainly of thenumber; but we are ignorant how far this mark ofrespect was extended; if to Cæsar and Augustus, itmust have produced a very awful spectacle; a longline of the masters of the world.
[jo] Vopiscus in Hist. August, p. 210.
[31] Dexippus gives them a subtle and prolixoration, worthy of a Grecian Sophist.
[32] Hist. August, p. 215.
[33] Dexippus, p. 12.
[34] Victor Junior, in Aurelian.
[35] Vopiscus in Hist. August, p, 216.
[36] The little river or rather torrent of Me-taurus, near Fano, has been immortalized, byfinding such an historian as Livy, and such a poetas Horace.


[37] It is recorded by an inscription sound atPczaro. See Gruter. cclxxvi. 3.
[38] One should imagine, he said, that youwere assembled in a Christian church, not in thetemple of all the gods.
[39] Vopiscus in Hist. Aug. p. 215, 216. gives along account of these ceremonies, from the Registersof the Senate.
[40] Plin. Hist. Natur. iii. 5. To confirm ouridea, we may observe, that for a long time MountCælius was a grove of oaks, and Mount Viminal wasover-run with osiers; that, in the fourth century,the Aventine was a vacant and solitary retirement,that till the time of Augustus, the Efquiline wasan unwholesome burying ground; and that thenumerous inequalities, remarked by the ancients inthe Quirinal, sufficiently prove that it was notcovered with, buildings. Gf the seven hills, theCapitoline and Palatine only, with the adjacentvallics, were the primitive habitation of the Romanpeople. But thk sobject would require a disser­tation.
[4>] Exspatiantia tecta multas addidere urbes,is the expression of Plinyi
[42] Hist. August, p. 22)2. Both Lipsius andIsaac Vofiius have eagerly embraced this measure.
[43] See Nardini, Roma Antica, 1. i. c. 8.[44] Tacit. Hist, iv. 23.
[45] For Aurelian's walls, see Vopiscus in Hist.August, p. 216. 222. Zosimus, 1. i. p. 43. Ea-tropius, ix. 15. Aurel. Victor in Aurelian, VictorJunior in Aurelian, Euseb. Hieronym, et Watiusin Chronic.
[46] His competitor was Lollianus, or Ælianus,if indeed these names mean the fame person. SeeTillemont, torn. iii. p. 1177.
[47] The character of this prince by Julius Ate-rianus (ap. Hist. August, p. 187.) is worth transcrib­ing, as it seems fair and impartial. Victorino qoipost Junium Pollhumium Gallias rexit neminemexistimo pr-eferendum: non in virtute Trajanum;non Antoninum in dementia; non in gravitateNervam; non in gubernaado ærario Vefpasianum;
non







OCR Output








 


/


 







OCR Output








THE DEC LINE AND FALL


decisive victoryThe war was finished by that memorableday.'decided by The civil wars of modern Europe have been distinguished, notbattles/*" only by the fierce animosity, but likewise by the obstinate perseve­rance of the contending factions. They have generally been jus­tified by some principle, or, at least, coloured by some pretext, ofreligion, freedom, or loyalty. The leaders Were nobles of indepen­dent property and hereditary influence. The troops fought likemen interested in the decision of the quarrel; and as military spiritand party zeal were strongly diffused throughout the whole com­munity, a vanquished chief was immediately supplied with newadherents, eager to shed their blood in the same cause. But theRomans, after the fall of the republic, combated only for thechoice of masters. Under the standard of a popular candidate forempire, a few inlisted from affection, some from fear, many frominterest, none from principle. The legions uninflamed by partyzeal, were allured into civil war by liberal donatives, and stillmore liberal promises. A defeat, by disabling the chief from theperformance of his engagements, dissolved the mercenary allegi­ance of his followers; and left them to consult their own safety, bya timely desertion of an unsuccessful cause. It was of little momentto the provinces, under whose name they were oppressed or governed;they were driven by the impulsion of the present power, and assoon as that power yielded to a superior force, they hastened toimplore the clemency of the conqueror, who, as he had an im­mense debt to discharge, was obliged to sacrifice the most guiltycountries to the avarice of his soldiers. In the vast extent of theRoman empire there were few fortified cities, capable of protectinga routed army; nor was there any person, or family, or order ofinen, whose natural interest, unsupported by the powers of govern­ment, was capable of restoring the cause of a sinking party 5\
Yet







OCR Output








402 THE DECLINE AND FALL


as he had held the scepter with glory, he would have resigned itwithout disgrace.
The two c*. After the elevation of Conscantius and Galerius to the rank of
lars, Severuj
andMaximin. August'^ two new Casars were required to supply their place, andto complete the system of the imperial government. Diocletianwas sincerely desirous of withdrawing himself from the world .he considered Galerius, who had married his daughter, as thefirmest support of his family and of the empire; and he consented,without reluctance, that his successor should assume the merit as wellas the envy of the important nomination. \t was fixed withoutconsulting the interest or inclination of the princes of the Weft.Each of them had a son who was arrived at the age of manhood*and who might have been deemed the most natural candidates forthe vacant honour. But the moderate Constantius was not disposedto assert his claims by arms, and the impotent resentment ofMaximian was no longer to be dreaded. The two persons whom.Galerius promoted to the rank of Cæfer, were much better suitedto serve the views of his ambition; and their principal recom­mendation seems to have consisted in the want of merit or personalconsequence. The first of these was Daza, or, as he was after­ward* called, Maximin, whose mother was the lister of Galerius.The unexperienced youth still betrayed by his manners and lan­guage his rustic education, when, to his own astonishment as well asthat of the world, he was invested by Diocletian with the purple, ex­alted to the dignity of Cæsar, and intrusted with the sovereigncommand of Egypt and Syria J. At the same time, Severus,a faithful servant, addicted to pleasure, but not incapable of busi­ness, was sent to Milan, to receive from the reluctant hands ofMaximian the Cæsarean ornaments, and the possession of Italy andAfrica6. According to the forms of the constitution, Severusacknowledged the supremacy of the western emperor ; but he was
absolutely







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AND FALL


deities of the empire. But the leisure of the two empresses, of hUwife Prisca and of Valeria his daughter, permitted them to listenwith more attention and respect to the truths of Christianity, whichin every age has acknowledged its important obligations to femaledevotion"Sl. The principal eunuchs, Lucian "l and Dorotheus,Gorgonius and Andrew, who attended the person, possessed the fa­vour, and governed the household, of Diocletian, protected by theirpowerful influence the faith which they had embraced. Their ex­ample was imitated by many of the most considerable officers of thepalace, who, in their respective stations, had the care of the imperialornaments, of the robes, of the furniture, of the jewels, and evenof the private treasury;, and, though it might sometimes be in­cumbent on them to accompany the emperor when he sacrificed inthe temple ,SS, they enjoyed, with their wives, their children, andtheir staves, the free exercise of the Christian religion. Diocletianand his colleagues frequently conferred the most, important officeson those persons who avowed their abhorrence for the worship ofthe Gods, but who had displayed abilities proper for the service ofthe state. The bishops held an honourable rank in their respectiveprovinces, and were treated with distinction and respect, not only bythe people, but by the magistrates themselves. Almost in everycity, the ancient churches were found insufficient to contain the in­creasing multitude of proselytes-; and in their place more statelyand capacious edifices were erected for the public worship of thefaithful. The corruption of manners and principles, so forciblylamented by Eusebius ''*, may be considered, not only as a conse­quence but as a proof of the liberty which the Christians enjoyedand abused under the reign of Diocletian. Prosperity had relaxedthe nerves of discipline. Fraud, envy, and malice, prevailed in everycongregation. The presbyters aspired to the episcopal office, whichevery day became an object more worthy of their ambition. Thebishops, who contended with each other for ecclesiastical pre­eminence,







OCR Output








NOTES ON" THE THIRTEENTH CHAPTER. lisi


sore, it hardly paid its own establishment. SeeAppian in Proxm.
[z8] As a great number of medals of Caraufiusare still preserved, he is become a very favouriteobject of antiquarian curiosity, and every circum­stance of his life and actions has been investigatedwith sagacious accuracy. Dr. Stulcely in particularha's devoted a large volume to the British Emperor.I have used his materials, and rejected most of hisfanciful conjectures.
[29] When Mamertinus pronounced his firstpanegyric, the naval preparations of Maximian werecompleted: and the orator presaged an assuredvictory. His silence in the second Panegyric, mightalone inform us, that the expedition had not suc­ceeded.
[30] Aurelius Victor, Eutrppius, and the medals(Pax Auggg.) inform us of this temporary reconci­liation: though 1 will not presume (as Dr. Stukelyhas done, Metallic History of Caraufius, p. 86, &c.)to insert the identical articles of the treaty.
[31] With regard to the recovery of Britain,we ob:ain a few hints from Aurelius Victor andEutropius.
[32] John Malela, in Chron. Antiochen, torn. i.p. 408, 409.
[33J Zosimus, 1. i. p. 3. That partial historianseems to cekbra:e the vigilance of Diocletian,with the design of exposing the negligence ofConstantine; we may, however, listen to an ora­tor, " Nam quid ego alarum et cohortium castrapercenseam, toto Rheni et Istri et Euphratis limiterestituta, Panegyr. Vet. iv. 18.
[34] Ruunt omnes in sanguinem suum populi,quibus nca contigit esse Romanis, obstinatacqueferitatis pœnas nunc sponte persolvunt. Panegyr.Vet. iii. 16. Mamertinus illustrates the fact, bythe example of alinost all the nations of the world.
[33] He complained, though not with the strict,est. truth; " Jam fluxisse annos quindecim in qui.bus, in Ulyrico, ad ripam Danubii relegatus cumgentibus barbaris luctaret-" Lactant. de M. P.C. 18.
[36] In the Greek text of Eusebius, we read sixthousand, a number which I have preferred to the


sixty thousand os Jerome, Crosius, Eutropius, ar.dhis Greek translator Pæanius.[37] Panegyr. Vet. vii. zi.
[38] There was a settlement of the Sarmatians lathe neighbourhood of Treves, which seems to haverbeen deserted by those lazy Barbarians: Aufoniuispeaks of them in his Moselle.
Unde iter ingrediens nemorosa per avia solum,Et nulla humani spectans vestigia cultus
Arvaque Sauromatum nuper me tata colonis.There was a town of the Carpiin the Lower Mæsia-
[39] See the rhetorical exultation of Eumenius.Panegyr. vii. 9»
[40] Scaliger (Animadverf. ad Euscb. p. 243.)decides in his usual manner, that the Quinquegentiani, or five African nations, were the five greatcities, the Pentapolis of the inoffensive provinceof Cyrene.
[41] After his defeat, Julian stabbed himselfwith a dagger, and immediately leaped into theflames. Victor in Epitome.
[42] Tu ferocisiimos Mauritania; populos in access smontium jugis et naturali munitione fidentes, ex-pugnasti, recepisti, transtulisti. Panegyr. Vet. vi, 8.
[43] See the description of Alexandria in Hir-tius de Bel. Alexandrin. c. 5.
[44] Eutrop. ix. 24. Ofosius, vii. 25. JohnMak-la in Chron. Antioch. p. 409, 410. YetEumenius assures us, that Egypt was pacified by theclemency of Diocletian.
[45] Eusebius (in Chron.) places their destruction,several years sooner, and at a time when Egypt it­self was in a state of rebellion against the Romans.
[46] Strabo, 1. xvii. p. 1.172. Pomponius Mela.1. i. c. 4. His words are curious, " Intra, si crederelibet, vix homines magifque semiferi; Ægipanes*et Biemmjts, et Satyri." ,
[47] Aufus sefe inserere fortunæ et provocarearma Romana.
[48] See Procopius de Bell. Persic, l.i. c. 19.
[49] He fixed the public allowance of corn forthe people of Alexandria, at two millions of me-Jimni; about four hundred thousand quarters.
Chron ►







OCR Output








37* THE DECLINE AND FALL


Tiridates theArmenian.


A. D. 282.


A. D. 286.His restora­tion to thethrone ofArmenia.


powerful nation, and to force a confession from the successors ofArtaxerxes, of the superior majesty of the Roman empire.
We have observed, under the rejgn of Valerian, that Armeniawas subdued by the perfidy and the arms of the Persians, and thatafter the assassination of Chosroes, his son Tiridates, the infant heirof the monarchy, was saved by the fidelity of his friends, andeducated under the protection of the emperors. Tiridates derivedfrom his exile such advantages as he could never have obtained onthe throne of Armenia; the early knowledge of adversity, of man­kind, and of the Roman discipline. He signalized his youth bydeeds of valour, and displayed a matchless dexterity, as well asstrength, in every martial exercise, and even in the less honourablecontests of the Olympian games s\ Those qualities were more no­bly exerted in the defence of his benefactor Licinius fJ. That offi­cer, in the sedition which occasioned the death of Probus, was ex­posed to the most imminent danger, and the enraged soldiers wereforcing their way into hie tent, when they were checked by thesingle arm of the Armenian prince. The gratitude of Tiridatescontributed soon afterwards to his restoration. Licinius was inevery station the friend and companion of Galerius, and the meritof Galerius, long before he was raised to the dignity of Caesar, hadbeen known and esteemed by Diocletian. In the third year of thatemperor's reign, Tiridates was invested with the kingdom of Ar­menia. The justice of the measure was not less evident than itsexpediency. It was time to rescue from the usurpation of the Per­sian monarch an important territory, which, since the reign ofNero, had been always granted under the protection of the empireto a younger branch of the house of Arsacess+.
When Tiridates appeared on the frontiers of Armenia, he wasreceived with an unfeigned transport of joy and loyalty. Duringtwenty-six years, the country had experienced the real and imagi­nary hardfliips of a foreign yoke. The Persian monarchs had
4 . adorned







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE, izt


Whilst Severus was engaged in his eastern war, he had reason to swards Al-
Dill US*
apprehend that the governor of Britain might pass the sea andthe Alps, occupy the vacant feat of empire, and oppose his returnwith the authority of the senate and the forces of the west. Theambiguous conduct of Albinus, in not assuming the Imperial title,left room for negociation. Forgetting, at once, his professions ofpatriotism, and the jealousy of sovereign power, he accepted theprecarious rank of Caesar, as a reward for his fatal neutrality.Till the first contest was decided, Severus treated the man whomhe had doomed to destruction, with every mark of esteem and re­gard. Even in the letter, in which he announced his victory overNiger, he styles Albinus the brother of his soul and empire, fendshim the affectionate salutations of his wife Julia, and his youngfamily, and intreats him to preserve the armies and the republicfaithful to their common interest. The messengers charged withthis letter, were instructed to accost the Cæsar with respect, to de­sire a private audience, and to plunge their daggers into hisheart *s. The conspiracy was discovered, and the too credulousAlbinus, at length, passed over to the continent, and prepared foran unequal contest with his rival, who rushed upon him at the headof a veteran and victorious army.
The military labours of Severus seem inadequate to the import- Event of theance of his conquests. Two engagements, the one near the Helles- civi1 warf»pont, the other in the narrow defiles of Cilicia, decided the fateof his Syrian competitor; and the troops of Europe asserted theirusual ascendant over the effeminate natives of Asia 49. The battleof Lyons, where one hundred and fifty thousand Romans s" wereengaged, was equally fatal to Albinus. The valour of the Britisharmy maintained, indeed, a sharp and doubtful contest, with thehardy discipline of the lllyrian legions. The fame and person ofSeverus appeared, during a few moments, irrecoverably lost, till- that warlike prince rallied his fainting troops, and led them on to aVol. I. R decisive







OCR Output








NOTES ON THE FIFTEENTH CHAPTER.


[91] See a chain of tradition, from JuSia Mar­tyr to Jerome, in the Morale des Peres, c. iv. 6—26.
[92] See a very curious Dissertation on the Vestals,in the Memoires de l'Acaderoie des Inscriptions,torn ii. p. 161—227. Notwithstanding the ho­nours and rewards which were bestowed on thosevirgins, it was difficult to procure a sufficient num­ber; nor could the dread of the most horrible deathalways restrain their incontinence.
[93] Cupiditatem procreandi aut unam scimusautnullam. Minucius Fælix.c. 31. Justin. Apolog.Major. Athenagoras in Legat. c. 28. Tertulliande Cultu Fcemin. 1. ii.
[94] Eusebius, 1. vi. 8. Before the fame ofOrigen had excited envy and persecution, this ex­traordinary action was rather admired than censured.As it was his general practice to allegorize scrip*ture; it seems unfortunate that, in this instanceonly, he sliould have adopted the literal fense.
[95] Cyprian. Epistol. 4. and Dodwell Difler-tat. Cyprianic. iii. Something like this rash at­tempt was long afterwards imputed to the founderof the order of Fontevrault. Bay le has amusedhimself and his readers on that very delicate subject.
[96] Dnpin (Bibliotheque Ecclefiastique, torn. i.P- '95-) gives a particular account of the dialogueof the ten virgins, as it was composed by Metho­dius, Bishop of Tyre.. The praises of virginity areexcessive.
[97] The Ascetics (as early as the second cen­tury) made a public profession of mortifying theirbodies, and of abstaining from the use of flesh andwine. Mofheim, p 310.
[98] See the Morale des Peres. The fame pa­tient principles have been revived since the Refor­mation'by the Socinians, the modern Anabaptists,and the Quakers. Barclay, the apologist of theQuakers, has protected his brethren, by the autho­rity of the primitive christians, p. 542—549.
[99] Tertullian, Apolog. c. 21. De Idolatria, c.17, 18. Origen contra Celsum, 1. v. p. 253. Lvii. p. 348. L viii. p. 423—418.
[too] Tertullian (de Corona Militii, c. 11.) sug­gests to them the expediences deserting; a counsel,


which, if it had been generally known, was notvery proper to conciliate the favour of the empe­rors towards the chriijian sect.
[101] As well as we can judge from the muti-,lated representation of Origen, (1. viii. p. 423 ) hisadversary, Celsus, had urged his objection withgreat force and candour.
[102! The Aristocratical party in France, as wellas in England, has strenuously maintained the di­vine origin of bishops. But the Calvinistical presrbyters were impatient of a superior; and the Ro­man pontiff refused to acknowledge an equal. SeeFra-Paolo.
[103] In the history of the christian hierarchy,I have, for the most part, followed the learned andcandid Mofheim.
[104] For the prophets of the primitive church,,fee Mofheim, Dissertation es ad Hist. Ecclef. per-tihentes, torn. ii. p. 132—208.
[105] See the epistles of St. Paul, and ofClemens, to the Corinthians.
[106] Hooker's Ecclesiastical Polity, I vii.
[107] See Jerome ad Titum, c. 1. and Eplstol.85 (in the Benedictine edition, tot). What heobserves of the bishop and presbyters of Alexandria,receives a remarkable confirmation from the patri­arch Eutychius (Annal. torn. i. p. 330. Vers.Pocock); whose testimony I know not how to reject,in spite of all the objections of the learned Pearson,irr his Vindici* Ignatianx, part i. c. 11.
[108J See the introduction to the Apocalypse,Bishops, under the name of Angels, were alreadyinstituted in seven cities of Asia. And ytt theepistle of Clemens (which is probably of as ancienta date) does not lead us to discover any traces os'episcopacy either at Corinth or Rome.
[109J Nulla Ecclesia sine Episcopo, was a fact aswell as a maxim from the time of Tertullian andIrenæus.
[110] After we have passed the difficulties of thefirst century, we find the episcopal governmentuniversally established, till it was interrupted by the
republican







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


cian, were guilty of the same crime, the knowledge of his originalobscurity. For this crime many were put to death ; and by the exe­cution of several of his benefactors, Maximin published, in charac­ters of blood, the indelible history of his baseness and ingratitude9.
The dark and sanguinary soul of the tyrant, was open to everysuspicion against those among his subjects who were the most dis­tinguished by their birth or merit. Whenever Tie was alarmed withthe sound of treason, his cruelty was unbounded and unrelenting.A conspiracy against his life was either discovered or imagined, andMagnus, a consular senator, was named as the principal author ofit. Without a witness, without a trial, and without an opportunityof defence, Magnus, with four thousand of his supposed accom­plices, were put to death; Italy and the whole empire were infestedwith innumerable spies and informers. On the slightest accusation,the first of the Roman nobles, who had governed provinces, com­manded armies, and been adorned with the consular and triumphalornaments, were chained on the public carriages, and hurried awayto the emperor's presence. Confiscation, exile, or simple death,were esteemed uncommon instances of his lenity. Some of the un­fortunate sufferers he ordered to be sewed up in the hides of slaugh­tered animals, others to be exposed to wild beasts, others again tobe beaten to death with clubs. During the three years of his reign,he disdained to visit either Rome or Italy. His camp, occasionallyremoved from the banks of the Rhine to those of the Danube, wasthe feat of his stern despotism, which trampled on every principleof law and justice, and was supported by the avowed power of thesword. No man of noble birth, elegant accomplishments, or know­ledge of civil business, was suffered near his person; and the courtof a Roman emperor revived the idea of those ancient chiefs ofslaves and gladiators, whose savage power had left a deep impressionof terror and detestation 'V
Vol. I. A a As







OCR Output








SIO T.HE DECLINE AND FALL


hundred miles of her capital. The fate of the East was decided in.two great hattles; so similar in almost every circumstance, that wecan scarcely distinguish them from each other, except by observingthat the first was fought near Antioch'5, and the second nearEmesa6S. In both, the queen of Palmyra animated the armies byher presence, and devolved the execution of her orders on Zabdas,who had already signalized his military talents by the conquest ofEgypt. The numerous forces of Zenobia, consisted for the mostpart of light archers, and of heavy cavalry clothed in completesteel. The Moorish and Illyrian horse of Aurelian, were unable tosustain the ponderous charge of their antagonists. They fled inreal cur affected disorder, engaged the Palmyrenians in a laboriouspursuit, harassed them by a desultory combat, and at length dis­comfited this impenetrable but unwieldy body of cavalry. Thelight infantry, in the mean time, when they had-exhausted theirquivers, remaining without protection against a closer onset, exposedtheir naked sides to the swords of the legions. Aurelian had chosenthese veteran troops, who were usually stationed on the UpperDanube, and whose valour had been severely tried in the Alemannicwar67. After the defeat of Emesa, Zenobia found it impossible tocollect a third army. As far as the frontier of Egypt, the nationssubject to her empire had joined the standard of the conqueror, whodetached the bravest of his generals to possess himself of the Egyp­tian provinces. Palmyra was the last resource of the widow of Ode-nathus. She retired within the walls of her capital, made everypreparation for a vigorous resistance, and declared with the intrepi­dity of a heroine, that the last moment of her reign and of her lifeshould be the same.
The state of Amid the barren deserts of Arabia, a few cultivated spots rife likeislands out of the sandy ocean. Even the name of Tadmor, or Palmyra,by its signification in the Syriac as well as in the Latin language, de­noted the multitude of palm trees which afforded shade and verdure to


2 that







OCR Output








*c6 T#E DECLINE AND FALL


CHAP. V.
Public sale of the Empire to Didius jsulianus by the Præ­torian Guards.—Clodius Atbinus in Britain^ PescenniusNiger in Syria, and Septimius Severus in Pannonia, de­clare again/I the murderers of Pertinax.—Civil warsand victory of Severus over his three rivals.—Relaxationof discipline.—New maxims of government.
Proportion 'I * H E power of the sword is more sensibly felr in an exten-tary force, to J- five monarchy, than in a small community. It has beenof Unpeople, calculated by the ablest politicians, that no state, without being soonexhausted, can maintain above the hundredth part of its members inarms and idleness. But although this relative proportion may beuniform, its influence over the rest of the society will vary accordingto the degree of its positive strength. The advantages of militaryscience and discipline cannot be exerted, unless a proper number ofsoldiers are united into one body, and actuated by one soul. With ahandful of men, such a union would be ineffectual; with an unwieldyhost, it would be impracticable; and the powers of the machine wouldbe alike destroyed by the extreme minuteness, or the excessive weightof its springs. To illustrate this observation we need only reflect,that there is no superiority of natural strength, artificial weapons, oracquired (kill, which could enable one man to keep in constant sub­jection a hundred of his fellow-creatures: the tyrant of a singletown, or a small district, would soon discover that an hundred armed/followers were a weak defence against ten thousand peasants or ci­tizens; but a hundred thousand well-disciplined soldiers will com­mand)







OCR Output








222 THE DECLINE AND FALL


and of too decisive a nature to leave room for any reply. The Ger­mans, in the age of Tacitus, were unacquainted with the use of let­ters 16 i and the use of letters is the principal circumstance that distin­guishes a civilized people from a herd of savages incapable of know­ledge or reflection. Without that artificial help, the human me­mory soon diflipates or corrupts the ideas intrusted to her charge;and the nobler faculties of the mind, no longer supplied with mo­dels or with materials, gradually forget their powers: the judge­ment becomes feeble and lethargic, the imagination languid or irre­gular. Fully to apprehend this important truth, let us attempt, inan improved society, to calculate the immense distance between theman of learning and the illiterate peasant. The former, by readingand reflection, multiplies his own experience, and lives in distantages and remote countries; whilst the latter, rooted to a single spot,and confined to a few years of existence, surpasses, but very little,his fellow-labourer the ox in the exercise of his mental faculties.The fame, and even a greater, difference will be found betweennations than between individuals; and we may safely pronounce,that without some species of writing, no people has ever preservedthe faithful annals of their history, ever made any considerable pro­gress in the abstract sciences, or ever possessed, in any tolerable de­gree of perfection, the useful and agreeable arts of life.
Of am and Of these arts, the ancient Germans were wretchedly destitute.
agriculture, fhey passed their lives in a state of ignorance and poverty, which ithas pleased some declaimers to dignify with the appellation of vir­tuous simplicity. Modern Germany is said to contain about twothousand three hundred walled towns '7. In a much wider extentof country, the geographer Ptolemy could discover no more thanninety places, which he decorates with the name of cities 18; though,according to our ideas, they would but ill deserve that splendidtitle. We can only suppose them to have been rude fortifications,constructed in the center of the woods, and designed to secure the
women,







OCR Output








CONTENTS.


A.D.


Page
347


Clemency and Justice os Claudius
He undertakes the Reformation of the
Army - - 348
269 The Goths invade the Empire - 349
Distress and Firmness of Claudius 350
His Victory over the Goths - ib.
270 Death of the Emperor, who recommends
Aurelian for his Successor - 352
The Attempt and Fall of Quintilius 353
Origin and Services of Aurelian ib.
Aurelian's successful Reign - 354
His severe Discipline - ib.
He concludes a Treaty with the Goths 355
He resigns to them the Province of Dacia 356
270 The Alemannic War - 357
The Alemanni invade Italy - 359
Are at last vanquished by Aurelian 360
271 Superstitious Ceremonies - 361
Fortifications of Rome - 362
Aurelian suppresses the two Usurpers 363
Succession of Usurpers in Gaul ib.
271 The Reign and Defeat of Tetricus 364
272 Character of Zenobia - 365
Her Beauty and Learning - 366
Her Valour - - i\
She revenges her Husband's Death 367
Rcigns'over the East and Egypt ib.
272 The Expedition of Aurelian - 369
The Emperor defeats the Palmyrenians
in the Battles of Antioch and Emesa ib.
The State of Palmyra - 3-0
It is besieged by Aurelian - 371
Aurelian becomes Master of Zenobia,
and of the City - 372
Sehaviour of Zenobia - 373
Rebellion and Ruin of Palmyra 374
Aurelian suppresses the Rebellion of vFirmus in Egypt - ib.
.274. Triumph of Aurelian - 375
His Treatment of Tetricus and Zenobia 377
His Magnificence and Devotion ib.
He suppresses a Sedition at Rome 378
Observations upon it 3-9
Cruelty of Aurelian - - 381
375 He marches inio the East, and is assas­sinated /- - ib.


CHAP. XII.
ConduR of the Army and Senate aster theDeath of Aurelian.—Reigns of Tacitus,Probus, Carus, and bis Sons.


A.D.


Pag*


Extraordinary Contest between the Army
and the Senate for the Choice of an Em­
peror - - 383
275 A peaceful Interregnum of eight Months 384
The Consul assembles the Senate 386
Character of Tacitus - - ib.
He is elected Emperor - 387
He accepts the Purple - 388
Authority of the Senate - ib.
Their Joy and Confidence - 390
276 Tacitus is acknowledged by the Army ib.
The Alani invade Asia, and are repulsed
by Tacitus - - 391
276 Death of the Emperor Tacitus 392
Usurpation and Death of his Brother
Florianus - - 393
Their Family subsists in Obscurity ib.
Character and Elevation of the Emperor
Probus - - 394
His respectful Conduct towards the Senate 395
Victories of Probus over the Barbarians 396
277 He delivers Gaul from the Invasion of
the Germans - - 398
He carries his Arms into Germany 399
He builds a Wall from the Rhine to the


Danube
Introduction and Settlement of the Bar­
barians
Daring Enterprise of the Franks
279 Revolt of Saturninus in the East
280 — of Bonosus and Proculus in Gaul


400
402
403
404
405
ib.
4064074 3


281 Triumph of the Emperor ProbusHis Discipline
282 His Death
Election and Character of Carus
The Sentiments of the Senate and People 409
Carus defeats the Sarmatians, and marches
into the East - .- 410
283 He gives Audience to the Persian Am­
bassadors - - ib.


His







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 573


him in chains to the proconsul. The proconsul transmitted him tothe Prætorian præfect of Italy; and Fælix, who disdained even togive an evasive answer, was at length beheaded at Venufia, inLucania, a place on which the birth of Horace has conferredfame This precedent, and perhaps some imperial rescript, whichwas issued in consequence of it, appeared to authorize the gover­nors of provinces, in punishing with death the refusal of the Chri­stians to deliver up their sacred books. There were undoubtedlymany persons who embraced this opportunity of obtaining the crownof martyrdom; but there were likewise too many who purchasedan ignominious life, by discovering and betraying the holy scriptureinto the hands of infidels. A great number even of bishops andpresbyters acquired, by this criminal compliance, the opprobriousepithet of Traditors; and their offence was productive of muchpresent scandal, and of much future discord, in the AfricanChurch ,5\
The copies, as well as versions of scripture, were already so Demolition ofmultiplied in the empire, that the most severe inquisition could no thec utche!"longer be attended with any fatal consequences; and even thesacrifice of those volumes, which, in every congregation, were pre­served for public use, required the consent of some treacherous andunworthy Christians. But the ruin of the churches was easilyeffected by the authority of the government, and by the labourof the Pagans. In some provinces, however, the magistrates* con­tented themselves with shutting up the places of religious worshipIn others, they more literally complied with the terms of theedict; and after taking away the doors, the benches, and the pulpit,which they burnt, as it were in a funeral pile, they completelydemolislied the remainder of the edifice ,59. It is perhaps to thismelancholy occasion, that we should apply a very remarkable story,which is related with so many circumstances of variety and impro­bability, that it serves rather to excite than to satisfy our curiosity.
In







OCR Output








Jxxx NOTES ON THE SIXTEENTH CHAPTER.


[56] Plin. Epistol. x. 97. The learned Molheimexpresses himself (p. 147. 232.) with the highestapprobation of Pliny's moderate and candid tem­per. Notwithstanding Dr. Lardner's suspicions 'feeJewifhand Heathen Testimonies, vol. ii. p. 46 ) 1 amunable to discover any bigotry in his language orproceedings.
[57] Plin. Epistol v. 8. He pleaded his firstcause, A. D. 81. 1 he year after the famous erup­tions of Mount Vesuvius, in which his uncle losthis life.
[58] Plin. Epistol. x. 98. Tertullian (Apclog.c. 5.) considers this rescript as a relaxation of theancient penal laws, "quas Trajanus ex parte fru-ftratus est:" and yet Tertullian, in another part ofhis Apologists, exposes the inconsistency of prohi­biting inquiries, and enjoining punishments.
fj9] F.uscbius (Hist. Eccleliast. l.iv.c. 9.) haspreserved the edict of Hadrian, He has likewise(c. 13.) given us one still more favourable under thename of Antoninus; the authenticity of which isnot so universally allowed. The second apology osJustin contains some curious particulars relative tothe accusations of christians.
[60] See Tertullian (Apolog. c. 40). The actsof the martyrdom of Polycarp, exhibit a livelypicture of these tumults, which were usually fo­mented by the malice of the Jews.
[61] These regulations are inserted in the abovenventioned edicts of Hadrian and Pius. See theapology of Melito, (apud Euseb. 1. iv. c. 26.)
[62] See the rescript of Trajan, and the conductof Pliny. The most authentic acts of the martyrsabound in these exhortations.
[63] In particular, fee Tertullian, (Apol. c. 2',3,). and Lactantius (Institut. Divin. v. 9). Theirreasonings are almost the fame; but we may dis­cover, that one of these apologists had been a lawyer,and the other a rhetorician.
[64] See two instances of this kind of torture inthe Acta Sincera Martyrum. publistied by Ruinart,p. 160. 399. Jerome, in his Legend of Paul theHermit, tells a strange story of a young man, who'was chained naked on a bed of flowers, and as­saulted by a beautiful and wanton courtezan. He


quelled the riling temptation by biting off histongue.
[65I The conversion of his wife provoked Clau­dius Herminianus, governor of Cappadocia, to treat;the christians with uncommon severity. Tertullianad Scapulam, c. 3.
f 66] Tertullian, in his epistle to the governor ofAfrica, mentions several remarkable instances oflenity and forbearance, which had happened withinhis knowledge.
[67} Neque enim in universum aliquid quodquasi certam formats habeat, constitui potest: anexpression of Trajan, which gave a very great lati­tude to the governors of provinces.
[68] In Metalla damnamur, in insulas relege-mur. Tertullian. Apolcg. c. 12. The mines otNumidia contained nine bishops, with a proportion­able number of their Clergy aud people, to whomCyprian addresscd~a pious epistle of praise and com­fort. See Cyprian. Epistol. j6, 77.
[69] Though we cannot receive with entire con­fidence, either the epistles, or the acts of Ignatius,(they may be found in the 2d volume of the Apo­stolic Fathers) yet we may quote that bifliop ofAntioch as one of these txemplary martyrs. He wassent in chains to Rome as a public spectacle: andwhen he arrived at Troas, he received the pleasingintelligence, that the persecution of Antioch was al­ready at an end-
[70] Among the martyrs of Lyons, (Euseb. 1. v,c. 1.) the stave Blandina was distinguished by moreexquisite tortures. Of the five martyrs so much ce­lebrated in the acts of Felicitas and Perpetua, twowere of a sen ile, and two others of a very meancondition.
[71] Origen advers. Celsum, I. iti. p. 116. Hi*words deserve to be trai.scribed. "OXiyoi xur»
[72] If we recollect that til the Plebeians ofRome were not christians, and that all the christianswere not saints and martyrs, we mayjudge with howmuch safety religious honours can oe ascribed tobones or urns, indiscriminately taken from thepublic burial place. After ten centuries of a veryfree and open trade, some suspicions hare arisen
among







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


back into the city over the Milvian bridge, but the crowds which-pressed together through that narrow passage, forced him into theriver, where he was immediately drowned by the weight of hisarmour °9. His body, which had funk very deep into the mud,*ras found with some difficulty the next day. The fight of his head,when it was exposed to the eyes of the people, convinced them of theirdeliverance, and admonished them to receive, with acclamations ofJoyalty and gratitude, the'fortunate Constantine, who thus atchievedby his valour and ability the most splendid enterprise of his life 7°.
In the use of victory, Constantine neither deserves the praise of His receptionclemency, nor the censure of immoderate rigour7'. He inflictedthe same treatment, to which a defeat would have exposed his ownperson and family, put to death the two sons of the tyrant, andcarefully extirpated his whole race. It was natural that the mostdistinguished adherents of Maxentius should share his fate, as theyhad shared his prosperity and his crimes: but when the Romanpeople loudly demanded a greater number of victims, he resisted,with firmness and humanity, those servile clamours which weredictated by flattery as well as by resentment. Informers werepunished and discouraged; the innocent, who had suffered underthe late tyranny, were recalled from exile, and restored to theirestates. A general act of oblivion quieted the minds and settledthe property of the people, both in Italy and in Africa 7\ Thefkst time that Constantine honoured the senate with his presence,he recapitulated his own services and exploits in a modest oration,assured that illustrious order of his sincere regard, and promisedto re-establish its ancient dignity and privileges. The gratefulsenate repaid these unmeaning professions by the empty titles ofhonour, which it was yet in their power to bestow; and withoutpresuming to ratify the authority of Constantine, they passed adecree to assign him the first rank among the three Augufii whogoverned the Roman world Games and festivals were institutedS to







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 311


that temperate region. The air was pure, and the foil, wateredby some invaluable springs, was capable of producing fruits, as wellas corn,. A place possessed of such singular advantages, and situ­ated at a convenient distance 6S, between the gulph of Persia and theMediterranean, was soon frequented by the caravans which con­veyed to the nations of Europe a considerable part of the rich com­modities of India. Palmyra insensibly increased into an opulentand independent city, and connecting the Roman and the Parthianmonarchies by the mutual benefits of commerce, was suffered toobserve an humble neutrality, till at length, after the victories ofTrajan, the little republic funk into the bosom of Rome, and flou­rished more than one hundred and fifty years in the subordinatethough honourable rank of a colony. It was during that peacefulperiod, if we may judge from a few remaining inscriptions, thatthe wealthy Palmyrenians constructed those temples, palaces, andporticos of Grecian architecture, whose ruins, scattered over an ex­tent of several miles, have deserved the curiosity of our travellers.The elevation of Odenathus and Zenobia appeared to reflect newsplendour on their country, and Palmyra, for a while, stood forth therival of Rome: but the competition was fatal, and ages of prospe­rity were sacrificed to a moment of glory 6'.
In his march over the sandy desert, between Emesa and Palmyra, it is besieged
by Aurelian,
the emperor Aurelian was perpetually harassed by the Arabs; norcould he always defend his army, and especially his baggage, fromthese flying troops, which were vexatious only from their minutenessand activity. The siege of Palmyra was an object far more difficult andimportant, and the emperor, who with incessant vigour pressed theattacks in person, was himself wounded with a dart. *' The Romanpeople," says Aurelian, in an original letter, " speak with contempt"of the war which I am waging against a woman. They are ignorant"both of the character and of the power of Zenobia. It is impossible to
"enumerate







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


barbarians who had never beheld Italy till they entered it in a ho­stile manner. Had they not been restrained by motives of a moreinterested nature, they would probably have answered Galerius inthe words of Cæsar's veterans: "If our general wishes to lead us"to the banks of the Tyber, we are prepared to trace out his camp."Whatsoever walls he has determined to level with the ground,"our hands are ready to work the engines: nor shall we hesitate,"should the name of the devoted city be Rome itself." These areindeed the expressions of a poet; but of a poet who had diligentlyconsulted both history and human nature *\
The legions of Galerius exhibited a very melancholy proof of His retreat;,their disposition by the ravages which they committed in theirretreat. They murdered, they ravished, they plundered, theydrove away the flocks and herds of the Italians, they burnt thevillages through which they passed, and they endeavoured todestroy the country, which it had not been in their power tosubdue. During the whole march, Maxentius hung on their reaT,but he very prudently declined a general engagement with thosebrave and desperate veterans. His father had undertaken a secondjourney into Gaul, with the hope of persuading Constantine, who. .had assembled an army on the frontier, to join the pursuit and tocomplete the victory. But the actions of Constantine were guidedby reason and not by resentment. He persisted in the wise reso­lution of maintaining a balance of power in the divided empire, andhe no longer hated Galerius, when that aspiring prince had ceasedto be an object of terror *8.
The mind of Galerius was the most susceptible of the sterner Elevation ofpassions, but it was not however incapable of a sincere and lasting rankofAji-friendship. Licinius, whose manners as well as character were ^i)\07,not unlike his own, seems to have engaged both his affection and NovemberIIiesteem. Their intimacy had commenced in the happier periodperhaps of their youth and obscurity. It had been cemented by
the







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AND FALL


of the first Christians, who, according to the lively expression ofSulpicius Severus, desired martyrdom with more eagerness than hisown contemporaries solicited a bishopric S*. The epistles whichIgnatius composed as he was carried in chains through the cities ofAsia, breathe sentiments the most repugnant to the ordinary feelingsof human nature. He earnestly beseeches the Romans, that whenhe should be exposed in the amphitheatre, they would not, by theirkind but unseasonable intercession, deprive him of the crown ofglory; and he declares his resolution to provoke and irritate thewild beasts which might be employed as the instruments of hisdeath '*. Some stories are related of the courage of martyrs, whoactually performed what Ignatius had intended; who exasperatedthe fury of the lions, pressed the executioner to hasten his office,cheerfully leaped into the sires which were kindled to consume them,and discovered a sensation of joy and pleasure in the midst of themost exquisite tortures. Several examples have been preserved of azeal impatient of those restraints which the emperors had providedfor the security of the church. The Christians sometimes suppliedby their voluntary declaration the want of an accuser, rudely dis­turbed the public service of Paganism 9J, and rushing in crowds roundthe tribunal of the magistrates, called upon them to pronounce andto inflict the sentence of the law. The behaviour of the Christianswas too remarkable to escape the notice of the ancient philosophers .but they seem to have considered it with much less admiration thanastonishment. Incapable of conceiving the motives which sometimestransported the fortitude of believers beyond the bounds of prudenieor reason, they treated such an eagerness to die as the strange resultof obstinate despair, of stupid insensibility, or of superstitiousphrenzy9*. "Unhappy men," exclaimed the proconsul Antoninusto the Christians of Asia, " unhappy men, if you are thus weary of"your lives, is it so difficult for you to find ropes and precipices 95?"He was extremely cautious (as it is observed by a learned and pious
4 historian)







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 32$


He gratified their avarice by a liberal distribution of treasure, underthe names of pay and donative. He engaged their esteem by aspirited declaration, that although his age might disable him fromthe performance of military exploits, his counsels mould never beunworthy of a Roman general, the successor of the brave Au-relian ,6.
Whilst the deceased emperor was making preparations for a fe- TheAlaniio.cond expedition into the east, he had negociated with the Alani, and are re-a Scythian people, who pitched their tents in the neighbourhood of Tachas'.7the lake Mceotis. Those barbarians, allured by presents and sub­sidies, had promised to invade Persia with a numerous body of lightcavalry. They were faithful to their engagements; but when theyarrived on the Roman frontier, Aurelian was already dead, the designof the Persian war was at least suspended, and the generals, who,during the interregnum, exercised a doubtful authority, were unpre­pared either to receive or to oppose them. Provoked by such treat­ment, which they considered as trifling and perfidious, the Alani hadrecourse to their own valour for their payment and revenge; and asthey moved with the usual swiftness of Tartars, they had soon spreadthemselves over the provinces of Pontus, Cappadocia, Cilicia, andGalatia. The legions, who from the opposite shores of the Bosphorus,could almost distinguish the flames of the cities and villages, impa­tiently urged their general to lead them against the invaders. Theconduct of Tacitus was suitable to his age and station. He convincedthe barbarians, of the faith, as well as of the power, of the empire.Great numbers of the Alani, appeased by the punctual discharge ofthe engagements which Aurelian had contracted with them, relin­quished their booty and captives, and quietly retreated to their owndeserts, beyond the Phasis. Against the remainder who refused peace,the Roman emperor waged, in person, a successful war. Seconded byan army of brave and experienced veterans, in a few weeks he de-.
Vol. I. U u livered







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


ductive of sentiments of veneration. Like the modesty affectedby Augustus, the state maintained by Diocletian was a thea­trical representation; but it must be confessed, that of the twocomedies, the former was of a much more liberal and manlycharacter than the latter. It was the aim of the one to disguise,and the object of the other to display, the unbounded power whichthe emperors possessed over the Roman world.
Ostentation was the first principle of the new system instituted by New so™ ofDiocletian. The second was division. He divided the empire, the tion>two
. ... Augusti, and
provinces, and every branch of the civil as well as military admi- two Cæsars,nistration. He multiplied the wheels of the machine of govern­ment, and rendered its operations less rapid but more secure.Whatever advantages, and whatever defects might attend theseinnovations, they must be ascribed in a very great degree to thefirst inventor; but as the new frame of policy was graduallyimproved and completed by succeeding princes, it will be moresatisfactory to delay the consideration of it till the season of its fullmaturity and perfection ,C5. Reserving, therefore, for the reign ofConstantine a more exact picture of the new empire, we shall con-'tent ourselves with describing the principal and decisive outline, as-it was traced by the hand of Diocletian. He had associated threecolleagues in the exercise of the supreme power; and as he wasconvinced that the abilities of a single man were inadequate to thepublic defence, he considered the joint administration of four princesnot as a temporary expedient, but as a fundamental law of the con­stitution. It was his intention, that the two elder princes shouldbe distinguished by the use of the diadem, and the title of Augusti ithat, as affection or esteem might direct their choice, they shouldregularly call to their assistance two subordinate colleagues; andthat the Cœfors, rising in their turn to the first rank, should supplyan uninterrupted succession' of emperors. The empire wc:s dividedinto four parts. The East and Italy were the most honourable, the
Danube







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


than three years, he had restored universal peace and order to theRoman world7<S.
Since the foundation of Rome, no general had more nobly deserved A.p. 274
... . Triumph o
a triumph than Aurelian; nor was a triumph ever celebrated with Aureiian.superior pride and magnificence11. The pomp was opened by twentyelephants, four royal tygers, and above two hundred of the most curi­ous animals from every climate of the North, the East, and the South,They were followed by sixteen hundred gladiators, devoted to thecruel amusement of the amphitheatre. The wealth of Asia, the armsand ensigns of so many conquered nations, and the magnificent plateand wardrobe of the Syrian queen, were disposed in exact symmetryor artful disorder. The ambassadors of the most remote parts ofthe earth, of Æthiopia, Arabia, Persia, Bactriana, India, and China*all remarkable by their rich or singular dresses, displayed the fameand power of the Roman emperor, who exposed likewise to thepublic view the presents that he had received, and particularly agreat number of crowns of gold, the offerings of grateful cities.The victories of Aurelian were attested by the long train of cap­tives who reluctantly attended his triumph, Goths, Vandals, Sar-matians, Alemanni, Franks, Gauls, Syrians, and Egyptians. Eachpeople was distinguished by its peculiar inscription, and the title ofAmazons was bestowed on ten martial heroines of the Gothic na­tion who had been taken in arms7". But every eye, disregardingthe crowd of captives, was fixed on the emperor Tetricus, and thequeen of the East. The former, as well as his son, whom he hadcreated Augustus, was dressed in Gallic trowscrs 7% a saffron tunic,and a robe of purple. The beauteous figure of Zenobia was confinedby fetters of gold; a slave supported the gold chain which encircledher neck, and she almost fainted under the intolerable weight ofjewels, She preceded on foot the magnificent chariot, in which sheonce hoped to enter the gates of Rome. It was followed by twoother chariots, still more sumptuous, of Odenathus and of the
S s 2 Persian







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 397


columns, on one side of which we discover the square temple ofÆsculapius, on the other the octagon temple of Jupiter. Thelatter of those deities Diocletian revered as the patron of his for­tunes, the former as the protector of his health. By comparingthe present remains with the precepts of Vitruvius, the severalparts of the building, the baths, bedchamber, the atrium, the bafisica,and the Cyzicene, Corinthian, and Egyptian halls, have beendescribed with some degree of precision, or at least of probability.Their forms were various, their proportions just, but they wereall attended with two imperfections, very repugnant to our modernnotions of taste and conveniency. These stately rooms had*neither windows nor chimnies. They were lighted from thetop (for the building seems to have consisted of no more than onestory), and they received their heat by the help of pipes that wereconveyed along the walls. The range of principal apartments'was protected towards the south west, by a portico five hundred andseventeen feet long, which must have formed a very noble anddelightful walk, when the beauties of painting and sculpture wereadded to those of the prospect.
Had this magnificent edifice remained in a solitary country, itwould have been exposed to the ravages of time ; but it might, per­haps, have escaped the rapacious industry of man. The village ofAspalathus ,10, and long afterwards the provincial town of Spalatro,have grown out of its ruins. The golden gate now opens intothe market place. St. John the Baptist has usurped the honours ofÆsculapius; and the temple of Jupiter, under the protection of theVirgin, is converted into the cathedral church. For this accountof Diocletian's palace, we are principally indebted to an ingeniousartist of our own time and country, whom a very liberal curiosity car- Decline ofried into the heart of Dalmatia But there is room to suspect that the am*the elegance of his designs and engraving has somewhat flatteredthe objects which it was their purpose to represent. We are in*-formed by a more recent and very judicious traveller, that the awful1
ruins







OCR Output








kxviii NOTES ON THE SEVENTH CHAPTER1.


[33] Muratori (Annali dTtalia, torn. ii.p. 29 V.)thinks the meliingof the snows suits better with themonths of June or July, than with those of February.The opinion of a man who passed his life betweenthe Alps and the Apennines, is undoubtedly of greatweight; yet I observe, 1. That the long winter, ofwhich Muratori takes advantage, is to be foundonly in the Latin version, and not in the Greektevt of Herodian. 2. That the vicissitude of funsand rains, to which the soldiers ofMaximin wereexposed, (Herodian, 1. viii. p. J77 ) denotes thespring rather thtn the summer. We mayobserve like­wise, that these several streams, as they, melted intoone, composed the Timavus, so poetically (in everysense of the word) described by Virgil. They areabout twelve miles to the east of Aquileia. SeeCluver. Italia Antiqua, torn. i. p. 189, &c.
[34] Herodian, 1. viii. p. 272. The Celtic deitywas supposed to be Apollo, and received under thatname the thanks of the senate. A temple waslikewise built to Venus the bald, in honour of thewomen of Aquileia, who had given up their hair tomake ropes for the military engines.
[35] Herodian, 1. viii. p. 279. Hist. August, p.14/). The duration of iVlaximin's reign has not beendenned with much inaccuracy, except by Eutropius,who allows him three years and a sew days (1. ix.1.); we may depend on the integrity of the text, asthe Latin original is checked with the Greek ver­sion of Pæanius.
[36] Eight Roman feet and one third, whichmakes above eight English, as the two measures areto each other in the proportion of 967 to 1000.See Greaves's discourse on the Roman foot. Max»imin could drink in a day an amphora (or aboutseven gallons of wine) and eat thirty or forty poundsof meat. He could move a loaded waggon, breaka horse's leg with his fist, crumble stones in hishand, and tear up small trees by the roots. See hislife in the Augustan History.
[38] See the congratulatory letter of ClaudiusJulian us the consul, to the two emperors,.in the Au­gustan History.
[38] Hist. August, p. I7».
[39] Herodian, 1. viii. p. 258.
[40] Herodian, 1, viii. p. 213.


[41] The observation had been made imprudently,enough in the acclamations of the senate, and with,the soldiers, it carried the appearance of a wantoninsult. Hist. August, p. 170..
[42] Discordiae tacitae et qua? intelligerenturpotius quam viderentor. Hist. August, p. 170... This well chosen expression is probably stolen fromsome better writer,
[43] Herodian, V, viii. p. 287, 288.
[44] Quia non alius erat in præsenti, is the ex­pression of the Augustan History .
[45] Quintus Curtius (1. x. c. 9.) pays an ele.gant compliment to the emperor of the day, forhaving, by his happy accession, extinguished somany fire-brands, sheathed so many swords, and-put an end to the evil; of a divided government.After weighing with attention every word of thepassage, I am of opinion, that it suits better with,the elevation of Gordian, than with any otherperiod of the Roman History. In that case, it mayserve to decide the age of Quintus Curtius. Those*who place him under the first Cæsars, argue from theparity of his style, but are embarrassed by the silenceof Quintilian, in his accurate list of Roman his­torians.
[46] Hist. August; p. 161. From some hints inthe two letters, I should expect that the eunuchswere not expelled the palace, without some degreesof gentle violence, and that young Gordian ratherapproved of, than consented, to, their disgrace.
[47] Duxit uxorem filiam Misithei, quern causa;eloquentiæ dignum parentela sua putavit; et præ-sectum- statim fecit; post quod, non puerile jam etcontemptibile videbatur imperinm.
[48] Hist. August, p. 162. Aurelius Victor.Porphyrius in Vit. Plotin. ap. Fabricium BibliouGrxc. 1. iv. c. 36. The philosopher Plotinusaccom.panied the army, prompted by the love of knowledge,and by the hope of penetrating as far at India.
[49] About twenty, miles from the little town orCircesium, on the frontier of the two empires.
[50] The inscription (which contained a verysingular pun) was erased by the order of Liciniuj,who claimed some degree of relationship to Philip
(Hist.)







OCR Output








448 THE DECLINE AND FALL


treasonable correspondence with the barbarians; but as he wa»never convicted, either by his own conduct or by any legal evidence,we may perhaps be allowed, from his weakness, to presume his in­nocence "\ The memory of Licinius was branded with infamy*his statues were thrown down, and, by a hasty edict, of such mis­chievous tendency that it was almost immediately corrected, allhis laws, and all the judicial proceedings of his reign, were at onceRe-union of abolished "\ By this victory of Constantine, the Roman world wasA.CD?32+. again united under the authority of one emperor, thirty-sevenyears after Diocletian had divided his power and provinces withhis associate Maximian.
The successive steps of the elevation of Constantine from his firstassuming the purple at York, to the resignation of Licinius at Nico-media, have been related with some minuteness and precision, not onlyas the events are in themselves both interesting and important, butstill more as they contributed to the decline of the empire by theexpence of blood and treasure, and by the perpetual increase as wellof the taxes as of the military establishment. The foundation ofConstantinople, and the establishment of the Christian religion, werethe immediate and memorable consequences of this revolution.


CHAP.







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 43


what was almost included in the description of cattle, four thousandone hundred and sixteen slaves
The number of subjects who acknowledged the laws of Rome, Popuiousnessof citizens, of provincials, and of slaves, cannot now be fixed with empire!*0111"such a degree of accuracy, as the importance of the object woulddeserve. We are informed, that when the emperor Claudius ex­ercised the office of censor, he took an account of six millions ninehundred and forty-five thousand Roman citizens, who, with the pro­portion of women and children, must have amounted to about twentymillions of souls. The multitude of subjects of an inferior rank,was uncertain and fluctuating. But after weighing with attentionevery circumstance which could influence the balance, it seems pro­bable, that there existed, in the time of Claudius, about twice asmany provincials as there were citizens, of either sex and of everyage; and that the staves were at least equal in number to the freeinhabitants of the Roman world. The total amount of this im­perfect calculation would rife to about one hundred and twentymillions of persons : a degree of population which possibly exceedsthat of modern Europe 6l, and forms the most numerous society thathas ever been united under the fame system of government*
Domestic peace aud union were the natural consequences of the obediencemoderate and comprehensive policy embraced by the Romans. If and union*we turn our eyes towards the monarchies of Asia, we shall beholddespotism in the center, and weakness in the extremities; thecollection of the revenue, or the administration of justice, enforcedby the presence of an army: hostile barbarians, hereditary satraps,and provinces inclined to rebellion, though incapable of freedom.But the obedience of the Roman world was uniform, voluntary, andpermanent. The vanquished nations blended into one great people",resigned the hope, nay even the wish, of resuming their inde­pendence, and scarcely considered their own existence as distinctfrom the existence of Rome. The established authority of the
G 2 emperors


■







OCR Output








;8 THE DECLINE AND FALL


consent had been secured by an immense donative, the new Cæsar **was ravistied from hie embraces by an untimely death. He leftonly one son. Hadrian commended the boy to the gratitude of theAntonines. He was adopted by Pius; and, on the accession ofMarcus, was invested with an equal share of sovereign power.Among the many vices of this younger Verus, he possessed onevirtue; a dutiful reverence for his wiser colleague, to whom hewillingly abandoned the ruder cares of empire. The philosophicemperor dissembled his follies, lamented his early death, and cast adecent veil over his memory.Adoption of As soon as Hadrian's passion was either gratified or disappointed,tonines. he resolved to deserve the thanks of posterity, by placing the mostexalted merit on the Roman throne. His discerning eye easilydiscovered a senator about fifty years of age, blameless in all theoffices of life, and a youth of about seventeen, whose riper yearsopened the fair prospect of every virtue: the elder of these wasdeclared the son and successor of Hadrian, on condition, howevef,that he himself should immediately adopt the younger. The twoAntonines (for it is of them that we are now speaking) governed theA.D. 138— Roman world forty-two years, with the fame invariable spirit ofwisdom and virtue. Although Pius had two sons41, he preferredthe welfare of Rome to the interest of his family, gave his daughterFaustina in marriage to young Marcus, obtained from the senatethe tribunitian and proconsular powers, and with a noble disdain1,or rather ignorance of jealousy, associated him to all the labours ofgovernment. Marcus, On the other hand, revered the character ofhis benefactor, loVed him as a parent, obeyed him as his sove­reign 45, and after he was no more, regulated his own administra­tion by the example and maxims of his predecessor. Their unitedreigns are possibly the only period of history in which the happinessof a great people was the sole object of government.
7 Titus







OCR Output








OE THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


■head of the effeminate troops .of Egypt and Syria, encounter, witfc.any hopes of victory, the legions of .Europe, whose irresistiblestrength appeared to support the brother of Tacitus. But thefortune and activity of Probus triumphed over every obstacle.The hardy veterans of his rival, accustomed to cold climates,sickened and consumed away in the sultry heats of Cilicia, wherethe summer proved remarkably unwholesome. Their numbers werediminished by frequent desertion, the passes of the mountains werefeebly defended; Tarsus opened its gates, and the soldiers of J!k>rxianus, when they had permitted him to enjoy the imperial titleabout three months, -delivered the empire from civil war by the J«ly.easy sacrifice of a peince whom they despised l0.
The perpetual revolutions of the throne had so perfectly erazed Their familyevery notion of hereditary right, .that the family of an unfortunate scurfr/.'"0t>"emperor was incapable of exciting the jealousy of his successors.The children of Taoitus and Elorianus were permitted to descendinto a private station, and to mingle with the general mass of thepeople. Their poverty indeed became an additional safeguard totheir innocence. When Tacitus was elected by the senate, heresigned his ample patrimony to the public service an act of ge­nerosity specious in appearance, but which evidently disclosed hisintention of transmitting the empire to his dependents. The onlyconsolation of their fallen state was the remembrance of transientgreatness, and a distant hope, the child of a flattering prophecy, that,at the end of a thousand years, a monarch of the race of Tacitusmould arise, the protector of the senate, the restorer of Rome, andthe conqueror of the whole earth
The peasants of Illyricum, who had already given Claudius and Cna raster a nl
. . . elevation of
Aurelian to the sinking empire, bad an equal right to glory in the themperjeelevation of Probus *\ Above twenty years before, the emperor Probus'Valerian, with his usual penetration, had discovered the rising meritof the young soldier, on whom he conferred the rank of tribune,
U u 9, long







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


adjacent to the ocean l\ To repel their desultory incursions, itwas found necessary to create a naval power; and the judiciousmeasure was pursued with prudence and vigour. Gessoriacum orBoulogne, in the narrow streights of the British channel, waschosen by the emperor for the station of the Roman fleet; and thecommand of it was intrusted to Carausius, a Menapian of themeanest origin IS, but who had long signalized his skill as a pilot,and his valour as a soldier. The integrity of the new admiralcorresponded not with his abilities. When the German pyratessailed from their own harbours, he connived at their passage, buthe diligently intercepted their return, and appropriated to his ownuse an ample share of the spoil which they had acquired. Thewealth of Carausius was, on this occasion, very justly consideredas an evidence of his guilt; and Maximian had already given ordersfor his death. But the crafty Menapian foresaw and prevented theseverity of the emperor. By his liberality he had attached to hisfortunes the fleet which he commanded, and secured the barbariansin his interest. From the port of Boulogne he sailed over to Britain,persuaded the legion, and the auxiliaries which guarded that island*to embrace his party, and boldly assuming, with the imperialpurple, the title of Augustus, defied the justice and the arms of hisinjured sovereign l6.
When Britai n was thus dismembered from the empire, its im- Importanceportance was sensibly felt, and its loss sincerely lamented. The °fBslUiaRomans celebrated, and perhaps magnified, the extent of that nobleisland, provided on every side with convenient harbours; the tem­perature of the climate, and the fertility of the foil, alike adaptedfor the production of corn or of vines; the valuable minerals withwhich it abounded; its rich pastures covered with innumerableflocks, and its woods free from wild beasts or venomous serpents.Above all, they regretted the large amount of the revenue ofBritain, whilst they confessed, that such a province well deserved to
A a a 2 become







OCR Output








144 THE DECLINE AND FALL


respect much inferior to those of Licinius. The maritime citiesof Greece sent their respective quotas of men and ships to thecelebrated harbour of Piræus, and their united force consisted ofno more than two hundred small vessels: a very feeble armamentif it is compared with those formidable fleets which were equippedand maintained by the republic of Athens during the Peloponnesianwar ,c6. Since Italy was no longer the feat of government, thenaval establishments of Misenum and Ravenna had been graduallyneglected; and as the shipping and mariners-of the empire weresupported by commerce rather than by war, it was natural that theyshould the most abound in the industrious provinces of Egypt and Asia.It is only surprising, that the eastern emperor, who possessed so great asuperiority at sea, should have neglected the opportunity of carryingan offensive war into the center of his rival's dominions.BattleofHa- 1 Instead of embracing such an active resolution, which might havea"d?3Z3.- changed the whole face of the war, the prudent Licinius expectedJuIy 3« tke approach of his rival in a camp near Hadrianople, which hehad fortified with an anxious care that betrayed his apprehensionof the event. Gonstantine directed his march from Thessalonicatowards that part of Thrace, till he found himself stopped by thebroad and rapid" stream of the Hebrus, and discovered the numerousarmy of Licinius, which filled the steep ascent of the hill, from theriver to the city of Hadrianople. Many days were spent in doubt"ful and distant skirmishes; but at length the obstacles of the passageand of the attack were removed by the intrepid conduct of Con-stantme. In this place we might relate a wonderful exploit ofConstantine, which, though it can scarcely be paralleled either iapoetry or romance, is celebrated, not by a venal orator devoted tohis fortune, but by an historian, the partial enemy of his fame.We are assured that the valiant emperor threw himself into theriver Hebrua, accompanied only by twelve horsemen, and that bya the







OCR Output








;92 THE DECLINE AND PALL


of fortune, and the disappointment of his favourite schemes urgedhim to relinquish a power which he found inadequate to his am­bition. But the reign of Diocletian had slowed with a tide of unin­terrupted success; nor was it till after he had vanquished all hisenemies, and accomplished all his designs, that he seems to haveentertained any serious thoughts of resigning the empire. NeitherCharles nor Diocletian were arrived at a very advanced period oflife; since the one was only fifty-five, and the other was no morethan fifty-nine years of age; but the active life of those princes,their wars and journies, the cares of royalty, and their applicationto business, had already impaired their constitution, and brought onA. D. 304. the infirmities of a premature old age107.
Long illness m , ,
of Diocletian. - Notwithstanding the severity of a very cold and rainy winter, Dio­cletian left Italy soon after the ceremony of his triumph, and began hisprogress towards the East round the circuit of the Illyrian provinces.Erom the inclemency of the weather, and the fatigue of the journey,he soon contracted a flow illness; and though he made easy marches,and was "generally carried in a close litter, his disorder, before he ar­rived at Nicomedia, about the end of the summer, was become veryserious and alarming. During the whole winter he was confined tohis palace; his danger inspired a general and unaffected concetn;but the people could only judge of the various alterations of hishealth, from the joy or consternation which they discovered in thecountenances and behaviour of his courtiers. The rumour of his deathwas for some time universally believed, and it was supposed to beconcealed, with a view to prevent the troubles that might have hap­pened during the absence of the Cæsar Galerius. At length, however,on the first of March, Diocletian once more appeared in public, but sopale and emaciated, that he could scarcely have been recognised byHis prudence, those to whom his person was the most familiar. It was time toput an end to the painful struggle, which he had sustained duringmore than a year between the care of his health and that of his
dignity.







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AND FALL


C H A P. xir,
ConduSi of thi Army and Seriate after the death of Aure-lian.—Reigns of Tacitusy Probus% Carus and his Sons.


ExtTaordinrry Q< U C H was the Unhappy condition of the Roman emperors*,tweenthe kD that whatever might be their conduct, their fate was corn-senate for the monly the same. A life of pleasure Or virtue, o£ severity or milcf-¥mperor[an ne^"S» °^ indolence or glory, alike led to an untimely grave; andalmost every reign is closed by the same disgusting repetition oftreason and murder. The death of Aurelian,, however, is remark­able by its extraordinary consequences. The legions admired,,lamented, and revenged, their victorious chief. The artifice ofhis perfidious secretary was discovered and ptinifhed. The deludedconspirators attended the funeral of their injured sovereign, withsincere or well feigned contrition, and submitted to the unanimousresolution of the military order, which was signified by the follow­ing epistle. "The brave and fortunate armies to the senate and."people of Rome. The crime of one man, and the error of many,.•* have deprived us of the late emperor Aurelian. May it please you,"venerable lords and fathers! to place him in the number of the84 gods, and to appoint a successor whom your judgment fliall deelape*' worthy of the imperial purple. None of those, whose guilt or"misfortune have contributed to our lose, shall ever reign over*' us '." The Roman senators heard, without surprise, that anotheremperor had been assassinated in his camp: they secretly rejoiced inthe fall of Aurelian; but the modest and dutiful address of thelegions, when it was communicated in full assembly by the consul,diffused the most pleasing astonishment. Such honours, as fear andperhaps esteem could extort, they liberally poured forth on the
4 memory







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AND FALL


 


move his suspicions; and even the care of their own safety urgedthem to share the fortune of an enterprise, of which (if unsuccessful)they were sure to be the first victims. These considerations, andperhaps others of a more private nature, were debated in a previousconference of the consuls and the magistrates. As soon as theirresolution was decided, they convoked in the temple of Castor thewhole body of the senate, according to an ancient form of secrecycalculated to awaken their attention, and to conceal their decrees."Conscript fathers," said the consul Syllanus, " the two Gordians,"both of consular dignity, the one your proconsul, the other your"lieutenant, have been declared emperors by the general consent"of Africa. Let us return thanks," he boldly continued, " to the"youth of Thysdrus; let us return thanks to the faithful peopleM of Carthage, our generous deliverers from an horrid monster.—"Why do you hear me thus coolly, thus timidly? Why do you cast"those anxious looks on each other? why hesitate? Maximin"is a public enemy! may his enmity soon expire with him, and<c may we long enjoy the prudence and felicity of Gordian the fa-«' ther, the valour and constancy of Gordian the son"!" Thenoble ardour of the consul revived the languid spirit of the senate,and declares By an unanimous decree the election of the Gordians was ratified,
Maximin a *
publicenemy. Maximin, his son, and his adherents, were pronounced enemies oftheir country, and liberal rewards were offered to whosoever hadthe courage and good fortune to destroy them.Assumes the During the Emperor's absence, a detachment of the PrætorianRomTand0*' guards remained at Rome, to protect or rather to command theIul>'' capital. The præfect Vitalianus had signalized his fidelity to Maxi­
min, by the alacrity with which he had obeyed, and even prevented,the cruel mandates of the tyrant. His death alone could rescue theauthority of the senate and the lives of the senators, from a state ofdanger and sufpence. Before their resolves had transpired, a quæstorand some tribunes were commiflioned to take his devoted life -
They







OCR Output














 







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 303,


guarded mistress of the world. But Aurelian, who, watchful forthe safety of Rome, still hung on their rear, found in this placethe decisive moment, of giving them a total and irretrievable de­feat 57. The flying remnant of their host was exterminated in athird and last battle near Pavia; and Italy was delivered from theinroads of the Alemanni.
Fear has been the original parent of superstition, and every new cala- Superstitious
. r ceremonies.
mity urges trembling mortals to deprecate the wrath of their invisibleenemies. Though the best hope of the republic was in the valourand conduct of Aurelian, yet such was the public consternation,when the barbarians were hourly expected at the gates of Rome,that, by a decree of the senate, the Sibylline books were consulted.Even the emperor himself, either from a principle of religion or ofpolicy, recommended the salutary measure, chided the tardiness ofthe senateand offered to supply whatever expence, whateveranimals, whatsoever captives of any nation, the gods mould require.Notwithstanding this liberal offer, it does not appear, that anyhuman victims expiated with their Wood the fins of the Romanpeople. The Sibylline books enjoined ceremonies of a more harm- a. D. 271.less nature, processions of priests in white robes, attended by a ■January ,uchorus of youths and virgins; lustrations of the city and adjacentcountry, and sacrifices, whose powerful influence, disabled the bar­barians from passing the mystic ground on which they had ,beencelebrated. However puerile in themselves, these superstitious artswere subservient to the success of the war; and if, in the decisivebattle of Fano, she Alemanni fancied they saw an army of spectrescombating on the side of Aurelian, he received a very powerful aidfrom this imaginary reinforcement39.
But whatever confidence might be placed in ideal ramparts, the Fortification*experience of the past, and the dread of the future, induced the ° Ro,ne'Romans to construct fortifications of a grosser and more substantial


kind..







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 2S7


was declared the most worthy of the imperial throne. The maliceof religious zeal, whilst it arraigns the savage fierceness of his col­league Maximian, has affected to cast suspicions on the personalcourage of the emperor DiocletianIt would not be easy to per­suade us of the cowardice of a soldier of fortune, who acquired andpreserved the esteem of the legions, as well as the favour of so manyWarlike princes. Yet even calumny is sagacious enough to discoverand to attack the most vulnerable part. The valour of Diocletianwas never found inadequate to his duty or to the occasion; but heappears not to have possessed the daring and generous spirit of ahero, who courts danger and fame, disdains artifice, and boldlychallenges the allegiance of his equals. His abilities were usefulrather than splendid; a vigorous mind, improved by the experienceand study of mankind; dexterity and application in business; ajudicious mixture of liberality and ceconomy, of mildness and ri­gour; profound dissimulation under the disguise of military frank­ness; steadiness to pursue his ends; flexibility to vary his means;and above all the great art of submitting his own passions, as wellas those of others, to the interest of his ambition, and of colouringhis ambition with the most specious pretences of justice and publicutility. Like Augustus, Diocletian may be considered as the found­er of a new empire. Like the adopted son of Cæsar, he was dis­tinguished as a statesman rather than as a warrior; nor did eitherof those princes employ force, whenever their purpose could beeffected by policy.
The victory of Diocletian was distinguished by its singular mild- His clemencyness. A people accustomed to applaud the clemency of the con- 30 v,ct)ry*queror, if the usual punishments of death, exile, and confiscationwere inflicted with any degree of temper and equity, beheld, withthe most pleasing astonishment, a civil war, whose rage was confinedto the field of battle. Diocletian received into his confidence Ari-stobulus, the principal minister of the house of Carus, respected the


lives,







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. If9


despair. A respite of three days, obtained with difficulty from therapacious treasurer, was employed in collecting from their estates agreat number of slaves and peasants, blindly devoted to the com­mands of their lords, and armed with the rustic weapons of clubsand axes. The leaders of the conspiracy, as they were admittedto the audience of the procurator, stabbed him with the daggersconcealed under their garments, and, by the assistance of their tu­multuary train, seized on the little town of Thysdrus and erectedthe standard of rebellion against the sovereign of the Roman em­pire. They rested their hopes on the hatred of mankind againstMaximin, and they judiciously resolved to set up in opposition tothat detested tyrant, an emperor whose mild virtues had already ac­quired the love and esteem of the Romans, and whose authorityover the province would give weight and stability to the enterprise*CrOrdianus, their proconsul, and the object of their choice, re­fused, with unfeigned reluctance, the dangerous honour, and beggedWith tears that they would suffer him to terminate in peace alongand innocent life, without staining his feeble age with civil blood.Their menaces compelled him to accept the Imperial purple, hisonly refuge indeed against the jealous cruelty of Maximin; since,according to the reasoning of tyrants, those who have been esteemedworthy of the throne deserve death, and those who deliberate havealready rebelled **.
The family of Gordianus was one of the most illustrious of the charafierandRoman senate. On the father's side. he was descended from the the two Gor., Gracchi, onlus mother's, from the emperor Trajan. A great estate d anS*enabled him to support the dignity of his birth, and, in the enjoy­ment of it, he displayed an elegant taste and beneficent disposition.The palace in Rome-, formerly inhabited by the great Pompey, hadbeenr during several generations, in. the post^slion of Gordian's fa­mily '*. h Was distinguished by ancient trophies of naval victories,and decorated with the works of modern painting. His villa on the
A a 2 road







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AND FALL


the Tyber was supposed to have "been honoured with the preachingand martyrdom of the twa most eminent among the apostles1,0»and the bishops of Rome very prudently claimed the inheritance ofwhatsoever prerogatives were attributed either to the person or tothe office of Saint Peter The bishops of Italy and of the pro­vinces, were disposed to allow them a primacy of order and associa­tion (such was their very accurate expression) in the Christian ari­stocracy "*. But the power of a monarch was rejected with ab­horrence, and the aspiring genius as Rome experienced from thenations of Asia and Africa, a more vigorous resistance to her spiri­tual than she had formerly done to her temporal dominion. Thepatriotic Cyprian, who ruled with the most absolute sway the churchof Carthage and the provincial synods, opposed with resolution andsuccess the ambition of the Roman pontiff, artfully connected hisown cause with that of the eastern bishops, aud, like Hannibal,sought out new allies in the heart of Asia If this Punic warwas carried on without any effusion of blood, it was owing muchless to the moderation than to the weakness of the contending pre­lates. Invectives and excommunications were their only weapons;and these, during the progress of the whole controversy, theyhurled against each other with equal fury and devotion. The hardnecessity of censuring either a pope, or a saint and martyr, distressesthe modern catholics whenever they are obliged to relate the par­ticulars of a dispute, in which the champions of religion indulgedsuch passions as seem much more adapted to the senate or to thecamp'
The progress of the ecclesiastical authority gave birth to the me­morable distinction of the laity and of the clergy, which had beenunknown to the Greeks and Romans ,,J. The former of theseappellations comprehended the body of the Christian people; thelatter, according to the signification of the word, was appropriatedto the chosen portion that had been set apart for the service of2 religion;







OCR Output








574 THE DECLINE AND FALL


Mamgo, with his followers, retired to the banks of the Oxus, andimplored the protection of Sapor. The emperor of China claimedthe fugitive, and alleged the rights of sovereignty. The Persianmonarch pleaded the laws of hospitality, and with some difficultyavoided a war, by the promise that he would banish Mamgo to theuttermost parts of the West; a punishment, as he described it, notless dreadful than death itself. Armenia was chosen for the placeof exile, and a large district was assigned to the Scythian horde, onwhich they might feed their flocks and herds, and remove their en­campment from one place to another, according to the differentseasons of the year. They were employed to repel the invasion ofTiridates; but their leader, after weighing the obligations and in­juries which he had received from the Persian monarch, resolved toabandon his party. The Armenian prince, who was well acquaintedwith the merit as well as power of Mamgo, treated him with dis­tinguished respect; and by admitting him into his confidence, ac­quired a brave and faithful servant, who contributed very effectuallyto his restoration 6\
The Persian! For a while, fortune appeared to favour the enterprising valour ofmenia. Tiridates. He not only expelled the enemies of his family and coun­try from the whole extent of Armenia, but in the prosecution of hisrevenge he carried his arms, or at least his incursions, into the heartof Assyria. The historian, who has preserved the name of Tiridatesfrom oblivion, celebrates, with a degree as national enthusiasm, hispersonal prowess; and, in the true spirit of eastern romance, de­scribes the giants and the elephants that fell beneath his invincible arm.It is from other information that we discover the distracted state of thePersian monarchy, to which the king of Armenia was indebted forsome part of his advantages. The throne was disputed by the am­bition of contending brothers; and Hormuz, after exerting withoutsuccess the strength of his own party, had recourse to the dangerousassistance of the barbarians who inhabited the banks of the Caspian


6 Sea.







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


by the clamorous return of the murderers, bearing on a lance thehead of Pertinax. T hough history has accustomed us to .observeevery principle and every passion yield to the imperious dictates ofambition, it is scarcely credible that, in these- moments o,f horrot^Sulpicianus should have aspired to ascend,a throne streaming with,the blood of so near a relation, and so excellent a prince. He hadalready begun to use the only, effectual argument, and to treat forthe Imperial dignity?; but the. more pr-udent of the Prætorians, ap(^tprehensive thatj in this private contract, they should not obtain ajust price for so valuable a commodity, ran out upon the ramparts;and, with a loud voice, proclaimed that the Roman world was tobe disposed of-to the best bidder by public .auction . ' . .
, This infamous offer, the most insolent excess of military licence,.Itii'purchaseddiffused a universal grief* shame, and indignation throughout the A. D. 193.cjty. It reached at length the ears of Didius Julianus, a wealthy March28th-senator, who, regardless of the public calamities, was indulging him-rself in the luxury of the tables. : His wife and his daughter, his,'freedmen and his parasites, easily convinced him that he deservedthe throne, and earnestly conjured him to embrace so fortunatean opportunity. The vain old man hastened to the Prætorian camp,where Sulpicianus was still in treaty with the guards; and began to,bid against him from the foot of the rampart. The unworthy ne-gociation was transacted by faithful emissaries, who passed alter­nately from one candidate to. the other, and acquainted each of them,,with the offers of his rival. Sulpicianus had already promised adonative of five thousand drachms (above one hundred and sixtypounds) to each soldier; when Julian, eager for the prize, rose' atonce to the sum of six thousand two hundred and fifty drachms, orupwards of two hundred pounds sterling. The gates of the campwere instantly thrown open to the purchaser; he was declared em­peror, and received an oath of allegiance from the soldiers, who re­tained







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


part of the treasure, and, what was dearer than any treasure, severalof the women of the Great King; who was at last obliged to repassthe Euphrates with some marks of haste and confusion '*9. By thisexploit, Odenathus laid the foundations of his future fame and for­tunes. The majesty of Rome, oppressed by a Persian, was protectedby a Syrian or Arab of Palmyra.
The voice of history, which is often little more than the organ Treatment ofof hatred or flattery, reproaches Sapor with a proud abuse of the Vakria11,rights of conquest. We are told that Valerian, in chains, but in­vested with the imperial purple, was exposed to the multitude a con­stant spectacle of fallen greatness; and that whenever the Persianmonarch mounted on horseback, he placed his foot on the neck of aRoman emperor, Notwithstanding all the remonstrances of hiaallies, who repeatedly advised him to remember the vicissitude offortune, to dread the returning power of Rome, and to make hisillustrious captive the pledge of peace, not the object of insult, Saporstill remained inflexible. When Valerian sunk under the weight ofshame and grief, his sldn, stuffed with straw, and formed into thelikeness of a human figure, was preserved for ages in the most cele­brated temple of Persia; a more real monument of triumph, thanthe fancied trophies of brass and marble so often erected by Romanvanity150. The tale is moral and pathetic, but the truth of it mayvery fairly be called in question. The letters still extant from theprinces of the East to Sapor, are manifest forgeries ,J'; nor is itnatural to suppose that a jealous monarch should, even in the personof a rival, thus publickly degrade the majesty of kings. Whatevertreatment the unfortunate Valerian might experience in Persia, it isat least certain, that the only emperor of Rome who ever fell intothe hands of the enemy, languished away his life in hopelesscaptivity.
The emperor Gallienus, who had long supported with impatience, Character andthe censorial severity of his father and colleague, received the in- of QdSnS?
telligence







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 56s


eminence, appeared by their conduct to claim a secular and tyran­nical power in the church; and the lively faith which still distin­guished the Christians from the Gentiles, was shewn much less intheir lives, than in their controversial writings.
Notwithstanding this seeming security, an attentive observer Progress ofmight discern some symptoms that threatened the church with a petition"more violent persecution than any which she had yet endured. The pT^ns.'1"zeal and rapid progress of the Christians awakened the Polytheistsfrom their supine indifference in the cause of those deities, whomcustom and education had taught them to revere. The mutual pro­vocations of a religious war, which had already continued abovetwo hundred years, exasperated the animosity of the contendingparties. The Pagans were incensed at the rashness of a recent andvobscure sect, which presumed to accuse their countrymen of error,and to devote their ancestors to eternal misery.. The habits of justi­fying the popular mythology against the invectives of an impla­cable enemy, produced in their minds some sentiments of faith andreverence for a system which they had been accustomed to considerwith the most careless levity. The supernatural powers assumed by thechurch inspired at the same time terror and emulation. The fol­lowers of the established religion intrenched themselves behind ctsimilar fortification of prodigies; invented new modes of sacrifice,of expiation, and of initiation ,JJ; attempted to revive the credit of.their expiring oracles "6; and listened with eager credulity to everyimpostor, who flattered their prejudices by a tale of wondersBoth parties seemed to acknowledge the truth of those miracles-■which were claimed by their adversaries; aud while they were con­tented with ascribing them to the arts of magic, and to the powerof dæmons, they, mutually concurred in restoring and establishingthe reign of superstition''8. Philosophy, her most dangerous ene­my, was now converted into her most useful ally. The groves ofthe academy, the gardens of Epicurus, and even the portico of th<j
6 Stoicij.







OCR Output








iSo THE DECLINE AND FALL


reign, and transmitted his infamy to-succeeding times. A capriciousprodigality supplied the want of taste and elegance; and whilst Ela-gabalus lavished away the treasures of his people in the wildest ex­travagance, his own voice and that of his flatterers applauded aspirit and magnificence unknown to the tameness of his predecessors.To confound the order of seasons and climates 57, to sport with thepassions and prejudices of his subjects, and to subvert every law ofnature and decency, were in the number of his most delicious amuse­ments. A long train of concubines, and a rapid succession of wives,among whom was a vestal virgin, ravished by force from her sacredasylum 58, were ^insufficient to satisfy the impotence of his passions.The master of the Roman world affected to copy the dress andmanners of the female sex, preferred the distaff to the scepter, anddishonoured the principal dignities of the empire by distributingthem among his numerous lovers; one of whom was publickly in­vested with the title and authority of the emperor's, or as he ratherstyled himself, of the empress's husband S9.Contempt The vices and follies of Elagabalus have most probably beenwhich distin- adorned by fancy, and blackened by prejudice 6o. Yet confining
guiihed the
Roman ty- ourselves to the public scenes displayed before the Roman people,and attested by grave and contemporary historians, their inexpres­sible infamy surpasses that of any other age or country. The licenceof an eastern monarch is secluded from the eye of curiosity by theinaccessible walls of his seraglio. The sentiments of honour andgallantry have introduced a refinement of pleasure, a regard for de­cency, and a respect for the public opinion, into the modern courtsof Europe; but the corrupt and opulent nobles of Rome gratifiedevery vice that could be collected from the mighty conflux of nationsand manners. Secure of impunity, careless of censure, they livedwithout restraint in the patient and humble society of their stavesand parasites. The emperor, in his turn, viewing every rank of his
subjects


rancr.







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AND FALL


Sedition ofthe guard?,and murderof Elagabalufi
A. D. 2Z2.
10th March,


Accession of
Alexander
Severus.


Pjwer or \.'»mother


præfects to watch over the safety of Alexander, and the conduct ofthe emperor
It was impossible that such a reconciliation should last, or thateven the mean soul of Elagabalus could hold an empire onsuch humiliating terms of dependence. He soon attempted, by adangerous experiment, to try the temper of the soldiers. The reportof the death of Alexander, and the natural suspicion that he hadbeen murdered, inflamed their passions into fury, and the tempest ofthe camp could only be appeased by the presence and authority ofthe popular youth. Provoked at this new instance of their affectionfor his cousin, and their contempt for his person, the emperorventured to punish some of the leaders of the mutiny. His unsea­sonable severity proved instantly fatal to his minions, his mother,and himself. Elagabalus was massacred by the indignant Præto­rians, his mutilated corpse dragged through the streets of the city,and thrown into the Tyber. His memory was branded witheternal infamy by the senate; the justice of whose decree has beenratified by posterity
In the room of Elagabalus, his cousin Alexander was raised tothe throne by the Prætorian guards. His relation to the family ofSeverus, whose name he assumed, was the fame as that of his pre­decessor; his virtue and his danger had already endeared him tothe Romans, and the eager liberality of the senate conferred uponhim, in one day, the various titles and powers of the Imperialdignity 6j. But as Alexander was a modest and dutiful youth, ofonly seventeen years of age, the reins of government were in thehands of two women, of his mother Mamæa, and of Mæsa, hisgrandmother. After the death of the latter, who survived but ashort time the elevation of Alexander, Mamæa remained the soleregent of her son and the empire.
In every age and country, the wiser, or at least the stronger ofthe two sexes, has usurped the powers of the state, and confined the
other







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 30.1


that could display the greatness and discipline of Rome.. Thelegions stood to their arms in well ordered ranks and awful silence.The principal commanders, distinguished by the ensigns of theirrank, appeared on horseback on either side of the imperial throne.Behind the throne, the consecrated images of the emperor, and hispredecessors the golden eagles, and the various titles of thelegions, engraved in letters of gold, were exalted in the air onlofty pikes covered with silver. When Aurelian assumed his seat,his manly grace and majestic figure 30 taught the barbarians torevere the person as well as the purple of their conqueror. Theambassadors fell prostrate on the ground in silence. They werecommanded to rife, and permitted to speak. By the assistance ofinterpreters they extenuated their perfidy, magnified their exploits*, expatiated' on the vicissitudes of fortune and the advantages ofpeace, and, with an ill-timed confidence, demanded a large subsidy,as the price of the alliance which they offered to the Romans.The answer of the emperor was stern and imperious. He treatedtheir offer with contempt, and their demand with indignation,reproached the barbarians, that they were as ignorant of the arts ofwar as of the laws of peace, and finally dismissed them with thechoice only of submitting to his unconditioned mercy, or awaitingthe utmost severity of his resentment3'. Aurelian had resigned adistant province to the Goths; but it was dangerous to trust or topardon these perfidious barbarians, whose formidable power keptItaly itself in perpetual alarms.
Immediately after this conference, it should seem that some un- The Ale-expected emergency required the emperor's presence in Pannonia. faty"1""'He devolved on his lieutenants the care of finishing the destructionof the Alemanni, either by the sword, or by the surer operation offamine. But an active despair has often triumphed over the indo­lent assurance of success. The barbarians, finding it impossible totraverse the Danube and the Roman camp, broke through the posts







OCR Output








OFTHEROMANEMPIRE. 365


first enterprise was against the important place of Boulogne. Astupendous mole, raised across the entrance of the harbour, inter­cepted all hopes of relief. The town surrendered after an ob- A. D» 292,stinate defence; and a considerable part of the naval strength ofCaraufius fell into the hands of the besiegers. During the threeyears, which Constantius employed in preparing a fleet adequate tothe conquest of Britain, he secured the coast of Gaul, invaded thecountry of the Franks, and deprived the usurper of the assistanceof those powerful allies.
Before the preparations were finished, Constantius received the A.0.294,
-His death.
intelligence of the tyrant's death, and it was considered as a surepresage of the approaching victory. The servants of Carausiusimitated the example of treason, which he had given. He wasmurdered by his first minister Allectus, and the assassin succeeded tohis power and to his danger. But he possessed not equal abilitieseither to exercise the one, or to repel the other. He beheld, withanxious terror, the opposite shores of the continent, already silledwith arms, with troops, and with vessels; for Constantius had veryprudently divided his forces, that he might likewise divide the at­tention and resistance of the enemy. The attack was at length A. D. 295.made by .the principal squadron, which, under the command of the Britain bypræfect Asclepiodotus, an officer of distinguished merit, had been ConstantluSkassembled in the mouth of the Seine. So imperfect in those timeswas the art of navigation, that orators have celebrated the daringcourage of the Romans, who ventured to set sail with a side wind,and on a stormy day. The weather proved favourable to theirenterprise. Under the cover of a thick fog, they escaped the fleetof Allectus, which had been stationed off the Isle of Wight toreceive them, landed in safety on some part of the western coast;and convinced the Britons, that a superiority of naval strength willnot always protect their country from a foreign invasion. As­clepiodotus had no sooner disembarked the imperial troops, than he
set







OCR Output








£8 THE DECLINE AND FALL


lieutenants, would be sufficient to complete the conquest of the dis­mayed barbarians; or <to impose such conditions, ais were more ad­vantageous than any conquest. By a dexterous application to hissensual appetites, they compared the tranquillity, the splendor, therefined pleasures of Rome, with the tumult of a Pannonian camp,•which afforded neither leisure nor materials for luxury **. Corn-modus listened to the pleasing advice; but whilst he hesitated be­tween his own inclination, and the awe which he still retained ForIris father's counsellors, the summer insensibly elapsed, and histriumphal entry into the capital was deferred till the autumn.His graceful person", popular address, and imagined virtues, at­tracted the public favour; the honourable peace which he had justgranted to the barbarians, diffused an universal joy M; his impa­tience to revisit Rome was fondly ascribed to the love of his country;and his dissolute course of amusements was faintly condemned in aprince of nineteen years of age.
During the three first years of his reign, the forms, and eventhe spirit of the old administration was maintained by those faith­ful counsellors, to whom Marcus had recommended his son, andfor whose wisdom and integrity Commodus still entertained a re­luctant esteem. The young prince and his profligate favourites re­velled in all the licence of sovereign power; but his hands were yetunstained with blood; and he had even displayed a generosity ofsentiment, which might perhaps have ripened into solid virtueA fatal incident decided his fluctuating character.Is wounded 0"e evening as the emperor was returning to the palace throughby an assassin. a an(j narrow portico, in the amphitheatre ,+, an assassin, whowaited his passage, rusiied upon him with a drawn sword, loudlyexclaiming, "The senate sends you this" The menace prevented thedeed; the assassin was seized by the guards, and immediately re­vealed the authors of the conspiracy. It had been formed, not inthe state, but within the walls of the palace. Lucilla, the empe­ror's







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


dies 97. The bloody sacrifices of Diana, the arrival of Orestes andPylades, and the triumph of virtue and religion over savage fierce­ness, serve to represent an historical truth, that the Tauri, theoriginal inhabitants of the peninsula, were, in some degree, reclaimedfrom their brutal manners, by a gradual intercourse with the Gre­cian colonies, which settled along the maritime coast. The littlekingdom of Bosphorus, whose capital was situated on the Straits,through which the Mæotis communicates itself to the Euxine, wascomposed of degenerate Greeks, and half-civilized barbarians. Itsubsisted, as an independent state, from the time of the Peloponnesianwar 9\ was at last swallowed up by the ambition of the Mi-thridates ", and, with the rest of his dominions, funk under theweight of the Roman arms. From the reign of Augustus thekings of Bosphorus were the humble, but not useless, allies of theempire. By presents, by arms, and by a flight fortification drawnacross the Isthmus, they effectually guarded against the rovingplunderers of Sarmatia, the access of a country, which, from itspeculiar situation and convenient harbours, commanded the Euxinesea and Asia Minor ,c". As long as the scepter was possessed by alineal succession of kings, they acquitted themselves of their impor­tant charge with vigilance and success. Domestic factions, and thefears, or private interest, of obscure usurpers, who seized on thevacant throne, admitted the Goths into the heart of Bosphorus.With the acquisition of a superfluous waste of fertile foil, the con­querors obtained the command of a naval force, sufficient to trans­port their armies to the coast of Asia ,0\ The ships used in the Who acquirenavigation of the Euxine were of a very singular construction.They were slight flat-bottomed barks framed of timber only, with­out the least mixture of iron, and occasionally covered with ashelving roof, on the appearance of a tempest ,0'. In these floatinghouses, the Goths carelessly trusted themselves to the mercy of anunknown sea, under the conduct of sailors pressed into the service,Vol, F. Mm and







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


nianus was involved in the fame fate. As soon as the stubbornPrætorians could be convinced that they fought for a prince who hadbasely deserted them, they surrendered to the conqueror; the con­tending parties of the Roman army mingling tears of joy and ten­derness, united under the banners of the imagined son of Caracalla,and the East acknowledged with pleasure the first emperor of Asiaticextraction. - •..,<;».■,..; v
The letters of Macrinus had condescended to inform the senate of the Eiagab»iflight disturbance occasioned by an impostor in Syria, and a decree senate,immediately passed declaring the rebel and his family public enemies;with a promise of pardon however to such of his deluded adherentsas should merit it by an immediate return to their duty. During thetwenty days that elapsed from $ie declaration to the victory of Anto­ninus (for in so short an interval was the fate of the Roman Worlddecided), the capital and the provinces, more especially those of theEast, were distracted with hopes and fears, agitated with tumult,and stained with a useless effusion of civil blood, since whosoeverof the rivals prevailed in Syria, must reign wer the empire. Thespecious letters in which the young conqueror announced his victoryto the obedient senate, were filled with professions of virtue andmoderation; the shining examples of Marcus and Augustus, heshould ever consider as the great rule of his administration?and he affected to dwell with pride on the striking resemblanceof his own age and fortunes with those of Augustus, who inthe earliest youth had revenged by a successful war the murder of hisfather. By adopting the style of Marcus Aurelius Antoninus, sonof Antoninus and grandson of Severus, he tacitly asserted his here­ditary claim to empire; but by assuming the tribunitian and pro­consular powers before they had been conferred on him by a decreeof the senate, he offended the delicacy of Roman prejudice. Thisnew and injudicious violation of the constitution, was probably dic­tated either by the ignorance of his Syrian courtiers, or the fiercedisdain of his military followersJ0.







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AND FALL


equestrian order, till the homage of flattery was insensibly con­verted into an annual and solemn protestation ©f fidelity.Consular snd Although Auguctus considered a military force, as the firmest
tribunician , _ _ . .
powers. foundation, he wuely rejected it, as a very odious instrument ofgovernment. It was more agreeable to his temper, as well as to his■policy, to reign under the -venerable names of ancient magistracy,and artfully to eoi4ect, 4n his own per son, *11 the scattered rays of-civil jurisdiction. With thi« view lie permitted the senate to con­fer upon him, for his life, the powers of the consular1' and lri~brunitian office* **, which were, in the fame manner, continued toall his succeffbrs. The consuls had succeeded to the kings of Rome,and represented the dignity of the state. They superintended theceremonies of religion, levied and commanded the legions, gaveaudience to foreign ambassadors, and presided in the assemblieshoth of the senate and people. The general control of the financeswas intrusted to their care, and though they seldom had leisure toadminister justice in person, they were considered as the supremeguardians of law, equity, and the public peace. Such was theirordinary jurisdiction; but whenever the senate empowered the firstmagistrate to consult the safety of the commonwealth, he was raisedby that 4egree above the laws, and exercised, in the defence ofliberty, a temporary despotism". The character of the tribuneswas, in every respect, different from that of the consuls. Theappearance of the former was modest and humble; but their person3were sacred and inviolable; Their force was suited rather for op­position than for action*. They were instituted to defend theoppressed, to pardon offences, to arraign the enemies of the people,and when they judged it necessary, to Hop, by a single word, thewhole machine of government. As long as the republic sub­sisted, the dangerous influence, which either the consul or thetribune might derive from their respective jurisdiction, was dir-i mkulhed







OCR Output








NOTES ON THE SIXTH CHAPTER.


Bis officer's head, became entitled to his privateeflate, as well as to his military commission.
[49] Dion, I. Ixxviii. p, 1745. Herodian, 1. v.p. 1S6. The battle was fought near the villageof Immæ, about two and twenty miles from An-tioch.
[50] Dion, 1. lxxix. p. 1350.
[5.1] Dion, 1. lxxix. p. 1363. Herodian, L »<p. 189.
[52] This name is derived by the learned fromtwo Syriac.words, Ela a God, and Gabai' to form,the forming, or plastic God, a proper, and evenhappy epithet for the Sun. Wotton's History ofRome, p. 378.
[c.3] Herodian, 1. v. p. 190.
[51] He broke into the sanctuary of Vesta, andcarried away a. statue, which he supposed to bethe Palladium; but the vestals boasted, that by apious fraud, they had imposed a counterfeit imageon the profane intruder. Hist. August, p. 103.
[5;] Dion, 1. lxxix. p 13C0. Herodian, L v.p. 193. The subjects of. the empire were obligedto make liberal presents to the new-married couple;and whatevei they had promised during the life ofElagabalus, was carefully exacted under the ad*ministration of Mamæa.
[56] The invention of a new sauce was liberallyrewarded; but if it was not relished, the inventorwas confined to eat of nothing else, till he had dis­covered another more agreeable to the imperialpalate. Hist. August, p. III.
[57] He never would eat sea-fish except at agreat distance from the sea; he then would distri­bute vast quantities of the rarest sous, brought at animmense expence, to the peasants of the inlandcountry. Hist. August, p. 109.
[58] Dion, L lxxix. p. 1358. Herodian, 1. t.p. 192.
[59] Hierocles enjoyed that honour; but hewould have been supplanted by one Zoticus, hadhe not 'contrived, by a potion, to enervate thepowers of his rival, who being found on trial un­


equal to his reputation, was driven with ignominyfrom the palace. Dion, 1. lxxix p. 1363, 1364.A dancer was made præfect of the city, a charioteerprefect of the watch, a barber pra:fcct of the pro­visions. These three ministers, with many inferiorofficers, were all recommended, tntrmitatt membrorum.Hist. August, p. 105.
[60] Even the credulous compiler of his lift,in the Augustan History (p 111.) is inclined to sus­pect that his vices may have been exaggerated.
[61] Dion, 1. lxxix. p. 1365. Herodian, I. v.p. 195—201. Hist. August, p. to?. The last ofthe three historians seems to have followed the bestauthors in his account of the revolution.
[62] The æra of the death of Elagabalus, amiof the accession of Alexander, has employed thelearning and ingenuity of Pagi, Tillemont, Val-fecchi, Vignoli, and Torre, bishop of Adria. Thequestion is most assuredly intricate; but I still ad­here to the authority of Dion; the truth of whosecalculations is undeniable, and the purity of whosetext is justified by the agreement ofXiphilin, Zo-naras, and Cedrenus. Elagabalus reigned threeyears, nine months, and four days, from his victoryover Macrinus, and was killed March 10, 222.But what shall we reply to the medals, undoubtedlygenuine, which reckon the fifth year of his tribu-nitian power? We shall reply with the learnedValsecchi, that the usurpation of Macrinus was an.nihilated, and that the son of Caracalla dated hisreign from his father's death. After resolving thisgreat difficulty, the smaller knots of this questionmay be easily untied, or cut asunder.
[63] Hist. August, p. 114. By this unusualprecipitation, the senate meant to- confound thehopes of Pretenders, and prevent the factions of thoarmies.
£64] Metellus Numidicus, the censor, acknow­ledged to the Roman people, in a public oration,that had kind Nature allowed us to exist withoutthe help of women, we should be delivered from avery troublesome companion; and he could recom­mend matrimony, only as the sacrifice of privatepleasure to public duty. Aulus Gellius, i. 6.
[65] Tacit. Annal. xiii. 5.
[66] Hist.







OCR Output








382 THE DECLINE AND FALL


was Frequently honoured with the residence of Tiridates, and ask sometimes bore the name of Ecbatana, he imitated, in the build-Iberia, fogs and fortifications, the splendid capital of the Mcdes 8\ IV. Thecountry of Iberia was barren, its inhabitants rude and savage. Butthey were accustomed to the use of arms,, and they separated fromthe empire barbarians much fiercer and more formidable thanthemselves. The narrow defiles of Mount Caucasus were in theirhands, and it was in their choice, either to admit or to excludethe wandering tribes of Sarmatia, whenever a rapacious spiriturged them to penetrate into the richer climates of the South 8?.The nomination of the kings of Iberia, which was resigned bythe Persian monarch to the emperors, contributed to the strengthand security of the Roman power in Asia 8*. The East enjoyeda profound tranquillity during forty years; and the treaty be­tween the rival monarchies was strictly observed, till the death ofTiridates; when a new generation, animated with different viewsand different passions, succeeded to the government of the world jand the grandson of Narses undertook a long and memorable waragainst the princes of the house of Corrstantine.Triumph of The arduous work of rescuing the distressed empire from tyrants
Diocletian . _'
and Maxi- and barbarians had now been completely atchieved by a successionA*D. 303. of Illyrian peasants. As soon as Diocletian entered into the twentiethyear of his reign, he celebrated that memorable -aera, as well as thesuccess of his arms, by the pomp of a Roman triumph 8$. Maxi-mian, the equal partner of his power, was his only companion inthe glory of that day. The two Cæsars had fought and con­quered, but the merit of their exploits was ascribod, according to therigour of ancient maxims, to the auspicious influence of their fathersand emperors The triumph of Diocletian and Maximian wasless magnificent perhaps than those of Aurelian and Probus, but itwas dignified by several circumstances of superior fame and goodfortune. Africa and Britain, the Rhine, the Danube, and the Nile,furnistied their respective trophies; but the most distinguished
ornament


mian.A..DNovember 20.







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AND FALL


fected to confound themselves with their* subjects, and maintainedwith them att equal intercourse of visits and entertainments. Theirhabit, their palace, their table were suited only to the rank of anopulent senator. Their family, however numerous or splendid,was composed entirely of their domestic slaves and freedmen **•Augustus or Trajaa wsuld have blushed at employing the meanestof the Romans in those menial offices, which, in the household andbedchamber of a limited monarch, are so eagerly solicited by theproudest nobles of Britain.
The deification of the emperors ** is the only instance inwhich they departed from their accustomed prudence and mo­desty. The Asiatic Greeks were the first inventors, the suc­cessors of Alexander the first objects, of this servile and im­pious mode of adulation. It was easily transferred from the kingsto the governors of Asia; and the Roman magistrates very fre­quently were adored as provincial deities, with the pomp of altarsand temples, of festivals and sacrifices **. It was natural that theemperors should not refuse what the proconsuls had accepted, andthe divine honours which both the one and the other receivedfrom the provinces, attested rather the despotism than the ser­vitude of Rome. But the conquerors soon imitated the vanquishednations in the arts of flattery; and the imperious spirit of the firstCaesar too easily consented to assume, during his life-time, a placeamong the tutelar deities of Rome. The milder temper of hissuccessor declined so dangerous an ambition, which was never after­wards revived, except by the madness of Caligula and Domitian.Augustus permitted indeed some of the provincial cities to erect tem­ples to his honour, on condition that they should associate the wor-(hip of Rome with that of the sovereign; he tolerated privatesuperstition, of which he might be the object " ^ but he contentedhimself with being revered by the senate and people in his humancharacter, and wisely left to his successor, the care of his public
deification.







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AND FALL


those, who remembered and regretted the luxurious prodigality ofCommodus *'.
To heal* as far as it was possible, the wounds inflicted by the handof tyranny, was the pleasing, but melancholy task of Pertinax. Theinnocent victims, who yet survived, were recalled from exile, re*leased from prison, a#d restored to the full possession of their ho­nours and fortunes. The unburied bodies of murdered senators (forthe cruelty of Commodus endeavoured to extend itself beyond death)were deposited in, the sepulchres of their ancestors; their me­mory was justified; and every consolation was bestowed on theirruined and afflicted families. Among these consolations one of themost delicious was. the punishment of the Delators; the commonenemies of their master, of virtue, and of their country. Yet evenin the inquisition of these legal assassins, Pertinax proceeded with asteady temper, which gave every thing to justice, and nothing topopular prejudice and resentment.
The finances of the state demanded the most vigilant care of theemperor. Though, every measure of injustice and extortion hadbeen adopted, which could collect: the property of the subject intothe coffers of the prince; the rapaciousness of Commodus had beenso very inadequate to his extravagance, that, upon his death,- nomore than eight thousand pounds were found in the exhausted trea­sury 5°, to defray the current expences of government, and to dis­charge the pressing demand of a_ liberal donative, which the newemperor had been obliged to promise to the Prætorian guards. Yetunder these distressed circumstances, Pertinax had the generous firm­ness to remit all the oppressive taxes, invented by Commodusj andto cancel all the unjust claims of tfeec treasury; declaring in a decreeof the senate, '* that he was better satisfied to administer a poor re-** public with innocence, than to acquire riches by the ways of ty-*' ranny and dishonour." Oeconomy and industry he considered as the


7 pure







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


no sooner had he assumed die reins of government, than he fre­quently intimated the insufficiency of the tribute*, and the necessityof throwing an equitable proportion of the public burden uponRome and Italy. In the prosecution of this unpopular design, headvanced, however, by cautious and well-weighed steps. The in­troduction of customs was followed by the establishment of an ex*eise, .and the scheme of taxation was completed by an artful assessmenton the real and personal property of the Roman citizens, who had beenexempted from any kind of coutribution above a century and a half.
J. In a great empire like that of Rome, a natural balance of money The customs-must have gradually established itself. It has been already observed,that as the wealth of the provinces was attracted to the capital bythe strong hand of conquest and power; a considerable part of it wasrestored to the industrious provinces by the gentle influence of com­merce and arts. In the reign of Augustus and his successors, dutieswere imposed on every kind of merchandise, which through a thou­sand channels flowed to the great center of opulence and luxury $and in whatsoever manner the law was expressed, it was the Romanpurchaser, and not the provincial merchant, who paid the tax "i-The rate of the customs varied from the eighth to the fortieth partof the value of the commodity; and we have a right to supposethat the variation was directed by the unalterable maxims of policy:that a higher duty was fixed on the articles of luxury than on thoseof necessity, and that the productions raised or manufactured by thelabour of the subjects of the empire, were treated with more in­dulgence than was shewn to the pernicious, or at least the unpopular,commerce of Arabia and India-9*. There is still extant a long butimperfect catalogue of eastern commodities, which about the timeof Alexander Severus were subject to the payment of duties; cinna­mon, myrrh, pepper, ginger, and the whole tribe of aromatics, a;great variety of precious stones, among which the diamond was the-most remarkable for its price, and the emerald for its beauty99:
Parthian







OCR Output








478 THE DECLINE AND FALL


I


their pretensions after they had lost their power. Credulity per­formed the office of faith; fanaticism was permitted to assume thelanguage of inspiration, and the effects of accident or contrivancewere ascribed to supernatural causes. The recent experience ofgenuine miracles mould have instructed the Christian world in theways of providence, and habituated their eye (if we may use avery inadequate expression) to the style of the divine artist. Shouldthe most skilful painter of modern Italy presume to decorate hisfeeble imitations with the name of Raphael or of Correggio, the in­solent fraud would be soon discovered and indignantly rejected.Use of the Whatever opinion may be entertained of the miracles of themiracles? primitive church since the time of the apostles, this unresisting soft­ness of temper, so conspicuous among the believers of the secondand third centuries, proved of some accidental benefit to the cause oftruth and religion. In modern times, a latent and even involuntaryscepticism adheres to the most pious dispositions. Their admissionof supernatural truths, is much less an active consent than a coldand passive acquiescence. Accustomed long since to observe and torespect the invariable order of Nature, our reason, or at least ourimagination, is not sufficiently prepared to sustain the visible actionof the Deity. But in the first ages of Christianity, the situation ofmankind was extremely different. The most curious, or the mostcredulous, among the pagans, were often persuaded to enter into asociety, which asserted an actual claim of miraculous powers. Theprimitive Christians perpetually trod on mystic ground, and theirminds were exercised by the habits of believing the most extraor­dinary events. They felt, or they fancied, that on every side theywere incessantly assaulted by dæmons, comforted by visions, in­structed by prophecy, and surprisingly delivered from dan­ger, sickness, and from death itself, by the supplications of thechurch. The real or imaginary prodigies, of which they so fre--quently conceived themselves to be the objects, the instruments,
or







OCR Output








356 THE DECLINE AND FALL


CHAP. XIII.


The reign of Diocletian and his three associates, Maximian,Galerius, and Conflantius.—General re-establishment oforder and tranquillity.—The Perfean war, victory, andtriumph.—The new form of administration.—Abdicationand retirement of Diocletian and Maximian.


Elevation and


character ofDiocletian.A. D. 285.


 


'The strong claims of merit and of violence had frequently supersededthe ideal prerogatives of nobility; but a distinct line of separationwas still preserved between the free and the servile part of mankind.The parents of Diocletian had been staves in the house of Anuli-nus, a Roman senator ; nor was he himself distinguished by any othername, than that which he derived from a small town in Dalmatia,from whence his mother deduced her origin It is, however, pro­bable, that his father obtained the freedom of the family, and thathe soon acquired an office of scribe, which was commonly exercisedby persons of his condition \ Favourable oracles, or rather theconsciousness of superior merit, prompted his aspiring son topursue the profession of arms and the hopes of fortune; andit would be extremely curious to observe the gradation of artsand accidents which enabled him in the end to fulfil those oracles,and to display that merit to the world. Diocletian was successivelypromoted to the government of Mæsia, the honours of the consul­ship, and the important command of the guards of the palace. Hedistinguished his abilities in the Persian war ; and, after the death ofNumerian, the slave, by the confession and judgment of his rivals


was







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AND FALL


Stoics, were almost deserted, as so many different schools of scepti­cism or impiety 1,9: and many among the Romans were desirousthat the writings of Cicero should be condemned and suppressed bythe authority of the senate ,4°. The prevailing sect of the new Pla-tonicians judged it prudent to connect themselves with the priests,whom perhaps they despised, against the Christians, whom they hadreason to fear. These fashionable philosophers prosecuted the de­sign of extracting allegorical wisdom from the fictions of the Greekpoets; instituted mysterious rites of devotion for the use of theirchosen disciples; recommended the worship of the ancient gods asthe emblems or ministers of the supreme deity, and composed againstthe faith of the gospel many elaborate treatises which havesince been committed to the flames by the prudence of orthodoxemperors M*.
Although the policy of Diocletian and the humanity of Con-stantius inclined them to preserve inviolate the maxims of tolera­tion, it was soon discovered that their two associates, Maximianand Galerius, entertained the most implacable aversion for thennme and religion of the Christians. The minds of those prin­ces had never been enlightened by science; education had neversoftened their temper. They owed their greatness to their swords,and in their most elevated fortune they still retained the supersti­tious prejudices of soldiers and peasants. In the general admini­stration of the provinces they obeyed the laws which their bene­factor had established; but they frequently found occasions of exer­cising within their camp and palaces a secret persecution *♦», forwhich the imprudent zeal of the Christians sometimes offered themost specious pretences. A sentence of death was executed uponMaximilianus, an African youth, who had been produced by his ownfather before the magistrate as a sufficient and legal recruit, butwho obstinately persisted in declaring, that his conscience would notpermit him to embrace the profession of a soldier It could
scarcely







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AND FALL


took refuge in the episcopal palace, and though it was somewhatearly to advance any claims of ecclesiastical immunities, the-bishop-refused to deliver him up to the officers of justice. For this treason­able resistance, Mensurius was summoned to court, and instead ofreceiving a legal sentence of death or banishment, he was permitted,after a short examination, to return to his diocese ,6'. Suchwas die happy condition of the Christian subjects of Maxentius,that whenever they were desirous of procuring for their own useany bodies of martyrs, they were obliged to purchase them fromthe most distant provinces of the East. A story is related of Aglae,a Roman lady, descended from a consular family, and possessed ofso ample an estate, that it required the management of seventy-threestewards. Among these, Boniface was the favourite of his mistress;and as Aglae mixed love with devotion, it is reported that he wasadmitted to share her bed. Her fortune enabled her to gratify thepious desire of obtaining some sacred relics from the East. Sheintrusted Boniface with a considerable sum of gold, and a largequantity of aromaticsj and her lover, attended by twelve horsemenand three covered chariots* undertook a remote pilgrimage, as far as-Tarslis iniGUiaiR>,:0.. randtheEati ^ne sanguinary temper of Galerius, the first and principal au-"erfula^ds thor osuhe persecution,, was. formidable to those Christians, whomIfeximin. tftejr misfortunes had placed within the limits of his dominions;,and it may fairly be presumed,, that many persons of a middle rank,who were not confined by the chains either of wealth on of poverty,,very frequently deserted their native country, and sought a refugeinr the milder climate of the Welh As long as he commanded onlythe armies and provinces of Illyricum, he could with difficulty eitherfind or make a considerable number of martyrs* in a warlike country,which had entertained the missionaries of. the .gospel with marccoldness and reluctance than any other part of the:empire Butwhen Galerius had obtained the supreme power and the government
of







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AND FALL


as well as the provinces, congratulated the accession of the sons ofCarus. These fortunate youths were,strangers, however, to that con­scious superiority either of birth or of merit, which can alone renderthe possession of a throne easy, and as it were natural. Born and edu­cated in a private station, the election of their father raised them atonce to the rank of princes; and hie death, which happened aboutsixteen months afterwards, left them the unexpected legacy of a vastempire. To sustain with temper this rapid elevation, an uncommonshare of virtue and prudence was requisite; and Carinus, the elderof the brothers, was more than commonly deficient in those qua­lities. In the Gallic war, he discovered some degree of personalcourage 80; but from the moment of His arrival at Rome, he aban->doned himself to the luxury of the capital, and to the abuse of hisfortune- He was soft yet cruel, devoted to pleasure but destituteof taste; and though exquisitely susceptible of vanity, indifferentto the public esteem. In the course of a few months, he successivelymarried and divorced nine wives, most of whom he left pregnant;and notwithstanding this legal inconstancy, found time to indulgesuch a variety of irregular appetites, as brought dishonour on himselfand on the noblest houses of Rome. He beheld with inveterate hatredall those who might remember his former obscurity, or censure hispresent conduct. He banished, or put to death, the friends and coun­sellors whom his father had placed about him, to guide his inexpe­rienced youth; and he persecuted with the meanest revenge his school­fellows and companions, who had not sufficiently respected the futuremajesty of the emperor. With the senators, Carinus affected a loftyand regal demeanour, frequently declaring, that he designed to distri­bute their estates among the populace of Rome. From the dregs ofthat populace, he selected his favourites, and even his ministers. Thepalace, and even the imperial table, was filled with lingers, dancers,prostitutes, and all the various retinue of vice and folly. One of hisdoor-keepers81 he entrusted with the government of the city. In
the







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 533


seemed to have dictated the edicts which regulated the disposition ofthe streets and the construction of private houses; and as it usuallyhappens, in an age of prosperity, the conflagration of Rome, inthe course of a few years, produced a new city, more regular, andmore beautiful than the former. Bur all the prudence and huma­nity of Nero were insufficient to protect him from the popular sus­picion. Every crime might be imputed to the assassin of his wifeand mother; nor could the prince, who prostituted his person anddignity on the theatre, be deemed incapable of the most extravagantfolly. The voice of rumour accused the emperor as the incendiaryof his own capital; and as the most incredible stories are the bestadapted to the genius of an enraged people, it was gravely reported,and firmly believed, that Nero, enjoying the calamity which hehad occasioned, amused himself with singing to his lyre the de­struction of ancient Troy ,0. To divert a suspicion, which thepower of despotism was unable to suppress, the emperor resolvedto substitute in his own place some fictitious criminals. "With"this view, (continues Tacitus) he inflicted the most exquisite Cruel punifh-"tortures on those men, who, under the vulgar appellation christians, as"of Christians, were already branded with deserved infamy. neVofthe**"They derived their name and origin from Christ, who in the c,ty*"reign of Tiberius had suffered death, by the sentence of the pro-"curator Pontius Pilate ". For a while, this dire superstition was*' checked; but it again burst forth; and not only spread itself over"Judæa, the first seat of this mischievous sect, but was even intro-"duced into Rome, the common asylum which receives and pro-"tects, whatever is impure, whatever is atrocious. The confessions"of those who were seized, discovered a great multitude of their"accomplices, and they were all convicted, not so much for the"crime of setting fire to the city, as for their hatred of human** kind. They died in torments, and their torments were embit-"tered by insult and derision. Some were nailed on crosses; others
<c sewn


■







OCR Output








344 THE DECLINE AND FALL


"and even barbarous origin of the preceding emperors; yet the mostinquisitive of his contemporaries, very far from admitting his claim,have variously deduced his own birth, or that of his parents, fromUlyricumj from Gaul, or from Africa 6+. Though a soldier, hehad received a learned education; though a senator, he was investedwith the first dignity of the army; and in an age, when the civiland military professions began to be irrecoverably separated fromeach other, they were "united in the person of Carus. Notwith­standing the severe justice which he exercised against the assassins ofProbus, to whose favour and esteem he was highly indebted, hecould not escape the suspicion of being accessary to a deed fromwhence he derived the principal advantage. He enjoyed, at leastbefore his elevation, an acknowledged character of virtue andabilities65; but his austere temper insensibly degenerated intomoroseness and cruelty;' and the imperfect writers -of his life al­most hesitate whether they shall not rank him in the number ofRoman tyrants 66. When Carus assumed the purple, he was aboutsixty years of age, and his two sons Carinus and Numerian had al­ready attained the season of manhood *7. '•The semi- The authority of the senate expired with Probus; nor was the
senate and^ repentance of the soldiers displayed by the same dutiful regard forpeople. the ciyil
power, which they had testified after the unfortunate deathof Aurelian. The election of Carus was decided" without expectingthe approbation of the senate, and the new emperor contented him­self with announcing, in a cold and stately epistle, that he hadascended the vacant throne 6\ A behaviour so very opposite to thatof his amiable predecessor, afforded no favourable presage of the newreign; and the Romans, deprived of power and freedom, assertedtheir privilege of licentious murmurs 6s. The voice of congratula­tion and flattery was not however silent; and we may still peruse,with pleasure and contempt, an eclogue, which was composed on theaccession of the emperor Carus. Two shepherds, avoiding the
noon-tide







OCR Output








NOTES ON THE THIRD CHAPTER.


to the emperor, and his most successful lieutenantswere satisfied with some marks of distinction, which,under the name of triumphal honours, were invent­ed in their favour.
[n] Cicero {de Legibus, iii. 3.) gives the con­sular office the name of Regia poteftas: and Poly-bius (1. vi. c. 3.) observes three powers in the Ro­man constitution. The monarchical was representedand exercised by the Consuls.
[12] As the tribunitian power (distinct from theannual office) was first invented for the dictatorCaesar (Dion, 1. xliv. p. 3^4.), we may easily con­ceive, that it was given as a reward for having sonobly asserted, by arms, the sacred rights of thetribunes and people. See his own commentaries,deBell. Civil. 1. i.
[13] Augustus exercised nine annual consulshipswithout interruption. He then most artfully re­fused that magistracy as well as the dictatorstn'p,absented himself from Rome, and waited till the fa­tal effects of tumult and faction forced the senate toinvest him with a perpetual consulship. Augustus,as well as his successors, affected, however, to con­ceal so invidious a title.
[14] See a fragment of a Decree of the Senate,conferring on the emperor Vespasian, all the powersgranted to his predecessors, Augustus, Tiberius,and Claudius. This curious and important monu­ment is published in Gruter's Inscriptions, No.ccxlii.
[15] Two consuls were created on the Calendsof January; but in the course of the year otherswere substituted in their places, till the annual num­ber seems to have amounted to no less than twelve.The prætors were usually sixteen or eighteen (Lip-sius in Excurs. D. ad Tacit. Annal. 1. i.). I havenot mentioned the Ædiles or Qu.rstors. Officersof the police or revenue easily adapt themselvesto any form of government. In the time of Nerothe tribunes legally possessed the right of intercijjion,though it might be dangerous to exercise it ( sacit.Annal. xvi. 26.). In the time of Trajan, it wasdoubtful whether the tribuneihip was an office or aname (Plin. Epist. 133.).
[16] The tyrants themselves were ambitious ofthe consulship. The virtuous princes were mo­


derate in the pursuit, and exact in the discharge ofit. Trajan revived the ancient oath, and swore be­fore the consul's tribunal, that he would observethe laws (Plin. Panegyric, c. 64.).
[17] Quoties Magistratuum Comitus interesset,tribus cum candidatis suis circuibat: supplicabat-'que more solemni. Ferebat et ipse suffragium intribubus, ut unus e populo. Suetonius in August,c S6.
[18] Turn primum Comitia e campo ad patrestranflata sunt. Tacit. Annal. i. 15. The wordfrimum seeins to allude to some faint and unsuccess­ful efforts, which were made towards restoring themto the people.
[19] Dion Caffius (1. liii. p. 703—714.) hasgiven a very loose and partial sketch of the Imperialsystem. 7o illustrate and often to correct him, Ihave meditated Tacitus, examined Suetonius, andconsulted the following moderns: the Abbe de'la Bleterie, in the Memoires de l'Academie des In­scriptions, torn. xix. xxi. xxiv. xxv. xxvii. Beau­fort Republique Romaine, torn. i. p. 255 —27c.Two Dissertations of Noodt and Gronovius, dt ItgeRegia; printed at Leyden, in the year 1731.Gravina de Imperio Romano, p. 479—544 of hisOpuscula. Maffei Verona Illustrata, p. i. p. 245.&c.
[20] A weak prince will always be governed byhis domestics. The power of slaves aggravated theshame of the Romans; and the senate paid courtto a Pallas or a Narcissus. There is a chance that amodern favourite may be a gentleman.
[21] See a treatise of Vandale de ConfecrationePrincipum. It would be easier for me to copy,than it has been to verify, the quotations of thatlearned Dutchman.
[22] See a dissertation of the Abbe Mongault inthe first volume of the Academy of Inscriptions.
[23] Jutandasque tuum per nomen ponimusaraj, fays Horace to the emperor himself, and Ho­race was well acquainted with the court of Au­gustus.
[24] See Cicero in Philippic, i. 6. Julian inCæsaribus. Inque Deum templis jurabit Roma perb z umbras,







OCR Output








THE DECU'NE A ND f ALL


the charge was communicated to the party accused, and that a con­venient time vyas allowed him -to settle his domestic concerns, and toprepare an answer to the crime which was imputed to him 9\ Ifhe entertained any doubt of his own constancy, such a delay af­forded him the opportunity of preserving his life and honour byflight, of withdrawing himself into some obseure retirement or somedistant province, and of patiently expecting .the return of peace andsecurity. A measure so consonant *o reason was soon authorized bythe advice and example of -the most holy prelates; and seems tohave been censured by few, except by the Mpntanists, who deviatedinto heresy by their strict and obstinate adherence to the rigour ofancient discipline II. The,provincial governors, whose zeal waskss prevalent than their avarice, had countenanced the practice offelling certificates (or libels as they were called), which attested, thatthe persons therein mentioned had complied with the laws, and sa­crificed to the Roman deities, . By producing these false r*k-clarations* the opulent and timid Ghristiane were enabled losilence the malice of an informer, and to reconcile in some mea»sure their safety with their religion. A flight pennance atonedfor tins profane dissimulation HI. In every persecution therewere great number* of unworthy Christians, who publickly disownedor renounced the faith which they had profesied; and who con-*firmed the sincerity of their abjuration, by the legal acts of burningincense or of offering sacrifices. Some of these apostates had yieldedon the first menace or exhortation of the magistrate; whilst thepatience of others had been subdued by the length and repetition oftortures. The affrighted countenances of some betrayed their in­ward remorse, while others advanced with confidence and alacrityto the altars of the gods "". But the disguise, which fear had im­posed, subsisted no longer than the present danger. As soon as theseverity of the persecution was abated, the doors of the churcheswere assailed by the returning multitude of penitents, who detested


their







OCR Output








238 THE DECLINE AND FALL


an army of Germans into Gaul, prevailed on the powerful cities ofTreves and Langres, to embrace his cause, defeated the legions,destroyed their fortified camps, and employed against the Romansthe military knowledge which he had acquired in their service.When at length, after an obstinate struggle, he yielded to the powerof the empire, Civilis secured himself and his country by an ho­nourable treaty. The Batavians still continued to occupy the iflandof the Rhine ?6, the allies not the servants of the Roman monarchy.Civil dissen- H. The strength of ancient Germany appears formidable, when we
lions of Ger­many, consider the effects that might have been produced by its united
effort. The wide extent of country might very possibly contain amillion of warriors, as all who were of an age to bear arms, wereof a temper to use them. But this fierce multitude, incapable ofconcerting or executing any plan of national greatness, was agi­tated by various and often hostile intentions. Germany was dividedinto more than forty independent states; and even in each state theunion of the several tribes was extremely loose and precarious.The barbarians were easily provoked; they knew not how to for­give an injury, much less an insult; their resentments were bloodyand implacable. The casual disputes that so frequently happenedin their tumultuous parties of hunting or drinking, were sufficientto inflame the minds of whole nations; the private feud of anyconsiderable chieftains, diffused itself among their followers and al­lies. To chastise the insolent, or to plunder the defenceless, werealike causes of war. The most formidable states of Germany af­fected to encompass their territories with a wide frontier of solitudeand devastation. The awful distance preserved by their neighbours,attested the terror of their arms, and in some measure defended themfrom the danger of unexpected incursionsFomented by "The Bructeri (it is Tacitus who now speaks) were totally ex-Rome.1'03'0 "terminated by the neighbouring tribes78 provoked by their inso-"lence, allured by the hopes of spoil, and perhaps inspired by the
"tutelar







OCR Output








OF T H E; R O M A N EMPIRE. 20


** addressed.'' Yet, at the same time, in the true spirit of a polytheist,he accuses them of adoring Earth, Water, Fire, the Winds, andthe Sun and Moon. But the Persians of every age have deniedthe charge, and explained the equivocal conduct, which mightappear to give a colour to it. The elements, and more particu­larly Fire, Light, and the Sun, whom they called Mithra, were theobjects of their religious reverence, because they considered them asthe purest symbols, the noblest productions, and the most powerfulagents of the Divine Power and Nature ". ( •.,
Every mode of religion, to make a deep and lasting impression onthe human mind, must exercise our obedience, by enjoining practices precept*,of devotion, for which we can assign no reason ; and must acquire ouresteem, by inculcating moral duties analogous to the dictates of ourown hearts. The religion of Zoroaster was abundantly providedwith the former, and possessed a sufficient portion of the latter. Ar>the age of puberty, the faithful Persian was invested with a mys­terious girdle, the badge of the divine protection; and from thatmoment, all the actions of his life, even the most indifferent}or the most necessary, were sanctified by their peculiar prayers,,ejaculations, or genuflexions; the omission of which, under anycircumstances, was a grievous sin, not inferior in guilt to the vio­lation of the moral duties. The moral duties, however, of justice,,mercy, liberality, &c. were in their turn required of the disciple ofZoroaster* who wished to escape the persecution of Ahriman, and tolive with Ormusd in a blissful eternity, where the degree of felicityis exactly, proportioned to the degree of virtue and piety '\
But there are some remarkable instances, in, which Zoroaster lays Encourage-aside the prophet, assumes the legislator, and discovers a liberal *g"concern for private and public happiness, seldom to be found amongthe groveling or visionary schemes of superstition. Fasting andcelibacy, the common means of purchasing the divine favour,he condemns with abhorrence, as a criminal rejection of the best


gifts







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


ported by any principle of loyalty; and treason, against such aprince, might easily be considered as patriotism to the state. Yet ifwe examine with candour the conduct of these usurpers, it will ap­pear, that they were much oftener driven into rebellion by theirfears, than urged to it by their ambition. They dreaded the cruelsuspicions of Gallienus; they equally dreaded the capricious violenceof their troops. If the dangerous favour of the army had impru­dently declared them deserving of the purple, they were markedfor sure destruction; and even prudence would counsel them, tosecure a short enjoyment of empire, and rather to try the fortune ofwar, than to expect the hand of an executioner. "When theclamour of the soldiers invested the reluctant victims with the en­signs of sovereign authority, they sometimes mourned in secrettheir approaching fate. "You have lost," said Saturninus, onthe day of his elevation, " you have lost a useful commander, and"you have made a very wretched emperor ,6'."
The apprehensions of Saturninus were justified by the repeatedexperience of revolutions. Of the nineteen tyrants who started upunder the reign of Gallienus, there was not one who enjoyed a lifeof peace, or a natural death. As soon as they were invested withthe bloody purple, they inspired their adherents with the fame fearsand ambition which had occasioned their own revolt. Encompassedwith domestic conspiracy, military sedition, and civil war, theytrembled on the edge of precipices, in which after a longer orshorter term of anxiety, they were inevitably lost. These precariousmonarchs received, however, such honours, as the flattery of theirrespective armies and provinces could bestow; but their claimfounded on rebellion, could never obtain the sanction of law orhistory. Italy, Rome, and the senate, constantly adhered to thecause of Gallienus, and he alone was considered as the sovereign ofthe empire. That prince condescended indeed to acknowledge thevictorious arms of Odenathus, who deserved the honourable distinc-
Vol. I. O o tion,







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 247


If so many successive generations of Goths were capable of pre- Ehm'£ra^on cfserving a faint tradition of their Scandinavian origin, we must not fromScaodi-expect, from such unlettered barbarians, any distinct account of the p^uffia." °time and circumstances of their emigration. To cross the Balticwas an easy and natural attempt. The inhabitants of Sweden weremasters of a sufficient number of large vessels, with oars ", and thedistance is little more than one hundred miles from Carlscroon to thenearest ports of Pomerania and Prussia. Here, at length, we land onfirm and historic ground. At least as early as the Christian æraand as late as the age of the Antonines IS, the Goths were establishedtowards the mouth of the Vistula, and in that fertile province, wherethe commercial cities of Thorn, Elbing, Koningsberg, and Dantzick,were long afterwards founded ,6. Westward of die Goths, thenumerous tribes of the Vandals were spread along the banks of theOder, and the sea coast of Pomerania and Mecklenburgh. A strik­ing resemblance of manners, complexion, religion, and language,seemed to indicate that the Vandals and the Goths were originallyone great people ,?. The latter appear to have been subdividedinto Ostrogoths, Visigoths, and Gepidæ ,8. The distinction amongthe Vandals was more strongly marked by the independent namesof HerulL, Burgundians, Lombards, and a variety of other pettystates, many of which, in a future age, expanded themselves into-powerful monarchies.
In the age of the Antonines, the Goths were still seated in From PmffiatPrussia. About the reign of Alexander Severus, the Roman pro- Ukraine,vince of Dacia had already experienced their proximity by frequentand destructive inroads '9. In this interval therefore, of aboutseventy years, we must place the second migration of the Goths,from the Baltic to the Euxine; but the cause that produced it liesconcealed among the various springs of action, incident to unsettled,barbarians. Either a pestilence, or a famine, a victory, or a defeat,
2. ana







OCR Output








242 THE DECLINE AND FALL


CHAP. X.
The Emperors Decius, Gallus, Æmilianus> Valerian, andGallienus.—The general Irruption of the Barbarians.—Tlie thirty Tyrants.
The nature of "1 ROM the great secular games celebrated by Philip, to theA.eD.b248— -t^ death of the emperor Gallienus, there elapsed twenty years"6"" ef shame and misfortune. During that calamitous period, every
instant of time was marked, every province of the Roman worldwas afflicted by barbarous invaders and military tyrants, and theruined empire seemed to approach the last and fatal moment of itsdissolution. The confusion of the times, and the scarcity of authen­tic memorials, oppose equal difficulties to the historian, who attempts:to preserve a clear and unbroken thread of narration. Surroundedwith imperfect fragments, always concise, often obscure, and some­times contradictory, he is reduced to collect, to compare, and toconjecture: and though he ought never to place his conjecturesin the rank of facts, yet the knowledge of human nature, and ofthe sure operation of its fierce and unrestrained passions, might, onsome occasions, supply the want of historical materials.The emperor There is not, for instance, any difficulty in conceiving, that thePhiijp. successive murders of so many emperors, had loosened all the tiesof allegiance between the prince and people; that all the generalsof Philip were disposed to imitate the example of their master, andthat the caprice of armies, long since habituated to frequent and violentrevolutions, might every day raise to the throne the most obscure oftheir fellow-soldiers. History can only add, that the first rebellionagainst the emperor Philip, broke out in the summer of the yeartwo hundred and forty-nine, among the legions of Mæsia; and that
a. sub-







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 151


subjects with the fame contemptuous indifference, asserted withoutcontrol his sovereign privilege of lust and luxury.
The most worthless of mankind are not afraid to condemn in Dris">»«n»
ot the army.
others the fame disorders which they allow in themselves; and canreadily discover some nice difference of age, character, or station, tojustify the partial distinction. The licentious soldiers, who hadraised to the throne the dissolute son of Caracalla, blushed at theirignominious choice, and turned with disgust from that monster, tocontemplate with pleasure the opening virtues of his cousin Alex­ander the son of Mamæa. The crafty Mæsa, sensible that her grand­son Elagabalus must inevitably destroy himself by hia own vices,had provided another and surer support of her family. Embracinga favourable moment of fondness and devotion, she had persuadedthe young emperor to adopt Alexander, and to invest him with thetitle of Cæsar, that his own divine occupations might be no longer cIared Cæsar»
0 A.D. 221.
interrupted by the care of the earth. In the second rank that ami­able prince soon acquired the affections of the public, and excitedthe tyrant's jealousy, who resolved to terminate the dangerous com­petition either by corrupting the manners or taking away the lifeof his rival. His arts proved unsuccessful; his vain designs wereconstantly discovered by his own loquacious folly, and disappointedby those virtuous and faithful servants whom the prudence of Mamæahad placed about the person of her son. In a hasty sally of passion,Elagabalus resolved to execute by force what he had been unable tocompass by fraud, and by a despotic sentence degraded his cousinfrom the rank and honours of Cæsar. The message was received inthe senate with silence, and in the camp with fury. The Prætorianguards swore to protect Alexander, and5 to revenge the dishonouredmajesty of the throne. The tears and promises of the tremblingElagabalus, who only begged them to spare his life, and to leavehim in the possession of his beloved Hierocles, diverted their justindignation j and they contented themselves with empowering their
prefects







OCR Output








53o THE DECLINE AND- FALL


Or a Louis XIV, might have acquired a just knowledge of the rightsof conscience, of the obligation of faith, and of the innocence oferror. But the princes and magistrates of ancient Rome werestrangers to those principles which inspired and authorized the in­flexible obstinacy of the Christians in the cause of truth, nor couldthey themselves discover in their own breasts, any motive whichwould have prompted them to refuse a legal, and as it were a natu­ral submission to the sacred institutions of their country. The famereason which contributes to alleviate the guilt, must have tended toabate the rigour of their persecutions. As they were actuated, notby the furious zeal of bigots, but by the temperate policy of legis­lators, contempt must often have relaxed, and humanity must fre­quently have suspended the execution of those laws, which theyenacted against the humble and obscure followers of Christ. Fromthe general view of their character and motives we might naturallyconclude: I. That considerable time elapsed before they consideredthe new sectaries as an object deserving of the attention of govern­ment. II. That in the conviction of any of their subjects whowere accused of so very singular a crime, they proceeded with cau­tion and reluctance. III. That they were moderate in the use ofpunishments; and IV. That the afflicted church enjoyed many in­tervals of peace and tranquillity. Notwithstanding the carelessindifference which the most copious and the most minute of thepagan writers have shewn to the affairs of the Christiansl+, it maystill be in our power to confirm each of these probable supposi­tions, bv the evidence of authentic facts.They neglect- L By the wife dispensation of Providence, a mysterious veil wasdan* afa sect ca^ over tne infancy of the church, which served to protect the•fjews. Christians till their faith was matured, and their numbers weremultiplied, not only from the malice, but even from the knowledgeof the pagan world. The slow and gradual abolition of the Mosaicceremonies afforded a safe and innocent disguise to the more early
pro­







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 4«


Though Constantinre might view the conduct of Maxentius with CiviI w" be"
° ° tween Con-


abhorrence, and the situation of the Romans with companion, we have famine and
Maxentius.
no reason to presume that he would have taken up arms to punish A. D. 312^the one or to relieve the other. But the tyrant of Italy rashlyventured to provoke a formidable enemy, whose ambition had beenhitherto restrained by considerations of prudence, rather than byprinciples of justice *\ After the death of Maximian, his titles>according to the established custom, had been erased, and his statue*thrown down with ignominy. His son, who had persecuted anddeserted him when alive, affected to display the most pious re*-gard for his memory, and gave orders that a similar treatment shouldbe immediately inflicted on all the statues that had been erected inItaly and Africa to the honour of Constantine. That wife prince,who sincerely wished to decline a war, the difficulty and im­portance of which he was sufficiently acquainted with, at firifrdissembled the insult, and sought for redress by the milder ex<-pedients of negociation, till he was convinced, that the hostile andambitious designs of the Italian emperor, made it necessary for himto arm in his own defence. Maxentius, who openly avowed hispretensions to the whole monarchy of the West, had- already pre­pared a very considerable force to invade the Gallic provinces ot*the side of Rhætia, and though he could not expect any assistance fromLicinius, he was flattered, that the legions of Illyricum, allured by hispresents and promises, would desert the standard of that prince, andunanimously declare themselves his soldiers and subjects 49. Con­stantine no longer hesitated. He had deliberated with caution, heacted with vigour. He gave a private audience to the ambassadors*who, in the name of the senate and people, conjured him to deliverRome from a detested tyrant; and, without regarding the timidremonstrances of his council, he resolved to prevent the enemy>and to carry the war into the heart of Italy *°,
The







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AND FALL


father, ha introduced a division of Gaul equally adapted tothe progrese of the legions, to the course of the rivers, and tothe principal national distinctions, that before the conquest hadcomprehended above an hundred independent states7'. The sea-coast of the Mediterranean, Languedoc, Provence, and Dauphine,received the provincial appellation from the colony of Narbonne.The government of Aquitaiae was extended from the Pyrenees tothe Loire. Between, the Loire and the Seine was situate the CelticGaul, which soon borrowed a new denomination from the celehratedcolony of Lugdunum, or Lyon*. The Belgic lay beyond the Seine,and in more ancient times had been bounded only by the Rhine;but a little before the age of Cæsar, the Germans abusing their su­periority of valour, had occupied a considerable portion of theBelgic territory. The Roman conquerors very eagerly embraced soflattering a circumstance, and the Gallic frontier of the Rhine, fromBasil to Leyden, received the pompous names of the Upper andthe Lower Germany 7\ Such, under the reign of the Antonines,were the six provinces of Gaul; the Narbonnese, Aquitaine, theCeltic, or Lyonnese, the Belgic, and the two Germanies.Britain. We have already had occasion to mention the conquest of
Britain, and to fix the boundary of the Roman province in thisisland. It comprehended all England, Wales, and the lowlandcounties of Scotland, as far as the Firths of Dunbarton and Edin­burgh. Before Britain lost her freedom, it was irregularly dividedbetween thirty tribes of barbarians, of whom the most considerablewere the Belgæ in the West, the Brigantes in the North, theSilures in South Wale8, and the Iceni in Norfolk and Suffolk 7\As far as we can either trace or credit the resemblance of manners• and language, Spain, Gaul, and Britain were peopled by the famehardy race of savages. Before they yielded to the Roman arms>they often disputed the field, and often renewed the contest- Aftertheir submission they constituted the western division of the Eu­ropean







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AND FALL


states, who, during the long slumber of his predecessors, had insultedPerfia with impunity. He obtained some easy victories over thewild Scythians and the effeminate Indians j but the Romans werean enemy, who, by their past injuries and present power, deservedthe utmost efforts of his arms. A forty years tranquillity, thefruit of valour and moderation, had succeeded the victories of Trajan.During the period that elapsed from the accession of Marcus to thereign of Alexander, the Roman and the Parthian empires were twiceengaged in war; and although the whole strength of the Arsacidescontended with a part only of the forces of Rome, the event wasmost commonly in favour of the latter. Macrinus, indeed, promptedby his precarious situation and pusillanimous temper, purchased apeace at the expence of near two millions of our money 56; but thegenerals of Marcus, the emperor Severus, and his son, erected manytrophies in Armenia, Mesopotamia, and Assyria. Among their ex­ploits, the imperfect relation of which would have unseasonably in­terrupted the more important series of domestic revolutions, we shallonly mention the repeated calamities of the two great cities of Se-leucia and Ctesiphon*
Seleucia, on the western bank of the Tigris, about forty-fivemiles to the north of ancient Babylon, was the capital of the Mace­donian conquest in Upper Asia 11. Many ages after the fall of theirempire, Seleucia retained the genuine characters of a Grecian colony,arts, military virtue, and the love of freedom. The independentrepublic was governed by a senate of three hundred nobles; thepeople consisted of six hundred thousand citizens; the walls werestrong, and as long as concord prevailed among the several orders ofthe state, they viewed with contempt the power of the Parthian:the madness of faction was sometimes provoked to implore the dan­gerous aid of the common enemy, who was posted almost at the gatesof the colony 5\ The Parthian monarchs, like the Mogul sovereignsof Hindostan, delighted in the pastoral life of their Scythian ances­tors;







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


fore, (such was the haughty style of his embassies to the emperorAlexander) commanded the Romans instantly to depart from all-the provinces of his ancestors, and yielding to the Persians the em­pire of Asia, to content themselves with the undisturbed possessionof Europe. This haughty mandate was delivered by four hundredof the tallest and most beautiful of the Persians; who, by their finehorses, splendid arms, and rich apparel, displayed the pride and-greatness of their master 47. Such an embassy was much less an offerof negociation than a declaration of war. Both Alexander Severusand Artaxerxes, collecting the military force of the Roman andPersian monarchies, resolved in this important contest to lead theirarmies in person^
If we credit what should seem the most authentic of all records, Ps<-tcndcd
victory of
an oration, still extant, and delivered by the emperor himself to the Alexander
Severus.
senate, we must allow that the victory of Alexander Severus was A.D.iy^not inferior to any of those formerly obtained over the Persians bythe son of Philip. The army of the Great King consisted of onehundred and twenty thousand horse,, clothed in complete armourof steel; of seven hundred elephants, with towers filled with ar­chers on their backs, and of eighteen hundred chariots, armed with-scythes. This formidable host, the like of which is not to be found in-eastern history, and has scarcely been imagined in eastern romance 4%was discomfited in a great battle, in- which the Roman Alexander ap­proved himself an intrepid soldier and a skilful general. The GreatKing fled before his valour \ an immense booty and the conquest ofMesopotamia, were the immediate fruits of this signal victory. Suchare the circumstances of this ostentatious and improbable relation,dictated, as it too plainly appears, by the vanity of the monarchycomposed by the unblushing servility of his flatterers* and receivedwithout contradiction by a distant and obsequious senate Farfrom being inclined to believe that the arms of Alexander obtainedso memorable a victory over the Persians, we are induced to suspect,
that







OCR Output








OF THE ROM AN EMPIRE. 479


or the spectators, very happily disposed them to adopt with the sameease, but with far greater justice, the authentic wonders of theevangelic history; and thus miracles that exceeded not the measure oftheir own experience, inspired them with the most lively assurance ofmysteries which were acknowledged to surpass the limits of theirunderstanding. It is this deep impression of supernatural truths,which has been so much celebrated under the name of faith; astate of mind described as the surest pledge of the divine favourand of future felicity, and recommended as the first or perhaps theonly merit of a Christian. According to the more rigid doctors,,the moral virtues, which may be equally practised by infidels, aredestitute of any value or efficacy in the work of our justification. .IV. But the primitive Christian demonstrated his faith by his The
FOURTH
virtues; and it was very justly supposed that the divine persuasion cause.• which enlightened or subdued the understanding, must, at the same first Chris-time, purify the heart and direct the actions of the believer. The tians*first apologists of Christianity who justify the innocence of theirbrethren, and the writers of a later period who celebrate the sanctityof their ancestors, display, in the most lively colours, the reforma­tion of manners which was introduced into the world by thepreaching of the gospel. As it is my intention to remark onlysuch human causes as were permitted to second the influence ofrevelation, I shall slightly mention two motives which mightnaturally render the lives of the primitive Christians much purerand more austere than those of their Pagan contemporaries or theirdegenerate successors; repentance for their past sins, and the laudabledesire of supporting the reputation of the society in which they wereengaged.
It is a very ancient reproach, suggested by the ignorance or the Effect*-ofmalice of infidelity, that the Christians allured into their party the ince.most atrocious criminals, who, as soon as they were touched by afense of remorse, were easily persuaded to wash away, in the water.


their rej ent­


. 5 of







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AND FALL


well instructed in the advantages of laws and letters, and who hadrisen, by equal steps, through the regular succession of civil and mi­litary honours "6. To their influence and example we may partlyascribe the modest obedience of the legions during the two firstcenturies of the Imperial history.
But when the last enclosure of the Roman constitution was tram­pled down, by Caracalla, the separation of professions gradually•succeeded to the distinction of ranks. The more polished citizensof the internal provinces were alone qualified to act as lawyersand ma­gistrates. The rougher trade of arms was abandoned to the peasantsand barbarians of the frontiers, who knew no country but theircamp, no science but that of war, no civil laws, and scarcelythose of military discipline. With bloody hands, savage manners,and desperate resolutions, they sometimes guarded, but much oftenersubverted the throne of the emperors.


 


CHAP.







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AND FALL


A mixed body Jn the
reien of the emperor Caracalla, an innumerable swarm of
osSuevi al- ° 1
fume the name Suevi appeared on the banks of the Mein, and in the neighbour^
of Alemanni,
hood of the Roman provinces, in quest either of food, of plunder,or of glory Ss. The hasty army of volunteers gradually coalescedinto a great and permanent nation; and, as it was composed fromso many different tribes, assumed the name of Alemanni, or All-men; to denote at once their various lineage, and their commonbravery S6. The latter was soon felt by the Romans in many ahostile inroad. The Alemanni fought chiefly on horseback; but theircavalry was rendered still more formidable by a mixture of lightinfantry, selected from the bravest and most active of the youth,whom frequent exercise had enured to accompany the horsemen inthe longest march, the most furious charge, or the most precipitateretreat 8\
invade Gaul This warlike people of Germans had been astonished by the im-
and Italy, y
mense preparations of Alexander Severus, they were dismayed by thearms of his successor, a barbarian equal in valour and fierceness tothemselves. But still hovering on the frontiers of the empire, theyincreased the general disorder that ensued after the death of Decius.They inflicted severe wounds on the rich provinces of Gaul: theywere the first who removed the veil that covered the feeble majestyof Italy. A numerous body of the Alemanni penetrated across theDanube, and through the Rhsetian Alps, into the plains of Lom-bardy, advanced as far as Ravenna, and displayed the victoriousbanners of barbarians, almost in fight of Rome 88. The insult andthe danger rekindled in the senate some sparks of their ancientvirtue. Both the emperors were engaged in far distant wars, Vale­rian in the east, and Gallienus on the Rhine. All the hopes andare repulsed resources of the Romans, were in themselves. In this emergency.
from Rome 0 ''
by the senate the senators resumed the defence of the republic, drew out the
and people
Prætorian guards, who had been left to garrison the capital, and


filled







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 473


the world itself; which, as it had once perished by the element ofwater, was destined to experience a second and a speedy destructionfrom the element of fire. In the opinion of a general conflagration,the faith of the Christian very happily coincided with the traditionof the East, the philosophy of the Stoics, and the analogy of Nature:and even the country, which had been chosen from religious motivesfor the origin and principal scene of the conflagration, was the bestadapted for that purpose by natural and physical causes; by its deepcaverns, beds of sulphur, and numerous volcanos, of which thoseof Ætna, of Vesuvius, and of Lipari, exhibit a very imperfect re­presentation. The calmest and most intrepid sceptic could not re­fuse to acknowledge, that the destruction of the present system of -the world by fire, was in itself extremely probable. The Christian,who founded his belief much less on the fallacious arguments ofreason than on the authority of tradition and the interpretationof scripture, expected it with terror and confidence as a certain andapproaching event; and as his mind was perpetually filled with thesolemn idea, he considered every disaster that happened to the em­pire as an infallible symptom of an expiring world 6;.
The condemnation of the wisest and most virtuous of the pagans, The pa^anion account of their ignorance or disbelief of the divine truth, seems eteevrnai °to offend the reason and the humanity of the present age But Punisliment-the primitive church, whose faith was of a much firmer consistence,delivered over, without hesitation, to eternal torture, the far greaterpart of the human species. A charitable hope might perhaps beindulged in favour of Socrates, or some other sages of antiquity,who had consulted the light of reason before that of the gospel hadarisen 69. But it was unanimously affirmed, that those who, sincethe birth or the death os Christ, had obstinately persisted in theworship of the dæmons, neither deserved nor could expect a pardonfrom the irritated justice of the Deity. These rigid sentiments,which had been unknown to the ancient world, appear to have in-
Vol. I. P p p fused







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AND FALL
changed the language of exhortation into that of command, scatteredthe seeds of future usurpations, and supplied by scripture allegoriesand declamatory rhetoric, their deficiency of force and of reason.They exalted the unity and power of the church, as it was repre­sented in the episcopal office, of which every bishop enjoyedan equal and undivided portion Princes and magistrates, it wasoften repeated, might boast an earthly claim to a transitory domi­nion. It was the episcopal authority alone which was derived fromthe deity, and extended itself over this and over another world.The bishops were the vicegerents of Christ, the successors of theapostles, and the mystic substitutes of the high priest of the Mosaiclaw. Their exclusive privilege of conferring the sacerdotal charac­ter, invaded the freedom both of clerical and of popular elections;and if, in the administration of the church, they sometimes con­sulted the judgment of the presbyters, or the inclination of thepeople, they most carefully inculcated the merit of such a voluntarycondescension. The bishops acknowledged the supreme authoritywhich resided in the assembly of their brethren; but in she govern­ment of his peculiar diocese, each of them exacted from his Jlockthe fame implicit obedience as if that favourite metaphor had beenliterally just, and as if the shepherd had been of a more exaltednature than that of his sheep"6. This obedience, however, wa»not imposed without some efforts on one side, and some resistanceon the other. The democratical part of the constitution was, inmany places, very warmly supported by the zealous or interestedopposition of the inferior clergy. But their'patriotism received theignominious epithets of faction and schism; and the episcopal causeWas indebted for its rapid progress to the labours of many activeprelates, who, like Cyprian of Carthage, could reconcile the arts ofthe most ambitious statesman with the christian virtues which seerr*adapted to the character of a faint and. martyr "\
The







OCR Output








n8 THE DECLINE AND FALL


culture and commerce, the goodness of the roads, the discipline ofthe legions, and the indolent subdued temper of the provinces ,7.Disgrace of The first cares of Severus were bestowed on two measures, theguards?10"" one dictated by policy, the other by decency; the revenge, and thehonours due to the memory of Pertinax. Before the new emperorentered Rome, he issued his commands to the Prætorian guards,directing them to wait his arrival on a large plain near the city,without arms, but in the habits of ceremony, in which they wereaccustomed to attend their sovereign. He was obeyed by thosehaughty troops, whose contrition was the effect of their justterrors. A chosen part of the Illyrian army encompassed themwith levelled spears. Incapable of flight or resistance, they ex­pected their fate in silent consternation. Severus mounted thetribunal, sternly reproached them with perfidy and cowardice,dismissed them with ignominy from the trust they had betrayed,despoiled them of their splendid ornaments, and banished them,on pain of death, to the distance of an hundred miles from thecapital. During the transaction, another detachment had been sentto seize their arms, occupy their camp, and prevent the hastyconsequences of their despair 38.Funeral and -yjjg funeral and consecration of Pertinax was next solemnized
apotheosis or
Pertinax. with every circumstance of fad magnificence 39. The senate, witha melancholy pleasure, performed the last rites to that excellentprince, whom they had loved, and still regretted. The concern ofhis successor was probably less sincere. He esteemed the virtues ofPertinax, but those virtues would for ever have confined his ambitionto a private station. Severus pronounced his funeral oration withstudied eloquence, inward satisfaction, and well acted sorrow; andby this pious regard to his memory, convinced the credulous mul­titude that he alone was worthy to supply his place. Sensible,however, that arms, not ceremonies, must assert his claim to the
empire;







OCR Output








NOTES ON THE FIFTH CHAPTER.


<£i] T^HEY were originally nine or ten thou-JL sand men (for Tacitui and Dion are notagreed upon the subject), divided into as many co­horts. Vitellius increased them to sixteen thou­sand, and as far as we can learn from inscriptions,they never afterwards funk much below that num*bcr. See Lipsius dc magnitudine Roraani, i. 4.
[2] Sueton. in August, c. 49.
[3] Tacit. Annal. iv. 2. Sueton. is Tiber, c. 37.Dion Cassius, 1. lvii. p. 867.
{4] In the civil war between Vitellius and Ves­pasian, the Prætorian camp was attacked and de­fended with all the machines used in the siege of thebest fortified cities. Tacit. Hist. iii. 84.
f 5] Close to the walls of the city, on the broadsummit of the Quirinal and Vimiual hills. SeeNardini Roma Arnica, p. 174. Donatus de RomaAntiqua, p. 46.
[6] Claudius, raised by the soldiers to the em­pire, was the first who gave a donative. He gavequina dtna, 120 1. (Sueton. in Claud, c. 10.):when Marcus, with his colleague Lucius Verus,took quiet possession of the throne he gave vicena,160 1. to each of the guards. Hist. August, p. 2$,(Dion, lxxiii. p. 1231.) We may form some ideaof the amount of these sums, by Hadrian's complaint,that the promotion of a L'assar had coil him ter miUiis,two millions and a half sterling.
[7] Cicero de Legibus, iii. 3. The first book ofLivy, and the second of Dionysius of Halicarnassus,shew the authority of the people, even in the electionof the king.
[8] They were originally recruited in Latimn,Etruria, and the old colonies (Tacit. Annal. iv,U he emperor Otho compliments their vanity, with*he flattering titles of Itali* Alumni, Roman a verejuventus. Tacit Hist. i. 84.
[9] In the siege of Rome by the Gauls. SeeLivv, V.4S. PlMtarch. in CamiU..p. 14.3.Vol. I.
1


[ioJ Dion, 1. lxxiii, p. 1*34. Herodian, I. i\.p. 63. Hist. August, p. 60. Though the threehistorians agree that it was in fact an auction, He­rodian alone affirms, that it was proclaimed as suchby the soldiers.
[11] Spartianus softens the most odious parts ofthe character and elevation of Julian.
[12] Dion Cafsius, at that time prætor, had beena personal enemy to Julian, 1. lxxiii. p. 123 J.
[13] Hist. August, p. 61. We learn from thenceone curious circumstance, that the new emperor,whatever had been his birth, was immediatelyaggregated to the number of Patrician fami­lies.
[14] Dion, 1. lxxiii. p. 123-. Hist* August,.p. 61. I have endeavoured to b,lcnd into one con­sistent story the seeming contradictions of thetwo writers.
[15] Dion, 1. lxxiii. p. 1235.
[16] The Posthumian and the Cejonian; theformer of whom was raised to the consulship, in th«fjfih year after its institution.
[17] Spartianus, in his undigested collections,mixes up all the virtues, and all the vices that enterinto the human composition, and bestows them onthe fame object. Such, indeed, are many of thecharacters in the Augustan history.
[18] Hist. August, p. 80. S4.
[19] Pertinax, who governed Britain a few yearsbefore, had been left for dead, ip a mutiny of thesoldiers. Hist. August, p. 54. Yat they sov.ed andregretted him; admiraotibtis .earn vir.fcuteju cuiirafeebantur.
[zo] Sueton. in Galb. c. ic.
[21] HifUAuguil p. 76.
c j[:2] Herod.







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


the room of the prætorian praefect, whom he put to death, Carinussubstituted one of the ministers of his looser pleasures. Another,who possessed the fame, or even a more infamous title to favour, wasinvested with the consulship. A confidential secretary, who had a6*»quired uncommon skill in the art of forgery, delivered the indolentemperor, with his own consent, from the irksome duty of signinghis name.
When the emperor Carus undertook the Persian war, he was in­duced, by motives of affection as well as policy, to secure the sot*- tunes of his family, by leaving in the' hands of his eldest son thearmies and provinces of the West. The intelligence which he soonreceived of the conduct of Carinus, filled him with shame and re­gret; nor had he concealed his resolution of satisfying the republicby a severe act of justice, and of adopting, in the place of an un­worthy son, the brave and virtuous Constantius, who at that timewas governor of Dalmatia. But the elevation of Constantius wasfor a while deferred; and as soon as a father's death had releasedCarinus from the controul of fear or decency, he displayed to theRomans the extravagancies of Elagabalus, aggravated by the crueltyof Domitian 8*.
The only merit of the administration of Carinus that history He celebrates
. ii i r i i • i 'he Roman
could record or poetry celebrate, was the uncommon lplendor with games,which, in his own and his brother's name, he exhibited the Romangames of the theatre, the circus, and the amphitheatre. More thantwenty years afterwards, when the courtiers of Diocletian repre­sented to their frugal sovereign the fame and popularity of his mu­nificent predecessor, he acknowledged, that the reign of Carinushad indeed been a reign of pleasure 8\ But this vain prodigality,which the prudence of Diocletian might justly despise, was enjoyedwith surprise and transport by the Roman people. The oldest ofthe citizens, recollecting the spectacles of former days, the trium­phal pomp of Probus or Aurelian, and the secular games of the em­peror







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. a#?


quences, turned away with indignant contempt, from the remon­strances of justice and policy, and it was the practice to signify by a thollow murmur, their dislike of such timid councils. But whenevera more popular orator proposed to vindicate the meanest citizen, fromeither foreign or domestic injury, whenever the called upon his fel­low-countrymen to assert the national honour, or to pursue someenterprise full of danger and glory, a loud clashing of shields andspears expressed the eager applause of the assembly. For the Ger­mans always met in arms, and it was constantly to be dreaded, lestan irregular multitude, inflamed with faction and strong liquors,should use those arms to enforce, as well as to declare their furiousresolves. We may recollect how often the diets of Poland havebeen polluted with blood, and the more numerous party has beencompelled to yield to the more violent and seditious *6.
A general of the tribe was elected on occasions of danger; and, if ^'princetandthe danger was pressing and extensive, several tribes concurred in magistratesthe choice of the fame general. The bravest warrior was namedto lead his countrymen into the field, by his example rather than byhis commands. But this power, however limited, was still invi­dious. It expired with the war, and in time of peace, the Germantribes acknowledged not any supreme chief+7. Princes were, how­ever, appointed* in the general assembly, to administer justice,or rather to compose differences 48, in their respective districts.In the choice of these magistrates, as much regard was shewn tobirth as to merit *9. To each was given, by the public, a guard',and a council of an hundred persons; and the first of the princesappears to have enjoyed a pre-eminence of rank and honour whichsometimes tempted the Romans to compliment him with the regaltitle 5°.
The comparative view of the powers of the magistrates, in two more absolute
over the pro-remarkable instances, is alone sufficient to represent the - whole perty than
mi -r r t- over the per-
system of German manners. The disposal of the landed property son. of the
. , . Germans.


within







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 7


distant nations would throw off the unaccustomed yoke, when theywere no longer restrained by the powerful hand which had imposedit.
It was an ancient tradition, that when the Capitol was founded by Resigned byone of the Roman kings, the god Terminus (who presided over Adrian,boundaries, and was represented according to the fashion of thatage by a large stone) alone, among all the inferiour deities, refusedto yield his place to Jupiter himself. A favourable inference wasdrawn from his obstinacy, which was imterpreted by the augurs, as asure presage that the boundaries of the Roman power would neverrecede **. Daring many ages, the prediction, as it is usual, con­tributed to its own accomplishment. But though Terminus hadresisted the majesty of Jupiter, he submitted to the authority of theemperor Hadrian15. The resignation of all the eastern conquestsof Trajan was the first measure of his reign. He restored to theParthians the election of an independent Sovereign, withdrew theRoman garrisons from the provinces of Armenia, Mesopotamia, andAssyria, and, in compliance with the precept of Augustus, oncemore established the Euphrates as the frontier of the empire *4.Censure, which arraigns the public actions and the private motivesof princes, has ascribed to envy, a conduct, which might be attri­buted to the prudence and moderation of Hadrian. The variouscharacter of that emperor, capable, by turns, of the meanest andthe most generous sentiments, may afford some colour to the sus­picion. It was, however, scarcely in his power to place thesuperiority of his predecessor in a more conspicuous light, than bythus confessing himself unequal to the task of defending the conquestsof Trajan.
The martial and ambitious spirit of Trajan, formed a very sin- Contrast osgular contrast with the moderation of his successor. The restless Antoninus*activity of Hadrian was not less remarkable when compared with Plu''the gentle repose of Antoninus Pius. The life of the former was
almost







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 379


world, which would remain imperfect and mutilated if eitherof them should be put out.
"It well becomes the Persians," replied Galerius, with a transport Answer ofof fury, which seemed to convulse his whole frame, ** it well be- "a""comes the Persians to expatiate on the vicissitudes of fortune,"and calmly to read us lectures on the virtues of moderation."Let them remember their own moderation towards the unhappy"Valerian. They vanquished him by fraud, they treated him"with indignity. They detained him till the last moment of"his life in shameful captivity, and after his death they exposed"his body to perpetual ignominy." Softening, however, his tone,Galerius insinuated to the ambassador, that it had never been thepractice of the Romans to trample on a prostrate enemy; and that,on this occasion, they should consult their own dignity, rather thanthe Persian merit. He dismissed Apharban with a hope, thatNarses would soon be informed on what conditions he might obtain,from the clemency of the emperors, a lasting peace, and therestoration of his wives and children. In this conference we maydiscover the fierce passions of Galerius, as well as his deference tothe superior wisdom and authority of Diocletian. The ambition of Moderation
of Diocletian.
the former grasped at the conquest of the East, and had proposedto reduce Persia into the state of a province. The prudence of thelatter, who adhered to the.moderate policy of Augustus and theAntonines, embraced the favourable opportunity of terminating asuccessful war by an honourable and advantageous peace 7S.
in pursuance of their promise, the emperors soon afterwards Conclusionappointed Sicorius Probus, one of their secretaries, to acquaint thePersian court with their final resolution. As the minister of peace}he was received with every mark of politeness and friendship; but,under the pretence of allowing him the necessary repose afterso long a journey, the audience of Probus was deferred from dayto day; and he attended the flow motions of the king, till atlength he was admitted to his presence, near the river Asprudus,
C c c 2 in







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AND FALL


gagement, he would shut himself up within the walls of Rome.His ample magazines secured him against the danger of famine;and as the situation of Constantine admitted not of delay, he mighthave been reduced to the sad necessity of destroying with fire andsword the imperial city, the reward of his victory, and the deliveranceof which had been the motive, or rather indeed the pretence, of thecivil war6f. It was with equal surprise and pleasure, that on hi6 arrivalat a place called 5axa Rubra, about nine miles from Rome66, hediscovered the army of Maxentius prepared to give him battle67.Their long front filled a very spacious plain, and their deep arrayreached to the banks of the Tyber, which covered their rear, andforbade their retreat. We ate informed, and we may bplieve, thatConstantine disposed his troops with consummate skill, and that hechose for himself the post of honour and danger. Distinguishedby tbe splendour of his arms, he charged in person the cavalry ofhis rival; and his irresistible attack determined the fortune of theday. The cavalry of Maxentius was principally composed eitherof unwieldy cuirassiers, or of light Moors and Numidians. Theyyielded to the vigour of the Gallic horse, which possessed more acti­vity than the one, more firmness than the other. The defeat ofthe two wings left the infantry without any protection On itsflanks, and the undisciplined Italians fled without reluctance fromthe standard of a tyrant whom they had always hated, and whomthey no longer feared. The Prætorians, conscious that their of­fences were beyond the reach of mercy, were animated by revengeand despair. Notwithstanding their repeated efforts, those brave vete­rans were unable to recover the victory: they obtained, however, anhonourable death; and it was observed, that their bodies covered thefame ground which had been occupied by their ranks68. The confusionthen became general, and the dismayed troops of Maxentius, pursuedby an implacable enemy, rushed by thousands into the deep and rapidstream of the Tyber. The emperor himself attempted to escape
back







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 283


-


forces of the state were dissipated in private quarrels, the defence­less provinces lay exposed to every invader. The bravest usurperswere compelled by the perplexity of their situation, to conclude ig­nominious treaties with the common enemy, to purchase with op­pressive tributes the neutrality or services of the barbarians, and tointroduce hostile and independent nations into the heart of the)Roman monarchy 161.
Such were the barbarians, and such the tyrants, who, under thereigns of Valerian and Gallienus, dismembered the provinces, andreduced the empire to the lowest pitch of disgrace and ruin, fromwhence it seemed impossible that it should ever emerge. As far asthe barrenness of materials would permit, we have attempted totrace, with order and perspicuity, the general events of that cala­mitous period. There still remain some particular facts; I. Thedisorders of Sicily; II. The tumults of Alexandria; and III. The rebel­lion of the Isaurians, which may serve to reflect a strong light on thehorrid picture.
I. Whenever numerous troops of banditti, multiplied by success Disorders ofand impunity, publickly defy, instead of eluding, the justice of their ycountry, we may safely infer, that the excessive weakness of thegovernment is felt and abused by the lowest ranks of the com­munity. The situation of Sicily preserved it from the barbarians;nor could the disarmed province have supported an usurper. Thesufferings of that once flourishing and still fertile island, were in­flicted by baser hands. A licentious crowd of slaves and peasantsreigned for a while over the plundered country, and renewed thememory of the servile wars of more ancient times ,6S. Devastationsof which the husbandman was either the victim or the accomplice*must have ruined the agriculture of Sicily; and as the principalestates were the property of the opulent senators of Rome, whooften enclosed within a farm the territory of an old republic; it is• O o 2 not







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


to the first offices of the empire. Two admirable letters that passedbetween them, are stil! extant. The minister, with the consciousdignity of virtue, congratulates Gordian that he is delivered fromthe tyranny of the eunuchs *6, and still more, that he is sensible ofhis deliverance. The emperor acknowledges, with an amiable con­fusion, the errors of his past conduct; and laments, with singularpropriety, the misfortune of a monarch, from whom a venal tribe ofcourtiers perpetually labour to conceal the truth 47.
The life of Misitheus had been spent in the profession of letters, The Persian
w<ir.
not of arms; yet such was the versatile genius of that great man, a. b. 242.that, when he was appointed Prætorian præfect, he discharged themilitary duties of his place with vigour and ability. The Persianshad invaded Mesopotamia, and threatened Antioch. By the per­suasion of his father-in-law, the young emperor quitted the luxuryof Rome, opened, for the last time recorded in history, the temple ofJanus, and marched in person into the East. On his approach witha great army, the Persians withdrew their garrisons from the citieswhich they had already taken, and retired from the Euphrates tothe Tigris. Gordian enjoyed the pleasure of announcing to thesenate the first success of his arms, which he ascribed with a becom­ing modesty and gratitude to the wisdom of his father and præfect.During the whole expedition, Misitheus watched over the safetyand discipline of the army ; whilst he prevented their dangerousmurmurs by maintaining a regular plenty in the camp, and by esta­blishing ample magazines of vinegar, bacon, straw, barley, andwheat, in all the cities of the frontier48. But the prosperity ofGordian expired with Misitheus, who died of a flux, not without . „
. ... . A. D. 243,
very strong suspicions of poison. Philip, his successor in the præ- Arts of
Philip.
fecture, was an Arab by birth, and consequently, in the earlier partof his life, a robber by profession. His rife from so obscure a sta­tion to the first dignities of the empire, seems to prove that he wasa bold and able leader. But his boldness prompted him to aspire
C c 2 to







OCR Output








OFTHE ROMAN EMPIRE.


greatness of its cities will serve to confirm the former, and to multiplythe latter. It may not be unpleasing to collect a few scattered instancesrelative to that subject, without forgetting, however, that from thevanity of nations arid the poverty of language, the vague appellationof city has been indifferently bestowed on Rome and upon Lau-rentum. Ancient Italy is said to have contained eleven hundred In July,and ninety-seven cities ;J and for whatsoever æra of antiquitythe expression -might be intended '*, there is not any reason tobelieve the country less populous in the age of the Antonines, thanin that of Romulus. The petty states of Latium were containedwithin the metropolis of the empire, by whose superior influencethey had been attracted. Those parts of Italy which have so longlanguished under the lazy tyranny of priests and viceroys, hadbeen afflicted only by the more tolerable calamities of war; andthe first symptoms of decay, which they experienced, were amplycompensated by the rapid improvements of the Cisalpine Gaul.The splendor of Verona may be traced in its remains: yet Veronawas less celebrated than Aquileia or Padua, Milan or Ravenna.II. The spirit of improvement had passed the Alps, and been felt Gaul andeven irt the woods- of Britain. York was the feat of government, Spam'and London was already enriched by commerce. Gaul could boastof her twelve hundred cities 7r; and though, in the northern parts,many of them, without excepting Paris itself, were little morethan the rude and imperfect townships of a rising people; thesouthern provinces imitated the wealth and elegance of Italy 7<s.Many were the cities of Gaul, Marseilles, Aries, Nismes, Nar-bonne, Thoulouse, Bourdeaux, Autun, Vienna, Lyons, Langres,and Treves, whose ancient condition might sustain an equal, andpefhaps advantageous comparison With their present state. Withregard to Spain, tbat- country flourished as a province, and has de­clined as a kingdom. Exhausted by the abuse of her strength,by America, and by superstition, her pride might possibly be con-Vol. I. H founded,







OCR Output








j5g THE DECLINE AND FALL


Seditions of The Prætorian guards were attached to the youth of Alexander.
the Piætorian m , 1 j - ■ e
guard?, and They loved him as a tender pupil, whom they had saved fromu°pfan.°f * tyrant's fury, and placed on the Imperial throne. That amiableprince was sensible of the obligation, but as his gratitude was re­strained within the limits of reason and justice, they soon weremore dissatisfied with the virtues of Alexander, than they hadever been with the vices of Elagabalus. Their præfect, the wifeUlpian, was the friend of the laws and of the people; he wasconsidered as the enemy of the soldiers, and to his perniciouscouncils every scheme of reformation was imputed. Some triflingaccident blew up their discontent into a furious mutiny; and acivil war raged, during three days, in Rome, whilst the life of thatexcellent minister was defended by the grateful people. Terrified,at length by the sight of some houses in flames, and by the threatsof a general conflagration, the people yielded with a sigh, and leftthe virtuous, but unfortunate Ulpian to his fate. He was pursuedinto the Imperial palace, and massacred at the feet of his master,who vainly strove to cover him with the purple, and to obtain hispardon from the inexorable soldiers. Such was the deplorableweakness of government, that the emperor was unable to revengehis murdered friend and his insulted dignity, without stooping tothe arts of patience and dissimulation. Epagathus, the principalleader of the mutiny, was removed from Rome, by the honourableemployment of præfect of Egypt; from that high rank he wasgently degraded to the government of Crete; and when, at length,his popularity among the guards, was effaced by time and ab­sence, Alexander ventured to inflict the tardy, but deserved punish­ment of his crimes 7+. Under the reign of a just and virtuousprince, the tyranny of the army threatened with instant deathhis most faithful ministers, who were suspected of an intention to, correct their intolerable disorders. The historian Dion Cassius had
Ditigcr ot
Dion Caflius. commanded the Pannonian legions with the spirit of ancient dis­cipline.







OCR Output








274 THE DECLINE AND FALL


Rome with a deep sense of the insult as well as of the danger. Va­lerian flattered himself, that the vigilance of his lieutenants wouldsufficiently provide for the safety of the Rhine and of the Danube;hut he resolved, notwithstanding his advanced age, to march inperson to the defence of the Euphrates. During his progressthrough Asia Minor, the naval enterprises of the Goths were sus­pended, and the afflicted province enjoyed a transient and fallaciouscalm. He passed the Euphrates, encountered the Persian mo­narch near the walls of Edessa, was vanquished, and taken prisonerIs defeated by Sapor. The particulars of that great event, are darkly and im-sonertJsapor perfectly represented; yet by the glimmering light which is afforded^"i^fof3' us» we mav discover a long series of imprudence, of error, and ofdeserved misfortunes on the side of the Roman emperor. He re­posed an implicit confidence in Macrianus, his prætorian præfect"VThat worthless minister rendered his master formidable only to theoppressed subjects, and contemptible to the enemies of Rome ,}S.By his weak or wicked counsels, the imperial army was betrayedinto a situation, where valour and military skill were equally un­availing M7. The vigorous attempt of the Romans to cut their waythrough the Persian host, was repulsed with great flaughter 1,8 j andSapor, who encompassed the camp with superior numbers, patientlywaited till the increasing rage of famine and pestilence had ensuredhis victory. The licentious murmurs of the legions, soon accusedValerian as the cause of their calamities; their seditious clamoursdemanded an instant capitulation. An immense sum of gold wasoffered to purchase the permission of a disgraceful retreat. But thePersian, conscious of his superiority, refused the money with dis?dain; and detaining the deputies, advanced in order of battle tothe foot of the Roman rampart, and insisted on a personal confer­ence with the emperor. Valerian was reduced tP the necessity ofintrusting his life and dignity to the faith of an enemy. The in­terview ended as it was natural to expect. The emperor was made6 a prisoner,







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AND FALL


nobia and osthe city.


"enumerate her warlike preparations, of stones, of arrows, and of"every species of missile weapons. Every part of the walls is pro-*' vided with two or three balistte, and artificial fires are thrown'* from her military engines. The fear of punishment has armed"her with a desperate courage. Yet still I trust in the protecting"deities of Rome, who have hitherto been favourable to all my"undertakings70." Doubtful, however, of the protection of thegods, and of the event of the siege, Aurelian judged it more pru­dent to offer terms of an advantageous capitulation: to the queen,a splendid retreat; to the citizens, their ancient privileges. Hisproposals were obstinately rejected, and the refusal was accompaniedwith insult.
wko kc°mes -phe firmnefs of Zenobia was supported by the hope, that in a
master of Ze- rr y r »
very short time famine would compel the Roman army to repass thedesert; and by the reasonable expectation that the kings of the East,and particularly the Persian monarch, would arm in the defence oftheir most natural ally. But Fortune and the perseverance of Aure­lian overcame every obstacle. The death of Sapor, which hap­pened about this time7', distracted the counsels of Persia, and theinconsiderable succours that attempted to relieve Palmyra, were easilyintercepted either by the arms or the liberality of the emperor.From every part of Syria, a regular succession of convoys safelyarrived in the camp, which was increased by the return of Probuswith his victorious troops from the conquest of Egypt. It was thenthat Zenobia resolved to fly. She mounted the fleetest of her dro­medaries 7% and had already reached the banks of the Euphrates,about sixty miles from Palmyra, when she was overtaken by thepursuit of Aurelian's light horse, seized, and brought back a captiveA- D. 273. to the feet of the emperor. Her capital soon afterwards surrendered,and was treated with unexpected lenity. The arms, horses, andcamels, with an immense treasure of gold, silver, silk, and preciousstones, were all delivered to the conqueror, who having only a
garrison







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AND FALL


granted them a very liberal indulgence of craft a nd dissimulation.Yet the arts of Severus cannot be justified by the most ample pri.vileges of state reason. He promised only to betray, he flatteredonly to ruin, and however he might occasionally bind himself byoaths and treaties, his conscience, obsequious to his interest, alwaysreleased him from the inconvenient obligation 4!.
If these two competitors, reconciled by their common danger, hadadvanced upon him without delay, perhaps Severus would havefunk under their united effort. Had they even attacked him, atthe fame time, with separate views and separate armies, the contestmight have been long and doubtful. But they fell, singly and suc­cessively, an easy prey to the arts as well as arms of their subtleenemy, lulled into security by the moderation of his professions, andoverwhelmed by the rapidity of his action. He first marchedagainst Niger, whose reputation and power he the most dreaded:but he declined any hostile declarations, suppressed the name of hisantagonist, and only signified to the senate and people, his intentionof regulating the eastern provinces. In private he spoke of Niger,his old friend and intended successor 4+, with the most affectionateregard, and highly applauded his generous design of revenging themurder of Pertinax. To punish the vile usurper of the thronewas the duty of every Roman general. To persevere in arms, andto resist a lawful emperor, acknowledged by the senate, wouldalone render him criminal4J. The sons of Niger had fallen intohis hands among the children of the provincial governors, detainedat Rome as pledges for the loyalty of their parents +6. As longas the power of Niger inspired terror, or even respect, they wereeducated with the most tender 'care, with the children of Severushimself; but they were soon involved in their father's ruin, andremoved first by exile, and afterwards by death, from the eye ofpublic compassion 1,1.


Whilst







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


nity, which had never before been profaned by the hands of* a bar­barian Great numbers of the Goths, disgusted with the perilsand hardships of a tedious voyage, broke into Mæfia, with a designof forcing their way over the Danube to their settlements in theUkraine. The wild attempt would have proved inevitable destruc­tion, if the disagreement of the Roman generals had not spared thebarbarians at the expence of the common cause The small re­mainder of this destroying host, returned on board their vessels;and measuring back their way through the Hellespont and the Bos*-phorus, ravaged in their passage the shores of Troy, whose fame,immortalised by Homer, will probably survive the memoryof the Gothic conquests. As soon as they found themselvesin safety within the bason of the Euxine, they landed at Anehialusin Thrace, near the foot of Mount Hæmus; and, after all theirtoils, indulged themselves in the use of those pleasant and salutaryhot baths. What remained of the voyage, was a short and easy•navigation."6. Such was the various fates of this third and greatestof their naval enterprises. It may seem difficult to conceive,1 howthe original body of fifteen thousand warriors could sustain the lossesand divisions of so bold an adventure. But as their numbere weregradually wasted by the sword, by shipwrecks, and by the influeheeof a warm climate, they were perpetually renewed by troops ofbanditti and deserters, who flecked to the standard of plunder, andby a croud of fugitive staves, often of German or Sarmatian extrac­tion, who eagerly seized the glorious opportunity of freedom andrevenge. In these expeditions, the Gothic nation claimed a superiorshare of honour and danger; but the tribes that fought under theGothic banners, are sometimes distinguished and sometimes con­founded in the imperfect histories of that age; and as the barbarianfleets seemed to issue from the mouth of the Tanais, the vague butfamiliar appellation of Scythians was frequently bestowed on themixed multitude "7.
In







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AND FALL


garrison of a Roman cohort to enforce the execution of his ordersThe Nazarenes had only one way left to escape the common pro­scription, and the force of truth was on this occasion assisted by theinfluence of temporal advantages. They elected Marcus for theirbishop, a prelate of the race of the Gentiles, and most probably anative either of Italy or of some of the Latin provinces. At hispersuasion, the most considerable part of the congregation renouncedthe Mosaic law, in the practice of which they had persevered abovea century. By this sacrifice of their habits and prejudices, theypurchased a free admission into the colony of Hadrian, and morefirmly cemented their union with the Catholic church *\ThaEhic- When the name and honours of the church of Jerusalem hada' es' • been restored to Mount Sion, the crimes of heresy and schism wereimputed to the obscure remnant of the Nazarenes, which refusedto accompany their Latin bishop. They still preserved their formerhabitation of Pella, spread themselves into the villages adjacent toDamascus, and formed an inconsiderable church in the city of Boerea,or, as it is now called, Aleppo in Syria The name of Nazareneswas deemed too honourable for those Christian Jews, and they soonreceived from the supposed poverty of their understanding, as wellas of their condition, the contemptuous epithet of Ebionites ". Ina few years after the return of the church of Jerusalem, it becamea matter of doubl and controversy, whether a man who sincerelyacknowledged Jesus as the Messiah, but who still continued to ob­serve the law of Moses, could possibly hope for salvation. Thehumane temper of Justin Martyr, inclined him to answer this ques­tion in the affirmative; and though he expressed himself with themost guarded diffidence, he ventured to determine in favour of suchan imperfect Christian, if he were content to practise the Mosaicceremonies, without pretending to assert their general use- or neces­sity. But when Justin was pressed to declare the sentiment of thechurch, he confessed that there were very many among the ortho­


dox







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 35^


tribunal, and raising his eyes towards the Sun, made a solemn pro­fession of his own innocence, in the presence of that all-seeingDeity ,o6. Then, assuming the tone of a sovereign and a judge, hecommanded that Aper should be brought in chains to the foot of thetribunal. "This .man," said he, "is the murderer of Numerian;"and, without giving him time to enter on a dangerous justification,drew his sword, and buried it in the breast of the unfortunate præfect.A charge supported by such decisive proof, was admitted withoutcontradiction, and the legions, with repeated acclamations, acknow­ledged the justice and authority of the emperor Diocletian '°7.
Before we enter upon the memorable reign of that prince, it will JjJ^'i8*be proper to punish and dismiss the unworthy brother of Numerian. Carinus..Carinus possessed arms and treasures sufficient to support his legaltitle to the empire. But his personal vices overbalanced everyadvantage of birth and situation. The most faithful servants of thefather despised the incapacity, and dreaded the cruel arrogance, of theion. The hearts of the people were engaged in favour 9s his rivaj,and /even the senate was inclined to prefer an usurper to a tyrant.The arts of Diocletian .inflamed the general .discontent; and thewinter was employed in secret intrigues, and open preparations-for acivil war, In the spring, the forces of the EajR: ^and of the \^ejr. *• l8S*encountered each other in the plains of Margus, a small city ofMæsia, in the neighbourhood of the Danube ,o8. , The .troops, solately returned from the Persian war, had acquired their glory atthe expence of health and numbers, nor were they in a condition tocontend with the unexhausted strength of ,the legions of Europe,Their ranks were broken, and, for a moment, .Diocletian.despairedof the purple and of life. But the advantage which Carinushad obtained by the valour of his soldiers, he quickly lost iby theinfidelity of his officers. A Tribune, whose wife he ,had seduced,seized the opportunity of revenge, and by a single blow extin­guished civil discord in -the blood of the adulterer ,u9.
Z z 2 CHAP.







OCR Output








*94 THE DECLINE AND FALL


The thirdGordian re­mains soleemperor.


Innocenceand virtues ofGordian.


A. D. *4*>.Administra-i of Misi-


their bodies, mangled with a thousand wounds, were left exposed tothe insults or to the pity of the populace
In the space of a few months, six princes had been cut off bythe sword. Gordian, who had already received the title of Cæsar,was the only person that occurred to the soldiers as proper to sillthe vacant throne **. They carried him to the camp, and unani­mously saluted him Augustus and emperor. His name* was dear tothe senate and people; his tender age promised a long impunity ofmilitary licence; and the submission of Rome and the provinces tothe choice of the Prætorian guards,. saved the republic, at the ex-pence indeed of its freedom and dignity, from the horrors of a newcivil war in the heart of the capital +s.
As the third Gordian was only nineteen years of age at the timeof his death, the history of his life, were it known to us withgreater accuracy than it really is, would contain little more than theaccount of his education, and the conduct of the ministers, who byturns abused or guided the simplicity of his unexperienced youth.Immediately after his accession, he fell into the hands of his mo­ther's eunuchs, that pernicious vermin of the East, who, since thedays of Elagabalus, had infected the Roman palace. By the artfulconspiracy of these wretches, an impenetrable veil was drawn be­tween an innocent prince and his oppressed subjects, the virtuousdisposition of Gordian was deceived* and the honours of the empiresold without his knowledge, though in a very public manner, tothe most worthless of mankind. We are ignorant by what fortu­nate accident the emperor escaped from this ignominious slavery,and devolved his confidence on a minister, whose wise councils hadno object except the glory of his sovereign, and the happiness ofthe people. It should seem that love and learning introduced Misi-theus to the favour of Gordian. The young prince married thedaughter of his master of rhetoric, and promoted his father-in-law







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. S>5


*' and they lose sight of Heaven while they are employed in measur-"ing the earth. Euclid is perpetually in their hands. Aristotle"and Theophrastus are the objects cf their admiration; and they** express an uncommon reverence for the works of Galen. Their"errors are derived from the abuse of the arts and sciences of*' the infidels, and they corrupt the simplicity of the gospel by the*' refinements of human reason '* V
Nor can it be affirmed with truth, that the advantages of birth and wi:h re8ar<1
... to rank* ml
fortune were always separated from the profession of Christianity, soitune.Several Roman citizens were brought before the tribunal of Pliny,and he soon discovered, that a great number of persons of every orderof men in Bithynia had deserted the religion of their ancestorsHis unsuspected testimony may, in this instance, obtain more creditthan the bold challenge of Tertullian, when he addresses him­self to the fears as well as to the humanity of the proconsul ofAfrica, by assuring him, that if he persists in his cruel intentions,he must decimate Carthage, and that he will find among the guiltymany persons of his own rank, senators and matrons of noblestextraction, and the friends or relations, of his most intimatefriends ,8\ It appears, however, that about forty years afterwardsthe emperor Valerian was persuaded of the truth of this assertion,since in one of his, rescripts he evidently supposes, that senators,Roman knights, and ladies of quality, were engaged in the Chris­tian sect ,S\ The church still continued to increase its outwardsplendor as it lost its inrernal purity; and, in the reign of Diocletian,the palace, the courts of justice, and even the army, concealeda multitude of Christians, who endeavoured to reconcile the interestsof the present, with those of a future, life.
And yet these exceptions are either too few in number, or too Christianityrecent in time, entirely to remove the imputation of ignorance and Xy receivedobscurity which has been so arrogantly cast on the first proselytes of ^h^°eTChristianity. Instead of employing in our defence the fictions
U u u 2 of







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AND FALL


caufes°bable Although the progress of civilization has undoubtedly contributedto asswage the fiercer passions of human nature, it seems to havebeen less favourable to the virtue of chastity, whose most dangerousenemy is the softness of the mind. The refinements of life cor­rupt while they polish the intercourse of the sexes. The gross ap­petite of love becomes most dangerous when it is elevated, orrather, indeed, disguised by sentimental passion. The elegance ofdress, of motion, and of manners, give a lustre to beauty, and in­flame the senses through the imagination. Luxurious entertain­ments, midnight dances, and licentious spectacles, present at oncetemptation and opportunity to female frailty From such dangers,the unpolissied wives of the barbarians were secured, by poverty,solitude, and the painful cares of a domestic life. The German huts,open, on every side, to the eye of indiscretion or jealousy, were abetter safe-guard of conjugal fidelity, than the walls, the bolts, andthe eunuchs of a Persian haram. To this reason, another may beadded of a more honourable nature. The Germans treated theirwomen with esteem and confidence, consulted them on every occa­sion of importance, and fondly believed, that in their breasts re­sided a sanctity and wisdom, more than human. Some of theseinterpreters of fate, such as Velleda, in the Batavian war, governedin the name of the deity, the fiercest nations of Germany s8. Therest of the sex, without being adored as goddesses, were respected asthe free and equal companions of soldiers; associated even by themarriage ceremony to a life of toil, of danger, and of glory 59. Intheir great invasions, the camps of the barbarians were filled witha multitude of women, who remained firm and undaunted amidstthe sound of arms, the various forms of destruction, and the ho­nourable wounds of their sons and husbands 6o. Fainting armies ofGermans have more than once been driven back upon the enemy,by the generous despair of the women, who dreaded death muchless than servitude. If the day was irrecoverably lost, they well
knew







OCR Output








l3o THEDECLINEANDFALL


to preserve the fame of his victory, and several edifices raisedat the expence of Maxentius, were dedicated to the honour ofhis successful rival. The triumphal arch of Constantine still re­mains a melancholy proof of the decline of the arts, and a singulartestimony of the meanest vanity. As it was not possible to find in thecapital of the empire, a sculptor who was capable of adorning thatpublic monument; the arch of Trajan, without any respect eitherfor his memory or for the rules of propriety, was stripped of itsmost elegant figures. The difference of times and persons, ofactions and characters, was totally disregarded. The Parthiancaptives appear prostrate at the feet of a prince who never hadthe smallest connexion with that people; and curious antiquarianscan still discover the head of Trajan on the trophies of Constantine.The new ornaments which it was necessary to introduce betweenthe vacancies of ancient sculpture, are executed in the rudest andmost unskilful manner 7+.and conduct The final abolition of the Prætorian guards was a measure ofprudence as well as of revenge. Those haughty troops, whosenumbers and privileges had been restored, and even augmented byMaxentius were for ever suppressed by Constantine. Their fortifiedcamp was destroyed, and the few Prætorians who had escaped thefury of the sword, were dispersed among the legions, and banishedto the frontiers of the empire, where they might be serviceablewithout again becoming dangerous 7S. By suppressing the troopswhich were usually stationed in Rome, Constantine gave the fatalblow to the dignity of the senate and people, and the disarmedcapital was exposed without protection to the insults or neglect ofits distant master. We may observe, that in this last effort topreserve their expiring freedom, the Romans, from the appre­hension of a tribute, had raised Maxentius to the throne. He ex­acted that tribute from the senate, under the name of a free gift.They implored the assistance of Constantine. He vanquished the
tyrant,







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. Z9S


"disgraces the most virtuous and capable among his subjects.«' By such infamous arts, added Diocletian, the best and wisest** princes are fold to the venal corruption of their courtiers '".**A just estimate of greatness, and the assurance of immortal fame,improve our relish for the pleasures of retirement; but the Romanemperor had filled too important a character in the world, to enjoywithout allay the comforts and security of a private condition.It was impossible that he could remain ignorant of the troubleswhich afflicted the empire after his abdication. It was impossiblethat he could be indifferent to their consequences. Fear, sorrow, anddiscontent, sometimes pursued him into the solitude of Salona.His tenderness, or at least his pride, was deeply wounded by themisfortunes of his wife and daughter ; and the last moments ofDiocletian were embittered by some affronts, which Licinius andConstantine might have spared the father of so many emperors, andthe first author of their own fortune. A report, though of a very and death,doubtful nature, has reached our times, that he prudently withdrew '"3 3*himself from their power by a voluntary death "*.
Before we dismiss the consideration of the life and character of Description ofDiocletian, we may, for a moment, direct our view to the place of the adjacenthis retirement. Salona, a principal city of his native province of coantrjs*Dalmatia, was near two hundred Roman miles (according to themeasurement of the public highways) from Aquileia and the con­fines of Italy, and about two hundred and seventy from Sirmium,the usual residence of the emperors, whenever they visited theIUyrian frontier ,,s. A miserable village still preserves the name ofSalona, but so late as the sixteenth century, the remains of a theatre,and a confused prospect of broken arches and marble columns, con­tinued to attest its ancient splendour I""5. About six or seven milesfrom the city, Diocletian constructed a magnificent palace, andwe may infer from the greatness of the work, how long he had'meditated his design of abdicating the empire. The choice of a
E e e 2 spot







OCR Output








394 THE DECLINE AND FALL


possible that such an impatient spirit could find any lasting tran-»quillity.
Retirement Diocletian, who* from a servile origin, had' raised himself to the
os Diocletian «• » « - in <•«•<■•«•• *
at Salona. throne, pasted th.e rune last years of his Use in a private condition,
Reason had dictated, and content seems to have accompanied hisretreat, in which he enjoyed for a long time the respect of thoseprinces to whom he had resigned the possession of the worklj'".It is seldom that minds, long exercised in business, have formedany habits of conversing with themselves, and in the loss of powerthey principally regret the want of occupation. The amusements*of letters and, of devotion, which afford so many resources Lnsolitude, were incapable of fixing the attention of Diocletian;but he had preserved* or at least he soon recovered a taste for themost innocent as. well as natural pleasures, and his leisure hourswe*e sufficiently employed in building, planting, and gardening.His phaoso. His. answer to- Maximian is deservedly celebrated. He was solicitedby that restless old man to reassume the reins of government andthe imperial purple. He rejected- the temptation with' a smile ofpity, calmly observing, that if he could shew Maximian the cab*bages which he had planted with, his own hands at Salona, heshould no longer be urged to relinquish, the enjoyment of happinessfor the pursuit of power "\. In his conversations with his friends,he frequently acknowledged, that of all arts, the most difficult wasthe ar t of reigning; and he expressed himself on that favourite topicwith a degree of warmth which could be the result only of ex­perience. ,c How often, was he accustomed to fay, is it the interestM of four or five ministers to combine together to deceive their"sovereign. Secluded from mankind by his exalted dignity, the"truth is concealed from his knowledge; he can fee only with"their eyes, he hears nothing but their misrepresentations. He"confers the most important offices upon vice and weakness, and
"disgraces


i







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


other. The cruel fate of Caracalla, though her good sense must Jj^JkgJjrhave lone taught her to expect: it, awakened the feelings of a mother simusand
. . ... A*on:nus.
and of an empress. Notwithstanding the respectful civility ex­pressed by the usurper towards the widow of Severus, flie descendedwith a painful struggle into the condition of a subject, and soonwithdrew herself by a voluntary death from the anxious and humi­liating dependence 4\ Julia Mæsa, her sister, was ordered to leavethe court and Antioch. She retired to Emesa with an immense for­tune, the fruit of twenty years favour, accompanied by her twodaughters, Soæmias and Mamæa, each of whom was a widow, andeach had an only son. Bassianus, for that was the name of the sonof Soæmias, was consecrated to the honourable ministry of highpriest of the Sun; and this holy vocation, embraced either fromprudence or superstition, contributed to raise the Syrian youth tothe empire of Rome. A numerous body of troops was stationed atEmesa; and as the severe discipline of Macrinus had constrainedthem to pass the winter encamped, they were eager to reyenge thecruelty of such unaccustomed hardships* The soldiers, who resortedin crowds to the temple of the Sun, beheld with veneration anddelight the elegant dress and figure of the young pontiff: they re­cognised, or they thought that they recognised, the features of Cara­calla, whose memory they,now adored^ The artful Mæsa saw andcherished their rising partiality, and readily sacrificing her daugh­ter's reputation to the fortune of her grandson, flie insinuated thatBassianus was the natural son of their murdered sovereign. Thesums distributed by her emissaries with a lavish hand, silenced everyobjection, and the profusion sufficiently- proved the affinity, or atleast the resemblance, of Bassianus with, the great original.. Theyoung Antoninus (for he assumed and polluted that respectablename) was declares emperor by the troops of Emesa, asserted his a. D. 218.hereditary right, and called aloud on the armies to follow the stand- May l6.Vol. I. 'U '' '' ard







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


CHAP. XI.
Reign of Claudius,—Defeat of the Goths.—Victoriestri­umphs and deaths of Aurelian.
UNDER the deplorable reigns of Valerian and Gallienus, theempire was oppressed and almost destroyed by the soldiers,the tyrants, and the barbarians. It was saved by a series of greatprinces, who derived their obscure origin from the martial provincesof Ulyricum. "Within a period of about thirty years, Claudius,Aurelian, Probus, Diocletian and his colleagues, triumphed over theforeign and domestic enemies of the state, re-established with themilitary discipline, the strength of the frontiers, and deserved theglorious title of Restorers of the Roman world.
The removal of an effeminate tyrant made way for a succession of Aareolm in.heroes. The indignation of the people, imputed all their calamities defeated, andto Gallienus, and the far greater part were, indeed, the consequence Milan!*1 Wof his dissolute manners and careless administration. He wa6 evendestitute of a fense of honour, which so frequently supplies the ab­sence of public virtue; and as long as he was permitted to enjoy thepossession of Italy, a victory of the barbarians, the loss of a pro­vince, or the rebellion of a general, seldom disturbed the tranquilcourse of his pleasures. At length, a considerable army, stationed A.D. 268..on the Upper Danube, invested with the imperial purple their leaderAureolus; who disdaining a confined and barren reign over themountains of Rhœtia, passed the Alps, occupied Milan, threatenedRome, and challenged Gallienus to dispute in the field the sove­reignty of Italy. The emperor provoked by the insult, and alarmedby the instant danger, suddenly exerted that latent vigour, whichsometimes broke through the indolence of his temper. Forcing
himself







OCR Output








3o£ THE DECLINE AND FALL


gifts of providence. The faint, in the Magian religion, h obligedto beget children, to plant useful trees, to destroy noxious animals,to convey water to the dry lands of Persia, and to work out hissalvation by pursuing all the labours of agrrcultuTe. We may quotefrom the Zendavesta a wife and benevolent maxim, which com­pensates for many an absurdity. "He who sows the ground with"care and diligence, acquires a greater stock of religious merit, thanM he- could gain by the repetition of ten thousand prayers 'VIn the spring of every year a festival was celebrated, destined torepresent the primitive equality, and the present connexion, of man­kind. The stately kings of Persia, exchanging their vain pompfor more genuine greatness, freely mingled with the humblest butmost useful of their subjects. On that day the husbandmen wereadmitted, without distinction, to the table of the king and hissatraps. The monarch accepted their petitions, inquired into theirgrievances, and conversed with them on the most equal terms."From your labours, was he accustomed to fay, and to fay with"truth, if not with sincerity, from your labours we .receive our■** subsistence; you derive your tranquillity from our vigilance;
since, therefore, we are mutually necessary to each other, let us"live together like brothers in concord and love 'V Such a fes-tival must indeed have degenerated, in a wealthy and despoticempire, into a theatrical representation ; but it was at least a co­medy well worthy of a royal audience, and which might sometimesimprint a salutary lesson on the mind of a young prince.Power of the Had Zoroaster, in all his institutions, invariably supported this ex-»alted character, his name would deserve a place with those of Numaand Confucius, and his system would be justly entitled to all theapplause, which it has pleased some of our Divines, and even someof our philosophers, to bestow on it. But in that motley composi­tion, dictated by reason and passion, by enthusiasm and by selfishmotives, some useful and sublime truths were disgraced by a mix­ture


r







OCR Output








OFTHEROMANEMPIRE. 523


gratifications. They embraced every opportunity of over-reachingthe idolaters in trade; and they pronounced secret and ambiguousimprecations against the haughty kingdom of Edom \
Since the Jews, who rejected with abhorrence the deities adored The Jewsby their sovereign and by their fellow-subjects, enjoyed however the which fol-free exercise of their unsocial religion; there must have existed some chHst!th


ians, a


other cause, which exposed the disciples of Christ to those severities {^J^erelfrom which the posterity of Abraham was exempt. The difference ''g"00 of theirbetween them is simple and obvious; but according to the senti­ments of antiquity, it was of the highest importance. The Jewswere a nation; the Christians were a seSi: and if it was natural forevery community to respect the sacred institutions of their neigh­bours, it was incumbent on them to persevere in those of their an­cestors. The voice of oracles, the precepts of philosophers, and theauthority of the laws, unanimously enforced this national obligation.By their lofty claim of superior sanctity, the Jews might provokethe Polytheists to consider them as an odious and impure race. Bydisdaining the intercourse of other nations they might deserve theircontempt. The laws of Moses might be for the most part frivolousor absurd; yet since they had been received during many ages by alarge society, his followers were justified by the example of mankind;and it was universally acknowledged, that they had a right to prac­tise what it would have been criminal in them to neglect. Butthis principle which protected the Jewish synagogue, afforded notany favour or security to the primitive church. By embracing thefaith of the Gospel, the Christians incurred the supposed guilt of anunnatural and unpardonable offence. They dissolved the sacred tiesof custom and education, violated the religious institutions of theircountry, and presumptuoufly despised whatever their fathers hadbelieved as true, or had reverenced as sacred. Nor was this apostacy(if we may use the expression) merely of a partial or local kind jsince the pious deserter who withdrew himself from the temples ofEgypt or Syria, would equally disdain to seek an asylum in those
X x x 2 of







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


•their complaints before the emperor. These military petitioners,by their own determined behaviour, by inflaming the divisions ofthe guards, by exaggerating the strength of the British army, andby alarming the fears of Commodus, exacted and obtained the mi­nister's death, as the only redress of their grievances '7. Thispresumption of a distant army, and their discovery of the weaknessof government, was a sure presage of the most dreadful convul­sions.
The negligence of the public administration was betrayed soonafterwards, by a new disorder which arose from the smallest begin­nings. A spirit of desertion began to prevail among the troops; andthe deserters, instead of seeking their safety in flight or conceal­ment, infested the highways. Maternus, a private soldier, of adaring boldness above his station, collected these bands of robbersinto a little army, set open the prisons, invited the slaves to asserttheir freedom, and plundered with impunity the rich and defence­less cities of Gaul and Spain. The governors of the provinces, whohad long been the spectators, and perhaps the partners, of his de­predations, were, at length, roused from their supine indolence bythe threatening commands of the emperor. Maternus found thathe was encompassed, and foresaw that he must be overpowered. Agreat effort of despair was his last resource. He ordered his fol­lowers to disperse, to pass the Alps in small parties and variousdisguises, and to assemble at Rome, during the licentious tumult ofthe festival of Cybele ,8. To murder Commodus, and to ascendthe vacant throne, was the ambition of no vulgar robber. Hismeasures were so ably concerted, that his concealed troops alreadyfilled the streets of Rome. The envy of an accomplice discovered-and ruined this singular enterprise, in the moment it was ripe for


Revolt ofMiternus.


execution '9.


Suspicious princes often promote the last of mankind from a vain TV ministerpersuasion, that those who have no dependence, except on their
N a favou^







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AND FALL


tonally separated to act in the line, and to compose a part of the■wings of the army s°. The cavalry of the emperors was no longercomposed, like that of the ancient republic, of the noblest youthsof Rome and Italy, who, by performing their military service onhorseback, prepared themselves for the offices of senator and consul;and solicited, by deeds of valour, the future suffrages of theircountrymen 51. Since the alteration of manners and government,•the most wealthy of the equestrian order were engaged in the admi­nistration of justice, and of the revenue51; and whenever theyembraced the profession of arms, they were immediately intrustedwith a troop of horse, or a cohort of footTrajan and Hadrianformed their cavalry from the same provinces, and the fame class oftheir subjects, which recruited the ranks of the legion. The horseswere bred, for the most part, in Spain or Cappadocia. The Romantroopers despised the complete armour with which the cavalry of theEast was encumbered. Their more useful arms consisted in ahelmet, an oblong shield, light boots, and a coat of mail: A ja­velin, and a long broad sword, were their principal weapons ofoffence. The use of lances and of iron maces they seem to have bor­rowed.from the barbarians I+.
The safety and honour of the empire was principally intrusted tothe legions, but the policy of Rome condescended to adopt everyuseful instrument of war. Considerable levies were regularly made•among the provincials, who had not yet deserved the honourabledistinction of Romans. Many dependent princes and communities,dispersed round the frontiers, were permitted, for a while, to holdtheir freedom and security by the tenure of military service 5S.Even select troops of hostile barbarians were frequently compelledor persuaded to consume their dangerous valour in remote climates,and for the benefit of the state 5°. All these were included underthe general name of auxiliaries; and however they might vary ac­cording to the difference of times and circumstances, their numbers
were







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 279


in every province of the empire, against the son of Valerian. Itwas probably some ingenious fancy, of comparing the thirtytyrants of Rome with the thirty tyrants of Athens, that induced thewriters of the Augustan history, to select that celebrated numberwhich has been gradually received into a popular appellation'56.But in every light the parallel is idle and defective. What resem­blance can we discover between a council of thirty persons, theunited oppressors of a single city, and an uncertain list of independ­ent rivals, who rose and fell in irregular succession, through the ex­tent of a vast empire? Nor can the number of thirty be completedunless we include in the account the women and children, who werehonoured with the imperial title. The reign of Gallienus, distracted Their real
"... , "number was
as it was, produced only nineteen pretenders to the throne; Cy" 00 m.<ve than-'riades, Macrianus, Balista, Odenathus, and Zenobia in the east; nmeIeen*in Gaul, and the western provinces, Postumus, Lollianus, Victo-rinus and his mother Victoria, Marius, and Tetricus. In Illyricumand the confines of the Danube, Ingenuus, Regillianus and Au-reolus; in Pontus ,S7, Saturninus; in Isauria, Trebellianus; Pisoin Thessaly; Valens in Achaia; Æmilianus in Egypt; and Celsusin Africa. To illustrate the obscure monuments of the life anddeath of each individual, would prove a laborious task, alike barrenof instruction and of amusement. We may content ourselves withinvestigating some general characters, that most strongly mark thecondition of the times, and the manners of the men, their preten­sions, their motives, their fate, and the destructive consequences oftheir usurpation ,j8.
It is sufficiently known, that the odious appellation of Tyrant was Characterandoften employed by the ancients to express the illegal seizure of tyrant".''supreme power, without any reference to the abuse of it. Severalof the pretenders, who raised the standard of rebellion against theemperor Gallienus, were shining models of virtue, and almost allpossessed a considerable share of vigour and ability. Their merjt
had







OCR Output








468 THE DECLINE AND FALL


that their conduct in this life was never regulated by any seriousconviction of the rewards or punishments of a future state. At thebar and in the senate of Rome the ablest orators were not appre­hensive of giving offence to their hearers, by exposing that doc­trine as an idle and extravagant opinion, which was rejected withcontempt by every man of a liberal education and understand­ing 51.
among the Since therefore the most sublime efforts of philosophy can extend
Pagans of
Greece and no farther than feebly to point out the desire, the hope, or, atmost, the probability, of a future state, there is nothing, except adivine revelation, that can ascertain the existence, and describethe condition, of the invisible country which is destined to receivethe fouls of men after their separation from the body. But wemay perceive several defects inherent to the popular religions ofGreece and Rome, which rendered them very unequal to so arduous-a task. i. The general system of their mythology was unsupportedby any solid proofs; and the wisest among the Pagans had alreadydisclaimed its usurped authority, a. The description of the infer­nal regions had been abandoned to the fancy of painters andof poets, who peopled them with so many phantoms and monsters>who dispensed their rewards and punishments with so little equity,,that a solemn truth, the most congenial to the human heart, was-oppressed and disgraced by the absurd mixture of the wildestfictions 3. The doctrine of a future state was scarcely con­sidered among the devout polytheists of Greece and Rome as afundamental article of faith. The providence of the gods, as itrelated to public communities rather than to private individuals,.was principally displayed on the visible theatre of the present world.The private petitions which were offered on the altars of Jupiteror Apollo, expressed the anxiety of their worshippers for temporalhappiness, and their ignorance or indifference concerning a futurelife ,+. The important truth of the immortality of the foul was
inculcated







OCR Output








138 THE DECLINE AND FALL


Pertinax,son to the prince of that name, lost his life by an unseason­able witticism 17. It was a sufficient crime of Thrasea Priscus, tobe descended from a family in which the love of liberty seemed anhereditary quality 4\ The particular causes of calumny and suspi­cion were at length exhausted; and when a senator was accused ofbeing a secret enemy to the government, the emperor was satisfiedwith the general proof that he was a man of property and virtue.From this well-grounded principle, he frequently drew the mostbloody inferences.
Death of The execution of so many innocent citizens was bewailed by thePap>man. secret tears Qf their friends and families. The death of Papinian,the Prætorian praefect, was lamented as a public calamity. Duringthe last seven years of Severus, he had exercised the most importantoffice of the state, and by his salutary influence, guided the empe­ror's steps in the paths of justice and moderation. In full assuranceof his virtue and abilities, Severus, on his death-bed, had conjured himto watch over the prosperity and union of the Imperial family 19. Thehonest labours of Papinian, served only to inflame the hatred whichCaracalla had already conceived against his father's minister. Afterthe murder of Geta, the praefect was commanded to exert the powersof his skill and eloquence in a studied apology for that atrociousdeed. The philosophic Seneca had condescended to compose a simi­lar epistle to the senate, in the name of the son and assassin of Agrip­pina 30; " That it was easier to commit than to justify a parricide,**was the glorious reply of Papinian Jl, who did not hesitate betweenthe loss of life and that of honour. Such intrepid virtue, whichhad escaped pure and unsullied from the intrigues of courts, thehabits of business, and the arts of his profession, reflects more lustreon the memory of Papinian, than all his great employments, hisnumerous writings, and the superior reputation as a lawyer, whichhe preserved through every age of the Roman jurisprudence
k







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


sure of the most abject and dangerous superstition. The Magi, orsacerdotal order, were extremely numerous, since, as we have alreadyseen, fourscore thou&nd of them attended a general council. Theirforces were multiplied by discipline. A regular hierarchy wasdiffused through all the provinces of Persia; and the Archimagus,who resided at Balch, was respected as the visible head of thechurch, and the lawful successor of Zoroaster '7. The property ofthe Magi was very considerable. Besides the lese invidious posses­sion of a large tract of the most fertile lands of Media ,s, they levieda general tax on the fortunes and the industry of the Persians"Though your good works," fays the interested prophet, "exceed"in number the leaves of the trees, the drops of rain, the stars in** the heaven, or the sands on the sea shore, they will all be un-** profitable to you, unless they are accepted by the deftour, or priest."To obtain the acceptation of this guide to salvation, you must"faithfully pay him tythes of all you possess, of your goods, of** your lands, and of your money. If the destour be satisfied, your.'* foul will escape hell tortures; you will secure praise in this world,,41 and happiness in the next. For the destours are the teachers of« religion ; they know all things, and they deliver all men *°."
These convenient maxims of reverence and implicit faith weredoubtless imprinted with care on the tender minds of youth; sincethe Magi were the masters of education in Persia, and to their hands-the children even of the royal family were intrusted The Persian'priests, who were of a speculative genius, preserved and investigated ithe secrets of Oriental philosophy; and acquired, either by supe­rior knowledge or superior art, the Teputation of being well versed iin feme occult sciences, which have derived their appellation fromthe Magi**. Those of more active dispositions, mingled with theworld in courts and cities; and it is observed, that the administra­tion of Artaxerxes was in a great measure directed by the counsels
of.







OCR Output








376 THE DECLINE AND FALL


neither hope for victory if they preserved their ranks, nor break theirranks without exposing themselves to the most imminent danger. Inthis situation they were gradually encompassed by the superior num­bers, harassed by the rapid evolutions, and destroyed by the arrows ofthe barbarian cavalry. The king of Armenia had signalized his valourin the battle, and acquired personal glory by the public misfortune.He was pursued as far as the Euphrates; his horse was wounded, andit appeared impossible for him to escape the victorious enemy. In thisextremity Tiridates embraced the only refuge which he saw beforehim: he dismounted and plunged into the stream. His armour washeavy, the river very deep, and in those parts at least half a mile inbreadth66; yet such was his strength and dexterity, that he reachedin safety the opposite bank 6\ With regard to the Roman gene­ral, we are ignorant of the circumstances of his escape; but whenHis reception he returned to Antioch, Diocletian received him, not with the ten-byDwcieuan. ^ernef8 cf a frien(j amj colleague, but with the indignation of an
offended sovereign. The haughtiest of men, clothed in his purple,but humbled by the fense of his fault and misfortune, was obligedto follow the emperor's chariot above a mile on foot, and to exhibit,before the whole court, the spectacle of his disgrace ".Second cam- As soon as Diocletian had indulged his private resentment, andieriu".osGa* asserted the majesty of supreme power, he yielded to the submissiveA. D. 297; entreaties of the Cæsar, and permitted him to retrieve his own honouras well as that of the Roman arms. In the room of the unwarliketroops of Asia, which had most probably served in the first expe­dition, a second army was drawn from the veterans and new leviesof the Illyrian frontier, and a considerable body of Gothic auxili­aries were taken into the imperial pay*9. At the head of a chosenarmy of twenty-five thousand men, Galerius again passed the Eu­phrates; but, instead of exposing his legions in the open plains ofMesopotamia, he advanced through the mountains of Armenia,where he found the inhabitants devoted to his cause, and the country
as







OCR Output








82 THE DECLINE AND FALL


through fix mouths received into the Euxine, which appears scarcelyequal to such an accession of waters 1%. The provinces of theDanube soon acquired the general appellation of Illyricum, or theUlyrian frontier79, and were esteemed the most warlike of theempire; but they deserve to be more particularly considered underthe names of Rhætia, Noricum, Pannonia, Dalmatia, Dacia, Mæsia,Thrace, Macedonia, and Greece.Rhætia. The province of Rhætia, which soon extinguished the name of
the Vindelicians, extended from the summit of the Alps to thebanks of the Danube; from its source, as far as its conflux withthe Inn. The greatest part of the flat country is subject to theelector of Bavaria; the city of Augfburgh is protected by the con­stitution of the German empire j the Grisons are safe in theirmountains, and the country of Tirol is ranked among the numerousprovinces of the house of Austria.Noricum and The wide extent of territory, which is included between the InnPannonw. ^ Danube, and the Save; Austria, Styria, Carinthia, Carniola,the Lower Hungary and Sclavonia, was known to the ancients, un­der the names of Noricum and Pannonia. In their original stateof independence, their fierce inhabitants were intimately connected.Under the Roman government they were frequently united, and theystill remain the patrimony of a single family. They now containthe residence of a German prince, who styles himself Emperor ofthe Romans, and form the center, as well as strength, of the Austrianpower. It may not be improper to observe, that if we exceptBohemia, Moravia, the northern slcirts of Austria, and a part ofHungary, between the Teyss and the Danube, all the other domi­nions of the house of Austria were situate within the limits of theRoman empire.
Dalmatia. Dalmatia, to which the name of Illyricum more properly belonged,was a long, but narrow tract, between the Save and the Adriatic.The best part of the sea-coast, which still retains its ancient ap­pellation,







OCR Output








Ixxxiv NOTES ON THE SIXTEENTH CHAPTER.


[i2oJ Lactantius, de Mortibus Persecutorum, c.3, 4. After celebrating the felicity and increase ofthe church, under a long succession of good princes:he adds, u Extitit post annos plurimos, execrabileanimal, Decius, qui vexaret Ecclesiam."
[121] Eufeb. 1. vi. c. 39. Cyprian Epistol. 55.The fee of Rome remained vacant from the martyr­dom of Fabianus, to the zoth of January, A. D.250, till the election of Cornelius, the 4th of June,A. D. 251. Deciu3 had probably left Rome, sincehe was killed before the end of that year.
[122] Euseb. 1. vii. c. rc. Mostieim (p, 548.)has very clearly (hewn, that the Præfect Macrianus,and the Egyptian Magui, are one and the fameperson.
[123] Eusebius (1. vii. c. 13.) gives us a Greekversion of this Latin edict, which seems to havebeen very concise. By another edict, he directed,that the Cacmtttria should be restored to the Chris­tians.
[124] Euseb. 1. vii. c. 30. Lactantius de M. P.«. 6. Hieronym. in Chron. p. 177. Orosius, 1. vii.c. 23. Their language is in general so ambiguousand incorrect, that we are at a loss to determinehow far Aurelian had carried his intentions beforehe was assassinated. Most of the moderns (exceptDodwell, Dissertat. Cyprian, xi. 64.) have seizedthe occasion of gaining a few extraordinary martyrs.
[125] Paul was better pleased with the title ofDu-tmariui, than with that of bishop. The Ducenariuswas an imperial procurator, so called from his salaryof two hundred Sejitrtia, or 1,600 1. a year. (SeeSalmasius ad Hist. August, p. 124.) Some criticssuppose, that the bilhop of Antioch had actuallyobtained such an office from Zcnobia, while othersconsider it only as a figurative expression of hispomp and insolence.
[126] Simony was not unknown in those times;and the clergy sometimes bought what they intend-ed to sell. It appears that the bishopric os Car­thage was purchased by a wealthy matron, namedLucilla, for her servant Majorinus. The price was400 Folles. (Monument. Antiq. ad calcem Optati,oj: p. 263.) Every Folliscontained iz; pieces of silver,and the whjole sum may be computed at about2,400 1.


[127] If we are desirous of extenuating the vicesof Paul, we mull suspect the assembled bishops of theEast of publilhing the most malicious calumnies in acircular epistle, addressed to all the churches of theempire (ap. Euseb. 1. vii. c. 30).
[128] His heresy (like those of Noetus and Sa-bcllius, in the fame century) tended to confound themysterious distinction of the divine persons. SeeMostieim, p. 702, &c.
[129] Euseb. Hist. Ecclesiast. 1. vii. c. 30. Weare entirely indebted to him for the curious story ofPaul of Samofota.
[i3oJ The Æra of Martyrs, which is still in useamong the Copts and the Abyssinians, must be rec­koned from the 29th of August, A. D- 2-4; as thebeginning of the Egyptian year was nineteen daysearlier than the real accession of Diocletian. SeeDissertation preliminaire a l'Art de verifier lesDates*.
[131] The expression of Lactantius (de M. P.c. 15.) "sacrificio pollui coegit," implies theirantecedent conversion to the faith; but does not seento justify the assertion of Mostieim (p, 91-'.), thatthey had been privately baptised.
[132] M. deTillemont(MemoiresEcclesiasliques,torn. v. parti, p. 11, 12.) has quoted from theSpicilegium of Dom Luc d'Acheri, a very curiousinstruction which bilhop Theonas composed for theuse of Lucian.
[133] Lactantius de M. P. c. 10..
[134] Euscbius Hist. Ecclesiast. I. viii. c. 1. Thereader, who consults the original will not accuse meof heightening the picture. Eusebius was aboutsixteen years of age, at the accession of the empe.orDiocletian.
f 13 5.3 We might quote, among a great numberof instances, the mysterious worship of Mithras,and the Taurobolia; the latter of which becamefashionable in the time of the Antonines (See aDissertation of M. de Boze, in the Memoires tiel'Academie des Inscriptions, torn. ii. p. 443.}.The romance of Apulcius is as full of devotion asof satire.
[136] Thfr impostor Alexander very stronglyrecommended the oracle of Trcphonius at Mallei,
and







OCR Output








334- THE DECLINE AND FALX


Viaories of she strength of Aurelian had crushed on every side the enemies
Piobus over
thebarba- of Rome. After his death they seemed to revive, and even to mul­tiply. They were again vanquished by the active vigour of Probus,who, in a short reign of about six years*9, equalled the fame of;ancient heroes, and restored peace and order to every province ofthe Roman world. The dangerous frontier of Rhqctia he so firmly-secured, that he left it without the suspicion of an enemy. Hebroke the wandering power of the Sarmatian tribes, and by the ter­ror of his arms compelled those barbarians to relinquish their spoil.'The'Gothic nation courted the alliance of so warlike an emperor 5°.He attacked the Isaurians in their mountains4 besieged and tookseveral of their strongest castles and flattered himself that he hadfor ever suppressed a domestic foe, whose independence so deeplywounded the majesty of the empire. The troubles excited by theusurper Firmus in the Upper Egypt, had never been perfectly ap­peased, and the cities of Ptolemais and Coptos, fortified by thealliance of the Blemmyes, still maintained an obscure rebellion,.The chastisement of those cities, and of their auxiliaries the savagesof the South? is said to have alarmed the court of Persia and theGreat King sued in vain for the friendship of Probus. Most of theexploits whioh distinguished his reign, were atchieved by the per­sonal valour .and conduct of the emperor, insomuch that the writerof his life expresses some amazement how, in so short a time, asingle man could be present in so many distant wars. The remain­ing actions he entrusted to the care of his lieutenants, the judiciouschoice of whom forms no inconsiderable part of his glory. Carus,Dioclcsian, Maximian, Constantius, Galerius, Asclepiodatus, Anni-balianus, and a crowd of other chiefs, who afterwards ascended orsupported the throne, were trained to arms in the severe school ofAurelian and Probus 35.A. D. 2-7. But the most important service which Probus rendered to the re-^lulseoÆihe Pu^ucj was tne deliverance of Gaul, and the recovery of seventy
flourishing







OCR Output








9^ THE DECLINE AND FALL


Commodusdisplay! his(kill in theamphithea­tre.


medals'1) the Roman Hercules. The club and the lion's hidewere placed by the side of the throne, amongst the ensigns of so­vereignty; and statues were erected, in which Commodus wasrepresented in the character, and with the attributes of the God,whose valour and dexterity he endeavoured to emulate in the dailycourse of his ferocious amusements
Elated with these praises, which gradually extinguished the in­nate sense of shame, Commodus resolved to exhibit, before the eyesof the Roman people, those exercises, which till then he had decentlyconfined within the walls of his palace, and to the presence of afew favourites. On the appointed day, the various motives offlattery, fear, and curiosity, attracted to the amphitheatre an innu­merable multitude of spectators; and some degree of applause wasdeservedly bestowed on the uncommon skill of the Imperial per­former. Whether he aimed at the head or heart of the animal, thewound was alike certain and mortal. With arrows, whose pointwas shaped into the form of a crescent, Commodus often inter­cepted the rapid career, and cut asunder the long bony neck of theostrichA panther was let loose; and the archer waited till hehad leaped upon a trembling malefactor. In the same instant thelhaft flew, the beast dropt dead, and the man remained unhurt.The dens of the amphitheatre disgorged at once a hundred lions;a hundred darts from the unerring hand of Commodus laid themdead as they ran raging round the Arena. Neither the huge bulkof the elephant, nor the scaly hide of the rhinoceros, could defendthem from his stroke. Æthiopia and India yielded their most ex­traordinary productions; and several animals were slain in the am­phitheatre, which had been seen only in the representations of art,or perhaps of fancy J+. In all these exhibitions, the securest pre­cautions were used to protect the person of the Roman Herculesfrom the desperate spring of any savage; who might possibly disre­gard the dignity of the emperor, and the sanctity of the god
But







OCR Output








1 NOTES ON THE TWELFTH CHAPTER.


[71] Hist. August, p. 253. Eutropius, ix. 18.Fagi. Annal.
[7*] Agathias, 1. iv. p. 13?. We find one of hissayings in the Bibliotheque Orientale of M. d'Her-bclot. "The definition of humanity includes allother virtues."
{73] Synesius tells this story of Carinus; and itis much more natural to understand it of Cams,than (as Petavius and Tillemont chuse to do) ofProbus.
[74] Vppiscus in Hist. August, p. 250. Eutro­pius, ix. it. The two Victors.
[75] To the Persian victory of Carus, I refer thedialogue of the Pbilopatris, which has so long beenan object of dispute among the learned. But toexplain and justify my opinion, would require adissertation.
[76] Hist. August, p. 250. Yet Eutropius,Festus, Ruses, the two Victors, Jerome, SidoniusjApollinaris, Syncellus, and Zonaras, all ascribethe death of Carus to lightning.
I77] See Nemefian. Cynegeticon, v. 71, &c.
[78] See Festus and his commentators, on theword Scribonianum. Places struck with lightning,were surrounded with a wall: things were buriedwith mysterious ceremony.
[79] Vopiseus in Hist. August, p. 250. AureliusVictor seems to believe the prediction, and to ap­prove the retreat.
[80] Nemefian. Cynegeticon, v. 69. He was acontemporary, but a poet.
[81] Canctllarius. This word, so hnmble inits origin, has by a singular fortune rose into thetitle of the first great office os state in the monarchiesof Europe. See Casaubon and Salmasius, ad Hist.August. j>. 253.
[82] Vopiscusin Hist. August, p. 253, 254. Eu­tropius, ix. 19. Victor Junior. The reign of Dio­cletian indeed was so long and prosperous, that itmust have been very unfavourable to the fame ofCarinus.
[83] Vopiseus in Hist. August, p. 254. He callshim Cams, but the fense is sufficiently obvious, andthe words were often confounded.


[84] See Calphurnius. Eclog. vii. 43. Wemay observe, that the spectacles of Probus were stillrecent, and that the poet is seconded by thehistorian.
[85] The philosopher Montaigne (E/Tats, I. Hi.6.) gives a very just and lively view of Romanmagnificence in these spectacles.
[86] Vopiseus in Hist. August, p. 240.
[87] They are called Onagri'■; but the numberis too inconsiderable for mere wild-asses. Cuper(de Elephantis Exercitat. ii. 7.) has proved fromOppian, Dion, and an anonymous Greek, thatzebras had been seen at Rome. They werebrought from some island of the ocean, perhapsMadagascar.
[88] Carinus gave an hippopotamus (see Cal-phurn. Eclog. vii. 66,). In the later spectacles, £do not recollect any crocodiles, of which Augustua,once exhibited thirty-six. Dion Caffius, L lv„p. 781.
[89] Capitolin. in Hist. August, p. 164, r'c.We are not acquainted with the animals whomhe calls arckeltoritts, some read argtleontt*,others agrialeontts: both corrections are very nu­gatory. ■ .
[9c] Plin. Hist. Natur. viii. 6. from the annals ofPiso.
[91] SeeMafFei, Verona Illustrata, P. iv.I. i.e. 2.
[92] Maffei, 1. ii c. 2. The height was very much,exaggerated by the ancients. It reached almost tothe heavens, according to Calphurnius, (Eclog,vii. 23.) and surpassed the ken of human fight,according to Ammiaaus Marcellinus (xvi. 10).Yet how trifling to the great pyramid of Egypt,which rises 500 feet perpendicular.
[93] According to different copies of Victor,we read 77,000, or 87,000 spectators; but Maffei(1. ii. c. 12.) finds room on the open feats for nomore than 34,000. The remainder were containedin the upper covered galleries.
[94] See Maffei, 1. ii. c. 5—12. He treats thevery difficult subject with all possible clearness,and like an architect, as well as an antiquarian.
[95] Calphurn. Eclog. vii. 64. 73. Theselines are curious, and the whole Eclogue has beenof infinite use to Maffei. Calphurnius, as well as
Martial,







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


their reason had been often guided by their imagination, and that theirimagination had been prompted by their vanity. When theyviewed with complacency the extent of their own mental powers,when they exercised the various faculties of memory, of fancy,and of judgment, in the most profound speculations, or the mostimportant labours, and when they reflected on the desire of fame,which transported them into future ages, far beyond the boundsof death and of the grave; they were unwilling to confound them­selves with the beasts of the field, or to suppose, that a beingsfor whose dignity they entertained the most sincere admiration,could be limited to a spot of earth, and to a few years of duration.With this favourable prepossession they summoned to their aid thescience, or rather the language, of Metaphysics. They soon dis­covered, that as none of the properties of matter will apply to theoperations of the mind, the human foul must consequently be asubstance distinct from the body, pure, simple, and spiritual, in­capable of dissolution, and susceptible of a much higher degree ofvirtue and happiness after the release from its corporeal prison.From these specious and noble principles, the philosophers whotrod in the footsteps of Plato, deduced a very unjustifiable conclu­sion, since they asserted, not only the future immortality, but thepast eternity of the human soul, which they were too apt to con­sider as a portion of the infinite and self-existing spirit, which per­vades and sustains the universe 51. A doctrine thus removedbeyond the fenses and the experience of mankind, might serve toamuse the leisure of a philosophic mind; or, in the silence of soli­tude, it might sometimes impart a ray of comfort to despondingvirtue; but the faint impression which had been received in theschools, was soon obliterated by the commerce and business ofactive life. We are sufficiently acquainted with the eminent per­sons who flouriihed in the age of Cicero, and of the first Cæsars,with their actions, their characters, and their motives, to be assured
O o o 2 that







OCR Output








2I4 THE DECLINE AND FALL


that all this blaze of imaginary glory, was designed to conceal somereal disgrace.
More proba- Our suspicions are confirmed by the authority of a contemporaryIf'thewar.' historian, who mentions the virtues of Alexander with respect, andhis faults with candour. He describes the judicious plan which hadbeen formed for the conduct of the war. Three Roman armieswere destined to invade Persia at the fame time, and by differentroads. But the operations of the campaign, though wisely con­certed, were not executed either with ability or success. The first,of these armies, as soon as it had entered the marflvy plains of Ba­bylon, towards the artificial conflux of the Euphrates and theTigris 5°, was encompassed by the superior numbers, and destroyedby the arrows of the enemy. The alliance of Chosroes king ofArmenia s', and the long tract of mountainous country, in whichthe Persian cavalry was of little service, opened a secure entranceinto the heart of Media, to the second of the Roman armies. Thesebrave troops laid waste the adjacent provinces, and by several success­ful actions against Artaxerxes, gave a faint colour to the emperor'svanity. But the retreat of this victorious army was imprudent,or at least unfortunate. In repasting the mountains, great numbersof soldiers perished by the badness of the roads and the severityof the winter season. It had been resolved, that whilst these twogreat detachments penetrated into the opposite extremes of the Per­sian dominions, the main body, under the command of Alexanderhimself, should support their attack, by invading the center of thekingdom. But the unexperienced youth, influenced by his mother'scounsels, and perhaps by his own fears, deserted the bravest troopsand' the fairest prospect of victory; and after consuming in Meso­potamia an inactive and inglorious summer, he led back to Antiochan army diminished by sickness, and provoked by disappointment.The behaviour of Artaxerxes had been very different. Flying withrapidity from the hills of Media to the marshes of the Euphrates,
he







OCR Output








272 THE DECLINE AND FALL


*


Mmpieo'f6 *n tne genera* calamities of mankind, the death of an individual,Ephesus. however exalted, the ruin of an edifice, however famous, are passedover with careless inattention. Yet we cannot forget, that the tem­ple of Diana at Ephesus, after having risen with increasing splendorfrom seven successive misfortunes ,l8, was finally burnt by the Gothsin their third naval invasion. The arts of Greece, and the wealthof Asia, had conspired to erect that sacred and magnificent structure.It was supported by an hundred and twenty-seven marble columnsof the Ionic order. They were the gifts of devout monarchs, andeach was sixty feet high. The altar was adorned with the masterlysculptures of Praxiteles, who had, perhaps, chosen from the favou­rite legends of the place the birth of the divine children of Latona,the concealment of Apollo after the flaughter of the Cyclops, andthe clemency of Bacchus to the vanquished Amazons "9. Yet thelength of the temple of Ephesus was only four hundred and twenty-five feet, about two thirds of the measure of the church of St.Peter's at Rome "°. In the other dimensions, it was still more in­ferior to rhat sublime production of modern architecture. Thespreading arms of a Christian cross, require a much greater breadththan the oblong temples of the Pagans; and the boldest artists ofantiquity, would have been startled at the proposal of raising inthe air a dome of the size and proportions of the pantheon. Thetemple of Diana was, however, admired as one of the wondersof the world. Successive empires, the Persian, the Macedonian,and the Roman, had revered its sanctity, and enriched its splen­dor,5'. But the rude savages of the Baltic were destitute of a tastefor the elegant arts, and they despised the ideal terrors of a foreignsuperstition
Conduct of Another circumstance is related of these invasions, which mightAthens. deserve our notice, were it not justly to be suspected as the fancifulconceit of a recent sophist. We are told, that in the sack of Athens,the Goths had collected all the libraries, and were on the point of
setting







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 491
maintained a mutual as well as friendly intercourse of letters anddeputations, the christian world was not yet connected by any su­preme authority or legislative assembly. As the numbers of thefaithful were gradually multiplied, they discovered the advantagesthat might result from a closer union of their interest and designs.Towards the end of the second century, the churches of Greeceand Asia adopted the useful institutions of provincial synods,and they may justly be supposed to have borrowed the model of arepresentative council from the celebrated examples of their owncountry, the Amphictyons, the Achæan league, or the assemblies ofthe Ionian cities. It was soon established as a custom and as a law,that the bishops of the independent churches should meet in thecapital of the province at the stated periods of spring and autumn.Their deliberations were assisted by the advice of a few distinguishedpresbyters, and moderated by the presence of a listening multi­tude "'. Their decrees, which were styled Canons, regulated everyimportant controversy of faith and discipline; and it was naturalto believe that a liberal effusion of the holy spirit would be pouredon the united assembly of the delegates of the christian people.The institution of synods was so well suited to private ambition and topublic interest, that in the space of a few years it was received through­out the whole empire. A regular correspondence was established Union of thebetween the provincial councils, which mutually communicated churLh-and approved their respective proceedings; and the catholic churchsoon assumed the form, and acquired the strength, of a great fede­rative republic "*.
As the legislative authority of the particular chnrches was insen- Progress of- sibly superseded by the use of councils, the bishops obtained by 'hority! *Utheir alliance a much larger share of executive and arbitrary power;connected by a sense of their common interest, they were enabledto attack, with united vigour, the original rights of their clergyand people. The prelates of the third century imperceptibly
R r r 9 changed







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 201


successors. The Medes and the Babylonians divided their power,and were themselves swallowed up in the monarchy of the Persians,whose arms could not be confined within the narrow limits of Asia.Followed, as it is said, by two millions of men, Xerxes, the descendantof Cyrus, invaded Greece. Thirty thousand soldiers, under thecommand of Alexander, the son of Philip, who was intrusted bythe Greeks with their glory and revenge, were sufficient to subduePersia. The princes of the house of Seleucus usurped and lost theMacedonian command over the East. About the same time, that,by an ignominious treaty, they resigned to the Romans the countryon this side Mount Taurus, they were driven by the Parthians, anobscure horde, of Scythian origin, from all the provinces of UpperAsia. The formidable power of the Parthians, which spread fromIndia to the frontiers of Syria, was in its turn subverted by Ardstiir,or Artaxerxes; the founder of a new dynasty, which, under thename of Sassanides, governed Persia till the invasion of the Arabs.This great revolution, whose fatal influence was soon experienced bythe Romans, happened in the fourth year of Alexander Severus,two hundred and twenty-six years after the Christian sera *.
Artaxerxes had served with great reputation in the armies of ThePe''"ian
° x monarchy
Artaban, the last king of the Parthians, and it appears that he was <"est°red by
it- • • Artaxerxes.
driven into exile and rebellion by royal ingratitude, the customaryreward for superior merit. His birth was obscure, and the obscurityequally gave room to the aspersions of his enemies, and the flatteryof his adherents. If we credit the scandal of the former, Arta­xerxes sprang from the illegitimate commerce of a tanner's wifewith a common soldier \ The latter represent him, as descendedfrom a branch of the ancient kings of Persia, though time andmisfortune had gradually reduced his ancestors to the*humble stationof private citizens 4. As the lineal heir of the monarchy, heasserted his right to the throne, and challenged the noble taste ofdelivering the Persians from the oppression under which theyuVol. I. D d groaned







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


immediate representations of the Gods, and the holy instrumentsof their worship, the elegant forms and agreeable fictions con­secrated by the imagination of the Greeks, were introduced a»the richest ornaments of the houses, the dress, and the furniture*of the Pagans 4°. Even the arts of music and painting, of eloquenceand poetry, flowed from the fame impure origin. In the styleof the fathers, Apollo and the Muses were the organs of theinfernal spirit, Homer and Virgil were the most eminent of hisservants, and the beautiful mythology which pervades and animatesthe compositions of their genius, is destined to celebrate the gloryof the dæmons. Even the common language of Greece and Romeabounded with familiar but impious expressions, which the im­prudent Christian might too carelessly utter, or too patientlyhear 47.
The dangerous temptations, which on every side lurked in Festival*,ambush to surprise the unguarded believer, assailed him with re­doubled violence on the days of solemn festivals. So artfullywere they framed and disposed throughout the year, that super­stition always wore the appearance of pleasure, and often of vir­tue *8. Some of the most sacred festivals in the Roman ritual weredestined to salute the new calends of January with vows of publicand private felicity, to indulge the pious remembrance of the deadand living, to ascertain the inviolable bounds of property, to hail*on the return of spring, the genial powers of fecundity, to per­petuate the two memorable aeras of Rome, the foundation of thecity, and that of the republic, and to restore, during the humanelicense of the Saturnalia, the primitive equality of mankind. Someidea may be conceived of the abhorrence of the Christians for suchimpious ceremonies, by the scrupulous delicacy which they dis­played on a much less alarming occasion. On days of generalfestivity, it was the custom of the ancients to adorn their doorswith lamps and with branches of laurel, and to crown their heads
Vol. I. O o o with







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 79


Titus Antoninus Pius has been justly denominated a second Numa. Charactcr
J 4 and reign of
The same love of religion, justice, and peace, was the distinguishing Pws.characteristic of both princes. But the situation of the latter openeda much larger field for the exercise of those virtues. Numa couldonly prevent a few neighbouring villages from plundering eachother's harvests. Antoninus diffused order and tranquillity over thegreatest part of the earth. His reign is marked by the rare advan­tage of furnishing very few materials for history; which is, indeed,little more than the register of the crimes, follies, and misfortunesof mankind. In private life, he was an amiable, as well as a goodman. The native simplicity of his virtue was a stranger to vanityor affectation. He enjoyed, with moderation, the conveniencies ofhis fortune, and the innocent pleasures of society **; and the be­nevolence of his foul displayed itself in a cheerful serenity oftemper.
The virtue of Marcus Aurelius Antoninus was of a severer and Of Marcus,more laborious kind 4S. It was the well-earned harvest of many alearned conference, of many a patient lecture, and many a midnightlucubration. At the age of twelve years he embraced the rigidsystem of the stoics, which taught him to submit his body to hismind, his passions to his reason; to consider virtue as the onlygood, vice as the only evil, all things external, as things in­different46. His meditations, composed in the tumult of a camp,are still extant; and he even condescended to give lessons of philo­sophy, in a more public manner, than suited the modesty of a sage»or the dignity of an emperor *7. But his life was the noblest com­mentary on the precepts of Zeno. He was severe to himself, in­dulgent to the imperfection of others, just and beneficent to allmankind. He regretted that Avidius Cassius, who excited a re­bellion in Syria, had disappointed him, by a voluntary death, ofthe pleasure of converting an enemy into a friend, and he justifiedthe sincerity of that sentiment, by moderating the zeal of the senate
against







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. u


l>lows, the generals with death; and it was an inflexible maxim ofRoman discipline, that a good soldier should dread his officers farmore than the enemy. From such laudable arts did the valour ofthe Imperial troops receive a degree of firmness and docility, unattain­able by the impetuous and irregular passions of barbarians.
And yet so sensible were the Romans of the imperfection of va- Exercises,lour without skill and practice, that, in their language, the nameof an army was borrowed from the word which signified exercise ,fi.Military exercises were the important and unremitted object of theirdiscipline. The recruits and young soldiers were constantly trainedboth in the morning and in the evening, nor was age or knowledgeallowed to excuse the veterans from the daily repetition of whatthey had completely learnt. Large sheds were erected in the win­ter-quarters of the troops, that their useful labours might notreceive any interruption from the most tempestuous weather; and itwas carefully observed, that the arms destined to this imitation ofwar, should be of double the weight which was required in realaction '7. It is not the purpose of this work to enter into any mi­nute description of the Roman exercises. We shall only remark,that they comprehended whatever could add strength to the body,activity to the limbs, or grace to the motions. The soldiers were•diligently instructed to march, to run, to leap, to swim, to carryheavy burdens, to handle every species of arms that was usedeither for offence or for defence, either in distant engagement orin a closer onset; to form a variety of evolutions; and to move tothe found of flutes, in the pyrrhic or martial dance ,s. In themidst of peace, the Roman troops familiarised themselves with thepractice of war; and it is prettily remarked by an ancient historianwho had fought against them, that the effusion of blood was theonly circumstance which distinguished a field of battle from a fieldof exercise ". It was the policy of the ablest generals, and even ofthe emperors themselves, to encourage these military studies by their
C 2 presence







OCR Output








NOTES ON THE SIXTEENTH CHAPTER. Ixxxvii


partment of Constantius, as Cæsar, did not includeSpain, which still continued under the immediatejurisdiction of Maximian.
[166] Eusebius, 1. viii. c. II. Gruter. Inscript.p. 1171. No. 18. Rufinus has mistaken the officeof Adauctus as well as the place of his martyrdom.
[167] Eusebius, 1. viii. c. 14. But as Maxentiuswas vanquished by Constantine, it suited the pur­pose of Lactantius to place his death among thoseof the persecutors.
[168] The epitaph of Marcel 1 us is to be foundin Gruter, Inscript. p. 1172. No. 3. and it con­tains all that we know of his history. Marcellinusand Marcellus, whose names follow in the list ofpopes, are supposed by many critics to be differentpersons; but the learned Abbe de Longuerue wasconvinced that they were one and the fame.Veridicus rector lapsis quiacrimina HerePrædixit miseris, suit omnibus hostis amarns.Hinc furor, hinc odium; sequitur difcordia, lites,Scditio, cædes; solvuntur fcedera pacis.Crimen ob alterius, Christum qui in pace negavicFinibus expulsus patriæ est feritate Tyranni.Hax breviter Damasus voluit comperta reserreMarcelli populus meritum cognoscere posset.We may observe that Damasus was made bishopof Rome, A. D. 366.
[169] Optatus contr. Donatist. 1. i. c. 17, 18.
[170] The Acts of the Passion of St. Boniface,which abound in miracles and declamation, arepublished by Ruinart, (p. 283 — 291.) both in Greekand Latin, from the authority of very ancient ma­nuscripts.
[171] During the four first centuries, there existsew traces of either bishops or bishoprics in thewestern Myricum. It has been thought probablethat the primate of Milan extended his jurisdictionover Sirmium, the capital of that great province.See the Geographia Sacra of Charles de St. Paul, p.68—76. with the observations of Lucas Hol-sterius.
[172] The viiith book of Eusebius, as well as thesupplement concerning the martyrs of Palestine,principally relate to the persecution ofGalerius andMaximin. The general lamentations with whichLactantius opens the vth book of his Divine Initi-iutions, allude to their cruelty.


[173] Eusebius (I. viii. c. 17.) has given us aGreek version, and Lactantius (de M. P. c. 34.),the Latin original,of this memorable edict. Neitherof these writers seem to recollect how directly itcontradicts, whatever they have just affirmed of theremorse and repentance of Galerius.
[174] Eusebius, 1. ix. c 1. He inserts theepistle of the Prafect.
[175] See Eusebius, 1. viii. c. 14. 1. ix. c. 2—8.Lactantius de M P. c. 36. These writers agree inrepresenting the arts of Maximin: but the formerrelates the execution of several martyrs, while thelatter expressly affirms, occidi servos Dei vetuit.
[176] A sew days before his death, he publisheda very ample edict of toleration, in which he imputesall the severities which the christians suffered tothejudgcs and governors, who had misunderstood hisintentions. See the Edict in Eusebius, 1. ix. c. 10.
[177] See two remarkable passages in Eusebius,1. viii. c. 2. and de Martyr. Palestin, c. 12. Theprudence of the historian has exposed his own cha­racter to censure and suspicion. It was well knownthat he himself had been thrown into prison; andit was suggested that he had purchased his deliver­ance by some dishonourable compliance. The re­proach was urged in his lifetime, and even in hispresence, at the council of Tyre. See Tilsemont,Memoires Ecclesiastiques, torn. viii. part i. p 67.
[178] The ancient, and perhaps authentic ac­count of the sufferings of Tarachus, and his compa­nions (Acta Sincera Ruinart, p. 419—448) is filledwith strong expressions of resentment and contemptwhich could not fail of irritating the magistrate.The behaviour of Ædesius to Hierocles, pnesect ofEgypt, was still more extraordinary, Xoyou ti xatipyois to» tuum .... is<fi]S«?vw>. Euseb. de Martyr.Palestin. c. 5.
[170] Euseb. de Martyr. Palestin. c. 13.
[180] Augustin. Collat. Carthagin. Lei, iii. c*13. ap. Tillemont, Memoires Ecclesiastiques, torn,v. part i. p. 46. The controversy with the Dona-tists has reflected some, though perhaps a partial,light on the history of the African church.
[181] Eusebius de Martyr. Palestin. c. 13. Hecloses his narration, by assuring us that these werethe martyrdoms inflicted in Palestine, during thenthflt course of the persecution. The vth chapter







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AND FALL


conquerors, fatigued with civil war, and connected by a private aswell as public alliance, would have renounced, or at least have sus­pended, any farther designs of ambition. And yet a year hadscarcely elapsed after the death of Maximin, before the victoriousemperors turned their arms against each other. The genius, thesuccess, and the aspiring temper, of Constantine, may seem to markhim out as the aggressor; but the perfidious character of Liciniusjustifies the most unfavourable suspicions, and by the faint lightwhich history reflects on this transaction 86, we may discover aconspiracy fomented by his arts against the authority of his col­league. Constantine had lately given his sister Anastasia in mar­riage to Bassianus, a man of a considerable family and fortune, andhad elevated his new kinsman to the rank of Cæsar. According tothe system of government instituted by Diocletian, Italy, and per­haps Africa, were designed for his department in the empire.But the performance of the promised favour was either attendedwith so much delay, or accompanied with so many unequal con­ditions, that the fidelity of Bassianus was alienated rather thansecured by the honourable distinction which he had obtained. Hisnomination had been ratified by the consent of Licinius, and thatartful prince, by the means of his emissaries, soon contrived toenter into a secret and dangerous correspondence with the newCæsar, to irritate his discontents, and to urge him to the rashenterprise of extorting by violence what he might in vain solicitfrom the justice of Constantine. But the vigilant emperor dis­covered the conspiracy before it was ripe for execution; and, aftersolemnly renouncing the alliance of Bassianus, despoiled him of thepurple, and inflicted the deserved punishment on his treason andingratitude. The haughty refusal of Licinius, when he was required todeliver up the criminals, who had taken refuge in his dominions,confirmed the suspicions already entertained of his perfidy; and theindignities offered at Æmona, on the frontiers of Italy, to the5 statues­







OCR Output








Off THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 579


of the East, he indulged in their fullest extent his zeal and cruelty,not only in the provinces of Thrace and Asia, which acknowledgedhis immediate jurisdiction; but in those of Syria, Palestine, andEgypt, where Maximin gratified his own inclination, by yieldinga rigorous obedience to the stern commands of his benefactor ''*.The frequent disappointments of his ambitious views, the experienceof six years of persecution, and the salutary reflections which alingering and painful distemper suggested to the mind of Galerius,at length convinced him that the most violent efforts of despotismare insufficient to extirpate a whole people, or to subdue theirreligious prejudices. Desirous of repairing the mischief that hehad occasioned, he published in his own name, and in those ofLicinius and Constantine, a general edict, which, after a pompousrecital of the imperial titles, proceeded in the following manner.
"Among the important cares which have occupied our mind fof Galerius pob-
& , - . e . . , l foe* an edict
u the utility and preservation or the empire, it was our intention to of toleration."correct and re-establish all things according to the ancient laws*' and public discipline of the Romans. We were particularly"desirous of reclaiming, into the way of reason and nature, the"deluded Christians who had renounced the religion and cere-"monies instituted by their fathers; and presumptuously despising"the practice of antiquity, had invented extravagant laws andn opinions according to the dictates of their fancy, and had col-"lected a various society from the different provinces of our em-"pire. The edicts which we have published to enforce the wor-"ship of the gods, having exposed many of the Christians to danger"and distress, many having suffered death, and many more, who"still persist in their impious folly, being left destitute of atty<l public exercise of religion, we are disposed to extend to those''* unhappy men the effects of our wonted clemency. We permit"them therefore freely to profess their private opinions, and''i to assemble in their conventicles without fear or molestation,
4 E 2 "provided







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. Sl7


■ It is at least doubtful whether any1 of these philosophers perusedthe apologies which the primitive Christians repeatedly publishedin behalf of themselves and of their religion; but it is much tobe lamented that such a cause was not defended by abler advo­cates. They expose, with superfluous wit and eloquence, theextravagance of Polytheism. They interest our compaction bydisplaying the innocence and sufferings of their injured brethren.But when they would demonstrate the divine origin of Christianity,they insist much more strongly on the predictions which announced,than on the miracles which accompanied, the appearance of theMessiah. Their favourite argument might serve to edify a Christianor to convert a Jew, since both the one and the other acknowledgethe authority of those prophecies, and both are obliged, withdevout reverence, to search for their sense and their accomplish­ment. But this mode of persuasion loses much of its weight and in­fluence, when it is addressed to those who neither understand norrespect the Mosaic dispensation and the prophetic style '9<\ In theunskilful hands of Justin and of the succeeding apologists, thesuhlime meaning of the Hebrew oracles evaporates in distant types,affected conceits, and cold allegories; and even their authenticitywas rendered suspicious to an unenlightened Gentile, by the mixtureof pious forgeries, which, under the names of Orpheus, Hermes,and the Sibyls ,9', were obtruded on him as of equal value withthe genuine inspirations of Heaven. The adoption of fraud andsophistry in the defence of revelation, too often reminds us ofthe injudicious conduct of those poets who load their invulnerableheroes with a useless weight of cumbersome and brittle armour.
But how shall we explain or excuse the supine inattention and of mi.of the Pagan and philosophic world, to those evidences whichwere presented by the hand of Omnipotence, not to their rea­son, but to their senses? During the age of Christ, of hisapostles,"and of their first disciples, the doctrine which they preached


races.


6 was







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


By a race of soldiers; and the veterans, whether they received thereward of their service in land or in money, usually settled withtheir families in the country, where they had honourably spenttheir youth* Throughout the empire, but more particularly in thewestern parts, the most fertile districts, and the most convenientsituations, were reserved for the establishment of colonies; some ofwhich were of a civil, and others of a military nature. In theirmanners and internal policy, the colonies formed a perfect repre­sentation of their great parent; and as they were soon endeared tothe natives by the ties of friendship and alliance, they effectuallydiffused a reverence for the Roman name, and a desire which wasseldom disappointed of sharing, in due time, its honours and- ad­vantages The municipal cities- insensibly equalled the rank andsplendour of the colonies; and in the reign of Hadrian, it was dis­puted which was the preferable condition, of those societies which hadissued from, or those which had been received into, the bosom ofRome The right of Latiura, as it was. called, conferred on thecities,to which it had been granted, a more partial favour. Themagistrates only, at the expiration of their office, assumed thequality of Roman citizens; bat as those offices were annual, in-afew years they circulated round the principal families J\ Those ofthe provincials who were permitted to bear arms in the legions 51;thole who exercised any civil employment; all, in a word, whoperformed any public service, or displayed any personal talents,were rewarded with a present, whose value was continually di­minished by the increasing, liberality ,of the emperors. Yet even,in the age of the Antonines, when the freedom of the city had beenbestowed on the greater number of their subjects, it was still accom­panied with very solid advantages. The bulk of the people ac*quired, with that title, the benefit of the Roman, laws, particularlyin the interesting articles of marriage, testaments, and inheritances,and the road of fortune was open to those whose pretensions were6 seconded







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 3%


The diflike expressed by Diocletian towards Rome and Roman Debasementfreedom, was not the effect of momentary caprice, but the remit 0f the senate,of the most artful policy. That crafty prince had framed a newsystem of imperial government, which was afterwards completedby the family of Constantine, and as the image of the old con­stitution was religioufly preserved in the senate, he resolved todeprive that order of its small remains of power and consideration.We may recollect about eight years before the elevation of Dio­cletian, the transient greatness, and the ambitious hopes, of theRoman senate. As long as that enthusiasm prevailed, many of thenobles imprudently displayed their zeal in the cause of freedom;and after the successors of Probus had withdrawn their countenancefrom the republican party, the senators were unable to disguise theirimpotent resentment. As the sovereign of Italy, Maximian wasintrusted with the care of extinguishing this troublesome, ratherthan dingerous, spirit, and the task was perfectly suited to hiscruel temper. The most illustrious members of the senate, whomDiocletian always affected to esteem, were involved, by his col­league, in the accusation of imaginary plots; and the possession ofan elegant villa, or a well cultivated estate, was interpreted as aconvincing evidence of guilt9}. The camp of the Prætorians,which had so long oppressed, began to protect, the majesty of Rome;and as those haughty troops were conscious of the decline of theirpower, they were naturally disposed to unite their strength with theauthority of the senate. By the prudent measures of Diocletian,the number* of the Praetorians were insensibly reduced, their pri­vileges abolished 9+, and their place supplied by two faithful legions Ncwbedies oof Illyricum, who, under the new titles of Jovians and Herculians, fns, and °'were appointed to perform the service of the imperial guards 9S. IlCrculians*But the most fatal though secret wound, which the senate receivedfrom the hands of Diocletian and Maximian, was inflicted by the in­evitable operation of their long absence. As long as the emperors
Vol. I. D d d resided







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AND FALL


they knew not how to reconcile with the patient doctrine whichenjoined an unlimited forgiveness of past injuries, and commandedthem to invite the repetition of frefli insults. Their simplicity wasoffended by the use of oaths, by the pomp of. magistracy, and bythe active contentien of public life, nor could their, humane igno-,ranee be convinced, that it was lawfulon any occasion to shedthe blood of our fellow-creatures, either by the sword of justice, orby that of war, even though their criminal or hostile attemptsshould threaten the peace and safety of the whole community 9*.It was acknowledged, that, under a less perfect law, the powersof the Jewish constitution had been exercised, with the approbationof Heaven, by inspired prophets and by anointed kings. TheChristians felt and confessed, that such institutions might be ne­cessary for the present system of the world, and they cheerfullysubmitted to the authority of their Pagan governors. But whilethey inculcated the maxims of passive obedience, they refused totake any active part in the civil administration or the military defenceof the empire. Some indulgence might perhaps be allowed to thosepersons who, before their conversion, were already engaged in suchviolent and sanguinary occupations 99; but it was impossible thatthe Christians, without renouncing a more sacred duty, couldassume the character of soldiers, of magistrates, or of princes '00*This indolent, or even criminal, disregard to the public welfare,-exposed them to the. contempt and reproaches of the Pagans, whovery frequently asked, what must be the fate of the empire, attackedon every side by the barbarians, if all mankind should adopt thepusillanimous sentiments of the new sect V" i To this insultingquestion the Christian apologists returned obscure and ambiguous,answers, as they were unwilling to reveal the secret cause of theirsecurity; the expectation that, before the conversion of mankind wasaccomplished, war, government, the Roman empire, and the worlditself, would be no more. It may be observed, that in this instance
likewise,







OCR Output








NOTES ON THE THIRTEENTH CHAPTER. lv


I will venture to recommend as one of the bellversions extant.
[67] Hist. Armen. I. ii. c. 76. I have transferredthis exploit of Tiridates from an imaginary defeatto the real one of Galerius.
[68] Ammian. Marcellin. L xiv. The mile, inthe hands of Eutropiui (ix. 24.)> ofFestus (c. 25.),and of Orosius (vii. 25 ), easily increased to ftvtralmiles,
[69] Aurelius Victor. Jornandes de rebus Ge-ticis, c. 21.
[70] Aurelius Victor fays, "Per Armeniam inhostes contendit, qua: ferme sola, feu facilior vin-cendi via est." He followed the conduct of Trajan,and the idea of Julius Cæsar.
[71] Xenophon's Anabasis, 1. iii. For that reasonthe Persian cavalry encamped sixty stadia from theenemy.
[72] The story is told by Ammianus, 1. xxii.Instead of saccunt some read scutum.
[73] The Persians confessed the Roman superio­rity in morals as well as in arms. Eutrop. ix. 24.But this respect and gratitude of enemies is very sel­dom to be found in their own accounts.
[74] The account of the negociation is takenfrom the fragments of Peter the Patrician, in theExcerpta Legationum published in the ByzantineCollection. Peter lived under Justinian; but it is veryevident, by the nature of his materials, that theyare drawn from the most authentic and respectablewriters.
[75] Adeo Victor (fays Aurelius) ut ni Valerius,cujus nutu omnia gerebantur, abnuiflet, Romanifasces in provinciam novam ferrentur. Verumpars terrarum tamen nobis utilior quæsita.
[76] He had been governor of Sumium. (Pet,Patricius in Excerpt. Legat. p. 30.) This provinceseems to be mentioned by Moses of Chorene (Geo-graph. p. 360.), and lay to the East of MountArarat.
(77] By an error of the geographer Ptolemy,the position of Singara is removed from the Aborts


to the Tigris, which may have produced the mistakeof Peter, in assigning the latter river for the boun­dary, instead of the former. The line of the Romanfrontier traversed, but never followed, the course ofthe Tigris.
[78] Procopius de Edificiis, 1. ii. c. 6.
[79] Three of the provinces, Zabdicene, Ar.zanene, and Carduene, are allowed on all sides.But instead of the other two, Peter (in Excerpt.Leg. p. 30.) inserts Rehimene and Sophcne. Ihave preferred Ammianus, (1. xxv. 7.) because itmight be proved, that Sophene was never in thehands of the Persians, either before the reign ofDiocletian, or after that of Jovian. For want ofcorrect maps, like those of M. Danville, almost allthe moderns, with Tillemont and Valesius at theirhead, have imagined, that it was in respect toPersia, and not to Rome, that the five provinceswere situate beyond the Tigris.
[80] Xenophon's Anabasis, 1. iv. Their bowswere three cubits in length, their arrows two; theyrolled down stones that were each a waggon load.The Greeks found a great many villages in thatrude country.
[81] According to Eutropius (vi. 9. as the textis represented by the best MSS.) the city of Tigra-nocerta was in Arzanene. The names and situationof the other three may be faintly traced.
[82] Compare Herodotus, 1. i. c. 97. with MosesChoronens. Hist. Armen. 1. ii. c. 84. and the mapos Armenia given by his editors.
[83] Hiberi, locorum potentes,Caspia via Sarma-tam in Armenios raptim efFundunt. Tacit. Annal.vi. 34. See Strabon. Geograph. 1. xi. p. 7s 4.
[84] Peter Patricius (in Excerpt. Leg. p. 30.) isthe only writer who mentions the Iberian article ofthe treaty.
[8c] Eufebius in Chron. Pagi ad annum. Tillthe discovery of the treatise De Mortibus Persecu-torum, it was not certain that the triumph and th«Vicennalia were celebrated at the fame time.
[86] At the time of the Vicennalia, Galeriusseems to have kept.his station on the Danube. SeeLactant. de M. P. c. 38.
[S7] Eutropius







OCR Output








Si6 THE DECLINE AND FALL


of later ages, it will be more prudent to convert the occasion ofscandal into, a subject: of edification. Our serious thoughts willsuggest to us, that the apostles themselves were chosen by pro­vidence among the fishermen of Galilee, and that the lower wedepress the temporal condition of the first Christians, the morereason we shall find to admire their merit and success. It is in­cumbent on us diligently to remember, that the kingdom ofHeaven was promised to the poor in spirit, and that minds afflictedby calamity and the contempt of mankind, cheerfully listen to thedivine promise of future happiness; while, on the contrary, the fortu­nate are satisfied with the possession of this world; and the wife abusein doubt and dispute their vain superiority of reason and knowledge.Rejected by We stand in need of such reflections to comfort us for the loss ofmen"™""' s°me illustrious characters, which in our eyes might have seemedcon/cen^ mo^ wortny °f heavenly present. The names of Seneca,
turies. cf tjie elder and the younger Pliny, of Tacitus, of Plutarch, ofGalen, of the slave Epictetus, and of the emperor Marcus Anrtoninus, adorn the age in which they flourished, and exalt thedignity of human nature. They filled with glory their respectivestations, either in active or contemplative life; their excellentunderstandings were improved by study; Philosophy had purifiedtheir minds from the prejudices of superstition; and their days werespent in the pursuit of truth and the practice of virtue. Yet allthese sages (it is no less an object of surprise than of concern) over­looked or rejected the perfection of the Christian system. Theirlanguage or their silence equally discover their contempt for thegrowing sect, which in their time had diffused itself over theRoman empire. Those among them who condescend to mentioathe Christians, consider them only as obstinate and perverse en­thusiasts, who exacted an implicit submission to their mysteriousdoctrines, without being able to produce a single argument thatcould engage the attention of men of fense and learning ,8'.


It







OCR Output








266 THE DECLINE AND FALL5


and whose skill and fidelity were equally suspicious. But the hopesof plunder had banished every idea of danger, and a natural fear­lessness of temper, supplied in their minds the more rational confidence,which is the just result of knowledge and experience. Warriors ofsuch a daring spirit, must have often murmured against the cowardiceof their guides, who required the strongest assurances of a settledcalm, before they would venture to embark; and would scarcelyever be tempted to lose sight of the land. Such, at least, is thepractice of the modern Turks ,0*; and they are probably not in­ferior, in the art of navigation, to the ancient inhabitants of Bos­phorus.
MpeditSof The fleet of the Goths» having the coast of Circassia on the lefttheGoths. hand, first appeared before Pityus ,oS, the utmost limits of the Ro­man provinces; a city provided with a convenient port, and forti­fied with a strong wall. Here they met with a resistance more ob­stinate than they had reason to expect from the feeble garrison of adistant fortress. They were repulsed; and their disappointmentseemed to diminish the terror of the Gothic name. As long asSuccessianus, an officer of superior rank and merit, defended thatfrontier, all their efforts were ineffectual; but as soon as he wasremoved by Valerian to a more honourable but less importantstation, they resumed the attack of Pityus; and, by the destructionof that city, obliterated the memory of their former disgrace ,o6.TheGoths Circling round the eastern extremity of the Euxine sea, thetake^rre"?./ navigation from Pityus to Trebizond is about three hundredmiles 107. The course of the Goths carried them in sight of thecountry of Colchis, so famous by the expedition of the Argo­nauts ; and they even attempied, though without success, to pillagea rich temple at the mouth of the river Phasis. Trebizond, cele­brated in the retreat of the ten thousand, as an ancient colony o£Greeksderived its wealth and splendor from the munificence ofthe emperor Hadrian, who had constructed an artificial port on a2 coast


zond.







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AND FALL


drachms of silver, or about three hundred thousand pounds ayear Twenty thousand pound weight of gold was annually re­ceived from the provinces of Asturia,. Gallicia, and Luiitania94, . •of the isle of . We want both leisure and materials to pursue this curious inquiry53 through the many potent states that were annihilated in the Roman-
empire. Some notion, however, may be formed of the revenue ofthe provinces where considerable wealth had been deposited by na­ture, or collected by man, if we observe the severe attention thatwas directed to the abodes of solitude and sterility. Augustus oncereceived a, petition from the inhabitants of Gyarus, humbly prayingthat they might be relieved from one third of their exceffive impo­sitions. Their whole tax amounted indeed to no more than onehundred and fifty drachms, or about five pounds: but Gyarus wasa little island, or rather a rock, of the Ægean sea, destitute of frestvwater and every neceflary of life, and inhabited only by a fewwretched fishermen95.Amount of From the faint glimmerings of such doubtful and scattered lights,,the revenue, wg n^^d incline to believe, ist, That (with every fair allowance forthe difference of times and circumstance*) the general income of theRoman provinces could seldom amount to less than fifteen or twentymillions of our money9<s; and, 2dly, That so ample a revenue musthave been fully adequate to all the expences of the moderate go­vernment instituted by Augustus, whose court was the modest familyof a private senator, and whose military establishment was calcu­lated for the defence of the frontiers, without any aspiring views ofconquest, or any serious apprehension of a foreign invasion.Taxes on Ro- Notwithstanding the seeming probability of both these conclusion^!nst?t"edeby ^e ^ter °f them at least is positively disowned by the languageAugustus. and conduct of Augustus. It is not easy to determine whether, on:this occasion, he acted a* the common father of the Roman world,or as the oppressor of liberty; whether he wished to relieve the pro­vinces, or to impoverish the senate and the equestrian order. But


4 no







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


of Rome. But this accidental benefit, which science might derivefrom folly, is surely insufficient to justify such a wanton abuse ofthe public riches. There occurs, however, a single instance in thefirst Punic war, in which the senate wisely connected this amuse­ment of the multitude with the interest of the state. A considerablenumber of elephants, taken in the defeat of the Carthaginian army,were driven through the circus by a few slaves, armed only withblunt javelins 9°. The useful spectacle served to impress the Romansoldier with a just contempt for those unwieldy animals; and heno longer dreaded to encounter them in the ranks of war.
The hunting or exhibition of wild beasts, was conducted with a Theamphi-magnificence suitable to a people who styled themselves the mastersof the world; nor was the edifice appropriated to that entertain­ment less expressive of Roman greatness. Posterity admires, and willlong admire, the awful remains of the amphitheatre of Titus, whichso well deserved the epithet of Colossal''. It was a building of aneliptic figure, five hundred and sixty-four feet in length, and fourhundred and sixty-seven in breadth, founded on fourscore arches, andrising, with four successive orders of architecture, to the height ofone hundred and forty feet The outside of the edifice was en­crusted with marble, and decorated with statues. The sloping sidesof the vast concave, which formed the inside, were filled and sur­rounded with sixty or eighty rows of feats of marble likewise, co­vered with cushions, and capable of receiving with ease above four­score thousand spectators Sixty-four vomitories (for by that namethe doors were very aptly distinguished) poured forth the immensemultitude; and the entrances, passages, and stair-cafes, were.con­trived with such exquisite skill, that each person, whether of thesenatorial, the equestrian, or the plebeian order, arrived at his des­tined place without trouble or confusion 9+. Nothing was omittedwhich, in any respect, could be subservient to the convenience and
pleasure







OCR Output








CON TENTS.


Power of his Mother Mamæa 182
His wife and moderate Administration 184
Education and virtuous Temper of Alex­ander - - ib.
Journal of his ordinary Life - 185
222—235. General Happiness of the Roman
World - - 186
Alexander refuses the Name of Antoninus 187
He attempts to reform the Army ib.
Seditions of the Prætorian Guards, and
Murder of Dlpian - 188
Danger of Dion Caflius - 189
Tumults of the Legions - 190
Firmness of the Emperor - ib.
Defects of his Reign and Character 191
Digression on the Finances of the Empire 192
Establishment of the Tribute on Roman
Citizens - - 193
Abolition of the Tribute - 194
Tributes of the Provinces - ib.
Of Asia and Egypt — ib.
Of Gaul, Africa, and Spain 195Of the Ifle of Gyanis - 196
Amount of the Revenue - ib.
Taxes on Roman Citizens instituted by
Augustus - - ib.
L The Customs - 197
II. The Excise - 198
III. Tax on Legacies and Inheritances ib.
Suited to the Laws and Manners 199
Regulations of the Emperors - 200
Edict of Caracalla - 201
The Freedom of the City given to all the
Provincials, for the Purpose of Tax­
ation - - ib.
Temporary and Reduction of the Tri­
bute - 202
Consequences of the universal Freedom of
Rome - - ib.
CHAP. VII.
The Elevation and Tyranny of Maximin.—
Rebellion in Africa and Italy, under the
Authority of the Senate.—Civil Wars and
Seditions.—Violent Deaths of Maximin
and his Sont of Maximus and Balbianust


and of the three Gordians.—Usurpation
and secular Games of Philip.
AtD. p»i«
The apparent Ridicule and solid Advan­
tages of hereditary Succession 204
Want of it in the Roman Empire pro­ductive of the greatest Calamities 20J
Birth and Fortunes of Maximin 206
His military Service and Honours 207
235 Conspiracy of Maximin - 208
Murder of Alexander and Severus ib.
Tyranny of Maximin - 209
Oppression of the Provinces -• 211
237 Revolt in Africa - - . 212
Character and Elevation of the two Gor­
dians - - 213
They solicit the Confirmation of their
Authority - - 1 215
The Senate ratifies their Election of the
Gordians - - ib.
Declares Maximin a public Enemy 217
Assumes the Command of Rome and Italy ib.
Prepares for a civil War - ib.
237 Defeat and Death of the two Gordians 218
Election of Maximus andSalbinus by the
Senate - - 219.
Their Characters - - 220
Tumult at Rome. The Younger Gor-
dian is declared Cæsar - 221
Maximin prepares to attack the Senate,
and their Emperors - - - ib.
238 Marches into Italy - - 223
Siege of Aquileia - - ib.
Conduct of Maximus - - 224
238 Murder of Maximin and his Son 225
His Portrait - - 226
Joy of the Roman World - 226
Sedition at Rome - - 227
226 Discontent of the Prætorian Guards 228
238 Massacre of Maximus and Balbinus 229
The third Gordian remains sole Emperor 230
Innocence and Virtues of Gordian ib.
240 Administration of Misitheus - 231
242 The Persian War - ib.
243 The Arts of Philip - - 232
244 Murder of Gordian - - ib.
Form of a military Republic. - 233
Reign







OCR Output








CONTENTS.


chap. n.
Of the Union and internal Prosperity of the
Roman Empire in the Age of the An to-


nines.
A. D. P»6«
Principles of Government - 34
Universal Spirit os Toleration - ib.
Of the People - - 35
Of Philosophers - - 36
Of the Magistrate - - 38
In the Provinces - - ib.
At Rome - - - 39
Freedom of Rome - - 40
Italy - - - 41
The Provinces - - 42
Colonies, and Municipal Towns - 43
Division of the Latin and the Greek Pro­
vinces - - - _ 45
General Use of both the Greek and Latin
Languages - 47
• Slaves - - - 48
Their Treatment - - ib.
Enfranchisement - "49
Numbers - - - 56
Populousness of the Roman Empire 51
Obedience and Union . - 5 2
Roman Monuments - "53
Many of theni erected at private Expence ib.
Example of Herodes Atticus • - 54
His Reputation - - 55
Most of the Roman Monuments for public
Use " " "56
Temples, Theatres, Aqueducts, 57
Number and Greatness of the Cities of the
Empire - - "58
In Italy - - - ib.
Gaul and Spain - - 59
Africa - " - ib.
Asia - "60
Roman Roads - - 61
Posts . - - - 62
Navigation - - - ib.


Improvement of Agriculture in the West­
ern Countries of the Empire - 63


Page
Introduction of Fruits, &e.
ib>
The Vine
- . 64
The Olive
ib.
Artificial Grafs
- ib.
General Plenty
65
Arts of Luxury
ib.
Foreign Trade
66
Gold and Silver
67
General Felicity
68
Decline of Courage
69
of Genius
ib.
Degeneracy
- 70


chap. m.
Of the Constitution of the Roman Empire*in the Age of the Antonines.


Page
Idea of a Monarchy
72
Situation of Augustus
ib.
He reforms the Senate-
73
Resigns his usurped Power
7.4
Is prevailed upon to resume it under the
Title of Emperor, or General
ib.
Power of the Roman Generals
75
Lieutenants of the Emperor
77
Division of the Provinces between the
Emperor and the Senate
ib.
The former preserves his Military Com­
mand, and guards, in Rome itself
78
Consular and Tribunitian Powers
ib.
Imperial Prerogatives
80
The Magistrates
81
The Senate -
8z
General Idea of the Imperial System
83
Court of the Emperors
ib.
Deification ...
8+
Titles of Augustus and Cæsar
85
Character and Policy of Augustus
86
Image of Liberty for the People
87
Attempts of the Senate after the Death of
Caligula ...
ib.
Image of Government for the Armies
88
Their Obedience
89
Designation,







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 22X


to the Greeks aud Romans the siege of Troy. On a narrow baÆsof acknowledged truth, an immense but rude superstructure of fablehas been erected; and the wild Irishman", as well as the wildTartar '4, could point out the individual son of Japhet, from whoseloins his ancestors were lineally descended. The last centuryabounded with antiquarians of profound learning and easy faith,who, by the dim light of legends and traditions, of conjecture*and etymologies, led the great-grandchildren of Noah from theTower of Babel to the extremities of the globe. Of these judicious-critics, one of the most entertaining was Olaus Rudbeck, professorin the university of Upsal ". Whatever is celebrated either in his­tory or fable, this zealous patriot ascribes to his country. FromSweden (which formed so considerable a part of ancient Germany)the Greeks themselves derived their alphabetical characters, theirastronomy, and their religion. Of that delightful region (for suchit appeared to the eye» of a native) the Atlantis of Plato, the coun­try of the Hyperboreans, the gardens of the Hesperides, the For­tunate Iflands, and even the Elysian Fields, were all but faint andimperfect transcripts. A clime so profusely favoured by Nature,,could not long remain desert after the flood. The learned Rudbeckallows the family of Noah a few years to multiply from eight to>about twenty thousand persons. He then disperses them into smallcolonies to replenish the earth, and to propagate the human species.The German or Swedilh detachment (which marched, if I am notmistaken, under the command of Astcenaz the son of Gomer, theson of" Japhet) distinguistied itself by a more than common dili­gence in the prosecution of this great work. The northern hivecast its swarms over the greatest part of Europe, Africa, and Asia;and (to use the author's metaphor) the blood circulated back fromthe extremities to the heart.
But all this well-laboured system of German antiquities is anni- The Germans,Dilated by a single fact, too well attested to admit of any doubt, Utters."' °8 • and.







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 541


were none of sufficient weight and authority to establish a precedentfor the conduct of a Roman magistrate.
The answer of Trajan, to which the Christians of the succeeding Trajan andage have frequently appealed, discovers as much regard for justice establish a Sand humanity as could be reconciled with his mistaken notions pr|ceed?ng °fof religious policy s*. Instead of displaying the implacable zeal of aga,nst'nem-an inquisitor, anxious to discover the most minute particles ofheresy, and exulting in the number of his victims, the emperorexpresses much more solicitude to protect the security of the in­nocent than to prevent the escape of the guilty. He acknowledgesthe difficulty of fixing any general plan; but he lays down twosalutary rules, which often afforded relief and support to thedistressed Christians. Though he directs the magistrates to punishsuch persons as are legally convicted, he prohibits them, witha very humane inconsistency, from making any inquiries concern­ing the supposed criminals. Nor was the magistrate allowed toproceed on every kind of information. Anonymous charges theemperor rejects, as too repugnant to the equity of his government;and he strictly requires, for the conviction of those to whom theguilt of Christianity is imputed, the positive evidence of a fair andopen accuser. It is likewise probable, that the persons who assumedso invidious an office, were obliged to declare the grounds of theirsuspicions, to specify (both in respect to time and place) the secretassemblies, which their Christian adversary had frequented, and todisclose a great number of circumstances, which were concealedwith the most vigilant jealousy, from the eye of the profane. Ifthey succeeded in their prosecution, they were exposed to theresentment of a considerable and active party, to the censure of themore liberal portion of mankind, and to the ignominy which, inevery age and country, has attended the character of an informer*K, on the contrary, they failed in their proofs, they incurred thesevere and perhaps capital penalty, which,, according to a-law pub­lished!







OCR Output








S58 THE DECLINE AND FALL


lives, the fortunes, and the dignity of his adversaries, and evencontinued in their respective stations the greater number of the ser­vants of Carinus *. It is not improbable that motives of prudencemight assist the humanity of the artful Dalmatian; of these ser­vants, many had purchased his favour by secret treachery; in others,he esteemed their grateful fidelity to an unfortunate master. Thediscerning judgment of Aurelian, of Probus, and of Carus, hadfilled the several departments of the state and army with officers ofapproved merit, whose removal would have injured the public ser­vice, without promoting the interest of the successor. Such a con­duct, however, displayed to the Roman-world the fairest prospectof the new reign, and the emperor affected to confirm this favour­able prepossession, by declaring, that among all the virtues of hispredecessors, he was the most ambitious of imitating the humane.philosophy of Marcus Antoninus s.Association The first considerable action of his reign, seemed to evince bisof Maximtuu sincerity as well as his moderation. After the example of Marcus,Aprii'i286 he gave himself a colleague in ithe person of Maximian, on whomheibestowed at first the title of Cæsar, and afterwards that of Augustus 6.■But the-motives of his conduct, as well as the object of his choice, wereof a very different nature from those of hisadmired predecessor. Byinvesting a (luxurious youth with the honours of the purple, Marcusbad discharged a debt of privategratitude, at the expcnce, indeed, of the'happiness of the state. By associating a friend and a fellow-soldier tothe labours of government, Diocletian, in a time of public, danger, pro­vided for'the defence both of the East and of the West. Maximianwas born a peasant, and, like Aurelian, in .the territory of Sirmium.Ignorant of letters7, careless of laws, 'the rusticity of his appear­ance and manners still'betrayed in -the most elevated fortune themeanness of his extraction. War-was the only art which he pro-fessed. In a long course of service, he had distinguished himself onevery frontier of the empire 5 -and-though his military talents were
formed







OCR Output













OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 343


But in the prosecution of a favourite scheme, the best of men, satis- His death,fied with the rectitude of their intentions, are subject to forget thebounds of moderation j nor did Probus himself sufficiently consultthe patience and disposition of his fierce legionaries 6o. The dangersof the military profession seem only to be compensated by a life ofpleasure and idleness; but if the duties of the soldier are in­cessantly aggravated by the labours of the peasant, he will at lastsink under the intolerable burden, or shake it off with indignation.The imprudence of Probus is said to have inflamed the discontentof his troops. More attentive to the interests of mankind thanto those of the army, he expressed the vain hope, that, by theestablishment of universal peace, he ihould soon abolish the necessityof a standing and mercenary force 61. The unguarded expressionproved fatal to him. In one of the hottest days of summer, a« heseverely urged the unwholesome labour of draining the marches ofSirmium, the soldiers, impatient of fatigue,, on a sudden threwdown their tools, grasped their arms, and broke out into a furiousmutiny. The emperor, conscious of his danger, took refuge in alofty tower, constructed for the purpose of surveying the progressof the work 6z. The tower was instantly forced, and a thousand A.v.tSg.swords were plunged at once in the bosom ©f tJie unfortunate *August"Probus. The rage of the troops subsided as .seon as it had beengratified. They then lamented their fatal rashness, forgot the se­verity of the emperor, whom they had massacred, and hastened toperpetuate, by an honourable monument, the memory of his vir­tues and victories 6'.
When the legions had indulged their grief and repentance for Eleaion andthe death of Probus, their unanimous consent declared Carus, his caTus?" °fPrætorian prefect, the most deserviug of the imperial throne.Every circumstance that relates to this prince appears of a mixedand doubtful nature. He gloried in the title of Roman Citizen;and affected to compare the purity of his blood, with the foreign
and







OCR Output








C O N T E N T S.


A.D. Page
Designation of a Successor - 89
Of Tiberius - 90
Of Titus - - ib.
The Race of the Cæsars, and Flavian Fa­
mily - - ib.
96 Adoption and Character of Trajan 91
t 17 Of Hadrian 92
Adoption of the Elder and Younger Verus ib.
138—180. Adoption of the two Antonines 93
Character and Reign of Pius - 94
of Marcus ib.
Happiness of the Romans - 96
Its precarious Nature - ib.
Memory of Tiberius, Caligula, Nero,
and Domitian - 97
Peculiar Misery of the Romans under their
Tyrants - ib.
Insensibility of the Orientals - 98
Knowledge and free Spirit of the Romans 99
Extent of their Empire left them no Place
of Refuge - - iod


CHAP. IV.
The Cruelty, Follies, and Murder of Com-
modus.—Elettion of Pertinax.—His At­
tempts to reform the State.— His Assassi­


nation by the Prætorian Guards.
A. D. Pig«
Indulgence of Marcus - 102
To his Wife Faustina . ib.
To his Son Commodus , - 103
180 Accession of the Emperor Commodus 104
Character of Commodus - ib.
He returns to Rome - 105
183 Is wounded by an Assassin - 106Hatred and Cruelty of Commodus to­wards the Senate - - 107
The Quintilian Brothers - ib.
186 The Minister Perennis - ic8
Revolt of Maternus - 109
The Minister Cleander - no
His Avarice and Cruelty - ib.
189 Sedition and Death of Cleander in
Dissolute Pleasures of Commodus 113


A.D.
His Ignorance and low Sports ib.
Hunting of wild Beasts - 114
Commodus displays his Skiil in the Am­
phitheatre - - 11;
Acts as a Gladiator - 116
His Infamy and Extravagance 117
Conspiracy of his Domestics - ib.
192 Death of Commodus - 118
Choice of Pertinax for Emperor ib.
He is acknowledged by the Prætorian
Guards - - 119
193 And by the Senate - 120
The Memory of Commodus declared in­
famous - - ib.
Legal Jurisdiction of the Senate over the
Emperors •- - 121
Virtues of Pertinax - - ib.
He endeavours to reform the State 122
His Regulations - - ib.
His Popularity - - 124
Discontent os the Prætorians - ib.
A Conspiracy prevented - ib.
193 Murder of Pertinax by the Prætorians 125


CHAP. V.
Public Sale of the Empire to Didius Juli-anus by the Prætorian Guards.—Clodius
Albinus in Britain, Pefcennius Niger in
Syria, and Septitnius Severus in Pannonia,
declare against the Murderers of Perti­
nax.—Civil Wars and Vitlory of Severus
over his three Rivals.—Relaxation ofDiscipline.—New Maxims of Govern­ment.
A.D. PageProportion of the military Force to ths
Number of the People - 127
The Institution of the Prætorian Guards 128
Their Camp, Strength, and Confidence ib.
Their specious Claims - 129
They offer the Empire to Sale 130
193 It is purchased by Julian - 131 •
Julian is acknowledged by the Senate ib.
* a 2 Taken







OCR Output








2 ($4 THE DECLINE AND FALL


daughter in the affections of the inconstant emperor, and the bandsof policy were more firmly connected by those of love. But thehaughty prejudice of Rome still refused the name of marriage, tothe profane mixture of a citizen and a barbarian ; and has stigmatizedthe German princess with the opprobrious title of concubine of Gal-lienus
inroads ofthe uj. \ye have already traced the emigration of the Goths fromGoths. .'
Scandinavia, or at least from Prussia, to the mouth of the Bory-
sthenes,and have followed their victorious arms from the Borysthenes,to the Danube. Under the reigns of Valerian and Gallienus thefrontier of the last mentioned river was perpetually infested bythe inroads of Germans and Sarmatians; but it was defended bythe Romans with more than usual firmness and success. The pro­vinces that were the feat of war, recruited the armies of Rome withan inexhaustible supply of hardy soldiers; and more than one ofthese Illyrian peasants attained the station, and displayed the abi­lities, of a general. Though flying parties of the barbarians, whoincessantly hovered on the banks of the Danube, penetrated some­times to the confines of Italy and Macedonia ; their progress wascommonly checked, or their return intercepted, by the imperiallieutenants 9+. But the great stream of the Gothic hostilities wasdiverted into a very different channel. The Goths, in their newsettlement of the Ukraine, soon became masters of the northerncoast of the Euxine: to the south of that inland sea, were situatedthe soft and wealthy provinces of Asia Minor, which possessed allthat could attract, and nothing that could resist, a barbarian con­queror.
Conquest of The banks of the Borysthenes are only sixty miles distant from
the Boiphorus
by the Goths. the narrow entrance 9S of the peninsula of Crim Tartary, known tothe ancients under the name of Chersonefus Taurica 9<s. On thatinhospitable shore, Euripides, embellishing with exquisite art the talesof antiquity, has placed the scene of one of his most affecting trage­


dies,







OCR Output








3>y© THE DECLINE AND FALL


vessels, and to direct their various incursions, as well on the coast ofGreece as on that of Asia. "fU length the Gothic fleet anchored inthe port of Piræus, five miles distant from Athens'", which hadattempted to make some preparations for a vigorous defence. Cleo-damus, one of the engineers employed by the emperor's orders tofortify the maritime cities against the Goths, had already begun torepair the ancient walls fallen to decay since the time of Sylla,The efforts of his skill were ineffectual, and the barbarians be­came masters of the native feat of the muses and the arts. Butwhile the conquerors abandoned themselves to the licence of plunderand intemperance, their fleet, that lay with a slender guard in theharbour of Piræus, was unexpectedly attacked by the brave Dexip-pus, who flying with the engineer Cleodamus from the sack ofi • Athens, collected a hasty band of volunteers, peasants as well assoldiers, and in some measure avenged the calamities of hisCountry
ravage But this exploit, whatever lustre it might shed on the declining
threa"nluiy. age or~ Athens, served rather to irritate than to subdue the undauntedspirit of the northern invaders. A general conflagration blazed outat the fame time, in every district of Greece. Thebes and Argos,Corinth and Sparta, that had formerly waged such memorable warsagainst each other, were now unable to bring an army into the field,or even to defend their ruined fortifications. The rage of war,both by land and by sea, spread from the eastern point of Suniam,< .' t© the western coast of Epirus. The Goths had already advancedwithin sight of Italy, when the approach of such imminent dangerawakened the indolent Gallienus from his dream of pleasure. Theemperor appeared in arms; and his presence seems to have checkedthe ardour, and to have divided the strength of the enemy. Nau-Their divi- lobatus, a chief of the Heruli, accepted an honourable capitula-tre"t.and ™ iion, entered with a large body of his countrymen into the serviceof Rome, and was invested with the ornaments of the consular dig­


nity,







OCR Output













OCR Output








THE DECLINE AND FALL


rupted, by the habits of government. In the church as well as inthe world, the persons who were placed in any public stationrendered themselves considerable by their eloquence and firmness,by their knowledge of mankind, and by their dexterity in business,and while they concealed from others, and perhaps from them­selves, the secret motive of their actions, they too frequentlyrelapsed into all the turbulent passions of active life, which weretinctured with an additional degree of bitterness and obstinacy fromthe infusion of religious zeal.
The government of the church has often been the subject aswell as the instrument of contention. The hostile disputants ofRome, of Paris, of Oxford, and of Geneva, have each of themstrove to reduce the primitive and apostolic model ***, to the respec­tive standards of their own policy. The few who have pursuedthis inquiry with more candour and impartiality, are of opinionthat the apostles declined the office of legislation, and rather choseto endure some partial scandals and divisions, than to excludethe Christians of a future age from the liberty of varying theirforms of ecclesiastical government according to the changes oftimes and circumstances. The scheme of policy, which, under theirapprobation, was adopted for the use of the first century, maybe discovered from the practice of Jerusalem, of Ephesus, or ofCorinth. The societies which were instituted in the cities of theRoman empire, were united only by the ties of faith and charity.Independence and equality formed the basis of their internal con­stitution. The want of discipline and human learning was sup­plied by the occasional assistance of the prophets,e*, who werecalled to that function without distinction of age, of sex, or ofnatural abilities, and who, as often as they felt the divine impulse,poured forth the effusions of the spirit in the assembly of the faithful.But these extraordinary gifts were frequently abused Or misappliedby the prophetic teachers. They displayed them at an improper
season,







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 189


The emperor Maximus, who had advanced as far as Ravenna, ^°a"^softo secure that important place, and to hasten the military prepa­rations, beheld the event of the war in the more faithful mirror ofreason and policy. He was too sensible, that a single town couldnot resist the persevering efforts of a great army; and he dreaded,lest the enemy, tired with the obstinate resistance of Aquileia,should on a sudden relinquish the fruitless siege, and march directlytowards Rome. The fate of the empire and the cause of freedommust then be committed to the chance of a battle; and what armscould he oppose to the veteran legions of the Rhine and Danube?Some troops newly levied among the generous but enervated youthof Italy; and a body of German auxiliaries, on whose firmness inthe hour of trial, it was dangerous to depend. In the midst of thesejust alarms, the stroke of domestic conspiracy punished the crimesof Maximin, and delivered Rome and the senate from the calamitiesthat would surely have attended the victory of an enraged barba­rian.
The people of Aquileia had scarcely experienced any of the Murder ofcommon miseries of a siege, their magazines were plentifully sup- Msason.10 8ndplied, and several fountains within the walls assured them an in- A' /Lri^*"exhaustible resource of fresh water. The soldiers of Maximinwere, on the contrary, exposed to the inclemency of the season,and the horrors of famine. The naked country was ruined, theriver3 filled with the slain and polluted with blood. A spirit ofdespair and disaffection began to diffuse itself among the troops;and as they were cut off from all intelligence, they easily believedthat the whole empire had embraced the cause of the senate, and thatthey were left as devoted victims to-perish under the impregnablewalls of Aquileia. The fierce temper of the tyrant was exasperatedby disappointments, which he imputed to the cowardice of hisarmy; and his wanton and ill-timed cruelty, instead of strikingterror, inspired hatred and a just desire of revenge. A party of
Prætorian







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 401


those ample provinces was sufficient to exercise his talents, and tosatisfy his ambition. Clemency, temperance, and moderation, dis­tinguished the amiable character of Constantius, and his fortunatesubjects had frequently occasion to compare the virtues of theirsovereign with the passions of Maximian, and even with the arts ofDiocletian \ Instead of imitating their eastern pride and magni­ficence, Constantius preserved the modesty of a Roman prince.He declared with unaffected sincerity, that his most valued treasurewas in the hearts of his people, and then, whenever the dignity ofthe throne or the danger of the state required any extraordinarysupply, he could depend with confidence on their gratitude andliberality The provincials of Gaul, Spain, and Britain, sensibleof his worth and of their own happiness, reflected with anxietyon the declining health of the emperor Constantius, and the tenderage of his numerous family, the issue of his second marriage withthe daughter of Maximian. •
The stern temper of Galerius was cast in a very different mould; Of Galerius.and while he commanded the esteem of his subjects, he seldom con­descended to solicit their affections. His fame in arms, and aboveall, the success of the Persian war, had elated his haughty mind,which was naturally impatient of a superior, or even of an equal.If it were possible to rely on the partial testimony of an injudiciouswriter, we might ascribe the abdication of Diocletian to the me­naces of Galerius, and relate the particulars of a private conver­sation between the two princes, in which the former discoveredas much pusillanimity as the latter displayed ingratitude and arro­gance +. But these obscure anecdotes are sufficiently refuted by animpartial view of the character and conduct of Diocletian. What­ever might otherwise have been his intentions, if he had appre­hended any danger from the violence of Galerius, his good fensewould have instructed him to prevent the ignominious contest; and
Vol. I. Fff as







OCR Output








4^4 THE DECLINE AND FALL


Abhorrenceof the Chris­tians foridolatry.


Ceremonies.


Arts.


In consequence of this opinion, it was the first but arduous duty•of a Christian to preserve himself pure and undefiled by the practiceof idolatry. The religion of the nations was not merely a specu­lative doctrine professed in the schools or preached in the temples.The innumerable deities and rites of polytheism were closely inter­woven with every circumstance of business or pleasure, of publicor of private life; and it seemed impossible to escape their obser­vance, without, at the same time, renouncing the commerce ofmankind, and all the offices and amusements of society Theimportant transactions of peace and war were prepared or con­cluded by solemn sacrifices, in which the magistrate, the senator,and the soldier, were obliged to preside or to participate40. Thepublic spectacles were an essential part of the cheerful devotion ofthe Pagans, and the gods were supposed to accept, as the mostgrateful offering, the games that the prince and people celebratedin honour of their peculiar festivals *'. The Christian, who withpious horror avoided the abomination of the circus or the theatre,found himself encompassed with infernal snares in every convivialentertainment, as often as his friends, invoking the hospitabledeities, poured out libations to each other's happiness **. Whenthe bride, struggling with well-affected reluctance, was forced inhymenæal pomp over the threshold of her new habitation 4{; orwhen the sad procession of the dead slowly moved towards thefuneral pile 4+, the Christian, on these interesting occasions, wascompelled to desert the persons who were the dearest to him, ratherthan contract the guilt inherent to those impious ceremonies.Every art and every trade that was in the least concerned in theframing or adorning of idols was polluted by the stain of idola­try *% a levere sentence, since it devoted to eternal misery the fargreater part of the community, which is employed in the exerciseof liberal or mechanic professions. If we cast our eyes over thenumerous remains of antiquity, we shall perceive, that besides the
immediate







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. Bi


0
that absolute power, which they had exerted for the benefit of theirpeople. The ideal restraints of the senate and the laws might serveto display the virtues, but could never correct the vices of the emperor.The military force was a blind and irresistible instrument of oppression;and the corruption of Roman manners would always supply flat­terers eager to applaud, and ministers prepared to serve, the fear orthe avarice, the lust or the cruelty, of their masters.
These gloomy apprehensions had been already justified by theexpe- Memory ofrience of the Romans. The annals of the emperors exhibit a strong i^u^N^o]and various picture of human nature, which we should vainly seek Donu*among the mixed and doubtful characters of modern history. In theconduct of those monarebs we may trace the utmost lines of vice andvirtue; the moist exalted perfection, and the meanest degeneracy ofour own species. The golden age of Trajan and the Antonines,had been preceded by an age of iron. It is almost superfluous toenumerate the unworthy successors of Augustus. Their unpa­ralleled vices, and the splendid theatre on which they were acted,have saved them from oblivion. The dark unrelenting Tiberius,the furious Caligula, the stupid Claudius, the profligate and cruelNero, the beastly Vitellius 5°, and the timid inhuman Domitian,are condemned to everlasting fame. During fourscore years (ex­cepting only the short and doubtful respite of Vespasian's reign JI)Rome groaned beneath an unremitting tyranny, which exterminatedthe ancient families of the republic, and was fatal to almost everyvirtue, and every talent, that arose in that unhappy period.
Under the reign of these monsters, the slavery of the Romans „
° , ' Peculiar mi-
was accompanied with two peculiar circumstances, the one occasion- se|7 °f «heed by their former liberty, the other by their extensive conquests, der their ty.which rendered their condition more wretched than that of the ran's"victims of tyranny in any other age or country. From thesecauses were derived, i. The exquisite sensibility of the sufferers;and, 2. The impossibility of escaping from the hand of the oppressor.Vol. I. M I. When







OCR Output








i88 THE DECLINE AND FALL


villages and open towns had been deserted on their approach, by theinhabitants, the cattle was driven away, the provisions removed,or destroyed, the bridges broke down, nor was any thing leftwhich could afford either shelter or subsistence to an invader. Suchhad been the wise orders of the generals of the senate; whose de­sign was to protract the war, to ruin the army of Maximin bythe flow operation of famine, and to consume his strength in thesieges of the principal cities of Italy, which they had plentifully
AquLll stored with
men and provisions from the deserted country. Aquileiareceived and withstood the first shock of the invasion. The streamsthat issue from the head of the Hadriatic gulf, swelled by the meltingof the winter snows opposed an unexpected obstacle to the armsof Maximin. At length, on a singular bridge, constructed withart and difficulty, of large hogsheads, he transported his army tothe opposite bank, rooted up the beautiful vineyards in the neigh­bourhood of Aquileia, demolished the suburbs, and employed thetimber of the buildings in the engines and towers, with which onevery side he attacked the city. The walls, fallen to decay, duringthe security of a long peace, had been hastily repaired on this sud­den emergency; but the firmest defence of Aquileia consisted in theconstancy of the citizens; all ranks of whom, instead of beingdismayed, were animated by the extreme danger, and their know­ledge of the tyrant's unrelenting temper. Their courage wassupported and directed by Crispinus and Menophilus, two of thetwenty lieutenants of the senate, who, with a small body of regulartroops, had thrown themselves into the besieged place. The armyof Maximin was repulsed in repeated attacks, his machines de­stroyed by showers of artificial fire, and the generous enthusiasm ofthe Aquileians was exalted into a confidence of success, by theopinion, that Belenus, their tutelar deity, combated in person inthe defence of his distressed worshippers
The


4







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. rfy


fair prospect of honours and fortune that was thrown open to theirambition. But the favour, which implied a distinction, was lostin the prodigality of Caracalla, and the reluctant provincials Thefreedomwere compelled to assume the vain title, and the real obliga- given to all
_ _ „ the provin-
tions, of Roman citizens. Nor was the rapacious Ion or oe- ciais, for theverus contented with such a measure of taxation, as had appeared ["^ion.^sufficient to his moderate predecessors. Instead of a twentieth, heexacted a tenth of all legacies and inheritances; and during hisreign (for the ancient proportion was restored after his death) hecrushed alike every part of the empire under the weight of hisiron scepter "V . • I i
When all the provincials became liable to the peculiar impositions Temporaryof Roman citizens, they seemed to acquire a legal exemption from the [heuibute.0tributes which they had paid in their former condition of subjects.Such were not the maxims of government adopted by Caracalla andhis pretended son. The old as well as the new taxes were, at the fametime, levied in the provinces. It was reserved for the virtue of Alexan­der to relieve them in a great measure from this intolerable grievance,by reducing the tributes to a thirtieth part of the sum exacted at thetime of his accession "s. It is impossible to conjecture the motive thatengaged him to spare so trifling a remnant of the public evil; butthe noxious weed, which had not been totally eradicated, again sprangup with the most luxuriant growth, and in the succeeding age,darkened the Roman world with its deadly shade. In the course ofthis history, we shall be too often summoned to explain the land-tax,the capitation, and the heavy contributions of corn, wine, oil, andmeat, that were exacted from the provinces, for the use of thecourt, the army, and the capital.
As long as Rome and Italy were respected as the center of govern- Consequencesment, a national spirit was preserved by the ancient, and insensibly a freedomTfimbibed by the adopted citizens. The principal commands of the Rome'army were filled by men who had received a liberal education, were
Vol. I. Z well







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AND FALL


the Latin tongue, and the exclusive use of the latter was inflexiblymaintained in the administration of civil as well as military govern­ment 45. The two languages exercised at the same time their se­parate jurisdiction throughout the empire : the former, as the naturalidiom of science; the latter, as the legal dialect of public trans­actions. Those who united letters with business, were equally con­versant with both; and it was almost impossible, in any province,to find a Roman subject, of a liberal education, who was at once astranger to the Greek and to the Latin language.Slaves. It was by such institutions that the nations of the empire insensibly
melted away into the Roman name and people. But there still re­mained, in the centre of every province and of every family, anunhappy condition of men who endured the weight, without fhar--ing the benefits of society. In the free states of antiquity, the do-
Their treat- mestic slaves were exposed to the wanton rigour of despotism. Themenu
perfect settlement of the Roman empire was preceded by ages ofviolence and rapine. The slaves consisted, for the most part, ofbarbarian captives, taken in thousands by the chance of war, pur­chased at a vile price +S, accustomed to a life of independence, andimpatient to break and to revenge their fetters. Against such in­ternal enemies, whose desperate insurrections had more than oncereduced the republic to the brink of destruction 47, the most severeregulations *8, and the most cruel treatment, seemed almost justifiedby the great law of self-preservation. But when the principalnations of Europe, Asia, and Africa, were united under the laws ofone sovereign, the source of foreign supplies flowed with muchless abundance, and the Romans were reduced to the milder butmore tedious method of propagation. In their numerous families,and particularly in their country estates, they encouraged the mar­riage of their slaves. The affections of nature, the habits of edu­cation, and the possession- of a dependent species of property,contributed to alleviate the hardships of servitude "9. The ex­istence







OCR Output








8o THE DECLINE AND FALL


against the adherents of the traitor 4\ War he detested, as thedisgrace and calamity of human nature; hut when the necessity ofa just defence called upon him to take up arms, he cheerfully ex­posed his person to eight winter campaigns, on the frozen banks ofthe Danube, the severity of which was at last fatal to the weaknessof his constitution. His memory was revered by a grateful posteri­ty, and above a century after his death, many persons preserved theimage of Marcus Antoninus among those of their householdgods49.
Happiness of If a man were called to fix the period in the history of the world,t.eRoman. ^ur-ing which the condition of the human race was most happy andprosperous, he would, without hesitation, name that which elapsedfrom the death of Domitian to the accession of Conuriodus. Thevast extent of the Roman empire was governed by absolute power,under the guidance of virtue and wisdom. The armies wererestrained by the firm but gentle hand of four successive emperors,whose characters and authority commanded involuntary respect. Theforms of the civil administration were carefully preserved by Nerva,Trajan, Hadrian, and the Antonines, who delighted in the imageof liberty, and were pleased with considering themselves, as theaccountable ministers of the laws. Such princes deserved thehonour of restoring the republic, had the Romans of their daysbeen capable of enjoying a rational freedom.Its precarious The labours of these monarchs were over-paid by the immensereward that inseparably waited on. their success; by the honestpride of virtue, and by the exquisite delight of beholding thegeneral happiness of which they were the authors. A just, butmelancholy reflection, embittered, however, the noblest of hu­man enjoyments. They must often have recollected the instabilityof a happiness which depended on the character of a single man.The fatal moment v/as perhaps approaching, when some licentiousyouth, or some jealous tyrant, would abuse, to the destruction,
that


nature.







OCR Output








74 THE DECLINE AND FALL


fused a spirit of bitterness into a system of love and harmony. Theties of blood and friendship were frequently torn asunder by thedifference of religious faith; and the Christians, who, in this world,found themselves oppressed by the power of the pagans, were some­times seduced by resentment and spiritual pride to delight in theprospect of their future triumph. "You are fond of spectacles,"exclaims the stern Tertullian ; "expect the greatest of all spectacles,"the last and eternal judgment of the universe* How shall I ad-"mire, how laugh, how rejoice, how exult, when I behold so"many proud monarchs, and fancied gods, groaning in the lowest"abyss of darkness; so many magistrates who persecuted the name"of the Lord, liquefying in fiercer fires than they ever kindled"against the. Christians; so many sage philosophers blushing in red*' hot flames with their deluded scholars; so many celebrated poets"trembling before the tribunal, not of Minos, but of Christ; so"many tragedians, more tuneful in the expression of their own"sufferings; so many dancers"—But the humanity of the readerwill permit me to draw a veil over the rest of this infernal descrip­tion, which the zealous African pursues in a long variety of affectedand unfeeling witticisms 7<\.We» often Doubtless there were many among the primitive Christians of atheiTfws.by temper more suitable to the meekness and charity of their profession.
There were many who felt a sincere compassion for the danger oftheir friends and countrymen, and who exerted the most benevolentzeal to save them from the impending destruction. The carelessPolytheist, assailed by new and unexpected terrors, against whichneither his priests nor his philosophers could afford him any cer­tain protection, was very frequently terrified and subdued by themenace of eternal tortures. His fears might assist the progress ofhis faith and reason; and if he could once persuade himself to suspectthat the Christian religion might possibly be true, it became an easy
talk







OCR Output








 


1







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


A rapid succession of monarchs had arisen and fallen in the pro- Succession os
* * Usurpers in
vinces of Gaul. The rigid virtues of Posthumus were fatal to him. Gaul.After suppressing a competitor, who had assumed the .purple atMentz, he refused to gratify his troops with the plunder of thdrebellious city; and in the seventh year of his reign, became thevictim of their disappointed avarice *6. The death of Victorinus,his friend and associate, was occasioned by a less worthy cause*The shining accomplishments 47 of that prince were stained bya licentious passion, which he indulged in acts of violence,with too little regard to the laws of society, or even to those oflove 4". He was slain at Cologne, by a conspiracy of jealous huf-1bands, whose revenge would have appeared more justifiable hadthey spared the innocence of his son. After the murder of so manyvaliant princes, it is somewhat remarkable, that a female for a longtime controuled the fierce legions of Gaul, and still more singular,that she was the mother of the unfortunate Victorinus. Thearts and treasures of Victoria enabled her successively to placeMan us and Tetricus on the throne, and to reign with a manlyvigour under the name of those dependent emperors. Money ofcopper, of silver, and of gold, was coined in her name; she as­sumed the titles of Augusta and Mother of the Camps: her powerended only with her life; but her life was perhaps shortened by theingratitude of Tetricus 49.
When, at the instigation of his ambitious patroness, Tetricus The reign andassumed the ensigns of royalty, he was governor of the peaceful tricus.province of Aquitaine, an employment suited to his character andeducation. He reigned four or five years over Gaul, Spain, andBritain, the slave and sovereign of a licentious army, whom hedreaded, and by whom he was despised. The valour and fortune ofAuretian, at length opened the prospect of a deliverance. He ven­tured todHclose his melancholy situation, and conjured the emperorto hasten to the relief of his unhappy rival. Had this secret cor- A. D. 271.
Vol. I. Rr - respondence Summer*







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AND FALL


their labours in exposing its falsehood and extravagance, they areobliged to transcribe the eloquence of Cicero or the wit of Lucian.The contagion of these sceptical writings had been diffused farbeyond the number of their readers. The fashion of incredulitywas communicated from the philosopher to the man of pleasure orbusiness, from the noble to the plebeian, and from the master to themenial slave who waited at his table, and who eagerly listenedto the freedom of his conversation. On public occasions the phi­losophic part of mankind affected to treat with respect and decencythe religious institutions of their country; but their secret con­tempt penetrated through the thin and awkward disguise, and eventhe people, when they discovered that their deities were rejectedand derided by those whose rank or understanding they wereaccustomed to reverence, were filled with doubts and apprehensionsconcerning the truth of those doctrines, to which they had yieldedthe most implicit belief. The decline of ancient prejudice left avery numerous portion of human kind in a painful and comfortlesssituation. A state of scepticism and suspence may amuse a fewinquisitive minds. But the practice of superstition is so congenialto the multitude, that if they are forcibly awakened, they stillregret the loss of their pleasing vision. Their love of the marvellousand supernatural, their curiosity with regard to future events,and their strong propensity to extend their hopes and fears beyondthe limits of the visible world, were the principal causes whichfavoured the establishment of Polytheism. So urgent on the vulgar isthe necessity of believing, that the fall of any system of mythology willmost probably be succeeded by the introduction of some other modeof superstition. Some deities of a more recent and fashionable castmight soon have occupied the deserted temples of Jupiter andApollo, if, in the decisive moment, the wisdom of Providence hadnot interposed a genuine revelation, fitted to inspire the mostrational esteem and conviction, whilst, at the same time, it was
2 adorned







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE:


inimitable character of the style of Tacitus; by his reputation, -which guarded his text from the interpolations of pious fraud, andby the substance of his narration, which accused the first Christiansof the most atrocious crimes, without insinuating that they pos­sessed any miraculous or even magical powers above the rest ofmankind 55. 2. Notwithstanding it is probable that Tacitus wasborn some years before the fire of Rbme 36, he could derive onlyfrom reading and conversation the knowledge of an event whichhappened during his infancy. Before he gave himself to the pub­lic, he calmly waited till his genius had attained its full maturity,and he was more than forty years of age, when a grateful regardfor the memory of the virtuous Agricola, extorted from him themost early of those historical compositions which will delight andinstruct the most distant posterity. After making a trial of hisstrength in the life of Agricola and the description of Germany, heconceived, and at length executed, a more arduous work, the his­tory of Rome, in thirty books, from the fall of Nero to the acces­sion of Narva. The administration of Nerva introduced an age ofjustice and prosperity, which Tacitus had destined for the occu­pation of his old age37; but when*he took a nearer view of hissubject, judging, perhaps, that it was a more honourable, or a lessinvidious office, to record the vices of past tyrants, than to cele­brate the virtues of a reigning monarch, he chose rather to relate,under the form of annals, the actions of the four immediate successorsof Augustus. To collect, to dispose* and to adorn a series of fourscoreyears, in an immortal work, every sentence of which is pregnantwith the deepest observations and the most lively images, was an un­dertaking sufficient to exercise the genius of Tacitus himself duringthe greatest part of his life. In the last years of the. reign of Trajan,whilst the victorious monarch extended the power of Rome beyondits ancient limits, the historian was describing, in the second andfourth books of his annals, the tyranny of Tiberius33; and the6-! . emperot







OCR Output








470 THE DECLINE AND FALL


among theChriltians.


Approaching«nd.of theworld.


under the reign of the Asmonæan princes and pontiffs. The tem­per of the Jews was incapable of contenting itself with such a coldand languid assent as might satisfy the mind of a Poly thrift; and assoon as they admitted the idea of a future state, they embraced itwith the zeal which has always formed the characteristic of thenation. Their zeal, however, added nothing to its evidence, oreven probability: and it was still necessary, that the doctrine of lifeand immortality, which had been dictated by nature, approved byreason, and received by superstition, should obtain the sanction ofdivine truth from the authority and example of Christ.
When the promise of eternal happiness was proposed to mankind,on condition of adopting the faith and of observing the preceptsof the gospel, it is no wonder that so advantageous an offer shouldhave been accepted by great numbers of every religion, of everyrank, and of every province in the Roman empire. The ancientChristians were animated by a contempt for their present existence,and by a just confidence of immortality, of which the doubtful andimperfect faith of modern ages cannot give us any adequate notion.In the primitive church, the influence of truth was very powerfullystrengthened by an opinion, which, however it may deserve respectfor its usefulness and antiquity, has not been found agreeable toexperience. It was universally believed, that the end of the world»and the kingdom of Heaven, were at hand. The near approachof this wonderful event had been predicted by the apostles; thetradition of it was preserved by their earliest disciples, and thosewho understood in their literal sense the discourses of Christ himself,were obliged to expect the second and glorious coming of the Sonof Man in the clouds, before that generation was totally extin­guished, which had beheld his humble condition upon earth, andwhich might still be witness to the calamities of the Jews underVespasian or Hadrian. The revolution of seventeen centuries haainstructed us not to press too closely the mysterious language of
prophecy







OCR Output








336" THE DECLINE AND FALL


i


granted them an honourable capitulation, and permitted them toreturn in safety to their native country. But the losses which theysuffered in the march, the battle, and the retreat, broke the powerof the nation: nor is the Lygian name ever repeated in the historyeither of Germany or of the empire. The deliverance of. Gaul isreported to have cost the lives of four hundred thousand of the in­vaders; a work of labour to the Romans, and of expence to theemperor, who gave a piece of gold for the head of every barba­rian '9. But as the fame of warriors is built on the destruction ofhuman kind, we may naturally suspect, that the sanguinary accountwas multiplied by the avarice of the soldiers, and accepted withoutany very severe examination by the liberal vanity of Probus.and carries Since the expedition of Maximin, the Roman generals had con-Gcrmany.nt0 fined their ambition to a defensive war against the nations of Ger­many, who perpetually pressed on the frontiers of the empire. Themore daring Probus pursued his Gallic victories, passed the Rhine,and displayed his invincible eagles on the banks of the Elbe and theNecker. He was fully convinced that nothing could reconcile theminds of the barbarians to peace, unless they experienced in theirown country the calamities of war. Germany, exhausted by theill success of the last emigration, was astonished by his presence.Nine of the most considerable princes repaired to his camp, and fellprostrate at his feet. Such a treaty was humbly received by theGermans, as it pleased the conqueror to dictate. He exacted astrict restitution of the effects and captives which they had carriedaway from the provinces; and obliged their own magistrates topunish the more obstinate robbers who presumed to detain any partof the spoil. A considerable tribute of corn, cattle, and horses, theonly wealth of barbarians, was reserved for the use of the garrisonswhich Probus established on the limits of their territory. He evenentertained some thoughts of compelling the Germans to relinquishshe exercise of arms, and to trust their differences to the justice,


their







OCR Output








NOTES ON THE FOURTEENTH CHAPTER. Ixt


delight in recording the wonderful deaths of thepersecutors, I would recommend to their perusalan admirable passage of Grorus iHist. 1. vii. p.352.) concerning the last illness of Philip II. ofSpain.
[39] See Euscbius, 1. if. 6. 10. Lactantius deM. P. c. 36. Zosimus is less exact, and evidentlyconfounds Maximian with Maximin.
[40] See the viiith Panegyric, in which Eu-menius displays, in the presence of Constantine,the misery and the gratitude of the city of Autun.
[41] Eutropius, x. 3. Panegyr. Vcter. vii. 10,11,12. A great number of the French youth werelikewise exposed to the same cruel and ignominiousdeath.
[42] Julian excludes Maxentius from the banquetof the Cæsars with abhorrence and contempt; andZosimus (1. ii. p. 85.) accuses him of every kind ofcruelty and profligacy.
[43] Zosimus, 1. ii. p. 83—85. AureliusVictor.
[44] The passage of Aurelius Victor mould beread in the following manner. Primus institutopeflimo, muntrum specie, Patres Oratorefque pecu-niam conferre prodigenti sibi cogeret.
[4;] Panegyr. Vet. ix, 3. Euseb. Hist. Eccles.viii 14, et in Vit. Constantin. i. 33, 34. Rufinus,c. 17. The virtuous Matron, who stabbed herselfto escape the violence of Maxentius, was a Christian,wife to the prefect of the city, and her name wasSophronia. It still remains a question among thecasuists, whether, on such occasions, Suicide isjustifiable.
[46] Prætorianis cxdem vulgi quondam annueret,is the vague expression of Aurelius Victor. Seemore particular, though somewhat different, ac­counts of a tumult and massacre, which happenedat Rome, in Eusebius (I. viii. c. 14 ) and in Zosi­mus (1. ii. p. 84..).
[47] See in the Panegyrics (ix. 14.). a lively de­scription of the indolence and vain pride of Max­entius. In another place, the orator observes, theniches which Rome had accumulated in a period of1060 years, were lavished by the tyrant on his mer-7


cenary bands; rederriptis ad civilelatrocinium ma-nibus ingesserat.
[4R] After the victory of Constantine, it wasuniversally allowed, that the motive of deliveringthe republic from a detested tyrant, would, at anytime, havejuilified his expedition into Italy. Euseb.in Vit. Constantine, 1. i. c. 26. Panegyr. Vet.ix. 2.
[49] Zosimus, 1. ii. p. 84, 85. Nazarius inPanegyr. x. 7—13 .
[^o] See Panegyr. Vet. ix. 2. Omnibus feretuis Comitibus et Ducibus non solum tacite muf-santibus, fed etiam aperte timentibus; contra con-silia hominum, contra Haruspicum monita, ipseper temet liberandæ urbis tempus venifle scntirej.The embassy of the Romans is mentioned only byZonaras (1. xiii.) and by Cedrenus (in Ccmpend.Hist. p. 2;o.): but those modern Greeks had theopportunity of consulting many writers which havesince been lost, among which we may reckon thelife of Constantine by Praxagoras, an Atheniaaphilosopher. Photius (p. 63.) has drawn a stiortextract from that historical work.
[51] Zosimus (I. ii. p. 86.) has given us thiscurious account of the forces on both sides. Hemakes no mention of any naval armaments, thoughwe are assured (Panegyr. 'Vet. ix. 25.) that the warwas carried on by/ea as well as by land; and thatthe fleet of Constantine took possession of Sardinia,Corsica, and the ports of Italy.
[52] Panegyr. Vet- ix. 3. It is not surprisingthat the orator should diminish the numbers withwhich his sovereign atchieved the conquest of Italy;but it appears somewhat singular, that he shouldesteem the tyrant's army at no more than ico.coomen.
[55] The three principal passages of the Alpsbetween Gaul andltaly, are those ot'Mount St Ber­nard, Mount Cenis. and Mount Genevre. Tradi­tion, and a resemblance of names (Alfes Ptnnintr),had assigned the first of these for the march of Han­nibal (See Simler de Alpibus). The v. hevalier deFolard (Polybe, torn, iv.) and M. Danville haveled him over Mount Genevre. But notwithstand­ing the authority of an experienced officer, and alearned geographer, the pretensions of Mount
Cenis







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AND FALL


had a wife still alive, but divorce was permitted by the Roman law,and the fierce passions of the tyrant demanded an immediate gra­tification. The answer of Valeria was such as became the daughterand widow of emperors; but it was tempered by the prudencewhich her defenceless condition compelled her to observe. She re­presented to the persons whom Maximin had employed on thisoccasion, <c that even if honour could permit a woman of hercharacter and dignity to entertain a thought of second nuptials,"decency at least must forbid her to listen to his addresses at a'* time when the ashes of her husband and his benefactor were"still warm; and while the sorrows of her mind were still expressed** by her mourning garments. She ventured to declare, that she"could place very little confidence in the professions of a man,*' whose cruel inconstancy was capable of repudiating a faithful"and affectionate wife 8*". On this repulse, the love of Maximinwas converted into fury, and, as witnesses and judges were alwaysat his disposal, it was easy for him to cover his fury with anappearance of legal proceedings, and to persecute the reputation aswell as the happiness of Valeria. Her estates were confiscated, hereunuchs and domestics devoted to the most inhuman tortures, andseveral innocent and respectable matrons, who were honoured withher friendship, suffered death on a false accusation of adultery.The empress herself, together with her mother Prisca, was con­demned to exile, and as they were ignominiousty hurried fromplace to place before they were confined to a sequestered village in thedeserts of Syria, they exposed their shame and distress to the provinces o^the East, which, during thirty years, had respected their august dignity.Diocletian made several ineffectual efforts to alleviate the misfortunesof his daughter; and, as the last return that he expected for theimperial purple, which he had conferred upon Maximin, he en­treated that Valeria might be permitted to share his retirement of
& Salona







OCR Output








176 THE DECLINE AND FALL


pearance of Maximin, who declared himself the friend and advo­cate of the military order, and was unanimously acknowledged em­peror of the Romans by the applauding legions. The son ofMamæa, betrayed and deserted, withdrew into his tent, desirous atleast to conceal his approaching fate from the insults of the multi­tude. He was soon followed by a tribune and some centurions, theministers of death; but instead of receiving with manly resolutionthe inevitable stroke, his unavailing cries and entreaties disgracedthe last moments of his life, and converted into contempt someportion of the just pity which his innocence and misfortunes mustinspire. His mother, Mamæa, whose pride and avarice he loudlyaccused as the cause of his ruin, perished with her son. The mostfaithful of his friends were sacrificed to the first fury of the soldiers.Others were reserved for the more deliberate cruelty of the usurper,and those who experienced the mildest treatment were stripped of
their employments, and ignominioufly driven from the court and
army \
Tyranny of The former tyrants Caligula and Nero, Commodus and Caracalla,were all dissolute and unexperienced youths7, educaced in the pur­ple, and corrupted by the pride of empire, the luxury of Rome,and the perfidious voice of flattery. The cruelty of Maximin wasderived from a different source, the fear of contempt. Though hedepended on the attachment of the soldiers, who loved him for vir­tues like their own, he was conscious that his mean and barbarianorigin, his savage appearance, and his total ignorance of • the ajjtsand institutions of civil life 8, formed a very unfavourable contrastwith the amiable manners of the unhappy Alexander. He remem­bered, that, in his humbler fortune, he had often waited before thedoors of the haughty nobles of Rome, and had been denied admittanceby the insolence of their slaves. He recollected too the friendshipof a sew who had relieved his poverty, and assisted his rising hopes.But those who had spurned, and those who had protected the Thra­


 


cian,







OCR Output








>34 THE DECLINE AND FALL


Death of Se-verus^and ac­cession of histwo sons,A. D. an.4th February.


Jealousy andhatred of thetwo-emperor;.


shorten the small remainder of his father's days, and endeavoured,-but without success, to excite a mutiny among the troops '5. The*old emperor had often censured the misguided lenity of Marcus,who, by a single act of justice, might have saved the Romans from,the tyranny of his worthless son. Placed in the same situation, heexperienced how easily the rigour of a judge dissolves away in the-tenderness of a parent. He deliberated, he threatened, but he couldnot punish -t and this last and only instance of mercy, was more fa­tal to the empire than a long series of cruelty "5. The disorder ofhis mind irritated the pains of his body; he wished impatiently fordeath, and hastened the instant of it by his impatience. He ex­pired at York in the sixty-fifth year of his life, and in the eighteenth*of a glorious and successful reign. In his last moments he recom­mended concord to his sons, and his sons to the army. The salu­tary advice never reached the heart, or even the understanding, ofthe impetuous youths; but the more obedient troops, mindful oftheir oath of allegiance,, and of the authority of their deceased master,resisted the solicitations of Caracalla, and proclaimed both brothersemperors of Rome. The new princes soon left the Caledonians inpeace, returned to the capital, celebrated their father's funeral withdivine honours, and were cheerfully acknowledged as lawful sove­reigns by the senate, the people, and the provinces. Some pre­eminence of rank seems to have been allowed to the elder brother;but they both administered the empire with equal and independentpower '7.
Such a divided form of government would have proved a sourceof discord between the most affectionate brothers. It was impossiblethat it could long subsist between two implacable enemies, who nei­ther desired nor could trust a reconciliation. It was visible that oijeonly could reign, and that the other must fall; and each of themjudging of his rival's designs by his own, guarded his life with themost jealous vigilance from the repeated attacks of poison or the
swordk.







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AND FALL


Pannoniaand Dal ma-tia.


ScptimiusSeverus


stead of entering into an effectual negociation with the powerfularmies of the west, whose resolution might decide, or at least mustbalance, the mighty contest; instead of advancing without delaytowards Rome and Italy, where his presence was impatiently ex­pected **, Niger trifled away in the luxury of Antioch those irre­trievable moments which were diligently improved by the decisiveactivity of Severus*S.
The country of Pannonia and Dalmatia, which occupied the spacebetween the Danube and the head of the Hadriatic, was one of thelast and most difficult conquests of the Romans. In the defence ofnational freedom, two hundred thousand of these barbarians had onceappeared in the field, alarmed the declining age of Augustus, and ex­ercised the vigilant prudence of Tiberius at the head of the col­lected force of the empire *6. The Pannonians yielded at length to.the arms and institutions of Rome. Their recent subjection, how-even the neighbourhood, and even the mixture of the unconqueredtribes, and perhaps the climate, adapted, as it has been observed, tothe production of great bodies and flow minds x\ all contributed topreserve some remains of their original ferocity, and under thetame resemblance of Roman provincials, the hardy features of thenatives were still to be discerned. Their warlike youth afforded aninexhaustible supply of recruits to the legions stationed on thebanks of the Danube, and which, from a perpetual warfare againstthe Germans and Sarmatians, were deservedly esteemed the besttroops in the service.
The Pannonian army was at this time commanded by Sep-timius Severus, a native of Africa, who, in the flow ascent of privatehonours, had concealed his daring ambition, which was never di­verted from its steady course by the allurements of pleasure, the ap­prehension of danger, or the feelings of humanity lS. On the firstnews of the murder of Pertinax, he assembled his troops, paintedin the most lively colours the crime, the insolence, and the weakness


4 of







OCR Output








;7o THE DECLINE AND FALL


ment, of the Christians, it was thought necessary to subject to the mostintolerable hardships the condition of those perverse individuals whoshould still reject the religion of Nature, of Rome, and of theirancestors. Persons of a liberal birth were declared incapable ofholding any honours or employments; slaves were for ever deprivedof the hopes of freedom, and the whole bo#y of the people wereput out of the protection of the law. The judges were authorizedto hear and to determine every action that was brought against aChristian. But the Christians were not permitted to complain ofany injury which they themselves had suffered; and thus those un­fortunate sectaries were exposed to the severity, while they were ex­cluded from the benefits, of public justice. This new species of mar­tyrdom, so painful and lingering, so obscure and ignominious, was,perhaps, the most proper to weary the constancy of the faithful:nor can it be doubted that the pallions and interest of mankind weredisposed on this occasion to second the designs of the emperors. Butthe policy of a well-ordered government must sometimes have in­terposed in behalf of the oppressed Christians; nor was it possiblefor the Roman princes entirely to remove the apprehension ofpunishment, or to connive at every act of fraud and violence, with­out exposing their own authority and the rest of their subjects tothe most alarming dangers ,f\Zeal and pj- This edict was scarcely exhibited to the public view, in the mostchristian. conspicuous place of Nicomedia, before it was torn down by thehands of a Christian, who expressed, at the fame time, by the bit­terest invectives, his contempt as well as abhorrence for such im>pious and tyrannical governors. His offence, according to themildest laws, amounted to treason, and deserved death. And if itfee true that he was a person of rank and education, those circum­stances could serve only to aggravate his guilt. He was burnt, orrather roasted, by a slow sire; and bis executioners, zealous to re­venge the personal insult which had been offered to the emperors*
exhausted







OCR Output








236 THE DECLINE AND FALL


mated strains. The view of arms and of danger heightenedthe effect of the military song; and the passions which it tended toexcite, the desire of fame and the contempt of death, were the ha­bitual sentiments of a German mind.Causes wh-ch Such was the situation, and such were the manners of the ancient
checked the
progress at Germans. Their climate, their want of learning, of arts, and of
the Germans. . .
laws, their notions of honour, of gallantry, and of religion, theirfense of freedom, impatience of peaee, and thirst of enterprise, aljcontributed to form a people of military heroes. And yet we findthat during more than two hundred and fifty years that elapsed fromthe defeat of Varus to the reign of Decius, these formidable barbarrians made few considerable attempts, and not any material impres­sion on the luxurious and-enstaved provinces of the empire. Theirprogress was checked by their want of arms and discipline, andtheir fury was diverted by the intestine divisions of ancient Germany.Want of arms I. It has been observed, with ingenuity, and not without truth,..
that the command of iron soon gives a nation the command of gold.But the rude tribes of Germany, alike destitute of both thosevaluable metals, were reduced slowly to acquire, by their unassistedstrength, the possession of the one as well as the other. The faceof a German army displayed their poverty of iron.. Swords,.and thelonger kind of lances, they could seldom use. Their frames- (asthey called them in their own language) were long spears headedwith a sharp but narrow iron point, and which, as occasion verquired, they either darted from a distance or pussied in close onset.With this spear, and with a shield, their cavalry was contented. Amultitude of darts,, scattered 71 with incredible force were an addi­tional resource of the infantry.. Their military dress, when theywore any,, was nothing more than a loose mantle. A variety ofcolours was the only ornament of their wooden or their osier ssiields.Few of the chiefs were distinguished by cuirasses", scarce any by4 helmets..







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 5a?


sometimes boldly asserted, that the fame bloody sacrifices, and the fameincestuous festivals, which were so falsely ascribed to the orthodoxbelievers were in reality celebrated by the Marcionites, by the Car-pocratians, and by several other sects of the Gnostics, who, not­withstanding they might deviate into the paths of heresy, were stillactuated by the sentiments of men, and still governed by the pre-'cepts of Christianity *'. Accusations of a similar kind were retortedupon the church by the schismatics who had departed from its com­munion and it was confessed on all sides, that the most scandal­ous licentiousness of manners prevailed among great numbers ofthose who affected the name of Christians. A Pagan magistrate,who possessed neither leisure nor abilities, to discern the almost im­perceptible line which divides the orthodox faith from hereticalpravity, might easily have imagined that their mutual animosityhad extorted the discovery of their common guilt. It was fortu­nate for the repose, or at least for the reputation of the first Chris­tians, that the magistrates sometimes proceeded with more temperand moderation, than is usually consistent with religious zeal, andthat they reported as the impartial result of their judicial inquiry;that the sectaries, who had deserted the established worship, appearedto them sincere in their professions, and blameless in their man­ners; however they might incur, by their absurd and excessive su­perstition, the censure of the laws
History, which undertakes to record the transactions of the past, idea of thefor the instruction of future ages; would ill deserve that honour- emperorsable office, if she condescended to plead the cause of tyrants, or to christians,justify the maxims of persecution. It must however be acknow­ledged, that the conduct of the emperors who appeared the leastfavourable to the primitive church, is by no means so criminal asthat of modern sovereigns, who have employed the arm of violenceand terror against the religious opinions of any part of their subjects.From their reflections, or even from their own feelings, a Charles V,
Vol. I. Yyy or







OCR Output








NOTES ON THE FOURTEENTH CHAPTER. lix


of Helenopolis, and Justinian adorned with manysplendid buildings (Procop. de Ædiriciis, v. 2.).It is indeed probable enough that Helena's fatherkept an inn at Drepanura; and that Constantiusmight lodge there when he returned from a Persianembassy in the reign of Aurelian. But in the wan­dering life of a soldier, the place of his marriage,and the place where his children are born, havevery little connexion with each other. j. Theclaim of Naissus is supported by the anonymouswriter, published at the end of Ammianus, p. 710,and who in general copied very good materials; andit is confirmed by Julius Firmicius, (de Astrologia,1. i. c. 4.) who flourished under the reign of Con­stantine himself. Some objections have been raisedagainst the integrity of the text, and the applicationof the passage of Firmicius; but the former is esta­blished by the best MSS. and the latter is very ablydefended by Lipfius dc Magnitudine Romana, 1. iv.c. 11. et supplement,
[ii] Literis minus instructus. Anonym, adAmmian. p. 710.
[12] Galerius, or perhaps his own courage, ex­posed him to single combat with a Sarmatian(Anonym, p. 710.), and with a monstrous lion. SeePraxagoras apud Photium, p. 63. Praxagoras, anAthenian philosopher, had written a life of Con-stantine, in two books, which are now lost. Hewas a contemporary.
[13] Zosimus, 1. ii. p. 78, 79, Lactantius deM. P. c. 24. The former tells a very foolish story,that Constantine caused all the post horses, which hehad used, to be hamstrung. Such a bloody execu­tion, without preventing a pursuit, would undoubt­edly have occasioned suspicions that might havestopped his journey.
[14] Anonym, p- 710. Panegyr. Veter. vii. 4.But Zosimus, 1. ii, p. 79. Euscbius de Vit. Con­stant. 1. i. c. 21. and Lactantius de M. P. c. 24.suppose, with less accuracy, that he found his fatheron his death-bed.
[15] Cunctis qui aderant annitentibus, fed præ-cipue Croco (alii EroceJ Alamannorum Rege,auxilii gratia Constanti'um comitato, imperium capit.Victor Junior, c. 41. This is perhaps the firstinstance of a barbarian king, who assisted the Ro­man arms, with an independent body of his ownsubjects. The practice grew familiar, and at lastbecame fatal.


[16] His panegyrist Eumenius (vii. 8.) venturesto affirm, in the presence of Constantine, that heput spurs to his horse, and tried, but in vain, t#escape from the hands of his soldiers.
[17] Lactantius de M. P. c. 25. Eumenii:*(vii. 8 ) gives a rhetorical turn to the whole trans­action.
[18] The choice of Constantine, by his dyingfather, which is warranted by reason, and insinuatedby Eumenius, seems to be confirmed by the mostunexceptionable authority, the concurring evidenceof Lactantius (de M. P. c. 24.) and of Libanius(Oration i.), of Euscbius (in Vit. Constantine, L i.c. 18. zi.J, and of Julian (Oration L).
[19] Of the three sisters of Constantine, Con-stantia married the emperor Licinius, Anastasia theCæsar Bassianus, and Eutropia the consul Nepo*tianus. The three brothers were, Dalmatius, Juliu*Constantius, and Annibalianus, of whom we shallhave occasion to speak hereafter.
[20] See Gruter Inscript. p. 178. The sixprincesare all mentioned, Diocletian and Maximian asthe senior Augusti and fathers of the emperors.They jointly dedicate, for the use of their oivaRomans, this magnificent edifice. The architectshave delineated the ruins of these Thermæ; and theantiquarians, particularly Donatus and Nardini,have ascertained the ground which they covered. Oneof the great rooms is now the Carthusian church;and even one of the porter's lodges is sufficient toform another church, which belongs to the Feu-illans.
[21] See Lactantius de M. P. c. 26.31.
[22] The vith Panegyric represents the conductof Maximian in the most favourable light, and theambiguous expression of Aurelius Victor, "re-"tractante diu," may signify, either that he con­trived, or that he opposed the conspiracy. SeeZosimus, 1. ii. p. 79. aud Lactantius de M. P.c. zf.
[23] The circumstances of this war, and thedeath of Scvcrus, are very doubtfully and variouslytold in our ancient fragments (see Tillemont, Hist,des Empercurs, torn. iv. part i. p. 555-). 1 havjendeavoured to extract from them a consistent andprobable narration..
h 2 I he







OCR Output








kjp THE DECLINE AND FALL


they professed. But the scandal of the pious Christian, and the fal­lacious triumph of the Infidel, should cease as soon as they recol­lect not only by ivhom, but likewise to 'whom, the Divine Reve­lation was given. The theologian may indulge the pleasing taskof describing Religion as she descended from Heaven, arrayed inher native purity. A more melancholy duty is imposed on the his­torian. He must discover the inevitable mixture of error and cor­ruption, which she contracted in a long residence upon earth,,among a weak and degenerate race of beings.Five causes of Our curiosity k naturally prompted to inquire by what meansChrManity. the Christian faith obtained so remarkable a victory over the esta­blished religions of the earth. To this inquiry, an obvious butsatisfactory answer may be returned, That it was owing to the con­vincing evidence of the doctrine itself, and to the ruling providenceof its great Author. But as truth and reason seldom find so favour­able a reception in the world, and as the wisdom of Providence fre­quently condescends to use the passions of the human heart, andthe general circumstances of mankind, as instruments to execute itspurpose; we may still be permitted, though with becoming sub­mission, to ask, not indeed what were the first, but what were thesecondary causes of the rapid growth of the Christian church. Itwill, perhaps, appear, that it was most effectually favoured andassisted by the five following causes: I. The inflexible,, and, if wemay use the expression, the intolerant zeal of the Christians, de­rived, it is true, from the Jewish religion, but purified from thenarrow and unsocial spirit, which, instead of inviting, had deterredthe Gentiles from embracing the law of Moses. II. The doctrineof a future life, improved by every additional circumstancewhich could give weight and efficacy to that important truth.
III. The miraculous powers ascribed to the primitive church..
IV. The pure and austere morals of the Christians. V. The unionand discipline of the Christian republic, which gradually formed
, an


3







OCR Output








aj>o THE DECLINE AND FALL


character and that of the times. *' There is not any thing capable44 of giving me more serious concern, than the intelligence contained"in your last dispatch 4; that some malicious suggestions have indis-4< posed towards us the mind of our friend and parent Claudius."As you regard your allegiance, use every means to appease his** resentment, but conduct your negociation with secrecy; let it'* not reach the knowledge of the Dacian troops; they are alreadyM provoked, and it might inflame their fury. I myself have sent"him some presents: be it your care that he accept them with plea-*' sure. Above all, let him not suspect that I am made acquainted"with his imprudence. The fear of my anger might urge him to"desperate counsels5." The presents which accompanied this hum­ble epistle, such as a monarch has seldom addressed to a discontentedsubject, consisted of a considerable sum of money, a splendidwardrobe, and a valuable service of silver and gold plate. By sucharts Gallienus softened the indignation, and dispelled the fears of^ his Illyrian general; and, during the remainder of that reign, the
formidable sword of Claudius Was always drawn in the cause of amaster whom he despised. At last, indeed, he received from theconspirators the bloody purple of Gallienus: but he had been absentfrom their camp and councils; and however he might applaud thedeed, we may candidly presume that he was innocent of the know­ledge of it6. When Claudius ascended the throne, he was aboutfifty-four years of age.Death of The siege of Milan was still continued, and Aureolus soon dis­covered, that the success of his artifices had only raised up a moredetermined adversary. He attempted to negociate with Claudius atreaty of alliance and partition. "Tell him," replied the intrepidemperor, " that such proposals should have been made to Gallienus;44 he, perhaps, might have listened to them with patience, and ac-44 cepted a colleague as despicable as himself7." This stern refusesand a last unsuccessful effort, obliged Aureolus to yield the city and
himself







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AND FALL


and the apprehension of his enemies. The object of his displeasure,after his exile or escape from the narrow limits of his dominions,would easily obtain, in a happier climate, a secure refuge, a newfortune adequate to his merit, the freedom of complaint, and perhapsthe means of revenge. But the empire of the Romans filled theworld, and when that empire fell into the hands of a single person,the world became a secure and dreary prison for his enemies. Theslave of Imperial despotism, whether he was condemned to drag hisgilded chain in Rome and the senate, or to wear out a life of exileon the barren rock of Seriphus, or the frozen banks of the Danube,expected his fate in silent despair 5". To resist was fatal, and itwas impossible to fly. On every side he was encompassed with avast extent of sea and land, which he could never hope to traversewithout being discovered, seized, and restored to his irritatedmaster. Beyond the frontiers, his anxious view could discover no­thing, except the ocean, inhospitable deserts, hostile tribes of bar­barians, of fierce manners and unknown language, or dependentkings, who would gladly purchase the emperor's protection by thesacrifice of an obnoxious fugitiveS9. "Wherever you are," saidGicero to the exiled Marcellus, " remember that you are equally«« within the power of our conqueror6o."


CHAP.







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 223


women, children, and cattle, whilst the warriors of the tribe marchedout to repel a sudden invasion '9. But Tacitus asserts, as a wellknown fact, that the Germans, in his time, had no cities *°; andthat they affected to despise the works of Roman industry, as aplaces of confinement rather than of security Their edifices werenot even contiguous, or formed into regular villages 12; each bar­barian fixed his independent dwelling on the spot to which a plain,a wood, or a stream of fresh water, had induced him to give the pre­ference. Neither stone, nor brick, nor tiles, were employed in theseflight habitations". They were indeed no more than low huts ofa circular figure, built of rough timber, thatched with straw, andpierced at the top, to leave a free passage for the smoke. In themost inclement winter, the hardy German was satisfied with a scantygarment made of the skin of some animal. The nations who dwelttowards the North, clothed themselves in furs; and the women ma­nufactured for their own use a coarse kind of linen **. The gameof various forts, with which the forests of Germany were plenti­fully stocked, supplied its inhabitants with food and exercise *J.Their numerous herds of cattle, less remarkable indeed for theirbeauty than for their utilitylS, formed the principal object of theirwealth. A small quantity of corn, was the only produce exactedfrom the earth: artificial meadows and orchards were unknown tothe Germans; nor can we expect any improvements in agriculturefrom a people, whose property every year experienced a generalchange by a new division of the arable lands, and who, in that strangeoperation, avoided disputes, by suffering a great part of their terri­tory to lie waste and without tillage *7.
Gold, silver, and iron, were extremely scarce in Germany. Its and of the usebarbarous inhabitants wanted both Ikill and patience to investigate m S*those rich veins of silver, which have so liberally rewarded the at­tention of the princes of Brunswick and Saxony. Sweden, whichnow supplies Europe with iron, was equally ignorant of its own
2 riches;







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


"were the rewards which the companions claimed from theliberality of their chief. The rude plenty of his hospitable board"was the only pay, that he could bestow, or they would accept."War, rapine, and the free-will offerings of his friends, supplied"the materials of this munificence This institution, howeverit might accidentally weaken the several republics, invigorated thegeneral character of the Germans, and even ripened amongst them,all the virtues of which barbarians are susceptible; the faith andvalour, the hospitality and the courtesy, so conspicuous long after­wards in the ages of chivalry. The honourable gifts, bestowed bythe chief on his brave companions, have been supposed, by an in­genious writer, to contain the first rudiments of the fiefs, distributed,after the conquest of the Roman provinces, by the barbarian lordsamong their vassals, with a similar duty of homage and militaryservice 5V These conditions are, however, very repugnant to themaxims of the ancient Germans, who delighted in mutual presents ibut without either imposing, or accepting, the weight of obliga­tions "..
"In the days of chivalry, or more properly of romance, all the ^™ty"u men were brave, and all the women were chaste and notwith­standing the latter of these virtues is acquired and preserved withmuch more difficulty than the former, it is ascribed, almost withoutexception, to the wives of the ancient Germans. Polygamy was -not in use, except among the princes, and among them only for thefake of multiplying their alliances. Divorces were prohibited bymanners rather than by laws. Adulteries were punished as rareand inexpiable crimes; nor was seduction justified by example andfashion s6. We may easily discover, that Tacitus indulges an honestpleasure in the contrast of barbarian virtue, with the dissolute con­duct of the Roman ladies: yet there are some striking circumstances -that give an air of truth, or at least of probability, to the conjugalfaith and chastity of the Germans.
Although







OCR Output








44 THE DECLINE AND FALL


emperors pervaded without an effort the wide extent of theirdominions, and was exercised with the same facility on the banksof the Thames,.or of the Nile, as on those of the Tyber. Thelegions were destined to serve against the public enemy, and theeivil magistrate seldom required the aid of a military force61. Inthis state of general security, the leisure as well as opulence bothof the prince and people, were devoted to improve and to adorn theRoman empire.
Roman mo- Among the innumerable monuments of architecture constructedr.uniu.t:. ky the Romans, how many have escaped the notice of history, howfew have resisted the ravages of time and barbarism! And yet eventhe majestic ruins that are still scattered over Italy and the pro*vinces, would be sufficient to prove, that those countries were oncethe feat of a polite and powerful empire. Their greatness alone, ortheir beauty, might deserve our attention; but they are renderedmore interesting, by two important circumstances which connect theagreeable history of the arts, with the more useful history ofhuman manners. Many of those works were erected at private ex-pence, and almost all were intended for public benefit.Many of them It is natural to suppose that the greatest number, as well as themost considerable of the Roman edifices, were the works of theemperors, who possessed so unbounded a command both of menand money. Augustus was accustomed to boast that he had foundhis capital of brick, and that he had left it of marble 6+. Thestrict ceconomy of Vespasian was the source of his magni­ficence. The works of Trajan bear the stamp of his genius. Thepublic monuments with which. Hadrian adorned every province ofthe empire, were executed, not only by his orders, but under hisimmediate inspection. He was himself an artist; and he loved thearts, as they conduced to the glory of the monarch. They wereencouraged by the Antonines, as they contributed to the happinessof the people. But if the emperors were the first, they were not the
only







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AND FALL


form a just idea of his true character. Under the philosophic cloakof austerity, he stands accused of concealing most of the vices whichdegrade human nature". But his accusers are those venal writerswho adored the fortune of Severus, and trampled on the aflies of anunsuccessful rival. Virtue, or the appearances of virtue, recom­mended Albinus to the confidence and good opinion of Marcus; andhis preserving with the son the same interest which he bad acquiredwith the father, is a proof at least that he .was possessed of a veryflexible disposition. The favour of a tyrant does not always sup­pose a want of merit in the object of.it; he may, without in­tending it, reward a man of worth and ability, or he may find sucha man useful to his own service. It does not appear that Albinusserved the son of Marcus, either as the minister of his cruelties, oreven as the associate of his pleasures. He was employed in a dis­tant honourable command, when he received a -confidential letterfrom the emperor, acquainting him of the treasonable designs ofsome discontented generals, and authorizing him to declare himselfthe guardian and successor of the throne, by assuming the title andensigns of Cæsar ,8. The governor of Britain wisely declined thedangerous honour, which would have marked him for the jealousy,or involved him in the approaching ruin, of CommoduSi Hecourted power by nobler, or, at least, by more specious, arts. Oaa premature report of the death of the emperor, he assembled histroops; and in an eloquent discourse, deplored the inevitable mis­chiefs of despotism, described the happiness and glory.Which theirancestors had enjoyed under the consular ^government, and declaredhis firm resolution to reinstate the senate and people in their legalauthority. This popular harangue was answered by the loud accla­mations of the British legions, and received at Rome with a secretmurmur of applause. Safe in the'possession .ofihis little world, andin the command, of an army less distinguished indeed for disciplinethan for numbers and valour '% Albinus braved the menaces of
Commodus,







OCR Output








NOTES ON THE SIXTEENTH CHAPTER.


[186] Plin. Epist. x. 97. Fuerunt alii similrsamentiæ, cives Romani - — - - Mulri enimomnis ætatis, omnis ordinii, utriusque sexus, eciarrevocantur in periculum et vocabuntur.
[187J Tertullian ad Scapulam. Yet even hisrhetoric rises no higher than to claim a tsnth partof Carthage.
[188] Cyprian. Epist. 79.
[189] Dr. Lardner, in his first and second vo­lume of Jewish and Christian testimonies, collectsand illustrates those of Pliny the younger, of Tacitus,of Galen, of Marcus Antoninus, and perhaps ofEpictetus (for it is doubtful whether that philoso­pher means to speak of the Christians). The newsect is totally unnoticed by Seneca, the elder Pliny,and Plutarch.
[190] If the famous prophecy of the SeventyWeeks had been alleged to a Roman philosopher,would he not have replied in the words of Ciceroi"Qu-e tandem ista auguratio est, annorum potiusquam aut mensium aut dierum?" De Divinatione,ii, 30. Observe with what irreverence Lucian (inAlexandra, c. 13.), and his friend Celfus ap. Origen,(I. vii. p. 327.) express themselves concerning theHebrew prophets.
[191] The Philosophers, who derided the moreancient prediiiions of the Sybils, would easily havedetected the Jewish and Christian forgeries, whichhave been so triumphantly quoted by the fathers fromJustin Martyr to Lactantius. When the Sibyllineverses had performed their appointed task, they, like


the system of the millennium, were quietly laid aside.The Christian Sibyl had unluckily fixed the ruinof Rome for the year 195, A. U. C. 94.8.
[192] The fathers, as they are drawn out inbattle array by Dom Calmet (Dissertations furla Bible, torn. Hi. p. 295—308 ), fcem to coverthe whole earth with darkness, in which they arefollowed by most of the moderns.
[•93] Origen ad Matth. c. 27. and a fewmodern critics, Beza, Le Clare, Lardner, &c. arc,desirous of confining it to the land of judea.
[194.] The celebrated passage of Phlegon is nowwifely abandoned. When Tertullian assures the,pagans, that the mention of the prodigy is found inArcanis (not Archivis) vestris, (fee his Apology, c.21.) he probably appeals to the Sibylline verses, which,relate it exactly in the words of the gospel.
[195] Seneca Quæst. Natur. i. l, 15. vi. |«-vii. 17. Plin. Hist. Natur. 1. ii.
[196] Plin. Hist. Natur. ii. 30.
[197] Virgil Georgic. c. i. 466. Tibaltus, 1. n,Eleg. v. p. 75. Ovid. Metamorph. xv. 782. Lucan.r. 54.0. The last places this prodigy before thecivil war.
[198] See a public epistle of M. Anthony inJoseph. Antiquit. xiv. iz. Plutarch in Cæsar, p- 74^Appian, Bell. Civil. 1. iv. Dion Caffius, l.xlv. p.431. Julius Obiequens, c. 1 28. His little treatise,is an abstract of Livy's prodigies.


N O T ES O N THE S I
[i]TN Cyrcne they massacred 2zc,odd Greeks;A in Cyprus, 240,000; in Egypt, a .verygreat multitude. Many of these unhappy victimswere sawed asunder, according to a precedent towhich David had given the sanction of his example.The victorious Jews devoured the flesh, licked upthe blood, and twisted the entrails like a girdleround their bodies. See Dion Cailius, 1. lxviii.p. 1145.
[2] Without repeating the well-known narra­tives of josephus, we may learn from Dion, (1.


TEENTH CHAPT E B...
Ixix. p. 1162.) that in Hadrian's war 580,000 Jewswere cut off by the sword, besides an infinite numberwhich perished by famine, by disease, and by fire*
[3J For the sect of the Zealots, fee Bafnage,Histoire des Juiss, 1. i. c. 1-. for the characters ofthe Messiah, according to the Rabbis, f, v. c. 11^.1 a, 13. for the actions of Barchochebat, 1. vii. c. 12.
[i] Is is to Modcstinu?, a Roman lawyer (1. vi.regular.^, that we are indebted fora distinct know­ledge of the Edict of Antoninus. See Cafaubon ad
Hist. August- p-
ts] See







OCR Output








252 THE DECLINE AND FALL


Decius re- At the fame time wheiTBecius was struggling with the violence
vives the office j
of censor in of the tempest, his mind, calm and deliberate amidst the tumult ofofVSeriL. war, investigated the more general causes, that, since the age ofthe Antonines, had so impetuously urged the decline of the Romangreatness. He soon discovered, that it was impossible to replacethat greatness on a permanent basis, without restoring public virtue,ancient principles and manners, and the oppressed majesty of thelaws. To execute this noble but arduous design, he first resolved to*revive the obsolete office of censor; an office, which, as long as ithad subsisted in its pristine integrity, had so much contributed to theperpetuity of the state '% till it was usurped and gradually neglectedby the Caesars Conscious that the favour of the sovereign mayconfer power, but that the esteem of the people can alone bestowauthority, he submitted the choice of the censor to the unbiassed'
A. D. 251. voice of the senate. By their unanimous votes, or rather acclama*
27 th October. _ \
tions, Valerian, who was afterwards emperor, and who then servedwith distinction in the army of Decius, was declared the moltworthy of that exalted honour. As soon as the decree of the senatewas transmitted to the emperor, he assembled a great council in*his camp, and before the investiture of the censor elect, he apprized'him of the difficulty and importance of his great office. "Happyn Valerian," said the prince, to hi6 distinguished subject, ** happy** in the general approbation of the senate and of the Roman re-•* public! Accept the censorship of mankind; and judge of ouru manners. You will select those who deserve to continue mem-* bers of the senate; you will restore the equestrian order to its*' ancient splendour; you will improve the revenue, yet moderate the4< public burdens. You will distinguisli into regular classes the** various and infinite multitude of citizens, and accurately review"the military strength, the wealth, the virtue, and the resources"of Rome. Your decisions shall obtain the force of laws. The** army, the palace, the ministers of justice, and the great officers of
"the







OCR Output








 







OCR Output








CONTENTS.


C H A P. VI.


The death of Severus. Tyranny of Caracal/a. Usurpation of
Macrinus. Follies of Elagabalus. Virtues of Alexander
Severus. Licentiousness of the army. -General fate of the
Roman Finances. 13 o
CHAP. VII.
The elevation and tyranny of Maximin. Rebellion in Africa and
Italy, under the authority of the Senate. Civil Wars and Se­
ditions. Violent Deaths of Maximin and his Son, of Maximus
and Balbinus, and of the three Gordians. Usurpation andsecu­
lar Games of Philip. 171
CHAP. VIII.
Of the fate of Per/ia after the res oration of the monarchy by
Artaxerxes. 200
CHAP. IX.
The State of Germany till the invasion of the Barbarians, in the Time
of the Emperor Decius. 217
CHAP. X.
The Emperors Decius, Gallus, Æmilianus, Valerian, and Gallienus.
The general Irruption of the Barbarians. The thirty
Tyrants. 242
CHAP. XI.
Reign of Claudius. Defeat of the Goths. Victories, triumph,
ami death, of Aurelian. 287
2 CHAP.







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 433


by the soldiers. The provinces of the East, delivered from the terrorsof civil war, cheerfully acknowledged the authority of Licinius 79.
The vanquished emperor left behind him two children, a boy of Cruelty ofabout eight, and a girl of about seven years old. Their inoffensiveage might have excited compaffion, but the compassion of Liciniuswas a very feeble resource, nor did it restrain him from extinguiJJjingthe name and memory of his adversary. The death of Severianuswill admit of less excuse, as it was dictated neither by revengenor by policy. The conqueror had never received any injury fromthe father of that unhappy youth, and the stiort and obscure reignof Severus in a distant part of the empire was already forgotten. Butthe execution of Candidianus was an act of the blackest cruelty andingratitude. He was the natural son of Galerius, the friend and bene­factor of Licinius. The prudent father had judged him too young tosustain the weight of a diadem; but he hoped that under the protectionof princes, who were indebted to his favour for the imperial purpleCandidianus might pass a secure and honourable life. He was nowadvancing towards the twentieth year of his age, and the royaltyof his birth, though unsupported either by merit or ambitionwas sufficient to exasperate the jealous mind of Licinius So. Tothese innocent and illustrious victims of his tyranny, we must addthe wife and daughter of the emperor Diocletian. When thatprince conferred on Galerius the title of Cæsar, he had given him inmarriage his daughter Valeria, whose melancholy adventures mightfurnish a very singular subject for tragedy. She had fulfilled and even Unfortunatesurpassed the duties of a wife. As she had not any children her- empress vVself, flie condescended to adopt the illegitimate son of her hufbandj Jj;"th™d ^and invariably displayed towards the unhappy Cardidianus thetenderness and anxiety of a real mother. After the death of Ga­lerius, her ample possessions provoked the avarice, and her personalattractions excited the desires of his successor Maxioun HeVol. I. Kkk had







OCR Output








NOTES


NOTES ON THE FIRST CHAPTER.


[i] pviON CASSIUS, (1. liv. p. 736.) with\-J the annotations of Reymar, who hascollected all that Roman vanity has left upon thesubject. The marble of Ancyra, on which Augustusrecorded his own exploits, asserts that he compelledthe Parthians to restore the ensigns of Crassus.
[2] Strabo, (1. xvi. p. 780.) Pliny, the elder(Hist. Natur. 1. vi. c. 32. 3;.) and Dion Caffius(I. liii. p. 7Z3, and 1. liv. p. 734.) have left usverycurious details concerning these wars. The Ro­mans made themselves masters of Mariaba, or Me-rab, a city of Arabia F.clix, well known to theOrientals (fee Abulfeda and the Nubian geographyf>. 52). They were advanced within three daysjourney of the Spice country, the rich object of theirinvasion-.
[3] By the slaughter of Varus and his threelegions. Sec the first book of the Annals of Tacitus.Sucton. in August, c. 23, and Velleius Paterculus,1. ii. c. 117, &c. Augustus did not receive themelancholy news with all the temper and firmnessthat might have been expected from his character.
[4] Tacit. Annal. I. ii. Dion Cassius, I. Ivi.p. 833, and the speech of Augustus himself, inJulian's Cæsars. It receives great light from thelearned notes of his French translator, M. Span-heim.
[5] Germanicus, Suetonius Paulinos, and Agri­cola, were checked and recalled, in the course oftheir victories. Corbulo was put to death. Mi-litary merit, as it is admirably expressed by Tacitus,was, in the strictest fense of the word, imperateria•virtus.
[6] Cæsar himself conceals that ignoble motive;but it is mentioned by Suetonius, c. 47. The I! ri-Vol. J.


ttlh pearls proved, however, of little value, on ac­count of their dark and livid colour. Tacitusobserves, with reason, (in Agricola, c. 12.) that itwas an inherent defect. "Ego facilius crediderim,naturam margarhis deesse quam nobis avaritiam."
[7] Claudius, Nero, and Domitian. A hope isexpressed by Pomponius Mela, 1. iii. c. 6. (He wroteunder Claudius) that by the success of the Romanarms, the island and its savages would soon be betterknown. It is amusing enough to peruse such pas­sages in the midst of London.
[8] See the admirable abridgment, given byTacitus, in the life of Agricola, and copiously,though perhaps not completely illustrated, by ourown antiquarians, Camdcn and Horfley.
[9] The Irish writers, jealous of their nationalhonour, are extremely provoked on this occasion,both with Tacitus and with Agricola.
[10] See Horfley'sBritannia Romana, 1. i. c. 10.
[n] The poet Buchanan celebrates, with ele­gance and spirit, (see his Sylvæ v.) the unviolatedindependence of his native country. But, if thesingle testimony of Richard of Cirencester was suf­ficient to create a Roman province of Vespasiana tothe north of the wall, that independence would bereduced within very narrow limits.
[12] See Appian (in Proæm.) and the uniformimagery of Ossian's Poems, which, in every hypo­thesis, were composed by a native Caledonian.
[13] See Pliny's Panegyric, which seems soundedon facts.
[14] Dion Cassius, 1. lxvii.
a [15] Hero-







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 449


CHAP. XV.
The Progress of the Christian Religion, and the Senti­ments, Manners, Numbers, and Condition, of the pri­mitive Christians,
Acandid but rational inquiry into the progress and establish- importanceofment of Christianity, may be considered as a very essential ^"^""y*part of the history of the Roman Empire. While that great bodywas invaded by open violence, or undermined by flow decay, apure and humble religion gently insinuated itself into the minds ofmen, grew up in silence and obscurity, derived new vigour fromopposition, and finally erected the triumphant banner of the crosson the ruins of the capitol. Nor was the influence of Christianityconfined to the period or to the limits of the Roman empire.After a revolution of thirteen or fourteen centuries, that religionis still profesied by the nations of Europe, the most distinguishedportion of human kind in arts and learning as well as in arms.By the industry and zeal of the Europeans, it has been widelydiffused to the most distant shores of Asia and Africa; and by themeans of their colonies has been firmly established from Canada toChili,- in a world unknown to the ancients.
But this inquiry, however useful or entertaining, is attended Its difficulties;with two peculiar difficulties. The scanty and suspicious materialsof ecclesiastical history seldom enable us to dispel the dark cloudthat hangs over the first age of the church. The great law of im­partiality too often obliges us to reveal the imperfections of theuninspired teachers and believers of the gospel \ and, to a carelessobserver, their faults may seem to cast a shade on the faith whichVol. L M m m they







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 337


their safety to the power of Rome. To accomplish these salutaryends, the constant residence of an imperial governor, supported bya numerous army, was indispensably requisite. Probus thereforejudged it more expedient to defer the execution of so great a de­sign; which was indeed rather of specious than solid utility 40. HadGermany been reduced into the state of a province, the Romans,with immense labour and expence, would have acquired only amore extensive boundary to defend against the fiercer and moreactive barbarians of Scythia.
Instead of reducing the warlike natives of Germany to the con- He builds a
... e _ , . _ , , wall from thi
dition or lubjects, Probus contented himself with the humble ex- Rhine to thepedient of raising a bulwark against their inroads. The country, Danube'which now forms the circle of Swabia, had been left desert in theage of Augustus by the emigration of its ancient inhabitants *\The fertility of the soil soon attracted a new colony from the ad­jacent provinces of Gaul. Crowds of adventurers, of a roving tem­per and of desperate fortunes, occupied the doubtful possession, andacknowledged, by the payment of tythes, the majesty of the em­pire **. To protect these new subjects, a line of frontier garrisons wasgradually extended from the Rhine to the Danube. About the reignof Hadrian, when that mode of defence began to be practised, thesegarrisons were connected and covered by a strong intrenchment of treesand palisades. In the place of so rude a bulwark, the emperor Probusconstructed a stone-wall of a considerable height, and strengthenedit by towers at convenient distances. From the neighbourhood ofNewstadt. and Ratifbon on the Danube, it stretched across hills,vallies, rivers, and morasses, as far as Wimpfen on the Necker,and at length terminated on the banks of the Rhine, after a wind­ing course of near two hundred miles+J. This important barrier,uniting the two mighty streams that protected the provinces of Europe*seemed to fill up the vacant space through which the barbarians, andparticularly the Alemanni, could penetrate with the greatest faci-, Vol. I. X x lity







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


minished by several important restrictions. Their authority expiredwith the year in which they were elected j the former office was di­vided between two, the latter among ten persona; and, as both intheir private and public interest they were adverse to each other, theirmutual conflicts contributed, for the most part, to strengthen ratherthan to destroy the balance of the constitution. But when the con­sular and tribunitian powers were united, when they were vestedfor life hi a single person, when the general of the army was, atthe fame time, the minister of the senate and the representative ofthe Roman people* it was impossible to resist the exorcise, nor wasit easy to define the limits, of his imperial prerogative.
To these accumulated honour?, the policy of Augustus soon added imperial pwthe splendid, as well as important dignities of supreme pontiff, and °* '**of censor. By the former he acquired the management of thereligion* and by the latter a legal inspection over the manners andfortunes of the Roman people. If so many distinct and inde­pendent powers did not exactly unite with each other, the com­plaisance of the senate was prepared to fill up every interval, andto supply every deficiency by the most ample concessions. Theemperors, as the first ministers of the republic, were exemptedfrom the obligation and penalty of many inconvenient laws: theywere authorized to convoke the senate, to make several motions inthe fame day, to recommend candidates for the honours of thestate, to enlarge the bounds of the city, to employ the revenue attheir discretion, to declare peace and war, to ratify treaties; andby a most comprehensive clause, they were impowered to executewhatsoever they should judge advantageous to the empire, andagreeable to the majesty of things private or public, human ordivine '*»
When all the various powers of executive government were The magis.committed to the Imperial magi/lrate, the ordinary magistrates trates*of the commonwealth languished in obscurity, without vigour, and
K 2 almost


0







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 309


minions of Odenathus, which extended from the Euphrates to thefrontiers of Bithynia, his widow added the inheritance of her an­cestors, the populous and fertile kingdom of Egypt. The emperorClaudius acknowledged her merit, and was content, that, while hepursued the Gothic war,yZ>£ should assert the dignity of the empire inthe East 6\ The conduct, however, of Zenobia, was attended withsome ambiguity; nor is it unlikely that she had conceived the designof erecting an independent and hostile monarchy. She blended withthe popular manners of Roman princes, the stately pomp of thecourts of Asia, and exacted from her subjects the fame adorationthat was paid to the successors of Cyrus. She bestowed on her threesons 61 a Latin education, and often shewed them to the troops adornedwith the imperial purple. For herself she reserved the diadem,with the splendid but doubtful title of Queen of the East.
When Aurelian passed over into Asia, against an adversary whofe sex The expedf-alone could render her an object of contempt, his presence restored obe- ran.°f Aure*dience to the province of Bithynia, already shaken by the arms and A'D"intrigues of Zenobia 6\ Advancing at the head of his legions, he ac­cepted the submission of Ancyra, and was admitted into Tyana afteran obstinate siege by the help of a perfidious citizen. The generousthough fierce temper of Aurelian, abandoned the traitor to the rageof the soldiers: a superstitious reverence induced him to treat withlenity the countrymen of Apollonius the philosopherfiJ. Antiochwas deserted on his approach, till the emperor, by his salutary edicts,recalled the fugitives, and granted a general pardon to all who,from necessity rather than choice, had been engaged in the serviceof the Palmyrenian queen. The unexpected mildness of such aconduct, reconciled the minds of the Syrians, and, as far as thegates of Emesa, the wishes of the people seconded the terror of hisarms6+.
Zenobia would have ill deserved her reputation, had she indo- dci^i^he™*lently permitted the emperor of the West to approach within an sn thebTtties4 hundred ^°e£







OCR Output








2jo THE DECLINE AND FALL


within their district, was absolutely vested in their hands, and theydistributed it every year according to a new division r\ At thesame time they were not authorized to punish with death, to imprison,or even to strike a private citizen A people thus jealousof their persons, and careless of their possessions, must have beentotally destitute of industry and the arts, but animated with a highfense of honour and independence.Voluntary The Germans respected only those duties which they imposed on
engagements.
themselves. The most obscure soldier resisted with disdain, theauthority of the magistrates. "The noblest youths blushed not"to be numbered among the faithful companions of some renowned"chief, to whom they devoted their arms and service. A noble'* emulation prevailed among the companions to obtain the first"place in the esteem of their chief; amongst the chiefs to acquire"the greatest number of valiant companions. To be ever fur-"rounded by a band of select youths, was the pride and strength"of the chiefs, their ornament in peace, their defence in war.* The glory of such distinguished heroes diffused itself beyond the"narrow limits of their own tribe. Presents and embassies solicited*' their friendship, and the fame of their arms, often ensured"victory to the party which they espoused. In the hour of danger"it was shameful for the chief to be surpassed in valour by hisu companions; shameful for the companions not to equal the•* valour of their chief. To survive his fall in battle, was indelible"infamy. To protect his person, and to adorn his glory with the'* trophies of their own exploits, were the most sacred of theirH duties. The chiefs combated for victory, the companions for the"chief. The noblest warriors, whenever their native country was"funk in the laziness of peace, maintained their numerous bands"in some distant scene of action, to exercise their restless spirit, and"to acquire renown by voluntary dangers. Gifts worthy of*' soldiers, the warlike steed, the bloody and ever victorious lance,
1«were







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


fanaticism often prompted its ministers to sanctify the most daringand the most unjust enterprises, by the approbation of Heaven, andfull assurances of success. The consecrated standards, long reveredin the groves of superstition, were placed in the front of thebattle 67; and the hostile army was devoted with dire execrationsto the gods of war and of thunder 6*. In the faith of soldiers (andsuch were the Germans) cowardice is the most unpardonable offins. A brave man was the worthy favourite of their martialdeities; the wretch, who had lost his shield, was alike banislied fromthe religious and the civil assemblies of his countrymen. Some tribesof the north seem to have embraced the doctrine of transmigration6',others imagined a gross paradise of immortal drunkenness 7°. Allagreed, that a life spent in arms, and a glorious death in battle,were the best preparations for a happy futurity, either in this or inanother world.
The immortality so vainly promised by the priests, was, in some The bards,degree, conferred by the bards. That singular order of men hasmost deservedly attracted the notice of all who have attemptedto investigate the antiquities of the Celts, the Scandinavians, andthe Germans. Their genius and character, as well as the reverencepaid to their important office, have been sufficiently illustrated.But we cannot so easily express, or even conceive, the enthusiasmof arms and glory, which they kindled in the breast of their au­dience. Among a polished people, a taste for poetry is rather anamusement of the fancy, than a passion of the soul. And yet, whenin calm retirement we peruse the combats described by Homer orTaflb, we are insensibly seduced by the fiction, and feel a momentaryglow of martial ardour. But how faint, how cold is the sensationwhich a peaceful mind can receive from solitary study! It was in thehour of battle, or in the feast of victory, that the bards celebratedthe glory of heroes of ancient days, the ancestors of those warlikechieftains, who listened with transport to their artless but ani-
H h 2 mated







OCR Output








400 THE DECLINE AND FALL


CHAP. XIV.
Troubles after the abdication of Diocletian.—Death ofConjlantius.—Elevation of Conjlantine and Maxentius.—Six Emperors at the fame time.—Death of Max-imian and Galerius.—ViElories of Conjlantine overMaxentius and Licinius.—Re-union of the Empireunder the authority of Conjlantine.
Period os civil ' I ^ HE balance of power established by Diocletian subsisted nofufion.nd C°n* ■*■ longer than while it was sustained by the firm and dexterousA.^D. 305— hand of the founder. It required such a fortunate mixture ofdifferent tempers and abilities, as could scarcely be found or. even expected a second time; two emperor's without jealousy,two Cæsars without ambition, and the fame general interest inva­riably pursued by four independent princes. The abdication ofDiocletian and Maximian was succeeded by eighteen years ofdiscord and confusion. The empire was afflicted by five civilwars; and the remainder of the time was not so much a state oftranquillity as a suspension of arms, between several hostile monarchs*who, viewing each other with an eye of fear and hatred, strove toincrease their respective forces at the expence of their subjects.Character and As soon as Diocletian and Maximian had resigned the purple,Constant!*, their station, according to the rules of the new constitution, wasfilled by the two Cæsars, Constantius and Galerius, who imme­diately assumed the title of Augustus \ The honours of seniorityand precedence were allowed to the former of those princes, andhe continued, under a new appellation, to administer his ancientdepartment of Gaul, Spain, and Britain. The government of
tkofe







OCR Output








NOTES ON THE T
[iJTTOPISCUS in Hist. August, p. 222.
V Aurelius Victor mentions a formal de­putation from the troops to the senate.
[2] Vopiscus, our principal authority, wroteat Rome, sixteen years only after the death of Au-relian; and besides the recent notoriety of the facts,constantly draws his materials from the Journals ofthe Senate, and the original papers of the Ulpianlibrary. Zosimus and Zonaras appear as ignorantof this transaction- a* they were ia general of theRoman constitution.
[j] Liv. i. 17. Dionys. Halicarn. 1. ii. p. 115.Plutarch in Numa, p. 60. The first of these writersrelates the story like an orator, the second like alawyer, and the third like a moralist, and none ofthem probably without some intermixture of sable.
[4] Vopiscus (in Hist. August, p. 227.) calls him'primæ sententi e consuLu is;' and soon afterwards,frinapsfinatus. It is natural to suppose, that themonarchs of Rome, disdaining that humble title,resigned it to the most ancient of the senators.
[5] The only objection to this genealogy, is thatthe historian was named Cornelius, the emperor,Claudius. But under the lower empire, surnameswere extremely various and uncertain.
[6] Zonaras, 1. xii. p. 637. The AlexandrianChronicle, by an obvious mistake, transfers thatage to Aurelian.
[7] In the year 273, he was ordinary consul.But he must have been SufFectus many years before,and most probably under Valerian.
[8] Bit millies oBingcntitt. Vopiscus in Hist.August, p. 229. This sum, according to the oldstandard, was equivalent to eight hundred and fortythousand Roman pounds of silver, each of the valueof three pounds sterling. But in the age of Tacitus,the coin had lost much of its weight and purity.
[9] After his accession, he gave orders that tencopies of the historian should be annually transcrib­ed and placed in the public libraries. The Romanlibraries have long since perished, and tho mostvaluable part of Tacitus was preserved in a singleMS. and discovered in a monastery of Westphalia.


WELFTH CHAPTER.
See Bayle, Dictionaire, Art. 7W//,'and Lipsius ziAnnal. ii. 9.
[10] Vopiscus in Hist. August, p. 227.
[n] Hist. August, p. 228. Tacitus addressed thePrætorians by the appellation of sandijjimi milites,and the people by that ofsacratijjimi S^irites.
[12] In his manumissions he never exceeded thenumber of an hundred, as limited by the Caninianlaw, which was enacted under Augustus, and atlength repealed by Justinian. See Casaubon ad locumVopisci.
[13] See the lives of Tacitus, Florianus, andProbus, in the Augustan History; we may be wellassured, that whatever the soldier gave, the senatorhad already given.
[14] Vopiscus in Hist. August, p. 216. Thepas-sage is perfectly clear; yet both Casaubon and Sal-masius wish to correct it.
[15] Vopiscus in Hist. August, p. 230. 232, 233.The senators celebrated the happy restoration with-hecatombs and public rejoicings.
[16] Hist. August, p. 228.
[17] Vopiscus in Hist. August, p. 230. Zosimus,l.i. p. 57. Zonaras, l.xii. p. 637. Two passagesin the life of Probus (p. 236. 238.) convince me,that these. Scythian invaders of Pontus were Alani.IT we may believe Zosimus (I. i. p. ;8.) Florianuspursued them as far as the Cimmerian Bosphorus;But he had scarcely time for so long and difficult anexpedition.
[18] Eutropius and Aurelius Victor only fay thathe died; Victor junior adds, that it was of afever. Zosimus and Zonaras affirm, that he waskilled by the soldiers. Vopiscus mentions both ac­counts, and seems to hesitate. Yet surely thesejarring opinions are easily reconciled.
[19] According to the two Victors, he reignedexactly two hundred days.
[20] Hist. August, p. 231.- Zosimus, L i. p. 58,59. Zonaras, I. xii-p. 637. Aurelius Victor fays,
that







OCR Output








C O N T E N T 5.


A.D. Pl8e
283 His Victories and extraordinary Death 411
He is succeeded by his two Sons, Carinus
and Numerian - - 412
284. Vices of Carinus - • 413
He celebrates the Roman Games 415
Spectacles of Rome - - ib.
The Amphitheatre - - 417
Return of Numerian with the Army from
Persia - - 419
Death of Numerian - 420
284 Election of the Emperor Diocletian 421
2S5 Defeat and Death of Carinus 422
CHAP. XIII.
The Reign of Diocletian and bis three Asso­
ciates, Maximian, Galerius, and Constan­
tius.—General Re-establijhment of Order
and Tranquillity.—The Persian War,
Viftory, and Triumph.—The new Form
of Administration.—Abdication and Re­
tirement of Diocletian and Maximian.
A. D. Page
285 Elevation and Character of Diocletian 423
His Clemency and Victory - 425
286 Association and Character of Maximian ib.
292 Association of two Cæsars, Galerius and
Constantius - - 427
Departments and Harmony of the four
Princes - - 428
.Series of Events - - 429
287 State of the Peasants of Gaul - ib.Their Rebellion and Chastisement 430
287 Revolt of Carausius in Britain - 431
Importance of Britain - 432
Power of Carausius • - ib.
289 Acknowledged by the other Emperors 433
294 His Death - - 434
296 Recovery of Britain by Constantius ib.
Defence of the Frontiers - 435
Fortifications - - ib.'
Dissensions of the Barbarians - 436
Conduct of the Emperors - ib.
Valour of the Cscsars - 437
Treatment of the Barbarians - 438
Wars of Africa and Egypt - ib.
.296 Conduct of Diocletian in Egypt 439
Vol. I.


A.D,


P«ge
441


ib.


• He suppresses Books of Alchymy
Novelty and Progress of that Art
The Persian War - - 442
282 Tiridates the Armenian - ib.
286 His Restoration to the Throne of Armenia 443
State of the Country - - ib.
Revolt of the People and Nobles 444
Story of Mungo - - ib.
» The Persians recover Armenia - 445
296 War between the Persians and the Romans 446
Defeat of Galerius - ib.
His Reception by Diocletian 448
297 Second Campaign of Galerius ib.
His Victory - >■ it>.
His Behaviour to his royal Captives 449
Negotiation for Peace - ib.
Speech of the Persian Ambassador 450
Answer of Galerius - - ib.
Moderation of Diocletian - 451
Conclusion of a Treaty os Peace ib.
Articles of the Treaty - 452
The Aboras fixed as the Limits between
the Empires - - 453
Cession of five Provinces beyond the Tigris ib.
Armenia and Iberia - . - 454
303 Triumph of Diocletian and Maximian 45c
Long Absence of the Emperors from Rome 456
Their Residence at Milan and Nicomedia 457
Debasement of Rome and of the Senate 458
New Bodies of Guards, Jovians and Her-
culians - - 459
Civil Magistracies laid aside - 460
Imperial Dignity and Titles - ib.
Diocletian assumes the Diadem, and in­
troduces the Persian Ceremonial 461
New Form of Administration, two Au-
gusti, and two Cæsars - 463
Increase of Taxes . - - 464
Abdication of Diocletian and Maximian 465
Resemblance to Charles the Fifth 466
304 Long Illness of Diocletian -. ib.
His Prudence - - 467
Compliance of Maximian - 468
Retirement of Diocletian at Salona ib.
His Philosophy - - 469
313 His Death - - 470
Description of Salona and the adjacent
Country - - ib.
Of Diocletian's Palace' - 471
• b Decline







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AND FALL


road to Præneste, was celebrated for baths of singular beauty and extent,for three stately rooms of an hundred feet in length, and for a magnifi­cent portico, supported by two hundred columns of the four mostcurious and costly sorts of marble '5. The public (hows exhibited athis expence, and in which the people were entertained with many hun­dreds of wild beasts and gladiators ,6, seem to surpass the fortune of asubject, and whilst the liberality of other magistrates was confined toa few solemn festivals in Rome, the magnificence of Gordian was re­peated, when he was ædile, every month in the year, and extended,during his consulship, to the principal cities of Italy. He was twiceelevated to the last mentioned dignity, by Caracalla and by Alexander;for he possessed the uncommon advantage of deserving the esteemof virtuous princes, without alarming the jealousy of tyrants. Hislong life was innocently spent in the study of letters and the peace-ful honours of Rome; and, till he was named proconsul of Africa,by the voice of the senate and the approbation of Alexander'7, heappears prudently to have declined the command of armies and thegovernment of provinces. As long as that emperor, lived, Africawas happy under the administration of his worthy representative;after the barbarous Maximin had usurped the throne, Gordianusalleviated the miseries which he was unable to prevent. When hereluctantly accepted the purple, he was above fourscore years old;a last and valuable remains of the happy age of the Antonines,whose virtues he revived in his own conduct, and celebrated in anelegant poem of thirty books. With the venerable proconsul, hisson, who had accompanied him into Africa as his lieutenant, waslikewise declared emperor. His manners were less pure, but hischaracter was equally amiable with that of his father. Twenty-twoacknowledged concubines, and a library of sixty-two thousand vo­lumes, attested the variety of his inclinations; and from the pro­ductions which he left behind him, it appears that both the one andthe other were designed for use rather than for ostentation ,8. The
Roman







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 25s


compared, both in life and death, with the brightest examples ofancient virtue49.
This fatal blow humbled, for a very little time, the insolence of Election ofthe legions. They appear to have patiently expected, and fubmis- A. D. xji..fively obeyed, the decree of the senate, which regulated the succes- Deccmber*sion to the throne. From a just regard for the memory of Decius,the imperial title was conferred on Hostilianus, his only survivingson; but an equal rank, with more effectual power, was granted toGallus, whose experience and ability seemed equal to the great trustof guardian to the young prince and the distressed empire S°. Thefirst care of the new emperor was to deliver the Illyrian provinces A.D. 2jz.from the intolerable weight of the victorious Goths. He consentedto leave in their hands the rich fruits of their invasion, an immensebooty, and what was still more disgraceful, a great number of pri­soners of the highest merit and quality. He plentifully supplied Retreat of the
, Goths.
their camp with every convemency that could assuage their angryspirits, or facilitate their so much wislied-for departure; and he evenpromised to pay them annually a large sum of gold, on conditionthey should never afterwards infest the Roman territories by theirincursions5'.
In the age of the Scipios, the most opulent kings of the earth* Gallus Pur-who courted the protection of the victorious commonwealth, were by'thc p"-"gratified with such trifling presents as could only derive a value from nuT/trlbute.""the hand that bestowed them; an ivory chair, a coarse garment ofpurple, an inconsiderable piece of plate, or a quantity of coppercoin 5\ After the wealth of nations had centered in Rome, theemperors displayed their greatness, and even their policy, by theregular exercise of a steady and moderate liberality towards the alliesof the state. They relieved the poverty of the barbarians, honouredtheir merit, and recompensed their fidelity. 1 hese voluntary marksof bounty were understood to flow not from the fears, but merelyfrom the generosity or the gratitude of the Romans; and whilst
presents







OCR Output








NOTES ON THE SIXTH CHAPTER. xxv


[-85] Tacit, in Annal. i. 11. It seems to have-existed in the time of Appian.
[86] Plutarch, in Pompeio, p. 642.
[87] Strabo, 1. xvii. p. 798.
[88] Velleios Paterculus, 1. ii. c. 39. he seemsto give the preference to the revenue of Gaul.
[89] The Euboic, the Phœnician, and Alex­andrian talents, were double in weight to the Attic.See Hooper of ancient weights and measures, p. iv.C j. It is very probable, that the fame talent wascarried from Tyreto Carthage.
[90] Polyb. 1. xv. c. 2.
[21] Appian in Punicis, p. 84.
[92] Diodorus Sicnlus, 1. v. Cadiz was built bythe Phœnicians a little more than a thousand yearsbefore Christ. See Veil. Patercul. i. 2.
[93] Strabo, 1. iii. p. 148.
[94] Plin. Hist. Natur. 1. xxxiii. c. 3. He men­tions likewise a silver mine in Dalmatia, that yieldedevery day fifty pounds to the state.
[9;] Strabo, 1. x. p. 485. Tacit. Annal. iii. 69.and iv. 30. See in Tournefort (Voyages au Le­vant, Lettre viii.) a very lively picture of the actualmisery of Gyarus.
[96] Lipfiut de magnit udine Romana (1. ii. c. 3.)computes the revenue at one hundred and fiftymillions of gold crowns; but his whole book,though learned and ingenious, betrays a very heatedimagination.
[97] Tacit. Annal. xiii. 31.
[98] See Pliny (Hist. Natur. 1. vi. c. 23. 1. xii.c. 18.). His observations, that the Indian commo­dities were fold at Rome at a hundred times theiroriginal price, may give ns some notion of the pro­duce of the customs, since that original price a-mounted to more than eight hundred thousandpounds.
[99] The ancients were unacquainted with theart of cutting diamonds.
[ico] M. Bouchaud, in his treatise de l'Impotchez les Remains, has transcribed this catalogue,Vol. I.


faom the Digest, and attempts to illustrate it by avery prolix commentary.
[101] Tacit. Annal. i. 78. Two- years after­wards, the reduction of the poor kingdom of Cappa-docia gave Tiberius a pretence for diminishing theexcise to one half; but the relief was of very Ihortduration.
[102] Dion Caflius, I. Iv. p. 794. 1. Ivi. p.825.
[103] The sum is only fixed by conjecture.
[104] As the Roman law subsisted for many ages,the Cognati, or relations on the mother's side, werenot called to the succession. This harsti institutionwas gradually undermined by humanity, and finallyabolislied by Justinian.
f jo;] Plin. Panegyric, c. 37.
[106] See Heineccius in the Aotiquit. Juris Ro-inani, 1. ii.
[107] Horat. 1. ii. Sat. v. Petron. c. 116, &c.Plin. 1. ii. Epist. 20.
[108] Cicero in Philipp. ii. c. 16.
[109] See his epistles. Every such Will gave himan occasion of displaying his reverence to the dead,and his justice to the living. He reconciled both, inhis behaviour to a son who had been disinherited byhis mother (v. 1.).
[110] Tacit. Annal. xiii. 50. Esprit des Loix,1. xii. c. 19.
[111] See Pliny's Panegyric, the Augustanhistory, and Burman. de Vectigal. passim.
[112] The tributes (properly so called) were notfarmed; since the good princes often remitted manymillions of arrears.
[113] The situation of the new citizens is mi­nutely described by Pliny (Panegyric, c. 37, 38,39.). Trajan published a law very much in theirfavour.
[114] Dion, 1. Ixxvii. p. 129;.
[115] He who paid ten aurei, the usual tribute,was charged with no more than the third part ofd an







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AND FALL


"soon as the cruel deed was perpetrated, the sectaries drank up the"blood, greedily tore asunder the quivering members, and pledged"themselves to eternal secrecy, by a mutual consciousness of guilt."It was as confidently affirmed, that this inhuman sacrifice was." succeeded by a suitable entertainment, in which intemperance"served as a provocative to brutal lust; till at the appointed mo-"inent, the lights were suddenly extinguished, shame was banished,"nature was forgotten; and, as accident might direct, the dark-'* ness of the night was polluted by the incestuous commerce of"sisters and brothers, of sons and of mothers "9.Their impru- But the perusal of the ancient apologies was sufficient to re-d«ot defence. move even the slightest suspicion from the mind of a candid adver­sary. The Christians, with the intrepid security of innocence,appealed from the voice of rumour to the equity of the magistrates.They acknowledge, that if any proof can be produced of thecrimes, which calumny has imputed to them, they are worthy ofthe most severe punishment. They provoke the punishment, andthey challenge the proof. At the same time they urge with equaltruth and propriety, that the charge is not less devoid ofprobability, than it is destitute of evidence; they ask, whetherany one can seriously believe that the pure and holy precepts ofthe Gospel, which so frequently restrain the use of the most lawfulenjoyments, should inculcate the practice of the most abominablecrimes; that a large society should resolve to dishonour itself in theeyes of its own members; and that a great number of persons ofeither sex, and every age and character, insensible to the fear ofdeath or infamy, should consent to violate those principles whichnature and education had imprinted most deeply in their minds10.Nothing, it should seem, could weaken the force or destroy the ef­fect of so unanswerable a justification, unless It were the injudiciousconduct of the apologists themselves, who betrayed the commoncause of religion, to gratify their devout hatred to the domestic ene­mies of the church. It was sometimes faintly insinuated, and some­


times







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AND FALL


wards the sectaries of the new religion, and his constant reverencefor the ministers of the church, gave some colour to the suspicion,which prevailed in his own times, that the emperor himself hadbecome a convert to the faith 1,8; and afforded some grounds for afable which was afterwards invented, that he had been purified byconfession and pennance from the stain of guilt, which he had con­tracted by the murder of his innocent predecessor "9. The fall ofA.D. 449. Philip, introduced, with the change of masters, a new system ofgovernment, fo oppressive to the Christians, that their former con­dition, ever since the time of Domitian, was represented as a state ofperfect freedom and security, if compared with the rigorous treat­ment which they experienced under the short reign of Decius'".The virtues of that prince will scarcely allow us to suspect that hewas actuated by a mean resentment against the favourites of hispredecessor, and it is more reasonable to believe, that in the prosecu­tion of his general design to restore the purity of Roman manners,he was desirous of delivering the empire from what he condemnedas a recent and criminal superstition. The bishops of the most con­siderable cities were removed by exile or death; the vigilance ofthe magistrates prevented the clergy of Rome during sixteen monthsfrom proceeding to a new election; and it was the opinion of theChristians, that the emperor would more patiently endure a compe­titor for the purple, than a bishop in the capital '*". Were it possibleto suppose that the penetration of Decius had discovered pride underthe disguise of humility, or that he could foresee the temporal do­minion which might insensibly arise from the claims of spiritualauthority, we might be less surprised, that he should consider thesuccessors of St. Peter as the most formidable rivals to those of Au­gustus.
<$f Valerian, The administration of Valerian was distinguished by a levity andand'hUso'c- inconstancy, ill suited to the gravity of the Roman Censor. In thecesl°I!z6o ° Part °^ reign, he surpassed in clemency those princes who
had







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AND FALL


Danube and the Rhine the most laborious stations. The formerclaimed the presence of the Augusts the latter were entrusted to theadministration of the Ctesars. The strength of the legions was inthe hands of the four partners of sovereignty, and the despair ofsuccessively vanquishing four formidable rivals, might intimidatethe ambition of an aspiring general. In their civil government, theemperors were supposed to exercise the undivided power of themonarchy, and their edicts, inscribed with their common names,were received in all the provinces, as promulgated by their mutualcouncils and authority. Notwithstanding these precautions, the po­litical union of the Roman world was gradually dissolved, and aprinciple of division wa6 introduced, which, in the course of a fewyears, occasioned the perpetual separation of the eastern and westernempires.
The system of Diocletian was accompanied with another verymaterial disadvantage, which cannot even at present be totally over­looked; a more expensive establishment, and consequently an in­crease of taxes, and the oppression of the people. Instead of amodest family of staves and freedmen, such as had contented thesimple greatness of Augustus and Trajan, three or four magnificentcourts were established in the various parts of the empire, and asmany Roman kings contended with each other and with the Persianmonarch for the vain superiority of pomp and luxury. The num­ber of ministers, of magistrates, of officers, and of servants, whofilled the different departments of the state, was multiplied beyondthe example of former times; and if we borrow the warmexpression of a contemporary, "when the proportion of thoseu who received, exceeded the proportion of those who contri-"buted, the provinces were oppressed by the weight of tri-"butes,0+." From this period to the extinction of the empire, itwould be easy to form a series of clamours and complaints. Ac­cording to his religion and situation, each writer chuses either Dio­cletian,







OCR Output








i68 THE DECLINE AND FALL


of two or three generations, the whole property of the subjectmust have gradually passed through the coffers of the state.
In the first and golden years of the reign of Nero, that prince,from a desire of popularity, and perhaps from a blind impulseof benevolence, conceived a wish of abolishing the oppression of theRegulations customs and excise. The wisest senators applauded his magnanimity;e m but they diverted him from the execution of a design, which would


have dissolved the strength and resources of the republic "°. Hadit indeed been possible to realize this dream of fancy, such princesas Trajan and the Antonines would surely have embraced withardour, the glorious opportunity of conferring so signal an obli­gation on mankind. Satisfied, however, with alleviating the pub­lic burden, they attempted not to remove it. The mildness andprecision of their laws ascertained the rule and measure of taxation,and protected the subject of every rank against arbitrary interpret­ations, antiquated claims, and the insolent vexation of the farmersof the revenue"'. For it is somewhat singular, that in every age,the best and wisest of the Roman governors persevered in this per­nicious method of collecting the principal branches at least ofthe excise and customsEdict of The sentiments, and, indeed, the situation of Caracalla, were very
Caracalla. different from those of the Antonines. Inattentive, or ratheraverse to the welfare of his people, he found himself under thenecessity of gratifying the insatiate avarice, which he had excitedin the army. Of the several impositions introduced by Augustus,the twentieth on inheritances and legacies, was the most fruitful,as well as the most comprehensive. As its influence was not con­fined to Rome or Italy, the produce continually increased with thegradual extension of the Roman City. The new citizens, thoughcharged, oft equal terms ,,J, with the payment of new taxes, whichhad not affected them as subjects, derived an ample compensationfrom the rank they obtained, the privileges they acquired, and the


fair







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 4,7*


prophecy and revelation; but as long as, for wise purposes, this errorwas permitted to subsist in the church, it was productive of the mostsalutary effects on the faith and practice of Christians, who livedin the awful expectation of that moment when the globe itself, andall the various race of mankind, should tremble at the appearanceof their divine judge
The ancient and popular doctrine of the Millennium was inti* Doctrine ofmately connected with the second coming of Christ. As the works n;'^'1of the creation had been finished in six days, their duration in theirpresent state, according to a tradition which was attributed to theprophet Elijah, was fixed to fix thousand years6o. By the fame"analogy it was inferred, that this long period of labour and con­tention, which was now almost elapsed 6\ would be succeeded by ajoyful Sabbath of a thousand years; and that Christ, with the tri­umphant band of the saints and the elect who had escaped death, orwho had been miraculously revived, would reign upon earth till thetime appointed for the last and general resurrection. So pleasingwas thifr hope to the mind of believers, that the -neiv Jerusalem, theseat of this blissful kingdom, was quickly adorned with all thegayest colours of the imagination. A felicity consisting only ofpure and spiritual pleasure, Would have appeared too refitted for it»inhabitants, who were still supposed to possess their human natureand senses. A garden of Eden, with the amusements of the pastoralJife, was no longer suited to the advanced state of society whichprevailed under the Roman empire. A city Was therefore erectedof gold and precious stones-, and a supernatural plenty of corn andWine was bestowed on the adjacent territory; in the free enjoymentof whose spontaneous productions, the happy and benevolent peo­ple was never to be restrained by any jealous laws of exclusiveproperty6*. The assurance of such a Millennium, was carefully irt»-culcated by a succession of the fathers from Justin Martyr andIrenæus, who conversed with the immediate disciples of the apostles*
dowa







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 419


312.


wild beasts in the amphitheatre of Treves, and the people seemto have enjoyed the spectacle, without discovering, in such atreatment of royal captives, any thing that was repugnant to thelaws of nations or of humanity *\
The virtues of Constantine were rendered more illustrious by the Tyranny of
. . . • • Maxentius ia
vices of Maxentius. Whilst the Gallic provinces enjoyed as much Italy andhappiness as the condition of the times was capable of receiving, a. d. 306—•Italy and Africa groaned under the dominion of a tyrant as con­temptible as he was odious. The zeal of flattery and faction hasindeed too frequently sacrificed the reputation of the vanquished, tothe glory of their successful rivals; but even those writers whohave revealed, with the most freedom and pleasure, the faults ofConstantine, unanimously confess, that Maxentius was cruel, ra­pacious, and profligate 4\ He had the 'good fortune to suppressa flight rebellion in Africa. The governor and a few adherentshad been guilty; the province suffered for their crime. The'flourishing cities of Cirtha and Carthage, and the whole extentof that fertile country, were wasted by fire and sword. The abuseof victory was followed by the abuse of law and justice. A for­midable army of sycophants and delators invaded Africa; the richand the noble were easily convicted of a connexion with therebels; and those among them who experienced the emperor'sclemency, were only punished by the confiscation of their estates 4'.So signal a victory was celebrated by a magnificent triumph, andMaxentius, exposed to the eyes of the people the spoils and cap­tives' of a Roman province. The state of the capital was no Jessdeserving of compassion than that of Africa. The wealth of Romesupplied an inexhaustible fund for his vain and prodigal expences,and the ministers of his revenue, were skilled in the arts of rapine.It was under his reign that the method of exacting a fret giftfrom the senators was first invented, and as the sum was insensibly
H h h 2 increased*







OCR Output








NOTES ON THE SIXTEENTH CHAPTER. Ixxvii


£5] See Basnage, Histoire des Juifs, !. iii. c. 2, 3.The office of Patriarch was suppressed by Theo-dosms the younger.
[6] We need only mention the purim, or deliver­ance of the Jews from the rage of Hainan, which,till the reign of Theodosius, was celebrated withinsolent triumph and riotous intemperance. Baf-nage, Hist des Juifs, 1. vi. c. 17. 1. viii. c. 6.
[7] According to the false Joscphus, Tfepho, thegrandson of Esau, conducted into Italy the army ofÆneas, king of Carthage. Another colony ofIdumæans, flying from the sword of David, tookrefuge in the dominions of Romulus, For these,or for other reasons of equal weight, the name ofEdom was applied by the Jews to the RomanEmpire.
[8] From the arguments of Celsus, as they are,represented and refuted by Origen (1. v. p.247—259), we may clearly discover the distinctionthat was made between the Jewish people and theChristian Je3. See in the Dialogue of MinuciusFœlix (c. 5, 6.) a fair and not inelegant descriptionof the popular sentiments, with regard to the deser­tion of the established worship.
[9] Cur nullas aras habent? templa -nulla)nulla nota simulacra? - - - Unde autem, velquis ille, aut ubi, Deus unicus, solitarius, destitutus?Minucius Fœlix, c. 10. The Pagan Interlocutorgoes on to make a distinction in savour of the Jews,who had once a temple, altars, victims, &c. • 1
"[to] It is difficult (fays Plato) to attain, andcriminal to publish, the knowledge of the true God.
[11] The author of the Philopatris perpetuallytreats the Christians as a company of dreaming en.
thu flails ^a^o-ioi, a*£Lfi&», cs.^pleatTtftrjfjaEf/ojiTwWe;, S$C,and in one place, manifestly alludes to rhevision, inWhich St. Paul was transported to the third hca'ven.in another place, Tricphcm, who personates a Chri­stian, after deriding the Gods of Paganism, proposesa mysterious oath,
E» tier fiat, x) f| ir& Tf<«.
A^i^fii(i»fti iilxrxHt (is the profane answer of CritLs)
[12] According to Justin Martyr (Apolog. Major,a. 70—85 ), tlie d.umon, who had gained someimperfect knowledge of the prophecies, purposely


contrived this resemblance, which might deter,though by different means, both the people and thephilosophers from embracing the faith of Christ.
[13] In the first and second books of Origen, Celsustreats the birth and character of our Saviour with themost impious contempt. The orator Libaniuspraises Porphyry and Julian for confuting the follyof a sect, which styled a dead man of Palestine, God,and the Son of God. Socrates, Hist. Ecclesiast. iii. 23^
[14] The emperor Trajan refused to incorporatea company of 150 fire-men, for the use of the cityos NicomcJia. He disliked all association*. See.Plin. Epist. x. 42, 43.
[15] The proconsul Pliny had published ageneral edict against unlawful meetings. Theprudence of the Christians suspended their Agapæ jbut it was impossible for them to omit the exerciseof public worship.
[16J As the prophecies of the antichrist, ap*proaching conflagration, &c. provoked those Paganswhom they did not convert, they were mentionedwith caution and reserve; and the Montanistswere censured for disclosing too freely the dangeroussecret. See Mosheim, p. 413.
[17] Neque enim dubitabam, quodcunque esseftquod saterentur (such are the words of PlinyJ per-vicaciam certe et insiexibilem obstinationem deberepuniri.
[i8j See Moseeim's Ecclesiastical History, vol. ».p. 101, and Spanheim, Remarques fur les Ccsius deJulien, p. 46s, &c. •' ' -.
[19] See Justin Martyr, Apolog. i. 3?. ii. 14.Athenagoras in Legation* c. 27. TertullianApolog c. 7, P, 9. Minucius Foelix, c. 9. 16. 3?,3it. The last of the writers relates the accusationip the molt elegant and circumstantial manner.The answer of Tertullian is the boldest and mostvigorous. . ■ .. . j • ■
[20] In the persecution of Lyons, some Gentileslaves were compelled, by the fear of tortures, toajCcu.se their Christian master.. The church ofLyoas, writing to their brethren of Asia, treat thehorrid charge with proper, indignation, and con­tempt. Euseb. Hist. Eccles. v* 1.
[21") See Justin Martyr. Apolog. i. 35. Irermatadv. Ha;rcs. i. 24. Clemens Alexandria Stromat.1. iii. p. 438. Euseb. iv. 8. It would be tediousand disgusting to relate all that succeeding writers2 have:







OCR Output








ioo THE DECLINE AND FALL


their hands to conduct him to the senate-house, that the military-consent might be ratified by the civil authority,and by the This important night was now far spent; with the dawn of day,
senate,
A. D. 193. and the commencement or the new year, the senators expected aistjanua.y. fummons to attend an ignominious ceremony. In spite of all remon­strances, even of those of his creatures, who yet preserved any re­gard for prudence or decency, Commodus had resolved to pass thenight in the gladiators school, and from thence to take possession ofthe consulship, in the habit and with the attendance of that infa­mous crew. On a sudden, before the break of day, the senate wascalled together in the temple of Concord, to meet the guards, andto ratify the election of a new emperor. For a few minutes theyfat in silent suspence, doubtful of their unexpected deliverance, andsuspicious of the cruel artifices of Commodus; but when at lengththey were assured that the tyrant was no more, they resigned themrselves to all the transports of joy and indignation. Pertinax, whomodestly represented the meanness of his extraction, and pointed outseveral noble senators more deserving than himself of the empire,was constrained by their dutiful violence to ascend the throne, andreceived all the titles of Imperial power, confirmed by the mostThe memory sincere vows of fidelity. The memory of Commodus was brandedmodus de- with eternal infamy. The names of tyrant, of gladiator, of publicenemy, resounded in every corner of the house. They decreed intumultuous votes, that his honours should be reversed, his titleserased from the public monuments, his statues thrown down, hisbody dragged with a hook into the stripping room of the gladiators,to satiate the public fury; and they expressed some indignationagainst those officious servants who had already presumed to screenhis remains from the justice of the senate. But Pertinax couldnot refuse those last rites to the memory of Marcus, and the tearsof his first protector Claudius Pompeianus, who lamented the cruel
fate


dared infa­mous


1


1







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


were far from admitting the prejudices of mankind a6 the standardof truth, but they considered them as flowing from the original dis­position of human nature; and they supposed that any popular modeof faith and worship which presumed to disclaim the assistance of thesenses, would, in proportion as it receded from superstition, finditself incapable of restraining the wanderings of the fancy and thevisions of fanaticism. The careless glance which men of wit andlearning condescended to cast on the Christian revelation, served onlyto confirm their hasty opinion, and to persuade them, that the prin­ciple which they might have revered, of the divine unity, was de­faced by the wild enthusiasm, and annihilated by the airy specula­tions of the new sectaries. The author of a celebrated dialogue,which has been attributed to Lucian, whilst he affects to treat themysterious subject of the Trinity in a style of ridicule and con­tempt, betrays his own ignorance of the weakness of humanreason, and of the inscrutable nature of the Divine perfections ".
It might appear less surprising, that the founder of Chri­stianity should not only be revered by his disciples as a sage anda prophet, but that he should be adored as a God. The Po-lytheists were disposed to adopt every article of faith, which seemedto offer any resemblance, however distant or imperfect, with thepopular mythology; and the legends of Bacchus, of Hercules, andof Æsculapius, had, in some measure, prepared their imaginationfor the appearance of the Son of God under a human formBut they were astonished that the Christians should abandon thetemples of those ancient heroes, who, in the infancy of the world,had invented arts, instituted laws, and vanquished the tyrants ormonsters who infested the earth; in order to choose for the exclusiveobject of their religious worship, an obscure teacher, who, in a.recent age, and among the barbarous people, had fallen a sacrificeeither to the malice of his own countrymen, or to the jealousy ofthe Roman government. The Pagan multitude, reserving their
gratitude.







OCR Output








NOTES ON THE Jxxlx SIXTEENTH CHAPTER.


and release of some Jewish priests who were pri­soners at Rome.
[40] The learned Dr. Lardner (Jewish and Hea­then Testimonies, vol. ii. p. icx, 103.) has provedthat the name of Galileans, was a very ancient, andperhaps the primitive, appellation of the Christians.
[41] Joseph. Antiquitat. xviii 1,2. Tillemont,Ruine des Juifs, p. 742. The sons of Judas werecrucified in the time of Claudius. His grandsonEleazar, after Jerusalem was taken, defended astrong fortress with 960 of his most desperate fol­lowers. When the battering ram had made abreach, they turned their swords against theirwives, their children, and at length against theirown breasts. They died to the last man.
[42] The Spanish Inscription in Gruter, p. 238,No. 9, is a manifest and acknowledged imposition.See Ferreras Histoire d' Espagne, tom._i. p. 192.
[43] The capitol was burnt duiing the civil warbetween Vitellius and Vespasian, the 19th of De­cember, A. D. 69. On the icth of August, A. D.70, the temple of Jerusalem was destroyed by thehands of the Jews themselves, rather than by thoseof the Romans.
[44] The new capitol was dedicated by Domi­tian. Sueton. in Domitian, c. 5. Plutarch inPoplicola, torn, i. p. 230. Edit. Bryan. Thegilding alone cost 12000 talents (above two millionsand a half). It was the opinion of Martial, thatif the emperor had called in his debts, Jupiter him­self, even though he had made a general auction ofOlympus,would have been unable to pay two shillingsin the pound.
[45] With regard to the tribute, see DionCassius, 1. lxvi. p. 1082, with Rcimarus's notes.Spanheim, de Usu Numismatum, torn. it. p. 571,and Basnage, Hist. Des Juifs, 1. vii. c 2.
[46] Suetonius (in Domitian, c. 12.) had seenan old man of ninety publickly examined beforethe procurator's tribunal. This is what Martialcalls, Mentula tributis damnata.
[47] This appellation was at first understood inthe most obvious sense, and it was supposed, thatthe brothers of Jesus were the lawful issue of Josephand of Mary. A devout respect soothe virginity os


the mother of God. suggested to the Gnostics, andafterwards to the orthodox Greeks, the expedient ofbestowing a second wise on Joseph. The Latins(from the time of Jerome) improved on that hinr,asserted the perpetual celibacy of Joseph, and justi­fied by many similar examples that Jude, as well asSimon and James, who are styled the brothers ofJesus Christ, might be only his first cousins. SeeTillemont, Mem. Ecclesiast. torn, i. part iii. andBcausobre, Hist. Critique du Manicheisme, 1. ii. c.2.
[48J Thirty-nine wXi8f«, squares of an hundredfeet each, which if strictly computed would scarcelyamount to nine acres. But the probability of cir*cumstances, the practice of other Greek writers*and the authority of M. de Valois, incline msto believe that the *x»9por is used to express theRoman jugerum-
[49] Eusebius, iii. 2cv The story is taken from-Hegesippus.
[50] Seethe death and character of Sabinus inTacitus (Hist. iii. 74, 75-)- Sabinus was the elderbrother, and till the acceslion of Vespasian, had beenconsidered as the principal support os the Flavianfamily.
[51] Flavium Clcmentem patruelem sunm con*temtijjima inertia ... ex tenuiffima suspicione intere*mit. Sueton. in Domitian, c. 1.5.
[52] The isle of Pandataria, according to Dion.Bruttius Præsens (apud Euseb. iii. 18.) banishes herto that of Pontia, which was not far distant from theother. That difference, and a mistake either ofEusebius, or of his transcribers, have given occa­sion to suppose two Domitillas, the wise and theniece of Clemens. See Tillemont, Memoires Eccle-siastiques,. torn. ii. p. 224..
[53] Dion. 1. lxvii. p. 1112. If the Bruttius-Præsens, from whom it is probable that he collected-this account, was the correspondent of Pliny,(Epistol. vii. 3.) we may consider him as a contem­porary writer,
[54] Sueton. in Domit. c. 17. Philostratus inVit. Apollon. 1. viii.
[55] Dion. 1. Ixviii. p. 11-18. Plin. Epistol.iv. 22.
L56] Plin.







OCR Output








386 THE DECLINE AND FALL


resided at Rome, that assembly might be oppressed, but it could scarcelybe neglected. The successors of Augustus exercised the power of dic­tating whatever laws their wisdom or caprice might suggest; but thoselaws were ratified by the sanction of the senate. The model of an­cient freedom was preserved in its deliberations and decrees; and wifeprinces, who respected the prejudices of the Roman people, were insome measure obliged to assume the language and behaviour suitable tothe general and first magistrate of the republic. In the armies and inthe provinces, they displayed the dignity of monarchs; and whenthey fixed their residence at a distance from the capital, they for everlaid aside the dissimulation which Augustus had recommended to hissuccessors. In the exercise of the legislative as well as of the executivepower, the sovereign advised with his ministers, instead of consultingthe great council of the nation. The name of the senate was men­tioned with honour till the last period of the empire; the vanity ofits members was still flattered with honorary distinction'6, but theassembly, which had so long been the source, and so long the instru­ment of power, was respectfully suffered to sink into oblivion.The senate of Rome, losing all connexion with the imperial courtand the actual constitution, was left a venerable but useless monumentof antiquity on the Capitoline hill.Civil magi- When the Roman princes had lost sight of the senate and of theiraside!'la d ancient capital, they, easily forgot the origin and nature of theirlegal power. The civil offices of consul, of proconsul, of censor,and of tribune, by the union of which it had been formed, betrayedto the people its republican extraction. Those modest titles werelaid aside 97; and if they still distinguished their high station by theappellation of Emperor, or Imperator, that word was understoodin a new and more dignified fense, and no longer denoted the gene­ral of the Roman armies, but the sovereign of the Roman world.imperiaHig- The name of Emperor, which was at first of a military nature, wastitles. associated with another of a more servile kind. The epithet of
4 Dominos,







OCR Output








OFTHEROMANEMPIRE. 333


cc


August 3.


and the power which you derive from your ancestors, will de-*' scend to your posterity. Happy would it have been, if Flori-"anus, instead of usurping the purple of his brother, like a pri-"vate inheritance, had expected what your majesty might deter-"mine, either in his favour, or in that of any other person. The** prudent soldiers have punislied his rashness. To me they have"offered the title of Augustus. But I submit to your clemency my"pretensions and my merits *6." When this respectful epistle was ^A. D. 276.read by the consul, the senators were unable to disguise their satis­faction, that Probus should condescend thus humbly to solicit ascepter which he already possessed. They celebrated with thewarmest gratitude his virtues, his exploits, and above all his mode­ration. A decree immediately passed, without a dissenting voice, togratify the election of the eastern armies, and to confer on theirchief all the several branches of the imperial dignity: the names ofCaesar and Augustus, the title of Father of his country, the rightof making in the fame day three motions in the senate t7, the officeof Pontifex Maximus, the tribunitian power, and the proconsularcommand; a mode of investiture, which, though it seemed to mul­tiply the authority of the emperor, expressed the constitution of theancient republic. The reign of Probus corresponded with this fairbeginning. The senate was permitted to direct the civil admini­stration of the empire. Their faithful general asserted the honourof the Roman arms, and often laid at their feet crowns of goldand barbaric trophies, the fruits of his numerous victories 1V Yetwhilst he gratified their vanity, he must secretly have despised theirindolence and weakness. Though it was every moment in theirpower to repeal the disgraceful edict of Gallienus, the proud succes­sors of the Scipios patiently acquiesced in their exclusion from allmilitary employments. They soon experienced, that those who re­fuse the sword, must renounce the scepter.
. The







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AND FALL


to senators and magistrates. Their principal distinction was theimperial or military robe of purple; whilst the senatorial gar­ment was marked by a broad, and the equestrian by a narrow, bandor stripe of the fame honourable colour. The pride, or rather thepolicy, of Diocletian, engaged that artful prince to introduce thestately magnificence of the court of Persia I0t. He ventured toassume the diadem, an ornament detested by the Romans as theodious ensign of royalty, and the use of which had been consideredas the most desperate act of the madness of Caligula. It was nomore than a broad white fillet set with pearls, which encircled theemperor's head. The sumptuous robes of Diocletian and his suc­cessors were of silk and gold; and it is remarked with indignation,that even their shoes were studded with the most precious gems.The access to their sacred person was every day rendered more diffi­cult, by the institution of new forms and ceremonies. The ave­nues of the palace were strictly guarded by the various schools^ asthey began to be called, of domestic officers. The interior apart­ments were intrusted to the jealous vigilance of the eunuchs; the in­crease of whose numbers and influence was the most infallible symp­tom of the progress of despotism. When a subject was at lengthadmitted to the imperial presence, he was obliged, whatever mightbe his rank, to fall prostrate on the ground, and to adore, accord­ing to the eastern fashion, the divinity of his lord and master "\Diocletian was a man of fense, who in the course of private as well aspublic life had formed a just estimate both of himself and of man­kind: nor is it easy to conceive, that in substituting the manners ofPersia to those of Rome, he was serioufly actuated by so mean a prin­ciple as that of vanity. He flattered himself, that an ostentation ofsplendor and luxury, would subdue the imagination of the multi­tude; that the monarch would be less exposed to the rude licenceof the people and the soldiers, as his person was secluded from thepublic view 5 and that habits of submission would insensibly be pro­ductive







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 497


his residence in the capital These oblations, for the mostpart, were made in money; nor was the society of Christians eitherdesirous or capable of acquiring, to any considerable degree, theincumbrance of a landed property. It had been provided by severallaws, which were enacted with the fame design as our statutes ofmortmain, that no real estates should be given or bequeathed to anycorporate body, without either a special privilege or a particulardispensation from the emperor or from the senate "JJ, who wereseldom disposed to grant them in favour of a sect, at first the objectof their contempt, and at last of their fears and jealousy. Atransaction however is related under the reign of Alexander Severus,which discovers that the restraint was sometimes eluded or sus­pended, and that the Christians were permitted to claim and topossess a piece of ground within the limits of Rome itself,,<S. Theprogress of Christianity, and the civil confusions of the empire,contributed to relax the severity of the laws, and before the closeof the third century many considerable estates were bestowed on theopulent churches of Rome, Milan, Carthage, Antioch, Alexandria,and the other great cities of Italy and the provinces.
The bishop was the natural steward of the church', the public Distributionstock was entrusted to his care without account or controul: the ofthe
'revenue.
presbyters were confined to their spiritual functions, and the moredependent order of deacons was solely employed in the manage­ment and distribution of the ecclesiastical revenue "7. If we maygive credit to the vehement declamations of Cyprian, there weretoo many among his African brethren, who, in the execution oftheir charge, violated every precept, not only of evangelic perfection,but even of moral virtue. By some of these unfaithful stewardsthe riches of the church were lavished in sensual pleasures, by othersthey were perverted to the purposes of private gain, of fraudulentpurchases, and of rapacious usury "\ But as long as the contri-v butions of the Christian people were free, and unconstrained, theVol. I. S s s abuse







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AND FALL


that it extended, in length, more than three thousand miles fromthe Western Ocean to the Euphrates ; that it was situated in thefinest part of the Temperate Zone, between the twenty-fourth andthe fifty-sixth degrees of northern latitude; and that it was sup­posed to contain above sixteen hundred thousand square miles, forthe most part of fertile and well cultivated land 8'.


CHAP.







OCR Output








4oS THE DECLINE AND FALL


this occasion the injury was aggravated by the insult, and the sense,of private interest was quickened by that of national honour. Theconquest of Macedonia, as we have already observed, had deliveredthe Roman people from the weight of personal taxes. Thoughthey had experienced every form of despotism, they had now en­joyed that exemption near five hundred years; nor could they pa­tiently brook the insolence of an Illyrian peasant, who, from hisdistant residence in Asia, presumed to number Rome among the tri­butary cities of his empire. The rising fury of the people was en­couraged by the authority, or at least the connivance, of the senate;and the feeble remains of the Prætorian guards, who had reason toapprehend their own dissolution, embraced so honourable a pretence,and declared their readiness to draw their swords in the service oftheir oppressed country. It was the wish, and it soon became thehope, of every citizen, that after expelling from Italy their foreigntyrants, they should elect a prince who, by the place of his resi­dence, and by his maxims of government, might once more deservethe title of Roman emperor. The name, as well as the situation ofMaxentius, determined in his favour the popular enthusiasm.Maxemius Maxentius was the son of the emperor Maximian, and he had
declared em- f a> i «
peror at married the daughter of Galenus. His birth and alliance seemeda°d!'3c6- to offer him the fairest promise of succeeding to the empire; but^8th October. .n;S vices and incapacity procured him the fame exclusion from-the dignity of Cæsar, which Constantine had deserved by a danger­ous superiority of merit. The policy of Galerius preferred suchassociates, as would neither disgrace the choice, nor dispute the com-■ mands of their benefactor. An obscure stranger was therefore-raised to the throne of Italy, and the son of the late emperor of-the West was left to enjoy the luxury of a private fortune in a villaa few miles distant from the capital. The gloomy passions of his•foul, sliame, vexation, and rage, were inflamed by envy on the.news.of .Constantine's success j but the hopes of Maxentius revived
with


8







OCR Output








NOTES ON THE FIFTEENTH CHAPTER. Ixv


[105] Constantine was very attentive to the pri­vileges and comfort of his fellow-veterans (Conve-terant), as he now began to style them. See theTheodosia-n Code, 1. vii. tit. 20. torn. ii. p.419—429.
[106] Whilst the Athenians maintained the em­pire of the sea, their fleet consisted of three, andafterwards of four, hundred gallies of three ranks ofoars, all completely equipped and ready for imme­diate service. The arsenal in the port of Piraushad cost the republic a thousand talents, abouttwo hundred and sixteen thousand pounds. SeeThucydides de Eel. Peloponn. 1. ii. c. 13. andMeursius de Fortuna Attica, c. 19.
[107] Zosimus, 1. ii. p. 95, 96. This greatbattle is described in the Valesian fragment (p.714.), in a clear though concise manner. " Liciniusvero circum Hadrianopolin maximo exercitu la-teraardui montis impleverat: illuctoto agmineCon-stantinus inflexit. Cum bellum terra marique tra-heretur, quamvis per arduum suis nitentibus, atta-m'en difciplina militari et felicitate, Constantinus Li-cinii confusum et fine ordine agentem vicit exerci-tum; leviter femore sauciatus."
[108] Zosimus, 1. ii. p. 97, 98. The currentalways sets out of the Hellespont; and when it isassisted by a north wind, no vessel can attempt thepassage. A south wind renders the force of the cur­rent almost imperceptible. See Tournefort's Voyageau Levant, Let. xi.


[109] Aureliu3 Victor. Zosimus, 1. ii. p. 98.According to the latter, Martinianus was MagisterOfficiorum (he uses the Latin appellation in Greek).Some medals seem to intimate, that during his stiortreign he received the title of Augustus.
[11c] Eusebius (in Vita Constantin. 1. ii. c. 16,17.) ascribes this decisive victory to the piousprayers of the emperor. The Valesian fragment(p. 714.) mentions a body of Gothic auxiliaries,under their chief Aliquaca, who adhered to theparty of Licinius.
[111] Zosimus, 1. ii. p. 102. Victor Junior imEpitome. Anonym. Valesian. p. 714.
[112] Contra religionem sacramenti. Thessa-lonicæ privatus occifus est. Eutropius x. 6. and hisevidence is confirmed by St. Jerome (in Chronic.) a*well as by Zosimus, 1. ii p. 102. The Valesianwriter is the only one who mentions the soldiers,and it is Zonaras alone who calls in the assistance*of the senate. Eusebius prudently slides over thisdelicate transaction. But Sozomen, a century af­terwards, ventures to assert the treasonable practicesof Licinius.
[113] See the Theodosian Code, 1. xv. tit. 15.torn. v. p. 404, 405. These edicts of Constantinebetray a degree of passion and precipitancy very un­becoming of the character of a lawgiver.


NOTES ON THE FI
£i] T"\UM Assyrios penes, Medosque, et PersasOriens suit, defpectissima pars fervitutis.Tacit. Hist. v. 8. Herodotus, who visited Asiawhilst it obeyed the last of those empires, slightlymentions the Syrians of Palestine, who, accordingto their own confession, had received from Egyptthe rite of circumcision. See 1. ii. c. 104.
[2] Diodorus Siculus, 1. xl. Dion Caslius, 1.xxxvii. p. 121. Tacit. Hist. v. 1—9. Justin,xxxvi. 2, 3. • • - . ....
Vol:t.


TEENTH CHAPTER.


[3] Tradidit arcano quæcunque volumine Moses,Non monstrare vias, eadem nisi sacra colentiQuæsitos ad fontes solos deducere verpas.The letter of this law is not to be found in the pre­sent volume of Moses. Eut the wife, the humaneMaimonides openly teaches, that if an idolater fallinto the water, a Jew ought not to save him frominstant death. See Basnage, Histoirc des Juifs, I.vi. c. 28.
[4] A Jewish sect, which indulged themselves ina sort of occasional conformity, derived from Herod,
i by







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 77


suspicion of flattery. Above two hundred and fifty years after thedeath of Trajan, the senate, in pouring out the customary accla­mations on the accession of a new emperor, wished that he mightsurpass the felicity of Augustus, and the virtue of Trajan
We may readily believe, that the father of his-country hesitated Hadria'Z*whether he ought to intrust the various characters of his nephewHadrian with sovereign power. In his last moments, the arts ofthe empress Plotina either fixed the irresolution of Trajan, or boldlysupposed a fictitious adoption,8; the truth of which could not besafely disputed, and Hadrian was peaceably acknowledged as his-lawful successor. Under his reign, as has been already mentioned,the empire flourished in peace and prosperity. He encouraged thearts, reformed the laws, asserted military discipline, and visited allhis provinces in person. His vast and active genius was equallysuited to the most enlarged views, and the minute details of civilpolicy. But the ruling passions of his foul were curiosity andvanity. As they prevailed, and as they were attracted by differentobjects, Hadrian was, by turns, an excellent prince, a ridiculoussophist, and a jealous tyrant. The general tenor of his conductdeserved praise for its equity and moderation. Yet in the first daysof his reign, he put to death four consular senators, his personalenemies, and men who had been judged worthy of empire; and thetediousness of a painful illness rendered him, at last, peevish andcruel. The senate doubted whether they should pronounce him agod or a tyrant; and the honours decreed to his memory weregranted to the prayers of the pious Antoninus !9.
The caprice of Hadrian influenced his choice of a succeflor. Adoption of
..... l'ie el e a r.d
After revolving in his mind several men of distinguished merit, youngtrwhom he esteemed and hated, he adopted Ælius Verus, a gay and ™'voluptuous nobleman, recommended by uncommon beauty to thelover of Antinous *°. But whilst Hadrian was delighting himselfwith his own applause, and the acclamations of the soldiers, whose
consent







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE;- «7


Having now finished the circuit of the Roman empire* we may The Medi-
°' ''terraneati
observe, that Africa is divided from Spain by a narrow strait of with itsabout twelve miles, through which the Atlantic flows into the Medi­terranean. The columns of Hercules, so famous among the ancients,were two mountains which seemed to have been torn asunder bysome convulsion of the elements; and at the foot of the European*mountain, the fortress of Gibraltar is now seated. The whole ex­tent of the Mediterranean Sea, its coasts, and its islands, were com­prized within the Roman dominion. Of the larger islands, the twoBaleares, which derive their names of Majorca and Minorca fromtheir respective size, are subject at present, the former to Spain, thelatter to Great Britain. It is easier to deplore the fate, than todescribe the actual condition of Corsica. Two Italian sovereignsassume the regal title from Sardinia and Sicily. Crete, orCandia, with Cyprus, and most of the smaller islands of Greeceand Asia, have been subdued by the Turkish arms; whilst thelittle rock of Malta defies their power, and has emerged, underthe government of its military Order, into fame and opulence.
This long enumeration of provinces, whose broken fragments General M«have formed so many powerful kingdoms, might almost induce us empiref°maBto forgive the vanity or ignorance of the ancients. Dazzled withthe extensive sway, the irresistible strength, and the real or affectedmoderation of the emperors, they permitted themselves to despise,and sometimes to forget, the outlying countries which had been leftin the enjoyment of a barbarous independence; and they graduallyassumed the licence of confounding the Roman monarchy with theglobe of the earth88. But the temper, as well as knowledge, of amodern historian, require a more sober and accurate language. Hemay impress a juster image, by observing that the empire was abovetwo thousand miles in breadth, from the wall of Antoninus and thenorthern limits of Dacia, to mount Atlas and the tropic of Cancer;
E 2 that







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AND FALL


the principle of evil eternally buried in darkness. The wife benevo­lence of Ormusd formed man capable of virtue, and abundantly pro­vided his fair habitation with the materials of happiness. By hisvigilant providence, the motion of the planets, the order of theseasons, and the temperate mixture of the elements are preserved.But the malice of Ahriman has long since pierced Ormusd's egg-tor, in other words, has violated the harmony of his works. Sincethat fatal irruption, the most minute particles of good and evilare intimately intermingled and agitated together; the rankestpoisons spring up amidst the most salutary plants; deluges, earth­quakes, and conflagrations, attest the conflict of Nature, and thelittle world of man is perpetually shaken by vice and misfortune;Whilst the rest of human kind are led away captives in the chainsof their infernal enemy, the faithful Persian alone, reserves hisreligious adoration for his friend and protector Ormusd, and sightsunder his banner of light, in the full confidence, that he shall, inthe last day, mare the glory of his triumph. At that decisiveperiod, the enlightened wisdom of goodness will render the powerof Ormusd superior to the furious malice of his rival. Ahriman andhis followers, disarmed and subdued, will sink into their native^darkness; and virtue will maintain the eternal peace and harmonyof the universe
The theology of Zoroaster was darkly comprehended by foreigners,,and even by the far greater number of his disciples; but the mostcareless observers were struck with the philosophic simplicity of thePersian worship. "That people, says Herodotus rejects the"use of temples, of altars, and of statues, and smiles at the folly of*' those nations, who imagine that the gods are sprung from,"or bear any affinity with the human nature. The tops of the"highest mountains are the places chosen for sacrifices. Hymns'* and prayers are the principal worship; the Supreme God who'* fills the wide circle of Heaven^ is the object to whom they are6 "addressed."







OCR Output








86 THE DECLINE AND FALl


To his sonCommodus.


Accession ofthe emperorCommodus.


her proofs of the most tender confidence, and of a respect whichended not with her life. In his Meditations, he thanks the gods,who had bestowed on him a wife, so faithful, so gentle, and ofsuch a wonderful simplicity of manners *. The obsequious senate,at his earnest request, declared her a goddess. She was representedin her temples, with the attributes of Juno, Venus, and Ceres;and it was decreed, that, on the day of their nuptials, the youth ofeither sex should pay their vows before the altar of their chastepatroness s.
The monstrous vices of the son, have cast a (hade on the purityof the father's virtues. It has been objected to Marcus, that hesacrificed the happiness of millions to a fond partiality for a worth­less boy; and that he chose a successor in his own family, ratherthan in the republic. Nothing, however, was neglected by the an­xious father, and by the men of virtue and learning whom hesummoned to his assistance, to expand the narrow mind of youngCommodus, to correct his growing vices, and to render him wor­thy of the throne, for which he was designed. But the power ofinstruction is seldom of much efficacy, except in those happy dis­positions where it is almost superfluous. The distasteful lesson of agrave philosopher was, in a moment, obliterated by the whisper ofa .profligate favourite; and Marcus himself blasted the fruits of thislaboured education, by admitting his son, at the age of fourteenor fifteen, to a full participation of the Imperial power. He livedbut four years afterwards; but he lived long enough to repent arash measure, which raised the impetuous youth above the restraintof reason and authority.;
Most of the crimes which disturb the internal peace of society, areproduced by the restraints which the necessary, but unequal lawsof property, have imposed on the appetites of mankind, by con­fining to a few the possession of those objects that are coveted bymany. Of all our passions, the love of power is of the most im­perious







OCR Output








414 THE DECLINE AND FALL


ad of Max-


the freedom and dangers of a military life; they had advanced,almost by equal steps, through the successive honours of the ser­vice, and as soon as Galerius was invested with the imperialdignity, he seems to have conceived the defign of raising his com­panion to the fame rank with himself. During the ssiort period ofhis prosperity he considered the rank of Caesar as unworthy ofthe age and merit of Licinius, and rather chose to reserve for himthe place of Constantius, and the empire of the West. While theemperor was employed in the Italian war, he intrusted his friendwith the defence of the Danube; and immediately after his returnfrom that unfortunate expedition, he invested Licinius with thevacant purple of Severus, resigning to his immediate commandthe provinces of Illyricum The news of his promotion was nosooner carried into the East, than Maximin, who governed or ratheroppressed the countries of Egypt and Syria, betrayed his envyand' discontent, disdained the inferior name of Cæsar, and not­withstanding the prayers as well as arguments of Galerius, exacted*almost by violence, the equal title of Augustus For the first,and indeed for the last time, the Roman world was administered bySx emperors, six emperors. In the West, Constantine and Maxentius affected toA. . 308. feverence their father Maximian. In the East, Licinius andMaximin honoured with more real consideration their benefactorGalerius. The opposition of interest, and the memory of a recentwas, divided the empire into two great hostile powers ; but theirmutual fears produced an apparent tranquillity, and even a feignedreconciliation, till the deaths of the elder princes, of Maximian,and more particularly of Galerius, gave a new direction to the viewsand passions of their surviving associates.Misfortunes When Maximian had reluctantly abdicated the empire, the
of Maximian. m
venal orators of the times applauded his philosophic moderation.When his ambition excited, or at least encouraged, a civil war,they returned thanks to his generous patriotism, and gently cen­sured


■







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AND FALL


situation of the prisoners, he frequently condescended to set beforetheir eyes every circumstance which could render life more pleasing,or death more terrible; and to solicit, nay to intreat, them, thatthey would shew some compassion to themselves, to their families,and to their friends 6*. If threats and persuasions proved in­effectual, he had often recourse to violence; the scourge and therack were called in to supply the deficiency of argument, and everyart of cruelty was employed to subdue such inflexible, and as itappeared to the Pagans, such criminal, obstinacy. The ancientapologists of Christianity have censured, with equal truth andseverity, the irregular conduct of their persecutors, who, contraryto every principle of judicial proceeding, admitted the use of torture,in order to obtain, not a confession, but a denial, of the crime whichwas the object of their inquiry 6|. The monks of succeeding ages,who, in their peaceful solitudes, entertained themselves with di­versifying the deaths and sufferings of the primitive martyrs, havefrequently invented torments of a much more refined and ingeniousnature. In particular, it has pleased them to suppose, that thezeal of the Roman magistrates, disdaining every consideration ofmoral virtue or public decency, endeavoured to seduce those whomthey were unable to vanquish, and that by their orders the most brutalviolence was offered to those whom they found it impossible to seduce.It is related, that pious females, who were prepared to despise death,were sometimes condemned to a more severe trial, and called upon to de­termine whether they set a higher value on their religion or on theirchastity. The youths to whose licentious embraces they were aban­doned, received a solemn exhortation from the judge, to exert theirmost strenuous efforts to maintain the honour of Venus against the im­pious virgin who refused to burn incense on her altars. Theirviolence however was commonly disappointed, and the seasonableinterposition of some miraculous power preserved the chaste spousesof Christ from the diflionour even of an involuntary defeat. We
2 should







OCR Output








4<5$ THE DECLINE AND FALL


with a garland of flowers. This innocent and elegant practicemight perhaps have been tolerated as a mere civil institution. Butit most unluckily happened that the doors were under the protectionof the household gods, that the laurel was sacred to the lover ofDaphne, and that garlands of flowers, though frequently wornas a symbol either of joy or mourning, had been dedicated intheir first origin to the service of superstition. The tremblingChristians, who were persuaded in this instance to comply with-the fashion of their country, and the commands of the magistrate,laboured under the most gloomy apprehensions, from the reproachesof their own conscience, the censures of the church, and the de­nunciations of divine vengeance *5.Zeal for Such was the anxious diligence which was required to guard the
Christianity. cyia^-ty 0f tne gGfpei fr0m the infectious breath of idolatry. Thesuperstitious observances of public or private rites were carelessly prac­tised, from education and habit, by the followers of the establishedreligion. But as often as they occurred, they afforded the Christiansan opportunity of declaring and confirming their zealous opposition.By these frequent protestations their attachment to the faith wascontinually fortified, and in proportion to the increase of zeal, they*combated with the more ardour and success in the holy war, whichthey had undertaken against the empire of the dæmons.The second If. The writings of Cicero J° represent in the most livery colours-The doctrine the ignorance, the errors, and the uncertainty of the ancient phi-uijtyofthe' losophers with regard to the immortality of the foul. When[he'phToso- ttey are denrous °f arming their disciples against the fear of death,phers; thev inculcate, as an obvious though melancholy position, thatthe fatal stroke of our dissolution releases us from the calamities oflife; and that those can no longer suffer who no longer exist.Yet there were a few sages of Greece and Rome who had conceiveda more exalted, and, in some respects, a juster idea of humannature; though it must be confessed, that in the sublime inquiry.
~ their







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AND FALL


to appear in his private council-chamber. He there acquainted himwith the Imperial mandate which he had just received 8o, that thosewho had abandoned the Roman religion should immediately returnto the practice of the ceremonies of their ancestors. Cyprian repliedwithout hesitation, that he was a Christian and a bishop, devoted tothe worship of the true and only Deity, to whom he offered up hisdaily supplications for the safety and prosperity of the two emperors,his lawful sovereigns. With modest confidence he pleaded the pri­vilege of a citizen, in refusing to give any answer to some invidiousand indeed illegal questions which the proconsul had proposed. Asentence of banishment was pronounced as the penalty of Cyprian'sdisobedience; and he was conducted without delay to Curubis, a freeand maritime city of Zeugitania, in a pleasant situation, a fertileterritory, and at the distance of about forty miles from Carthage 8r.The exiled bishop enjoyed the conveniencies of life and the con­sciousness of virtue. His reputation was diffused over Africa andItaly; an account of his behaviour was publistied for the edificationof the Christian world 81; and his solitude was frequently interruptedby the letters, the visits, and the congratulations of the faithful.On the arrival of a new proconsul in the province, the fortune ofCyprian appeared for some time to wear a still more favourable as­pect. He was recalled from banishment; and though not yet per­mitted to return to Carthage, his own gardens in the neighbourhoodof the capital were assigned for the place of his residence
At length, exactly one year "* after Cyprian was first appre­hended, Galerius Maximus, proconsul of Africa, received the Impe­rial warrant for the execution of the Christian teachers. The bishopof Carthage was sensible that he should be singled out for one of thefirst victims; and the frailty of nature tempted him to withdrawhimself, by a secret flight, from the danger and the honour ofmartyrdom: but soon recovering that fortitude which his characterrequired, he returned to his gardens, and patiently expected the
ministers







OCR Output








s20 THE DECLINE AND FALL


progress of Christianity. About fourscore years after the dtastiof Christ, his innocent disciples were punished with death by thesentence of a proconsul of the most amiable and philosophic cha­racter, and according to the laws of an emperor, distinguished bythe wisdom and justice of his general administration. The apo­logies which were repeatedly addressed to the successors of Trajanare filled with the most pathetic complaints, that the Christianswho obeyed the dictates, and solicited the liberty of conscience, werealone, among all the subjects of the Roman empire, excluded fromthe common benefits of their auspicious government. The deathsof a few eminent martyrs have been recorded with care; and fromthe times that Christianity was invested with the supreme power, thegovernors of the church have been no less diligently employed indisplaying the cruelty, than in imitating the conduct of their Paganadversaries. To separate (if it be possible) a few authentic as well asinteresting facts from an undigested mass of fiction and error, andto relate, in a clear and rational manner, the causes, the extent, theduration, and the most important circumstances of the persecutionsto which the first Christians were exposed, is the design of thepresent chapter.
Srmo'Ses. The scctaries of a persecuted religion, depressed by fear, animatedwith resentment, and perhaps heated by enthusiasm, are seld Dm ina proper temper of mind calmly to investigate, or candidly toappreciate, the motives of their enemies, which often escape the im­partial and discerning view even of those who are placed at a securedistance from the flames of persecution. A reason has been assignedfor the conduct of the emperors towards the primitive Christians,which may appear the more specious and probable as it is drawnfrom the acknowledged genius of Polytheism. It has already beenobserved, that the religious concord of the world was principallysupported by the implicit assent and reverence which the nations ofantiquity expressed for their respective traditions and ceremonies.


It







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AND FALL


presumed, that they insisted on every topic which might interest thepride, the piety, or the fears of their sovereign in the destructionof Christianity. Perhaps they represented, that the glorious workof the deliverance of the empire was left imperfect, as long as anindependent people was permitted to subsist and multiply in theheart of the provinces. The Christians (it might speciously bealleged) renouncing the gods and the institutions of Rome, hadconstituted a distinct republic, which might yet be suppressed beforeit had acquired any military force; but which was already governedby its own laws and magistrates, was possessed of a public treasure,and was intimately connected in all its parts, by the frequent assem­blies of the bistiops, to whose decrees their numerous and opulentcongregations yielded an implicit obedience. Arguments like these,may seem to have determined the reluctant mind of Diocletian toembrace a new system of persecution: but though we may suspect,it is not in our power to relate, the secret intrigues of the palace,the private views and resentments, the jealousy of women or eu­nuchs, and all those trifling but decisive causes which so often in­fluence the fate of empires, and the counsels of the wisest mo-narchs **V
Demolition of The pleasure of the emperors was at length signified to theNkomedia!* Christians, who, during the course of this melancholy winter, had23'dFebruary exPe<^ed> with anxiety, the result of so many secret consultations.
The twenty-third of February, which coincided with the Romanfestival of the Terminalia ,4*, was appointed (whether from acci­dent or design) to set bounds to the progress of Christianity. Atthe earliest dawn of day, the Prætorian præfect ,+9, accompanied byseveral generals, tribunes, and officers of the revenue, repaired tothe principal church of Nicomedia, which was situated on an emi­nence in the most populous and beautiful part of the city. Thedoors were instantly broke open; they rushed into the sanctuary;and as they searched in vain for some visible object of worship, they
were







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 125


The true interest of an absolute monarch generally coincides with The wisdom
° * and just'ce of
that of his people. Their numbers, their wealth, their order, and hitheir security, are the best and only foundations of his real greatness jand were he totally devoid of virtue, prudence might supply its.place, and would dictate the fame rule of conduct. Severus con­sidered the Roman empire as his property, and had no sooner se­cured the possession, than he bestowed his care on the cultivationand improvement of so valuable an acquisition. Salutary laws,executed with inflexible firmness, soon corrected most of the abuseswith which, since the death of Marcus, every part of the govern­ment had been infected. In the administration of justice, the judge­ments of the emperor were characterized by attention, discern­ment, and impartiality; and whenever he deviated from the strict lineof equity, it was generally in favour of the poor and oppressed;not so much indeed from any sense of humanity, as from the naturalpropensity of a despot, to humble the pride of greatness, and to finkall his subjects to the fame common level of absolute depend­ence. His expensive taste for building, magnificent shows, andabove all a constant and liberal distribution of corn and provisions,were the surest means of captivating the affection of the Romanpeople59. The misfortunes of civil discord were obliterated. The Generalcalm of peace and prosperity was once more experienced in the pro- prosperity,vinces, and many cities, restored by the munificence of Severus,assumed the title of his colonies, and attested by public monumentstheir gratitude and felicity The fame of the Roman arms wasrevived by that warlike and successful emperor 6,} and he boastedwith a just pride, that having received the empire oppressed withforeign and domestic wars, he left it established in profound univer­sal and honourable peace.
Although the wounds of civil war appeared completely healed, its Relaxation ofmortal poison still lurked in the vitals of the constitution. Severus j^n^7 d,su"possessed a considerable share of vigour and ability j but the daring
foul


■







OCR Output








wfl THE DEGLIN'E AND FALL


ard of a young and liberal prince, who had taken up arms to re-. venge his father's death and the oppression of the military order 47.Defeat and Whilst a conspiracy of women and eunuchs was concerted withcfinus!fMa* prudence, and conducted with rapid vigour," Macrirrus, who by adecisive motion might have crushed his infant enemy, floated be­tween the opposite extremes of terror and security, which alike fixedhim inactive at Antioch. A spirit of rebellion diffused itself throughall the camps and garrisons of Syria, successive detachments mur­dered their officers4*, and joined the party of the rebels; arid thetardy restitution of military pay and privileges was imputed to theacknowledged weakness of Macrinus. At length he marched outof Antioch, to meet the increasing and zealous army of the youngpretender. His own troops seemed to take the field with faintnesaA. D. 218. andrehictance; but in the heat of the battle *9, the Praetorian guards,^hjune. almost by an involuntary impuise, asserted the superiority of theirvalour and discipline. The rebel ranks were broken; when themother and grandmother of the Syrian prince, who according to theireastern custom had attended the army, threw themselves from thecovered chariots, and, by exciting the compassion of the soldiers, en­deavoured to animate their drooping courage. Antoninus himsclf>who in the rest of his life never acted like a man, in this importantcrisis of his fate approved himself a hero, mounted his horse, andat the head of his rallied troops charged sword in hand among thethickest of the enemy; whilst the eunuch Gannys, whose occupationshad been confined to female cares and the soft luxury of Asia,displayed the talents of an able and experienced general. Thebattle still raged with doubtful violence, and Macrinus might haveobtained the victory, had he not betrayed his own cause by a shame­ful and precipitate flight. His cowardice served only to protracthis life a few days, and to stamp deserved ignominy on his mis­fortunes. It is scarcely necessary to add, that his son Biadume-
3 nianus.







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 495
religion; a celebrated order of rrieri which his furnished the most im­portant, though not always the most edifying subjects, for modernhistory. Their mutual hostilities sometimes disturbed the peace ofthe infant church, but thejr zeal and activity were united in thecommon cause, and the love of power, which (under the most artfuldisguises) could insinuate itself into the breast* of bishops and mar­tyrs, animated them to increase the number of their subjects, andto enlarge the.limits of thei Christian empire. They were destituteof any temporal force, and they were for a long time discouragedand oppressed, rather than assisted, by the civil magistrate; but theyhad acquired, and they employed within their own society, the twomost efficacious instruments of government, rewards and punish­ments; the former derived from the pious liberality, the latter fromthe devout apprehensions of the faithful. .
I. The community of goods, which had so agreeably amused the Oblations and
p , ~ revenue of the
imagination of Plato'1 » and which subsisted in some degree among church,the. austere sect of the Estonians' "7, was adopted for a short time inthe primitive church. , The fervour of the first proselytes promptedthem to fell those worldly possessions, which they despised, to laythe price of ithem at the feet of the apostles, and to content them*selves with receiving an equal share out of the general distribution "VThe progress of the Christian religion relaxed, and gradually abo­lished this generous institution, which, in hands less pure than thoseof the apostles, would too soon have been corrupted and abused bythe returning selfishness of human nature \ and the-converts whoembraced the new religion were permitted to retain the possessionof their patrimony, to receive legacies and inheritances, and toH*crease their separate property by all the lawful means of trade andindustry* Instead of an absolute sacrifice, a moderate proportionwas accepted by the ministers of the gospel j and in their weekly ormonthly assemblies, every beiSfevery according to the exigency of theoccasion, and the measure of his weaUk and piety, presented his
voluntary







OCR Output








CONTENTS.


CHAP. XII.
Conduct of the Army and Senate aster the death of Aurelian.
Reigns of Tacitus, Probus, Cants and his Sons. . 322
CHAP. XIII.
The reign of Diocletian and his three associates, Maximian, Galerius^
and Conjlantius. General re-establishment of order and tran­
quillity. The Persian "war, vitlory, and triumph. The neiv
form of administration. Abdication and retirement of Diocletian
and Maximian. 356
CHAP. XIV.
Troubles after the abdication of Diocletian. Death of Conjlantius*
Elevation of Constantine and Maxentius.——Six Emperors at
the fame time. Death of Maximian and Galerius.- Victories
of Constantine over Maxentius and Licinius. '—Re-union of the
Empire under the authority of Constantine. 400
CHAP. XV.
The Progress of the Christian Religion, and the Sentiments, Manners,
Numbers, and Condition, of the primitive Christians. 449
CHAP. XVI.
The condutl of the Roman Government toivards the Christians, from
the reign of Nero to that of Constantine. 519


THE







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. £90


and by bestowing them in marriage on some of his principal officers,gradually introduced between the two nations, the closest and mostendearing connexions ".
But the most important condition of peace was understood rather »nd resigns^
1 A them the ptO«
than expressed in the treaty. Aurelian withdrew the Roman forces vin« offrom Dacia, and tacitly relinquished that great province to theGoths and Vandals His manly judgment convinced him of thesolid advantages, and taught him to despise the seeming disgraceof thus contracting the frontiers of the monarchyv The Daciansubjects removed from those distant possessions which they wereunable to cultivate or defend, added strength and populousnefs to thesouthern side of the Danube. A fertile territory, which the repe­tition of barbarous inroads had changed into a desert, was yieldedto their industry, and a new province of Dacia still preserved thememory of Trajan's conquests. The old country of that namedetained, however, a considerable number of its inhabitants whodreaded exile more thart a Gothic master *J. These degenerate Ro­mans continued to serve the empire, whose allegiance they had re­nounced by introducing among their conquerors the first notions ofagriculture, the useful arts, and the conveniences of civilised life.An intercourse of commerce and language was gradually establishedbetween the opposite banks of the Danube; and after Dacia becamean independent state, it often proved the firmest barrier of theempire against the invasions of the savages of the north. A fense ofinterest attached these more settled barbarians to the alliance ofRome, and a permanent interest very frequently ripens into sincereand useful friendship. This various colony which filled the ancientprovince, and was insensibly blended into one great people, still ac­knowledged the superior renown and authority of the Gothic tribe,and claimed the fancied honour of a Scandinavian origin. At thesame time the happy resemblance of the name of Getæ, infusedamong the credulous Goths, a vain persuasion, that in a remote
QjJ 2 age,







OCR Output








£10 THE DECLINE AND FALL


tests the state of religion in that city ahout the middle of the thirdcentury, and after a peace of thirty-eight years. The clergy, atthat time, consisted of a bishop, forty-six presbyters, seven deacons,as many sub-deacons, forty-two acolythes, and fifty readers, exor­cists, and porters. The number of widows, of the infirm, and ofthe poor, who were maintained by the oblations of the faithful,amounted to fifteen hundred '6?. From reason, as well as from theexample of Antioch, we may venture to estimate the Christians ofRome at about fifty thousand. The populousness of that greatcapital cannot perhaps be exactly ascertained; but the most modestcalculation will not surely reduce it lower than a million of inhabitants,of whom the Christians might constitute at the most a twentieth


. 168


part
in Africa and The western provincials appeared to have derived the knowledgeprovinces."1 of Christianity from the fame source which had diffused amongthem the language, the sentiments, and the manners of Rome. Inthis more important circumstance, Africa, as well as Gaul, weregradually fashioned to the imitation of the capital. Yet notwith­standing the many favourable occasions which might invite theRoman missionaries to visit their Latin provinces, it was late beforethey passed either the sea or the Alps 169; nor can we discover inthose great countries any assured traces either of faith or of perse­cution that ascend higher than the reign of the Antonines'70. Theflow progress of the gospel in the cold climate of Gaul, was ex­tremely different from the eagerness with which it seems to havebeen received on the burning sands of Africa. The African Chris­tians soon formed one of the principal members of the primitivechurch. The practice introduced into that province, of appointingbissiops to the most inconsiderable towns, and very frequently tothe most obscure villages, contributed to multiply the splendor andimportance of their religious societies, which during the course ofthe third century were animated by the zeal of Tertullian, directed


* i by







OCR Output








Soo THE DECLINE ANU FALL


bic war.


September.


age, their own ancestors, already seated in the Dacian provinces,,had received the instructions of Zamolxis, and checked the victoriousarms of Sesostris and Darius z*.The Aleman- While the vigorous and moderate conduct of Aurelian restoredthe Illyrian frontier, the nation of the Alemanni 1S violated theconditions of peace, which either Gallienus had purchased, orClaudius had imposed, and inflamed by their impatient youth',suddenly flew to arms. Forty thousand horse appeared: in thefield *6, and the numbers of the infantry doubled those of the ca*,valry 11. The first objects of their avarice were a few cities of theRhætian frontier; but their hopes soon rising with success, therapid march of the Alemanni traced a line of devastation from theDanube to the Po lS;A. D. 270. The emperor was almost at the fame time informed of the irrupttion, and of the retreat, of the barbarians. Collecting an activebody of troops, he marched with silence and celerity along the■fleirts of the Hercynian forest:; and the Alemanni, laden with thespoils of Italy, arrived at the Danube, without suspecting, that onthe opposite bank, and in an advantageous post, a Roman army layconcealed and prepared to intercept their return. Aurelian indulgedthe fatal security of the barbarians, and permitted about halftheir forces to pass the river without precaution. Their situationand astonishment gave him an easy victory; his skilful conduct im­proved the advantage. Disposing the legions in a semicircular form,he advanced the two horns of the crescent across the Danube,and wheeling them on a sudden towards the center, inclosed therear of the German host. The dismayed barbarians, on whatsoeverside they cast their eyes, beheld with despair, a wasted country, adeep and rapid stream, a victorious and implacable enemy.
Reduced to this distressed condition, the Alemanni, no longerdisdained to sue for peace. Aurelian received their ambassadors atthe head of his camp, and with every circumstance of martial pomp
that







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 407


nested, attest the fraternal affection of Constantine; and as thoseprinces poflested a mild and grateful disposition, they submitted with­out reluctance to the superiority of his genius and fortune '9.
H, The ambitious spirit of Galerius was scarcely reconciled to the Discontent of
the Romans
disappointment of his views upon the Gallic provinces, before the attheappre-unexpected loss of Italy wounded his pride as well as power in a taxes."still more sensible part. The long absence of the emperors hadfilled Rome with discontent and indignation; and the people gra­dually discovered, that the preference given toNicomedia and Milan,was not to be ascribed to the particular inclination of Diocletian,but to the permanent form of government which he had instituted.It was in vain that, a few months after his abdication, his succes­sors dedicated, under his name, those magnificent baths, whoseruins still supply the ground as well as the materials for so manychurches and convents I0. The tranquillity of those elegantrecesses of ease and luxury, was disturbed by the impatientmurmurs of the Romans; and a report was insensibly circu­lated, that the sums expended in erecting those buildings, wouldsoon be required at their hands. About that time the avarice ofGalerius, or perhaps the exigencies of the state, had induced himto make a very strict and rigorous inquisition into the property ofhis subjects for the purpose of a general taxation, both on theirlands and on their persons. A very minute survey appears to havebeen taken of their real estates; and wherever there was the slightestsuspicion of concealment, torture was very freely employed to ob­tain a sincere declaration of their personal wealth The privi­leges which had exalted Italy above the rank of the provinces,were no longer regarded: and the officers of the revenue al­ready began to number the Roman people, and to settle the pro­portion of the new taxes. Even when the spirit of freedom hadbeen utterly extinguished, the tamest subjects have sometimes ven­tured to resist an unprecedented invasion of their property; but on


* this







OCR Output








3?6 THE DECLINE AND FALL


spot which united all that could contribute either to health or to.
luxury, did not require the partiality of a native. "The soil was
** dry and fertile, the air is pure and wholesome, and though ex-
*c tremely hot during the summer months* this country seldom
"feels those sultry and noxious winds, to which the coast of
«c Istria and some parts of Italy are exposed. The views from
"the palace are no less beautiful than the foil and climate was in-
«' viting. Towards the west lies the fertile shore that stretchea
"along the Hadriatic, in which a number of small islands are
** scattered in such a manner, as to give this- part of the sea the
"appearance of a great lake. On the north side lies the bay,.
"which led to the ancient city of Salona; and the country be-
** yond it, appearing in sight, forms a. proper contrast, to that
*•* more extensive prospect of water, which the Hadriatic presents-
"both to the south and to the east. Towards the north, the view
"U terminated by high and irregular mountains, situated at a..
u proper distance, and, in. many places, covered with villages,.
"woods, and vineyards"7."
OfDiode- Though Constantine,. from a- very obvious prejudice, affects totian's palace. . . ,
mention the palace of Diocletian with contempt , yet one of their
successors, who could only fee it in a neglected and mutilated state*.
celebrates its magnificence in terms of the highest admiration "9. It
covered an extent of ground consisting of between nine and ten Eng~
lish acres. The form was quadrangular* flanked with sixteen towers*.
Two of the sides were near six hundred, and the other two near seven
hundred feet in length. The whole was constructed of a beautifuL
free-stone, extracted from the neighbouring quarries of Trau or
Tragutium, and very little inferior to marble itself. Four streets,.
intersecting each other at right angles, divided the several parts of
this great edifice, and the approach to the principal apartment
was from a stately entrance, which is still denominated the Golden
gate. The approach was terminated by a periftylium of granite-
v columns,







OCR Output








CONTENTS


CHAP. I
The Extent and Military Force of the Empire in the Age of the
Antonines. Page 1
CHAP. II.
Of the Union and internal Prosperity of the Roman Empire* in the
Age of the Antonines* 29
CHAP. IIL
Of the Constitution of the Roman Empire, in the Age of the
Antonines. 60
CHAP. IV.
The crueltyfollies, and murder of Commodus. Election of Per-
tinax his attempts to reform the State his assassination by
the Prætorian Guards. 85
C HAP. V.
Public sale of the empire to Didius Julianus by the Pratorian
Guards.——Clodius Albinus in Britain, Pefcennius Niger in Syria>,
and Septimus Severus in Pannonia, declare against the murderers,
of Pertinax.~——Civil ivars and victory of Severus over his three
rivals. Relaxation of discipline. New maxims of govern­
ment. 106
CHAP..







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


But although the obscurity of the house of David might protect Execution of
• • c r ° * Clemens ihe
them from the suspicions of a tyrant, the present greatness of his consul,own family alarmed the pusillanimous temper of Domitian, whichcould only be appeased by the blood of those Romans whom heeither feared, or hated, or esteemed. Of the two sons of his uncleFlavius Sabinus s°, the elder was soon convicted of treasonable in­tentions, and the younger, who bore the name of Flavius Clemens,was indebted for his safety to his want of courage and ability s\The emperor, for a long time, distinguished so harmless a kinsmanby his favour and protection, bestowed on him his own nieceDomitilla, adopted the children of that marriage to the hope of thefucceffion, and invested their father with the honours of the con­sulship. But he had scarcely finished the term of his annual ma­gistracy, when on a flight pretence he was condemned and exe­cuted, Domitilla was banished to a desolate island on the coast ofCampania 5% and sentences either of death or of confiscation were pro*nounced against a great number of persons who were involved inthe fame accusation. The guilt imputed to their charge was thatof Atheism and 'Jewish manners 5J; a singular association of ideas,which cannot with any propriety be applied except to the Chri­stians, as they were obscurely and imperfectly viewed by the ma­gistrates and by the writers of that period. On the strength of soprobable an interpretation, and too eagerly admitting the suspicionsof a tyrant as an evidence of their honourable crime, the church-has placed both Clemens and Domitilla among its first martyrs, andhas branded the cruelty of Domitian with the name of the secondpersecution. But this persecution (if it deserves that epithet) wasof no long duration. A few months after the death of Clemens,and the banishment of Domitilla, Stephen, a freedman belonging tothe latter, who had enjoyed the favour, but who had not surelyembraced the faith, of his mistress, assassinated the emperor in hispalace 5+. The memory of Domitian was condemned by the senate;
Zzz « his







OCR Output








54» THE DECtINE AND FALL


his acts were rescinded, his exiles recalled; and under the gentleadministration of Nerva, while the innocent were restored to theirrank and fortunes, even the most guilty either obtained pardon orescaped punishment
Ignorance of II. About ten years afterwards, under the reign of Trajan, thecernmgthe younger Pliny was entrusted by his friend and master with theChnslians. government of Bithynia and Pontus. He soon found himself ata loss to determine by what rule of justice or of law he shoulddirect his conduct in the execution of an office the most repugnantto his humanity. P^iny had never assisted at any judicial proceedingsagainst the Christians, with whose name alone he seems to be ac­quainted; and he was totally uninformed with regard to the natureof their guilt, the method of their conviction, and the degree oftheir punishment. In this perplexity he had recourse to his usualexpedient, of submitting to the wisdom of Trajan an impartial*and in some respects, a favourable account of the new superstition*requesting the emperoF, that he would condescend to resolve hisdoubts, and to instruct his ignorance s6. The life of Pliny hadbeen employed in the acquisition of learning, and in the business ofthe world. Since the age of nineteen he had pleaded with distinc­tion in the tribunals of Rome 57, filled a place in the senate, hadbeen invested with, the honours of the consulship, and had formedvery numerous connexions with every order of men, both in Italyand in. the provinces. From his ignorance therefore we may derivesome useful information. We may assure ourselves, that when heaccepted the government of Bithynia, there were no general laws-or decrees of the senate in force against the Christians; that neitherTrajan nor any of his virtuous predecessors, whose edicts were re­ceived into the civil and criminal jurisprudence, had publicklydeclared, their intentions concerning the new sect; and that what*ever proceedings had been carried on against the Christians, there
were







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


of Mæsia, whilst the main body of the army, consisting of seventythousand Germans and Sarmatians, a force equal to the most daringatchievements, required the presence of the Roman monarch, andthe exertion of his military power.
Decius found the Goths engaged before Nicopolis, on the Jatrus. Various
r ^ _ . , . _ . , _ . . events of th«
one or the many monuments or Trajan s victories . On his Gothic war.approach they raised the siege, but with a design only of marching A" D" *S°'away to a conquest of greater importance, the siege of Philippopolis,a city of Thrace, founded by the father of Alexander, near thefoot of mount Hæmus Decius followed them through a diffi­cult country, and by forced marches; but when he imagined him­self at a considerable distance from the rear of the Goths, Cnivaturned with rapid fury on his pursuers. The camp of the Romanswas surprised and pillaged, and for the first time, their emperor fledin disorder before a troop of half armed barbarians. After along resistance, Philippopolis, destitute of succour, was taken bystorm. An hundred thousand persons are reported to have beenmassacred in the sack of that great city Many prisoners of con­sequence became a valuable accession to the spoil, and Priscu6 abrother of the late emperor Philip, blushed not to assume thepurple under the protection of the barbarous enemies of Rome".The time, however, consumed in that tedious siege, enabled Deciusto revive the courage, restore the discipline, and recruit the numbersof his troops. He intercepted several parties of Carpi, and otherGermans, who were hastening to share the victory of their country­men **, intrusted the passes of the mountains to officers of approvedvalour and fidelity '% repaired and strengthened the fortifications ofthe Danube, and exerted his utmost vigilance to oppose either theprogress or the retreat of the Goths. Encouraged by the return offortune, he anxiously waited for an opportunity to retrieve, by agreat and decisive blow, his own glory, and that of the Romanarms '6. •
Kk 2 As







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AND FALL


be reduced by a civil war under the dominion of one master; butif the separation was permanent, the division of the provinces mustterminate in the dissolution of an empire whose unity had hithertoremained inviolate *°.Murder of Had the treaty been carried into execution, the sovereign of Europe
Gets
a. D. zi2. would soon have been the conqueror of Asia; but Caracalla obtaineda7thFebru- an ea{ier though a more guilty victory. He artfully listened to hismother's entreaties, and consented to meet his brother in her apart­ment, on terms of peace and reconciliation. In the midst of theirconversation, some centurions, who had contrived to conceal them­selves, rushed with drawn swords upon the unfortunate Geta. Hisdistracted mother strove to protect him in her arms; but in the una­vailing struggle, she was wounded in the hand, and covered withthe blood of her younger son, while she saw the elder animating andassisting" the fury of the assassins. As soon as the deed was perpe­trated, Caracalla, with hasty steps and horror in his countenance,ran towards the Prætorian camp as his only refuge, and threw him­self on the ground before the statues of the tutelar deities Thesoldiers attempted to raise and comfort him. In broken and dis­ordered words he informed them of his imminent danger and for­tunate escape; insinuated that he had prevented the designs of hisenemy* and declared his resolution to live and die with his faithfultroops. Geta had been the favourite of the soldiers; but complaintwas useless, revenge was dangerous, and they still reverenced the sonof Severus- Their discontent died away in idle murmurs, andCaracalla soon convinced them of the justice of his cause, by distri­buting in one lavish donative the accumulated treasures of his father'sreign The real sentiments of the soldiers alone were of import­ance to his power or safety. Their declaration in his favour,commanded the dutiful professions of the senate. The obsequiousassembly was always prepared to ratify the decision of fortune;hut as. Caracalla wished to assuage the first emotions of public indig­nation*







OCR Output








4o6 THE DECLINE AND FALL


the succession, and respectfully lamented, that the affectionate vio­lence of his troops had not permitted him to solicit the imperialpurple in the regular and constitutional manner. The first emotionsof Galerius were those of surprise, disappointment, and rage; andas he could seldom restrain his passions, he loudly threatened, thathe would commit to the flames both the letter and the messenger.Heisacknow- But his resentment insensibly subsided; and when he recollected theledgedbyGa- doubtful chance of war, when he had weighed the character and
lenus, who
gives him strength of his adversary, he consented to embrace the honourable
only the title °
of Cæsar, and accommodation which the prudence of Constantine had left open togustustoSe- him. Without either condemning or ratifying the choice of theCsu5' British army, Galerius accepted the son of his deceased colleague,as the sovereign of the provinces beyond the Alps; but he gavehim only the title of Cæsar, and the fourth rank among the Romanprinces, whilst he conferred the vacant place of Augustus on hisfavourite Severus. The apparent harmony of the empire was stillpreserved, and Constantine, who already possessed the substance,expected, without impatience, an opportunity of obtaining the ho­nours of supreme power ,?.The t nthers The children of Constantius by his second marriage were six inConstantbe. number, three of either sex, and whose imperial descent mighthave solicited a preference over the meaner extraction of the son ofHelena. But Constantine was in the thirty-second year of his age,in the full vigour both of mind and body, at the time when theeldest of his brothers could not possibly be more than thirteen yearsold. His claim of superior merit had been allowed and ratified bythe dying emperor ,S. In his last moments, Constantius bequeathedto his eldest son the care of the safety as well as greatness of the fa­mily; conjuring him to assume both the authority and the senti­ments of a father with regard to the children of Theodora. Theirliberal education, advantageous marriages, the secure dignity of theirlives, and the first honours of the state with which they were in­vested,







OCR Output








NOTES ON THE SIXTEENTH CHAPTER.


tions of a nocturnal crowd. Act Proconsularia,C. 2.
[8*] See the original sentence in the Acts, c. 4,and in Pontius, c. 17. The latter expresses it in amore rhetorical manner.
[87] Pontius, c. 19. M. de Tillemont (Memoires,tom. iv. part i. p. 450. note cc) is not pleasedwith so positive an exclusion of any former martyrsof the episcopal rank.
[88] Whatever opinion we may entertain os thecharacter or principles of Thomas Becket, we mustacknowledge that he suffered death, with a con­stancy not unworthy of the primitive martyrs. SeeLord Lyttehon's History of Henry II. vol. ii. p.59*, &c
[So] See in particular the treatise of Cyprian deLapsis, p. 87—98. Edit. Fell. The learning ofDodwell (Dissertat. Cyprianic. xii. xiii.), and theingenuity of Middleton (Free Enquiry, p. 162, &c),have left scarcely any thing to add concerning themerit, the honours, and the motives of the martyrs.
[90] Cyprian Epistol. ;, 6, 7. 22. 24, and deUnitat. Ecclesiæ. The number of pretended mar­tyrs has been very much multiplied, by the customwhich was introduced of bestowing that honourablename on confessors.
[91] Certatim gloriosa in certamina ruebatur;multique avidius turn martyri.i gloriosis mortibusquærebantur, quam nunc Episeopatus pravis ambi-onibus appetuntur. Sulpicius Severus, 1. ii. Hemight have omitted the word nunc.
[02] See Epist. ad Roman, c. 4, e. ap. PatresApostol. tom. ii. p. 27. It suited the purpose ofEilhop Pearson (see Vindiciæ Ignatianæ, part ii.c. 9.) to justify by a profusion of examples and au­thorities, the sentiments of Ignatius.
[93] The story of Polyeuctes, on which Corneilfehas founded a very beautiful tragedy, is one of themost celebrated, though not perhaps the most au­thentic instances of this excessive zeal. We shouldobserve, that the 60th canon of the council of IHi-beris refuse* the title of martyrs to those who ex­posed themselves to death, by publicly destroyingthe idols.


[94] See Epictetus, 1. iv. c. 7. (though there issome doubt whether he alludes to the christian.)Marcus Antoninus de Rebus suis, 1. xi. c. 3. Lu-cian in Peregrin.
[95] Tertnllian ad Scapul. c. 5. The learnedare divided between three persons of the famename, who were all proconsuls of Asia. I aminclined to ascribe this story to Antoninus Pius,who was afterwards emperor; and who may havegoverned Asia, under the reign of Trajan.
[96] Mostieim, de Rebus Christ, ante Constan-tin. p. 235.
[97] See the Epistle of the Church of Smyrna,ap. Eufeb. Hist. Eccles. 1. iv. c. 1 j.
[98] In the second apology of Justin, there is aparticular and very curious instance of this legaldelay. The fame indulgence was granted to accusedchristians, in the persecution of Decius; and Cy­prian (de Lapsis) expresly mentions the "Dies ne>gantibus præstitutus."
[99] Tertullian considers flight from persecution,as an imperfect, but very criminal apostacy, as animpious attempt to elude the will of God, &c. &c.He has written a treatise on this subject (see p. 536—C44. Edit. Rigalt.), which is filled with thewildest fanaticism, and the most incoherent decla­mation. It is however somewhat remarkable, thatTertullian did not suffer martyrdom himself.
[ 100] ThxLibellatici, who are chiefly known by thewritings of Cyprian, are described with the utmostprecision, in the copious commentary of Mosheim,p. 483—489,
[101] Plin. Epistol. x. 97. Dionysius Alexaa-drin. ap. Eufeb. 1. vi. c. 41. Ad prima slatimverba minantis inimici maximus fratrum numerussidem suam prodidit: nec prostratus est persecuti-onis impetu, fed voluntario lapfu seipsum prostra-vit. Cyprian. Opera, p. 89. Among these de­serters were many priests, and even bishops.
[101] It was on this occasion that Cyprian wrotehis treatise De Lapsis and many of his epistles. Thecontroversy concerning rhe treatment of peniteatapostates, does not occur among the Christians ofthe preceding century. Shall we ascribe this to thesuperiority of their faith and courage, or to onr lessintimate knowledge of their history?
4 [103] See







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE* .543


a subaltern officer', named Marinus, was the object of their sedi­tious choice. Philip was alarmed. He dreaded lest the treason ofthe Mæsian army should prove the first spark of a general confla­gration. Distracted with the consciousness of his guilt and ofhis danger, he communicated the intelligence to the senate. Agloomy silence prevailed, the effect of fear, and perhaps of disaffec­tion: till at length Decius, one of the assembly, assuming a spirit Service, rworthy of his noble extraction, ventured to discover more intre- V3 t' v'ct°ov
« and reign of
pidity than the emperor seemed to possess. He treated the whole 'he emperorbusiness with contempt, as a hasty and inconsiderate tumult, and a.d. 249.Philip's rival as a phantom of royalty, who in a very few dayswould be destroyed by the fame inconstancy that had created him.The speedy completion of the prophecy, inspires Philip with a just';esteem for so able a counsellor; and Decius appeared to him the onlyperson capable of restoring peace and discipline to an army, whosetumultuous spirit had not entirely subsided after the murder of Ma*rinus. Decius, who long resisted his own nomination, seems to haveinsinuated the danger of presenting a leader of merit, to the angry andapprehensive minds of the soldiers ; and his prediction was again con­firmed by the event. The legions of Maesia forced their judge to
become their accomplice. They left him only the alternative of death /or the purple. His subsequent conduct, after that decisive measure, wasunavoidable. He conducted, or followed, his army to the confinesof Italy, whither Philip, collecting all his force to repel the for­midable competitor whom he had raised up, advanced to meet him.The imperial troops were superior in number1; but the rebelsformed an army of Veterans, commanded by an able and experiencedleader. Philip was either killed in the battle, or put to death afew days afterwards at Verona. His son and associate in the em­pire, was massacred at Rome by the Prætorian guards; and the vic­torious Decius, with more favourable circumstances than the ambi­tion of that age can usually plead, was universally acknowledged
I i 2 by







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 553


historian) of punishing men who had found no accusers but them­selves, the Imperial laws not having made any provision for so un­expected a case: condemning therefore a few, as a warning to theirbrethren, he dismissed the multitude with indignation and con­tempt 9<S. Notwithstanding this real or affected disdain, the intrepidconstancy of the faithful was productive of more salutary effects onthose minds which nature or grace had disposed for the easy recep­tion of religious truth. On these melancholy occasions, there weremany among the Gentiles who pitied, who admired, and who wereconverted. The generous enthusiasm was communicated from thesufferer to the spectators; and the blood of martyrs, according to awell-known observation, became the seed of the church.
But although devotion had raised, and eloquence continued to Gradual re-inflame, this fever of the mind, it insensibly gave way to the more hxMoa'natural hopes and fears of the human heart, to the love of life, theapprehension of pain, and the horror of dissolution. The more pru­dent rulers of the Church found themselves obliged to restrain theindiscreet ardour of their followers, and to distrust a constancy whichtoo often abandoned them in the hour of trial97. As the lives ofthe faithful became less mortified and austere, they were every dayless ambitious of the honours of martyrdom; and the soldiers ofChrist, instead of distinguishing themselves by voluntary deeds ofheroism, frequently deserted their post, and fled in confusion beforethe enemy whom it was their duty to resist. There were threemethods, however, of escaping the flames of persecution, whichwere not attended with an equal degree of guilt: the first indeedwas generally allowed to be innocent; the second was of a doubtful,or at least of a venial nature; but the third implied a direct and cri­minal apostacy from the Christian faith.
I. A modern inquisitor would hear with surprise, that whenever Thr


tree me­


an information was given to a Roman magistrate of any person ^alpingwithin his jurisdiction who had embraced the sect of the Christians, mart)rJon>-Vol. I. 4 B the







OCR Output








2S8 THE DECLINE AND FALL


a prince who so lately bad been tbe object of their partial choice.The guilt was theirs, but the advantage of it was Valerian's; whoobtained the possession of the throne by the means indeed of a civilwar, but with a degree of innocence singular in that age of revo­lutions; since he owed neither gratitude nor allegiance to his pre­decessor, whom he dethroned.Character of Valerian was about sixty years of age6' when he was investedValerian. y^th the purple, not by the caprice of the populace, or the cla­mours of the army, but by the unanimous voice of the Romanworld. In his gradual ascent through the honours of the state, hehad deserved the favour of virtuous princes, and had declared him­self the enemy of tyrants6*. His noble birth, his mild but unble­mished manners, his learning, prudence, and experience, were re­vered by the senate and people; and if mankind (according to theobservation of an ancient writer) had been left at liberty to chuse amaster, their choice would most assuredly have fallen on Valerian 6j.Perhaps the merit of this emperor was inadequate to his reputation;perhaps his abilities, or at least his spirit, were affected by the lan­guor and coldness of old age. Perhaps the emergency of the timesdemanded the talents of a soldier, as well as the virtues of a censor.Gensrai mis- But the whole reign of Valerian, which together with that of Gal-the reigns c f lienus, his son, his associate 66, and his successor, lasted fifteen years,Galiienus?n was one uninterrupted period of confusion and calamity. As the268? 253~~ R°man empire was at the fame time, and on every side, attacked bythe blind fury of foreign invaders, and the wild ambition of do­mestic usurpers, we-shall consult order and perspicuity, by pursu­ing, not so much the doubtful arrangement of dates, as the morenatural distribution of subjects. The most dangerous enemies ofInroads of the Rome, during the reigns of Valerian and Gallienus, were, 1. Thebarbarians. Franks, 2. The Alemanni. 3. The Goths; and, 4. The Persians.
Under these general appellations, we may comprehend the adven­tures of less considerable tribes, whose obscure and uncouth names-would







OCR Output








PREFACE.


«•
dred, established the second, or German Empire ofthe west.
III. The last -and longest of these periods includesabout seven centuries and a half; from the revival ofthe Western Empire, till the taking of Constantino­ple by the Turks, and the extinction of a degeneraterace of princes, who continued to assume the titlesof Cæsar and Augustus, after their dominions werecontracted to the limits of a iingle city; in which thelanguage, as well as manners, of the ancient Romans,had been long since forgotten. The writer whostiould undertake to relate the events of this period,would find himself obliged to enter into the generalhistory of the Crusades, as far as they contributed tothe ruin of the Greek Empire; and he would scarcelybe able to restrain his curiosity from making someinquiry into the state of the city of Rome, duringthe darkness and confusion of the middle ages.
As I have ventured perhaps too hastily to committo the press, a work, which, in every sense of the
A 2 word,







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AND FALL


ledging any supreme head, or representative assembly 7+. But theprinciple of the two confederacies was extremely different. A peaceof two hundred years has rewarded the wife and honest policyof the Swiss. An inconstant spirit, the thirst of rapine, and a disre­gard to the most solemn treaties, disgraced the character of the Franks.They invade ■ The Romans had long experienced the daring valour of the
Gaul,.
people of Lower Germany. Their united strength threatened Gaulwith a more formidable invasion, and required the presence ofGallienus, the heir and colleague of imperial power 75. Whilst thatprince, and his infant son, Saloninus, displayed in the court ofTreves, the majesty of the empire, its armies were ably conductedby their general Posthumus, who, though he afterwards betrayed thefamily of Valerian,, was ever faithful to the great interest of themonarchy. The treacherous language of panegyrics and medals,darkly announces a long series of victories. Trophies and titlesattest (if such evidence can attest) the fame of Posthumus, who isrepeatedly styled The conqueror of the Germans, and the saviourof Gaul 76..
r?.wge Spain, But a single fact, the only one indeed of which we have any dis­tinct knowledge, erases, in a great measure, these monuments ofvanity and adulation. The Rhine, though dignified with thetitle of Safe-guard of the provinces, was an imperfect barrieragainst the daring spirit of enterprise with which the Franks wereactuated. Their rapid devastations stretched from the river to thsfoot of the Pyrenees: nor were they stopped by those mountains.Spain, which had never dreaded, was unable to resist, the inroads ofthe Germans. During twelve years, the greatest part of the reign ofGallienus, that opulent country was the theatre of unequal anddestructive hostilities. Tarragona, the flourishing capital of a peace­ful province, was sacked and almost destroyed 77, and so late asthe days of Orosius, who wrote in the fifth century, wretched cot­tages, scattered amidst the ruins of magnificent cities, still recorded
Z- the:







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AND FALL


declaration of his paternal regard for Maxentius, who might obtainmore from his liberality than he could hope from the doubtfulchance of war *5. The offers of Galerius were rejected with firm­ness, his perfidious friendship refused with contempt, and it wasnot long before he discovered, that, unless he provided for his safetyby a timely retreat, he had some reason to apprehend the fate ofSeverus. The wealth, which the Romans defended against his ra­pacious tyranny, they freely contributed for his destruction. Thename of Maximian, the popular arts of his son, the secret distri­bution of large sums, and the promise of still more liberal rewards,checked the ardour and corrupted the fidelity of the lllyrian le­gions; and when Galerius at length gave the signal of the retreat,it was with some difficulty that he could prevail on his veterans notto desert a banner which had so often conducted them to victoryand honour. A contemporary writer assigns two other causes forthe failure of the expedition; but they are both of such a nature,that a cautious historian will scarcely venture to adopt them. Weare told that Galerius, who had formed a very imperfect notion ofthe greatness of Rome by the cities of the East, with which he wasacquainted, found his forces inadequate to the siege of thatimmense capital. But the extent of a city serves only to renderit more accessible to the enemy; Rome hadJong since been accus­tomed to submit on the approach of a conqueror; nor could thetemporary enthusiasm of the people have long contended withthe discipline and valour of the legions. We are likewise in­formed, that the legions, themselves were struck with horror andremorse, and that those pious sons of the republic refused to vio­late the sanctity of their ancient parentl6. But when we recollectwith how much ease in the more ancient civil war, the zeal ofparty, and the habits of military obedience, had converted thenative citizens of Rome into her most implacable enemies, weshall be inclined to distrust this extreme delicacy of strangers and2 barbarians







OCR Output








N


O


E


S.







OCR Output








y5o THE DECLINE AND FALL


tors. His faithful presbyters and deacons were permitted to accom*pany their holy bishop. They assisted him in laying aside his uppergarment, spread linen on the ground to receive the precious relicsof hie blood, and received his orders to bestow five-and twenty piecesof gold on the executioner. The martyr then covered his face withhie hands, and at one blow his head was severed from his body*His corpse remained during some hours exposed to the curiosity ofthe Gentiles: but in the night it was removed, and transported ina triumphal procession and with a splendid illumination to the burial-place of the Christians. The funeral of Cyprian was publickly cele­brated without receiving any interruption from the Roman magis­trates; and those among the faithful who had performed the lastoffices to his person and his memory were secure from the danger ofinquiry or of punishment. It is remarkable, that of so great amultitude of bishops in the province of Africa, Cyprian was the firstwho was esteemed worthy to obtain the crown of martyrdom *T.Various In- It was in the choice of Cyprian either to die a martyr or to livemartyrdom, an apostate: but on that choice depended the alternative of honouror infamy. Could we suppose that the Bishop of Carthage had em­ployed the profession of the Christian faith only as the instrumentof his avarice or ambition, it was still incumbent on him to supportthe character which he had assumed 88; and, if he possessed thesmallest degree of manly fortitude, rather to expose himself to themost cruel tortures, than by a single act to exchange the reputationof a whole life, for the abhorrence of his Christian brethren andthe contempt of the Gentile world. But if the zeal of Cyprian wassupported by the sincere conviction of the truth of those doctrineswhich he preached, the crown of martyrdom must have appearedto him as an object of desire rather than of terror. It is not easy toextract any distinct ideas from the vague though eloquent declama­tions of the Fathers, or to ascertain the degree of immortal gloryand happiness which they confidently promised to those who were
so







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 445


the effort or terror of his invincible arm, he broke, slaughtered,and put to flight a host-of an hundred and fifty thousand men.The credulity of Zosimus prevailed so strongly over his passion,that among the events of the memorable battle of Hadrianople, heseems to have selected and embellished, not the most important*but the most marvellous. The valour and danger of Constantinoare attested by a flight wound which he received in the thigh, but itmay be discovered even from an imperfect narration, and perhaps acorrupted text, that the victory was obtained no less by the conductof the general than by the courage of the hero; that a body offive thousand archers marched round to occupy a thick wood inthe rear of the enemy, whose attention was diverted by the prepa­ration of a bridge, and that Licinius, perplexed by so many artfulevolutions, was reluctantly drawn from his advantageous post, tocombat on equal ground in the plain. The contest was no longerequal. His confused multitude of new levies was easily vanquishedby the experienced veterans of the West. Thirty-four thousand.men are reported to have been slain. The fortified camp of Lici­nius was taken by assault the evening of the ,battle; the greater partof the fugitives, who had retired to the mountains, surrendered then>selves the next day to the discretion of the conqueror; and hisrival, who could no longer keep the field, confined himself withinthe walls of Byzantium ,p7.
The siege of Byzantium, which was immediately, undertaken by Siege of By.
! i • i ii i • t "ntiumand
Constantine, was attended with great labour and uncertainty. In naval victory,the late civil wars, the fortifications of that place, so justly considered of CnsPw-as the key of Europe and Asia, had been repaired and strengthened;and as long as Licinius remained master of the sea, the garrisonwas much less exposed to the danger of famine than the army ofthe besiegers. The naval commanders of Constantine were sum­moned to his camp, and received his positive orders to force thepassage of the Hellespont, as the fleet of Licinius, instead of seeking
andi







OCR Output








NOTES ON THE FIFTEENTH CHAPTER. Ixxiii


[130] Irenrus adv. Hæres. I. iv. c. 27. 34. Ori-gen in Num. Horn. ii. Cyprian de Unitat. Eccles.Conslitut. Apostol. 1. ii. c. 34, 35, with the notesof Cotelerius. The constitutions introduce thisdivine precept, by declaring that priests are as muchabove kings, as the soul is above the body. Amongthe tytbable articles, they enumerafe corn, wine,cil, arid wool. On this interesting subject, consultPrideaux's FF.story of Tythes, and Fra Paolo dclleMaterie Benesiciarie; two writers of a very differ,ent character.
[131] The fame opinion which prevailed aboutthe year one thousand, was productive of the fameeffects. Most of the Donations express their mo­tive, " appropinquante mundi fine." See Mo-sheim's General History ofthe Church, vol. i.p. 457.
[ 132] Turn sum ma cura est fratribus
[Ut sermo testatur loquax )
Offerre, fundis venditis
Sestertiorum miilia.
Addicta avorum prædia
Fcedis sub auctionibus,
Succsffor exheres gemit
Sanctis egens Parentibus.
Hæc occuluntur abditis
Ecclesiarum in Angulis:
Ft fumma pictas creditur
Nudare dulces liberos.
Prudent, vift rifxtm. Hymn. 2.The subsequent conduct of the deacon Laurence,only proves how proper a use was made of thewealth of the Roman church: it was undoubtedlyvery considerable; but Fra Paolo (c. 3.) appears toExaggerate, when he supposes, that the successors ofConimodus were urged to persecute the christiansby their own avarice, or that of their Praetorianpraefects.
[133] Cyprian. Epistol. 62.
[134] Tertullian de Prescriptione, c. 30.
[135] Hist. August, p. 131, The ground hadbeen public; and was now disputed between thesociety os christians, and that of butchers.
[136} Diocletian gave a rescript, which is onlya declaration of the old law; '' Collegium, si nullospeciali privilegio subnixuni sit, hæreditatem ca-pere non posse, dubium non est." Fra-Paolo (c 4.)Vol. I.


thinks that these regulations had been much ne­glected since the reign of Valerian.
[137] Constitut. Apostol. ii. 35.
[138] Cyprian de Lapsis, p. 89. Epistol. 65.The charge is confirmed by the 19th and 2Cth canonof the council of llliberis.
[ 13 9] See the apologies of Justin, Tertullian, Sec.
[140] The wealth and liberality of the Romansto their most distant brethren, is gratefully cele­brated by Dionystus of Corinth, ap. Euseb. 1. iv.c. 23-.
[141] See Lucian in Peregrin. Julian (Epist.49.) seems mortified, that the christian charity main­tains not only their own, but likewise the heathenpoor.
[141] Such, at least, has been the laudable con­duct of more modern missionaries, under the famecircumstances. Above three thousand new-borninfants are annually exposed in the streets of Pekin.See Le Comic Memoires fur la Chine, and theKeener dies fur les Chinois et les Egyptiens, torn. t.p. 61.
(143] The Montanists and the Novatians, whoadhered to this opinion with the greatest rigourand obstinacy, found thtmstlvts at last in the num­ber of excommunicated heretics. See the learnedand copious Molheim, Secul. ii. and iii.
• [144] Dionyfius, ap. Eufeb. iv. 23. Cyprian, deLapsis.
[145] Cave's Primitive Christianity, Part iii. c.5. The admirers of antiquity regret the loss ofthis public pennance.
[146] See in Dupin, Bibliotheque Ecclesiastique,torn. ii. p. 304—313, a short but rational expositionof the canons of those councils, which were assem­bled in the first moments of tranquillity, after thepersecution of Diocletian. This persecution hadbeen much less severely felt in Spain than in Gala-tia; a difference which may, in some measure, ac­count for the contrast of their regulations.
[147] Cyprian Epist. 69.
[148] Thearts, the manners, and the vices ofthe priests of the Syrian goddess, are very humour­'s ously


 







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


leader; his camp became their country, and some circumstance ofthe enterprise soon gave a common denomination to the mixed mul­titude. The distinctions of the ferocious invaders were perpetuallyvaried by themselves, and confounded by the astonished subjects ofthe Roman empire86.
Wars, and the administration of public affairs, are the principal Numberssubjects of history; but the number of persons interested in thesebusy scenes, is very different according to the different conditionof mankind. In great monarchies, millions of obedient subjectspursue their useful occupations in peace and obscurity. The atten­tion of the Writer, as well as of the Reader, is solely confined to acourt, a capital, a regular army, and the districts which happen to bethe occasional scene of military operations. But a state of freedom andbarbarism, the season of civil commotions, or the situation of petty re­publics 8% raises almost every member of the community into action andconsequently into notice. The irregular divisions, and the restless mo­tions of the people of Germany, dazzle our imagination, and seemto multiply their numbers. The profuse enumeration of kings andwarriors, of armies and nations, inclines us to forget that the fameobjects are continually repeated under a variety of appellations, andthat the most splendid appellations have been frequently lavished onthe most inconsiderable objects.


Vol. I.


CHAP.







OCR Output








.I.Otf TUX JR OMAN EMPIRE. 493
The same causes which at first liad destroyed the equality of the IfSHmS!presbyters, introduced among the bishops a pre-eminence of rank,and from thence a superiority of jurisdiction. As often as in thespring and autumn^ they met in provincial synod, the difference ofpersonal merit and reputation was very sensibly felt among the memrbers of the assembly, and the multitude was governed by the wis­dom and eloquence of the few. But the order of public proceed­ings required a more regular and less invidious distinction; theoffice of perpetual presidents in the councils of each province, wasconferred on the bishops of the principal city, and these aspiringprelates, who soon acquired the lofty titles of Metropolitans andPrimates, secretly prepared themselves to usurp over their episcopalbrethren the same authority which the bishops had so lately assumedabove the college of presbyters "*. Nor was it long before anemulation of pre-eminence and power prevailed among the metro-ipolitans themselves,. each of them affecting to display, in the mostpompous terms, the temporal honours and advantages of the cityover which he presided; the numbers and opulence of the Christians*who were subject to their pastoral care; the faints and martyrswho had arisen among them, and the purity with which they pre­served the tradition of the faith, as it had been transmitted througha series of orthodox bishops from the apostle or the apostolic dis­ciple, to whom the foundation of their church was ascribed "9;From every cause either of a civil or of an ecclesiastical nature, itwas easy to foresee that Rome must enjoy the respect, and wouldsoon claim the obedience of the provinces. The society of the Ambition offaithful bore a just proportion to the capital of the empire; and pontiff!"*1the Roman church was the greatest, the most numerous, and, in re­gard to the West, the most ancient of all the Christian establish­ments, many of which had received their religion from the piouslabours of her missionaries. Instead of one. apostolic founder, theUtmost, boast of Antioch, of Ephesus, or of Corinth, the banks of
the







OCR Output








378 THE DECLINE AND FALL


tenderness, that was due from a generous enemy, to their age, theirsex, and their royal dignity ,J.Ntgoriation While the East anxiously expected the decision of this great
for peace,' j r o
contest, the emperor Diocletian, having assembled in Syria a strongarmy of observation, displayed from a distance the resources ofthe Roman power, and reserved himself for any future emer­gency of the war. On the intelligence of the victory, hecondescended to advance towards the frontier; with a viewof moderating, by his presence and counsels, the pride of Ga-lerius. The interview of the Roman princes at Nifibis, wasaccompanied with every expression of respect on one side, and ofesteem on the other. It was in that city that they , soon afterwardsgave audience to the ambassador of the great king 7f. The power,or at least the spirit, of Narses, had been broken by his last defeat;and he considered an immediate peace, as the only means that couldstop the progress of the Roman arms. He dispatched Apbarban,a servant who possessed his favour and confidence, with a com­mission to negociate a treaty, or rather to receive whatever con-Perfiinam ditions the conqueror should impose. Apharban opened thebaslador. conference by expressing his master's gratitude for the generoustreatment of his family, and by soliciting the liberty of those illus­trious captives. He celebrated the valour of Galerius withoutdegrading the reputation of Narses, and thought it no dishonour toconfess the superiority of the victorious Cæsar, over a monarch whohad surpassed in glory all the princes of his race. Notwithstandingthe justice of . the Persian cause, he was empowered to submit thepresent differences to the decision of the emperors themselves;convinced as he was, that, in the midst of prosperity, they wouldnot be unmindful of the vicissitudes of fortune. Apharban con­cluded his discourse in the style of eastern allegory, by observingthat the Roman and Persian monarchies were the two eyes of the
world,







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


circumcision was enjoined to a single family. When the posterityof Abraham had multiplied like the sands of the sea, the Deity,from whose mouth they received a system of laws and ceremonies,declared himself the proper and as it were the national God ofIsrael; and with the most jealous care, separated his favourite peo­ple from the rest of mankind. The conquest of the land of Canaanwas accompanied with so many wonderful and with so many bloodycircumstances, that the victorious Jews were left in a state of irre­concilable hostility with all their neighbours. They had been com­manded to extirpate some of the most idolatrous tribes, and theexecution of the Divine will had seldom been retarded by theweakness of humanity/- With the other nations they were forbiddento contract any marriages or alliances, and the prohibition of re­ceiving them into the congregation, which in some cafes was per­petual, almost always extended to the third, to the seventh, or evento the tenth generation. The obligation of preaching to the Gen­tiles the faith of Moses, had never been inculcated as a precept ofthe law; nor were the Jews inclined to impose it on themselves asa voluntary duty. In the admission of new citizens, that unsocialpeople was actuated by the selfish vanity of the Greeks, rather thanby the generous policy of Rome. The descendants of Abrahamwere flattered by the opinion, that they alone were the heirs of thecovenant, and they were apprehensive of diminishing the value oftheir inheritance, by sharing it too easily with the strangers of theearth. A larger acquaintance with mankind, extended their know­ledge without correcting their prejudices; and whenever the God ofIsrael acquired any new votaries, he was much more indebted to theinconstant humour of polytheism than to the active zeal of his ownmissionaries The religion of Moses seems to be instituted for aparticular country, as well as for a single nation; and if a strictobedience had been paid to the order, that every male, three times inthe year, should present himself before the Lord Jehovah, it would
have







OCR Output








•NOTES ON THE SIXTH CHAPTER.


[65] Hist. August, p. 102. 107.
[67] Dion, I. lxxx. p. 1369. Herodian, 1 vi.p. zc6 Hist- August, p. 131. Herodian repre­sents the Patrician as innocent. The AugustanHistory, on the authority of Dexippus, condemnshim, as guilty of a conspiracy against the life ofAlexander. It is impossible to pronounce betweenthem: but Dion is an irreproachable witness of the•jealousy and cruelty of Mamtea toward the young•empress, whose hard fate Alexander lamented, butdurst not oppose.
[68] Herodian, 1. ti. p. 203. Hist. August.
jp. 119. The latter insinuates, that when any lawwas to be passed, the council was assjsted by anumber of able lawyers and experienced senators,
•whose opinions were separately given, and takendown in writing.
[6c] See his life in the Augustan History. Theundistinguishing compiler has buried these interest­ing anecdotes under a load of trivial and unmeaningcircumstances,
[70] S«ethe 13th Satire of Juvenal.
[71] Hist. August, p. 119.
[72] See in the Hist. August, p. 116, 117, thewhole contest between Alexander and the senate,extracted from the journals of that assembly. ItJiappened on the sixth of March, probably of theyear 223, when the Romans had enjoyed, almosta twelvemonth, the blessings of his reign. Beforethe appellation of Antoninus was offered him as atitle of honour, the senate waited to see whetherAlexander would not assume it, as a family name.
[73] It was a favourite saying of the emperor's,Se raiiites magrs servare, quam seipfurn ; quod s»-lus publica in his esset. Hist. August, p. 130.
[743 Though the author of the life of Alexanderj(Hist August p. 132) mentions the sedition raisedagainst dpi an by the soldiers, he conceals the ca­tastrophe, as it might discover a weakness in theadministration of his hero. From this designedomission, we may judge of the weight and candour-of that author.
[7-] For an account of Ulpian's fate and hisown danger, see the mutilated conclusion of Dion'sHistory, 1. lxxx p. 1371.


[67] Annotat. Reimar. ad Dion Cassius, t. lxxx.p. 1369.
[77] Julius Cæsar had appeased a sedition withthe same word, Quirites; which thus opposed toSoJJurs, was used in a sersse of contempt, and reducedthe offenders to the less honourable condition of merecitizens. Tacit. Annal. i. 43.
[78] Hist. August, p. 132.
[79] From the Metelli. Hist. August, p. no.The choice was judicious. In one short period oftwelve years, the Metelli could reckon seven consul­ships, and five triumphs. See Velleius Paterculus,ii 11. and the 'Fasti.
[80] The life of Alexander, in the AugustanHistory, is the mere idea of a perfect prince, anawkward imitation of the Cyropædia. The accountof his reign, as given by Herodian, is rational andmoderate, consistent with the general history of theage; and, in some of the most invidious particulars,•connrmed;by the decisive fragments of Dion. Yetfrom a very paltry prejudice, the greater numberof our modem writers abuse Herodian, and copythe Augustan History. See Mess, de Tillemont andWotton. From the opposite prejudice, the emperorJulian (in Cresarib. p. 31 t ) dwells with a visiblesatisfaction on the effeminate weakness of the Syrian,and the ridiculous avarice of his mother.
[8j] According to the more accurate Diony si us,the city itself wis only an hundred stadia, or twelvemiles and a half from Rome ; though some out-postsmight be advanced faTfher on the side of Etruria.Nardini, in a professed treatise, has combated thepopular opinion and the authority of two popes, andhas removed Veii from Civita Castellana, to a littlespot called Isolo, in the midway between Rome andthe lake Bracciano.
[Sa] See the 4th and ;th books of Livy. In theRoman Census, property, power and taxation, werecommensurate with each other.
(83J PJin. Hist- Natut. 1. xxxiii. c 3 CUero de
Ofrkiis, ii. 22 Plutarch, in P. Ætnil. p. 275,
[84J See a sine description of this accumuht Jwealth of ages, in Lacan'o Pharsalia, i. iii. v. 15;,fee.
[%] Tach.







OCR Output








418 THE DECLINE AND FALL


in the might of the Roman world, were covered with soldiers, witharms, and with fortifications. The deaths of Maximian and ofGalerius reduced the number of emperors to four. The fense• of their true interest soon connected Licinius and Constantine; a
secret alliance was concluded between Maximin and Maxentius, andtheir unhappy subjects expected with terror the bloody consequencesof their inevitable dissensions, which were no longer restrainedby the fear or the respect which they entertained for GaleriusAdministra- Among so many crimes and misfortunes occasioned by theftamine iT~ passions of the Roman princes, there is some pleasure in discovering5u& 306— a single action which may be ascribed to their virtue. In the3I* sixth year of his reign Constantine visited the city of Autun, and
generously remitted the arrears of tribute, reducing at the fametime the proportion of their assessment, from twenty-five to eighteenthousand persons, subject to the capitation 4o. Yet even thisindulgence affords the most unquestionable proof of the publicmisery. This tax was so extremely oppressive, either in itselfor in the mode of collecting it, that whilst the revenue wasincreased by extortion, it was diminished by despair: a consider­able part of the territory of Autun was left uncultivated; and greatnumbers of the provincials rather chose to live as exiles andoutlaws, than to support the weight of civil society. It i&but too probable that the bountiful emperor relieved, by a par­tial act of liberality, one among the many evils which he hadcaused by his general maxims of administration. But even thosemaxims were less the effect of choice than of necessity. And ifwe except the death of Maximian, the reign of Constantine in Gaulseems to have been the most innocent and even virtuous period ofhis life. The provinces were protected by his presence from theinroads of the barbarians, who either dreaded or experienced hisactive valour. After a signal victory over the Franks and Ale-nianni, several of their princes were exposed by bis order to thea * wild


 







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


of the Prætorian guards, and animated the legions to arms and torevenge. He concluded (and the peroration was thought extremelyeloquent) with promising every soldier about four hundred pounds;an honourable donative, double in value to the infamous bribe withwhich Julian had purchased the empire The acclamations of the declared em.army immediately saluted Severus with the names of Augustus, Perti- p"°nr0nfjfenax, and Emperor; and he thus attained the lofty station to which £S™s'ig}he was invited by conscious merit and a long train of dreams and April 13th.omens, the fruitful offspring either of his superstition or policy 3o.
The new candidate for empire saw and improved the peculiaradvantage of his situation. His province extended to the JulianAlps, which gave an easy access into Italy; and he remembered thesaying of Augustus, That a Pannonian army might in ten days ap­pear in sight of Rome ". By a celerity proportioned to the great- Marche»intoness of the occasion, he might reasonably hope to revenge Pertinax, It>y*punish Julian, and receive the homage of the senate and people, astheir lawful emperor, before his competitors, separated from Italyby an immense tract of sea and land, were apprized of his expe­dition, or even of his election. During the march, he scarcelyallowed himself any moments for sleep or food; ever at the head ofhis columns, he insinuated himself into the confidence and affectionof his troops, pressed their diligence, revived their spirits, animatedtheir hopes, and was well satisfied to share the hardships of themeanest soldier, whilst he kept in view the infinite superiority ofhis reward.
The wretched Julian had expected, and thought himself prepared, Advances to-to dispute the empire with the governor of Syria; but in the invin- vludsRome'cible and rapid approach of the Pannonian legions, he saw his ine­vitable ruin. The hasty arrival of every messenger, increased hisjust apprehensions. He was successively informed, that Severus hadpassed the Alps; that the Italian cities, unwilling or unable to op­pose his progress, had received him with the warmest professions of
Qw2 joy







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


dart from an uncertain hand. Before he expired, a patriotic senti- ^rj^ *£9,ment riling in the mind of Gallienus, induced him to name a Death of
. . Galhenus.
deserving successor, and it was his last request, that the imperialornaments should he delivered to Claudius, who then commanded adetached army in the neighbourhood of Pavia. The report at leastwas diligently propagated, and the order cheerfully obeyed by theconspirators, who had already agreed to place Claudius on thethrone. On the first news of the emperor's death, the troops ex­pressed some suspicion and resentment, till the one was removed andthe other asswaged by a donative of twenty pieces of gold to eachsoldier. They then ratified the election, and acknowledged themerit of their new sovereign \
The obscurity which covered the origin of Claudius, though it Character and
'6 ° elevation of
might leave room for some flattering fictionssufficiently reveals the emperorthe meanness of his birth. We can only discover that he was anative of one of the provinces bordering on the Danube; that hisyouth was spent in arms, and that his modest valour attracted thefavour and confidence of Decius. The senate and people already •considered him as an excellent officer, equal to the most importanttrusts; and censured the inattention of Valerian, who suffered himto remain in the subordinate station of a tribune. But it was not longbefore that emperor distinguished the merit of Claudius, by declaringhim general in chief of the Illyrian frontier, with the command ofall the troops in Thrace, Mæsia, Dacia, Pannonia, and Dalmatia, theappointments of the præfect of Egypt, the establishment of the pro­consul of Africa, and the sure prospect of the consulship. By hisvictories over the Goths, he deserved from the senate the honour of astatue, and excited the jealous apprehensions of Gallienus. It wasimpossible that a soldier could esteem so dissolute a sovereign, nor is iteasy to conceal a just contempt. Some unguarded expressions whichdropt from Claudius, were officioufly transmitted to the royal ear.The emperor's answer to an officer of confidence, betrays his ownVol. I. Pp character







OCR Output








ERRATA.


Page 5.
13ss
*3*6
3«-


line 12. for state the read state of the
, 5. far corset r. corflet
.—27. for Tyss r. Teyss,— 6. /or describe r. describes— 19, /or Tingitaoia r. Tingitana
nit./er ensured r. ventured
44, 21. for work r. works4;.— 6 from bottom, /ar Cerops r. Cecrops
53. 8. for vines r. vine
56. 1. for whom r. which
65. 14. /or that r. than
67. 3. for between r. among
73.—21./or capital r. Capitol
75. 16. /or tribunal r. tribunitian
79.— 4. /"or would r. could
98. 3 from bottom, for state r. fate
104. 9 & 13. for Faleo r. Falco
no. 8 from bottom, for flatters r. flatterers
122. penult, /or natual r. natural127. 14. dele into
135. 25 for monarchies. That r. monar­chies; and that
175. 3. for their r. those
l81. 11. for or r. nor
183. 4 from bottom, /or conciousnefs r.
consciousness229. 5. for the r. he
248. 4 from bot./"or seperated r separated
z6 n ./or of the Mithridatesr. of Mithridates
298. 3. for legion r. legions
312. ult. for having r. leaving
319. 12. for lose the importance r. Jose their
weight and importance330. 20. for Tyane r. Tyana
333. 14. for gratify r. ratify
334. — 6 from bot, for Dioclesian r. Diocletian
342. 6 from bottom, for Alma r. Almo
351. 21. /or sloping sides slopes.
3X5.. 3./or a r. as


 


for on the occasion, r. on this occasionfor distinction r. distinctionsfrom bottom, for and if we borrowthe warm expression of a contempo­rary, r. and (if we may borrow thewarm expression of a contemporary)399.— 2. for and by their manners r. and bythe austerity of their manners
401. 9. for then r. that ,
412. ■ 4 from bottom, for war r. wars454.—10. /or courted r. courting464.— 4 from bottom, put a semicolon afterIdolatry;
530. 16. for That considerable r. that a con­siderable
536.—23. <aWr (,) after miftufi
558. 10. for seemed r. was designed
561. 5. for Galienus r. Gallienus
Page ii. note [35] line penult, for guard r. guardsiH. r57 J—— 3. for emperos r. emperors
xiii. [58 j ■ 1. for Scriphus r. Seriphut
xiv. ■ f 1 4, for inverts r. invents
[z^ — 1. for cayetam r. Cayetam[9] — 2.for Vindabona r. Vindobona3. for victors r. Victora[13] 2. for laid r. lain
xv. —[2;] 3. fryea.tr. day
[26J 6. put a comma after ra'ionibut
[ 3;] 1. for Herodium, r. Herodian
xxv. for Note [21] r. [91]
xxviii. note [3;] line 3. for inaccuracy r. accuracy6. for with r. by
xxx. ["]~~~ 3'ftr Akriman r. Ahriman
xxxi. [31] alt. for Froret r. Freret
xliv. 23] 3-/«'" the r. their
liii. [38J ult. for Carpiin r. Carpi in
lvii. [120J 1. after ancienne, add torn, u
lxviii.—[43]——3. for comparier r>. compararier.







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AND PALL


their unjust claim to many persons who were strangers to the bloodor religion of the Jews, it was impossible that the Christians, whohad so often sheltered themselves under the made of the synagogue,should now escape this rapacious persecution. Anxious as they wereto avoid the flightest infection of idolatry, their conscience forbadethem to contribute to the honour of that dæmon who had assumedthe character of the Capitoline Jupiter. As a very numerous thoughdeclining party among the Christians still adhered to the law ofMoses, their efforts to dissemble their Jewish origin were detectedby the decisive test of circumcision 46: nor were the Roman magi­strates at leisure to inquire into the difference of their religioustenets. Among the Christians who were brought before the tribu­nal of the emperor, or, as it seems more probable, before that ofthe procurator of Judæa, two persons are said to have appeared, di­stinguished by their extraction, which was more truly noble thanthat of the greatest monarchs. These were the grandsons of St. Judethe apostle, who himself was the brother of Jesus Christ *7. Theirnatural pretensions to the throne of David, might perhaps attractthe respect of the people, and excite the jealousy of the governor; butthe meanness of their garb, and the simplicity of their answers,soon convinced him that they were neither desirous nor capable ofdisturbing the peace of the Roman empire. They frankly confessed,their royal origin, and their near relation to the Messiah; but theydisclaimed any temporal views, and professed that his kingdom,which they devoutly expected, was purely of a spiritual and angelicnature. When they were examined concerning their fortune andoccupation, they (hewed their hands hardened with daily labour,,and declared that they derived their whole subsistence from the culti­vation of a farm near the village of Cocaba, of the extent of abouttwenty-four English acres *', and of the value of nine thousanddrachms, or three hundred pounds sterling. The grandsons of St.Jude were dismissed with compassion and contempt **•
But







OCR Output








 


4 s3<? • (







OCR Output








6F THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


so lately an object of terror, now cultivated their lands, drove theircattle to the neighbouring fair, and contributed by his labour to thepublic plenty. They congratulated their masters on the powerfulaccession of subjects and soldiers; but they forgot to observe, thatmultitudes of secret enemies, insolent from favour, or desperatefrom oppression, were introduced into the heart of the empire
While the Cæsars exercised their valour on the bank of the Rhine WarsofAsricaand Danube, the presence of the emperor6 was required on thesouthern confines of the Roman world. From the Nile to MountAtlas, Africa was in arms. A confederacy of five Moorish nationsissued from their deserts to invade the peaceful provinces 4\ Julianhad assumed the purple at Carthage Achilleus at Alexandria,and even the Blemmyes, renewed or rather continued their in­cursions into the Upper Egypt. Scarcely any circumstances havebeen preserved of the exploits of Maximian in the western parts ofAfrica; but it appears by the event, that the progress of his armswas rapid and decisive, that he vanquished the fiercest barbarians ofMauritania, and that he removed them from the mountains,whose inaccessible strength had inspired their inhabitants with a law­less confidence, and habituated them to a life of rapine and vio­lence *\ Diocletian, on his side, opened the campaign in Egypt by ^ndiict9^the siege of Alexandria, cut off the aqueducts which conveyed Diocletian inthe waters of the Nile into every quarter of that immense city4J,and rendering his camp impregnable to the sallies of the besiegedmultitude, he pushed his reiterated attacks with caution and vigour.After a siege of eight months, Alexandria, wasted by the swordand by fire, implored the clemency of the conqueror; but it ex­perienced the full extent of his severity. Many thousands of thecitizens perished in a promiscuous flaughter, and there were fewobnoxious persons in Egypt who escaped a sentence either of deathor at least of exile 44. The fate of Busiris and of Coptos was stillmore melancholy than that of Alexandria; those proud cities, theVol. I. B b b former







OCR Output








a6 THE DECLINE AND FALL


evolutions, which only veteran troops can execute without con­fusion in a moment of danger, commonly prove decisive: but asthis engagement began towards the close of the day, and was con­tested with great obstinacy during the whole night, there was lessroom for the ability of the generals than for the courage of the sol­diers. The return of light displayed the victory of Constantine,and a field of carnage covered with many thousands of the van­quished Italians. Their general Pompeianus was found among theslain; Verona immediately surrendered at discretion, and the gar­rison was made prisoners of war s8. When the officers of the vic­torious army congratulated their master on this important success,they ventured to add some respectful complaints, of such a nature,however, as the most jealous monarchs will listen to without dis­pleasure. They represented to Constantine, that, not contentedwith performing all the duties of a commander, he had exposed hisown person with an excess of valour which almost degenerated intorashness; and they conjured him for the future to pay more regardto the preservation of a life, in which the safety of Rome and ofthe empire was involvedIndolence and While Constantine signalized his conduct and valour in the field,
fears of Max- ,
tntius. the sovereign of Italy appeared insensible of the calamities anddanger of a civil war which raged in the heart of his dominions.Pleasure was still the only business of Maxentius. Concealing, orat least attempting to conceal, from the public knowledge the mis­fortunes of his arms 6o, -he indulged himself in a vain confidencewhich deferred the remedies of the approaching evil, withoutdeferring the evil itself6'. The rapid progress of Constantine61was scarcely sufficient to awaken him from this fatal security; heflattered himself, that his well-known liberality, and the majestyof the Roman name, which had already delivered him from twoinvasions, would dissipate with the fame facility the rebellious armyof Gaul. The officers of experience and ability, who had served
under







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 85


same as that of Cato and Cicero. From Grecian philosophy, theyhad imbibed the justest and most liberal notions of the dignity ofhuman nature, and the origin of civil society. The history of theirown country had taught them to revere a free, a virtuous, and-avictorious commonwealth; to abhor the successful crimes of Cæsarand Augustus; and inwardly to despise those tyrants whom theyadored with the most abject flattery. As magistrates and senators,they were admitted into-the great council, which had once dictatedlaws to the earth, whose name still gave a sanction to the acts ofthe monarch, and whose authority was so often prostituted to thevilest purposes of tyranny. Tiberius, and those emperors whoadopted his maxims, attempted to disguise their murders by theformalities of justice, and perhaps enjoyed a secret pleasure in ren­dering the senate their accomplice, as well as their victim. Bythis assembly, the last of the Romans were condemned for ima­ginary crimes and real virtues. Their infamous accusers assumedthe language of independent patriots, who arraigned a dangerouscitizen before the tribunal of his country; and the public servicewas rewarded by riches and honours The servile judges assertedthe majesty of the commonwealth, violated in the person of itsfirst magistrate 56, whose clemency they most applauded when theytrembled the most at his inexorable and impending cruelty Thetyrant beheld their baseness with just contempt, and encounteredtheir secret sentiments of detestation with sincere and avowed hatredfor the whole body of the senate. i»
II. The division of Europe into a number of independent states, Extent ofconnected, however, with each other, by the general resemblance {e1ftlrthemPnoof religion, language, and manners, is productive of the most bene- of r#"ficial consequences to the liberty of mankind. A modern tyrant,who should find no resistance either in his own breast, or in hispeople, would soon experience a gentle restraint from the exampleof his equals, the dread of present censure, the advice of his allies,
M a and







OCR Output








THE DECLINE, AND FALL


With regard to the treatment of these penitents two opposite©pinions, the one of justice, the other of mercy, divided the primitivechurch. The more rigid and inflexible casuists refused them forever, and without exception, the meanest place in the holy com­munity, which they had disgraced or deserted, and leaving them tothe remorse of a guilty conscience, indulged them only with a faintray of hope, that the contrition of their life and death mightpossibly be accepted by the Supreme Being A milder sentimentwas embraced in practice as well as in theory, by the purest andmost respectable of the Christian churches ,+\ The gates of re­conciliation and of Heaven were seldom shut against the returningpenitent; but a severe and. solemn form of discipline was instituted,which, while it served to expiate his crime, might powerfullyPublicpe- deter the spectators from the imitation of his example. Humbled
nance.
by a public confession, emaciated by fasting, and clothed in sack­cloth, the penitent lay prostrate at the door of the assembly, imrploring with tears the pardon of his offences, and soliciting theprayers of the faithful ,+5. If the fault was of a very heinous nature,whole years of penance were esteemed an inadequate satisfaction lothe Divine Justice; and it was always, by flow and painful grardations that the sinner, the heretic, or the apostate, was re-ad­mitted into the bosom of the church. A sentence of perpetual exr-communication was, however, reserved for some crimes , of anextraordinary magnitude, and particularly for the inexcusable re­lapses of those penitents who had already experienced and abusedthe clemency of their ecclesiastical superiors. According to thecircumstances or the number of the guilty, the exercise of theChristian discipline was varied by the discretion of the bishops*The councils of Ancyra and Illiberis were held about the fame time,the one in Galatia, the other in Spain; but their respective canons,which are still extant, seem to breathe a very different spirit. The
Galatian,,







OCR Output








NOTES ON THE FIFTEENTH CHAPTER. Ixvii


^stricter and a milder sect; and there is some rea­son to conjecture, that the family of Jesus Christremained members, at least, of the latter and moremoderate party.
[22] Some writers have been pleased to create anEbion, the imaginary author of their sect and name.Bar we can more safety rely on the learned Eusebiusthan on the vehement Tertuiliaa, or the credulousEpipbanius.
[23] See the very curious Dialogue of JustinMartyr with the Jew Tryphon. The conferencebetween them was held at Ephesas, in the reign ofAntoninus Pius, and about twenty years after thereturn of the church of Pella to Jerusalem. For thisdate consult the accurate note of riilemont. Me-moires Ecclesiasliques, torn. ii. p. 511*
[24}Of all the fy stems of Christianity, that of Abys­sinia is the only one which still adheres to the Mosaicrites (Geddes's Church History of Æthiopia, and Dis­sertations de le Grand, fur la Relation du P. Lobo).The eunuch of the queen Candace might suggestsome suspicions; but as we are assured (Socrates, i.19. Sozomen, ii. 24. Ludolphus, p. 281.J thatthe Æthiopians were not converted till the fourthcentury; it is more reasonable to believe, that theyrespected the Sabbath, and distinguished the forbiddenmeats, in imitation of the Jews, who in a very earlyperiod, were seated on both sides of the Red Sea.Circumcision had been practised by the most ancientÆthiopians, from motives of health and cleanliness,which seem to be explained in the Recherches Phi-losophiques fur les Americains, torn. ii. p. 117.
[2;] fieausobre, Histoire du Manicheifme, 1. i.c. 3. has fiated their objections, particularly those ofFaustus, the adversary of Augustin, with the mostlearned impartiality.
[26] Apud ipsos fides obstinata, mifericordia inpromptu: adversus omnes alios hostile odium.Tacit. Hist. v. 4. Surety Tacitus had seen theJews with too favourable an e/e. The perusal ofJoseph us must have destroyed the antithesis.
[27] Dr. Burnet (Archæologia, 1. ii. c. 7.) hasdiscussed the first chapters of Genesis with too muchwit and freedom.
[28] The milder Gnostics considered Jehovah, theCreator, as a Being of a mixed nature between Godand the Dæmon. Others confounded him with theevil principle.


[29] SeeBeausobre, Hist, du Manicheifme, 1. i. c. 4.Origen and St. Augustin were among the Allegorilt*.
[30] Hegesippas, ap. Euseb. I. iii. 32. iv. 22.Clemens Alexandrin. Stromat. vii. 17.
[31] In the account of the Gnostics of the secondand third centuries, Mofheim is ingenious and can­did ; Le Clerc, dull, but exact; Beaufobre almostalways an apologist; and it is much to be feared,that the primitive fathers are very frequently calum­niators.
[32] See the catalogues of Irenasus and Epipha-nius. It must indeed be allowed, that those writerswere inclined to multiply the number of sects whichopposed the unity of the church.
[33] Eusebius, 1. iv. a. 15. See in Bayle, in thearticle of Marciou, a curious detail of a dispute onthat subject. It mould seem that some of the Gnos­tics (the Basilidians) declined, and even refusedthe honour of martyrdom. Their reasons weresingular and abstruse. See Moiheim, p. 359.
[34] See a very remarkable passage of Origen(Proem, ad Lucam). That indefatigable writer, whohad consumed his life in the study of the scriptures,relies for their authenticity on the inspired authorityof the church. It was impossible that the Gnosticscould receive our present gospels, many parts ofwhich (particularly in the resurrection of Christ)are directly, and as it might seem designedly, pointedagainst their favourite tenets. It is therefore some­what singular that Ignatius (Epist. ad Smyrn. Patr.Apostol. torn. ii. p. 34.) should chuse to employ avague and doubtful tradition, instead of quoting thecertain testimony of the evangelists.
[35] Habent apes favos; habent ecclesias etMarcionitæ, is the strong expression of Tertullian,which I am obliged to quote from memory. In thetime of Epipnanius (advers. Hareses, p. 302.) theMaicidnir.es were very numerous in Italy, Syria,Egypt> Arabia, and Persia.
[36] Augustin is a memorable instance of thisgradual progress from reason to faith. He was,during several years, engaged in the Manichæan secti
[37] The unanimous sentiment of the primitivechurch is very clearly explained by Justin Martyr.Apolog. Major, by Athenagoras Lcgat. c. 2z, &c.and by Lactantius, Institut. Divin. ii. 14—19.
i 2 [37] Ter-







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


mony was regulated and maintained by the skilful hand of the firstartist ,s.
This important measure was not carried into execution, till about Scries of
events.
fix years after the association of Maximian, and that interval of timehad not been destitute of memorable incidents. But we have pre­ferred, for the fake of perspicuity, first to describe the more perfectform of Diocletian's government, and afterwards to relate the^actions of his reign, following rather the natural order of theevents, than the dates of a very doubtful chronology.
The first exploit of Maximian, though it is mentioned in a few A-D- 2,7-
r . State of the
words by our imperfect writers, deserves, from its singularity, to peasants ofbe recorded in a history of human manners. He suppressed thepeasants of Gaul, who, under the appellation of Bagaudæ ,a, hadrisen in a general insurrection; very similar to those, which in thefourteenth century successively afflicted both France and England ,7«It should seem, that very many of those institutions, referred by aneasy solution to the feudal system, are derived from the Celtic bar­barians. When Cæsar subdued the Gauls, that great nation wasalready divided into three orders of men; the clergy, the nobility,and the common people. The first governed by superstition, thesecond by arms, but the third and last was not of any weight oraccount in their public councils. It was very natural for the Ple­beians, oppressed by debt or apprehensive of injuries, to implore theprotection of some powerful chief, who acquired over their personsand property, the fame absolute rights as among the Greeks andRomans, a master exercised over his staves ,s. The greatest partof the nation was gradually reduced into a state of servitude; com­pelled to perpetual labour on the estates of the Gallic nobles, andconfined to the foil, either by the real weight of fetters, or by theno less cruel and forcible restraints of the laws. During the longseries of troubles which agitated Gaul, from the reign of Gallienusto that of Diocletian, the condition of these servile peasants wasVol. I. A a a peculiarly







OCR Output













OCR Output








18 THE DECLINE AND FALL


vinces. The policy of the emperors was directed only to pre­serve the peaceful dominion of that sea, and to protect the com­merce of their subjects. With those views of moderation, Au­gustus stationed two permanent fleets in the most convenientports of Italy, the one at Ravenna, on the Adriatic, the otherat Misenum, in the bay of Naples. Experience seems at length tohave convinced the ancients, that as soon as their gallies exceededtwo, or at the most three ranks of oars, they were suited rather forvain pomp than for real service. Augustus himself, in the victoryof Actium, had seen the superiority of his own light frigates (theywere called Liburnians), over the lofty but unwieldy castles of hisrival67. From these Liburnians he composed the two fleets ofRavenna and Misenum, destined to command, the one the eastern,the other the western division of the Mediterranean; and to each ofthe squadrons he attached a body of several thousand marines.Besides these two ports, which may be considered as the principalfeats of the Roman navy, a very considerable force was stationed atFrejus, on the coast of Provence, and the Euxine was guarded by fortystiips, and three thousand soldiers. To all these we add the fleetwhich preserved the communication between Gaul and Britain, and ~a great number of vessels constantly maintained on the Rhine andDanube, to harass the country, or to intercept the passage ofthe barbarians 6S. Such is the general picture of the Im­perial forces; the cavalry as well as infantry; of the legions, theauxiliaries, the guards, and the navy. And yet, the most liberalcomputation that reason can justify, will not allow us to fix theAmount of entire establishment by sea and by land at more than four hundredthe whole e- j gfty thousand men: a military power, which, however formi-dable it may seem, was equalled by a monarch of the last century,whose kingdom was confined within a. single province of the Romanempire *9.
We







OCR Output








NOTES ON THE ELEVENTH CHAPTER.


[72] Hist. August, p. ziS. Zosimus, 1. i. p. 50.Though the camel is a heavy beast of burden, wemay learn from Buffbn and Shaw, that the dromedaryis fwifeer than the fleetest-horse.
[73] Pollioin Hist. August, p. 199.
[74] Vopiscusin Hist. August, p. 219. Zosimus,1. i. p. 51.
[75] Hist. August, p. 219.
[76J See Vopiscus in Hist. August, p. 220, 242.As an instance of luxury, it is remarked, that hehad glass windows. He was remarkable for hisstrength and appetite, courage and dexterity. Fromthe letter of Aurelian, we may justly infer, thatFirmus was the last of the rebels, and consequentlythat Tetricus was already suppressed.
[77] See the triumph of Aurelian, described byVopiscus. He relates the particulars, with hisusual minuteness; and on this occasion, (tie) happento be interesting. Hist. August. 220.
[78] Among barbarous nations, women haveoften combated by the side of their husbands. Butit is almost impossible, that a society of Amazonsshould ever have existed either in the old or newworld.
[79] The use of Braces, breeches, or trowscrs,was still considered in Italy as a Gallic and Barba­rian fashion. The Romans, however, had madegreat advances towards it. To encircle the legs andthighs with fa/ciæ, or bands, was understood inthe time of Pompey and Horace, to be a proofof ill-health or effeminacy. Jn the age of Trajan,the custom was confined to the rich and luxurious.It gradually was adopted by the meanest of thepeople. See a very curious note of Cafaubon, adSucton. in August, c. 82.
[80] Most probably the former; the latter, seenon the medals of Aurelian, only denote accordingto the learned Cardinal Noris) an oriental victory.
[81] The expression of Calphurnius (Eclog. i.50) Nullos ducet capti<va triumphos, as applied toRome, contains a very manifest allusion and cen­sure.
[82] Vopiscus in Hist. August, p. 199. Hi-eronym. in Chron. Prosper in Chron. Baronius


supposes that Zenobius, bishop of Florence, in thetime of St. Ambrose, was of her family.
[8 j] Vopiscin Hist. August, p. 222. Eutropius,ix. 13. Victor Junior. But Pollio in Hist. August,p. 196, fays that Tetricus was made corrector of allItaly.
[84] Hist. August, p. 197.
[85] Vopiscus in Hist. August. 222. Zosimus,1. i. p. 56. He placed in it the images of Belusand of the Sun, which he had brought from Pal­myra. It was dedicated in the fourth year of hisreign (Euseb. in Chron.) but was most assuredlybegun immediately on his accession.
[86] See in the Augustan History, p. tio, theomens of his fortune. His devotion to the fun ap­pears in his letters, on his medals, and is mentionedin the Cæsars of Julian, Commentaire de Span-heim, p. 10;.
[87] Vopiscus in Hist. August, p. 22:.
[88] Hist. August, p. 2:2. Aurelian calls thosesoldiers Hlbcri Riparienses, Castriani, and Dafci/ci.
[89] Zosimus, 1. i. p. 56. Eutropius, ix. 14.Aurel. Victor.
[90] Hist. August, p. 222. Aurel. Victor.
[9t] It already raged before Aurelian's returnfrom Egypt. See Vopiscus, who quotes an originalletter. Hist. August, p. 244.
[92] Vopiscus in Hist. August, p. 222. The twoVictors. Eutropius, ix. 14. Zosimus (1. i. p. 43.)mentions only three senators, and places their deathbefore the eastern war.
[93] Nulla catenati feralis pompa fenatusCarniiiciim lassabit opus; nec carcere plenaInfelix raros numerabit curia Patres.
Calphurn. Eclog. i. 60.
[94] According to the younger Victor, he some­times wore the diadem. Dtut and Deminui appearon his medals.
[95] It was the observation of Diocletian. SeeVopiscus in Hist. August, p. 224.
[96] Vopiscus in Hist. August, p. 221. Zosi­mus, 1. i. p. 57. Eutrop. ix. 15. The two Victors.
NOTES







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. ,65


manded by senators, and the præfecture of Egypt was the onlyimportant trust committed to a Roman knight. ■; .
Within six days after Augustus had been compelled to accept so Division of
, the province*
very liberal a grant, he resolved to gratify the pride of the senate between the:by an easy sacrifice. He represented to them, that they had en- ^senate3."larged his powers, even beyond that degree which might berequired by the melancholy condition of the times. They had notpermitted him to refuse the laborious command of the armies andthe frontiers; but he must insist on being allowed to restore themore peaceful and secure provinces, to the mild administration of.the civil magistrate. In the division of the provinces, Augustusprovided for his own power, and for the dignity of the republic.The proconsuls' of the senate, particularly those of Asia, Greece,and Africa, enjoyed a more honourable character than the lieute­nants of the emperor, who commanded in Gaul or Syria. Theformer were attended by lictors, the latter by soldiers. A law waspassed, that wherever the emperor was present, his extraordinarycommission should supersede the ordinary jurisdiction of the governor,a 'custom was introduced, that the new conquests belonged to theImperial portion, and it was soon discovered, that the authority ofthe Prince, the favourite epithet of Augustus, was the fame in everypart of the empire.
In return for this imaginary concession, Augustus obtained an The former
preserve! hismilitary com-


Important privilege, which rendered him master of Rome and pr^erves hls


Italy. By a dangerous exception to the ancient maxims, he was ™anrjsa"ndauthorized to preserve his military command, supported by a Rome itself,numerous body of guards, even in time of peace, and in the heartof the capital. His command, indeed, was confined to those citi--zens who were engaged in the service, by the military oath; butsuch was the propensity of the Romans to servitude, that the oathwas voluntarily taken by the magistrates, the senators, and theVoLvI. K . equestrian







OCR Output








286 THE DECLINE AND FALL


causes must however have contributed to the furious plague, which,from the year two hundred and fifty, to the year two hundred andsixty-five, raged without interruption in every province, everycity, and almost every family, of the Roman empire. During sometime five thousand persons died daily in Rome; and many townsjthat had escaped the hands of the barbarians, were entirely depopu­lated "°.
Diminution We have the knowledge of a very curious circumstance of some use
of the human
species. perhaps in the melancholy calculation of human calamities. Anexact register was kept at Alexandria, of all the citizens entitled toreceive the distribution of corn. It was found, that the ancientnumber of those comprised between the ages of forty and seventy,had been equal to the whole sum of claimants, from fourteen tofourscore years of age, who remained alive after the reign of Gal-lienus ,8". Applying this authentic fact to the most correct tablesof mortality, it evidently proves, that above half the people ofAlexandria had perished; and could we venture to extend the ana­logy to the other provinces, we might suspect, that war, pestilence,and famine, had consumed, in a few years, the moiety of the hu­man species


CHAP.







OCR Output








4$% THE DECLINE AND FALL


Manichæans. Each of these sects could boast of its bistiops andcongregations, of its doctors and martyrs and, instead of thefour gospels adopted by the church, the heretics produced a mul­titude of histories, in which the actions and discourses of Christ andof his apostles were adapted to their respective tenets K. Thesuccess of the Gnostics was rapid and extensive They coveredAsia and Egypt, established themselves in Rome, and sometimespenetrated into the provinces of the West. For the most part theyarose in the second century, flourished during the third, and weresuppressed in the fourth or fifth, fcy the prevalence of more fashion­able controversies, and by the superior ascendant of the reigningpower. Though they constantly disturbed the peace, and fre­quently degraded the honour, of religion, they contributed toaflist rather than to retard the progress of Christianity. The Gen­tile converts, whose strongest objections and prejudices were di­rected against the law of Moses, could find admission into manyChristian societies, which required, not from their untutored mind,any belief of an antecedent revelation. Their faith was insensiblyfortified and enlarged, and the church was ultimately benefited bythe conquests of its most inveterate enemies ,6.The dæmons But whatever difference of opinion might subsist between thethe gods of Orthodox, the Ebionites, and the Gnostics, concerning the divinity orthe obligation of the Mosaic law, they were all equally animatedby the same exclusive zeal, and by the same abhorrence for idolatrywhich had distinguished the Jews from the other nations of theancient world. The philosopher, who considered the system ofpolytheism as a composition of human fraud and error, could dis­guise a smile of contempt under the mask of devotion, without ap­prehending that either the mockery, or the compliance would ex­pose him to the resentment of any invisible, or as he conceived them,imaginary powers. But the established religions of Paganism were
seen


antiquity.







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


tWs or in a future life, the crime of perjury is most assuredlypunished by the avenging gods'. But whilst they acknowledgedthe general advantages of religion, they were convinced, that thevarious modes of worstiip contributed alike to the fame salutarypurposes; and that in every country, the form of superstition, whichhad received the sanction of time and experience, was the best adaptedto the climate, and to its inhabitants. Avarice and taste Very inthepw-frequently despoiled the vanquished nations of the elegant statues of vinces'their gods, and the rich ornaments of their temples IO: but, in theexercise of the religion which they derived from their ancestors,they uniformly experienced the indulgence, and even protection ofthe Roman conquerors. The province of Gaul seems, and indeedonly seems an exception to this universal toleration. Under the fairpretext of abolishing human sacrifices, the emperors Tiberius andClaudius, suppressed the dangerous power of the Druids ": but thepriests themselves, their gods and their altars, subsisted in peacefulobscurity till the final destruction of Paganism *\
Rome, the capital of a great monarchy, was incessantly filled with at Rome,subjects and strangers from every part of the world ,J, who all in­troduced and enjoyed the favourite superstitions of their nativecountry *. Every city in the empire was justified in maintaining'the purity of its ancient ceremonies; and the Roman senate, usingthe common privilege, sometimes interposed, to check this inunda­tion . of foreign rites. The Egyptian superstition, of all the mostcontemptible and abject, was frequently prohibited; the temples ofSerapis and Isis demolished, and their worshippers banished from Romeand Italy But the zeal of fanaticism prevailed over the coldand feeble efforts of policy. The exiles returned, the proselytesmultiplied, the temples were restored with increasing splendor,and Isis and Serapis at length assumed their place among theRoman deities ,6. Nor was this indulgence a departure from theold maxims of government. In the purest ages of the common­er.. I, F wealth,







OCR Output








$o6, THE DECLINE AND FALL


distant country. There is the strongest reason to believe, that be­fore the reigns of Diocletian and Constantine, the faith of Christhad been preached in every province, and in all the great cities of
vfe^offhe tne empire > Dut tne foundation of the several congregations, the
Christianity numbers of the faithful who composed them, and their proportionto the unbelieving multitude, are now buried in obscurity, or dis­guised by fiction and declamation. Such imperfect circumstanceshowever, as have reached our knowledge concerning the increaseof the Christian name in Asia and Greece, in Egypt, in Italy, andin the West, we shall now proceed to relate, without neglecting
f' the real'or imaginary acquisitions which lay beyond the frontiers of
t the Roman empire. . .
ntfie'Eafe The rich provinces that extend from the Euphrates to the Ioniansea, were the principal theatre on which the apostle of the Gentilesdisplayed his zeal and piety. The feeds of the gospel, which hebad scattered in a fertile soil, were diligently cultivated by his dis­ciples; and it should seem that, during the two first centuries,the most considerable body of Christians was contained withinthose limits. Among the societies which were instituted in Syria,none were more ancient or more illustrious than those of Damascus,of Berea or Aleppo, and of Antioch. The prophetic introductionof the Apocalypse has described and immortalised the seven churchesof Asia; Ephesus, Smyrna, Pergamus, Thyatira Sardes, Lao-dicea, and Philadelphia; and their colonies were soon diffused overthat populous country. In a very early period, the islands ofCyprus and Crete, the provinces of Thrace and Macedonia, gave-a- favourable reception to the new religion; and Christian republicswere soon founded in the cities of Corinth, of Sparta, and ofAthens '5*. The antiquity of the Greek and Asiatic churchesallowed a sufficient space of time for their increase and multipli­cation, and even the swarms of Gnostics and other heretics serve todisplay the flourishing condition* of the orthodox church, since the
3 •' appellatioa







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 269


the reservoir of all the springs of Mount Olympus, rose to an un-. common height. The little river of Rhyndacus, that issues from it,swelled into a broad and rapid stream, and stopped the progress ofthe Goths. Their retreat to the maritime city of Heraclea, wherethe fleet had probably been stationed, was attended by a long trainof waggons, laden with the spoils of Bithynia, and was marked bythe flames of Nice and Nicomedia, which they wantonly burnt"7.Some obscure hints are mentioned of a doubtful combat that securedtheir retreat"8. But even a complete victory would have been oflittle service, as the approach of the autumnal equinox summonedthem to hasten their return. To navigate the Euxine before themonth of May, or after that of September, is esteemed by the mo­dern Turks the most unquestionable instance of rashness and folly "9.
When we are informed that the third fleet, equipped by the Goths Third navaI
* * K _ • ■ expedition of
in the ports of Bosphorus, consisted of five hundred sail of ships "% the Goths.our ready imagination instantly computes and multiplies the for­midable armament j but, as we are assured by the judicious Strabothat the pyratical vessels used by the barbarians of Pontus and theLesser Scythia, were not capable of containing more than twenty-five or thirty men, we may safely affirm, that fifteen thousand war­riors, at the most, embarked in this great expedition. Impatient ofthe limits of the Euxine, they steered their destructive course fromthe Cimmerian to the Thracian Bosphorus. When they had almostgained the middle of the Straits, they were suddenly driven backto the entrance of them; till a favourable wind springing up the They pass thenext day, carried them in a few hours into the.placid sea, or rather thesHeii«landlake of the Propontis. Their landing on the little island of Cyzicus, spont*was attended with the ruin of that ancient and noble city. Fromthence issuing again through the narrow passage of the Hellespont,they pursued their winding navigation amidst the numerous island*scattered over the Archipelago, or the Ægean Sea. The assistance'of captives and deserters, must have been very necessary to pilot their
vessels,







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


bly deferred till the return of the younger brother to Rome, wherea triumph was decreed to the young emperors, for the glorious suc­cess of the Persian war ,Co. It is uncertain whether they intended todivide between them the administration, or the provinces, of theempire; but it is very unlikely that their union would haveproved of any long duration. The jealousy of power must havebeen inflamed by the opposition of characters. In the most corruptof times, Carinus was unworthy to live: Numerian deserved toreign in a happier period. His affable manners and gentle vir­tues secured him, as soon as they became known, the regard andaffections of the public. He possessed the elegant accomplishments of apoet and orator, which dignify as well as adorn the humblest and themost exalted station. His eloquence, however it was applauded by thesenate, was formed not so much on the model of Cicero, as on thatof the modern declaimers ; but in an age very far from being destituteof poetical merit, he contended for the prize with the most celebratedof his contemporaries, and still remained the friend of his rivals;a circumstance which evinces either the goodness of his heart, or thesuperiority of his genius lo'. But the talents of Numerian wererather of the contemplative, than of the active kind. When hisfather's elevation reluctantly forced him from the shade of retire­ment, neither his temper ncr his pursuits had qualified him for thecommand of armies. His constitution was destroyed by the hard­ships of the Persian war ; and he had contracted, from the heat ofthe climate *01, such a weakness in his eyes, as obliged him, in thecourse of a long retreat, to confine himself to the solitude and dark­ness of a tent or litter. The administration of all affairs, civil aswell as military, was devolved on Arrius Aper, the Prætorian præ-fect, who, to the power of his important office, added the honourof being father-in-law to Numerian. The imperial pavilion wasstrictly guarded by his most trusty adherents; and during manyVol. I. Z z daysi







OCR Output








38o THE DECLINE AND FALL


in Media. The secret motive of Narses in this delay, had been tocollect such a military force, as might enable him, though sincerelydesirous of peace, to negociate with the greater weight anddignity. Three persons only assisted at this important conference,the minister Apharban, the præfect of the guards, and an officerwho had commanded on the Armenian frontier 76. The firstcondition proposed by the ambassador, is not at present of a veryintelligible nature; that the city of Nisibis might be establishedfor the place of mutual exchange, of,^as we should formerly havetermed it, for the staple of trade between the two empires. Thereis no difficulty in conceiving the intention of the Roman princes,to improve their revenue by some restraints upon commerce; butas Nisibis was situated within their own dominions, and as they weremasters both of the imports and exports, it mould seem, thatsuch restraints were the objects of an internal law rather than of aforeign treaty. To render them more effectual, some stipulationswere probably required on the fide of the king of Persia, whichappeared so very repugnant either to his interest or to his dignity, thatNarses could not be persuaded to subscribe them. As this was theonly article to which he refused his consent, it was no longer in­sisted on; and the emperors either suffered the trade to flow inits natural channels, or contented themselves with such restrictions,as it depended on their own authority to establish.ni articles of As soon as this difficulty was removed, a solemn peace was
the treaty. t 1
concluded and ratified between the two nations. The conditions of*a treaty so glorious to the empire, and so necessary to Persia,,may deserve a more peculiar attention, as the history of Romepresents very few transactions of a si milar nature; most of her wars,having either been terminated by absolute conquest, or waged againstThe Aboras barbarians ignorant of the use of letters. I. The Aboras, or as itlimit between is called by Xenophon, the Araxes, was fixed as the boundarythe empires, between the two monarchies 11. That river which rises near theTigris, was increased a few miles below Nisibis, by the little stream
of







OCR Output








lxxxvi NOTES ON THE SIXTEENTH CHAPTER,


[151] Mofheim (p. 922—926.), from manyscattered passages of Lactantius and Eusebius hascollected a very just and accurate notion of thisedict; though he sometimes deviates into conjectureand refinement.
[152] Many ages afterwards, Edward I. prac­tised, with great success, the fame mode of per­secution against the clergy of England. See Hume'sHistory of England, vol. i. p. 300, last 4W edition.
[153] Lactantius only calls him quidam, etsi jionrecte, magno tamen animo, &c. c. 12. Eusebius(1. viii. c. 5.) adorns him with secular honours.Neither have condescended to mention his name;but the Greeks celebrate his memory under that ofJohn. See Tillemont, Memoires Ecclesiastiques,torn. v. part ii. p. 320.
. [154] Lactantius de M. P.C. 13, 14. Potentiffimiquondam Eunuchi necati, per quos Palatium etipse constabat. Eusebius (1. viii. c. 6.) mentionsthe cruel executions of the eunuchs, Gorgonius andDorotheus, and of Anthimius, bishop of Nico-media; and both those writers, describe in a vaguebut tragical manner, the horrid scenes which wereacted even in the Imperial presence.
[155] See Lactantius, Eusebius, and Constantine,ad Cœtum Sanctorum, c, 2;. Eusebius confesseshis ignorance of the cause of the fire.
[156] Tillemont, Memoires Ecclesiast. torn. v.part i. p. 43.
[157] See the Acta Sincera of Ruynart, p. 353;those of Fcelix of Thibara, or Tibiur, appearmuch less corrupted than in the other editions,which afford a lively specimen of legendary license.
[158] See the first book of Optatus of Milevisagainst the Donatists at Paris, 1700. Edit. Dupin.He lived under the reign of Valens.
[159^ The ancient monuments, published at theend of Optatus, p. 261, &c. describe, in a very cir­cumstantial manner, the proceedings of the gover­nors in the destruction of churches. They made aminute inventory of the plate, &c. which they foundin them That of the church of Cirta, in Nu-midia, is still extant. It consisted of two chalicesof gold, and six of silver; six urns, one kettle, seven


lamps, all likewise of silver; besides a large quantityof brass utensils, and wearing apparel.
[160] Lactantius (Institut. Divin. v. 11.) con­fines the calamity to the conucHticulum, with its con­gregation. Eusebius (viii. 11.) extends it to a wholecity, and introduces something yery like a regularsiege. His ancient Latin translator, Rufinus, addsthe important circumstance of the permission givento the inhabitants of retiring from thence. AlPhrygia reached to the confines of Ifauria, it ispoflible that the restless temper of those independentBarbarians may have contributed to this misfortune.
[161] Eusebius, 1. viii. c. 6. M. de Valois (withsome probability) thinks that he has discovered theSyrian rebellion in an oration of Libanius; andthat it was a rash attempt of the tribune Eugenius,who with only five hundred men seized Antioch,and might perhaps allure the Christians by thepromise of religious toleration. From Eusebius(1. ix. c.8.) as well as from Moses ofChorene (Hist.Armen. 1. ii. c. 77, &c.) it may be inferred, thatChristianity was already introduced into Armenia.
[162] See Mofheim, p. 938; the textof Eusebiusvery plainly shews, that the governors, whose powerswere enlarged, not restrained, by the new laws,could punish with death the most obstinate Chri­stians, as an example to their brethren.
[16 ] Athanasius, p. 833, ap. Tillemont, Mem.Ecclesiast. torn. v. part L p. 90.
[164] Eusebius, I. viii. c. 13. Lactantius de M.P. c. 15. Dodwell (Dissertat. Cyprian, xi. 75.)represents them as inconsistent with each other.But the former evidently speaks of Constanrius inthe station of Cæsar, and the latter of the sameprince in the rank of Augustus.
[16;] Datianus is mentioned in Gruter's Inscrip­tions, as having determined the limits between theterritories of Pax Julia, and those of Ebora, bothcities in the southern part osLusitania. If we recol­lect the neighbourhood of those places to Cape St.Vincent, we may suspect that the celebrated deaconand martyr of that name has been inaccuratelyassigned by Prudentius, &c. to Saragossa, or Va­lentia. See the pompous history of his sufferings,in the Memoires de Tillemont, totn. v. part ii. p.58—85. Some critics are of opinion, that the de­partment







OCR Output








144 THE DECLINE AND FALL


flecting on the sure consequences of his own conduct, he wouldperhaps have enjoyed the dark prospect of the distress and calamitieswhich he bequeathed to his successors.Macrinus at- In the management of this necessary reformation, Macrinus pro-foraation of ceeded with a cautious prudence, which would have restored healththe army. vigour to the Roman army, in an easy and almost imperceptible
manner. To the soldiers already engaged in the service, he wasconstrained to leave the dangerous privileges and extravagant paygiven by Caracalla *, but the new recruits were received on the libe­ral but more moderate establishment of Severus, and graduallyformed to modesty and obedience *J. One fatal error destroyed thesalutary effects of this judicious plan. The numerous army, as­sembled in the East by the late emperor, instead of being imme­diately dispersed by Macrinus through the several provinces, wassuffered to remain united in Syria, during the winter that followedhis elevation. In the luxurious idleness of their quarters, the troopsviewed their strength and numbers, communicated their complaints,and revolved in their minds the advantages of another revolution.The veterans, instead of being flattered by the advantageous distinc­tion, were alarmed by the first steps of the emperor, which theyconsidered as the presage of his future intentions. The recruits,with sullen reluctance, entered on a service, whose labours were in­creased while its rewards were diministied by a covetous and unwar-like sovereign. The murmurs of the army swelled with impunityinto seditious clamours; and the partial mutinies betrayed a spiritof discontent and disaffection, that waited only for the slightest occa­sion to break out on every side into a general rebellion. To mindsthus disposed, the occasion soon presented itself.Deatii rsthe The empress Julia had experienced all the vicissitudes of fortune.lia^Educa- From an humble station, she had been raised to greatness only toCon- f!nd"l ta^e tne u,Per'or bitterness of an exalted rank. She was doomedvolt of EL- to weep over tne death of one of her sons, and over the life of the
other.







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


titles of that amiable prince, seem to have been inadequate to thedifficulties of his situation, the firmness of his conduct inferior tothe purity of his intentions. His virtues, as well as the vices ofElagabalus, contracted a tincture of weakness and effeminacy fromthe soft climate of Syria, of which he was a native; though heblushed at his foreign origin, and listened with a vain complacencyto the flattering genealogists, who derived his race from the ancientflock of Roman nobility The pride and avarice of his mothercast a shade on the glories of his reign; and by exacting from hisriper years the fame dutiful obedience which she had justly claimedfrom his unexperienced youth, Mamaea exposed to public ridiculeboth her son's character and her own 8o. The fatigues of the Persianwar irritated the military discontent; the unsuccessful event de­graded the reputation of the emperor as a general, and even as asoldier. Every cause prepared, and every circumstance hastened arevolution, which distracted the Roman empire with a long series ofcivil discord.
The dissolute tyranny of Commodus, the civil wars occasioned Digression onby his death, and the new maxims of policy introduced by the house of the empire,of Severus, had all contributed to increase the dangerous power ofthe army, and to obliterate the faint image of laws and liberty thatwas still impressed on the minds of the Romans^ This internalchange which undermined the foundations of the empire, we haveendeavoured to explain with some degree of order and perspicuity.The personal characters of the emperors, their victories, laws, follies,and fortunes, can interest us no farther than as they are connectedwith the general history of the Decline and Fall of the monarchy.Our constant attention to that great object, will not suffer us to over­look a most important edict of Antoninus Caracalla, which com­municated to all the free inhabitants of the empire the name andprivileges of Roman citizens. His unbounded liberality flowednot, however, from the sentiments of a generous mind; it was the
Vol. I. Y sordid







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AND FALL


Beyond the nie pr0grefs 0f Christianity was not confined to the Roman
limits of the * °'
Roman em- empire; and according to the primitive fathers, who interpret factsP by prophecy, the new religion, within a century after the death of
its divine author, had already visited every part of the globe.M There exists not," fays Justin Martyr, "a people, whether Greet** or Barbarian, of any other race of men, by whatsoever appella-"tkm or manners they may be distinguished, however ignorant of"arts or agriculture, whether they dwell under tents, or wanderu about in covered waggons, among whom prayers are not offered"up*n the name of a crucified Jesus to the Father and Creator of"all things171." But this splendid exaggeration, which even atpresent it would be extremely difficult to reconcile with the realstate of mankind, can be considered only as the rash sally of a devoatbut careless writer, the measure of whose belief was regulated by'that of his wishes. But neither the belief, nor the wishes of" thefathers, can alter the truth of history. It will still remain an un­doubted fact, that the barbarians of Scythia and Germany, whosubverted the Roman monarchy, were involved in the darkness ofpaganism; and that even the conversion of Iberia, of Armenia, orof Æthiopia, was not attempted with any degree of success till thescepter was in the hands of an orthodox emperor*'6. Before thattime, the various accidents of war and commerce might indeeddiffuse an imperfect knowledge of the gospel among the tribesof Caledonia *77, and among the borderers of the Rhine, the Danube,and the Euphrates '73. Beyond the last mentioned river, Edessa wasdistinguished by a firm and early adherence to the faith *79. FromEdessa, the principles of Christianity were easily introduced into theGreek and Syrian cities which obeyed the successors of Artaxerxes;but they do not appear to have made any deep impression on theminds of the Persians, whose religious system, by the labours of awell-disciplined order of priests, had been constructed with much
more







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 97


But the meanest of the populace were affected with shame and Acts as a
• i- • 1 1 • r • gladiator.
indignation when they beheld their sovereign enter the lists as agladiator, and glory in a profession, which the laws and manners ofthe Romans had branded with the justest note of infamy ,s. He chosethe habit and arms of the Secutor, whose combat with the Retiariusformed one of the most lively scenes in the bloody sports of theamphitheatre. The Secutor was armed with an helmet, sword, andbuckler; his naked antagonist had only a large net and a trident;with the one he endeavoured to entangle, with the other to dis­patch, his enemy. If he missed the first throw, he was obliged tofly from the pursuit of the Secutor, till he had prepared his net for asecond cast '7. The emperor fought in this character seven hundredand thirty-five several times. These glorious achievements werecarefully recorded in the public acts of the empire; and that hemight omit no circumstance of infamy, he received from the com­mon fund of gladiators a stipend so exorbitant, that it became a newand most ignominious tax upon the Roman people j8. It may beeasily supposed, that in these engagements the master of the worldwas always successful: in the amphitheatre his victories were notoften sanguinary; but when he exercised his skill in the school ofgladiators, or his own palace, his wretched antagonists were fre­quently honoured with a mortal wound from the hand as Coramo-dus, and obliged to seal their flattery with their blood ". -He now His infamydisdained the appellation of Hercules. The name of Paulus, a cele- !al.!Xirava*brated Secutor, was the only one which delighted his ear. It wasinscribed on his colossal statues, and repeated in the redoubled accla­mations 40 of the mournful and applauding senate *'. ClaudiusPompeianus, the virtuous husband of Lucilla, was the only senatorwho asserted the honour of his rank. As a father, he permitted hissons to consult their safety by attending the amphitheatre. As aRoman, he declared, that his own life was in the emperor's hands,but that he would never behold the son of Marcus prostituting hisVol. I. O person







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


were seldom much inferior to those of the legions themselves S/.Among the auxiliaries, the bravest and most faithful bands wereplaced under the command of prefects and centurions, and severelytrained in the arts of Roman discipline; but the far greater part rertained those arms, to which the nature of their country, or theirearly habits of life, more peculiarly adapted them. By this in­stitution each legion, to whom a certain proportion of auxiliaries wasallotted, contained within itself every species of lighter troops, andof missile weapons; and was capable of encountering every na­tion, with the advantages- of its respective arms and discipline S*.Nor was the legion destitute of what, in modern language, wouldbe styled a train of artillery. It consisted in ten military engines Artillery,of the largest, and fifty-five of a smaller size; but all of which,either in an oblique or horizontal manner, discharged stones anddarts with irresistible violence ■
The camp of a Roman legion presented the appearance of a-for- Encamp--tisied city60. As soon.as the space was marked out, the pioneers ment*carefully levelled the ground, and removed every impediment thatmight interrupt its perfect regularity. Its form was an exactquadrangle; and we may calculate, that a square of about sevenhundred yards was sufficient for the encampment of twenty thou­sand Romans; though a similar number of our own troops wouldexpose to the enemy a front of more than treble that extent. In themidst of the camp, the prætorium, or general's quarters, rose abovethe others; .the cavalry, the infantry, and the auxiliaries occupiedtheir respective stations; the streets were broad, and perfectlystraight, and a vacant space of two hundred feet was left on all sides,between the tents and the rampart. The rampart itself was usuallytwelve feet high, armed with a line of strong and intricate palisades»and defended by a ditch of twelve feet in depth as well as in breadth.This, important labour was performed by the hands of the legionariesthemselves, to whom the use of the spade and the pick-axe was no
2- less.-







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AND FALL


fate; and, when at last Cæsarea was betrayed by the perfidy of aphysician, he cut his way through the Persians, who had been or­dered to exert their utmost diligence to take him alive. This heroicchief escaped the power of a foe, who might either have honouredor punished his obstinate valour; but many thousands of his fel­low-citizens were involved in a general massacre, and Sapor is ac­cused of treating his prisoners with wanton and unrelenting cru­elty Much should undoubtedly be allowed for national animo­sity, much for humbled pride and impotent revenge; yet, upon thewhole, it is certain, that the fame prince, who, in Armenia, haddisplayed the mild aspect of a legislator, shewed himself to the Ro­mans under the stern features of a conqueror. He despaired ofmaking any permanent establishment in the empire, and sought onlyto leave behind him a wasted desert, whilst he transported into Persiathe people and the treasures of the provinces ,4V;Boldness and At the time when the East trembled at the name of Sapor, heSdeSthus received a present not unworthy of the greatest kings; a long train of•gainit Sapor. cameis iac|en with the most rare and valuable merchandises. Therich offering was accompanied by an epistle, respectful but not ser­vile, from Odenathus, one of the noblest and most opulent senatorsof Palmyra. "Who is this Odenathus (said the haughty victor,** and he commanded that the presents should be cast into the Eu-"phrates), that thus insolently presumes to write to his lord? If he"entertains a hope of mitigating his punishment, let him fall pro-"strate before the foot of our throne with his hands bound behind"his back. Should he hesitate, swift destruction shall be poured"on his head, on his whole race, and on his country ,4V Thedesperate extremity to which the Palmyrenian was reduced, calledinto action all the latent powers of his foul. He met Sapor; buthe met him in arms. Infusing his own spirit into a little army col­lected from the villages of Syria ,+7, and the tents of the desert '*\he hovered round the Persian host, harassed their retreat, carried off
part







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AND FALL


the thirteenth century, and studied by the learned of Denmark andSweden, as the most valuable remains of their ancient traditions,and death'of Notwithstanding the mysterious obscurity of the Edda, we canOdin. easily distinguish two persons confounded under the name of Odin;
the god of war, and the great legislator of Scandinavia. The latter,the Mahomet of the north, instituted a religion adapted to the climateand to the people. Numerous tribes on either side of the Balticwere subdued by the invincible valour of Odin, by his persuasiveeloquence, and by the fame, which he acquired, of a most skilfulmagician. The faith that he had propagated during a long andprosperous life, he confirmed by a voluntary death. Apprehensiveof the ignominious approach of disease and infirmity, he resolved toexpire as became a warriour. In a solemn assembly of the Swedesand Goths, he wounded himself in nine mortal places, hasteningaway (as he asserted with his dying voice) to prepare the feast ofheroes in the palace of the god of war '°.Agreeable but The native and proper habitation of Odin, is distinguished byhypothesis the appellation of As-gard. The happy resemblance of that name,concerning ^s-burg, or As-of ", words of a similar signification, has given
rife to an historical system of so pleasing a contexture, that we couldalmost wish to persuade ourselves of its truth. It is supposed thatOdin was the chief of a tribe of barbarians which dwelt on the banks ofthe lake Maeotis, till the fall of Mithridates and the arms of Pompeymenaced the north with servitude. That Odin, yielding with in­dignant fury to a power which he was unable to resist, conductedhis tribe from ihe frontiers of the Asiatic Sarmatia into Sweden,with the great design of forming, in that inaccessible retreat of free­dom, a religion and a people, which, in some remote age, might besubservient to his immortal revenge; when his invincible Goths,armed with martial fanaticism, should issue in numerous swarmsfrom the neighbourhood of the Polar circle, to chastise the op­pressors of mankind ",


If







OCR Output








C O N S. T N


A.D.


Decline of the Arts
of Letters
The new Platonists


Pige
473'
474
ib.


CHAP. XIV.
'Troubles after the Abdication of Diocletian.
—Death of Constantius.—Elevation of
Constantine andMaxentius.—Six Emperors
at the fame Time.—Death of Maximian
and Galerius.—Victories of Constantine
ever Maxentius and Licinius.—Re-union
of the Empire under the Authority of
Constantine.
A. D. Page
305—323. Period of civil Wars and Confusion 476
Character and Situation of Constantius ib.
Of Galerius . -' '- 477
The Two Cxsars, Severus and Maximin 478
Ambition of Galerius disappointed by two
Revolutions '- 479
274 Birth, Education, and Escape of Constan­
tine - - 480
306 Death of Constantius, and Elevation of
Constantine -'"" '• - 482
He is acknowledged by Galerius, who
gives him only the Title of Cæsar, and
that of Augustus to SeverusThe Brothers and Sisters of ConstantineDiscontent of the Romans at the Appre­hension of Taxes
306 Maxentius declared Emperor at RomeMaximian re-afl"umes the Purple
307 Defeat and Death of SeverusMaximian gives his Daughter Fausta^and
the Title of Augustus, to Constantine 489
Galerius invades Italy
His Retreat
307 Elevation of Licinius to* the Rank of Au­
gustusElevation of Maximin
308 Six Emperors
Misfortunes of Maximin
310 His Death
311 Death of Galerius
His Dominion shared between Maximin
and Licinius


483
484
485
486
487
ib.


ib.
49 2
ib.
493
ib.
ib.
495
496


A.D.
306—312. Administration of Constantine in
Gaul !-
Tyranny of Maxentius in Italy and Africa
312 Civil War between Constantine and Max­
entius
Preparations
Constantine passes the Alps
Battle of Turin
Siege and Battle of Verona
Indolence and Fears of Maxentius
312 Victory of Constantine near Rome
His Reception - - ■
His Conduct at Rome31-3 His Alliance with Licinius
War between Maximin and.Licinius
The Defeat and Death of Maximin
■
Cruelty of Licinius
Unfortunate Fate of the Empress Valeria
and her Mother
314 Quarrel between Constantine and Licinius
First civil War between them
314 Battle of Cibalis
Battle of Mardia
Treaty of Peace
315—323. General Peace, and Laws of Con­
stantine
322 The Gothic War
323 Second civil War between Constantine
and Licinius
323 Battle of Hadrianople
Siege of Byzantium, and naval Victory of
Crispus
Battle of Chryfopolis
Submission and Death of Licinius
324 Re-union of the Empire
CHAP. XV.


P«ge
497
49S--
501
502-
502
S°3
ib.
508
509
5"
S'3
S'4
ib.
SiS516
ib.
5'9520
521522
5Z3'
ib..526
52S529
531
53*
533534


497


The Progress of the Christian Religion, andthe Sentiments, Manners, 'Numbers, andCondition of the primitive Christians.
A. D. Page
Importance of the Inquiry - 535
Its Difficulties - - ib.
Five Causes of the Growth of Christianity 536
I. The First Cause. Zeal of the Jews 537
Its gradual Increase - - 538
7 Their







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AND FALL


Supposed e- The apology of Tertullian contains two very ancient, very sin-dictsofTi- r fa/ . . . _ . .
berius and gular, but at the fame time very suspicious instances of imperial
toninm. clemency; the edicts published by Tiberius, and by Marcus An­toninus, and designed not only to protect the innocence of theChristians, but even to proclaim those stupendous miracles whichhad attested the truth of their doctrine. The first of these examplesis attended with some difficulties which might perplex a scepticalmind We are required to believe, that Pontius Pilate informedthe emperor of the unjust sentence of death which he had pro­nounced against an innocent, and, as it appeared, a divine, person;and that without acquiring the merit, he exposed himself to thedanger, of martyrdom; that Tiberius, who avowed his contempt forall religion, immediately conceived the design of placing the JewishMessiah among the gods of Rome; that his servile senate venturedro disobey the commands of their master; that Tiberius, instead ofresenting their refusal, contented himself with protecting the Chris­tians, from the severity of the laws, many years before such laws,were enacted, or before the church had assumed any distinct nameor existence; and lastly, that the memory of this extraordinarytransaction was preserved in the most public and authentic records*which escaped the knowledge of the historians of Greece and Rome,and were only visible to the eyes of an African Christian, who com­posed his apology one hundred and sixty years after the death ofTiberius. The edict of Marcus Antoninus is supposed to have beenthe effect of his. devotion and gratitude, for the miraculous deliver­ance which he had obtained in the Marcomannic war. The distressof the legions, the seasonable tempest of rain and hail, of thunderand of lightning, and the dismay and defeat of the barharians, havebeen celebrated by the eloquence of several pagan writers. If there-were any Christians in that army, it was natural that they shouldascribe some merit to the fervent prayers* which in the moment ofdanger they had offered up for their own and the public safety.
But







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


garrison of six hundred archers, returned to Emesa, and employedsome time in the distribution of rewards and punishments at theend of so memorable a war, which restored to the obedience of Romethose provinces that had renounced their allegiance since the cap­tivity of Valerian.
When the Syrian queen was brought into the presence of Aure- ^^^r oflian, he sternly*aiked her, How (he had presumed to rise in arm6against the emperors of Rome? The answer of Zenobia was a pru­dent mixture of respect and firmness. "Because I disdained to con-"sider as Roman emperors an Aureolus or a Gallienus. You alone"I ackowledge as my conqueror and my sovereign71." But asfemale fortitude is commonly artificial, so it is seldom steady or con­sistent. The courage of Zenobia deserted her in the hour of trial; shetrembled at the angry clamours of the soldiers, who called aloud for herimmediate execution, forgot the generous despair of Cleopatra, whichshe had proposed as her model, and ignominioufly purchased life by thesacrifice of her fame and her friends. It was to their counsels whichgoverned the weakness of her sex, that she imputed the guilt of her ob­stinate resistance; it was on their heads that she directed the vengeanceof the conqueror. The fame of Longinus, who was included amongthe numerous and perhaps innocent victims of her fear, will survivethat of the queen who betrayed, or the tyrant who condemned him.Genius and learning were incapable of moving a fierce unletteredsoldier, but they had served to elevate and harmonise the soul ofLonginus. Without uttering a complaint, he calmly followed theexecutioner, pitying his unhappy mistress, and bestowing comforton his afHicted friends 7\
Returning from the conquest of the East, Aurelian had already Rebellion andcrossed the Streights which divide Europe from Asia, when he was myra.provoked by the intelligence that the Palmyrenians had massacredthe governor and garrison which he had left among them, and againerected the standard of revolt. Without a moment's deliberation,
Vol. I. S f he







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


of pardon reviving their fury, a barbarian of the country of Tongres51levelled the first blow against Pertinax, who was instantly dispatchedwith a multitude of wounds. His head, separated from his body,and placed on a lance, was carried in triumph to the Prætorian camp,in the fight of a mournful and indignant people, .who lamented theunworthy fate of that excellent prince, and the transient blessings ofa reign, the memory of which could serve only to aggravate theirapproaching misfortunes s\'••


r: 1
. Vol..I.


:> i'. - J


CHAP.







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AND FALL


crated by the reverence of succeeding generations. Their secretgloom, the imagined residence of an invisible power, by presentingno distinct object of fear or worship, impressed the mind with a stilldeeper sense of religious horror6t; and the priests, rude and illiterateajs they were, had been taught by experience, the use of everyajtifice that could preserve and fortify impressions so well suited totheir own interest.
Its effeas in The fame ignorance, which renders barbarians incapable of con-peace,
cei ving or embracing the useful restraints of laws, exposes them nakedand unarmed to the blind terrors of superstition. The German priests,improving this favourable temper cf their countrymen, had assumeda jurisdiction, even in temporal concerns, which the magistratecould not venture to exercise; and the haughty warrior patientlysubmitted to the lasli of correction, when it was inflicted, not byany human power, but by the immediate order of the god ofwar 6+. The defects of civil policy were sometimes supplied bythe interposition of ecclesiastical authority. The latter was con­stantly exerted to maintain silence and decency in the popularassemblies; and was sometimes extended to a more enlarged concernfor the national welfare. A solemn procession was occasionally ce­lebrated in the present countries of Mecklenburg and Pomerania.The unknown symbol of the Earth, covered with a thick veil, wasplaced on a carriage drawn by cows; and in this manner, thegoddess, whose common residence was in the ifle of Rugen, visitedieveral adjacent tribes of her worshippers. During her progress, thefound of war was hushed, quarrels were suspended, arms laid aside,and the restless Germans had an opportunity of tasting the blessingsof peace and harmony 6s. The truce of God, so often and so in­effectually proclaimed by the clergy of the eleventh century, was anobvious imitation of this ancient custom 66.in war. But the influence of religion was far more powerful to inflame,
than to moderate, the fierce passions of the Germans. Interest and
fanaticism


5







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. i


ened the life of his son, and of his friends, and of all who ven­tured to approach his person. The grateful intelligence of thedeath of the Gordiaris, was quickly followed By the assurance thatthe senate, laying aside all hopes of pardon or accommodation, hadsubstituted in their room two emperors, with whose merit he couldnot be unacquainted. Revenge was the Only consolation left toMaximin, and revenge could only be obtained by arms. Thestrength of the legions had been assembled by Alexander from allparts of the empire. Three successful campaigns against theGermans and the Sarmatians, had raised (heir fame, confirmed theirdiscipline, and even increased their numbers, by filling the rankswith the flower of the barbarian youth. The life of Maximin hadbeen spent in War, and the candid severity of history cannot refusehim the valour of a soldier, or even the abilities of an experiencedgeneral}0. It might naturally be expected, that a prince of such a cha­racter, instead of suffering the rebellion to gain stability by delay, mouldimmediately have maYched from the banks of the Danube to tholeof the Tyber, and that his victorious army, instigated by contemptfor the senate, and eager to gather the spoils of Italy, should haveburned with impatience to finish the easy and lucrative conquest.Yet as far as we can trust to the obscure chronology of that periodit appears that the Operations of some foreign war deferred theItalian expedition to the ensuing spring. From the prudent con­duct of Maximin, we may learn that the savage features of hischaracter have been exaggerated by the pencil of party, that his'passions, however impetuous, submitted to the force of reason, andthat the barbarian possessed something of the generous spirit ofSylla, who subdued the enemies of Rome, before he suffered himselfto reverige his private injuriesWhen the troops of Maximin, advancing in excellent order, Marches ;nto
Italy.
arrived at the foot of the Julian Alps, they were terrified by the a. d. 238.silence and desolation that reigned on the frontiers of Italy. The Febraary'
B b 2 villages







OCR Output








34^ THE DECLINE AND FALL


His victoriesand extraor­dinary death.


A.D. 283.December 25,


Persians expressed their desire of being introduced to the presence of theRoman emperor. They were at last conducted to a soldier, who wasseated on the grass. A piece of stale bacon and a few old pease com­posed his supper. A coarse woollen garment of purple was the onlycircumstance that announced his dignity. The conference was con­ducted with the fame disregard of courtly elegance. Carus, taking offa cap which he wore to conceal his baldness, assured the ambassadors,that, unless their master acknowledged the superiority of Rome, hewould speedily render Persia as naked of trees, as his own head wasdestitute of hair 11. Notwithstanding some traces of art and prepa­ration, we may discover in this scene the manners of Carus, and thesevere simplicity which the martial princes, who succeeded Gallienus,had already restored in the Roman camps. The ministers of the greatking trembled and retired.
The threats of Carus were not without effect. He ravagedMesopotamia, cut in pieces whatever opposed his passage, madehimself master of the great cities of Seleucia and Ctesiphon (whichseem to have surrendered without resistance), and carried his vic­torious arms beyond the Tigris 74. He had seized the favourablemoment for an invasion. The Persian councils were distracted bydomestic factions, and the greater part of their forces were detained onthe frontiers of India. Rome and the East received with transportthe news of such important advantages. Flattery and hope painted,in the most lively colours, the fall of Persia, the conquest of Arabiathe submission of Egypt, and a lasting deliverance from the inroadsof the Scythian nations 7S. But the reign of Carus was destined toexpose the vanity of predictions. They were scarcely utteredbefore they were contradicted by his death; an event attended withsuch ambiguous circumstances, that it may best be related in aletter from his own secretary to the praefect of the city. "Carus,"fays he, "our dearest emperor, was confined by sickness to his bed,"when a furious tempest arose in the camp. The darkness which
overspread


«<


♦







OCR Output








CONTENTS.


A. D. Page
Reign os Philip -« - 234
248 Secular Games -'' • ib.
Decline of the Roman Empire 235
CHAP. VIII.
Of the State of Persia after the Restoration
of the Monarchy by Artaxerxes.
A.D. Pjse
The Barbarians of the East and of the
North - - 237
Revolutions of Asia - ib.
The Persian Monarchy restored by Arta­
xerxes - - - 238
Reformation of the Magian Religion 240
Persian Theology, two Principles 241
Religious Worship - - 242
Ceremonies and moral Precepts 243
Encouragement of Agriculture . 244
Power of the Magi - 245
Spirit of Persecution - - 246
Establishment of the royal Authority in
the Provinces - - 247
Extent and Population of Persia 248
Recapitulation of the War between the
Parthian and Roman Empire 249
165 Cities of Seleucia and Ctesiphon 250
2l6 Conquest of Ofrhoene by the Romans 251
230 Artaxerxes claims the Provinces of Asia,
and declares War against the Romans 252
233 Pretended Victory of Alexander Severus 253
More probable Account of the War 254
240 Character and Maxims of Artaxerxes 256
Military Power of the Persians 256
Their Infantry contemptible - 257
Their Cavalry excellent - ib.


CHAP. IX.
The State os Germany till the Invasion ofthe Barbarians, in the Time of the Em­


peror Decius.
A.D. Pag:
Extent of Germany - - 260
Climate - - ib.
Its Effects on the Natives - 262


A.D. P«gt
Origin of the Germans - 263
Fables and Conjectures - ib.
The Germans ignorant of Letters 265 of Arts and Agri­
culture - - 266
1 m . of the Use of
Metals - - 267
Their Indolence - - 268
Their Taste for strong Liquors 269
State of Population - 270
German Freedom - - 271
Assemblies of the People - 272
Authority of the Princes and Magistrates 274
More absolute over the Property, than
over the Persons of the Germans ib.
Voluntary Engagements - 275
German Chastity - - 276
Its probable Causes - 277
Religion - - 278
Its Effects in Peace - - 279
in War - - 280
The Bards - - 281
Causes which checked the Progress of the
Germans - - ib.
Want of Amu - - 282
— of Discipline - - 283
Civil Dissentions of Germany - 284
Fomented by the Policy of Rome 285
Transient Union against Marcus Anto­
ninus - - 286
Distinction of the German Tribes ib.
Numbers - - 287
CHAP. X.


Ihe Emperors Decius, Gallus, Æmilianus,
Valerian, and Gallienus.—The general
Irruption of the Barbarians.—The thirty
Tyrants.
A.D. Page
248—268. The Nature of the Subject - 289
The Emperor Philip - ib.
249 Services, Revolt, Victory, and Reign of
the Emperor Decius - 290
250 He marches against the Goths 291
Origin of the Goths from Scandinavia ib.
Religion of the Goths - 293
Institutions and Death of Odin ib.
Agreeable,







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AND FALL


of the sacerdotal order, whose dignity, either from policy or devo­tion, that prince restored to its ancient splendour ,!.Spirit of per- The first counsel of the Magi was agreeable to the unsociable ge-C i t ,nius of their faith14, to the practice of ancient kings 1J, and even
to the example of their legislator, who had fallen a victim to a re­ligious war, excited by his own intolerant zeal l4. By an edict ofArtaxerxes, the exercise of every worship, except that of Zoroaster,-was severely prohibited. The temples of the Parthians, and the sta­tues of their deified monarchs, were thrown down with ignominy 17.The sword of Aristotle (such was the name given by the orientals tothe polytheism and philosophy of the Greeks) was easily broken 18;the flames of persecution soon reached the more stubborn Jews andChristians "; nor did they spare the heretics of their own nation andreligion. The majesty of Ormusd, who was jealous of a rival, wasseconded by the despotism of Artaxerxes, who could not suffer arebel; and with the assistance of what his prelates no doubt calledwholesome severities, the schismatics within his vast empire weresoon reduced to the inconsiderable number of eighty thousand J0.This spirit of persecution reflects dishonour on the religion of Zo­roaster; but as it was not productive of any civil commotion, it served•to strengthen the new monarchy by uniting all the various inhabit­ants of Persia in the bands of religious zeal.Establishment II. Artaxerxes, by his valour and conduct, had wrested the scep-of the royal ter of ^ £ast from the anc;ent r0yai family of Parthia. There
2iitnority in S
the provinces, ftjn remained the more difficult task of establishing, throughout thevast extent of Persia, a uniform and vigorous administration. Theweak indulgence of the Arfacides, had resigned to their sons andbrothers, the principal provinces, and the greatest offices of the king­dom, in the nature of hereditary possessions. The vitaxt, or eigh­teen most powerful satraps, were permitted to assume the regal title jand the vain pride of the monarch was delighted with a nominal
dominion







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. j


It had hitherto been the peculiar felicity of the Romans, and m £^ydr"dnnythe worst of times their consolation, that the virtue of the empe- over the
whole em«
rors was active, and their vice indolent. Augustus, Trajan, Ha- pire.drian, and Marcus, visited their extensive dominions in person, andtheir progress was marked by acts of wisdom and beneficence.The tyranny of Tiberius, Nero, and Domitian, who resided almostconstantly at Rome, or in the adjacent villas, was confined to thesenatorial and equestrian orders". But Caracalla was the com­mon enemy of mankind. He left the capital (and he never returnedto it) about a year after the murder of Geta. The rest of his reign A. D. 213.was spent in the several provinces of the empire, particularly thoseof the East, and every province was by turns the scene of his rapineand cruelty. The senators compelled by fear to attend his capriciousmotions, were obliged to provide daily entertainments at an immenseexpence, which he abandoned with contempt to his guards; and toerect, in every city, magnificent palaces and theatres, which he ei­ther disdained to visit, or ordered to be immediately thrown down.The most wealthy families were ruined by partial fines and confis­cations, and the great body of his subjects oppressed by ingeniousand aggravated taxes **. In the midst of peace, and upon theslightest provocation, he issued his commands, at Alexandria inEgypt, for a general massacre. From a secure post in the templeof Serapis, he viewed and directed the slaughter of many thousandcitizens, as well as strangers, without distinguishing either the num­ber or the crime of the sufferers; since, as he coolly informed thesenate, all the Alexandrians, those who had perished and those whohad escaped, were alike guilty 5 5. '*
The wise instructions of Severus never made any lasting impres- R"'a«tionsion on the mind of his son, who, although not destitute of imagi- °f dlsciplme'nation and eloquence, was equally devoid of judgment and huma­nity 3*. One dangerous maxim, worthy of a tyrant, was remem­bered and abused by Caracalla, *' To secure the affections of the
T a «


army.


»







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 537


braced the faith of Jesus of Nazareth **, and the zealots who hadfollowed the standard of Judas the Gaulonite 4'. The former werethe friends, the latter were the enemies, of humankind; and theonly resemblance between them, consisted in the same inflexible con­stancy, which, in the defence of their cause, rendered them insen­sible of death and tortures. The followers of Judas, who impelledtheir countrymen into rebellion, were soon buried under the ruinsof Jerusalem; whilst those of Jesus, under the more celebrated nameof Christians, diffused themselves over the Roman empire. Hownatural was it for Tacitus, in the time of Hadrian, to appropriateto the Christians, the guilt and the sufferings, which he might, withfar greater truth and justice, have attributed to a sect whose odiousmemory was almost extinguished! 4. Whatever opinion may beentertained of this conjecture, (for it is no more than a conjecture) itis evident that the effects, as well as the cause of Nero's persecution,were confined to the walls of Rome 41; that the religious tenets ofthe Galilæans, or Christians, were never made a subject of punishment,or even of inquiry; and that, as the idea of their sufferings was,for a long time, connected with those of cruelty and injustice, themoderation of succeeding princes inclined them to spare a sect, op­pressed by a tyrant, whose rage had been usually directed againstvirtue and innocence.
It is somewhat remarkable, that the flames of war consumed al- Oppression of
the Jews and
most at the fame time the temple of Jerusalem and the Capitol of Christians byRome 4J; and it appears no less singular, that the tribute which de- Dom,tian*votion had destined to the former, should have been converted bythe power of' an insulting victor to restore and adorn the splendorof the latter44. The emperors levied a general capitation tax onthe Jewish people; and although the sum assessed on the head ofeach individual was inconsiderable, the use for which it was designed,and the severity with which it was exacted, were considered as anintolerable grievance 4J. Since the officers of the revenue extended. Vol. I. 2 z 2 their







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 21


ropean provinces, which extended from the columns of Herculesto the wall of Antoninus, and from the mouth of the Tagus to thesources of the Rhine and Danube.
Before the Roman conquest, the country which is now called Italy.Lombardy, was not considered as a part of Italy. It had beenoccupied by a powerful colony of Gauls, who settling themselvesalong the banks of the Po, from Piedmont to Romagna, carriedtheir arms and their name from the Alps to the Apenninc. TheLigurians dwelt on the rocky coast, which now forms the republicof Genoa. Venice was yet unborn; but the territories of that state,which lie to the east of the Adige, were inhabited by the Vene­tians **. The middle part of the peninsula, that now composes thechitchy of Tuscany and the ecclesiastical state, was the ancient seatof the Etruscans and Umbrians; to the former of whom Italywas indebted for the first rudiments of a civilized life 7J. The Ty-ber rolled at the foot of the seven hills of Rome, and the countryof the Sabines, the Latins, and the Volsci, from that river to thefrontiers of Naples, was the theatre of her infant victories. Onthat celebrated ground the first consuls deserved triumphs; theirsuccessors adorned villas, and their posterity have erected con­vents '4. Capua and Campania possessed the immediate territory ofNaples; the rest of the kingdom was inhabited by many warlikenations, the Marsi, the Samnites, the Apulians, and the Luca-»nians; and the sea coasts had been covered by the flourishing colo­nies of the Greeks. We may remark, that when Augustus dividedItaly into eleven regions, the little province of Istria was annexed tothat feat of Roman sovereignty77.
The European provinces of Rome were protected by the course The Danubeof the Rhine and the Danube. The latter of those mighty streams *nd n|yrian
o J 7 frontier,
which rises at the distance of only thirty miles from the former,flows above thirteen hundred miles, for the most part, to the south­east, collects the tribute of sixty navigable rivers, and is, at length,
through.







OCR Output








i6 THE DECLINE AND FALL


less familiar than that of the sword or pilum; nor is there an •circumstance which more fully demonstrates the excellence of theRoman discipline. Active valour may often be the present of na­ture; but patient diligence can be the fruit only of reflection andhabit *
March. Whenever the trumpet gave the signal of departure, the camp
was almost instantly broke up, and the troops fell into their rankswithout delay or confusion. Besides their arms, which the legion­aries scarcely considered as an encumbrance, they were laden withtheir kitchen furniture, the instruments of fortification, and theprovision of many days *\ Under this weight, which would oppressthe delicacy of a modern soldier, they were trained by a regularstep to advance, in about six hours, near twenty miles 6\ On theappearance of an enemy, they threw aside their baggage, and by easyand rapid evolutions, converted the column of march into an order ofbattle6*. The {lingers and archers skirmished in the front; theauxiliaries formed the first line, and were seconded or sustained bythe strength of the legions. The cavalry covered the flanks, andthe military engines were placed in the rear.Nambfrand Such were the arts of war, by which the Roman emperors de-disposition of fen(ieci their extensive conquests, and preserved a military spirit, at
the legions. * '4
a time when every other virtue was almost extinguished by theprogress of despotism. Tf, in the consideration of their armies, wepass from their discipline to their numbers, we shall not find iteasy to appreciate them with any tolerable accuracy. We maycompute, however, that the legion which was itself a body of sixthousand eight hundred and thirty-one Romans, might, with itsattendant auxiliaries, amount to about twelve thousand five hundredmen. The peace establishment of Hadrian and his successors wascomposed of no less than thirty of these formidable brigades; andmost probably formed a standing force of three hundred and seventy-five thousand men. Instead of being confined within the walls of
4 fortified







OCR Output








3©2 THE DECLINE AND FALL


In their rear, which were more feebly or less carefully guarded; andwith incredible diligence, but by a different road, returned towardsthe mountains of Italy '*. Aurelian, who considered the war astotally extinguished, received the mortifying intelligence of theescape of the Alemanni, and of the ravage which they already-committed in the territory of Milan. The legions were com­manded to follow with as much expedition as those heavy bodieswere capable of exerting, the rapid flight of an enemy, whose in­fantry and cavalry moved with almost-equal swiftness. A few daysafterwards the emperor himself marched to the relief of Italy, atthe head of a chosen body of auxiliaries (among whom were thehostages and cavalry of the Vandals), and of all the Prætorian guardswho had served in the wars on the Danube*t»d are at last As the light troops of the Alemanni had spread themselves fromaSm? y the Alps to the Apennine, the incessant vigilance of Aurelian andhis officers was exercised in the discovery, the attack, and the pursuitof their numerous detachments. Notwithstanding this desultorywar, three considerable battles are mentioned, in which the principalforce of both armies was obstinately engaged '*. The success wasvarious. In the first, fought near Placentia, the Romans receivedso severe a blow, that, according to the expression of a writer ex­tremely partial to Aurelian, the immediate dissolution of the empirewas apprehended 5S. The crafty barbarians, who had lined thewoods, suddenly attacked the legions in'the dusk of the evening,and, as it is most probable, after the fatigue and disorder of a longmarch. The fury of their charge was irresistible; but at length,aster a dreadful slaughter, the patient firmness of the emperor ralliedhis troops, and restored, in some degree, the honour of his arms.The second battle was fought near Fano in Umbria; on the spotwhich, five hundred years before, had been fatal to the brother ofHannibal '6. Thus far the successful Germans had advanced along-the Æmilian and Flaminian way, with a design of sacking the un-
.8 guarded







OCR Output








I26 THE DECLINE AND FALL


soul of the first Cæsar, or the deep policy of Augustus, were scarcelyequal to the task of curbing the insolence of the victorious legions.By gratitude, by misguided policy, by seeming necessity, Severuswas induced to relax the nerves of discipline 6'. The vanity of hissoldiers was flattered with the honour of wearing gold rings; theirease indulged in the permission of living with their wives in theidleness of quarters. He increased their pay beyond the exampleof former times, and taught them to expect, and soon to claim, ex­traordinary donatives on every public occasion of danger or fes­tivity. Elated by success, enervated by luxury, and raised abovethe level of subjects by their dangerous privileges they soon be­came incapable of military fatigue, oppressive to the country, andimpatient of a just subordination. Their officers asserted the supe­riority of rank by a more profuse and elegant luxury. There isstill extant a letter of Severus, lamenting the licentious state of thearmy, and exhorting one of his generals to begin the necessary re­formation from the tribunes themselves; since, as he justly observes,the officer who has forfeited the esteem, will never command theobedience of his soldiers 6f. Had the emperor pursued the train ofreflection, he would have discovered, that the primary cause of thisgeneral corruption might be ascribed, not indeed to the example,but to the pernicious indulgence, however, of the commanderin chief.
New esta- T^ie Prætorians, who murdered their emperor and fold the em-Ih^Præto.i'an Pire' had received the Just punishment of their treason; but theguards. necessary, though dangerous, institution of guards was soon re­stored on a new model by Severus, and increased to four times theancient number Formerly these troops had been recruited inItaly; and as the adjacent provinces gradually imbibed the softermanners of Rome, the levies were extended to Macedonia, Noricum,and Spain. In the room of these elegant troops, better adapted tothe pomp of courts than to the uses of war, it was established by3 Severus,







OCR Output








24 THE DECLINE AND FALL


we reflect on the fame of Thebes and Argos, of Sparta and Athens,we can scarcely persuade ourselves, that so many immortal repub­lics of ancient Greece, were lost in a single province of the Romanempire, which, from the superior influence of the Achæan league,was usually denominated the province of Achaia.Asia Minor. Such was the state of Europe under the Roman Emperors. Theprovinces of Asia, without excepting the transient conquests ofTrajan, are all comprehended within the limits of the Turkishpower. But instead of following the arbitrary divisions of despotismand ignorance, it will be safer for us, as well as more agreeable,to observe the indelible characters of nature. The name of AsiaMinor is attributed with some propriety to the peninsula, which,confined between the Euxine and the Mediterranean, advances fromthe Euphrates towards Europe. Its principal division, westward ofmount Taurus and the river Halys, was dignified by the Romanswith the exclusive title of Asia. The jurisdiction of that provinceextended over the ancient monarchies of Troy, Lydia, and Phrygia,the maritime countries of the Pamphylians, Lycians, and Carians,and the Grecian colonies of Ionia, which equalled in arts, thoughnot in arms, the glory of their parent. The kingdoms of Bi-thynia and Pontus possessed the northern side of the peninsula fromConstantinople to Trebizond. On the opposite side, the provinceof Cilicia was terminated by the mountains of Syria: the inlandcountry, separated from the Roman Asia by the river Halys, andfrom Armenia by the Euphrates, had once formed the independ­ent kingdom of Cappadocia. In this place we may observe, thatthe northern shores of the Euxine, beyond Trebizond in Asia, andbeyond the Danube in Europe, acknowledged the sovereignty ofthe emperors, and received at their hands, either tributary princes,or Roman garrisons. Budzak, Crim Tartary, Circaffia, and Min-grelia, are the modern appellations of those savage countries *\
3 Under







OCR Output








C O N T E N T S.


A. D. Page
Takes Possession of the Palace - 132
The Public Discontent - ib.
The Armies of Britain, Syria, and Pan-
nonia, declare against Julian 133
Clodius Albinus in Britain - ib.
Pefccnnius Niger in Syria - 135
Pannonia and Dalmatia - 136
193 Septimius Severus declared Emperor by
the Pannonian Legions - 137
Marches into Italy - 138
Advances towards Rome - ib.
Distress of Julian - 135
His uncertain Conduct - ib.
Is deserted by the Prætorians 140
Is condemned and executed by Order of
the Senate - - 141
Disgrace of the Prætorian Guards ib.
Funeral and Apotheosis of Pertinax 142
193 — 197. Success of Severus against Niger
and against Albinus - ib.
Conduct of the two civil Wars 143
Arts of Severus - - ib.
Towards Niger - - ib.
Towards Albinus - 144
Event of the civil Wars - 145
Decided by one or two Battles 146
Siege of Byzantium - 147
Deaths of Niger and Albinus 148
Crnel Consequences of the civil Wars ib.
Animosity of Severus against Severus ib.
The Wisdom and Justice of his Go­
vernment - -- 149
General Peace and Prosperity 150
Relaxation of military Discipline ib.
New Establishment of the Prætorian
Guards _ - 151
The Office of Prætorian Præfect 152
The Senate oppressed by military Des­
potism - - 153
New Maxims of the Imperial Prerogative ib.


CHAP. VI.
The Death of Severus.—Tyranny of Cara-
talla—Usurpation of Macrinus.—Follies
of Elagabalus.-—Virtues of Alexander Se­


verus.—Licentiousness of the Army.—


General State of the Roman Finances.
A, D. Page
Greatness and Discontent of Severn* 155
His Wife the Empress Julia - ib.
Their two Sons, Caracalla and Geta 156
Their mutual Aversion to each other 157
Three Emperors - - ib.
208 The Caledonian War - ib.
Fingal and his Heroes - 158
Contrast of the Caledonians and the Ro­
mans - - 159
Ambition of Caracalla - ib.
211 Death of Severus, and Accession oshis two
Sons - - 160
Jealousy and Hatred os the two Emperors ib.
Fruitless Negociation for dividing the
Empire between them - 161
212 Murder of Geta - 162
Remorse and Cruelty of Caracalla 163
Death os Papiniart - 165
213 His Tyranny extended over the whole
Empire - 166
Relaxation of Discipline - 167
217 Murder of Caracalla - 168
Imitation of Alexander - 169
Election and Character of Macrinus ib.
Discontent of the Senate - 170
Discontent of the Army - 171
Macrinus attempts a Reformation of the
Army - - 174
Death of the Empress Julia - 173
Education, Pretensions, and Revolt of
Elagabalus, called at first Bassianus
and Antoninus - - ib.
218 Defeat and Death of Macrinus 174.
Elagabalus writes to the Senate 175
219 Picture of Elagabalus - 176
His Superstition - - 177
His profligate and effeminate Luxury 178 •
Contempt of Decency, which distinguish­
ed the Roman Tyrants - 180
Discontents of the Army - ib.
2ai Alexander Severus declared Cæsar ib..222 Sedition of the Guards, and Murder of
Elagabalus - - 18,
Accession of Alexander Severus 182


Power.







OCR Output








454 THE DECLINE AND FALL


have been impossible that the Jews could ever have spread themselvesbeyond the narrow limits of the promised land 1That obstacle wasindeed removed by the destruction of the temple of Jerusalem; butthe most considerable part of the Jewish religion was involved in itsdestruction; and the pagans, who had long wondered at the strangereport of an empty sanctuary '% were at a loss to discover whatcould be the object, or what could be the instruments, of a worshipwhich was destitute of temples and of altars, of priests and of sacri­fices. Yet even in their fallen state, the Jews, still asserting theirlofty and exclusive privileges, shunned, instead of courted, thesociety of strangers. They still insisted with inflexible rigour onthose parts of the law which it was in their power to practise.Their peculiar distinctions of days, of meats, and a variety oftrivial though burdensome observances, were so many objects ofdisgust and aversion for the other nations, to whose habits and pre­judices they were diametrically opposite. The painful and evendangerous rite of circumcision, was alone capable of repelling awilling proselyte from the door of the synagogueMore liberal Under these circumstances, Christianity offered itself to the world,
xcsl oFChri
fiianity. armed with the strength of the Mosaic law, and delivered from theweight of its fetters. An exclusive zeal for the truth of religion,and the unity of God, was as carefully inculcated in the new as inthe ancient system: and whatever was now revealed to mankindconcerning the nature and the designs of the Supreme Being, wasfitted to increase their reverence for that mysterious doctrine. Thedivine authority of Moses and the prophets was admitted, andeven established, as the firmest basis of Christianity. From the be­ginning of the world, an uninterrupted series of predictions hadannounced and prepared the long expected coming of the Messiah,who, in compliance with the gross apprehensions of the Jews, hadbeen more frequently represented under the character of a King andConqueror, than under that of a Prophet, a Martyr, and the Son
of







OCR Output








s94 THE DECLINE AND FALL


His victory The event surpassed his own expectations and those of the world.
over ,'ie 11* •
Gothi. By the most signal victories he delivered the empire from this bar­baric host, and was distinguished by posterity under the gloriousappellation of the Gothic Claudius. The imperfect historians of anirregular war do not enable us to describe the order and circum­stances of his exploits; but, if we could be indulged in the allu­sion* we might distribute into three acts this memorable tragedy.I. The decisive battle was fought near Naissus, a city of Dardania.The legions at first gave way, oppressed by numbers, and dismayedby misfortunes. Their ruin was inevitable, had not the abilitiesof their emperor prepared a seasonable relief. A large detachmentrising out of the secret and difficult passes of the mountains, which, byhis order they had occupied, suddenly assailed the rear of the victo­rious Goths. The favourable instant was improved by the activityof Claudius. He revived the courage of his troops, restored theirranks, and pressed the barbarians on every side. Fifty thousand menare reported to have been flain in the battle of Naissus. Severallarge bodies of barbarians, covering their retreat with a moveablefortification of waggons, retired, or rather escaped, from the fieldof flaughter. II. We may presume that some insurmountable dif­ficulty, the fatigue, perhaps, or the disobedience of the conquerors,prevented Claudius from completing in one day the destruction ofthe Goths. The war was diffused over the provinces of Mæfia,Thrace, and Macedonia, and its operations drawn out into a varietyof marches, surprises, and tumultuary engagements, as well by seaas by land. When the Romans suffered any loss, it was commonlyoccasioned by their own cowardice or rashness; but the superiortalents of the emperor, his perfect knowledge of the country, and hisjudicious choice of measures and officers, assured on most occasionsthe success of his arms. The immense booty, the fruit of so manyvictories, consisted for the greater part of cattle and flaves. A selectbody of the Gothic youth was ^received among the imperial troops;
the







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


the active and successful zeal of the Christians had insensibly diffusedthem through every province and almost every city of the empire.The new converts seemed to renounce their family and country,that they might connect themselves in an indissoluble band of unionwith a peculiar society, which every where assumed a different cha­racter from the rest of mankind. Their gloomy and austere aspect,their abhorrence of the common business and pleasures of life, andtheir frequent predictions of impending calamities'6, inspired thePagans with the apprehension of some danger, which would arisefrom the new sect, the more alarming as it was the more obscure.M Whatever," says Pliny, " may be the principle of their conduct,11 their inflexible obstinacy appeared deserving of punishment 'V
The precautions with which the disciples of Christ performed the Theiroffices of religion were at first dictated by fear and necessity; but "iated!lum"they were continued from choice. By imitating the awful secrecywhich reigned in the Eleusinian mysteries, the Christians had flat­tered themselves, that they should render their sacred institutionsmore respectable in the eyes of the Pagan world But the event,as it often happens to the operations of subtile policy, deceived theirwishes and their expectations. It was concluded, that they onlyconcealed, what they would have blushed to disclose. Their mis­taken prudence afforded an opportunity for malice to invent, and forsuspicious credulity to believe, the horrid tales which described theChristians as the most wicked of human kind, who practised intheir dark recesses every abomination that a depraved fancy couldsuggest, and who solicited the favour of their unknown God by thesacrifice of every moral virtue. There were many who pretendedto confess or to relate the ceremonies of this abhorred society. Itwas asserted, "that a new born infant, entirely covered over with"flour, was presented, like some mystic symbol os initiation, to the"knife of the proselyte, who unknowingly inflicted many a secret"and mortal wound on the innocent victim of his error; that as
«l soon







OCR Output








72 THE DECLINE AND FALL


family distinction. The former should naturally have expired withthe prince, on whom it was bestowed; and however the latter wasdiffused by adoption and female alliance, Nero was the last prince whocould claim so noble an extraction. But, at the time of his death, thepractice of a century had inseparably connected those appellations withthe Imperial dignity, and they have been preserved by a long succes­sion of emperors, Romans, Greeks, Franks, and Germans, from thefall of the republic to the present time. A distinction was, how­ever, soon introduced. The sacred title of Augustus was alwaysreserved for the monarch, whilst the name of Cæsar was more freelycommunicated to his relations; and, from the reign of Hadrian,at least, was appropriated to the second person in the state, whowas considered as the presumptive heir of the empire.Character and The tender respect of Augustus for a free constitution which heAugustus. had destroyed, can only be explained by an attentive considerationof the character of that subtile tyrant. A cool head, an unfeelingheart, and a cowardly disposition, prompted him, at the age ofnineteen, to assume the mask of hypocrisy, which he never after­wards laid aside. With the same hand, and probably with the sametemper, he signed the proscription of Cicero, and the pardon ofCinna. His virtues, and even his vices, were artificial; andaccording to the various dictates of his interest, he was at first theenemy, and at last the father, of the Roman world **. When heframed the artful system of the Imperial authority, his moderationwas inspired by his fears. He wished to deceive the people by animage of civil liberty, and the armies by an image of civil govern­ment.
jmageofii- - I. The death of Caesar was ever before his eyes. He had lavishedpeople. wealth and honours on his adherents; but the most favoured friendsof his uncle were in the number of the conspirators. The fidelityof the legions might defend his authority against open rebellion ; but•their vigilance could not secure his person from the dagger of a deter­


mined







OCR Output








NOTES ON THE SIXTH CHAPTER. xxi


ps] Dion, J. lxjtvi. p. 1282. Hist. August, p. 71.Aurel. V ictor.
[16] Dion, I. lxxvi. p. 1283. Hist. August.,p. 89.
[17] I>ion, p. lxxvi. 1. 1284. Herodian, I. iii.P- 135-
[18] Mr. Hume is justly surprised at a passage ofHerodian, (i iv. p. 159.) who, on this occasion, re­presents the imperial palace, as equal io extent tothe rest of Rome. The whole region of the Pala­tine Mount on which it was built, occupied, .at most,a circumference of eleven or twelve thousand feet.(See the Notitia and Victor, in Nardini's RomaAntica.) But we should recollect that the opulentsenators had almost surrounded the city with theirextensive gardens and suburb palaces, the greatestpart of which had been gradually confiscated bythe emperors, if Geta resided in the gardens thatbore his name on the Janiculum; and if Caracalla.inhabited the gardens o* Mecænas on the Efque-line, the rival brothers were separated from eachother by the distance of several miles; and yetthe in termed fa re space was filled by the imperialgardens of Salluft, of Lucullus, of Agrippa, of Do­mitian, of Caius, &c. all skirting round the city,and all connected with each other, and with thepalace, by bridges thrown over the Tyber and thestreets. But this explanation of Herodian wouldrequire, though it ill deserves, a particular disserta-ition, illustrated by a map of ancient Rome.
[19] Herodian, 1. 5v. p. 139.
[20] Herodian, 1. iv. p. 144.
[21] Caracalla consecrated, in the temple of Se-rapis, the sword, with which, a« he boasted, he hadiain his brother Gets, Dion, 1. Ixxvii. p. 1307.
[22] Herodian, I. iv. p. 147.. In every Romancamp there was a small chapel near the head­quarters, in which the statues of the tutelar deitieswere preserved and adored; and we may remark,that the eagles, and other military ensigns, were inthe first rank of these deities: an excellent institu­tion, which confirmed discipline by the sanctionof religion. See Lipsius de Militia Romana, iv. 5.«. 2.


[23] Herodian, 1. iv. p. 148. Dion, 1. Ixxvii,p* 1289.
[24] Geta was placed among the gods. Sit divut,dum non fit minus, said his brother. Hist. August,p. 91. Some marks of Geta's consecration arcstill found upon medals.
[25] Dion, 1. Ixxvii. p. 1307..
[26] Dion, 1 Ixxvii. p. 1290. Herodian, 1. iv..p. 1 50. Dion (p. 129S.) fays, that the comic poetsno longer durst employ the name of Geta in theirplays, and that the estates of those who mentionedit in their testaments,. were confiscated.
[27] Caracalla had assumed the names of several,conquered nations; Pertinax observed, that thename of Giticut (he had obtained some advantage ofthe Goths or Getæ) would be a proper addition to>Parthicus, Alemannicus, &c. Hist. August, p. 89.
[2S] Dion, 1. Ixxvii. p. 1291. He was proba­bly descended from Helvidius Prifcus, and ThraseaPætus, those patriots whose firm, but useless and'unscasonable virtue, has been immortalized by.Tacitus.
[29] It is said, that Papinian was himself a rela*tion of the empress Julia.
[$o] Tacit. Annal. xiv. ii.
£31] Hist. August, p. 88.
[32] With regard to Papinian, see Heineccius'sHistoria Juris Romani, 1. 33c, &c.
[33] Tiberius and Domitian never moved from •the neighbourhood of .Rome. Nero made a shortjourney into Greece. "Et laudatorum Principumufus ex æquo quamvis procul agentibus. S«eviproximisingruunt." Tacit. Hist. iv. 75.
[34] Dion, 1. lxxviL p. 1294.
[35] Dion, L Ixxvii. p. 1307. Herodian, 1. iv.p. 1 58. The former represents it as a cruel massacre,the latter as a perfidious one too. it seems pro­bable, that the Alexandrian* had irritated the ty­rant







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AND FALL


founded, if we required such a list of three hundred and sixtyAfrk% cities, as Pliny has exhibited under the reign of Vespasian '7. III.
Three hundred African cities had once acknowledged the authorityof Carthage T', nor is it likely thafc their numbers diminishedunder the administration of the emperors; Carthage itself ..rosewith new. splendor from its ashes; and that capital, as .well asCapua and Corinth, soon recovered all the advantages whish .sapbe separated from independent sovereignty.,,; IV. The provinces,Asu. of the east present the contrast of Roman magnificence with
Turkish barbarism. The ruins of antiquity scattered over un­cultivated fields, and ascribed, by ignorance, to the power asmagic, scarcely afford a shelter *o the oppressed peasant ;or wan­dering Arab. Under the reign of the Cæsars, the proper Asiaalone contained five hundred populous cities 79, enriched with allthe gifts of nature, and adorned with all the refinements of art.Eleven cities of Asia had once disputed the honour of dedicating atemple to Tiberius, and their respective merits were examined bythe senate 8°. Four of them were immediately rejected as unequalro the burthen ;. and among these was Laodicea, whose splendor is^ill displayed in its ruins 8'. Laodicea collected a very considerablerevenue from its flocks of sheep, celebrated for the fineness of theirwool, and had received, a little before the contest, a legacy of abovefour hundred thousand pounds by the -testament of a generouscitizen81. If such was the poverty of Laodicea, what must havebeen the. wealth of those cities, whose claim appeared preferable,and particularly of Pergamus, of Smyrna, and .of Ephesus, whoso long disputed with each other the titular primacy of Asia8i. Thecapitals of Syria and Egypt held a still superior rank in Xhe empire:Antioch and Alexandria looked down with disdain on a.crowd ofdependent cities84, and yielded, with reluctance, to the majesty ofRome itself. . t







OCR Output








8oo THE DECLINE AND FALL


CHAP. VIII.


The barba­rians of theEast and ofthe North.


Revolutionsof Alia.


Of the state of Persia after the restoration of the mo­narchy by Artaxerxes.
WHENEVER Tacitus indulgea himself b these beautifulepisodes, in which he relates some domestic transaction ofthe Germans or of the Parthians, his principal object is to relieve theattention of the reader from a uniform scene of rice and misery.From the reign of Augustus to the time of Alexander Severus, theenemies of Rome were in her bosom; the tyrants, and the soldiers;and her prosperity had a very distant and feeble interest in tbe revo­lutions that might happen beyond the Rhine and the Euphrates.But when the military order had levelled, in wild anarchy, the powerof the prince, the laws of the senate, and even the discipline of thecamp, the barbarians of the north and of the east, who had longhovered on the frontier, boldly attacked the provinces of a declin­ing monarchy. Their vexatious inroads became formidable inva­sions, and, after a long vicissitude of mutual calamities, many tribesof the victorious invaders established themselves in the provinces ofthe Roman empire. To obtain a clearer knowledge of these greatevents, we {hall endeavour to form a previous idea of the character,forces, and designs of those nations who avenged the cause ofHannibal and Mithridates.
In the more early ages of the world, whilst the forests that coveredEurope afforded a retreat to a few wandering savages, the inha­bitants of Asia were already collected into populous cities, and re­duced under extensive empires, the seat of the arts, of luxury, anddf aWpOtlfrn. The Assyrians reigned over the Easttill the scepterof Ninus and Semiramis dropt from the hands of their enervated
successors.







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE, '. i#


"might remain sole emperor j he Was unable to obtain it"He requested, that the power might be equally divided between"them; the army would not listen to his speech. He consented"to be degraded to the rank of Caesar; the favour Was refused*' him. He desired, at least, he might be appointed Prætorian"praefect; his prayer was rejected. Finally, he pleaded for hiftw life. The army, in these several judgments, exercised the Al*"preme magistracy." According to the historian, whose doubtfulnarrative the president De Montesquieu has adopted, Philip, Whos,during the whole transaction, had preserved a sullen silence, Wasinclined to spare the innocent life of his benefactor; till, recollect­ing that hit innocence might excite a dangerous compassion iri theRoman world; he commanded, without regard to his suppliantcries, that he should be seized, strips, and led aWay to instant death.After a moment's pause the inhuman sentence was executed 54.
On his return from the east to Rome, Philip, desirous of ob- Reign ofliberating the memory of his-erimes, and of captivating the affections Phll'p'of the people, solemnized the secular games with infinite pompand magnificence* Since their institution' or revival by Au­gustus they had been celebrated by Claudius, by Domitian* andby Severus, and were now renewed, the fifth time, on the ac­complishment of the full period of a thousand years from the foun*dation of Rome. Every circumstance of the secular games was SecuIar"
J "* games.
skilfully adapted to inspire the superstitious mind with deep and A- P-solemn reverence. The long, interval between them50 exceeded1 theterm of human life;, and;as none of the spectators had already seenthem, none could flatter themselves with the expectation of be­holding them a second time. The mystio sacrifices were performed,during three nights, on the banks of the Tyber ; and the Campus-Martius resounded with music and dances, and was illuminatedwith innumerable lamps and torches. Slaves and strangerswere excluded' from the peculiar ceremonies of the republic. A
chorus







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AND- FALL,,


service, it was sometimes indulged to the business or conveniencyNavigation, of private citizens9o. Nor was the communication of the Romanempire less free and open by sea than it was by land. The provincessurrounded and enclosed the Mediterranean; and Italy, in the shapeof an immense promontory, advanced into the midst of that greatlake. The coasts of Italy are, in general, destitute of safe harbours >but human industry had corrected the deficiencies of nature; andthe artificial port of Ostia, in particular, situate at the mouth of theTyber, and formed by the emperor Glaudiu6, Was a useful monu­ment of Roman greatness9'. From the port which was onlysixteen miles from the capital, a favourable breeze frequently car­ried vessels in seven days to the columns of Hercules, and in nine orten to Alexandria, in Egypt L v i .'..;:! . 'j
Improvement Whatever evils either reason or declamation have imputed towremthe extensive empire, the power of Rome was attended with some be-Coumriesof P^fic^ consequences to mankind j and the fame freedom of inter-the empire, course which extended the vices, diffused likewise the improvements,pf social life. In die, more remote ages of antiquity, the world Wasunequally divided. The east was in the immemorial possession ofarts and luxury; whilst the west was inhabited by rude and war?like barbarians, who -either disdained agriculture, or to whom itwas totally unknown. Under the protection of an establishedgovernment, the productions off happier climates, and the industryof more civilized nations, were gradually introduced into thewestern countries of Europe; and the natives were encouraged, byan open and profitable commerce* to multiply the former, as wellas to improve the latter. It would be almost impossible to enu*merate all the articles, cither of the animal or the vegetable reign,which were successively imported into Europe, from Asia andEgypt9'; but it will not be unworthy 'of the dignity, and muchless of the utility of an historical work,. slightly to touch on ja fewof the principal heads, i. Almost an the flowers, the herbs, and







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AND FALL


/
riches; and the appearance of the arms of the Germans, furnisheda sufficient proof how little iron the): were able to bestow on whatthey must have deemed the noblest use of that metal. The varioustransactions of peace and war, had introduced some Roman coins(chiefly silver) among the borderers of the Rhine and Danube;but the more distant tribes were absolutely unacquainted with theuse of money, carried on their confined traffic by the exchange ofcommodities, and prized their rude earthen vessels as of equal valuewith the silver vases, the presents of Rome to their princes and am-bastadors **. To a mind capable of reflection, such leading factsconvey more instruction, than a tedious detail of subordinate circum­stances. The value of money has been settled by general consentto express our wants and our property; as letters were inventedto express our ideas; and both these institutions, by giving a moreactive energy to the powers and passions of human nature, havecontributed to muhiply the objects they were designed to represent.The use of gold and silver is in a great measure factitious; but itwould be impossible-to enumerate the important and various serviceswhich agriculture, and all the arts, have received from iron, whentempered and fashioned by the operation of fire, and the dexteroushand of man. Money, in a word, is the most universal incitement,iron the most powerful instrument of human industry; and it isvery difficult to conceive by what means a people, neither actuatedby the one, nor seconded by the other, could emerge from the grossestbarbarism *'.
If we contemplate a savage nation in any part of the globe, asupine indolence and a carelessness of futurity will be found to con­stitute their general character. In a civilized state, every facultyof man is expanded and exercised; and the great chain of mutualdependence connects and embraces the several members of society.The most numerous portion of it is employed in constant and usefullabour. The select few, placed by fortune above that necessity,
can,







OCR Output








502 THE DECLINE AND' FALL


tion of thefive causes.


Weakness ofPolytheism.


■** impunity (it is thus that the bishop of Carthage chides the"lenity of his colleague) if such irregularities are suffered, there* is an end of Episcopal vigour ,4T; an end of the sublime and"divine power of governing the church, an end of Christianityw itself." Cyprian had renounced those temporal honours, whichit is probable he would never have obtained; but the acquisition ofsuch absolute command over the consciences and understanding of acongregation, however obscure or despised by the world, is moretruly grateful to the pride of the human heart, than the possessionof the most despotic power, imposed by arms and conquest on a re­luctant people.
In the course of this important, though perhaps tedious, inquiry*I have attempted to display the secondary causes which so effica­ciously assisted the truth of the Christian religion. If among thesecauses we have discovered any artificial ornaments, any accidentalcircumstances, or any mixture of error and passion, it cannot appearsurprising that mankind should be the most sensibly affected bysuch motives as were suited to their imperfect nature. It was bythe aid of these causes, exclusive zeal, the immediate expectation ofanother world, the claim of miracles, the practice of rigid virtue,and the constitution of the primitive church, that Christianity spreaditself with so much success in the Roman empire. To the first of thesethe Christians were indebted for their invincible valour, whichdisdained to capitulate with the enemy whom they were resolved tovanquish. The three succeeding causes supplied their valour with themost formidable arms. The last of these causes united their courage,directed their arms, and gave their efforts that irresistible weight,which even a small band of well-trained and desperate volunteershas so often possessed over an undisciplined multitude, ignorantof the subject, and careless of the event of the war. In the variousreligions of Polytheism, some wandering fanatics of Egypt andSyria, who addressed themselves to the credulous superstition of







OCR Output








6o THE DECLINE AND FALL


■


CHAP. III.
Of the Constitution of the Roman Empire^ in the Age of
the Antonines.
i
Idea of a mo- HPHE general definition of a monarchy seems to be that of anarcb/. _|_ ^ate^ m ^ich a singie person, by whatsoever name he may
be distinguished, is intrusted with the execution of the laws, themanagement of the revenue, and the command of the army. Butunless public liberty is protected by intrepid and vigilant guardians,the authority of so formidable a magistrate will soon degenerate intodespotism. The influence of the clergy, in an age of superstition,might be usefully employed to assert the rights of mankind; but suchis the connexion between the throne and the altar, that the bannerof the church has very seldom been seen on the side of the people.A martial nobility and stubborn commons, possessed of arms, tenaci­ous of property, and collected into constitutional assemblies, form theonly barrier which can perpetually resist the perpetual enterprisesof an aspiring prince.Situation of Every barrier of the Roman constitution had been levelled by theAugustus. vast ambition of the dictator; every fence had been extirpated bythe cruel hand of the Triumvir. After the victory of Actium, thefate of the Roman world depended on the will of Octavianus, fur-named Cæsar, by his uncle's adoption, and afterwards Augustus,by the flattery of the senate. The conqueror was at the head offorty-four veteran legions conscious of their own strength, and ofthe weakness of the constitution, habituated, during twenty years civilwar, to every act of blood and violence, and passionately devotedto the house of Cæsar; from whence alone they had received, and
expected,







OCR Output








DECLINE AND FALL THE


stowed on the prisoners After the church had triumphed over allher enemies, the interest as well as vanity of the captives promptedthem to magnify the merit of their respective suffering. A conve­nient distance of time or place gave an ample scope to the progressof fiction; and the frequent instances which might be alleged ofholy martyrs, whose wounds had been- instantly healed, whosestrength had been renewed* and whose lost members had miracu­lously been restored, were of sufficient weight to remove every diffi­culty, and to silence every objection. The most extravagant legends,as they conduced to the honour of the church, were applauded bythe credulous multitude, countenanced by the power of the clergy,and attested by the suspicious evidence of ecclesiastical history.
The vague descriptions of exile and imprisonment, of pain andtorture, are so easily exaggerated or softened by the pencil of anartful orator, that we are naturally induced to inquire into a factof a more distinct and stubborn kind; the number of persons who'suffered death in consequence of the edicts published by Diocletian,his associates, and his successors. The recent legendaries recordwhole armies and cities, which were at once swept away by theundistinguishing rage of persecution. The more ancient writers contentthemselves with pouring out a liberal effusion of loose and tragical in­vectives, without condescending to ascertain the precise number ofthose persons who were permitted to seal with their blood their beliefof the gospel. From the history of Eusebius, it may however be col­lected, that only nine bishops were punished with death; and we areassured, by his particular enumeration of the martyrs of Palestine,that no more than ninety-two Christians were intitled to that ho­nourable appellation ,8\ As we are unacquainted with the degreeof episcopal zeal and courage which prevailed at that time, it is notin our power to draw any useful inferences from the former of thesefacts: but the latter may serve to justify a very important and pro­bable conclusion. According to the distribution of Roman provinces,
I Palestine







OCR Output








CONTENTS.


D.


Page A. D.


Their Religion better suited to Defence
than to Conquest
More liberal Zeal of Christianity
Obstinacy and Reasons of the believing
Jews - -
The Nazarene Church of Jerusalem
The Ebionites
The Gnostics
Their Sects, Progress, and Influence
The Dæmons considered as the Gods of
Antiquity - •
Abhorrence of the Christians for Idolatry
Ceremonies
Arts
Festivals
Zeal for Christianity
II. The Second Cause. The Doctrine
of the Immortality of the Soul among
the Philosophers
Among the Pagans of Greece and
Rome
Among the Barbarians and the JewsAmong the Christians
Approaching End of the World
Doctrine of the Millennium
Conflagration of Rome and of the World
The Pagans devoted to eternal Punish­ment ...
Were often converted by their Fears
HI. The Third Cause. Miraculous
Powers of the primitive Church
Their Truth contested
Our Perplexity in defining the miraculous
Period
Use of the primitive MiraclesIV, The Fouhth Cause. Virtues of
the first Christians
Effects of their Repentance
Care of their Reputation
Morality of the Fathers
Principles of human NatureThe primitive Christians condemn Plea­sure and LuxuryTheir Sentiments concerning Marriage
and Chastity
Their Aversion to the B usiness of War and
Government


539
541
54254454<>547549
55»553ib.
554-
55555&


ib.
S5»559561ib.-562564
565567
ib.569
ib.571
57*573ib.
575ib.
576
5775S0


P»ge
V. The Fifth Cause. The Christians
active in the Government of the Church 581
Its primitive Freedom and Equality 582Institution of Bishops as Presidents of the
College of Presbyters
Provincial Councils
Union of the Church
Progress of Episcopal AuthorityPre-eminence of the Metropolitan
Churches
Ambition of the Roman Pontiff
Laity and Clergy
Oblations and Reverence of the Church
Distribution of the Revenue
Excommunication
Public Pennance
The Dignity of Episcopal Government
Recapitulation of the five Causes
Weakness of Polytheim
The Scepticism of the Pagnn World proved
favourable to the new Religion
And to the Peace and Union of the Ro­man Empire
Historical View of the Progress of Christi­anity
In the East
The Church of Antioch
In Egypt
In Rome
In Africa and the Western Provinces
Beyond the Limits of the Roman Em­pire - - -General Proportion of Christians and
Pagans - - 612
Whether the first Christians were mean
and ignorant - 613
Some Exceptions with regard to Learning 614• with regard to Rank and


584586ib.587
588 •
589
590
59''
594
596
597598
599600
601
602
603
604
605
606607609
611


Fortune
Christianity most favourably received by
the Poor and SimpleRejected by some eminent Men os the first
and second Centuries
Their Neglect cf Prophecy
of Miracles
General Silence concerning the Darkness
of the Passion


6lS
616'
ib.617618


ib.CHAP.







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


sured that love of ease and retirement which had withdrawn himfrom the public service But it was impossible, that minds likethose of Maximian and his son, could long possess in harmony anundivided power. Maxentius considered himself as the legalsovereign of Italy, elected by the Roman senate and people; norwould he endure the controul of his father, who arrogantly de­clared, that by his name and abilities the rash youth had beenestablished on the throne. The cause was solemnly pleaded beforethe Prætorian guards, and those troops who dreaded the severity, ofthe old emperor espoused the party of Maxentius The life andfreedom of Maximian were however respected, and he retired fromItaly into Illyricum, affecting to lament the past, and secretly con­triving new mischiefs. But Galerius, who was well acquaintedwith his character, soon obliged him to leave his dominions, andthe last refuge of the disappointed Maximian was the court of hisson-in-law Constantine JJ. He was received with respect by thatartful prince, and with the appearance of filial tenderness by theempress Fausta. That he might remove every suspicion, he re­signed the imperial purple a second time professing himself atlength convinced of the vanity of greatness and ambition. Hadhe persevered in this resolution, he might have ended his life withless dignity indeed than in his first retirement, yet, however, withcomfort and reputation. But the near prospect of a throne, broughtback to his remembrance the state from whence he was fallen, andhe resolved, by a desperate effort, either to reign or to peristuAn incursion of the Franks had summoned Constantine, with apart of his army, to the banks of the Rhine; the remainder ofthe troops were stationed in the southern provinces of Gaul, whichJay exposed to the enterprises of the Italian emperor, and a con­siderable treasure was deposited in the city of Aries. Maximianeither craftily invented, or hastily credited a vain report of thedeath of Constantine. Without hesitation he ascended the throne,


seized







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


and their discipline confirmed. There appeared the same differencebetween the leaders as between the .armies. Caprice or flattery hadtempted Maxentius with the hopes of conquest: but these aspiringhopes soon gave way to the habits of pleasure and the consciousness ofhis inexperience. The intrepid mind of Constantine had been trainedfrom his earliest youth to war, to action, and to military command.
When Hannibal marched from Gaul into Italy, he was obliged,first, to discover, and then to open, a way over mountains and Constantine
'passes the
through savage nations that had never yielded a passage to a regular Alps,army The Alps were then guarded by nature, they are now forti­fied by art. Citadels constructed with no less skill than labour andexpence, command every avenue into the plain, and on that siderender Italy almost inaccessible to the enemies of the king of Sar­dinia 54. But in the course of the intermediate period, the generalsrwho have attempted the paflage, have seldom experienced any dif­ficulty or resistance. In the age of Constantine, the peasants ofthe mountains were civilized and obedient subjects; the country-was plentifully stocked with provisions, and the stupendous high­ways which the Romans had carried over the Alps, opened severalcommunications between Gaul and Italy ,!. Constantine preferredthe road of the Cottian Alps, or as it is now called, of MountCenis, and led his troops with such active diligence, that he de­scended into the plain of Piedmont before the court of Maxentiushad received any certain intelligence of his departure from thebanks of the Rhine. The city of Susa, however, which is situatedat the foot of Mount Cents, was surrounded with walls, and pro­vided with a garrison sufficiently numerous to check the progress ofan invader; but the impatience of Constantine's troops disdainedthe tedious forms of a siege. The fame day that they appeared be­fore Susa, they applied fire to the gates, and ladders to the walls jand mounting to the assault amidst a shower of stones and arrows^they entered the place sword in hand> and cut in pieces the greatest







OCR Output








 







OCR Output








178 THE DECLINE AND FALL


Oppreffion of As ionpr a9 the cruelty of Maximin was confined to the illustrious
the provin- 0
cci. senators, or even to the bold adventurers, who in the court or army
expose themselves to the caprice of fortune, the body of the peopleviewed their sufferings with indifference, or perhaps with pleasure.But the tyrant's avarice, stimulated by the insatiate desires of thesoldiers, at length attacked the public property. Every city of theempire was possessed of an independent revenue, destined to pur-chafe corn for the multitude, and to supply the expences of thegames and entertainments. By a single act of authority, the wholemass of wealth was at once confiscated for the use of the Imperialtreasury. The temples were stripped of their most valuable offer­ings of gold and silver, and the statues of gods, heroes, and empe-lors were melted down and coined into money. These impious or­ders could not be executed without tumults and massacres, as in manyplaces the people chose rather to die in the defence of their altars,than to behold in the midst of peace their cities exposed to the ra­pine and cruelty of war. The soldiers themselves, among whomthis sacrilegious plunder was distributed, received it with a blush;and, hardened as they were in acts of violence, they dreaded the juftreproaches of their friends and relations. Throughout the Romanworld a general cry of indignation was heard, imploring vengeanceon the common enemy of human kind; and at length, by an act ofprivate oppreslion, a peaceful and unarmed province was driven intorebellion against him ''.Revolt in The procurator of Africa was a servant worthy of such a master,A. D.' 237. who considered the fines and confiscations of the nobles as one ofApnI* the most fruitful branches of the Imperial revenue. An iniquitoussentence had been pronounced against some opulent youths of thatcountry, the execution of which would have stripped them of farthe greater part of their patrimony. In this extremity, a resolutionthat must either complete or prevent their ruin, was dictated by
despair.


1







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 28;


sophers of Egypt, is described above a century afterwards, as alreadyreduced to its present state of a dreary solitude "7S.
III. The obscure rebellion of Trebellianus, who assumed the Rebellion ofpurple in Isauria, a petty province of Asia Minor, was attended withstrange and memorable consequences. The pageant of royalty wassoon destroyed by an officer of Gallienus; but his followers, de­spairing of mercy, resolved to shake off their allegiance, not only tothe emperor, but to the empire, and suddenly returned to the savagemanners, from which they had never perfectly been reclaimed.'Their craggy rocks, a branch of the wide extended Taurus, pro­tected their inaccessible retreat. The tillage of some fertilevallies ,:6, supplied them with the necessaries, and a habit of rapinewith the luxuries, of life. - In the heart of the Roman monarchy,the Haurians ever continued a nation of wild barbarians. Suc­ceeding princes, unable to reduce them to obedience, either by armsor policy, were compelled to acknowledge their weakness, by sur­rounding the hostile and independent spot, with a strong chain offortifications '77, which often proved insufficient to restrain the in­cursions of these domestic foes. The Isaurians, gradually extendingtheir territory to the sea coast, subdued the western and mountainous• part of Cilicia, formerly the nest of thole daring pyrates, againstwhom the republic was obliged to exert its utmost force, un­der the conduct of the great Pompey ,7S.
Our habits of thinking so fondly connect the order of the Famine an*
pcltilence.
universe with the fate of man, that this gloomy period of historyhas been decorated with inundations, earthquakes, uncommon me­teors, preternatural darkness, and a crowd of prodigies fictitious orexaggerated '79. Eut a long and general famine was a calamity of amore serious kind. It was the inevitable consequence of rapine andoppression, which extirpated the produce of the present, and thehope of future, harvests. Famine is almost always followed by epi­demical diseases, the effect of scanty and unwholesome food. Other
causes







OCR Output








,48 THE DECLINE AND FALL


the temples dedicated to the goddess of Peace and to the genius ofRome 71. These monuments of architecture, the property of theRoman people, were adorned with the most beautiful productionsof Grecian painting and sculpture; and in the temple of Peace, avery curious library was open to the curiosity of the learned. Ata small distance from thence was situated the Forum of Trajan. It wassurrounded with a lofty portico, and in the centre arose a columnof marble, whose height, of one hundred and ten feet, denoted theelevation of the hill that had been cut away. This column, whichstill subsists in its ancient beauty, exhibited an exact representationof the Dacian victories of its founder. The veteran soldier con­templated the story of his own c-ampaigns, and by an easy illusionof national vanity, the peaceful citizen associated himself to thehonours of the triumph. All the other quarters of the capital, andall the provinces of the empire, were embellished by the same liberalspirit of public magnificence, and were silled with amphitheatres,theatres, temples, porticos, triumphal arches, baths, and aqueducts,all variously conducive to the health, the devotion, and the pleasuresof the meanest citizen. The last mentioned of those edificesdeserve our peculiar attention. The boldness of the enterprise,the solidity of the execution, and the uses to which they weresubservient, rank the aqueducts among the noblest monuments ofRoman genius and power. The aqueducts of the capital claim ajust pre-eminence; but the curious traveller, who, without the lightof history, should examine those of Spoleto, of Metz, or of Segovia,would very naturally conclude, that those provincial towns hadformerly been the residence of some potent monarch. The solitudesof Asia and Africa were once covered with flouristiing cities, whosepopulousness, and even whose existence was dei.'Ved from such ar­tificial supplies of a perennial stream of frefli waterNumber and We have computed the inhabitants, and contemplated the public
greatness of _wort8 Qf tne Roman empire. The observation of the number andthe cries ot *
the empire. greatness







OCR Output








xvi NOTES ON THE FOURTH CHAPTER.


denly left him, and they returned as suddenly uponthe murder of that excellent prince. Dio, 1. lxxiii.p. 1227.
[43] The prefects were changed almost hourlyor daily; and the caprice of Commodus was oftenfatal to his most favoured chamberlains. Hist.August, p. 46. 51.
[44] Dio, 1. lxxii. p. 1222. Herodian, 1. i. p. 43.Hist. August, p- 5 2.
[45] Pertinax was a native of Alba Pompeia, inPiedmont, and son of a timber merchant. Theorder of his employments (it is marked by Capi-tolinus) well deserves to be set down as expressiveof the form of government and manners of theage. 1. He was a centurion, 2. Præfect of acohort in Syria, in the Parthian war, and in Bri­tain. 3. He obtained an Ala, or squadron of horse,in Maesia. 4. He was commissary of provisions00 the Æmilian way. ;. He commanded the fleetupon the Rhine. 6. He was procurator of Dacia,with a salary of about i6col. a year. 7. Hecommanded the Veterans of a legion. 8. He ob­tained the rank of senator. 9. Of prætor. 10.With the command of the first legion in Rhætia andNoricum. 11. He was consul about the year 17;.12. He attended Marcus into the east. 13. Hecommanded an army on the Danube. 14. He wasconsular legate of Mæsia. 15. Us Dacia. 16.Of Syria. 17. Of Britain. 18. He had the careof the public provisions at Rome. 19. He wasproconsul of Africa. 20. Præfect of the city. He­rodian (1. i. p. 48.) does justice to his disinterestedspirit; but Capitolinus, who collected every popu­lar rumor, charges him with a great fortune ac­quired by bribery and corruption.
[46] Julian, in the Cæsars, taxes him with beingaccessary to the death of Commodus.
[47] Capitolinus gives us the particulars of thesetumultuary votes which were moved by one senator,and repeated, or rather chanted by the whole body.Hist. August, p. 52.


[48] The senate condemned Nero to be put todeath mort majerum. Sueton. c. 49.
[49] Dio (1. lxxiii. p. 1223) speaks of theseentertainments, as a senator who had supped withthe emperor. Capitolinus (Hist. August, p. 58.)like a slave, who had received his intelligence fromone of the scullions.
[50] Decies. The blameless oeconomy of Pius, lefthis successors a treasure of view ftptitt milliu, abovetwo and twenty millions sterling. Dio, 1. lxxiii.p. 1231.
[51] Besides the design of converting these use­less ornaments into money. Dio (1. lxxiii. p. 1229.)assigns two secret motives of Pertinax. He wishedto expose the vices of Commodus, and to disco­ver by the purchasers those who most resembledhim.
[ 5 2] Though Capiteliftut has picked up many idletales of the private life of Pertinax, he joins withDio and Herodian in admiring his public conduct.
[93] Leges, rem furdam inexotabilera efle. T.
Liv. ii. 3.
[^4] If we credit Capitolinns (which is ratherdifficult) Falco behaved with the most petulant in­decency to Pertinax, on the day of his accession.The wife emperor only admonished him of hisyouth and inexperience. Hist. August, p. 55.
[55] The modern bishopric of Liege. Thissoldier probably belonged to the Batavian horse-guards, who were mostly raised in the dntchy ofGueldres and the neighbourhood, and were distin­guished by their valour, and by the boldnese withwhich they swam their horses acrose the broadestand most rapid rivers. Tacit. Hist., iv. 12. Dio,1. Iv. p. 797. Lipsius de magnitudine Romana,1. i. c. 4.
[56] Dio, 1. lxxiii. p. 1232. Herodian, 1. ii.p. to. Hist. August, p. 58. Victor in Epitom.& in- Cæsarib. Eutropius, viii. 16.


NOTES







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 193


new doctrine of submission to the senate ; and whatever clemencywas affected by that politic assembly, they dreaded a flow revenge,coloured by the name of discipline, and justified by fair pretencesof the public good. But their fate was still in their own hands,and if they had courage to despise the vain terrors of an impotentrepublic, it was easy to convince the world, that those who weremasters of the arms, were masters of the authority of the state.
When the senate elected two prinees, it is probable that, besides Massacre ofthe declared reason of providing for the various emergencies of Baibinu«.peace and war, they were actuated by the secret desire of weakenr-ing by division the despotism of the supreme magistrate. Theirpolicy was effectual, but it proved fatal both to their emperors andto themselves. The jealousy of power was soon exasperated by thedifference of character. Maximus despised Balbinus as a luxuriousnoble, and was in his turn disdained by his colleague as an obseuresoldier. Their silent discord was understood rather than seen 41;but the mutual consciousness prevented them from uniting in anyvigorous measures of defence against their common enemies of thePraetorian camp. The whole city was employed in the Capkoline A D t}Sgames* ami the emperors were left almost alone in the palace. On July «5«a sudden they were alarmed by the approach of a troop of desperateafiaflins. Ignorant of each other's situation or designs, for they al­ready occupied very distant apartments, afraid to give or to receiveassistance, they wasted the important moments in idle debates andfruitless recriminations. The arrival of the guards put an end tothe vain strife. They seized on these emperors of the senate, forsuch they called them with malicious contempt, stripped rhem oftheir garments, and dragged them in insolent triumph through thestreets of Rome, with a design of inflicting a slow and cruel deathon these unfortunate princes. The fear of a rescue from the faith­ful-Germans of the Imperial guards, shortened their tortures, and
Vol. I. C c their







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. ij


fortified cities, which the Romans considered as the" refuge of weak­ness or pusillanimity, the legions were encamped on the banks ofthe great rivers, and along the frontiers of the barbarians. As theirstations, for the most part, remained fixed and permanent, we may-venture to describe the distribution of the troops. Three legioaswere sufficient for Britain. The principal strength lay upon theRhine and Danube, and consisted of sixteen legions, in the follow­ing proportions; two in the Lower, and three in the Upper Germany;one in Rhætia, one in Noricum, four in Pannonia, three in Mæsia,and two in Dacia. The defence of the Euphrates was intrusted toeight legions, six of whom were placed in Syria, and the other twoin Cappadocia. With regard to Egypt, Africa, and Spain, as theywere far removed from any important scene of war, a single legionmaintained the domestic tranquillity of each of those great provinces.Even Italy was not left destitute of a military force. Above twentythousand chosen soldiers, distinguished by the titles of City Cohortsand Praetorian Guards, watched over the safety of the monarch andthe capital. As the authors of almost every revolution that distractedthe empire, the prætorians will, very soon, and very loudly demandour attention; but, in their arms and institutions, we cannot findany circumstance which discriminated them from the legions, unlessit were a more splendid appearance, and a less rigid discipline 6j.
The navy maintained by the emperors might seem inadequate to Navy,their greatness; but it was fully sufficient for every useful purposeof government. The ambition of the Romans was confined to theland; nor was that warlike people ever actuated by the enter­prising spirit which had prompted the navigators of Tyre, of Car­thage, and even of Marseilles, to enlarge the bounds of the worldand to explore the most remote coasts of the ocean. To the Romansthe ocean remained an object of terror rather than of curiosity 66; thewhole extent of the Mediterranean, after the destruction of Carthage,and the extirpation of the pirates, was included within their pro-
Vol. I. D vinces.







OCR Output








£T28 THE DECLINE AND FALL


means riches and despotism could penetrate into a remote corner ofthe North, and extinguish the generous flame that blazed with suchfierceness on the frontier of the Roman provinces: or how the an­cestors of those Danes and Norwegians, so distinguished in laterages by their unconquered spirit, could thus tamely resign the greatcharacter of German liberty **. Some tribes, however, on the coastof the Baltic, acknowledged the authority of kings, though withoutrelinquishing the rights of men ;but in the far greater part ofGermany, the form of government was a democracy, tempered, in­deed, and controuled, not so much by general and positive laws, asby the occasional ascendant of birth or valour, of eloquence or su­perstition **.
Assemblies of Civil governments, in their first institutions, are voluntary asso-the people. ciations for mutual defence. To obtain the desired end, it is abso­lutely necessary, that each individual should conceive himself obligedto submit his private opinion and actions, to the judgment of thegreater number of his associates. The German tribes were contentedwith this rude but liberal outline of political society. As soon as ayouth, born of free parents, had attained the age of manhood, hewas introduced into the general council of his countrymen, solemnlyinvested with a shield and spear, and adopted as an equal and worthymember of the military commonwealth. The assembly of the war­riors of the tribe was convened at stated seasons, or on sudden emer-gencies* The trial of public offences, the election of magistrates* andthe great business of peace and war, were determined by its inde­pendent voice. Sometimes, indeed, these important questions wereprevioufly considered; and prepared in a more select council of the-principal chieftains45. The magistrates might deliberate and per­suade, the people only could resolve and execute; and the resolu­tions of the Germans were fbr the most part hasty and violent.Barbarians accustomed to place their freedom in gratifying thepresent passion, and their courage in overlooking all future conse­quences,







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AND FALL


increased, the pretences of levying it, a victory, a birth, a marriage, oran imperial consulship, were proportionally multiplied4+. Maxentiushad imbibed the fame implacable aversion to the senate, which hadcharacterised most of the former tyrants of Rome: nor was it possiblefor his ungrateful temper to forgive the generous fidelity whichhad raised him to the throne, and supported him against all hisenemies. The lives of the senators were exposed to his jealoussuspicions, the dishonour of their wives and daughters heightenedthe gratification of his sensual passions 4S. It may be presumed,that an imperial lover was seldom reduced to sigh in vain ; butwhenever persuasion proved ineffectual, he had recourse to violence;and there remains one memorable example of a noble matron,who preserved her chastity by a voluntary death. The soldierswere the only order of men whom he appeared to respect, orstudied to please. He filled Rome and Italy with armed troops*connived at their tumults, suffered them with impunity to plunder,and even to massacre, the defenceless people 46, and indulgingthem in the fame licentiousness which their emperor enjoyed,Maxentius often bestowed on his military favourites the splendidvilla, or the beautiful wife of a senator. A prince of such &character, alike incapable of governing either in peace or in warrmight purchase the support, but he could never obtain the esteemof the army. Yet his pride was equal to his other vices. Whilsthe passed his indolent life, either within the walls of his palace,or in the neighbouring gardens of Sallust, he was repeatedly heard!to declare, that he alone was emperor, and that the other princeswere no more than his lieutenants, on whom he had devolved thedefence of the frontier provinces, that he might enjoy withoutinterruption the elegant luxury of the capital. Rome, which had:fo long regretted the absence, lamented, during the six years of hi*reign, the presence of her sovereign *\
Though







OCR Output








9a THE DECLINE AND. FALL


Condianus; whose fraternal love has saved their names from obli­vion, and endeared their memory to posterity. Their studies andtheir occupations, their pursuits and their pleasures, were still thefame. In the enjoyment of a great estate, they never admitted theidea of a separate interest; some fragments are now extant of a-treatise which they composed in common; and in every action oflife it was observed, that their two bodies were animated by one foul.The Antonines, who valued their virtues, and delighted in theirunion, raised them, in the some year, to the consulship; andMarcus afterwards intrusted to their joint care, the civil admi­nistration of Greece, and a great military command, in which theyobtained a signal victory over the Germans. The kind cruelty of. . Commodus united them in death ' •.The minister The tyrant's rage, after having shed the noblest blood of the se­nate, at length recoiled on the principal instrument of his cruelty.Whilst Commodus was immersed in blood and luxury, he devolvedthe detail of the public business on Perennis ; a servile and ambitiousminister, who had obtained his post by the murder of his predecessor,but who possessed a considerable share of vigour and ability. Byacts of extortion, and the forfeited estates of the nobles sacrificed tohis avarice, he had accumulated an immense treasure. The Præ­torian guard's were under his immediate command; and his son,who already discovered a military genius, was at the head of theIllyrian legions. Perennis aspired to the empire; or what, in theeyes of Commodus, amounted to the fame crime, he was capableof aspiring to it, had he not been prevented, surprised, and put tot8ty death. The fall of a minister is a very trifling incident in. thegeneral history of the empire; but it was hastened by an extra­ordinary circumstance, which proved how much the nerves of dis­cipline were already relaxed. The legions of Britain, discontentedwith the administration of Perennis, formed a deputation of fifteenhundred select men, with instructions to march to Rome, and lay


their







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 209


dominion over so many vassal kings. Even tribes of barbarians intheir mountain?, and the Greek cities of Upper Asia JI, within theirwalls, scarcely acknowledged, or at least obeyed, any superior; andthe Parthian empire exhibited, under other names, a lively image ofthe feudal system 51 which has since prevailed in Europe. But theactive victor, at the head of a numerous and disciplined army, visitedin person every province of Persia. The defeat of the boldest rebels,and the reduction of the strongest fortifications diffused the terrorof "his arms, and prepared the way for the peaceful reception of hisauthority. An obstinate resistance was fatal to the chiefs; but theirfollowers were treated with lenity '*. A cheerful submission wasrewarded with honours and riches; hut the prudent ArtaxerxCs,suffering no person except himself to assume the title of king, abo­lished every intermediate power between the throne and the people.His kingdom, nearly equal in extent to modern Persia, was, on every Extent and
. population of
fide, bounded by the sea or by great rivers; by the Euphrates, the Persia.Tigris, the Araxes, the Oxus, and the Indus, by the Caspian sea,and the gulph of Persia. That country was computed to contain inthe last century, five hundred and fifty-four cities, sixty thousandvillages, and about forty millions of fouls If we compare theadministration of the house of Sassan with that of the house of Sefi,the political influence of the Magian with that of the Mahometanreligion, we shall probably infer, that the kingdom of Artaxerxescontained at least as great a number of cities, villages, and inhabit­ants. But it must likewise be confessed, that in every age thewant of harbours on the sea coast, and the scarcity of frefli waterin the inland provinces, have been very unfavourable to the com­merce and agriculture of the Persians; who, in the calculation oftheir numbers, seem to have indulged one of the meanest, thoughmost common artifices, of national vanity.
As soon as the ambitious mind of Artaxerxes had triumphed over Recapitula­te resistance of his vassals, he began to threaten the neighbouring war between
tv, t 17 n thePaithian
Vol. I. E e • states,







OCR Output








vi NOTES ON THE SECOND CHAPTER.


[13] Seneca Consolat. ad Helvian, p. 74. Edit.Lips.
[14] Dionysius Halicarn. Antiquitat. Roman.1. ii.
[15] In the year of Rome 701, the temple ofIii s and Serapis was demolished by the order of thesenate, (Dion Cassius, 1. xl. p. 252) and even by thehandtof the consul (ValeriusMaximus.i. 3.). After thedeath of Cæsar, it was restored at the public expence(Dion, 1. xlvii. p. 501.) When Augustus was in Egypthe revered the majesty of Serapis, (Dion, 1. H.p. 647.) but in the Pomærium of Rome, and a mileround it, he prohibited the worship of the Egyptiangods (Dion, 1. liii. p. 679. 1. liv. p. 735.). Theyremained, however, very fashionable under hisreign, (Ovid, de Art. Amand. 1. i.) and that of hissuccessor, till the justice of Tiberius was provokedto some acts of severity. (See Tacit. Annal. ii. 85.Joseph Antiquit. 1. xviit. c. 3.)
[16] Tertullianin Apologetic, c. 6. p. 74. Edit,Havercamp. I am inclined to attribute their esta­blishment to the devotion of the Flavian family.
[17] See Livy, 1. xi and xxix.
[18] Macrob. Saturnalia, I. iii. c. 9. He givesus a form of evocation.
[19] MJnutius F-elixin Oflavio, p. 54. Arno-bius, 1. vi. p. 115.
[20] Tacit. Annal. xi. 24. The Orbis Romanusof the learned Spanheim, is a complete history of theprogressive admission ofLatium, Italy, and the pro­vinces, to the freedom of Rome.
[21] Herodctus, v. 97. It mould seem, however, that he followed a large and popular estima­tion.
[22] Athenxus Deipnosophist, 1. vi. p. 2;2."Edit. Casaubon. Meurfiusde Fortuna Attica, c. 4.
[2-3] See a very accurate collection of the num­bers of each Lustrum in M de Beaufort, Republi-que Romaine, 1. iv. c. 4.
[24] Appian de Bell, civil. 1. i. Velleius Pa-lerculuj, l. ii. c 15, 16, 17.
[25] Mæcenas had advised him to declare by oneedict, all his subjects, citizens. But we may justly
S


suspect that the historian Dion was the author of acouncil, so much adapted to the practice of his ownage, and so little to that of Augustus.
[26] The senators were obliged to have one thirdof their own landed property in Italy, See Plin.1. vi. ep. 19. The qualification was reduced byMarcus to one fourth. Since the reign of Trajan,Italy had funk nearer to the level of the provinces.
[27] The first part of the Verona illustrata of themarquis Massei, gives the clearest and most com­prehensive view of the state of Italy under theCæsars.
[28] See Pausanias, 1. vii. The Romans con­descended to restore the names of those assemblies,when they could no longer be dangerous.
[29] They are frequently mentioned by Cæsar.The Abbe Dubos attempts, with very little success,to prove that the assemblies of Gaul were continuedunder the emperors. Histoire de l'Etablissement deMonarchic Francoisc, 1. i. c. 4.
[ 3o] Seneca in Consolat. ad Helviam, c. 6.
[31] Memnon apud Photium, c. 33. Va-ler. Maxim, ix. 2. Plutarch and Dion Caffius swellthe massacre to 1; 0,000 citizens; but I stiould esteemthe smaller number to be more than sufficient.
[32] Twenty-five colonies were settled in Spain(see Plin. Hist. Natur. iii. 3, 4. iv. 55): and ninein Britain, of which London, Colchester, Lincoln,Chester, Gloucester, and Bath, still remain con­siderable cities (fee Richard of Cirencester, p. 36,and Whitaker's History of Manchester, 1 i. c. 3).
[33] Aul. GelL Noctes Atticas, xvi. 13. Theemperor Hadrian expressed his surprise, that thecities of Utica, Gades, and Itatica, which alreadyenjoyed the rights of Munkipia, (hould solicit thetitle of cehnits. Their example, however, becamefashionable, and the empire was filled with hono­rary colonies. See Spanheim, de Ufa Numisinatum,Dissertat. xiii.
[34] Spanheim, Orbis Roman, c. 8. p. 6z.
[3;] Aristid. in Romae Encomio, torn. i. p.218. Edit. Jebb.
[36] Tacit. Annal. xi. 23, 24. Hist. if. 74.
t37] Sec







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. S7S


which had required the direct and solemn testimony of an accuser,it became the duty as well as interest of the imperial officers, todiscover, to pursue, and to torment, the most obnoxious among thefaithful. Heavy penalties were denounced against all who shouldpresume to save a proscribed sectary from the just indignation ofthe gods, and of the emperors. Yet, notwithstanding the severity ofthis law, the virtuous courage of many of the Pagans, in concealingtheir friends or relations, affords an honourable proof, that therage of superstition had not extinguished in their minds the senti­ments of nature and humanity ,6'.
Diocletian had no sooner published his edicts against the Chri- Geneial idea
. r . . of the perse-
ftians, than, as if he had been desirous of committing to other cutionhands the work of persecution, he divested himself of the imperialpurple. The character and situation of his colleagues and successorssometimes urged them to enforce, and sometimes inclined themto suspend the execution of these rigorous laws; nor can we ac­quire a just and distinct idea of this important period of eccle­siastical history, unless we separately consider the state of Chri­stianity, in the different parts of the empire, during the space often years, which elapsed between the first edicts of Diocletian, andthe final peace of the ehurch.
The mild and humane temper of Cbnstantius Was averse to the in the westernoppression of any part of his subjects. The principal offices of his CoMta"-"palace were exercised by Christians. He loved their persons, esteemed Jj"*^.00""their fidelity, and entertained not any dislike to their religious prin­ciples. But as long as Constantius remained in the subordinatestation of Cæsar, it was not in his power openly to reject the edictsof Diocletian, or to disobey the commands of Maxhnian. Hi*authority contributed, however, to alleviate the sufferings which hepitied and abhorred. He consented, with reluctance, to the ruin ofthe churches ; but he ventured to protect the Christians themselvesfrom the fury of the populace, and from the rigour of the laws-.'! S The







OCR Output








58 2 THE DECLINE AND FALL


End of thepersecutions.


Probable ac­count of thesufferings ofthe martyrsand confes­sors.


he obtained from the citizens of Tyre is still extant. He praisestheir zeal and devotion in terms of the highest satisfaction, descants onthe obstinate impiety of the Christians, and betrays, by the readinesswith which he consents to their banishment, that he considered him­self as receiving, rather than as conferring, an obligation. The priestsas well as the magistrates were empowered to enforce the executionof his edicts which were engraved on tables of brass; and though itwas recommended to them to avoid the effusion of blood, the mostcruel and ignominious punishments were inflicted on the refractoryChristians
The Asiatic Christians had every thing to dread from the severityof a bigoted monarch, who prepared his measures of violence withsuch deliberate policy. But a few months had scarcely elapsed, be­fore the edicts publistied by the two western emperors obliged Maxi-min to suspend the prosecution of his designs: the civil war which heso rashly undertook against Licinius employed all his attention; andthe defeat and death of Maximin soon delivered the church from thelast and most implacable~of her enemies ,7<s.
In this general view of the persecution, which was first authorizedby the edicts of Diodesian, I have purposely refrained from describ­ing the particular sufferings and deaths of the Christian martyrs. Itwould have been an easy task, from the history of Eusebius, fromthe declamations of Lactantius, and from the most ancient acts, tocollect a long series of horrid and disgustful pictures, and to fillmany pages with racks and scourges, with iron hooks, and red-hotbeds, and with all the variety of tortures which fire and steel, savagebeasts and more savage executioners, could inflict on the humanbody. These melancholy scenes might be enlivened by a crowd ofvisions and miracles destined either to delay the death, to celebratethe triumph, or to discover the relics of those canonized saints whosuffered for the name of Christ. But I cannot determine what I oughtto transcribe, till I am satisfied how much I ought to believe. The
gravest







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AND FALt


of Europe, never made any considerable progress in the East. Thosedisciplined evolutions which harmonize and animate a confusedmultitude, were unknown to the Persians. They were equally un-stcilled in the arts of constructing, .besieging, or defending regularfortifications. They trusted more to their numbers than to theirt^vee 't'™ t c<HiraSe 5 more to their courage than to their discipline. The infantryjble. * was a half-armed spiritless crowd of peasants, levied in haste by theallurements of plunder, and as easily dispersed by a victory as by adefeat. The monarch and his nobles transported into the campthe pride and luxury of the seraglio. Their military operationswere impeded by a useless train of women, eunuchs, horses, and ca­mels, and in the midst of a successful campaign, the Persian hostwas often separated or destroyed by an unexpected famineTheir cavalry But the nobles of Persia, in the bosom of luxury and despotism,preserved a strong sense of personal gallantry and national honour.From the age of seven years they were taught lo speak truth, toshoot with the bow, and to ride; and it was universally confessed,that in the two last of these arts, they had made a more than com­mon proficiency s6. The most distinguished youth were educatedunder the monarch's eye, practised their exercises in the gate of hispalace, and were severely trained up to the habits of .temperance andobedience, in their long and laborious parties of hunting. Inevery province, the satrap maintained a like school of militaryvirtue. The Persian nobles (so natural is the idea of feudal tenures)received from the king's bounty lands and houses, on the conditionof their-service in war. They were ready .on the first summons tomount.on .^horseback, with a martial and splendid train of follow­ers, and to join the numerous bodies of guards, who were care­fully selected from among the most robust slaves, and the bravest ad­venturers of Asia. These armies, both of light and of heavy cavalry,equally formidable by the impetuosity of their charge, and therapidity of their motions, threatened, as an impending cloud, thepastern provinces of the .declining empire of Rome
CHAP.







OCR Output








Ix NOTES ON THE FOURTEENTH CHAPTER.


[24] The vith Panegyric was pronounced to ce­lebrate ilie elevation of Constantino; but the pru­dent orator avoids the mention either of Galeriusor of Maxentius. He introduces only one flightallusion to the actual troubles, and to the majesty,of Rome.
[25] With regard to this negociation, fee thefragments of an anonymous Historian, published byValerius at the end of his edition of ArnmianusMarcellinus, p. 711. These fragments have fur­nished us with several curious, and as it should seemauthentic, anecdotes.
[zf>] Lactantius, de M. P. c. a8. The formwof these reasons is probably taken from Virgil'sShepherd; "Illam ego huic nostræ simrlem Me-
libxe putavi, &c." Laitantius delights in thesepoetical allusions.
[27] Castra super Tusci si ponere Tybridis undas;(jubtas)
Hcsperios audax veniam metator in agros.
Tu quoscunque voles in planum efFundere muros,
His aries actus disperget saxa lacertis;
Ilia licet penitus tolli quam jusseris urbem
Roma sit. Lucan. Pharsal. i. 381.
[28] Lactantius de M. P. c. 27. Zosim. I. ii.p. 82. The latter insinuates, that Constantine, inhis interview with Maximian, had promised to de­clare war against Galerius.
• [29] M. de Tillemont (Hist, des Empereurs,torn. iv. part i. p. 559.) has proved, that Licinius,without passing through the intermediate rank ofCitsar, was declared Augustus, the nth of Novem­ber, A. D. 307, after the return of Galerius fromItaly.
[30] Lactantius de M. P. c. 32. When Ga­lerius declared Licinius Augustus with himself, hetried to satisfy his younger associates, by inventing,for Constantine and Maximin (not Maxtntiui, feeEaluze, p. 81.) the new title of sons of the Augusti.But when Maximin acquainted him that he hadbeen saluted Augustus by the army, Galerius wasobliged to acknowledge him, as well as Constan­tine, as equal associates in the Imperial dignity.
[31] See Panegyr. Vet. vi. 9. Audi doloris nostriliberam vocem, &c. the whole passage is imagined


with artful flattery, and expressed with an easyflow of eloquence.
[32] Lactantius de M. P. c. 28. Zosim. 1. ii.p. tiz. A report was spread, that Maxentius wasthe son of some obscure Syrian, and had been substi­tuted by the wise of Maximian as her own child.See Aurelius Victor, Anonym. Valesian, and Pan­egyr. Vet. ix. 3. 4.
[31] Ab urbe pulsum, ab Italia fugatum, ab>lllyrico repudiatum, tuis provineiis, tuis copiis, tuopalatio recepisti. Eumen.in i'anegyr. Vet. vii. 14.
[34] Lactantius de M. P. c. 29. Yet after theresignation of the purple, Constantine still continuedto Maximian the pomp and honours of the Imperialdignity; and on all public occasions gave theright-hand place to his father-in-law. Panegyr.Vet. vii. 15.
[35] Zosim. 1. ii. p. 82. Eumenius in Panegyr.Vet. vii. 16—21. The latter of these has un­doubtedly represented the whole affair in the mostfavourable light for his sovereign. Yet even from hispartial narrative we may conclude, that the repeatedclemency of Constantine, and the reiterated treasonsof Maximian, as they arc described by Lactantius(de M. P. c. 29, 30.), and copied by the moderns,are destitute of any historical foundation.
[36] Aurelius Victor, c. 40. But that lake wassituated in the Upper Pannonia, near th« borders ofNoricum; and the province of Valeria (a namewhich the wife of Galerius gave to [the drainedcountry) undoubtedly lay between the Drave andthe Danube (Sextus Rufus, c. c.). I ihould there­fore suspect that Victor has confounded the lakePelso, with the Volocean marshes, or, as they arenow called, the Jake Sabaton. It is placed in theheart of Valeria, and its present extent is not lessthan 12 Hungarian miles (about 70 English) inlength, and two in breadth. See Severini Panno­nia, 1. i. c. 9.
[57] Lactantius (de M. P. c. 33.) and Eusebius(1. viii. c. 16.) describe the symptoms and pro­gress of his disorder with singular accuracy and ap­parent pleasure.
[38] If any (like the late Dr. Jortin, Remarksof Ecclesiastical history, vol. ii. p. 307—356.) still
delight.







OCR Output








GF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


seen by the primitive Christians in a much more odious and formid­able light. It was the universal sentiment both of the church andof heretics, that the dæmons were the authors, the patrons, andthe objects of idolatry 57. Those rebellious spirits who had beendegraded from the rank of angels, and cast down into the infernalpit, were still permitted to roam upon earth, to torment the bodies,and to seduce the minds of sinful men. They soon discoveredand abused the natural propensity of the human heart towardsdevotion, and, artfully withdrawing the adoration of mankind fromtheir Creator, they usurped the place and honours of the SupremeDeity. By the success of their malicious contrivances, they at oncegratified their own vanity and revenge, and obtained the onlycomfort of which they were yet susceptible, the hope of involvingthe human species in the participation of their guilt and misery.It was confessed, or at least it was imagined, that they had dis­tributed among themselves the most important characters of poly­theism, one dæmon assuming the name and attributes of Jupiter,another of Æsculapius, a third of Venus, and a fourth perhaps ofApollo38; and that by the advantage of their long experience andaerial nature, they were enabled to execute, with sufficient skill and^ignity, the parts which they had undertaken. They lurkedin the temples, instituted festivals and sacrifices, invented fables,pronounced oracles, and were frequently allowed to perform,miracles. The Christians, who, by the interposition of thedæmons, could so readily explain every præternatural appear­ance, were disposed and even desirous to admit the most extra­vagant fictions of the Pagan mythology. But the belief of theChristian was accompanied with horror. The most trifling mark ofrespect to the national worship he. considered as a direct homageyielded to the dæmon, and as an act of rebellion against the majestyof God.
i la.







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. J57


to restore the glories and felicity of the age of the genuine An-tonines 7*«
In the civil administration of Alexander, wisdom was enforced He attemptshy power, and the people, sensible of the public felicity, repaid army,their benefactor with their love and gratitude. There still remained agreater, a more necessary, but a more difficult enterprise; the refor­mation of the military order, whose interest and temper, confirmed bylong impunity, rendered them impatient of the restraints of dis­cipline, and careless of the blessings of public tranquillity. In theexecution of his design the emperor affected to display his love,and to conceal his fear, of the army. The most rigid œconomyin every other branch of the administration, supplied a fund of goldand silver for the ordinary pay and the extraordinary rewards ofthe troops. In their marches he relaxed the severe obligation ofcarrying seventeen days provision on their shoulders. Amplemagazines were formed along the public roads, and as soon as theyentered the enemy's country, a numerous train of mules and camekwaited on their haughty laziness. As Alexander despaired ofcorrecting the luxury of his soldiers, he attempted, at least, to di­rect it to objects of martial pomp and ornament, fine horses, fplenrdid armour, and shields enriched with silver and gold. He sharedwhatever fatigues he was obliged to impose, visited, in person, thesick and wounded, preserved an exact register of their servicesand his own gratitude, and expressed, on every occasion, thewarmest regard for a body of men, whose welfare, as he affectedto declare, was so closely connected with that of the state 7\ Bythe most gentle arts he laboured to inspire the fierce multitudewith a sense of duty, and to restore at least a faint image of thatdiscipline, to which the Romans owed their empire over so manyother nations> as warlike and more powerful than themselves. Buthis prudence was vain, his courage fatal, and the attempt towardsa reformation served only to inflame the ills it was meant to cure.
The







OCR Output








328 THE DECLINE AND FALL


confidence8"*1 Circular epistles were sent, without delay, to all the principal■ cities of the empire, Treves, Milan, Aquileia, Thessalonica, Corinth,Athens, Antioch, Alexandria, and Carthage, to claim their obe­dience, and to inform them of the happy revolution, which hadrestored the Roman senate to its ancient dignity. Two of theseepistles are still extant. We likewise possess two very singular frag­ments of the private correspondence of the senators on this oc­casion. They discover the most excessive joy, and the most un­bounded hopes. "Cast away your indolence,'' it is thus that oneof the senators addresses his friend, " emerge from your retire-"ments of Baiæ and Puteoli. Give yourself to the city, to the"senate. Rome flourishes, the whole republic flourishes. Thanks".to the Roman army, to an army truly Roman; at length, we"have recovered our just authority, the end of all our desires."We hear appeals, we appoint proconsuls, we create emperors:"perhaps too we may restrain them—to the wife, a word is suffi-(* cient These lofty expectations were, however, soon dis­appointed; nor, indeed, was it possible, that the armies and theprovinces should long obey the luxurious and unwarlike nobles ofRome. On the flightest touch, the unsupported fabric of theirpride and power fell to the ground. The expiring senate displayeda sudden lustre, blazed for a moment, and was extinguished forever.
A. D. 276. All that had yet passed at Rome was no more than a theatrical
Tacius is ac­knowledged representation, unless it was ratified by the more substantial power
by the army. ^ ^ legions. Leaving the senators to enjoy their dream of free­dom and ambition, Tacitus proceeded to the Thracian camp, and wasthere, by the Prætorian præfect, presented to the assembled troops,as the prince whom they themselves had demanded, and whom thesenate had bestowed. As soon as the præfect was silent, the em­peror addressed himself to the soldiers with eloquence and propriety.
He







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AND FALL


mon soldiers, like the mercenary troops of modern Europe, wer*drawn from the meanest, and very frequently from the most pro­fligate of mankind.
The ancient virtue of patriotism is derived from a strong fenseof our own interest, in the preservation and prosperity of thefree government of which we are members. Such a sentiment,which had rendered the legions of the republic almost invincible,could make but a very feeble impression on the mercenary servantsof a despotic prince; and it became necessary to supply that defectby other motives, of a different,, but very forcible nature; honourand religion. The peasant, or mechanic, imbibed the useful,prejudice that he was advanced to the more dignified profession ofarms, in which his rank and reputation would depend on his ownvalour: and that, although the prowess of a private soldier mightescape the notice of fame, it would be in his power to confer gloryor disgrace on the company, the legion, or even the army, to whosehonours he was associated. On his first entrancg, into the service, anoath was administered to him, with every circumstance of solemnity..He promised never to desert his standard, to submit his own willto the commands of his leaders, and to sacrifice his life for the safetyof the emperor and, the empire ". The attachment of the Romantroops to their standards, was inspired by the united influence of re­ligion and of honour. The golden . eagle, which glittered in thefront of the legion, was the object of their fondest devotion j norwas it esteemed less impious, than it was ignominious, to abandon thatsacred ensign in the hour of danger These motives, which de­rived their strength from the imagination, were enforced by fearsand hopes of a more substantial kind. Regular pay, occasional do­natives, and a stated recompence, after the appointed term ofservice, alleviated the hardships of the military life55, whilst, on.theother hand, it was impossible for cowardice or disobedience to escapethe severest punishment. The centurions had a right to punish with
blows}







OCR Output








366 THE DECLINE AND FALL


set fire to his ships; and as the expedition proved fortunate, hl«heroic conduct: was universally admired. The usurper had postedhimself near. London, to expect:' the formidable attack of Con-stantius, who commanded in person the fleet of Boulogne; butthe descent of a new enemy required his immediate presence in thewest. He performed that long march in so precipitate a manner,that he encountered the whole force of the przefect with a smallbody of harassed and disheartened troops. The engagement was.soon terminated by the total defeat and death of Allectus; a singlebattle, as it has often happened, deckled the fate of this greatisland; and when Gonstantius landed on the shores of Kent, hefound them covered with obedient subjects. Their acclamationswere loud and unanimous; and the virtues, of the conqueror mayinduce us to believe, that they sincerely rejoiced in a revolution,which, after a separation of ten years, restored Britain to the bodyof the Roman empireDesenceof Britain had none but domestic enemies to dread; and as Ions: as
the iron tiers. 0
the governors preserved their fidelity, and the troops their disci­pline, the incursions of the Scots or Irish could never materiallyaffect the safety of the province. The peace of the continent, andthe defence of the great rivers which bounded the empire, were ob­jects of far greater difficulty and importance. The policy of Dio­cletian, which inspired the councils of his associates, provided forthe public tranquillity, by encouraging a spirit of dissension amongthe barbarians, and by strengthening the fortifications of theFortifications. Roman limit. In the East he fixed a line of camps from Egypt tothe Persian dominions, and, for every camp, he instituted anadequate number of stationary troops, commanded by their respec­tive officers, and supplied with every kind of arms, from the newarsenals which he had formed at Antioch, Emesa, and DamascusNor was the precaution of the emperor less watchful against thewell-known valour of the barbarians of Europe. From the mouth
of







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. Z&3


filled up their numbers, by insisting into the public service, thestoutest and most willing of the Plebeians. The Alemanni, asto­nished with the sudden appearance of an army more numerous thantheir own, retired into Germany, laden with spoil; and their retreatwas esteemed as a victory by the unwarlike Romans 39.
When Gallienus received the intelligence that his capital was de- The senators
. , excluded by
livered from the barbarians, he was much less delighted, than alarmed, Gallienuswith the courage of the senate, since it might one day prompt them tury service,to rescue the republic from domestic tyranny, as well as from foreigninvasion. His timid ingratitude was published to his subjects, inan edict which prohibited the senators from exercising any militaryemployment, and even from approaching the camps of the legions.But his fears were groundless. The rich and luxurious nobles>sinking into their natural character, accepted, as a favour, this dis­graceful exemption from military service; and as long as they wereindulged in the enjoyment of their baths, their theatres, and theirvillas; they cheerfully resigned the more dangerous cares of em­pire, to the rough hands of peasants and soldiers 90."
Another invasion of the Alemanni, of a more formidable aspect, Gallienus
contracts an
but more glorious event, is mentioned by a writer of the lower em- alliance with
c l-i the Altmannv
pire. Three hundred thousand of that warlike people are said tohave been vanquished, in a battle near Milan, by Gallienus in per­son, at the head of only ten thousand Romans 9'. We may how­ever, with great probability, ascribe this incredible victory, either tothe credulity of the historian, or to some exaggerated exploits of oneof the emperor's lieutenants. It was by arms of a very differentnature, that Gallienus endeavoured to protect Italy from the fury ofthe .Germans. He espoused Pipa the daughter of a king of theMarcomanni, a Suevic tribe, which was often confounded with theAlemanni in their wars and conquests **. To the father, as theprice of his alliance, he granted an ample settlement in Pannonia.The native charms of unpolished beauty seem to have fixed the
daughter







OCR Output








Of THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


formed to obey rather than so command, though, perhaps, he neverattained the skill of a consummate general, he was capable, by hisvalour, constancy, and experience, of executing the most arduousundertakings. Nor were the vices of Maximian less useful to hisbenefactor. Insensible to pity, and fearless of consequences, hewas the ready instrument of every act of cruelty which the policyof that artful prince might at once suggest and disclaim. As soonas a bloody sacrifice had been offered to prudence or to revenge,Diocletian, by his seasonable intercession, saved the remaining fewwhom he had never designed to punish, gently censured the severityof .his stern colleague, and enjoyed the comparison of a golden andan iron age, which was universally applied to their opposite maximsof government. Notwithstanding the difference of their characters,the two emperors maintained, on the throne, that friendship whichthey had contracted in a private station. The haughty turbulent*spirit of Maximian, so fatal afterwards to himself and to thepublic peace, was accustomed to respect the genius of Diocletian,,and confessed the ascendant of reason over brutal violence 8. Froma motive either of pride or superstition, the two emperors assumedthe titles, the one of Jovius, the other of Herculius. Whilst themotion of the world (such was the language of their venal orators)was maintained by the all-seeing wisdom of Jupiter, the invinciblearm of Hercules purged the earth of monsters and tyrants 9.
But even the omnipotence of Joviusand Herculius was insufficient to Association of
two Cæsars,
fdstain the weight of the public administration. The prudence of Dio- Galerius andcletian discovered, that the empire, assailed on every side by the barba- a. d. 292".rians, required on every side the presence of a great army, and of an Ma '*emperor. With this view he resolved once more to divide his unwieldypower, and with the inferior title of Cafars, to confer on two generalsof approved merit an equal share of the sovereign authority ". Ga* ■terius, surnamed Armentarius, from his original profession of aiierdsman, and Gonstantius, who from his pale complexion had
5 acquired







OCR Output








498 THE DECLINE AND FALL


abuse of their confidence could not be very frequent, and thegeneral uses to which their liberality was applied, reflected honouron the religious society. A decent portion was reserved for themaintainance of the bishop and his clergy; a sufficient sum wasallotted for the expences of the public worship, of which the feastsof love, the agapæ, as they were called, constituted a very pleasingand essential part. The w,hole remainder was the sacred patrimonyof the poor. According to the discretion of the bishop, it was dis­tributed to support widows and orphans, the lame, the sick, andthe aged of the community; to comfort strangers and pilgrims, andto alleviate the misfortunes of prisoners and captives, more especially ,when their sufferings had been occasioned by their firm attach­ment to the cause of religion "9. A generous intercourse of charityunited the most distant provinces, and the smaller congregationswere cheerfully assisted by the alms of their more opulent bre­thren ,4°. Such an institution, which paid less regard to the meritthan to the distress of the object, very materially conduced to theprogress of Christianity. The Pagans, who were actuated by a fenseof humanity, while they derided the doctrines, acknowledged thebenevolence of the new sect '*'. The prospect of immediate reliefand of future protection allured into its hospitable bosom manyof those unhappy persons whom the neglect of the world wouldhave abandoned to the miseries of want, of sickness, and of oldage. There is some reason likewise to believe, that great num­bers of infants, who, according to the inhuman practice of thetimes, had been exposed by their parents, were frequently rescuedfrom death, baptised, educated, and maintained by the piety ofthe Christians, and at the expence of the public treasure '**.Excommum ^' 1S undoubted right of every society to exclude fromcation. its communion and benefits, such among its members as reject orviolate those regulations which have been established by general con­sent. In the exercise of this- power, the censures of the Christian-
2 church;







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


** the empire, are all subject to your tribunal. None are exempted,** excepting only the ordinary consuls the praefect of the city,** the king of the sacrifices, and (as long as she preserves her cha-** stity inviolate) the eldest of the vestal virgins. Even these few,"who may not dread the severity, will anxiously solicit the esteem"of the Roman censor
A magistrate, invested with such extensive powers, would have ap- The designpeared not so much the minister aa the colleague of his sovereign4I. and wUhout*'Valerian justly dreaded an elevation so full of envy and of suspicion. effect"He modestly urged the alarming greatness of the trust, his own in­sufficiency, and the incurable corruption of the times; He artfullyinsinuated, that the office of censor was inseparable from the impe­rial dignity, and that the feeble hands of a subject were unequalto the support of so immense a weight of cares and of power +\The approaching event of war, soon put an end to the prosecutionof a project so specious but so impracticable; and whilst it preservedValerian from the danger, saved- the emperor Decius from the dis­appointment, which would most probably have attended it. A cen­sor may maintain, he can never restore the morals of a state. Itis impossible for such a magistrate to exert his authority with bene­fit, or even with effect, unless he is supported by a quick sense ofhonour and virtue in the minds of the people; by a decent reve­rence for the public opinion, and by a train of useful prejudices com­bating on the side of national manners. In a period when theseprinciples are annihilated, the censorial jurisdiction must either sinkinto empty pageantry, or be converted into a partial instrument ofvexatious oppression 45. It was easier to vanquish the Goths, than toeradicate the public vices; yet even in the first of these enterprises,Decius lost his army and his life.
The Goths were now, on every side, surrounded and pursued Defeat and
a c . j i • death ofDe-
by the Roman arms* The nower or their troops had pertfbied in cius and hitthe long siege of Philippopoiis, and the exhausted couatry could no son"
6 longer







OCR Output








T-HE DECLINE AND FALL


supply of wholesome and plentiful food for the cattle during winter,multiplied the number of the flocks and herds, which in theirturn contributed to the fertility of the foil. To all these im­provements may be added an asliduous attention to mines andfisheries, ;which, ,by employing a multitude of laborious hands,serve to increase the pleasures of the rich, and the subsistence ofthe poor. The elegant treatise of Columella describes the advancedstate of. the Spanish husbandry, under the reign of Tiberius; andit may be observed, that those famines which so frequently afflictedthe infant republic, were seldom or never experienced by the ex­tensive empire of Rome. The accidental scarcity, in any singleprovince, was immediately relieved by the plenty of its more fortu­nate neighbours^ ... t , • '. '' >'
Agriculture is. the foundation of manufactures; since the pro­ductions of nature are the materials of art. Under the Romanempire, the labour of an industrious and ingenious people was.variously, but incessantly employed, in the service of the rich.In their dress, their table, their houses, and their furniture, thefavourites of fortune united every refinement of conveniency, ofelegance, and of splendour; whatever could sooth their pride orgratify their sensuality. Such refinements, under the odious nameof luxury, have been severely arraigned by the moralists of everyage; and it might perhaps be more conducive to the virtue, aswell- as happiness of mankind, if all possessed the necessaries,and none the superfluities of life. But in the present imperfectcondition of society, luxury, though it may proceed from vice orfolly, seems to be the only means that can correct the unequal dis­tribution of property. The diligent mechanic, and the skilfulartist, who have obtained no share in the division of the earth,receive a voluntary taxi from the possessors of land; and the latterare prompted, by a fense of interest, to improve those estates, withwhose produce they may purchase . additional pleasures. This-'y-fi operation>







OCR Output








NOTES ON THE FIFTEENTH CHAPTE R. hxr


fixed by Burnet (Travels into Italy, p. 168), and isapproved by Moyle (vol. ii. p. 151). They wereboth unacquainted with the passage of Chrysostom,which converts their conjecture almost into a fact.
[169] Serius trans Alpes, rcligione Dei suscepta.Sulpicius Severus, 1. ii. These were the celebraredmartyrs of Lyons. SeeEuscbius, v. 1. Tillemont,Mem. Ecclesiast. torn. ii. p. 316. According to theDonatists, whose assertion is confirmed by the tacitacknowledgment of Augustin, Africa was the lastof the provinces which received the gospel. Tille­mont, Mem. Ecclesiast. torn. i. p. 754.
[170] Turn primum intra Gallias martyria visa.Sulp. Severus, 1. ii. With regard to Africa, fee Ter-tullian ad Scapulam, c. 3. It is imagined, that theScyllitan martyrs were the first (Acta Sincera Rey-nart, p. 34.). One of the adversaries of Apuleiusseems to have been a Christian. Apolog. p. 496,497. Edit. Delpbin.
[171] Rane in aliquibus civitatibus ecclesiæ,paucorum Christianorum devotione, resurgerent.Acta Sincera, p. 130. Gregory of Tours, 1. i. c.28. Molheim, p. 207. 449. There is some reasonto believe, that, in the beginning of the fourthcentury, the extensive dioceses of Liege, ofTreves, and of Cologne, composed a single bishop-rick, which had been very recently founded. SeeUfernoires de Tillemont, torn. vi. part i. p. 43, 411.
[172] The date of Tertullian's Apology is fixedin a dissertation of Molheim, to the year 198.
[173] In the fifteenth century, there were fewwho had either inclination or courage to questionwhether Joseph of Arimathea founded the monasteryof Glastenbury, and whether Dionysius the Areo-pagite preferred the residence of Paris to that ofAthens.
[ 174]The stupendous metamorphosiswas perform­ed in the ninth century. See Mariana (Hist. Hispan.v. 10. 13.), who, in every sense, imitates Livy, andthe honest detection of the legend of St. James byDr. Geddes, Miscellanies, vol. ii. p. 221.
[175] Justin Martyr, Dialog, cum Tryphon, p.341. lrenzus adv. Hæref. 1. i. c. 10. Tertullianadv. Jud. c. 7. See Molheim, p. Z03.
[176] See the fourth century of Molheim's His­tory of the Church. Many, though very confused


circumstances, that relate to the conversion of Iberiaand Armenia, may be found in Moses of Chorene,1. ii. c. 78—89.
[177] According to Tertullian, the Christia»faith had penetrated into parts of Britain inaccessibleto the Roman arms. About a century afterwards,Offian, the son of Fingal, is said to have disputed,in his extreme old age, with one of the foreign mis­sionaries, and the dispute is still extant, in verse,and in the Erse language. See Mr. Macpherson'sDissertation on the Antiquity of Offian's Poems,p. 10.
[178] The Goths, who ravaged Asia in the reignof Gallienus, carried away great numbers of cap­tives; some of whom were Christians, and beermemissionaries. See Tillemont, Mcmoires Ecclesiast.torn. iv. p. 44.
[179] The Legend of Abgarus, fabulous as it is,affords a decisive proof, that many years before Eu-febius wrote hit history, the greatest part of the in­habitants of Edessa had embraced Christianity.Their rivals, the citizens of Carrhæ adhered, on thecontrary, to the cause of Paganism, as late as thesixth century.
[180] According to Bardesanes (»p. Euscb. Praj.par. Evangel.) there were some Christians in Persiabefore the end of the second century. In the timeofConstantine (see his Epistle to Sapor. Vit. 1. iv.c. 13.) they composed a flourishing church. Con­sult Beausobre, Hist. Critique du Manicheisme, torn,i.p. 180. and the Bibliotheca Orientals of Assemani.
[181] Origen contra Celsum, I. viii. p. 424.
[182] Minuctus Fœlix, c. 8. with Wowerus'snotes. Celfus ap. Origen, I. iii. p. 138. 142.Julian ap. Cyril. 1. vi. p. 206. Edit. Spanheim.
[183] Eufeb. Hist. Ecclef. iv. 3. Hieronym.Epist. 83.
[184] The story is prettily told in Justin's Dai-logues. Tillemont (Mem. Ecclesiast. torn. ii. p.334.), who relates it after him, is sure that the oldman was a disguised angel. {
[185] Eusebius, v. 28. It may be hoped, thatnone, except the heretics, gave occasion to the com­plaint of Celsus (ap. Origen, 1 ii. fp. 77.), that theChristians were perpetually correcting and alteringtheir Gospels.
k 2 (186] Pin*







OCR Output








2*6 THE DECLINE AND FALL


Theiruttesor Strong beer, a liquor extracted with very little art from wheat or
strong liquors. ° * *
barley, and corrupted (as it is strongly expressed by Tacitus) into acertain semblance of wine, was sufficient for the grose purposes ofGerman debauchery. But those who had tasted the rich wines ofItaly, and afterwards of Gaul, sighed for that more delicious speciesof intoxication. They attempted not, however, (as has since beenexecuted with so much success) to naturalise the vine on the banks •of the Rhine and Danube-; nor did they endeavour to procure-by industry the materials of an advantageous commerce. Tosolicit by labour what might be ravished by arms, was esteemed un­worthy of the German spirit ".- The intemperate thirst of strongliquors, often urged the barbarians to invade the provinces on whichart or nature had bestowed those much envied presents. TheTuscan who betrayed his country to the Celtic nations, attractedthem into Italy by the prospect of the rich fruits and delicious •wines, the productions of a happier climate 3\ And in the famemanner the German auxiliaries, invited into France during thecivil wars of the sixteenth century, were allured by the pro­mise of plenteous quarters in the provinces of Champagne and Bur­gundy 5S. Drunkenness, the most illiberal, but not the most dangerousof our vices, had power in a less civilized state of mankind to occa­sion a battle, a war, or a revolution*Stateospopa- The climate of ancient Germany has been mollified, and the foil
lation.
fertilized, by the labour of ten centuries from the time of Charle­magne. The fame extent of ground which at present maintains, inease and plenty, a million of husbandmen and artificers, was un­able to supply an hundred thousand lazy warriors with the simplenecessaries of life '6. The Germans abandoned their immense foreststo the exercise of hunting, employed in pasturage the most consider­able part of their lands, bestowed on the small remainder a rudeand careless cultivation, and then accused the scantiness and sterilityof a country that refused to maintain the multitude of its inhabi-■ 5 tants.







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 41


istence of a slave became an object of greater value, and though hishappiness still depended on the temper and circumstances of themaster, the humanity of the latter, instead of being restrained byfear, was confirmed by the fense of his own interest. The pro­gress of manners was enforced by the virtue or policy of the em­perors; and by the edicts of Hadrian and the Antonines, theprotection of the laws was extended to the most abject part of man­kind. The jurisdiction of life and death over the staves, a powerlong exercised and often abused, was taken out of private hands,and reserved to the magistrates alone. The subterraneous prisonswere abolished; and upon a just complaint of intolerable treat­ment, the injured slave obtained either his deliverance, or a lesscruel master So.
Hope, the best comfort of our imperfect condition, was not denied Enfranchise-to the Roman slave; and if he had any opportunity of making him­self either useful or agreeable, he might very naturally expect'that the diligence and fidelity of a few years would be reward­ed with the inestimable gift of freedom. The benevolence ofthe master was so frequently prompted by the meaner sug­gestions of vanity and avarice, that the laws found it more ne­cessary to restrain than to encourage a profuse and undistinguish-ing liberality, which might degenerate into a very dangerous abuse5'.It was a maxim of ancient jurisprudence, that as a slave had not anycountry of his own, he acquired with his liberty an admission intothe political society of which his patron was a member. Theconsequences of this maxim would have prostituted the privileges ofthe Roman city to a mean and promiscuous multitude. Some sea­sonable exceptions were therefore provided; and the honourabledistinction was confined to such slaves only, as for just causes, andwith the approbation of the magistrate, should receive a solemn andlegal manumission. Even these chosen freedmen obtained no morethan the private rights of citizens, and were rigorously excludedfrom civil employments and military service. Whatever might be
Vol. I. G the







OCR Output








53* THE DECLINE AND FALL


the distant peregrinations, the wonderful atchievements, and thevarious deaths of the twelve apostles: but a more accurate inquirywill induce us to doubt, whether any of those persons who had beenwitnesses to the miracles of Christ were permitted, beyond the limitsof Palestine, to seal With their blood the truth of their testimony *7.From the ordinary term of human life, it may very naturally bepresumed that most of them were deceased before the discontent ofthe Jews broke out into that furious war, which was terminatedonly by the ruin of Jerusalem. During a long period, from thedeath of Christ to that memorable rebellion, we cannot discover anytraces of Roman intolerance, unless they are to be found in the sud­den, the transient, but the cruel persecution, which was exercisedby Nero against the Christians of the Capitol, thirty-five years afterthe former, and only two years before the latter of those greatevents. The character of the philosophic historian, to whom weare principally indebted for the knowledge of this singular trans­action, would alone be sufficient to recommend it to our most at­tentive consideration.The fire of In the tenth year of the reign of Nero, the capital of the empireth^ei-oof was afflicted by a fire which raged beyond the memory or example^er0" of former ages **. The monuments of Grecian art and of Romanvirtue, the trophies of the Punic and Gallic wars, the most holytemples, and the most splendid palaces, were involved in one com­mon destruction. Of the fourteen regions or quarters into whichRome was divided, four only subsisted entire, three were levelledwith the ground, and the remaining seven, which had experiencedthe fury of the flames, displayed a melancholy prospect of ruin anddesolation. The vigilance of government appears not to have ne­glected any of the precautions which might alleviate the fense of sodreadful a calamity. The imperial gardens were thrown open tothe distressed multitude, temporary buildings were erected for theiraccommodation, and a plentiful supply of corn and provisions wasdistributed at a very moderate price The most generous policy
seemed







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AND FALL


colony, afterwards a province of Egypt, and is now lost in the desertof Barca.
From Cyrene to the Ocean, the coast of Africa extends above fif­teen hundred miles; yet so closely is it presled between the Me­diterranean and the Sahara, or sandy desert, that its breadth seldomexceeds fourscore or an hundred miles. The eastern division wasconsidered by the Romans as the more peculiar and proper pro­vince of Africa. Till the arrival of the Phœnician colonies, thatfertile country was inhabited by the Libyans, the most savage ofmankind. Under the immediate jurisdiction of Carthage, it becamethe center of commerce and empire; but the republic of Carthageis now degenerated into the feeble and disorderly states of Tripoli andTunis. The military government of Algiers oppresses the wide extentQf Numidia, as it was once united under Massanissa and Jugurtha:but m the time of Augustus, the limits of Numidia were contracted;and, at least, two thirds of the country acquiesced in the name ofMauritania, with the epithet of Gæsariensis. The genuine Mau­ritania, or country of the Moors, which from the ancient city ofTingi, or Tangier, was distinguished by the appellation of Tingi-tana, is represented by the modern kingdom of Fez. Salle, on theOcean, so infamous at present for its piratical depredations, was no­ticed by the Romans, as the extreme object of their power, and almostof their geography. A city of their foundation may still be discoverednear Mequinez, the residence of the barbarian whom we condescendto style the Emperor of Morocco; but it does not appear, that hismore southern dominions, Morocco itself, and Segelmessa, were evercomprehended within the Roman province. The western parts ofAfrica are intersected by the branches of mount Atlas, a name soidly celebrated by the fancy of poets 8<s; but which is now diffusedaver the immense occean that rolls between the ancient and the newcontinent *7.
5 Having







OCR Output








iv NOTES ON THE FIRST-CHAPTER.


"genere necessariaeffe creduntur, se cum leglodebet"ubique portare, ut in quovis loco sixerit castra,"armatam faciat civitatem."
[61] For the Roman Castremetation, fee Poly-bius, 1. vi. with Lipsius de Militia Romana, Jo­seph, de Bell. Jud. 1. iii. c. c. Vegetius, i. 21—.25.iii. 9. and Memoires de Guichard, torn. i. c. I.
[62] Cicero in Tusculan. ii. 37.—Joseph, de Bell.Jud. 1. iii. 5. Frontinus, iv. 1.
[63] Vegetius, i. 9. See Memoires de V Aca-demiedes Inscriptions, torn. xxv. p. 187.
[64] See those evolutions admirably well ex­plained by M. Guichard, Nouveaux Memoires,torn. i. p. 141—234.
[6;J Tacitus (Annal. iv. 5) has given us a stateof the legions under Tiberius: and Dion Caslius(1. Iv. p. 794) under Alexander Severus. I haveendeavoured to fix on the proper medium betweenthose two periods. See likewise Lipsius de Mag-nitudine Romana, 1. i. c. 4, 5.
[66J The Romans tried to disguise, by the pre­tence of religious awe, their ignorance and terror.See Tacit. Germania, c. 34.
[67] Plutarch, in Marc. Anton. And yet if wemay credit Orosius, these monstrous castles were nomore than ten feet above the water, vi. 19.
[68] See Lipsius, de Magnitud. Rom. 1. i. c. 5.The sixteen last chapters of Vegetius relate to na­val affairs.
[69] Voltaire, Siecle de Louis XIV. c. 29. Itmust, however, be remembered, that France stillfeels that extraordinary effort.
[70] See Strabo, 1. ii. It is natural enoug h tosuppose, that Arragonis derived from Tarraconensis,and several moderns who have written in Latin,use those words as synonymous. It is howevercertain, that the Arragon, a little stream whichfalls from the Pyrenees into the Ebro, first gaveits name to a county, and gradually to a king­dom. See Danville, Geographie du Moyen Age,p. 181.
[71] One hundred and fifteen titkt appear inthe Notitia of Gaul. But Plutarch and Appian


increase the number of tribes to three or fcurhundred.
[72] Danville. Notice de 1* Ancknne Gaule.[73J Wbitakej's History of Manchester, vol. i.
[74] The Italian Veneti, though often confound­ed with the Gauls, were more probably of Illyrianorigin. See M. Freret, Memoires de P Academic■des Inscriptions, torn, xviii.
[75] See Maffei Verona illustrata, 1. i.
[76] The first contrast was observed by theancients. See Florus, i. 11, The second muststrike every modern traveller.
[77] Pliny (Hist. Natur. 1. iii.) follows the divi­sion of Italy, by Augustus.
[78] Tournefort, Voyages en Grece et AC*Mineure, lettre xviii.
[79] The name of Illyricum, originally belongedto the sea coast of the Hadriatic, and was graduallyextended by the Romans from the Alps to theEuxine Sea. See Severini Pannonia, 1. i. c, 3.
[So] A Venetian traveller, the Abbate Foitis,has lately given us some account os those very ob­scure countries. But the geography and anti­quities of the western illyricum, can be expectedonly from the munificence of the emperor, itssovereign:
[81] The.Save rises near the confines of Jfiria,and was considered by the more early Greeks as theprincipal stream of the Danube.
[82J See the Periplus of Arrian. He examinedthe coasts of the Euxine, when he was governor ofCappadocia.
[83J The progress of religion is well known.The use of letters was introduced among the sa­vages of Europe about fifteen hundred yearsbefore Christ; and the Europeans carried them toAmerica, about fifteen centuries after the Christiansera. But in a period of three thousand years,the Phœnician alphabet received considerable al­terations, as it passed through the hands of theGreeks and Romans.
[84] Dion







OCR Output








NOTES ON THE SIXTEENTH CHAPTER


have imagined, all that Epiphanius has received,and all that Tillemont has copied. M. de Beau-sobre (Hist, du Manieheisme, L ix. c. 8, 9.) hasexposed with great spirit, the disingenuous arts ofAugustin and Pope Leo I.
[22] When Tertullian became a Montanist, heaspersed the morals of the church which he hadso resolutely defended. Sed majoris est Agape,"quia per hanc Adolefcentes tui cum Sororibus"dormiunt, appendices scilicet gulae lascivia et"luxuria." De Jejuniis, c. 17. The 35th canonof the council of Illiberis provides against thescandals which too often polluted the vigils of thechurch, and disgraced the Christian name, in theeyes of unbelievers.
[73] Tertullian (Apolog. c. a.) expatiates onthe fair and honourable testimony of Pliny, withmuch reason, and some declamation.
[74] In the various compilation of the AcgcstanHistory, (a part of which was composed underthe reign of Constantine) there are not six lineswhich relate to the Christians; nor has the dili­gence of Xiphilin discovered their name in the largehistory of Dion Cassius.
[2,-] An obscure passage of Suetonius (in Claud,c. 25.) may seem to offer a proof how strangely theJews and Christians of Rome were confoundedwith each other.
[26] See in the xviiith and xxvth chapters of theActs of the Apostles, the behaviour of Gallio, pro­consul of Achaia, and of Festus, procurator ofJudea.
[27] In the time of Tertullian and Clemens ofAlexandria, the glory of martyrdom was confinedto St. Peter, St. Paul, and St. James. It wasgradually bestowed on the rest of the apostles, bythe more recent Greeks, who prudently selectedfor the theatre of their preaching and sufferings,some remote country beyond the limits of the Ro­man empire. See Molheim, p. 81, and Tillemont,Memoires Ecclesiafliques, torn. i. part iii.
[28] Tacit. Annal. xy. 38—44. Sueton. inNeron.^r. 38. Dion Caflius, 1. lxii. p. 1014. Oro-sius, vii. 7.
[29] The price of wheat (c robably of the nodtiti)was reduced as low as ttrmi Nummi; which would beequivalent to about fifteen shillings the Englishquarter.


[30] We may observe, that the rumour is men­tioned by Tacitus with a very becoming distrust andhesitation, whilst it is greedily transcribed by Sue­tonius, and solemnly confirmed by Dion.
[31] This testimony is alone sufficient to exposethe anachronism of the Jews, who place the birth ofChrist near a century sooner (Basnage, Histoire desJuifs, 1. v. c. 14, 15.). We may learn from Jose-phus (Antiquitat. xviii. 3.), that the procuratorlhipof Pilate corresponded with the last ten years ofTiberius, A. D. 27—37. As to the particular timeof the death of Christ, a very early tradition fixedit to the 25th of March, A. D. 29, under the con­sulship of the two Gemini (Tertullian adv. Judæos,c. 8.). This date, which is adopted by Pagi, cardi­nal Norris,and LeClerc, seems, at least, as probableas the vulgar æra, which is placed (I know not fromwhat conjectures) sour years later.
[32] Tacit. Annal. xv. 44.
[33] Nardini Roma Antica, p. 387. Donatusde Roma Antiqua, 1. iii. p. 449.
[34] Sueton. in Nerone, c. 16. The epithet ofmaltfica, which some sagacious commentators havetranslated magical, is considered by the more rationalMostieim as only synonymous to the exitiabilii ofTacitus.
[35] The passage concerning Jesus Christ, whichwas inserted into the text of Josephus, between thetime of Origen and that ofEusebius, may furnishan example of no vulgar forgery. The accom­plishment of the prophecies, the virtues, miracles,and resurrection of Jesus, are fairly related. Jose­phus acknowledges that he was the Messiah, andhesitates whether he should call him a man.
[36] See the lives of Tacitus by Lipsius and theAbbe de la fileterie, Dictionnaire de Bayle a Par-tide Tacite, and Fabricius, Biblioth. Latin, torn,ii. p. 386. Edit. Ernest.
[37] Principatum Divi Nerva?, et imperiumTrajani, uberiorem securioremque materiam se-nectuti sepofui, Tacit. Hist. i.
[38] See Tacit. Annal. ii. 61. iv. 4.
[39] The player's name was Aliturus. Throughthe fame channel, Josephus (de Vita fua, c. 3.)about two years before, had obtained the pardon
and







OCR Output








•OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


proselytes of the Gospel. As they were far the greater part of therace of Abraham, they were distinguished by the peculiar mark ofcircumcision, offered up their devotions in the Temple of Jerusalemtill its final destruction, and received both the Law and the Prophetsas the genuine inspirations of the Deity. The Gentile converts,who by a spiritual adoption had been associated to the hope of Israel,were likewise confounded under the garb and appearance of Jews*s,and as the Polytheists paid less regard to articles of faith than tothe external worship, the new sect, which carefully concealed orfaintly announced its future greatness and ambition, was permittedto slielter itself under the general toleration which was granted toan ancient and celebrated people in the Roman empire. It was notlong, perhaps, before the Jews themselves, animated with a fiercerzeal and a more jealous faith, perceived the gradual separation oftheir Nazarene brethren from the doctrine of the synagogue; andthey would gladly have extinguished the dangerous heresy in thelilood of its adherents. But the decrees of heaven had already dis­armed their malice, and though they might sometimes exert the li­centious privilege of sedition, they no longer possessed the admini­stration of criminal justice; nor did they find it easy to infuse intothe calm breast of a Roman magistrate the rancour of their own zealand prejudice. The provincial governors declared themselves readyto listen to any accusation that might affect the public safety: butas soon as they were informed, that it was a question not of factstut of words, a dispute relating only to the interpretation of theJewifli laws and prophecies, they deemed it unworthy the majestyof Rome serioufly to discuss the obscure differences which mightarise among a barbarous and superstitious people. The innocence ofthe first Christians was protected by ignorance and contempt; andthe tribunal of the pagan magistrate often proved their most assuredrefuge against the fury of the synagogue lS. If indeed we were disposedto adopt the traditions of a too credulous antiquity, we might relate
Yyy 2 the







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 477


quire for the proof of a miraculous event. The duty of an his- Ourperpiext-
* ty in defining
torian does not call upon him to interpose his private judgment in the miracu-this nice and important controversy; but he ought not to dissemble '°US fericd*the difficulty of adopting such a theory as may reconcile the interestof religion with that of reason, of making a proper application ofthat theory, and of defining with precision the limits of that happyperiod exempt from error and from deceit, to which we might bedisposed to allow the gift of supernatural powers. From the first ofthe fathers to the last of the popes, a succession of bishops, ofsaints, of martyrs, and of miracles, is continued without interrup­tion, and the progress of superstition was so gradual and almostimperceptible, that we know not in what particular link we shouldbreak the chain of tradition. Every age bears testimony to thewonderful events by which it was distinguished, and its testimonyappears no less weighty and respectable than that of the precedinggeneration, till we are insensibly led on to accuse our own incon­sistency, if in the eighth or in the twelfth century we deny to thevenerable Bede, or to the holy Bernard, the same degree of con­fidence which in the second century we had so liberally granted toJustin or to Irenæus 79. If the truth of any of those miracles isappreciated by their apparent use and propriety, every age had un­believers to convince, heretics to confute, and idolatrous nationsto convert; and sufficient motives might always be produced tojustify the interposition of Heaven. And yet since every friend torevelation is persuaded of the reality, and every reasonable man isconvinced of the cessation of miraculous powers, it is evident thatthere must have been some period in which they were either sud­denly or gradually withdrawn from the Christian church. What­ever æra is chosen for that purpose, the death of the apostles, theconversion of the Roman empire, or the extinction of the Arianheresy 8o, the insensibility of the Christians who lived at that timewill equally afford a just matter of surprise. They still supported


their







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AND FALL


emperor might have asserted his claim, and the prudent Atticus p-e-vented, by a frank confession, the officiousnefs of informers. Butthe equitable Nerva, who then filled the throne, refused to acceptany part of it; and commanded him to use, without scruple, thepresent of fortune. The cautious Athenian still insisted, that thetreasure was too considerable for a subject, and that he knew nothow to use it. Abuse it, then, replied the monarch, with a good-natured peevishness; for it is your own 6?. Many will be ofopinion, that Atticus literally obeyed the emperor's last instructions;since he expended the greatest part of his fortune, which was muchincreased by an advantageous marriage, in the service of thePublic. He had obtained for his son Herod, the prefecture of thefree cities of Asia; and the young magistrate, observing that thetown of Troas was indifferently supplied with water, obtained fromthe munificence of Hadrian, three hundred myriads of drachms(about a hundred thousand pounds) for the construction of a newaqueduct. But in the execution of the work the charge amountedto more than double the estimate, and the officers of the revenuebegan to murmur, till the generous Atticus silenced their com­plaints, by requesting that he might be permitted to take uponhimself the whole additional expence ". •
The ablest preceptors of Greece and Asia had been invited byliberal rewards to direct the education of young Herod. Their pupilsoon became a celebrated orator in the useless rhetoric of that age,which, confining itself to the schools, disdained to visit either theForum or the Senate. He was honoured with the consulship atRome; but the greatest part of his life was spent in a philosophicretirement at Athens, and his adjacent villas; perpetually surroundedby sophists, who acknowledged, without reluctance, the superiorityof a rich and generous rival e">. The monuments of his geniushave perished; some remains still preserve the fame of his taste andmunificence: modern travellers have measured the ruins of the
stadium







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AND FALL


they not already been the objects of secret contempt among thepolished and enlightened orders of society 7.
Notwithstanding the fashionable irreligion which prevailed inthe age of the Antonines, both the interest of the priests, and thecredulity of the people, were sufficiently respected. In their writ­ings and conversation, the philosophers of antiquity asserted thedignity of reason; but they resigned their actions to the com­mands of law and of custom. Viewing, with a smile of pity andindulgence, the various errors of the vulgar, they diligently prac­tised the ceremonies of their fathers, devoutly frequented the tem­ples of the gods; and sometimes condescending to act a part on thetheatre of superstition, they concealed the sentiments of an Atheistunder the sacerdotal robes. Reasoners of such a temper werescarcely inclined to wrangle about their respective modes of faith, orof worship. It was indifferent to them what sliape the folly of themultitude might chuse to assume; and they approached, with thesame inward contempt, and the same external reverence, the altarsof the Libyan, the Olympian, or the Capitoline Jupiter s.
It is not easy to conceive from what motives a spirit of persecu­tion could introduce itself into the Roman councils. The magis­trates could not be actuated by a blind, though honest bigotry,since the magistrates were themselves philosophers; and the schoolsof Athens had given laws to the senate. They could not be impelledby ambition or avarice, as the temporal and ecclesiastical powerswere united in the fame hands. The pontiffs were chosen amongthe most illustrious of the senators; and the office of Supreme Pon­tiff was constantly exercised by the emperors themselves. Theyknew and valued the advantages of religion, as it is connected withcivil government. They encouraged the public festivals whichhumanize the manners of the people. They managed the arts ofdivination, as a convenient instrument of policy; and they respected,as the firmest bond of society, the useful persuasion, that either in


this







OCR Output








342 THE DEGLINE AND FALt


Gladiators, reserved with nea* si* hundred others, for she inhumansports of the amphitheatre. Disdaining to shed their blood for theamusement of the populace, they killed their keepers, broke fromthe place of their confinement, and filled the streets of Rome Withblood and confusion* After an obstinate resistance they Were over­powered and cut in pieces by the regular forces; but they obtainedat least an honourable death, and the satisfaction of * just re­venge 56.
Hisdiseiplinc. The military discipline, which reigned in the camps of Probus,was less cruel than that of Aurelian, but it was equally rigid andexact. The latter punished the irregularities of the soldiers Withunrelenting severity, the former prevented them by employing the!legions iri constant and useful labours. When Probus commandedin Egypt, he executed many considerable Works for the" splendorand benefit of that rich country. The navigation of the Nile, soimportant to Rome itself, was improved j and temples, bridges,porticoes', asld palaces, were constructed by the hands of thesoldiers, who acted by turns as architects, as engineers, and ashusbandnteri It was reported of Hannibal, that, in order to pie-serve his troops from the dangerous temptations of idleness, hehad obliged them to form large plantations of olive trees along thecOast of Africa s8. Frdm a similar principle, Probus efcercised hislegions in covering, with rich vineyards, the hills of Gaul andPahnbhiaj and two considerable spots are described, Whieh wereentirely dbg and planted by military labour One of these, knownunder the name of Mount Alma, was situated neat Sifmium, thecountry where Probus was torn, for which he ever retained apartial affection, arid # whose gratitude he endeavoured to secure,by converting into tillage a large and unhealthy tract of marshyground. An army thus employed, constituted perhaps the most use*ful, as well as the bravest portion Of Romatt subjects.
But







OCR Output








534 THE DECLINE AND FALL


** sewn up in the skins of wild beasts, and exposed to the fury of"doga: others again, smeared over with combustible materials,"were i used as torches to illuminate the darkness of the night."The gardens of Nero were destined for the.melancholy spectacle,"which was accompanied with a horse race, and honoured with"the presence of the emperor, who mingled with the populace in"the dress and attitude of a charioteer. The guilt of the Chris-"tians deserved indeed the most exemplary punishment, but the"public abhorrence was changed into commiseration, from the"opinion that those unhappy wretches were sacrificed, not so much** . to, the rigour of justice, as to the cruelty of a jealous tyrant"."Those who survey with a curious eye the revolutions of mankind,may observe, that the gardens and circus of Nero on the Vatican,.which were polluted with the blood of the first Christians, have beenrendered still more famous, by the triumph and by the abuse of thepersecuted religion. On the same spot a temple, which far sur­passes the ancient glories of the Capitol, has been since erected bythe Christian Pontifs, who, deriving their claim of universal do­minion from an humble fisherman of Galilee, have succeeded to thethrone of the Cæsars, given laws to the barbarian conquerors ofRome, and extended their spiritual jurisdiction from the coast of theBaltic to the banks of the Pacific Ocean.
But it would be improper to dismiss this account of Nero's per­secution, till we have made some observations, that may serve toremove the difficulties with which it is perplexed, and to throwsome light on the subsequent history of the church.Remarks on I- The most sceptical criticism is obliged to respect the truth andTacitus«ia°f tne integrity of this celebrated passage of Tacitus. The former isperseruitn of confirmed by the diligent and accurate Suetonius, who mentions theb/New0'3"5 runistiment wnich Nero inflicted on the Christians, a sect of menwho had embraced a new and criminal superstition 3*. The latter iswarranted by the consent of the most ancient manuscripts; by the
inimitable







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 167


most probably, of fifty or an hundred pieces of gold IO'; nor could itbe exacted from the nearest of kin on the father's side lo*. Whenthe rights of nature and poverty were thus secured, it seemedreasonable, that a stranger, or a distant relation, who acquired anunexpected accession of fortune, should cheerfully resign a twentiethpart of it, for the benefit of the state ,0S. . ...
Such a tax, plentiful as it must prove in every wealthy com- Suited to th«munity, was most happily suited to the situation of the Romans, manner"1!who could frame their arbitrary wills, according to the dictatesof reason or caprice, without any restraint from the modern fettersof entails and settlements. Even the partiality of paternal affection,often lost its influence over the stern patriots of the commonwealth,and the dissolute nobles of the empire; and if the father bequeathedto his son the fourth part of his estate, he removed all groundof legal complaint,oS. But a rich childless old man was a do­mestic tyrant, and his power increased with his years and in­firmities. A servile crowd, in which he frequently reckonedprætors and consuls, courted his smiles, pampered his avarice, ap­plauded his follies, served his passions, and waited with impatiencefor his death. The arts of attendance and flattery were formed intoa most lucrative science, those who professed it acquired a peculiarappellation; and the whole city, according to the lively descripi-tions of satire, was divided between two parties, the hunters andtheir game ,07. Yet while so many unjust and extravagant willswere every day dictated by cunning, and subscribed by folly, a fewwere the result of rational esteem and virtuous gratitude. Cicero^who had so often defended the. lives and fortunes of his fellow-citizens, was rewarded with legacies to the amount of an hundredand seventy thousand pounds 108; nor do the friends of the youngerPliny, seem to have been less generous to that amiable orator ,0'.Whatever was the motive of the testator, the treasury claimed, with"out distinction, the twentieth part of his estate? and in the course
of







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AND FALL


CHAP. VI.
"The death of Severus.—Tyranny of Caracalla.—Usurpa­tion of Macrinus.—Follies of Elagabalus.—Virtues ofAlexander Severus.—Licentiousness of the army.—Ge­neral slate of the Roman Finances*
Greatness 'I *HE ascent to greatness, however steep and dangerous, maytent of Se- entertain an active spirit with the consciousness and exercise
veruS' of its own powers; but the possession of a throne could never yetafford a lasting satisfaction to an ambitious mind. This melan­choly truth was felt and acknowledged by Severus. Fortune andmerit had, from an humble station, elevated him to the first placeamong mankind. '* He had been all things, as he said himself, and** all was of little value '." Distracted with the care, not of ac­quiring, but of preserving an empire, oppressed with age and in­firmities, careless of fame \ and satiated with empire, all his pro­spects of life were closed. The desire of perpetuating the greatnessof his family, was the only remaining wish of his ambition andpaternal tenderness.
His wife the Like most of the Africans, Severus was passionately addicted toempress Julia. ^ va^n ftut}ies Qf magic and divination, deeply versed in the inter­pretation of dreams and omens, and perfectly acquainted with thescience of judicial astrology; which, in almost every age, except thepresent, has maintained its dominion over the mind of man. Hehad lost his first wife, whilst he was governor of the Lionnese Gaul'.In the choice of a second, he sought only to connect himself withsome favourite of fortune; and as soon as he had discovered that ayoung lady of Emesa in Syria had a royal nativityt he solicited, and2 obtained'







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. z57


fore, indulged himself in the pleasures of Italy, was almost in thefame instant informed of the success of the revolt, and of the rapidapproach of his aspiring lieutenant. He advanced to meet him asfar as the plains of Spoleto. When the armies came in fight of eachother, the soldiers of Gallus compared the ignominious conduct oftheir sovereign with the glory of his rival. They admired thevalour of Æmilianus; they were attracted by his liberality, for heoffered a considerable increase of pay to all deserters18. The mur- Gallus abaa.
. doned and
der of Gallus, and of his son Volusianus, put an end to the civil slain,war; and the senate gave a legal sanction to the rights of conquest. May,'The letters of Æmilianus to that assembly, were a mixture of mode­ration and vanity. He assured them, that he should resign to theirwisdom the civil administration; and contenting himself with thequality of their general, would in a short time assert the glory ofRome, and deliver the empire from all the barbarians both of theNorth and of the EastS9. His pride was flattered by the applause ofthe senate; and medals are still extant, representing him with the nameand attributes of Hercules the Victor, and of Mars the Avenger 6".
If the new monarch possessed the abilities, he wanted the Valerian re­time necessary to fulfil these splendid promises. Less than four deaofofGal-months intervened between his victory and his fall6'. He had t^"^'^*vanquished Gallus: he funk under the weight of a competitor more emPeror-formidable than Gallus. That unfortunate prince had sent Vale­rian, already distinguished by the honourable title of censor, to bringthe legions of Gaul and Germany 61 to his aid. Valerian executedthat commission with zeal and fidelity; and as he arrived too lateto save his sovereign, he resolved to revenge him. The troops ofÆmilianus, who still lay encamped in the plains of Spoleto, wereawed by the sanctity of his character, but much more by the supe­rior strength of his army; and as they were now become as inca­pable of personal attachment as they had always been of consti­tutional principle, they readily imbrued their hands in the blood of A. D. 253.
Vol. I. LI a prince Ausust"







OCR Output








NOTES ON THE ELEVENTH CHAPTER. xlv


non in Centura totius vitæ ac severitate militariPertinacem vel Severum. Sed omnia hæc libido,et cupiditas voluptatis mulierariæ sic perdidit, utnemo audeat virtutes ejus in literal mitten quernconstat omnium judicio meruisse puniri.
[48] He ravished the wise of Attitianus, anaJiuary, or army agent. Hist. August, p. 186.Aurel. Victor in Aurelian.
[49} Pollio assigns her an article among the thirtytyrants. Hist. Aug. p. zoo.
[<o] Pollio in Hist. August, p. 196. Vopiscusin Hist. August, p. 220. The two Victors, in thelives of Gallienus and Aurelian, Eutropius, ix. 13.Euscb. in Chron. Of all these writers only, thetwo last (but with strong probability) place die fallof Tetricus before that of Zenobia. M. de Boze(in the Academy of Inscriptions, torn, xxx.) doesnot wish, and Tillemont (torn, iii. p. 1189.) doesnot dare, to follow them. I have been fairer thanthe one, and bolder than the other.
[$i] Victor Junior in Aurelian. Eumenius men­tions Bata-victe\, some critics, without any reason,would sain alter the word to Bagaudiue.
[52] Eumen. in Vel. Panegyr. iv. 8.
[e£] Vopiscus in Hist. August, p. 24"). Autunwas not restored till tha reign of Diocletian, feeEumenius de restaurandis schoiis.
[54] Almost every thing that is said of the man­ners of Odenathus and Zenobia, is taken from♦heir lives in the Augustan History, by TrebelliusPollio, see p. 192. 198.
[55] She never admitted her husband's embracesbut for the fake of posterity. If her hopes werebaffled, in the ensuing month (he reiterated the ex­periment.
[56] Hist. August, p. 192, 193. Zosimus, 1. i.p. 36. Zonaras, 1. xii. p. 633. The last is clearand. probable, the others confused and inconsistent.The text of Syncellus, if not corrupt, is absolutenonsense.
[57] Odenathus and Zenobia, often sent himfrom the. spoils of the enemy, presents of gems, andtoys, which he received with infinite delight.


f 58J Some very unjust suspicions have been caston Zenobia, as if she was accessary to her husband'sdeath.
[59] Hist. August, p. 180, 181.
[60] See in Hist. August, p. 198. Aurelian'stestimony to her merit, and for the conquest ofEgypt. Zosimus, 1. i. p. 39, 40.
[61] Timolaus, Herennianus, and Vaballathus.It is supposed that the two former were alreadydead before the war. On the last, Aurelian be­stowed a small province of Armenia with the tideof king ; several of his medals are still extant. SeeTillemont, torn. iii. p. 1190.
[62] Zosimus, 1. i. p. 44.
[63] Vopiscus (in Hist. August, p. 217.) givesus an authentic letter, and a doubtful vision ofAurelian. Apollonius of Tyana was born aboutthe fame time as Jesus Christ. His life (that ofthe former) is related in so sabulous a manner byhis fanatic disciples, that we are at a loss to dis­cover whether he was a sage or an impostor.
[64] Zosimus, 1. i. p. 46.
[65] At a place called Immæ. Eutropius, SextusRufus, and Jerome, mention only this first battle.
[66] Vopiscus in Hist. August, p. Z17, men­tions only the second.
[67] Zosimus, !. i. p. 44.—48. His account ofthe two battles is clear and circumstantial.
[68] It was five hundred and thirty-seven milesfrom Seleucia, and two hundred and three from thenearest coast of Syria, according to the reckoning ofPliny, who, in a few words (Hist. ?\atur. v. 11.)gives an excellent description of Palmyra.
[69] Some Englilh travellers from Aleppo dis­covered the ruins of Palmyra, about the end of the lastcentury. Our curiosity has since been gratified.in a .more splendid manner by Messieurs Wood and Daw-kins. For the history of Palmyra, we may con­sult the masterly dissertation os Dr. Halley in thePhilosophical Transactions; Lowthorp's Abridge­ment, vol. iii. p. 518.
[7c] Vopiscus in Hist. August p. 218.
[71] From a very doubtful chronology I haveendeavoured to extract the.most probable date.
[7>] Hist.







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AND FALL


4S2


Its gradualincrease.


Their reli­gion bettersuited to de­fence than toconquest.


was equal to their detestation of foreign religions. The current ofzeal and devotion, as it was contracted into a narrow channel, ranwith the strength, and sometimes with the fury, of a torrent.
This inflexible perseverance, which appeared so odious or so ri­diculous to the ancient world, assumes a more awful character,since Providence has deigned to reveal to us the mysterious his­tory of the chosen people. But the devout and even scrupulousattachment to the Mosaic religion, so conspicuous among the Jewswho lived under the second temple, becomes still more surprising,if it is compared with the stubborn incredulity of their forefathers.When the law was given in thunder from Mount Sinai; when thetides of the ocean, and the course of the planets were suspendedfor the convenience of the Israelites; and when temporal rewardsand punishments were the immediate consequences of their pietyor disobedience, they perpetually relapsed into rebellion against thevisible majesty of their Divine King, placed the idols of the nationsin the sanctuary of Jehovah, and imitated every fantastic ceremonythat was practised in the tents of the Arabs, or in the cities ofPhœnicia 9. As the protection of Heaven was deservedly withdrawnfrom the ungrateful race, their faith acquired a proportionable de­gree of vigour and purity. The contemporaries of Moses andJoshua had beheld with careless indifference the most amazingmiracles. Under the pressure of every calamity, the belief of thosemiracles has preserved the Jews of a later period from the universalcontagion of idolatry; and in contradiction to every known prin­ciple of the human mind, that singular people seems to have yieldeda stronger and more ready assent to the traditions of their remoteancestors, than to the evidence of their own fenses.
The Jewish religion was admirably fitted for defence, but it wa&never designed for conquest; and it seems probable that the num­ber of proselytes was never much superior to that of apostates. Thedivine promises were originally made, and the distinguishing rite of
circumcision







OCR Output








2H THE fcfcCLJNfe ANt) tAtt


days, Aper delivered to she arms the supposed mandates of theirinvisible sovereign '°5.Death of Nu- It was hot till eight months after the death of Cams, that themenan. Roman army, returning by flow marches from thd banks of theTigris, arrived on those of the Thracian Botfphorus. The legionshalted at ChaTcedori in Asia, while the court passed over to He-raclea, on the European side of the Propontis ,0*. But a reportsoon circulated through the camp, at first in fec'rct whifttefs, and atlength in loud clamours, of the emperor's death, and of the pre­sumption of his ambitious minister, who still exercised the sovereignpower in the name of a prince who was no more. The impa­tience of the soldiers could not long support a state of suspense.With rude curiosity they broke into the imperial tent, and dis­covered only the corpse of Numeriah r°*. T'he gradual decline ofhis health might have induced theni to believe that his death wasnatural; but the concealment was interpreted as an evidence ofguilt, and the measures which Aper had taken to secure his election,became the immediate occasion of his ruitf. Yet, eVen in the tran­sport of their rage and grief, the troops observed a regular pro­ceeding, which proves how firmly discipline had been re-establifliedby the martial successors of Gallienus. A general assembly of thearmy was appointed to be held at Chalcedoh, whither Aper Wastransported in chains, a^ a prisoner and a criminal. A Vacanttribunal was erected in the midst of the camp, and the generals andA. r>. 284. tribunes formed a great military council. They soon announced toElectros17' &e multitude, that their choice had Fallen on Diocletian, com-theemperor mander of the domestics or body-guards, as the person the most
Diocletian. ,
capable of revenging and succeeding their beloved emperor. Thefuture fortunes of the candidate depended on the charice Or conductof the present hour. Conscious that the station which he hadfilled, exposed him to some suspicions, Diocletian ascended the
tribunal,







OCR Output








4H THE DECLINE AND PALL


part of the garrison. The flames were extinguished by the care ofConstantine, and the remains of Susa preserved from total destruc­tion. About forty miles from thence, a more severe contest awaitedhim. A numerous army of Italians was assembled under the lieu-Battle of tenants of Maxentius in the plains of Turin. Its principal strengthconsisted in a species of heavy cavalry, which the Romans, sincethe decline of their discipline, had borrowed from the nations of thev East. The horses, as well as the men, were clothed in completearmour, the joints of which were artfully adapted to the motionsof their bodies. The aspect of this cavalry was formidable, theweight almost irresistible; and as, on this occasion, their generalsliad drawn them up in a compact column or wedge, with a fliarppoint, and with spreading flanks, they flattered themselves that theyshould easily break and trample down the army of Constantine.They might perhaps have succeeded in their design, had nottheir experienced adversary embraced the same method of defence,which in similar circumstances had been practised by Aurelian.The skilful evolutions of Constantine divided and baffled this massycolumn of cavalry. The troops of Maxentius fled in confusion to­wards Turin; and as the gates of the city were (hut against them,very few escaped the sword of the victorious pursuers. By thisimportant service, Turin deserved to experience the clemency andeven favour of the conqueror. He made his entry into the imperialpalace of Milan, and almost all the cities of Italy between the Alpsand the Po not only acknowledged the power, but embraced withzeal the party of Constantine s6.Siege and From Milan to Rome, the Æmilian and Flaminian highwaysy'apnas opened an easy march of about four hundred miles; but thoughConstantine was impatient to encounter the tyrant, he prudentlyturned his arms against another army of Italians, who, "by theirstrength and position, might either oppose his progress, or, in cafe#f a misfortune, might intercept his retreat. Ruricius Pompeianus,
3 a general







OCR Output








Ixx NOTES ON THE FIFTEENTH CHAPTER.


[68J And yet whatever may be the languageof individual*, it is still the public doctrine of allthe Chriilian churches. The Janfenists, who haveso laboriously studied the works of the fathers,maintain this sentiment with distinguished zeal, andthe leaned M. de Tillemont never dismisses a vir­tuous emperor without pronouncing his damnation.Zuinglius was perhaps the only leader of a partywho ever adopted the milder sentiment, and hegave no tefs offence to the Lutherans than to theCatholics. See Bossuet, Histoire des Variationsdes Eglises Protestantes, ,L ii. c. 19—22.
[69] Justin and Clemens of Alexandria allowthat some of the philosophers were instructed bythe Logos, confounding its double signification, ofthe human reason, and of the Divine Word.
[70] Tertullian, De Spectaculis, c. 30.
[71] Notwithstanding the evasions of Dr. Mid-dleton, it is impossible to overlook the clear tracesof visions and inspiration, which may be found inthe apostolic fathers.
[72] Dr. Middleton (Free Inquiry, p. 96, kc.)observes, that as this pretension of all others wasthe most difficult to support by art, it was the soonestgiven up. 1 he observation suits his hypothesis.
[73] Athenagoras in Legatione. Justin Martyr,Cohort ad Gentes. Tertullian adverf. Marcionit.1. iv. These descriptions arc not very unlike theprophetic fury, for which Cicero (de Divinat. ii.54.) expresses so little reverence.
[74] Tertullian (Apolog. c. 23.) throws outa bold defiance to the Pagan magistrates. Of theprimitive miracles, the powerof exorcising, was the-Only one which has been assumed'by Protestants.
[75] Irenxus adv. Hæreses, 1. ii. 56, 57. 1. v.X. 6. Mr. Dodwell (Dissert, ad Iren-rum, ii. 42.)concludes, that the second century was still morefertile in miracles than the first.
[76] Theophilus ad Antolycum, 1. ii. p. 77.
fy] Dr Middleton sent out his introduction inthe year 1747, published his Free Inquiry in 1749,and before his death, which happened in 17 ;o,he h.id prepared a vindication of it against his nu>
merous adversaries.


[78] The university of Oxford conferred degreeson his opponents. From the indignation of Mo.iheim (p. 221,), we may discover the sentiments ofthe Lutheran divines.
[79] It may seem somewhat remarkable, thatBernard of Clairvaux, who records so many miraclesof his friend St. Malachi, never takes any notice ofhis own, which, in their turn, however, are carefullyrelated by his companions and disciples, In thelong series of ecclesiastical history, does there exista single instance of a faint asserting that he him­self possessed the gist of miracles?
[80] The conversion of Constantice ii the a-rswhich is most usually fixed by Protestants. Themore rational divines are unwilling to admit themiracles of the iveh, whilst the more credulous areunwilling to reject those of the vth century.
[81] The imputations of CeMui and Julian,with the defence of the fathers, are very fairly statedby Spanheim, Commentaire fur les Cesar* de Julian,
p. 468.
[a?] Plin. Epistol. x. 97.
[83] Tertullian, Apolog. c. 44. He adds how­ever, with some degree of hesitation, "Auc si aliud,"jam non Christianus."
[84] The philosopher Peregrin us (of whose lifeand death Lucian has left us so entertaining anaccount) imposed, for a long time, on the creduloussimplicity of the Christians of Asia.
[8$] See a very judicious treatise ofBarbeyracfur la Morale des Peres.
[86] Lactant. Instkut, Divin. I. vi. c. 20, 21, 22.
[87] Consult a work of Clemens of Alexandria,intitled the Pædagogue, which contains the rudi­ments ofethics, as they were taught in the most cele­brated of the Christian schools.
[88] Tertullian, de Spectaculis, c. 13. ClemensAlexandrin. Pœdagog. 1. iii. c. 8.
[89] Beaufobre Hist. Critique du Manicheisine,1, vii. c. 3. Justin, Gregory of Nyssa, Augustin, &cstrongly inclined to this opinion.
[9c] Some of the Gnostic heretics were moreconsistent; they rejected the use of marriage.
1 [90] See







OCR Output








lxvi NOTES ON THE FIFTEENTH CHAPTER.


by whose example and authority they had been se­duced, the name os Herodians. But their numberswere so inconsiderable, and their duration so short,that Joseph us has not thought them worthy of hisnotice. See Prideaux's Connection, vol. ii. p. 285.
[5] Cicero pro Flacco, c. 23.
[6] Philo de Legatione. Augustus left a foun­dation for a perpetual sacrifice. Yet he approvedof the neglect which his grandson Caius expressedtowards the temple of Jerusalem. See Sueton. inAugust, c. 93. and Casaubon's notes on that pas­sage.
[7] See, in particular, Joseph. Antiquitat. xvii. 6.xviii. 6. andde Bel. Judaic, i. 33. and ii. 9.
[8] jufli a Caio Cæsare, effigiem ejus in templolocare arma potius surapsere. Tacit. Hist. v. 9.Philo and Josephus gave a very circumstantial, but* very rhetorical account of this transaction, whichexceedingly perplexed the governor of Syria. Atthe first mention of this idolatrous proposal, KingAgrippa fainted way; and did not recover hisfenses till the third day.
[9] For the enumeration of the Syrian andArabian deities, it may be observed, that Miltonhas comprized in one hundred and thirty very beau-tifal lines, the two large and learned syntagmas,which Sclden had composed on that abstruse sub­ject.
[10] All that relates to the Jewish proselytes hasbeen very ably treated by Basnage, Hist, des Juifs,1. vi. c. 6, 7.
[11] See Exod. xxiv. 23. Deut. xvi. 16. thecommentators, and a very sensible note in the Uni­versal History, vol. i. p. 603. ediu foL
[12] When Pompey, using or abusing the rightof conquest, entered into the Holy of Holies, it wasobserved with amazement, "Nulla intus Deumeffigie, vacuam scdem et inania arcana." Tacit.Hist. v. 9. It was a popular saying, with regard tothe Jews,
Nil præter nubes et cœli numen adorant.
[■?] A second kind of circumcision was inflictedon a Samaritan or Egyptian proselyte. Tbe sullenindifference of the Talmudists, with respect to theconversion of strangers, may be seen in Basnage,Histoire des Jui£» 1. vi. c. 6.


[14] These arguments were urged with great in­genuity by the Jew Orobio, and refuted with equalingenuity and candour by the Christian Limborch.See the Arnica Collatio (it well deserves that name),
or account of the dispute between them.
[i^] Jesus - - - circumcisus erat; cibis uteba-tur Judaicis; vestitu firaili; purgatos fcabie mit-tebat ad sacerdotes; Pafcbata et aliot dies festoj re­ligiose observabat: Si quos fanavit fabatho, ostenditnon tantura ex lege, fed et exceptis sententiis taliaopera fabatho non interdicts. Grotius de VeritateReligionis Christiana;, 1. v. c. 7. A little afterwards(c. I2.>, he expatiates on the condescension of theapostles.
[16] Pæne omnes Christum Deum sub Iegis ob-fervatione credebant. Sulpicuis Severus, ii. jt.See Eusebius, Hist. Ecclesiact. 1. iv. c. 5.
[17] Mofheim de Rebus Christianis ante^Con-stantinum Magnum, p. 153. In this masterly per­formance, which I (hall often have occasion to quote,he enters much more fully into the state of the pri­mitive church, than he has an opportunity of doingin his General History.
[18] Eusebius, 1. iii.c. 5. Le Clerc Hist. Eccle-siast p. 605. During this occasional absence, thebishop and church of Pella still retained the title ofJerusalem. In the same manner, the Roman pon­tiffs resided seventy years at Avignon; and the pa­triarchs of Alexandria have long' since transferredtheir episcopal seat to Cairo.
[19] Dion Caffius, 1. lxix. The exile of theJewish nation from Jerusalem is attested by AristoofPella (apnd.Euseb. 1. iv. c. 6 ), and is mentioned byseveral ecclesiaflical writers; though some of themtoo hastily extend this interdiction to tbe wholecountry of Palestine.
[20] Eusebius, 1. iv. e. 6. Sulpicins Severns,ii. 31. By comparing their unsatisfactory accounts,Mofheim (p. 32-, &c.) has drawn out a very dis­tinct representation of the manner and motives ofthis revolution.
[21] Le Clerc (Hist. EcclesiafL p, 477, etc..)seems to have collected from Eusebius, Jerome, Epi-phanius, and other writers, all the principal circum­stances that relate to the Nazarenes or Ebionites.The nature of their opinion soon divided them into
a stricter







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AND FALL, &c.


the feeble efforts of reason, was at length assaulted by a crowd ofdaring fanatics, who, from the twelfth to the sixteenth century,assumed the popular character of reformers. The church of Romedefended by violence the empire which she had acquired by fraud ja system of peace and benevolence was soon disgraced by proscrip­tions, wars, massacres, and the institution of the holy office. Andas the reformers were animated by the love of civil, as well as ofreligious freedom, the Catholic princes connected their own interestwith that of the clergy, and enforced by fire and the sword theterrors of spiritual censures. In the Netherlands alone, morethan one hundred thousand of the subjects of Charles the Fifth aresaid to have suffered by the hand of the executioner; and this ex­traordinary number is attested by Grotius ,?+, a man of genius andlearning, who preserved his moderation amidst the fury of contend­ing sects, and who composed the annals of his own age and country,at a time when the invention of printing had facilitated the meansof intelligence, and increased the danger of detection. If we areobliged to submit our belief to the authority of Grotiue, it must beallowed, that the number of Protestants, who were executed in asingle province, and a single reign, far exceeded that of the primitivemartyrs in the space of three centuries, and of the Roman empire.But if the improbability of the fact itself should prevail over theweight of evidence: if Grotius should be convicted of exaggeratingthe merit and sufferings of the Reformers,8J; we shall be naturallyled to inquire, what confidence can be placed in the doubtful andimperfect monuments of ancient credulity; what degree of credit canbe assigned to a courtly bishop, and a passionate declaimer, who,under the protection of Constantine, enjoyed the exclusive privilegeof recording the persecutions, which Christianity had experiencedfrom the vanquished rivals or disregarded predecessors of their gra­cious sovereign.







OCR Output








TABLE of CONTENTS


OF THE


FIRST VOLUME.


CHAP. I.
The Extent and Military Force of the Em-
fire, in the Age of the Antonines.


A.D.


A.D.


INTRODUCTION
Moderation of Augustus
Imitated by his SuccessorsConquest of Britain was the first Excep­tion to it
Conquest of Dacia, the second Excep­tion to it
Conquests of Trajan in the East
Resigned by his Successor Adrian
Contrast of Hadrian and Antoninus Pius
Pacific System of Hadrian and the two
Antonines - - -
Defensive "Wars of Marcus AntoninusMilitary Establishment of the Roman Em­perors - -
Discipline ...
Exercises - -
The Legions under the Emperors
Arms - -
Cavalry
Vol. L


I
a
3


10ib.
ii
12
»3
'5
ib.
»7


Auxiliaries -
Artillery - - -
Encampment ...
March -
Number and Disposition of the Legions
Navy - -
Amount of the whole Establishment
View of the Provinces of the Roman Em­
pire -
Spain - - - -
Gaul - - -
Britain
Italy - - - -
The Danube and Illyrian Frontier
Rh;etia
Noricum and Pannonia
Dalmatia -
Mæsia and Dacia
Thrace, Macedonia, and Greece
Asia Minor
Syria, Phœnicia, and Palestine
Egypt -
Africa -
The Mediterranean, with its Islands
General Idea of the Roman Empire


P«ge
18
»9
ib.
20
ib.
22
23
ib.
ib.
*4
2S
ib.
26
*7
ib.
s8
ib.
ib.
29
30
J«
ib.
3«
33


CHAP.







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. t


and that they would forgive the execution of Arrius Antoninus, thelast representative of the name and virtues of the Antonines. Theformer, with more integrity than prudence, had attempted tolay open to his brother-in-law, the true character of Oleander..An equitable sentence pronounced by the latter, when Proconsutof Asia, against a worthless creature of the favourite, proved fatal"to him **.. Afeer the fall of Perennis, the terrors of Commodushad, for a short time, assumed the appearance of a return to virtue.He repealed the most odious of his acts, loaded his memory withthe public execration, and ascribed to the pernicious counsels ofthat wicked minister, all the errors of his inexperienced youth.But his repentance lasted only thirty days; and, under Oleander'styranny, the administration of Perennis was often regretted.
Pestilence and famine contributed to fill up the measure of the Sedition andcalamities of Rome15. The first could be only imputed to the ander.just indignation of the gods; but a monopoly of corn, supported by 'D' '89'the riches and power of the minister, was considered as the imme­diate cause of the second. The popular discontent, after it hadlong circulated in whispers, broke out in the assembled cisOtt.The people quitted their favourite amusements, for the more deli­cious pleasure of revenge, rushed in crowds towards a palace in the-siiburbs, one of the emperor's retirements, and demanded, with;angry clamoars, the head of the public enemy. Cleander, whocommanded the Praetorian guards ordered a body of cavalry to<sally forth, and disperse the seditious multitude. The multitudefled wkh precipitation towards the city; several were stain, and-many more were trampled to death :. but when the cavalry enteredthe streets, their pursuit was checked by a shower of stones and!darts from the roofs and windows of the houses. The footguards *7, who had been long jealous of the prerogatives and in­solence of the prætorian cavalry, embraced the party of the people.Tb* tumult became a.regular engagement, and threatened a general;
massacre.







OCR Output








472 THE DECLINE AND FALL


<3own toLactantius, who was preceptor to the son of Constantine6l.They all maintain and describe that system as received by thegeneral consent of the Christians of their own times; and itseems so well adapted to the desires and apprehensions of mankind,that it must have contributed in a very considerable degree to theprogress of the Christian faith. But when the edifice of the churchwas almost completed, the temporary support was laid aside. Thedoctrine of Christ's reign upon earth, was at first treated as a pro­found allegory, was considered by degrees as a doubtful and uselessopinion, and was at length rejected as the absurd invention of heresyand fanaticism 6\ A mysterious prophecy, which still forms a partof the sacred canon, but which was thought to favour the explodedsentiment, has very narrowly escaped the proscription of thechurch 6s.
Conflagration Whilst the happiness and glory of a temporal reign was promisedof the world. *° tne disciples of Christ, the most dreadful calamities were de­nounced against an unbelieving world. The edification of the newJerusalem was to advance by equal steps with the destruction of themystic Babylon: and as long as the emperors who reigned beforeConstantine persisted in the profession of idolatry, the epithet ofBabylon was applied to the city and to the empire of Rome. A re­gular series was prepared of all the moral and physical evils whichcan afflict a flourishing nation j intestine discord, and the invasion«f the fiercest barbarians from the unknown regions of the North jpestilence and famine, comets and eclipses, earthquakes and inun­dations 66. All these were only so many preparatory and alarmingsigns of the great catastrophe of Rome, when the country of theScipios and Cæsars should be consumed by a flame from Heaven,and the city of the seven hills, with her palaces, her temples,and her triumphal arches, should be buried in a vast lake of fireand brimstone. It might, however, afford some consolation toRoman vanity, that the period of their empire would be that of
the







OCR Output








NOTES ON THE NINTH CHAPTER. xxxiii


fn] The Romans made war in all climates,and by their excellent discipline were in a greatmeasure preserved in health and vigour. It maybe remarked, that man is the only animal whichcan live and multiply in every country from theequator to the poles. The hog seems to approachthe nearest to our species in that privilege.
[12] Tacit. German, c. 3. The emigration ofthe Gauls followed the course of the Danube, anddischarged itself on Greece and Asia. Tacituscould discover only one inconsiderable tribe thatretained any traces of a Gallic origin.
[13] According to Dr. Keating, (History ofIreland, p. 13, 14.J the giant Partholanus, whowas the son of Seara, the son of Esra, the son ofSru, the son of Framant, the son of Fathaclan, theson of Magog, the son of Japhet, the son of Noah,landed on the coast of Munster, the 14th day ofMay, in the year of the world one thousand ninehundred and seventy-eight. Though he succeededin his great enterprise, the loose behaviour of hiswife rendered his domestic life very unhappy, andprovoked him to such a degree, that he killed—her favourite greyhound. This, as the learnedhistorian very properly observes, was the firstinstance of female falsehood and infidelity everknown in Ireland.
[14] Genealogical History of the Tartars byAbulghazi Bahadur Khan.
[1;] His work, entitled Atlantica, is uncom­monly scarce. Bayle h;is given two most curiousextracts from it. Republique des Lettres Janvieret Fevrier, 16S;.
[16] Tacit. Germ. ii. 19. Literarum fecretaviri pariter ac feeminae ignorant. We may restcontented with this decisive authority, withoutentering into the obscure disputes concerning theantiquity of the Runic characters. The learnedCelsius, a Swede, a scholar, and a philosopher,was of opinion, that they were nothing more thanthe Roman letters, with the curves changed intostrait lines for the ease of engraving. See Pel-loutier, Histoire des Celts, 1. ii. c. 11. DictionaireDiplomatique, torn. i. p. 213. We may add, thatthe oldest Runic inscriptions are supposed to be of thethird century, and the most ancient writer who men­tions the Runic characters, is Venantius Fortunatus,(Carm. vii. 18.) who lived towards the end of the sixthcentury.
Barbara fraxineis pingatur Run a tabellis.Vol. I.


[17J Recherches Philosophiques fur les Ameri­cans, torn. iii. p. 22P. The author of that verycurious work is, if I am not misinformed, a Germanby birth.
[18] The Alexandrian Geographer is often cri­ticised by the accurate Cluverius.
[19] See Caesar, -and the learned Mr. Whitakerin his History of Manchester, vol. i.
[?o] Tacit. Germ. 1 5.
[21] When the Germans commanded the Ubitof Cologne to cast off the Roman yoke, and withtheir new freedom to resume their ancient manners,they insisted on the immediate demolition of thewalls of the colony. "Postulamus a vobis, muros'' coloniæ, muniments servitii detrahatis; etiam"sera animalia, si clausa teneas, virtutis oblivif-"cuntur." Tacit. Hist. iv. 64.
[22] The straggling villages of Silesia are severalmiles in length. See Cluver. 1. i. c. 13.
[23] One hundred and forty years after Tacitusa few more regular structures were erected near theRhine and Danube.
[24] Tacit. Germ. 17.
[25] Tacit. Germ. ;.
[26] Cæsar de Bell. Gall. vi. 21.
[27] Tacit. Germ. 26. Cæsar, vi. 72.
[28] Tacit. Germ. 6.
[29] It is said that the Mexicans and Peruvians,without the use of either money or iron had madea very great progress in the arts. Those arts, andthe monuments they produced, have been strangelymagnified. See Recherches fur les Americains,torn. ii. p. 153, &c.
[30] Tacit. Germ. 1 5.
[31] Id. 22. 23.
[32] Id. 24. The Germans might borrow thearts of play from the Romans, but the pajfitn iswonderfully inherent to the human species.
[33] Tacit. Germ. 14. *
[34] Plutarch, in Camillo. T. Liv. v. 33.
[35] Dubos. Hist, de la Monarchic Francoife,torn. i. p. 193.
e f3«] The







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. i8j


"dignity. Let us elect two emperors, one of whom may con-"duct the war against the public enemy, whilst his colleague"remains at Rome to direct the civil administration. I cheerfully"expose myself to the danger and envy of the nomination, and"give my vote in favour of Maximus and Balbinus. Ratify my"choice, conscript fathers, or appoint in their place, others moreworthy of the empire." The general apprehension silenced thewhispers of jealousy; the merit of the candidates was universallyacknowledged; and the house resounded with the sincere acclama­tions, of " long life and victory to the emperors Maximus and"Balbinus. You are happy in the judgment of the senate; may"the republic be happy under your administration 46!"
The virtues and the reputation of the new emperors justified the Their cha-
P . . racters-
most sanguine hopes of the Romans. The various nature of their
talents seemed to appropriate to each his peculiar departmentof peace and war, without leaving room for jealous emulation. Bal­binus was an admired orator, a poet of distinguished fame, and awife magistrate, who had exercised with innocence and applause,the civil jurisdiction in almost all the interior provinces of theempire. His birth was noble *7, his fortune affluent, his mannersliberal and affable. In him, the love of pleasure was corrected by afense of dignity, nor had the habits of ease deprived him of acapacity for business. The mind of Maximus was formed in arougher mould. By his valour and abilities he had raised himselffrom the meanest origin to the first employments of the state andarmy. His victories over the Sarmatians and the Germans, theausterity of his life, and the rigid impartiality of his justice, whilsthe was præfect of the city, commanded the esteem of a people,whose affections were engaged in favour of the more amiable Bal­binus. The two colleagues had both been consuls, (Balbinus hadtwice enjoyed that honourable office) both had been named amongthe twenty lieutenants of the senate, and since the one was sixtyVol. I. B b and







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 2


Roman provinces, the Rhine and the Danube, were frequently frozenover, and capable of supporting the most enormous weights. Thebarbarians, who often chose that severe season for their inroads,transported, without apprehension or danger, their numerousarmies, their cavalry, and their heavy waggons, over a vast andsolid bridge of ice '. Modern ages have not presented an instance ofa like phænomenon. 2. The rein deer, that useful animal, fromwhom the savage of the North derives the best comforts of hisdreary life, is of a constitution that supports, and even requires,the most intense cold. He is found on the rock of Spitzberg, withinten degrees of the pole; he seems to delight in the snows of Laplandand Siberia; but at present he cannot subsist, much less multiply,in any country, to the South of the Baltic +. In the time of Cæsar,the rein deer, as well as the elk, and the wild bull, was a nativeof the Hercynian forest, which then overshadowed a great partof Germany and Poland $. The modern improvements sufficientlyexplain the causes of the dimunition of the cold. These immensewoods have been gradually cleared, which intercepted from theearth the rays of the fun 6. The morasses have been drained, and,in proportion as the foil has been cultivated, the air has becomemore temperate. Canada, at this day, is an exact picture of an­cient Germany. Although situated in the same parallel with thefinest provinces of France and England, that country experiencesthe most rigorous cold. The rein deer are very numerous, theground is covered with deep and lasting snow, and the great riverof St. Lawrence is regularly frozen, in a season, when the watersof the Seine and the Thames are perfectly free from ice 7.
It is difficult to ascertain, and easy to exaggerate, the influence of Its effects onthe climate of ancient Germany over the minds and bodies of thenatives. Many writers have supposed, and most have allowed,though, as it should seem, without any adequate proof, that therigorous cold of the North was favourable to long life and genera-
F f 2 tive







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AND FALL


had recommended them to the favour of Valerian, and graduallypromoted them to the most important commands of the empire.The generals who assumed the title of Augustus, were eitherrespected by their troops for their able conduct and severe discipline,er admired for valour and success in war, or beloved for franknessand generosity. The field of victory was often the scene of theirelection, and even the armourer Marius, the most contemptible ofall the candidates for the purple, was distinguished however byintrepid courage, matchless strength, and blunt honesty ,J9. Hismean and recent trade, cast indeed an air of ridicule on his eleva­tion; but his birth could not be more obscure than was that ofthe greater part of his rivals, who were born of peasants, andTheir obscure inlisted in the army, as private soldiers. In times of confusionevery active genius finds the place assigned him by Nature: in ageneral state of war, military merit is the road to glory and togreatness. Of rhe nineteen tyrants, Tetricus only was a senator;Piso alone was a noble. The blood of Numa, through twenty-eightsuccessive generations, ran in the veins of Calphurnius Piso ,6°, who,by female alliances, claimed a right of exhibiting in his house, theimages of Crassus and of the great Pompey ,6'. His ancestors hadbeen repeatedly dignified with all the honours which the common­wealth could bestow; and of all the ancient families of Rome, theCalphurnian alone had survived the tyranny of the Cæsars. Thepersonal qualities of Piso added new lustre to his race. Theusurper Valens, by whose order he was killed, confessed, with deepremorse, that even an enemy ought to have respected the sanctityof Piso; and although he died in arms against Gallienus, the senate,with the emperor's generous permission, decreed the triumphalornaments to the memory of so virtuous a rebel l6\The cause* The lieutenants of Valerian were grateful to the father whombeilion!'" they esteemed. They disdained to serve the luxurious indolence ofhis unworthy son. The throne of the Roman world was unsup­ported







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. SS5


their idolatrous submission, and who solicited with equal ardor, butwith various success, their re-admission into the society of Chris­tians °\
IV. Notwithstanding the general rules, established for the con- Af»™«iv«
00 of seventy
viction and punishment of the Christians, the fate of those sectaries* a.n£i toiera-in an extensive and arbitrary government, must still, in a great mea­sure, have depended on their own behaviour, the circumstances ofthe times, and the temper of their supreme as well as subordinaterulers. Zeal might sometimes provoke, and: prudence might some­times avert or assuage, the superstitious f\iry of 1<he pagan6. A va*riety of motives might dispose the provincial' governors either toenforce or to relax the execution of the laws.; and of these motives,the most forcible was their regard not only for the public edicts,but for the secret intentions of the emperor, a glance from whoseeye was sufficient to kindle or to extinguish the flames of persecu­tion. As often as any occasional severities were exercised in thedifferent parts of the empire, the primitive Christians lamented andperhaps magnified their own sufferings ; but the celebrated number The ten per-of ten persecutions has been determined by the ecclesiastical writers secut,on'•of the fifth century, who possessed a more distinct view of the pro­sperous or adverse fortunes of the church, from the age of Nero tothat of Diocletian. The ingenious parallels of the ten plagues ofEgypt, arid' of the ten horns of the Apocalypse, first suggested thiscalculation to their minds, and in their application of the faith ofprophecy to the truth of history, they were careful to select thosereigns which, were indeed the most hostile to the Christian cause ,OJ.But these transient persecutions, served only to revive the zeal^ and torestore the discipline of the faithful: and the moments of extraor­dinary rigour were compensated by much longer intervals of peaceand security. The indifference of some princes, and the indulgenceof others, 'permitted"the Christiarfs to enjoy, though not peifiaps alegal, yet an^actuaVand public toleration of their religion;
4B2 The







OCR Output








2o8 THE DECLINE AND FALL


terrible; but he had seldom occasion to punish more than once the*same offence. His own conduct gave a sanction to his laws, and theseditious legion dreaded a chief who had learned to obey, and whowas worthy to command.He concludes The death °f Claudius had revived the fainting spirit of the Goths-theeGothsith "^ne tr0°P& which guarded the passes of mount Haemus, and the banks*of the Danube, had been drawn away by the apprehension of aeivil war; and it is probable that the remaining body of the Gothicand Vandalic tribes embraced the favourable opportunity, left theirsettlements of the Ukraine, traversed the rivers, and swelled withnew multitudes the destroying host of their countrymen. Theirunited numbers were at length encountered by Aurelian, and thebloody and douhtful conflict ended only with the approach ofnight Exhausted by so many calamities which they had mutuallyEndured and inflicted during a twenty years war, the Goths andthe Romans consented to a lasting and beneficial treaty. It wasearnestly solicited by the barbarians, and cheerfully ratified by thelegions, to whose suffrage Aurelian prudently referred the decisionof that important question. The Gothic nation engaged to supplythe armies of Rome with a body of two thousand auxiliaries, con-fisting entirely of cavalry, and stipulated in return an undisturbedretreat, with a regular market as far as the Danube, provided b;jrthe emperor's care, but at their own expence. The treaty was-observed with such religious fidelity,, that when a party of five hun­dred men straggled from the camp in quest of plunder, the king orgeneral of the barbarians commanded that the guilty leader shouldbe apprehended and shot to death with darts, as a victim devoted tothe sanctity of their engagements. It is, however, not unlikely*,that the precaution of Aurelian, who had exacted as hostages thesons and daughters of the Gothic chiefs, contributed something to-this pacific temper. The youths he trained in arms, and near hisown person i to the damsels he gave a liberal and Roman educations
and.







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 23?


"tutelar deities of the empire. Above sixty thousand barbarians"were destroyed; not by the Roman arms, but in our sight, and"for our entertainment. May the nations, enemies of Rome, ever"preserve this enmity to each other! We have now attained the"utmost verge of prosperity 79, and have nothing left to demand"of Fortune except the discord of the barbarians 8°." These sen­timents, less worthy of the humanity than of the patriotism ofTacitus, express the invariable maxims of the policy of his coun­trymen. They deemed it a much safer expedient to divide than tocombat the barbarians, from whose defeat they could derive nei­ther honour nor advantage. The money and negociations of Rome,insinuated themselves into the heart of Germany; and every art ofseduction was used with dignity, to conciliate those nations whomtheir proximity to the Rhine or Danube might render the most usefulfriends, as well as the most troublesome enemies. Chiefs of renownand power were flattered by the most trifling presents, which theyreceived either as marks of distinction, or as the instruments ofluxury. In civil distensions, the weaker faction endeavoured tostrengthen its interest by entering into secret connexions with thegovernors of the frontier provinces. Every quarrel among the Ger­mans, was fomented by the intrigues of Rome; and every plan ofunion and public good, defeated by the stronger bias of private jea­lousy and interest81.
Transient
The general conspiracy which terrified the Romans under the union againstreign of Marcus Antoninus, embraced almost all the nations of Marcu,Ant0-Germany, and even Sarmatia, from the mouth of the Rhine to that--of the Danube81. It is impossible for us to determine whetherthis hasty confederation was formed by necessity, by reason, or bypassion; but we may rest assured, that the barbarians were neitherallured by the indolence or provoked by the ambition of the Romanmonarch. This dangerous invasion required all the firmness andvigilance of Marcus. He fixed generals of ability in the severalstations of attack, and assumed in person the conduct of the most
important


nmus.







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 295


the remainder was fold into servitude; and so considerable was thenumber of female captives, that every soldier obtained to his sharetwo or three women. A circumstance from which we may con­clude, that the invaders entertained some designs of settlement aswell as of plunder; since in a naval expedition they were accom­panied by their families. III. The loss of their fleet, which waseither taken or funk, had intercepted the retreat of the Goths. A vastcircle of Roman posts distributed with skill, supported with firmness,and gradually closing towards a common center, forced the barbariansinto the most inaccessible parts of mount Haemus, where they found asafe refuge, but a very scanty subsistence. During* the course of arigorous winter, in which they were besieged by the emperor'stroops, famine and pestilence, desertion and the sword, continuallydiminished the imprisoned multitude. On the return of spring, A. D. 270.nothing appeared in arms except a hardy and desperate band, theremnant of that mighty host which had embarked at the mouth ofthe Niester.
The pestilence which swept away such numbers of the barbarians, Msrcb.at length proved fatal to their conqueror. After a sliort but glo- emperor, whorious reign of two years, Claudius expired at Sirmium, amidst the Au^nsortears and acclamations of his subjects. In his last illness, he con- his successor-vened the principal officers of the state and army, and in their pre­sence recommended Aurelian, one of his generals, as the most de­serving of the throne, and the best qualified to execute the great de­sign which he himself had been permitted only to undertake. Thevirtues of Claudius, his valour, affability'4, justice, and tempe­rance, his love of fame and of his country, place him in that shortlist of emperors who added lustre to the Roman purple. Those vir­tues, however, were celebrated with peculiar zeal and complacencyby the courtly writers of the age of Constantine, who was the greatgrandson of Crifpus, the elder brother of Claudius. The voice offlattery was soon taught to repeat, that the gods, who so hastily had
snatched







OCR Output








THE PECLINE AND FALL


and the twoAntonines.


almost a perpetual journey; and as he possessed the various talentsof the soldier, the. statesman, and the scholar, he gratified his cu­riosity in the discharge of his duty. Careless of the difference ofseasons and of climates, he marched on foot, and bare-headed, overthe snows of Caledonia, and the sultry plains of the Upper Egypt;nor was there a province of the empire, which, in the course of hisreign, was not honoured with the presence of the monarch,s.But the tranquil life of Antoninus Pius was spent in the bosom ofItaly; and, during the twenty-three years that he directed the publicadministration, the longest journies of that amiable prince, wereno more than from his palace in Rome> to the retirement of hisLanuvian Villal5.
ImalmT Nowithstanding this difference in their personal conduct, thegeneral system of Augustus was equally adopted and uniformlypursued by Hadrian and by the two Antonines. "They persisted inthe design of maintaining the dignity of the empire, without at­tempting to enlarge its limits. By every honourable expedient theyinvited the friendship of the barbarians; and endeavoured toconvince mankind, that the Roman power, raised above the tempta­tion of conquest, was actuated only by the love of order and justice.During a long period of forty-three years their virtuous labourswere crowned with success; and if we except a few flight hostili­ties that served to exercise the legions of the frontier, the reigns ofHadrian and Antoninus Pius offer the fair prospect of universalpeace 11. The Roman name was revered among the most re­mote nations of the earth. The fiercest barbarians frequently sub­mitted their differences to the arbitration of the emperor, and weare informed by a cotemporary historian, that he had seen am­bassadors who were refused the honour which they came to solicit,of being admitted into the rank of subjectsl8.Defensive The terror of the Roman arms added weight and dignity to theMsAwoni!'" moderation of the emperors. They preserved peace by a constantnus* - preparation







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AND FALL


must confess that a few short intervals of peace were insufficient for
the arduous work of reformation. Even his attempt to restore the
integrity of the coin, was opposed by a formidable^ insurrection.
The emperor's vexation breaks out in one of his private letters.
"Surely," fays he, " the gods have decreed that my life should be
"a perpetual warfare. A sedition within the walls has just now
"given birth to a very serious civil war. The workmen of the mint,
"at the instigation of Felicissimus, a stave to whom I had entrusted
"an employment in the finances, have risen in rebellion. They
"are at length suppressed; but seven thousand of my soldiers have
"been flain in the contest, of those troops whose ordinary station
"is in Dacia, and the camps along the Danube88." Other writers,
who confirm the fame fact, add likewise, that it happened soon after
Aurelian's triumph; that the decisive engagement was fought on
the Cælian hill; that the workmen of the mint had adulterated the
coin* and that the emperor restored the public credit, by delivering
out good money in exchange for the bad, which the people was
commanded to bring into the treasury
Observation! We might content ourselves with relating this extraordinaryupon it. ,
transaction, but we cannot dissemble how much in its present form
it appears to us inconsistent and incredible. The debasement of thecoin is indeed well suited to the administration of Gallienus; nor isit unlikely that the instruments of the corruption might dread theinflexible justice of Aurelian. But the guilt, as well as the profit,must have been confined to a few; nor is it easy to conceive by whatarts they could arm a people whom they had injured against a mo­narch whom they had betrayed. We might naturally expect, thatsuch miscreants should have shared the public detestation with theinformers and the other ministers of oppression; and that the re­formation of the coin should have been an action equally popularwith the destruction of those obsolete accounts, which by the empe­ror's order were burnt in the forum of Trajan 9°. In an age when


2 the







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


that period, he hoped that the wounds of civil discord wouldbe completely healed, and that the republic, restored to its pristinehealth and vigour, would no longer require the dangerous inter­position of so extraordinary a magistrate. The memory of thiscomedy, repeated several times during the life of Augustus, waspreserved to the last ages of the empire, by the peculiar pomp withwhich the perpetual monarchs of Rome always solemnized the tenthyears of their reign 6.
Without any violation of the principles of the constitution, the Power of the
. _ . _ . , Roman ge-
general of the Roman armies might receive and exercise an au- neral*.thority almost despotic over the soldiers, the enemies, and thesubjects of the republic. With regard to the soldiers, the jealousyof freedom had, even from the earliest ages of Rome, given way tothe hopes of conquest, and a just fense of military discipline. Thedictator, or cousul, had a right to command the service of theRoman youth; and to punisti an obstinate or cowardly disobedienceby the most severe and ignominious penalties, by striking theoffender out of the list of citizens, by confiscating his property,and by felling his person into slavery '. The most sacred rights offreedom, confirmed by the Porcian and Sempronean laws, weresuspended by the military engagement. In his camp the ge­neral exercised an absolute power of life and death; his juris­diction was not confined by any forms of trial, or rules of pro­ceeding, and the execution of the sentence was immediate and with­out appeal8. The choice of the enemies of Rome was regularlydecided by the legislative authority. On the most important occa­sions, peace and war were seriously debated in the senate, andsolemnly ratified by the people. But when the arms of the legionswere carried. to a.great distance from Italy, the generals assumed theliberty of directing them against whatever people, and in what­ever manner, they judged most advantageous for the public service.It was from the success, not from the justice of their enterprises,
that







OCR Output













OCR Output








xlviii NOTES ON THE TWELFTH CHAPTER.


that Probus assumed the empire in Illyricum; anopinion which (though adopted by a very learnedman) would throw that period of history into in­extricable confusion.
[21] Hist. August, p. 229.
[22] He was to fend judges to the Parthians,Persians, and Sarmatians, a president to Taprobana,and a proconsul to the Roman island (supposed byCafaubon and Salmasius to mean Britain). Such ahistory as mine (fays Vopifcus with proper modesty)will not subsist a thousand years to expose or justifythe prediction.
[23] For the private life of Probus, fee Vopifcusin Hist. August, p. 234—237.
[24] According to the Alexandrian Chronicle,he was fifty at the time of his death.
[25] The letter was addressed to the pr*torianprefect, whom (on condition of his good behaviour)he promised to continue in his great office. SeeHist. August, p. 237.
[26] Vopifcus in Hist. August, p. 237. Thedate of the letter is assuredly faulty. Instead ofNou. Fttrutr. we may read Nun, August.
[27] Hist. August, p. 238. It is odd, that thesenate should treat Probus less favourably than Mar­cus Antoninus. That prince had received, even be­fore the death of Pius Jui quintue rtlatioais. SeeCapitolin. in Hist. August, p. 24.
[28] See thedutiful letter of Probus to the senate,after his German victories. Hist. August, p 239.
[29] The date and duration of the reign of Pro-bus are very correctly ascertained by Cardinal Noris,in his learned work, De Epochis Syro-Macedonum,p. 96—105. A passage of Eufebius connects thesecond years of Probus, with the æras of several ofthe Syrian cities.
[30] Vopifcus in Hist. August, p. 239.
[31] Zosimus (1. i. p. 62—65.) tells a very longand trifling story of Lycius the Isaurian robber.
[32] Zosim. 1. i. p. 6y. Vopifcus in Hist. Au­gust, p. 239, 240. But it seems incredible, that the


defeat of the Savages of Æthiopia could affect thePersian monarch.
[33] Besides these well-known chiefs, severalothers are named by Vopifcus (Hist. August, p.2; 1). whose actions have not reached our know­ledge.
[34] See the Cæsars of Julian and Hist. August,p. 238, 24c, 241.
[3;] Zosimus, 1. i. p. 62. Hist. August, p. 240.But the latter supposes the punishment inflicted withthe consent of their kings; if so, it was partial likethe offence.
[36] See Cluver. Germania Antiqua, 1. iii. Pto­lemy places in their country the city of Calisia,probably Calilh in Silesia.
[37] Ferolit umbra, is the expression of Tacitus:it is surely a very bold one.
[38] Tacit. Germania ( c. 43.).
[59] Vopifcus in Hist. August.p. 238.
[40] Hist. August, p. 238, 239. Vopifcus quotesa letter from the emperor to the senate, in which hementions his design of reducing Germany into aprovince.
[41] Strabo, 1. vii. According to Velleius Pater-culus (ii. 108.) Maroboduus led his Marcomanniinto Bohemia: Cluverius (German. Antiq. iii. 8.)proves that it was from Swabia.
[42] These settlers from the payment of tytheswere denominated, Decumatet. Tacit. Germania,c. 29.
[43] See Notes de l'Abbe de la Bleterie a laGermanic do Tacite, p. 183. His account of thewall is chiefly borrowed (as he fays himself J fromthe Alsatia Illustrate of Schœpflin.
[44] See Recherches fur les Chinois et les Egyp-tiens, torn. ii. p. 8(—102. The anonymous authoris well acquainted with the globe in general, andwith Germany in particular: with regard to thelatter, he quotes a work of M. Hanfelman; buthe seems to confound the wall of Probus, designedagainst the Alemanni, with the fortification of the


6 Mat-







OCR Output








■io8 THE DECLINE AND FALL


hands. To divert the Prætorian hands from these dangerous reflec­tions, the firmest and best established princes were obliged to mixblandishments with commands, rewards with punishments, to flattertheir pride, indulge their pleasures, connive at their, irregularities,and to purchase their precarious faith by a liberal donative; whicfysince the elevation of Claudius, was exacted as a legal claim, on theaccession of every new emperor \Their spc- The advocates of the guards endeavoured to justify by arguments,the power, which they asserted by arms; and to maintain that, ac­cording to the best principles of the constitution, their consent wasessentially necessary in the appointment of an emperor. The elec­tion of consuls, of generals, and of magistrates, however it had beenrecently usurped by the senate, was the ancient and undoubted rightof the Roman people7. But where was the Roman people to befound? Not surely amongst the mixed multitude of staves andstrangers that filled the streets of Rome; a servile populace, as de­void of spirit as destitute of property^ The defenders of the state,selected from the flower of the Italian youth",' and trained in theexercise of arms and virtue, were the genuine representatives of thepeople, and the best entitled to elect the military chief of the re­public. These assertions, however defective in reason, became un­answerable, when the fierce Prætorians increased their weight, bythrowing, like the barbarian conqueror of Rome, their swords intothe scale 9.
They offer The Prætorians had violated the sanctity of the throne, by thesale.""1" 6 10 atrocious murder of Pertinax; they dishonoured the majesty ofit, by their subsequent conduct. The camp was without a leader,for even the præfect Lætus, .who has excited the tempest, prudentlydeclined the public indignation. Amidst the wild disorder Sulpi-cianus, the emperor's father-in-law, and governor of the city, whohad been sent to the camp on the first alarm of mutiny, was en­deavouring to calm the fury of the multitude, when he was silenced







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 19


We have attempted to explain the spirit which moderated, and Vle«r of the
* * * provinces 01
the strength which supported, the power of Hadrian and the Anto- the Roman
. r .r empire.
nines. We shall now endeavour with clearness and precision todescribe the provinces once united under their sway, but, at present,divided into so many independent and hostile states.
Spain, the western extremity of the empire, of Europe, and of the Spain,ancient world, has, in every age, invariably preserved the same na­tural limits; the Pyrenæan mountains, the Mediterranean, and theAtlantic Ocean. That great peninsula, at present so unequallydivided between two sovereigns, was distributed by Augustus intothree provinces, Lusitania, Bætica, and Tarraconensis. The king­dom of Portugal has succeeded to the warlike country of the Lu-sitanians; since the loss sustained by the former, on the side of theEast, is compensated by an accession of territory towards the North.The confines of Grenada and Andalusia correspond with those ofancient Baetica. The remainder of Spain, Gallicia, and the Asturias,Biscay, and Navarre, Leon, and the two Castilles, Murcia, Va­lencia, Catalonia, and Arragon, all contributed to form the thirdand most considerable of the Roman governments, which, from thename of its capital, was styled the Province of Tarragona 7°. Ofthe native barbarians, the Celtiberians were the most powerful, asthe Cantabrians and Asturians proved the most obstinate. Confidentin the strength of their mountains, they were the last who sub­mitted to the arms of Rome, and the first who threw off the yokeof the Arabs.
Ancient Gaul, as it contained the whole country between the Gaul.Pyrenees, the Alps, the Rhine, and the Ocean, was of greater ex­tent than modern France. To the dominions of that powerfulmonarchy, with its recent acquisitions of Alsace and Lorraine, wemust add the dutchy of Savoy, the cantons of Switzerland, the fourelectorates of the Rhine, Liege, Luxemburgh, Hainault, Flanders,and Brabant. When Augustus gave laws to the conquests of his
D 2 father,







OCR Output








*54 THE DECLINE AND FALL


Wise and mo­derate admi­nistration.


Educationand virtuoustemper ofAlexander.


Journal of hisordinary life.


executed on the ready accusation of treason, and the wife of Alexanderdriven with ignominy from the palace, and banished into Africa 6\
Notwithstanding this act of jealous cruelty, as well as someinstances of avarice, with which Mamæa is charged; the ge­neral tenour of her administration was equally for the benefit ofher son and of the empire. With the approbation of the senate,she chose sixteen of the wisest and most virtuous senators, as a per­petual council of state, before whom every public business of mo­ment was debated and determined. The celebrated Ulpian, equallydistinguished by his knowledge ofr and his respect, for, the laws ofRome, was at their head; and the prudent firmness of this aristo-qracy restored order and authority to the government. As soon asthey had purged the city from foreign superstition and luxury, theremains of the capricious tyranny of Elagabalus, they applied them­selves to remove his worthless creatures from every department of pub­lic administration, and to supply their places with men of virtue andability. Learning, and the love of justice, became the only recom­mendations for civil offices. Valour, and the love of discipline, thf>only qualifications for military employments 6S.
But the most important care of IVfamsea and her wife counsellors^was to form the character of the young emperor, on whose personalqualities the happiness or misery of the Roman world must ulti­mately depend. The fortunate soil assisted, and even prevented thehand of cultivation. An excellent understanding soon convincedAlexander of the advantages of virtue, the pleasure of knowledge,and the necessity of labour. A natural mildness and moderation oftemper, preserved him from the assaults of pastlon and the allure­ments of vice. His unalterable regard for his mother, and hisesteem for the wife Ulpian, guarded his unexperienced youth fromthe poison of flattery.
The simple journal of his ordinary occupations exhibits a pleasingpicture of an accomplished emperor6', and with some allowance
• :for







OCR Output








Ot THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 297


TJlpius Crinitus, whose blood was derived from the fame source asthat of Trajan, adopted the Pannonian peasant, gave him his daughterin marriage, and relieved with his ample fortune the honourablepoverty which Aurelian had preserved inviolate ,8.
The reign of Aurelian was only four years and about nine Aurelian'smonths; but every instant of that short period was filled by some reign,memorable atchievment. He put an end to the Gothic war, chas­tised the Germans who invaded Italy, recovered Gaul, Spain, andBritain out*of the hands of Tetricus, and destroyed the proud mo­narchy which Zenobia had erected in the East, on the ruins of theafflicted empire.
It was the rigid attention of Aurelian, even to the minutest ar- His severe dis.licles of discipline, which bestowed such uninterrupted success on hisarms. His military regulations are contained in a very conciseepistle to one of his inferior officers, who is commanded to enforcethem, as he wishes to become a tribune, or as he is desirous to live.Gaming, drinking, and the arts of divination, were severely pro­hibited. Aurelian expected that his soldiers should be modest,frugal, and laborious; that their armour should be constantly keptbright, their weapons .sharp, their clothing and horses ready forimmediate service; that they should live in their quarters with chas­tity and sobriety, without damaging the corn fields, without stealingeven a sheep, a fowl, or a bunch of grapes, without exacting fromtheir landlords either salt, or oil, or wood. "The public allow-u ance,'.' continues the emperor, "is sufficient for their support;u their wealth should be collected from the spoil of the enemy, not'* from the tears of the provincials 'V A single instance will serveto display the rigour, and even cruelty, of Aurelian. One of thesoldiers had seduced the wife of his host. The guilty wretch wasfastened to two trees forcibly drawn towards each other, and his limbstorn asunder by their sudden separation. A few such examples im­pressed a salutary consternation. The punishments of Aurelian wereVol. I. Q^q terrible j







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


appellation of heretics has always been applied to the less numerousparty. To these domestic testimonies we may add the confession,the complaints, and the apprehensions of the Gentiles themselves.From a philosophic writer who had studied mankind, and who de­scribes their manners in the most lively colours, we may learn, thatunder the reign of Commodus, his native country of Pontus wasfilled with Epicureans and Christians ''*. Within fourscore yearsafter the death of Christ the humane Pliny laments the mag­nitude of the evil which he vainly attempted to eradicate. In hisvery curious epistle to the emperor Trajan, he affirms, that the tem­ples were almost deserted, that the sacred victims scarcely found anypurchasers, and that the superstition had not only infected the cities,'but had even spread itself into the villages and the open country ofPontus and Bithynia's6. .- .
Without descending into a minute scrutiny of the expressions, or The churchof the motives of those writers who either celebrate or lament theprogress of Christianity in the East, it may in general be observed,that none of them have left us any grounds from whence a justestimate might be formed of the real numbers of the faithful inthose provinces. One circumstance, however, has been fortunatelypreserved, which seems to cast a more distinct light on this obscurebut interesting subject. Under the reign of Theodosius, after Chri-,stianity had enjoyed, during more than sixty years, the sunshine ofimperial favour, the ancient and illustrious church of Antioch con­sisted of one hundred thousand persons, three thousand of whom,were supported out of the public oblations ,S7. The splendor anddignity of the queen of the East, the acknowledged populousnessof Cæsarea, Seleucia, and Alexandria, and the destruction of twohundred and fifty thousand souls in the. earthquake which afflicted^Antioch under the elder Justin M% are . so many convincing proofsthat the whole number of its inhabitants was not less than half amillion, and that the Christians, however multiplied bj zeal and,'. i T11 2 ,v power,







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 377


as favourable to the operations of infantry, as it was inconvenientfor the motions of cavalry 7°. Adversity had confirmed the Ro­man discipline, whilst the barbarians, elated by success, were become His victoryso negligent and remiss, that in the moment when they least ex­pected it, they were surprised by the active conduct of Galerius>who, attended only by two horsemen, had with his own eyes secretlyexamined the state and position of their camp. A surprise, especiallyin the night-time, was for the most part fatal to a Persian army.Their horses were tied, and generally shackled, to prevent their run­ning away ; and if an alarm happened, a Persian had his housing to«* fix, his horse to bridle, and his corflet to put on, before he could"mount 7V On the occasion, the impetuous attack of Galeriusspread disorder and dismay over the camp of the barbarians. Aflight resistance was followed by a dreadful carnage, and in thegeneral confusion, the wounded monarch (for Narses commandedhis armies in person) fled towards the deserts of Media. Hissumptuous tents, and those of his Satraps, afforded an immensebooty to the conqueror; and an incident is mentioned, whichproves the rustic but martial ignorance of the legions in the elegantsuperfluities of life. A bag of shining leather silled with pearls,fell into the hands of a private soldier; he carefully preserved thebag, but he threw away its contents, judging, that whatever was ofno use could not possibly be of any value 7\ The principal loss £^5"of Narses was of a much more affecting nature. Several of his "P"*"-wives, his sisters, and children, who had attended the army, weremade captives in the defeat. But though the character of Ga~lerius had ip general very little affinity with that of Alexander,he imitated, after his victory, the amiable behaviour of the Ma­cedonian towards the family of Darius. The wives and childrenof Narses were protected from violence and rapine, conveyedto a place of safety, and treated with every mark of respect andVol. I. C c c tenderness,







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


would prefer even a female scepter to the sanctity of the Romanlaws. The consul then addressing himself to Tacitus, the first ofthe senators *, required his opinion on the important subject of aproper candidate for the vacant throne.
If we can prefer personal merit to accidental greatness, we shall charter ofesteem the birth of Tacitus more truly noble than that of kings. Tacitas*He claimed his descent from the philosophic historian, whose writ­ings will instruct the last generations of mankind 5. The senatorTacitus was then seventy-five years of age 6. The long period ofhis innocent life was adorned with wealth and honours. He hadtwice been invested with the consular dignity 7, and enjoyed his am­ple patrimony of between two and three millions sterling with ele­gance and sobriety 8. The experience of so many princes, whomhe had esteemed or endured, from the vain follies of Elagabalus tothe useful rigour of Aurelian, taught him to form a just estimate ofthe duties, the dangers, and the temptations, of their sublimestation. From the assiduous study of his immortal ancestor he derivedthe knowledge of the Roman constitution, and of human natureThe voice of the people had already named Tacitus as the citizenthe most worthy of empire. The ungrateful rumour reached hisears, and induced him to seek the retirement of one of his villas inCampania. He had pasted two months in the delightful privacy ofFaiæ, when he reluctantly obeyed the summons of the consul toresume his honourable place in the senate, and to assist the republicwith his counsels' on this important occasion.
He arose to speak, when, from every quarter of the house, he was He is electedsaluted with the names of Augustus and emperor. *' Tacitus Au- empcr0r»"gustus, the gods preserve thee, we chuse thee for our sovereign .•*Mto thy care we entrust the republic and the world. Accept the** empire from the authority of the senate. It is due to thy rank,**• to thy conduct, to thy manners." As soon as the tumult of ac­clamations subsided, Tacitus attempted to decline the dangerous
honour,







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 347


and Nume-rian.


"overspread the sky was so thick, that we could no longer dis-"tinguish each other; and the incessant flashes of lightning took"from us the knowledge of all that passed in the general confusion.*' Immediately after the most violent clap of thunder, we heard a"sudden cry, that the emperor was dead; and it soon appeared,"that his chamberlains, in a rage of grief, had set fire to the"royal pavillion, a circumstance which gave rife to the report that"Carus was killed by lightning. But, as far as we have been able tow investigate the truth, his death was the natural effect of his disorder76."
The vacancy of the throne was not productive of any disturbance. He !s succeed-The ambition of the aspiring generals was checked by their mu- sons Carina*tual fears, and young Numerian, with his absent brother Carinus,were unanimously acknowledged as Roman emperors. The publicexpected that the successor of Carus would pursue his father's foot­steps, and, without allowing the Persians to recover from their con­sternation, would advance sword in hand to the palaces of Susa andEcbatana 11. But the legions, however strong in numbers and dis­cipline, were dismayed by the most abject superstition. Notwith­standing all the arts that were practised to disguise the manner of thelate emperor's death, it was found impossible to remove the opinionof the multitude, and the power of opinion is irresistible. Places orpersons struck with lightning were considered by the ancients withpious horror, as singularly devoted to the wrath of Heaven 78. Anoracle was remembered, which marked the river Tigris as thefatal boundary of the Roman arms. The troops, terrified with thefate of Carus and with their own danger, called aloud on youngNumerian to obey the will of the gods, and to lead them awayfrom this inauspicious scene of war. The feeble emperor was un­able to subdue their obstinate prejudice, and the Persians wonderedat the unexpected retreat of a victorious enemy 7'.
The intelligence of the mysterious fate of the late emperor, was A. D. 284.soon carried from the frontiers of Persia to Rome; and the senate,
Y y 2 , as


Vices of Ca­rinus.







OCR Output








284 THE DECLINE AND FALL


not improbable, that this private injury might affect the capital moredeeply, than all the conquests of the Goths or the Persians.Tumults of II. The foundation of Alexandria was a noble design, at onceAlexandria. conceived and exectlted by the son of Philip. The beautiful andregular form of that great city, second only to Rome itself, compre­hended a circumference of fifteen miles 169; it was peopled by threehundred thousand free inhabitants, besides at least an equal numberof staves ,7°. The lucrative trade of Arabia and India flowedthrough the port of Alexandria, to the capital and provinces of theempire. Idleness was unknown. Some were employed in blowingof glass, others in weaving of linen, others again manufacturingthe papyrus. Either sex, and every age, was engaged in the pur­suits of industry, nor did even the blind or the lame want occupa­tions suited to their condition l7\ But the people of Alexandria, avarious mixture of nations, united the vanity and inconstancy ofthe Greeks, with the superstition and obstinacy of the Egyptians.The most trifling '^occasion, a transient scarcity of flesh or lentils, theneglect of an accustomed salutation, a mistake of precedency in thepublic baths, or even a religious dispute '7*, were at any time sufficientto kindle a sedition among that vast multitude, whose resentmentswere furious and implacable '7K After the captivity of Valerianand the indolence of his son had relaxed the authority of the laws,the Alexandrians abandoned themselves- to the ungoverned rage oftheir passions, and their unhappy country was the theatre of a civilwar, that continued (with a few short and suspicious truces) abovetwelve years '7*. All intercourse was cut off between the severalquarters of the afflicted city, every street was polluted with blood,every building of strength converted into a citadel; nor did thetumults subside, till a considerable part of Alexandria was irre­trievably ruined. The spacious and magnificent district of Bruchion,with its palaces and musæum, the residence of the kings and philo­sopher*







OCR Output








NOTES ON THE EIGHTH CHAPTER. xxxi


[31] These colonies were extremely numerous.Seleucus Nicat»r founded thirty-nine cities, allnamed from himself, or some of his relations (feeAppian in Syriac, p. 1 24.). The æra of Seleucus(still in use among the Eastern Christians) appears aslate as the year 508, of Christ 196, on the medalsof the Greek cities within the Parthian empire.See Moyle's works, vol. i. p. 273, &c. and M.Froret. Mem. ds PAcademic, torn. xix.
[32] The modern Persians distinguish that periodas the dynasty of the kings of the nations. SeePlin. Hist. Nat. vi. 25.
[33] Eutychius (torn. i. p. 367. 371. 375.) re­lates the siege of the island of Mesene in the Tigris,with some circumstances not unlike the story ofNisus and Scylla.
[34] Agathias, ii. 164. The princes of Se-gestan defended their independence for many years.As romances generally transport to an ancient pe­riod the events of their own time, it is not impos­sible, that the fabulous exploits of Rustan prince ofSegestan may have been grafted on this real history.
[35] Chardin, torn. iii. c. 1, 2, 3.
[36] Dion, 1. xxviii. p. 1335.
[37] For the precise situation of Babylon, Se-leucia, Ctesiphon, Modain, and Bagdad, cities oftenconfounded with each other; fee an excellent Geo­graphical Tract of M Danville, in Mem. de l'Aca-demie, torn. xxx.
[38] Tacit. Annal. xi. 43. Plin. Hist. Nat.vi. 26.
[39] This may be inferred from Strabo, 1. xvi.P- 743-
[40] That most curious traveller Bernier (feeHist, de Voyages, torn, x.) who followed the campef Aurengzebe from Dehli to Castimir, describes withgreat accuracy that immense moving city. 1 heguard of cavalry consisted of 35,000 men, that ofinfantry of io,ooq. ft was computed that the campcontained 150,000 horses, mules, and elephants;50,000 camels, 5o,coo oxen, and between 300,000and 400,000 persons. Almost all Dehli followed thecourt, whose magnificence supported its industry.
[41] Dion, 1. lxxi. p. 1178. Hist. August p. 38.Eutrop. viii. 10. Euseb, in Chronic. Quadratus


(quoted in the Augustan History) attempted to vin­dicate the Romans, by alleging, that the citizensof Scleucia had first violated th.ir faith.
[42] Dion, 1. lxxv. p. 1263. Herodian, 1. iii.p. 120. Hist. August, p. 70.
[43] The polished citizens of Antioch, calledthose of Edessa, mixed barbarians. It was, however,some praise, that of the three dialects of the Syriac,the purest and most elegant (the Aramæan) wasspoke at Edessa. This remark M. Bayer (Hist.Edess. p. 5.) has borrowed from George of Ma-latia a Syrian Writer.
[41] Dion, 1 lxxv. p. 1248, 1249, 1250. M.Bayerhas neglected to use this most important passage.
[45] This kingdom, from Osrhoes, who gave a-new name to the country, to the last Abgarus, hadlasted 353 years. See the learned work of M.Bayer, Historia Osrhoena et Edessena»
[4.6] Xenophon, in the preface to the Cyropaedia,gives a clear and magnificent idea of the extent ofthe empire of Cyrus. Herodotus (1. iii. c. 79, &c.)enters into a curious and particular description ofthe twenty great Satrapies into which the Persiaaempire was divided by Darius Hystaspes.
[47] Herodian, vi. 209. 212.
[4S] There were two hundred scythed chariots*at the battle of Arbela, in the host of Darius. Iathe vast army of Tigranes, which was vanquished byLucullus, seventeen thousand horse only were com­pletely armed. Antiochus brought fifty-four ele­phants into the field against the Romans: by hisfrequent wars and negociations with the princes ofIndia, he had once collected an hundred and fifty ofthose great animals; but it may be questioned,,whether the most powerful monarch of Hindostaaever formed a line of battle of seven hundredelephants.
[49] Hist. August, p. 133.
[51] M. de Tillemont has already observed, thatHerodian's geography is somewhat confused.
[5:] Moses of Chorene (Hist. Armen. 1, ii. c. 71.J.illustrates this invasion of Media, by asserting, thatChosroes, king of Armenia, defeated Artaxerxes,and pursued him to the confines of India. The
exploit*







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 581


But this treacherous calm was of short duration, nor could the Max,",in pre­pares to renew
Christians of the East place any confidence in the character of their jhepersceu-sovereign. Cruelty and superstition were the ruling passions of thefoul of Maximin. The former suggested the means, the latterpointed out the objects, of persecution. The emperor was devotedto the worship of the gods, to the study of magic, and to the be­lief of oracles. The prophets or philosophers, whom he revered asthe favourites of heaven, were frequently raised to the governmentof provinces, and admitted into his most secret councils. Theyeasily convinced him, that the Christians had been indebted for theirvictories to theip regular discipline, and that the weakness of poly­theism had principally stowed from a want of union and subordi­nation among the ministers of religion. A system of governmentwas therefore instituted, which was evidently copied from the policyof the church. In all the great cities of the empire, the templeswererepaired and beautified by the order of Maximin; and the offi­ciating priests of the various deities were subjected to the authorityof a superior pontiff, destined to oppose the bishop, and to pro­mote the cause of paganism. These pontiffs acknowledged, in theirturn, the supreme jurisdiction of the metropolitans or .high-priests!of the province, who acted as the immediate vicegerents of the.em~peror himself. A white robe was the ensign of their dignity; andthese new prelates were carefully selected from the most noble andopulent families. By the influence of the magistrates, and of thesacerdotal order, a great number of dutiful addresses were obtained,,particularly from the cities of Nicomedia, Antioch, and Tyre, which,artfully represented the well-known intentions of the court as thegeneral fense of, the people; solicited the emperor to consult the laws,of justice rather than the dictates of his clemency; expressed their,abhorrence of the Christians, and humbly prayed that those impi­ous sectaries might at least he excluded from the limits of their,respective territories. The answer of Maximin to the address which
he







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 3*


names, and with various ceremonies, they adored the fame deities.The elegant mythology of Homer gave a beautiful, and almost aregular form, to the polytheism of the ancient world !.
The philosophers of Greece deduced their morals from the na- Of phiioso-ture of man rather than from that of God. They meditated, how- rherS*ever, on the Divine Nature, as a very curious and important spe­culation, and in the profound inquiry, they displayed the strengthand weakness of the human understanding 6. Of the four mostconsiderable sects, the Stoics and the Platonicians endeavoured toreconcile the jarring interests of reason and piety. They have leftus the most sublime proofs of the existence and perfections of thefirst cause; but as it was impossible for them to conceive the creationof matter, the workman in the Stoic philosophy was not sufficientlydistinguished from the work ; whilst, on the contrary, the spiritualGod of Plato and his disciples, resembled more an idea than asubstance. The opinions of the Academics and Epicureans were ofa less religious cast; but when the modest science of the formerinduced them to doubt, the positive ignorance of the latter urgedthem to deny, the providence of a Supreme Ruler. Yet the Sagesof Greece, divided as they were, agreed in one great principle,an absolute disbelief of the popular superstition; which they com­municated to the ingenuous youth, who, from every part, resortedto Athens, and the other feats of learning in the Roman empire.How, indeed, was it possible, that a philosopher should accept, asdivine truths, the idle tales of the poets, and the incoherent tradi­tions of antiquity; or, that he should adore, as gods, those im­perfect beings whom he must have despised, as men! Against suchunworthy adversaries, Cicero condescended to employ the arms ofreason and eloquence; but the satire of Lucian was a much moreadequate, as well as more efficacious weapon. We may be wellassured, that a writer, conversant with the world, would never haveventured to expose the gods of his country to public ridicule, had
they







OCR Output








.OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE, 54S


should not indeed neglect to remark, that the more ancient as weljas authentic memorials of the church are seldom polluted withthese extravagant and indecent fictions 6*.
The total disregard of truth and probability in the representation Jjjg"^^ ofof these primitive martyrdoms was occasioned by a very natural magistrates,mistake. The ecclesiastical writers of the fourth or fifth centuriesascribed to the magistrates of Rome the fame degree of implacableand unrelenting zeal which silled their own breasts against theheretics or the idolaters of their own times. It is not improbablethat some of those persons who were raised to the dignities of theempire, might have imbibed the prejudices of the populace,and that the cruel disposition of others might occasionally bestimulated by motives of avarice or of personal resentment 6s.But it is certain, and we may appeal to the grateful confections ofthe first Christians, that the greatest part of those magistrates whoexercised in the provinces the authority of the emperor, or of thesenate, and to whose hands alone the jurisdiction of life and deathwas intrusted, behaved like men of polished manners and liberaleducations, who respected the rules of justice, and who were conver_fant with the precepts of philosophy. They frequently declined theodious task of persecution, dismissed the charge with contempt*or suggested to the accused Christian some legal evasion, by whichhe might elude the severity of the laws 66. Whenever they wereinvested with a discretionary power 6% they used it much less forthe oppression, than for the relief and benefit of the afflicted church-They were far from condemning all the Christians who were ac­cused before their tribunal, and very far from punishing with deathall those who were convicted of an obstinate adherence to the newsuperstition. Contenting themselves, for the most part, with themilder chastisements of imprisonment, exile, or slavery in themines 6\ they left the unhappy victims of their justice some reason tohope, that a prosperous event, the accession, the marriage, or theVol. I. 4 A triumph







OCR Output








94 THE DECLINE AND FALL


Dissolutepleasures ofCommodus.


His igno­rance andlow sports.


massacre. The prætorians, at length, gave way, oppressed withnumbers; and the tide of popular fury returned with redoubledviolence against the gate of the palace, where Commodus lay, dis­solved in luxury, and alone unconscious of the civil war. It wasdeath to approach his person with the unwelcome news. He wouldhave perished in this supine security, had not two women, hiseldest sister Fadilla, and Marcia, the most favoured of his concu­bines, ventured to break into his presence. Bathed in tears, andwith dishevelled hair, they threw themselves at his feet; and withall the pressing eloquence of fear, discovered to the affrighted em­peror, the crimes of the minister, the rage of the people, and theimpending ruin, which, in a few minutes, would burst over hispalace and person. Commodus started from his dream of pleasure,and commanded that the head of Cleander should be thrown out tothe people. The desired spectacle instantly appeased the tumult;and the son of Marcus might even yet have regained the affectionand confidence of his subjects l8.
But every sentiment of virtue and humanity was extinct in themind of Commodus. Whilst he thus abandoned the reins of em­pire to these unworthy favourites, he valued noting in sovereignpower, except the unbounded licence of indulging his sensual appe­tites. His hours were spent in a seraglio of three hundred beautifulwomen, and as many boys, of every rank, and of every province;and if the arts of seduction were ineffectual, the brutal lover hadrecourse to violence. The ancient historians *9, have expatiated onthese abandoned scenes of prostitution, which scorned every restraintof nature or modesty ; but it would not be easy to translate their toofaithful descriptions, into the decency of modern language. Theintervals of lust were filled up with the basest amusements.. Theinfluence of a polite age, and the labour of an attentive education,had never been able to infuse into his rude and brutish mind, theleast tincture of learning, and he was the first of the Roman empe­rors


«







OCR Output













OCR Output








ai8 THE DECLINE AND FALL


successfully discussed, that it is now grown familiar to the reader,and difficult to the writer. We shall therefore content ourselveswith observing, and indeed with repeating, some of the most im­portant circumstances of climate, of manners, and of institutions,which rendered the wild barbarians of Germanyj such formidableenemies to the Roman power.
Extent of Ancient Germany, excluding from its independent limits the pro­vince westward of the Rhine, which had submitted to the Roman yoke,extended itself over a third part of Europe. Almost the whole of mo­dern Germany, Denmark, Norway, Sweden, Finland, Livonia, Prussia,and the greater part of Poland, were peopled by the various tribes ofone great nation, whose complexion, manners, and language, denoteda common origin, and preserved a striking resemblance. On thewest, ancient Germany was divided by the Rhine from the Gallic,and on the south, by the Danube, from the lllyrian provinces ofthe empire. A ridge of hills, rising from the Danube, and calledthe Carpathian Mountains, covered Germany on the side of Daciaor Hungary. The eastern frontier was faintly marked by the mu­tual fears of the Germans and the Sarmatians, and was often con­founded by the mixture of warring and confederating tribes of thetwo nations. In the remote darkness of the north, the ancients im­perfectly descried a frozen ocean that lay beyond the Baltic Sea,and beyond the Peninsula, or islands 1 of Scandinavia.
Climate. Some ingenious writers 1 have suspected that Europe was much
colder formerly than it is at present; and the most ancient descrip­tions of the climate of Germany tend exceedingly to confirm theirtheory. The general complaints of intense frost, and eternal winter,are perhaps little to be regarded, since we have no method of re­ducing to the accurate standard of the thermometer, the feelings, orthe expressions, of an orator, born in the happier regions of Greeceor Asia. But I shall select two strong and incontestible proofs of aless equivocal nature. I. The great rivers which covered the
■ Roman.







OCR Output








XXX NOTES ON THE EIGHTH CHAPTER.


to observe, that the Greek writers, who lived almostin the fame age, agree in placing the æra of Zoro­aster many hundred, or even thousand years beforetheir own time. The judicious criticism of Mr.Moyle perceived, and maintained against his uncleDr. Prideaux, the antiquity of the Persian prophet.See his work, vol. ii.
[8] That ancient kKom was called the Zend.The language of the commentary, the Pehlvi, thoughmuch more modern, has ceased many ages ago to bea living tongue. This fact alone ;if it was receivedas authentic) sufficiently warrants the antiquity ofthose writings, which M. d'Anquetil has broughtinto Europe, and translated into French.
[9] Hyde deReligione veterum Persarum, c. 21.
[10] I have principally drawn this account fromthe Zendavesta of M. d Anquetil, and the Sadder,subjoined to Dr. Hyde's treatise. It mull, however,be confessed, that the studied obscuricy os a prophet,the figurative style of the east, and the deceitfulmedium of a French or Latin version, may havebetrayed us into error and heresy, in this abridg­ment of Persian theology.
[11] The modern Perfees (and in some dcgre«the Sadder) exalt Ormufd into the first and omni­potent cause, whilst they degrade Akriman into aninferior but rebellious spirit. Their desire of pleas­ing the Mahometans may have contributed to refinetheir theological system.
[iz] Herodotus, I. i. c. 131. But Dr. Prideauxthinks, with reason, that the use of temples wasafterwards permitted in the Magian religion.
[13] Hyde de Relig. Perf. c. 8. Notwithstand­ing all their distinctions and protestations, whichseem sincere enough, their tyrants the Mahometans,have constantly stigmatised them, as idolatrous vvor-fliippers of the fire.
[14] See the Sadder, the smallest part os whichconsists of moral precepts. The ceremonies en­joined are infinite and trifling. Fifteen genuflex­ions, prayers, &c were required whenever the de­vout Persian cut his nails or made water; or as oftenas he put on the sacred girdle. Sadder Art.14. 50. 60.
[15] Zendavesta, torn. i. p. 224, and. Precis duSylteme de Zoroailie, torn iii.


[16] Hyde de Religionc Persaruci, c ig.
[17] Id. c. 28. Both Hyde and Prideaux affectto apply to the Magian, the terms consecrated tothe Christian hierarchy.
[iP] Ammian. Marcellin. xxiii. 6. He informsus (as far as we may credit him) of two curious par­ticulars; 1. that the Magi derived some of theirmost secret doctrines from the Indhn Brachmans;and, 2. that they were a tribe or family, as wejl asorder.
[19] The divine institution of tythes exhibits asingular instance of conformity between the law ofZoroaster- and that of Moses. Those who cannototherwise account for it, may suppose, if they please,that the Magi os the latter times inserted so usefulan interpolation into the writings of their prophet.
(20] Sadder, Art. 8.
[21] Plato in Alcibiad.
[22] Plino (Hist. Natur. I. xxx. c. I.) observes,that magic held mankind by the triple chain of re­ligion, of physic, and of astronomy.
1
[23] Agathias, l.iv. p. 134.
[24] Mr. Hume, in the Natural History of Re­ligion, sagaciously remarks, that the most refinedand philosophic sects are constantly the most in­tolerant.
[25] Cicero de Legibus, ii. 10. Xerxes, by theadvice of the Magi, destroyed the temples of Greece.
[26] Hyde de Rel. Perfar. c. 23. 24. D'Her-belot Bibliothcque Orientale Zerdujht. Life ofZoroaster in torn. ii. of the Zendavesta.
[27] Compare Moses of Chorene, 1. ii. c. 74,with Ammian. Marcellin. xxiii. 6. Hereafter Ishall make use of these passages.
[28] Rabbi Abraham in the Tarikh Schickard.
[29] Bafnage Histoire des Juifs, J. viii. c. j.Sozomen, 1. ii. c. 1. Manes, who suffered an ignomi­nious death, may be deemed a Magian, as well as aChristian heretic.
[30] Hyde de Religione Perfar. c. 21.
[31] These







OCR Output








OF THE "ROMAN EMPIRE.


more art and solidity than the uncertain mythology of Greece andRome,S\
. From this impartial though imperfect survey of the progress of General pro-
portion of
Christianity, it may perhaps seem probable, that the number of its Christianiproselytes has been excessively magnified by fear on the one side, and Pagan!*and by devotion on the other. According to the irreproachabletestimony of Origen '8,} the proportion of the. faithful was very in­considerable when compared with the multitude of an unbelieving . ,world; but, as we are left without any distinct information, it is impos­sible to determine, and it is difficult even to conjecture, the real num­bers of the primitive Christians. The most favourable calculation,however, that can be deduced from the examples of Antioch and ofRome, will not permit us to imagine that more than a twentiethpart of the subjects of the empire had enlisted themselves underthe banner of the cross before the important conversion of Con-ftantine. But their habits of faith, of zeal, and of union, seemedto multiply their numbers; and the fame causes which contributedto their future increase, served to render their actual strengthmore apparent and more formidable.
Such is the constitution of civil society, that whilst a few persons Whether the
first Christians
are distinguished by riches, by honours, and by knowledge, the were meanbody of the people is condemned to obscurity, ignorance, andpoverty. The Christian religion which addressed itself to the wholehuman race must consequently collect a far greater number of pro­selytes from the lower than from the superior ranks of life. Thisinnocent and natural circumstance has been improved into a veryodious imputation, which seems to be less strenuoufly denied by theapologists than it is urged by the adversaries of the faith; that Thenew sect of Christians was almost entirely composed of the dregs ofthe populace, of peasants and mechanics, of boys and women, ofbeggars and staves, the last of whom might sometimes introduce themissionaries into the rich and noble families to which they belonged.Vol. I. U u u These


and ignorant.







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


church were chiefly directed against scandalous sinners, and par­ticularly those who were guilty of murder, of fraud, or of incon­tinence, against the authors, or the followers of any hereticalopinions which had been condemned by the judgment of theepiscopal order, and against those unhappy persons who, whetherfrom choice or from compulsion, had polluted themselves after theirbaptisin by any act of idolatrous worship. The consequences ofexcommunication were of a temporal as well as a spiritual nature.The Christian against whom it was pronounced, was deprived ofany part in the oblations of the [faithful. The ties both ofreligious and of private friendfliip were dissolved: he found himselfa prophane object of abhorrence to the persons whom he the mostesteemed, or by whom he had been the most tenderly beloved; andas far as an expulsion from a respectable society could imprinton his character a mark of disgrace, he was sliunned or suspectedby the generality of mankind. The situation of these unfortunateexiles was in itself very painful and melancholy; but, as it usuallyhappens, their apprehensions far exceeded their sufferings. Thebenefits of the Christian communion were those of eternal life, norcould they erase from their minds the awful opinion, that to thoseecclesiastical governors by whom they were condemned, the Deityhad committed the keys of Hell and of Paradise. The hereticsindeed, who might be supported by the consciousness of their in­tentions, and by the flattering hope that they alone had discoveredthe true path of salvation, endeavoured to regain, in their separateassemblies, those comforts, temporal as well as spiritual, which theyno longer derived from the great society of Christians. Butalmost all those who had reluctantly yielded to the power of viceor idolatry were sensible of their fallen condition, and anxiouslydesirous of being restored to the benefits of the Christian com­munion.
Sss2' With







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 3*7


continued a respectable member of the senate; nor was there anyone of the Roman nobility more esteemed by Aurelian, as well asby his successors **.
So long and so various was the pomp of Aurelian's triumph, that His magni-although it opened with the dawn of day, the flow majesty of the devotion,procession ascended not the capitol before the ninth hour; and itwas already dark when the emperor returned to the palace. Thefestival was protracted by theatrical representations, the games ofthe circus, the hunting of wild beasts, combats of gladiators, andnaval engagements. Liberal donatives were distributed to the armyand people, and several institutions, agreeable or beneficial to thecapital, contributed to perpetuate the glory of Aurelian. A con­siderable portion of his oriental spoils was consecrated to the godsof Rome; the capitol, and every other temple, glittered with theofferings of his ostentatious piety; and the temple of the Sun alonereceived above fifteen thousand pounds of gold 8s. This last was amagnificent structure, erected by the emperor on the side of theQuirinal hill, and dedicated, soon after the triumph, to that deitywhom Aurelian adored as the parent of his life and fortunes. Hismother had been an inferior priestess in a chapel of the Sun; apeculiar devotion to the god of Light, was a sentiment which thefortunate peasant imbibed in his infancy; and every step of his ele­vation, every victory of his reign, fortified superstition by gra­titude 86.
The arms of Aurelian had vanquistied the foreign and domestic He suppresses
1 °< a sedition a
foes of the Republic. We are assured, that, by his salutary rigour, Rome,crimes and factions, mischievous arts and pernicious connivance,the luxuriant growth of a feeble and oppressive government, wereeradicated throughout the Roman world 8?. But if we attentively re­flect how much swifter is the progress of corruption than its cure,and if we remember that the years abandoned to public disordersexceeded the months allotted to the martial reign of Aurelian, we


6 must







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. rcjr


taxes with which Maximin had loaded the rights of inheritance and"focceffion, were repealed, or at least moderated. Discipline wasrevived, and with the advice of the senate many wise laws were en­acted by their imperial ministers, who endeavoured to restore a civiFconstitution on the ruins of military tyranny. •* What reward may"we expect for delivering Rome from a monster?" was the questionasked by Maximus, in a moment of freedom and confidence. Bal-binus answered it without hesitation, *' The love of the senate, or'* the people, and of all mankind,*' "Alas!" replied his morepenetrating colleague, "Alas! I dread the hatred of the soldiers,"and the fatal effects of their resentment His apprehensions-were but too well justified by the event.
Whilst Maximus was preparing to defend Italy against the com- Seditions w.mon foe, Balbinus, who remained at Rome, had been engaged in Rome*scenes of blood and intestine discord. Distrust and jealousy reignedin the senate; and even in the temples where they assembled, every-senator carried either open or concealed arms. In the midst of theirdeliberations, two veterans of the guards, actuated either by curiosity ora sinister motive, audacioufly thrust themselves into the house, andadvanced by degrees beyond the altar of Victory. Gallicanus, aconsular,, and Mæcenas, a Prætorian senator, viewed with indigna­tion their insolent intrusion: drawing their daggers they laid thespies, for such they deemed them, dead at the foot of the altar, andthen advancing to the door of the senate, imprudently exhorted themultitude to massacre the Prætorians, as the secret adherents of thetyrant. Those who escaped the first fury of the tumult took refugein the camp, which they defended with superior advantage againstthe reiterated attacks of the people, assisted by the numerous bandsof gladiators, the property of opulent nobles. The civil war lastedmany days, with infinite loss and confusion on both sides. When,the pipes were broken that supplied the camp with water, the Præ­torians were reduced to intolerable distress j but in their turn they
made







OCR Output








58o THE DECLINE AND FALL


'* provided always that they preserve a due respect to the established"laws and government. By another rescript we shall signify"our intentions to the judges and magistrates; and we hope thatM our indulgence will engage the Christians to offer up their"prayers to the deity whom they adore, for our safety and pro-"sperity, for their own, and for that of the republic "V Itis not usually in the language of edicts and manifestos, that weshould search for the real character or the secret motives of princes;but as these were the words of a dying emperor, his situation, per­haps, may be admitted as a pledge of his sincerity.Feiceosthe When Galerius subscribed this edict of toleration, he was wellassured that Licinius would readily comply With the inclinations ofhis friend and benefactor, and that any measures in favour of theChristians, would obtain the approbation of Constantine. But theemperor would not venture to jnsert in the preamble the name ofMaximin, whose consent was of the greatest importance, and whosucceeded a few days afterwards to the provinces of Asia. In thefirst six months, however, of his new reign, Maximin affected to»adopt the prudent counsels of his predecessor; and though he nevercondescended to secure the tranquillity of the church by a public-edict, Sabinus, his Prætorian præfect, addressed a circular letter to*all the governors and magistrates of the provinces, expatiating on the-imperial clemency, acknowledging the invincible obstinacy of the-Christians, and directing the officers of justice to cease their ineffectualprosecutions, and to connive at the secret assemblies of those enthu­siasts. In consequence of these orders, great numbers of Christians-were released from prison, or delivered from the mines. The con­fessors, singing hymns of triumph, returned into their own coun­tries; and those who had yielded to the violence of the tempest,solicited with tears of repentance their re-admission into the bosomof the church I7*4
But







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 245


to the conquerors of Italy; the ties of ancient consanguinity werestrengthened by recent offices of friendship; and a Scandinavianking cheerfully abdicated his savage greatness, that he might passthe remainder of his days in the peaceful and polished court of Ra­venna 6. Many vestiges, which cannot be ascribed to the arts ofpopular vanity, attest the ancient residence of the Goths in thecountries beyond the Baltic. From the time of the geographerPtolemy, the southern part of Sweden seems to have continued inthe possession of the less enterprising remnant of the nation, and alarge territory is even at present divided into east and west Goth­land. During the middle ages (from the ninth to the twelfthcentury) whilst Christianity was advancing with a flow progress intothe north, the Goths and the Swedes composed two distinct andsometimes hostile members of the fame monarchy 7. The latter ofthese two names has prevailed without extinguishing the former.The Swedes, who might well be satisfied with their own fame inarms, have, in every age, claimed the ancient glory of the Goths.In a moment of discontent against the court of Rome, Charles theTwelfth insinuated, that his victorious troops were not degeneratedfrom their brave ancestors, who had already subdued the mistress ofthe world 8.
Till the end of the eleventh century, a celebrated temple subsisted Religion ofat Upsal, the most considerable town of the Swedes and Goths. Itwas enriched with the gold which the Scandinavians had acquiredin their pyratical adventures, and sanctified by the uncouth repre­sentations of the three principal deities, the god of war, the goddessof generation, and the god of thunder. In the general festival,that was solemnized every ninth year, nine animals of every species(without excepting the human) were sacrificed, and their bleedingbodies suspended in the sacred grove adjacent to the temple 9. Theonly traces that now subsist of this barbaric superstition are con­tained in the Edda, a system of mythology, compiled in Iceland about
the







OCR Output








74 THE DECLINE AND FALL


Image os go­vernment forihe ansies.


Their obe­dience.


amnesty, which Claudius had the prudence to offer, and thegenerosity to observe1*.
II. The insolence of the armies inspired Augustus with fears ofa still more alarming nature. The despair of the citizens couldonly attempt, what the power of the soldiers was, at any time, ableto execute. How precarious was his own authority over men whomhe had taught to violate every social duty! He had heard theirseditious clamours; he dreaded their calmer moments of reflection.One revolution had been purchased by immense rewards j but asecond revolution might double those rewards. The troops pro­fessed the fondest attachment to the house of Caesar; but the at­tachments of the multitude are capricious and inconstant. Au­gustus summoned to his aid, whatever remained in those fierceminds, of Roman prejudices; enforced the rigor of discipline bythe sanction of law; and interposing the majesty of the senate, be­tween the -emperor and the army, boldly claimed their allegiance,as the first magistrate of the republic
During a long period of two hundred and twenty years, fromthe establishment of this artful system to the death of Commodus,the dangers inherent to a military government were, in a greatmeasure, suspended. The soldiers were seldom roused to thatfatal sense of their own strength, and of the weakness of the civilauthority, which was, before and afterwards, productive of suchdreadful calamities. Caligula and Domitian were assassinated intheir palace by their own domestics: the convulsions which agitated"Rome on the death of the former, were confined to the walls of thecity. But Nero involved the whole empire in his ruin. In thespace of eighteen months, four princes perished by the sword; andthe Roman world was fliaken by the fury of the contending armies.Excepting only this short, though violent, eruption of militarylicence, the two centuries from Augustus to Commodus, passed away
unstained







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


small distance beyond the modern cities of Edinburgh and Glas­gow, was fixed as the limit of the Roman province. The nativeCaledonians preserved in the northern extremity of the island theirwild independence, for which they were not less indebted to theirpoverty than to their valour. Their incursions were frequently re­pelled and chastised; but their country was never subduedThe masters of the fairest and most wealthy climates of the globe*turned with contempt from gloomy hills assailed by the winter tem­pest, from lakes concealed in a blue mist, and from cold and lonelyheaths, over which the deer of the forest were chased by a troop ofnaked barbarians
Such was the state of the Roman frontiers, and such the maxims of Conquest of
_ Dacia; the
imperial policy from the death of Augustus to the accession of Tra- second ex-Jan. That virtuous and active prince had received the education cepUon*of a soldier, and possessed the talents of a general ,}. The peace­ful system of his predecessors was interrupted by scenes of war andconquest; and the legions, after a long interval, beheld a militaryemperor at their head. The first exploits of Trajan were againstthe Dacians, the most warlike of men, who dwelt beyond theDanube, and who, during the reign of Domitian, had insulted withimpunity the Majesty of Rome To the strength and fiercenessof barbarians, they added a contempt for life, which was derivedfrom a warm persuasion of the immortality and transmigration of thesoul'*. Decebalus, the Dacian King, approved himself a rivalnot unworthy of Trajan; nor did he despair of his own and the publicfortune, till by the confession of his enemies, he had exhaustedevery resource both of valour and policy'6. This memorablewar, with a very short suspension of hostilities, lasted five years-;and as the emperor could exert, without controul, the whole forceof the state, it was terminated by the absolute submission of thebarbarians '7. The new province of Dacia, which formed a se­cond exception to the precept of Augustus, was about thirteen hun-'3 dredl







OCR Output








xxxviii NOTES ON THE TENTH CHAPTER.


"[yo] Yet hi spite of this exemption Pompey ap­peared before that tribunal, during his consulship.The occasion indeed was equally singular and ho­nourable. Plutarch in Pomp. p. 630.
[40] See the original speech in the AugustanHist. p. 173, 174. ,
[41] This transaction might deceive Zonaras,who supposes that Valerian was actually declaredthe colleague of Decius, 1. xii, p. 625.
[42] Hist. August, p. 174. The emperor's re­ply is omitted.
[43] Such as the attempts of Augustus towards, areformation of manners. Tacit. Annal. iii. 24.
[44] Tillemont. Hiftoire des Empereurs, torn.•Iii; p.' 59?. As Zosimus and feme of his followersmistake the Danube for the Tanais, they placethe field of battle in the plains of Scythia.
[45] Aurelius Victor allows two distinct actionsfor the deaths of the two Decii; but I have pre­ferred the account of Jornandes.
[46] I have ventured to copy from Tacitus(Annal. i. 64 ) the picture of a similar engagementbetween a Roman army and a German tribe.
[47] Jornandes, c. 18. Zosimus, 1. i p. 22. Zo-aaras, 1. xii. p. 627. Aurelius Victor.
[48] The Decii were killed before the end ofthe year two hundred and fifty one, since the newprinces took possession of the consulship on the en­suing calends of January.
[49] Hist. August, p. 223, gives them a veryhonourable place among the small number of goodemperors who reigned between Augustus and Dio­cletian.
[50] Hsc nbi Patres comperere ..... de-
cernanr. Victor in Cæfaribus.
[51] Zonaras, 1 xii p. 6z3.
[52] A .V/a, a Tcga, and a golden Patera of fivepounds weight, were accepted with joy and grati­tude by the wealthy king of Egypt (Livy, xxvii. 4. J§>uiria Ivillia Ærij, a weight of copper in valueabout eighteen pounds sterling, was the usual pre­sent made to foreign ambassadors (Livy, xxxi. 9.J.


[53] See the firmness of a Romanas the time of Alexander Severus, in theLegationum, p. 25. Edit. Louvre.
[54] For the plague'fee Jornandes, c. 19, and• Victor in Cæfaribus.
[55] These improbable accusations are allegedby Zosimus, 1. i. p. 23, 24.
[;6] Jornandes, c. 19. The Gothic writer atleast observed the peace which his victorious coun­trymen had sworn to Gallus. ■
[57] Zosimus, 1. i. p. 25, 26.
[58] Victor in Cæfaribus.
[59] Zonaras, 1. xii. p. 628.
[60] Banduri Numifmata, p. 94.
[61] Eutropius, 1. ix. c. 6. fays tertio mease.Euscbius omits this emperor. ,
[62] Zosimus, 1. i. p. 28. Eutropius and Victor-station Valerian's army in Rhxtia.
[63] He was about seventy at the time of hit•accession, or, as is more probable, of his death.Hist. August, p. 173. Tillemont Hist, des Em­pereurs, torn. iii. p. S93, note 1.
[64] Inimicus Tyrannorum. Hist. hngM&. p.173. In the glorious struggle of the senate againstMaximin, Valerian acted a very spirited part.Hist. August, p. 156.
[65] According to the distinction of Victor, heseems to have received the title of Imperator fromthe army, and that of Augustus from the senate.
[65] From Victor and from the medals, Tille­mont (torn. iii. p. 710.) very justly infers, thatGallienus was associated to the empire about themonth of August of the year 253.
[67] Various systems have been formed to ex­plain a difficult passage in Gregory of Tours,1 ii. c. 9.
[63] The Geographer of Ravenna, i. 11. bymentioning Mauringania on the confines of Den­mark, as the ancient feat of the Franks, gave birthto an ingenious system of Leibnitz,
[6c] Sec







OCR Output








34© THE DECLINE AND FALL


Africa. The opulent city of Syracuse, in whose port the naviesof Athens and Carthage had formerly been funk, was sacked by'ahandful of barbarians, who massacred the greatest part of thetrembling inhabitants. From the island of Sicily, the Franks pro­ceeded to the columns of Hercules, trusted themselves to the ocean,coasted round Spain and Gaul, and steering their triumphant coursethrough the British channel, at length finished their surprisingvoyage, by landing in safety on the Batavian or Frisian shores 5°.The example of their success, instructing their countrymen to con­ceive the advantages, and to despise the dangers, of the sea, pointedout to their enterprising spirit, a new road to wealth and glory.Revolt of Notwithstanding the vigilance and activity of Probus, it was almost
Saturninus in . ........ .
ihe E .ft; impossible that he could at once contain in obedience every part or hiswide extended dominions. Hie barbarians who broke their chains,had seized the favourable opportunity of a domestic war. Whenthe emperor marched to the relief of Gaul, he devolved the com­mand of the East, on Saturninus. That general, a man of merit.and experience, Was driven into rebellion by the absence of his so­vereign, the levity of the Alexandrian people, the pressing in-•stances of his friends, and his own fears; but from the moment ofhis elevation, he never entertained a hope of empire, or even oflife. "Alas!" he said, "the republic has lost a useful servant,
and the rashness of an hour has destroyed the services of many!*' years. You know not," continued he, "the misery of sovereign"power; a sword is perpetually suspended over our head. We•** dread our very guards, we distrust our companions. The choice
of action or of repose is no longer in our disposition, nor is there"any age, or character, or conduct, that can protect us from the cen-iU sure of envy. In thus exalting me to the throne, you have"doomed me to a life of cares,- and to an untimely fate. The only"consolation which remains is, the assurance that I shall not fall** alone 'V But as the former part of his prediction was verified







OCR Output








4o4 THE DECLINE AND FALL


signalised his valour in the wars of Egypt and Persia, and graduallyrose to the honourable station of a tribune of the first order. Thefigure of Constantine was tall and majestic; he was dexterous in allhis exercises, intrepid in war, affable in peace; in his whole con­duct, the active spirit of youth was tempered by habitual prudence;and while his mind was engrossed by ambition, he appeared coldand insensible to the allurements of pleasure. The favour of thepeople and soldiers, who had named him as a worthy candidate forthe rank of Cæsar, served only to exasperate the jealousy of Ga-lerius, and though prudence might restrain him from exercisingany open violence, an absolute monarch is seldom at a loss how toexecute a sure and secret revenge 1 \ Every hour increased thedanger of Constantine, and the anxiety of his father, who, byrepeated letters, expressed the warmest desire of embracing his son.For some time the policy of Galerius supplied him with delaysand excuses, but it was impossible long to refuse so natural a requestof his associate, without maintaining his refusal by arms. Thepermission for the journey was reluctantly granted, and whateverprecautions the emperor might have taken to intercept a return,the consequences of which, he, with so much reason, apprehended>they were effectually disappointed by the incredible diligence ofConstantine ". Leaving the palace of Nicomedia in the night, hetravelled post through Bithynia, Thrace, Dacia, Pannonia, Italy,and Gaul, and amidst the joyful acclamations of the people, reachedthe port of Boulogne, in the very moment when his father waspreparing to embark for Britain "4.Death of The British expedition, and an easy victory over the barbarians
an°d elevation of Caledonia, were the last exploits of the reign of Constantius.tineConstan" He ended his life in the imperial palace of York, fifteen monthsjuly'ae. a^ter ^e ^ad assumed the title of Augustus, and almost fourteenyears and a half after he had been promoted to the rank of Cæsar.His death was immediately succeeded by the elevation of Constan­


tine*







OCR Output








i56 THE DECLINE AND FALX


Popular dis­content.


Victory andrevolt ofÆmilianus.A. D.153.


presents and subsidies were liberally distributed among friends andsuppliants, they were sternly refused to such as claimed them as adebt But this stipulation of an annual payment to a victoriousenemy, appeared without disguise in the light of an ignominioustribute; the minds of the Romans were not yet accustomedto accept such unequal laws from a tribe of barbarians; and theprince, who by a necessary concession had probably saved hiscountry, became the object of the general contempt and aversion.The death of Hostilianus, though it happened in the midst of araging pestilence, was interpreted as the personal crime ofGallus5*; and even the defeat of the late emperor was ascribedby the voice of suspicion to the perfidious counsels of his hated suc­cessor 5!. The tranquillity which the empire enjoyed during the firstyear of his administration 56, served rather to inflame than to ap­pease the public discontent; and, as soon as the apprehensions ofwar were removed, the infamy of the peace was more deeply andmore sensibly felt.
But the Romans were irritated to a still higher degree, when theydiscovered that they had not even secured their repose, though at theexpence of their honour. The dangerous secret of the wealth andweakness of the empire, had been revealed to the world. New swarmsof barbarians, encouraged by the success, and not conceiving themselvesbound by the obligation of their brethren, spread devastation throughthe Illyrian provinces, and terror as far as the gates of Rome. Thedefence of the monarchy, which seemed abandoned by the pusillani­mous emperor, was assumed by Æmilianus, governor of Pannoniaand Mæsia; who rallied the scattered forces, and revived the faint­ing spirits of the troops. The barbarians were unexpectedly at­tacked, routed, chaced, and pursued beyond the Danube. The vic­torious leader distributed as a donative the money collected for thetribute, and the acclamations of the soldiers proclaimed him emperoron the field of battle ". Gallus, who, careless of the general wel­fare,







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 327


s,
senate was confirmed by the consent of the Roman people, and ofthe Prætorian guards '*.
The administration of Tacitus was not unworthy of his life and Authority ofprinciples. A grateful servant of the senate, he considered that na­tional council as the author, and himself as the subject, of thelaws He studied to heal the wounds which imperial pride, civildiscord, and military violence, had inflicted on the constitution,and to restore, at least, the image of the ancient republic, as it hadbeen preserved by the policy of Augustus, and the virtues of Trajanand the Antonines. It may not be useless to recapitulate someof the most important prerogatives which the senate appeared tohave regained by the election of Tacitus ". 1. To invest one of theirbody, under the title of emperor, with the general command of thearmies and the government of the frontier provinces. 2. Todetermine the list, or as it was then styled, the College of Consuls.They were twelve in number, who, in successive pairs, each, duringthe space of two months, filled the year, and represented the dignityof that ancient office. The authority of the senate, in the nominationof them, was exercised with such independent freedom, that noregard was paid to an irregular request of the emperor in favour ofhis brother Florianus. "The senate," exclaimed Tacitus, with thehonest transport of a patriot, " understand the character of the prince,( whom they have chosen." 3. To appoint the proconsuls and pre­sidents of the provinces, and to confer on all the magistrates theircivil jurisdiction. 4. To receive appeals through the intermediateoffice of the præfect of the city from all the tribunals of the empire.-5. To give force and- validity, by their decrees, to such as they shouldapprove of the emperor's edicts. 6\ To these several branches ofauthority, we may add some inspection over the finances, since, evenin the stern reign of Aurelian, it was in their power to divert a partof the revenue from the public service I*..
Circular







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 7*


deification. A regular custom was introduced, that on the deceaseof every emperor who had neither lived nor died like a tyrant, thesenate by a solemn decree should place him in the number of thegods : and the ceremonies of his Apotheosis were blended withthose of his funeral. This legal, and as it should seem, injudiciousprofanation, so abhorrent to our stricter principles, was receivedwith a very faint murmur *4, by the easy nature of Polytheism;but it was received as an institution, not of religion but of policy.We should disgrace the virtues of the Antonines, by comparingthem with the vices of Hercules or Jupiter. Even the character ofCæsar or Augustus were far superior to those of the popular deities.But Lt was the misfortune of the former to live in an enlightenedager and their actions were too faithfully recorded to admit ofsuch a mixture of fable and mystery, as the devotion of the vulgarrequires. As soon as their divinity was established by law, it funkinto oblivion, without contributing either to ther own fame, or tothe dignity of succeeding princes.
In the consideration of the Imperial government, we have fre- Titles of Au-quently mentioned the artful founder, under his well known title c^,'r*ndof Augustus, which was not however conferred upon him, till theedifice was almost completed. The obscure name of Octavianus,he derived from a mean family, in the little town of Aricia. Itwas stained with the blood of the proscriptions: and he was desir­ous, had it been possible, to erase all memory of his former life.The illustrious surname of Cæsar, he had assumed, as the adoptedson of the dictator; but he had too much good sense, either to hopeto be confounded, or to wish to be compared with that extraordi­nary man. It was proposed in the senate, to dignify their ministerwith a new appellation; and after a very serious discuflion, thatof Augustus was chosen among several others, as being the mostexpressive of the character of peace and sanctity, which he uni­formly affected %$. Augustus was therefore a personal, Cæsar a


family







OCR Output








THE
HISTORY
OF THE
DECLINE and FALL
OF THE
ROMAN EMPIRE.


CHAP. I.
77je Extent and Military Force of the Empire in the Age
of the Antonines,
IN the second century of the Christian Æra, the empire of Rome introduaion.comprehended the fairest part of the earth, and the most civi­lized portion of mankind. The frontiers of that extensivemonarchy were guarded by ancient renown and disciplined valour.The gentle, but powerful influence of laws and manners had gra­dually cemented the union of the provinces. Their peaceful in­habitants enjoyed and abused the advantages of wealth and luxury.The image of a free constitution was preserved with decent reverence.The Roman senate appeared to possess the sovereign authority, anddevolved on the emperors all the executive powers of government. Ai p. 9^-.During a happy period of more than fourscore years, the public ,8°*administration was conducted by the virtue and abilities of Trajan,Hadrian, and the two Antonines. It is the design of this and of thetwo succeeding chapters, to describe the prosperous condition oftheir empire; and afterwards, from the death of Marcus Antoni-Vol. I. B . nus,







OCR Output








CONTENTS.


C H A P. XVI.
'The ConduR os the Roman Government to­wards the Christians, from the Reign of:Nero to ihat of Constantine.
Christianity persecuted by thcsRoman Em­perors - - 620
, Inquiry into their Motives - 621
Rebellious Spirit of the Jews 622
Toleration of the Jewish Religion 623
The Jews .were a People which followed,the Christians a Sect which deserted,the Religion of their Fathers . 624• Christianity accused of Atheism, and mis­taken by the People and Philosophers 626The Union and Assemblies of the Christi­ans considered as a dangerousConspiracy 628
Their Manners calumniated - 630
Their imprudent Defence - 631
Idea of the Conduct ef the Emperors to­
wards the Christians - - 633
They neglected the Christians as a Sect-of
Jews - - -634
The Fire ofRome under the Reign of Nero 636
, Cruel Punishment of the Christians as the
IncendLries of the City - 637
■ Remarks on the Passage of Tacitus re­
lative to die Persecution of the Chris­
tians by Nero - - 639
Oppression of the Jews and Christians by
Domitian - - 642
Execution of Clemens the Consul '644.
Ignorance of Pliny concerning the
Christians . - . - 646
Trajan and his Successors establish a legal
Mode of proceeding against them 647
Popular Clamours - - 648
Trials of the Christians - 650
Humanity of the. Roman Magistrates .652
Inconsiderable Number of Martyrs 653
Example of Cyprian, Rilhop of Carthage 654His Danger and Flight - - 655
257 His Banishment - - 656
. His Condemnation - 657
His Martyrdom - - -658
Various Incitements to Martyrdom 659
Ardour of the first Christians - 6£ri


A. D. Pige
Gradual Relaxation - 663
Three Methods of escaping Martyrdom ib.
Alternatives of Severity and Toleration 665
The ten Persecutions - ib.
. Supposed Edicts of Tiberius and Marcus
Antoninus - - 666
180 State of the Christians in the Reigns of
Commodus and Scverus - 667
211—249. Of the Successors of Severus 669
244 Of Maximin, Philip, and Decius 670
253 — 260. Of Valerian, Gallienus, and his
Successors - - 672
260 Paul of Samosata, hjs Manners 673270 He is degraded from the See of Antioch 674274 The Sentence is executed by Aurelian 675284—303. Peace and Prosperity of the Church
under Diocletian - 676
Progress of Zeal and Superstition among
the Pagans - - 677
Maximian and Galerius punish a few
Christian Soldiers - - 679
Galerius prevails on Diocletian to begin a
general Persecution - 681
303 Demolition of the Church of Nicomedia 68zThe first Edia against the Christians 683Zeal and Punishment of a Christian 684Fire of the- Palace of Nicomedia imputed
to the Christians - - 685
, Execution of the first Edict - 686
Demolition of the Churches - 688
Subsequent Edicts - 689
303—311. General Idea of the Persecution
In the Western Provinces, under
Constantius and Constantine 690
In Italy and Africa, under Maximianand Severus; and under Maxen-tius -~ .- -692
In Illyricum and the East under Gale­rius and Maximin - 6943M "Galerius publishes an Edict of Toleration 695Peace of the Church - - 696Maximin prepares to renew the Perse­cution - 697
313 End of the Persecutions - 698
Probable Account of the Sufferings of the
Martyrs and Confessors - 699
Number of Martyrs - ^701
Conclusion - - 7°3
T H F.







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AND FALL


seconded by favour or merit. The grandsons of the Gauls> whohad besieged Julius Cæsar in Alesia, commanded legions, governedprovinces, and were admitted into the senate of Rome Theirambition, instead of disturbing the tranquillity of the state, was inti­mately connected with its safety and greatness.
So sensible were the Romans of the influence of language overnational manners, that it was their most serious care to extend, withthe progress of their arms, the use of the Latin tongue ,7. Theancient dialects of Italy, the Sabine, the Etruscan, and the Vene­tian, sunk into oblivion; but in the provinces, the east was lessdocile than the west, to the voice of its victorious preceptors. Thisobvious difference marked the two portions of the empire with adistinction of colours, which, though it was in some degree con-. cealed during the meridian splendor of prosperity, became graduallymore visible, as the shades of night descended upon the Romanworld. The western countries were civilized by the fame handsAvhich subdued them. As soon as the barbarians were reednciled toobedience, their minds were opened to any new impressions ofknowledge and politeness. The language of Virgil and Cicero,though with some inevitable mixture of corruption, waS so uni­versally adopted in Africa, Spain, Gaul, Britain, and Pannoniathat the faint traces of the Punic or Celtic idioms were preservedonly in the mountains, or among the peasants Education andstudy insensibly inspired the natives of those countries with thesentiments of Romans ; and Italy gave fashions, as well as laws,to her Latin provincials. They solicited with more ardour, andobtained with more facility, the freedom and honours of the state;supported the national dignity in letters*0 and in arms; and, at length,in the person of Trajan, produced an emperor whom the Scipioswould not have disowned for their countryman. The situation 6fthe Greeks was very different from that of the barbarians. Theformer had been long since civilized and corrupted. They had







OCR Output








76 THE DECLINE AND FALL


of Nero, the grandson of Germanicus, and the lineal successor ofAugustus. It was not without reluctance and remorse, that theprætorian guards had been persuaded to abandon the cause of thetyrant 5\ The rapid downfal of Galba, Otho, and Vitellius, taughtthe armies to consider the emperors as the creatures of their will,and the instruments of their licence. The birth of Vespafian wasmean; his grandfather had been a private soldier, his father apetty officer of the revenue 35; his own merit had raised him, in anadvanced age, to the empire; but his merit was rather useful thanshining, and his virtues were disgraced by a strict and even sordidparsimony. Such a prince consulted his true interest by the asso­ciation of a son, whose more splendid and amiable character mightturn the public attention* from the obscure origin, to the futureglories of the Flavian house. Under the mild administration ofTitus, the Roman world enjoyed a transient felicity, and his be­loved memory served to protect, above fifteen years, the vices ofhis brother Domitian.Ai D. 964 Nerva had scarcely accepted the purple from the assassins of Do-^artctwof mitian, before he discovered that his feeble age was unable to stemTrajan. tjie torrent of public disorders, which had multiplied under the long. tyranny of his predecessor. His mild disposition was respected bythe good; but the degenerate Romans required a more vigorouscharacter, whose justice fliould strike terror into the guilty. Thoughhe had several relations, he fixed his choice on a stranger. Headopted Trajan, then about forty years of age, and who com­manded a powerful army in the lower Germany; and immediately,by a decree of the senate, declared him his colleague and successorA. D„ 98: jn the empire It is sincerely to be lamented, that whilst we arefatigued with the disgustful relation of Nero's crimes and follies,we are reduced to collect the actions of Trajan from the glimmer­ings of an abridgment, or the doubtful light of a panegyric.There remains, however, one panegyric far removed beyond the
7 suspicion:







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AND FALL


432


The defeat,April 30.


and death ofthe former.August.


fortune of a civil war. He moved out of Syria towards the frontiersof Bithynia in the depth of winter. The season was severe andtempestuous; great numbers of men as well as horses perishedin the snow; and as the roads were broken up by incessant rains,he was obliged to leave behind him a considerable part of theheavy baggage which was unable to follow the rapidity of his forcedmarches. By this extraordinary effort of diligence, he arrived,with a harassed but formidable army on the banks of the ThracianBosphorus, before the lieutenants of Licinius were apprized of hishostile intentions. Byzantium surrendered to the power of Max-imin, after a siege of eleven days. He was detained some day*under the walls of Heraclea ; (and he had no sooner taken possessionof that city, than he was alarmed by the intelligence, that Liciniushad pitched his camp at the distance of only eighteen miles. Aftera fruitless negociation, in which the two princes attempted toseduce the fidelity of each other's adherents, they had recourseto arms. The emperor of the East commanded a disciplined and■veteran army of above seventy thousand men, and Licinius, whohad collected about thirty thousand Illyrians, was at first oppressedby the superiority of numbers. His military skill, and the firmnessof his troops restored the day, and obtained a decisive victory. Theincredible speed which Maximin excited in his flight, is much morecelebrated than his prowess in the battle. Twenty-four hours after­wards he was seen pale, trembling, and without his imperial orna­ments, at Nicomedia, one hundred and sixty miles from the place ofhis defeat. The wealth of Asia was yet unexhausted ; and though theflower of his veterans had fallen in the late actiqn, he had still power, ifhe could obtain time, to draw very numerous levies from Syria andEgypt. But he survived his misforune only three or four months.His death, which happened at Tarsus, was variously ascribed to despair,to poison, and to the divine justice. As Maximin was alike destituteof abilities and of virtue, he was lamented neither by the people nor


b7







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 95


rors totally devoid of taste for the pleasures of the understanding.Nero himself excelled, or affected to excel, in the elegant arts ofmusic and poetry; nor should we despise his pursuits, had he notconverted the pleasing relaxation of a leisure hour into the seriousbusiness and ambition of his life. But Commodus, from his earliestinfancy, discovered an aversion to whatever was rational or liberal,and a fond attachment to the amusements of the populace; thesports of the circus and amphitheatre, the combats, of gladiators*and the hunting of wild beasts. The masters in every branch oflearning, whom Marcus provided for his son, were heard with in­attention and disgust; whilst the Moors and Parthians, who taughthim to dart the javelin and to shoot with the bow, found a disciplewho delighted in his application, and soon equalled the most skil­ful of his instructors, in the steadiness of the eye, and the dexterityof the hand.
The servile crowd, whose fortune depended on their master's Hunting ofvices, applauded these ignoble pursuits. The perfidious voice of .Wlldbeasts>flattery reminded him, that by exploits of the fame nature, by thedefeat of the Nemæan lion, and the slaughter of the wild boar ofErymanthus, the Grecian Hercules had acquired a place among thegods, and an immortal memory among men. They only forgotto observe, that in the first ages of society, when the fiercer animalsOften dispute with man the possession of an unsettled country, asuccessful war against those savages, is one of the most innocentand beneficial labours of heroism. In the civilized state of the Ro­man empire, the wild beasts had long since retired from the face ofmen, and the neighbourhood of populous cities. To surprise themin their solitary haunts, and to transport them, to Rome, that theymight be slain in pomp by the hand of an emperor, was an. enter­prise equally ridiculous for the prince, and oppressive for the peo­ple '°. Ignorant of these distinctions, Commodus eagerly embracedthe glorious resemblance, and styled himself (as we still read on his-
medals")







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


a prisoner, and his astonished troops laid down their arms'". Insuch a momeht of triumph, the pride and policy of Sapor promptedhim to fill the vacant throne with a successor entirely dependent onhis pleasure. Cyriadea, an obscure fugitive of Antioch, stainedwith every vice, was chosen to diflionour the Roman purple; andthe will of the Persian victor could not fail of being ratified by theacclamations, however reluctant, of the captive army ,4°.
The imperial Have was eager to secure the favour of his master, S-porover-
runs Syria,
by an act of treason to his native country. He conducted Sapor Ciacia, andover the Euphrates, and by the way of Chalcis to the metropolis of PPadoC1*'the East. So rapid were the motions of the Persian cavalry, that, ifWe may credit a Very judicious historian ,4', the city of Antioch wassurprised when the idle multitude was fondly gazing on the amuse­ments of the theatre. The splendid buildings of Antioch, privateas well as public, were either pillaged or destroyed; and the nume­rous inhabitants were put to the sword, or led away into captivityThe tide of devastation was stopped for a moment by the resolution ofthe high priest of Emesa. Arrayed in his sacerdotal robes, he ap- ■peared at the head of a great body of fanatic peasants, armed onlywith flings, and defended his god and his property from the sacri­legious hands of the followers of Zoroaster l+J. But the ruin ofTarsus, and of many other cities, furnilh a melancholy proofthat, except in this singular instance, the conquest of Syria andCilida scarcely interrupted the progress of the Persian arms. Theadvantages of the narrow passes of mount Taurus were abandoned,in which an invader, whose principal force consisted in his cavalry,would have been engaged in a very unequal combat: and Sapor wa6permitted to form the siege ofCæsarea, the capital of Cappadocia; acity, though of the second rank, which was supposed to containfour hundred thousand inhabitants. Demosthenes commanded inthe place, not so much by the commission of the emperor, as in thevoluntary defence of his country. For a long time he deferred its
N n 2 fate;







OCR Output








I73 THE DECLINE AND FALL


and teaches us, that in a large society, the election of a monarchcan never devolve to the wisest, or to the most numerous part ofthe people. The army is the only order of men sufficiently unitedto concur in the same sentiments, and powerful enough to imposethem on the rest of their fellow-citizens: but the temper of soldiers,habituated at once to violence and to slavery, renders them veryunfit guardians of a legal, or even a civil constitution. Justice,humanity, or political wisdo.m> are qualities they are too littleacquainted with in themselves, to appreciate them in others. Va­lour will acquire their esteem, and liberality will purchase theirsuffrage; but the first of these merits, is often lodged in the mostsavage breasts; the latter can only exert itself at the expence of thepublic; and both may be turned against the possessor of the throne,•• «. 3 . by the ambition of a daring rival.Want of h in ; The superior prerogative of birth, when it has obtained the sanc-
fhe Roman _ .... ...
empire pro- tion of time and popular opinion, is the plainest, and least invidious,
greatest cala- of all distinctions among mankind. The acknowledged rightinUlc" extinguishes the hopes of faction, and the conscious security dis­arms the cruelty of the monarch. To the firm establishment of thisidea, we owe the peaceful succession, and mild administration, ofEuropean monarchies. To the defect of it, we must attribute thefrequent civil wars, through which an Asiatic Despot is obliged tocut his way to the throne of his fathers. Yet, even in the East,the sphere of contention is usually limited to the princes of thereigning house, and as soon as the fortunate candidate has removedhis brethren, by the sword and the bow-string, he no longer enter­tains any jealousy of his meaner subjects. But the Roman empire,after the authority of the senate had sunk into contempt, was avast scene of confusion. The royal, and even noble, families ofthe provinces, had long since been led in triumph before the car of'the haughty republicans. The ancient families of Rome hadsuccessively fallen beneath the tyranny of the Caesars; and whilst! those







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


the fruits, that grow in our European gardens, are of foreign ex- introductiontraction, which, in many cafes, is betrayed even by their nasties:the apple was a native of Italy, and when the Romans had tasted thericher flavour of the apricot, the peach, the pomegranate, thecitron, and the orange, they contented themselves with applyingto all these new fruits, the common denomination of apple, dis­criminating them from each other by the additional epithet of theircountry. 2, In the time of Homer, the vine grew wild in theisland of Sicily, and most probably in the adjacent continent 5 butit was not improved by the skill, nor did it afford a liquor gratefulto the taste of the savage inhabitants 9+. A thousand years af­terwards, Italy could boast, that of the fourscore most generousand celebrated wines, more than two-thirds were produced fromher foil 9*. The blessing was soon communicated to the Narbon-nese province of Gaul; but so intense was the cold to the north ofthe Cevennes, that, in the time of Strabo, it was thought impossibleto ripen the grapes in those parts of Gaul 9\ - This -difficulty,however, was gradually vanquished; and there is some reason tobelieve that the vineyards of Burgundy are as old as the age of the-
Antonines 97. %. The olive, in the western world, was the com*- _
J The olive.
panion as well as the symbol of peace. Two centuries after thefoundation of Rome, both Italy and Africa were strangers to thatuseful plant; it was naturalized in those countries; and at lengthcarried into the heart of Spain and Gaul. The timid errors of theancients, that it requieed a certain degree of heat, and could onlyflourish in the neighbourhood of the sea, were insensibly explode*! byindustry and experience 9\ 4. The cultivation of flax was trabfc ^ported from Egypt to Gaul* and enriched the whole country^however it might impoverish the particular lands on which it wassown". 1 $. The use of artificial graffea became familiar ta the Artificial•farmers both of Italy and the provinces^ partkulayly thfi[iLuccrnej 8rafses*which derivtd [its Iname and torigin frcra Medih *^-:;The astbiat
4 supply







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


had been suspected of an attachment to the Christian faith. In the
last three years and a half, listening to the insinuations of a minister
addicted to the superstitions of Egypt, he adopted the maxims, and
imitated the severity of his predecessor Decius "\ The accession of
Galienus, which increased the calamities of the empire, restored
peace to the church; and the Christians obtained the. free exercise of
their religion, by an edict addressed to the bishops, and conceived in such
terms as seemed to acknowledge their office and public character'1'.
The ancient laws, without being formally repealed, were suffered to A. D. 260—
fink into oblivion; and (excepting only some hostile intentions
which are attributed to the emperor Aureliah '**) the disciples of
Christ passed above forty years in a state of prosperity, far more
dangerous to their virtue than the severest trials of persecution.
The story of Paul of Samosata, who filled the metropolitan see of Paul of Sa.Antioch, while the East was in the hands of Odenathus and Zeno- manners,bia, may serve to illustrate the condition and character of the times. A,D* 2<5°*The wealth of that prelate was a sufficient evidence of his guilt,since it was neither derived from the inheritance of his fathers, noracquired by the arts of honest industry. But Paul considered theservice of the church as a very lucrative profession "5. His ecclesiasti­cal jurisdiction was venal and rapacious; he extorted frequent con­tributions from the most opulent of the faithful, and converted tohis own use a considerable part of the public revenue. By hispride and luxury, the Christian religion was rendered odious in theeyes of the Gentiles. His council chamber and his throne, the splen­dor with which he appeared in public, the suppliant crowd who so-;licited his attention, the multitude of letters and petitions to which (j[he dictated his answers, and the perpetual hurry of business in <jfwhich he was involved, were circumstances much better suited tothe state of a civil magistrate,xS, than to the humility of a primi­tive bishop. When he harangued his people from the pulpit, Paulaffected the figurative style and the theatrical gestures of an Asiatic
Vol. I. 4C sophist,







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AND FALL


himself from the luxury of the palace, he appeared in arms at the headof his legions, and advanced beyond the Po to encounter his com­petitor. The corrupted name of Pontirolo 1 still preserves thememory of a bridge over the Adda, which, during the action, musthave proved an object of the utmost importance to both armies.The Rhætian usurper, after receiving a total defeat and a dangerouswound, retired into Milan. The siege of that great city was im­mediately formed; the walls were battered with every engine inuse among the ancients; and Aureolus, doubtful of his internalstrength, and hopeless of foreign succours, already anticipated thefatal consequences of unsuccessful rebellion.
His last resource was an attempt to seduce the loyalty of thebesiegers. He scattered libels through their camp, inviting the troopsto desert an unworthy master, who sacrificed the public happiness tohis luxury, and the lives of his most valuable subjects to theslightest suspicions. The arts of Aureolus diffused fears and discon­tent among the principal officers of his rival. A conspiracy wasformed by Heraclianus the Praetorian Præfect, by. Marcian a generalof rank and reputation, and by Cecrops, who commanded anumerous body of Dalmatian guards. The death of Gallienus wasresolved, and notwithstanding their desire of first terminating thesiege of Milan, the extreme danger which accompanied every mo­ment's delay, obliged them to hasten the execution of their daringpurpose. At a late hour of the night, but while the emperor stillprotracted the pleasures of the table, an alarm was suddenly given,that Aureolus, at the head of all his forces, had made a desperatesally from the town; Gallienus, who was never deficient in personalbravery, started from his silken couch, and, without allowing himselftime either to put on his armour, or to assemble his guards, hemounted on horseback, and rode full speed towards the supposedplace of the attack. Encompassed by his declared or concealedenemies, he soon, amidst the nocturnal tumult, received a mortal
dart







OCR Output








34 ,^HE DECLINE AND F ALL


wealth* Cybele and Æsculapius had been invited by solemn em*bashes 17; and it was customary to tempt the protectors of besiegedcities, by the promise of more distinguished honours than theypossessed in their native country ,8. Rome gradually became thecommon temple of her subjects; and the freedom of the city wasbestowed on all the gods of mankind ,?.Ro^™of Th.C narrow policy of preserving, without any foreign mix­
ture, the pure blood of the ancient citizens, had checked the for­tune, and hastened "the ruin, of Athens and Sparta.. The aspiringgenius of Rome sacrificed vanity to ambition, and deemed it moreprudent as well as honourable, to adopt virtue and merit for herqwn wheresoever they were found, among staves or strangers, ene­mies or barbarians "\ During the most flourishing zera of theAthenian commonwealth, the number of citizens gradually decreasedfrom about thirty*' to twenty-one thousand". If, on the con­trary, we study the growth of the Roman republic, we may discover,that, notwithstanding the incessant demands of wars and colonies,the citizens, who, in the first census of Servius Tullius, amountedto no more than eighty-three thousand, were multiplied, before thecommencement of the social war, to the number of four hundredand sixty-three thousand men, able to bear arms in the service oftheir country When the allies of Rome claimed an equal shareof honours and privileges, the senate indeed preferred the chanceof arms to an ignominious concession. The Samnites and the Lu-canians paid the severe penalty of their rafliness; but the rest of theItalian states, as they successively returned to their duty, were ad­mitted into the bosom of the republic **, and soon contributed tothe ruin of public freedom. Under a democratical government, thecitizens exercise the powers of sovereignty; and those powers willbe first abused, and afterwards lost, when they are committed toan unwieldy multitude. But when the popular assemblies hadbeen suppressed by the administration of the emperors, the con­querors







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 38:


of the Mygdonius, passed under the walls of Singara, and fellinto the Euphrates at Circefium, a frontier town, which, by thecare of Diocletian, was very strongly fortified ?8. Mesopotamia, theobject of so many wars, was ceded to the empire; and the Persians,by this treaty renounced all pretensions to that great province.II. They relinquished to the Romans five provinces beyond the Cession of five
/ * x * provinces
Tigris Their situation formed a very useful barrier, and their bfy°?d thenatural strength was soon improved by art and military skill. Four &of these, to the north of the river, were districts of obscure fameand inconsiderable extent; Intiline, Zabdicene, Arzanene, and Mox-oene: but on the east of the Tigris, the empire acquired the largeand mountainous territory of Carduene, the ancient feat of theCarduchians, who preserved for many ages their manly freedom in theheart of the despotic monarchies of Asia. The ten thousand Greekstraversed their country, after a painful march, or rather engage­ment, of seven days; and it is confessed by their leader, in hisincomparable relation of the retreat, that they suffered more from ,the arrows of the Carduchians, than from the power of the greatking 8\ Their posterity, the Curds, with very little alterationeither of name or manners, acknowledge the nominal sovereignty ofthe Turkish sultan. III. It is almost needless to observe, thatTiridates, Armenia,the faithful ally of Rome, was restored to the throne of his fathers,and that the right of the imperial supremacy were fully assertedand secured. The limits of Armenia were extended as far as thefortress of Sintha in Media, and this increase of dominion- wasnot so much an act of liberality as of justice; Of the provincesalready mentioned beyond the Tigris, the four first had beendismembered by the Parthians, from the crown of Armenia 81; andwhen the Romans acquired the possession of them, they stipulated,at the expence of the usurpers, an ample compensation, whichinvested their ally with the extensive and fertile country of Atropatene.Its principal city, in the fame situation perhaps as the modern Tauris,
was.







OCR Output








xi noteson the;t: N T H CHARTER,


[104] See a very natural picture of the'Euxine■avigation, in the xvith letter of Tournefort.
[icj] Arrian places the frontier garrison atDioscurias, or Sebaslopolis, forty four miles to theeast of Pityus. The garrison of Phasis consisted inhis time of only four hundred foot. See the Periplusof the Euxine.
[106] Zosimus, 1. i. p. 30.
[107] Arrian (in Periplo Maris Euxin. p. 130.calls the distance 2610 stadia.
[108] Xenophon. Anabasis, I. iv. p. 348. Edit.Hutchinson.
[109] Arrian, p. 129. The general observationis Tournefort's.
[no] See an epistle of Gregory Thaumaturgus,bishop of Neo-Cæsarea, quoted by Mascou, v. 37.
[111] Zosimus, 1. i. p. 32, 33.
[112] Itiner. Hierosolyrn. p. 572. Wesseling.
[113] Zosimus, 1. i. p. 32, 33.
[114] He besieged the place with 400 gallies,150,000 foot, and a numerous cavalry. See Plu­tarch in Lucul. Appian in Mithridat. Cicero pro-Lege Manilla, c. 8.
[115] Strabo, 1. xii. p. 573.
[116] Pocock's Description of the East, 1. ii.c. 23, 24.
[117] Zosimus, 1,1. p. 33.
[11S] Syncellus tells an unintelligible story ofPrince Odtnathui, who defeated the Goths, and whowas killed by Prince Qdcnathus,
[119] Voyages de Chardin, torn. i. p. 45. Hesailed with the Turks from Constantinople toCaffa.
[120] Syncellus (p. 3P2.) speaks of this expedi­tion as undertaken by the Heruli.
[121J Strabo, 1. xi. p. 495.
[122] Plin. Hist. Natur. iii. 7. 1
[1*3] Hist. August, p. 181. Victor, c. 33.Orosius, vii. 42. Zosimus, I. i. p. 35. Zona-
2


ras, 1. xii. 635. Syncellus, p. 382. Iris not with­out some attention, that we can explain and conci­liate their imperfect hints. . We can still discoversome traces of the partiality ofDexippus, in the re-lation of his own and his countrymen's exploits.
[124] Syncellus, p. 382. This body of Heruliwas for a long time faithful and famous.
[125] Claudius, who commanded on the Danube,thought v\ith propriety and acted with spirit. His col­league was jealous of his fame. Hist. August, p. 181.
[ 126] Jornandes, c. 20.
[127] Zosimus, and tlie Greeks (as the author ofthe Philopatris) give the name of Scythians to thosewhom Jornandes, and the Latin writers, constantlyrepresent as Goths.
[128] Hist. August, p. 178. • Jornandes, c. 20.
[129] Strabo, 1. xiv. p. 640. Vitruvius, 1. i, c. 1.præfat. 1. vii. Tacit. Annal. iii. 61. Plin. Hist.Nat. xxxvi. 14.
[ 130] The length of St. Peter's is 840 Romanpalms, each palm is a very little sliort of nine Eng­lish inches. See Greaves's Miscellanies, vol. i.p. 233; On the Roman foot.
[131] The policy however of the Romans in­duced them to abridge the extent of the sanctuary orasylum, which by successive privileges had spreaditself two stadia round the temple. Strabo, 1. xiv.p. 641. Tacit. Annal. iii. 60, &c.
[132] They offered no sacrifices to the Greciangods. See Epistol. Gregor. Thaumat.
[133] Zonaras, 1. xii. p. 635. Such an anecdotewas perfectly suited to the taste of Montaigne. Hemakes use of it in his agreeable Essay on Pedantry,
I. i. c. 24. • ■•
[134] Moses Chorenensis, 1. ii. c. 71. 73, 74.Zonaras, 1. xii. p. 628. The authentic relation ofthe Armenian historian serves to rectify the confusedaccount of the Greek. The latter talks of thechildren of Tiridates, who at that time was himselfan infant.
[13;] Hist. August, p. 191. As Macrianus wasan enemy to the Christians, they charged him withbeing a magician. .
[136] Zosimus







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AND FALL


Parthian and Babylonian leather, cottons, silks, both raw and manu­factured, ebony, ivory, and eunuchs ,co. We may observe that theuse and value of those effeminate slaves gradually rose with thedecline of the empire.The excise. TC. The excise, introduced by Augustus after the civil wars, wasextremely moderate, but it was general. It seldom exceeded oneper cent.; but it comprehended whatever was fold in the marketsor by public auction, from the most considerable purchases of landsand houses, to those minute objects which can only derive a valuefrom their infinite multitude and daily consumption. Such a tax,as it affects the body of the people, has ever been the occasion ofclamour and discontent. An emperor well acquainted with thewants and resources of the state, was obliged to declare by a publicedict, that the support of the army depended in a great measure onthe produce of the exciseTax on lega- III. When Augustus resolved to establish a permanent militaryriuncei nhe" force for the defence of his government against foreign and domesticenemies, he instituted a peculiar treasury for the pay of the soldiers,the rewards of the veterans, and the extraordinary expences ofwar. The ample revenue of the excise, though peculiarly appro­priated to those uses, was found inadequate. To supply the defi­ciency, the emperor suggested a new tax of five per cent, on alllegacies and inheritances. But the noble6 of Rome were more tena­cious of property than of freedom. Their indignant murmurs werereceived by Augustus with his usual temper. He candidly referredthe whole business to the senate, and exhorted them to provide forthe public service by some other expedient of a less odious nature.They were divided and perplexed. He insinuated to them, thattheir obstinacy would oblige him to propose a general land-tax andcapitation. They acquiesced in silence "\ The new imposition onlegacies and inheritances, was however mitigated by some restric­tions. It did not take place unless the object was of a certain value,
most







OCR Output








NOTES ON THE SECOND CHAPTER. v


[84] Dion Caffius, lxviii. p. 1131.
[ ^] Ptolemy and Strabo, with the modern geo­graphers, fix the Isthmus of Suez as the boundary ofAsia and Africa. Dionysius, Mela, Pliny, Sailust,Hiriius, and Solinus, have preferred for that pur­pose the western branch of the Nile, or even thegreat Catabathrnus, or descent, which last wouldresign to Asia, not only Egypt, but part of Libya.
[86] The long range, moderate height, andgentle declivity of mount Atlas (see Shaw's tra­vels, p. are very unlike a solitary mountainwhich rears its head into the clouds, and seems tosupport the heavens. The Peak of Teneriff, onthe contrary, rises a league and a half above the


surface of the sea, and as it was frequently visitedby the Phœnicians, might engage the notice of theGreek poets. See Buffon, Histoire Naturelle,torn. i. p. 312. Histoire des Voyages, torn. ii.
[87] M. de Voltaire, torn. xiv. p. 297, un­supported by either fact or probability, has gene­rously bestowed the Canary Islands on the Romanempire.
[88] Bergier, Hist, des Grands Chemins, 1. iii.c. 1, 2, 3, 4, a very useful collection.
[89] See Templeman's Survey of the Globe;hut I distrust both the doctor's learning and hismaps.


NOTES ON THE SECOND CHAPTER.


HEY were erected about the midway be-X tween Labor and Dehli. The conquestsof Alexander in Hindostan, were confined to thePunjab, a country watered by the five great streams.of the Indus.
[2] See M. de Guignes Histoire des Huns,1, xv, xvi, and xvii.
[5] There is not any writer who describes in solively a manner as Herodotus, the true genius ofPolytheism. The best commentary may be foundin Mr. Hume's Natural History of Religion; andthe best contrast in Bossuet's Universal History.Some obscure traces of an intolerant spirit appearin the conduct of the Egyptians, (see Juvenal, Sat. xv.)and the Christians as well as Jews, who lived un­der the Roman empire, formed a very importantexception: so important indeed, that the discussionwill require a distinct chapter of this work.
[4] The rights, power, and pretensions of thesovereign of Olympus, are very clearly describedin the xvth book of the Iliad: in the Greek ori­ginal, I mean; for Mr. Pope, without perceiving it,has improved the theology of Homer.
[?] See for instance, Cæsar de Bell. Gall. vi. 17.Within a century or two the Gauls themselvesapplied to their gods the names of Mercury, Mars,Apollo, &c.
4


[6] The admirable work of Cicero de NaturaDeorum, is the best clue we have to guide usthrough the dark and profound abyss. He repre­sents with candour, and confutes with subtlety, theopinions of the philosophers.
[7] I do not pretend to assert, that, in this isre-ligious age, the natural terrors of superstition,dreams, omens, apparitions, &c. had lost theirefficacy.
[8] Socrates, Epicurus, Cicero, and Plutarch,always inculcated a decent reverence for the religion,of their own country, and of mankind. The devo­tion of Epicurus was assiduous and exemplars.Diogen. Laert. x. 10.
[9] Polybius, 1. vi. c. 5?, J4. Juvenal. Sat.xiii. laments, that in his time this apprehension hadlost much of its effect.
[10J See the fate of Syracuse, Tarentum, Am.bracia, Corinth, &c. the conduct of Verres, inCicero (Actio ii. Orat. 4.), and the usual practiceof governors, in the viiith Satire of Juvenal.
[11] Sueton. in Claud.—Plin. Hist. Nat. xxx. n.
[12] Pelloutier Histoire de* Celtes, torn. »i.p. 230—252.
■ 1
[13] Seneca







OCR Output








PREFACE.


I. The first of these periods may be traced fromthe age of Trajan and the Antonines, when the Ro­man monarchy having attained its full strength andmaturity, began to verge towards its decline; andwill extend to the subversion of the western empire,by the barbarians of Germany and Scythia, the rudeancestors of the most polished nations of modernEurope This extraordinary revolution, which sub­jected Rome to the power of a Gothic conqueror,was completed about the beginning of the sixthcentury.
II. The second period of the Decline and Fall ofRome, may be supposed to commence with the reignof Justinian, who by his laws, as well as by his vic­tories, restored a transient splendor to the EasternEmpire. It will comprehend the invasion of Italy bythe Lombards; the conquest of the Asiatic and Africanprovinces by the Arabs, who embraced the religionof Mahomet; the revolt of the Roman people againstthe feeble princes of Constantinople; and the eleva­tion of Charlemagne, who, in the year eight hun-
^ dredj,







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE, 333


the republic. Into Britain and most probably into Cambridge­shire 46, he transported a considerable body of Vandals. The im­possibility of an escape, reconciled them to their situation, and inthe subsequent troubles of that island, they approved themselves themost faithful servants of the state *\ Great numbers of Franksand Gepidse were settled on the banks of the Danube and theRhine. An hundred thousand Bastarnæ, expelled from their owncountry, cheerfully accepted an establishment in Thrace, and sooaimbibed the manners and sentiments of Roman subjects *8. Butthe expectations of Probus were too often disappointed. Theimpatience and idleness of the barbarians could ill brook the flowlabours of agriculture. Their unconquerable love of freedom,rising against despotism, provoked them into hasty rebellions, alikefatal to themselves and to the provinces 49; nor could these artificialsupplies, however repeated by succeeding emperors, restore the im­portant limit of Gaul and Illyricum to its ancient and nativevigour.
Of all the barbarians who abandoned their new settlements, and Dar'"g enter­prise of the
disturbed the public tranquillity, a very small number returned to their Franks,own country. For a short season they might wander in arms throughthe empire; but in the end they were surely destroyed by the powerof a warlike empercr. The successful rashness of a party of Frankswas attended with such memorable consequences, that it ought not tobe passed unnoticed. They had been established by Probus, onthe sea coast of Pontus, with a view of strengthening that frontieragainst the inroads of the Alani. A fleet stationed in one of theharbours of the Euxine, fell into the hands of the Franks; and theyresolved, through unknown seas, to explore their way from themouth of the Phasis to that of the Rhine. They easily escapedthrough the Bosphorus and the Hellespont, and cruizing along theMediterranean, indulged their appetite for revenge and plunder,by frequent descents on the unsuspecting shores of Asia, Greece, and
X x 2 Africa.







OCR Output








OF THE; ROMAN EMPIRE.


and calumny to shed their poison on the administration of the best-of princes, and to accuse even their virtues by artfully confoundingthem with those vices, to which they bear the nearest affinity. Thetroops listened with pleasure to the emifiaries of Maximin. Theyblushed at their own ignominious patience, which during thirteenyears had supported the vexatious discipline imposed by an effemi­nate Syrian, the timid slave of his mother and of the senate. Itwas time, they cried, to cast away that .useless phantom of the civilpower, and to elect for their prince and general a real soldier, edu­cated in camps,< exercised in war, who would assert the glory, anddistribute among his companions the treasures, of the empire* Agreat army, commanded by the emperor in person, was at that• lime assembled on the banks of the Rhine against the Germansand the important care of training and reviewing the new levies,-was intrusted to Maximin. One day as he entered the field of exer­cise, the troops, either from a sudden impulse or a formed conspi­racy, saluted him emperor, silenced by their loud acclamations hisobstinate refusal, and hastened to consummate their rebellion by the ^ D -murder of Alexander Severus. March '9-
The circumstances of his death are variously related. The wri- .
* Murder of
ters, who suppose that he died in ignorance of the ingratitude and Alexander.
. 'a Severus,-
ambition of Maximin, affirm, that after taking a frugal repast inthe fight of the army, he retbed to sleep, and that about theseventh hour of the day, a party of his own guards broke into theImperial tent, and, with many wounds, astaffinated their virtuous-and unsuspecting prince5. If we credit another, and indeed a moreprobable account, Maximin was invested with the purple by a nu*-merous detachment, at the distance of several miles from the headVquarters; and he trusted for success rather to the secret wishes thanto the public declarations of the great army. Alexander had suffi­cient time to awaken a faint sense of loyalty among his troops; buttheir reluctant professions of fidelity quickly vanished on the ap-
3 pearance







OCR Output








36* THE DECLINE ANI> FAL1


 


of Rome; and the latter, after saving his country from the designsof Catiline, enabled her to contend with Athens for the palm ofeloquence 17.
vinceT0 ^ne Provinces °f rtie empire (as they have been described in the
preceding chapter) were destitute of any public force, or constitu­tional freedom. In Etruria, in Greece 28, and in Gaul19, it wasthe first care of the senate to dissolve those dangerous confederacieswhich taught mankind, that, as the Roman arms prevailed by di­vision, they might be resisted by union. Those princes, whom anostentation of gratitude or generosity permitted for a while to holda precarious scepter, were dismissed from their thrones, as soon asthey had performed their appointed task of fashioning to the yokethe vanquished nations. The free states and cities which had em­braced the cause of Rome, were rewarded with a nominal alliance,and insensibly sunk into real servitude. The public authoritywas every where exercised by the ministers of the senate and of theemperors, and that authority was absolute, and without control.But the same salutary maxims of government, which had securedthe peace and obedience of Italy, were extended to the most dis­tant conquests. A nation of Romans was gradually formed in theprovinces, by the double expedient of introducing colonies, and ofadmitting the most faithful and deserving of the provincials to thefreedom of Rome.
Colonies and "Wheresoever the Roman conquers, he inhabits," is a very justtowM.IFal observation of Seneca'% confirmed by history and experience.
The natives of Italy, allured by pleasure or by interest, hastened to enjoythe advantages of victory; and we may remark, that about forty yearsafter the reduction of Asia, eighty thousand Romans were massacredin one day, by the cruel orders of Mithridates ". These voluntaryexiles were engaged, for the most part, in the occupations of com­merce, agriculture, and the farm of the revenue. But after the legionswere rendered permanent by the emperors, the provinces were peopled
by







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


pure and genuine sources of wealth; and from them he soon deriveda copious supply for the public necessities. The expence of thehousehold was immediately reduced to one half. All the instru­ments of luxury, Pertinax exposed to public auction gold andsilver plate, chariots of a singular construction, a superfluous ward­robe of silk and embroidery, and a great number of beautiful stavesof both sexes; excepting only, with attentive humanity, those whowere born in a state of freedom, and had been ravished from thearms of their weeping parents. At the fame time that he obligedthe worthless favourites of the tyrant to resign a part of their ill-gotten wealth, he satisfied the just creditors of the state, and dis­charged the long arrears of honest services. He removed the oppres­sive restrictions which had been laid upon commerce, and granted allthe uncultivated lands in Italy and the provinces, to those who wouldimprove them; with an exemption from all tribute, during the term,of ten years '\
Such an uniform conduct had already secured to Pertinax the no- and popu-blest reward of a sovereign, the love and esteem of his people. *mr'Those who remembered the virtues of Marcus were pleased to con­template in their new emperor the features of that bright original}.and flattered themselves, that they should long enjoy the benign,influence of his administration* A hasty zeal to reform the cor­rupted stater. accompanied with less prudence than might have beer*expected from the years and experience of Pertinax, was fatal tohimself and to his country. His honest indiscretion united againsthim the servile crowd, who found their private benefit in the pub­lic disorders, and who preferred the favour of a tyrant to the inex­orable equality of the laws
Amidst the general joy, the sullen and angry countenance of the Discontent ofPraatorian guards betrayed thier inward diflatisfaction. They had ^tD,txto*reluctantly submitted to Pertinax; they dreaded the strictness of theancient discipline, which be was preparing to restore j and they re­gretted.







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 489


season, presumptuously disturbed the service of the assembly, andby their pride or mistaken zeal they introduced, particularly into theapostolic church of Corinth, a long and melancholy train of dis­orders ,oS. As the institution of prophets became useless, and evenpernicious, their powers were withdrawn, and their office abolished.The public functions of religion were solely entrusted to the esta­blished ministers of the church, the bi/hops and the presbyters; twoappellations which, in their first origin, appear to have distinguishedthe same office and the same order of persons. The name of Pres­byter was expressive of their age, or rather of their gravity andwisdom. The title of Bishop denoted their inspection over the faithand manners of the christians who were committed to their pastoralcare. In proportion to the respective numbers of the faithful, alarger or smaller number of these episcopal presbyters guided eachinfant congregation with equal authority, and with unitedcounsels Io6.
But the most perfect equality of freedom requires the directing institution ofhand of a superior magistrate; and the order of public deliberations presidents ofsoon introduces the office of a president invested at least with the prlityten! °fauthority of collecting the sentiments, and of executing the re­solutions, of the assembly. A regard for the public tranquillity,which would so frequently have been interrupted by annual or byoccasional elections, induced the primitive christians to constitute anhonourable and perpetual magistracy, and to choose one of the wisestand most holy among their presbyters to execute, during his life, theduties of their ecclesiastical governor. It was under these circum­stances that the lofty title of Bishop began to raise itself above thehumble appellation of presbyter; and while the latter remained themost natural distinction for the members of every christian senate,the former was appropriated to the dignity of its new president '°7.The advantages of this episcopal form of governments which ap­pears to have been introduced before the end of the first century ,0%, Vol. L R r r were







OCR Output








Iviii NOTES ON THE FOURTEENTH CHAPTER.


ing to the lowest computation of that age, must haveexceeded three thousand pounds a year. He generousty requeued the permission of employing it inrebuilding the college. See his Oration De restau-randis scholis ; which, though not exempt fromvanity, may atone for his panegyrics.


[124] Porphyry died about the time of Diocle­tian's abdication. The life of his master Plotinus,which he composed, will give us the most completeidea of the genius of the sect, and the manners ofits professors. Thii very curious piece is insertedin Fabricius, Bibliptheca Grxca, torn. iv. p.88—148.


NOTES ON THE FOU
[1] li/s De Montesquieu (Considerations fur laIVJs • Grandeur et la Decadence des Romains,c. 17.) supposes, on the authority of Orosiu3 andEusebius, that, on this occasion, the empire, for thefirst time, was real/y divided into two parts. It isdifficult, however, to discover in what respect theplan of Galerius differed from that of Diocletian.
[2] Hie r.on modo amabilis, fed etiam venera-bilis Gallis suit; praecipue quod Diocletiani fuf-pectam prudentiam, et Maximiani sanguinariamviolentiam imperio ejus evaferanr. Eutrop. Bre-viar. x. 1.
[3] Divitiis Provincialiura (mel. provinciarum)ac privatorura studens, fisci commoda non admo.dum affectans; ducensque melius publicas opes aprivatis haberi, quam intra unum claustrum reser-vari. Id. ibid. He carried this maxim so far, thatwhenever he gave an entertainment, he was obligedto borrow a service os plate.
[4] Lactantius de Mort. Persecutor, c. 18. Werethe particulars of the conference more consistentwith truth and decency, we might still a(k, howthey came to the knowledge of an obscure rheto­rician? But there are many historians who putus in mind of the admirable saying of the greatConde to cardinal de Retz; "Ces coquins nous"font parler et agir, comme ils auroient fait eux-"memes a notre place."
[(] Sublatus nuper a pecoribus et silvis (faysLactantius de M. P. c. 19.) statim Scutarius, continuoProtector, mox Tribunos, postridie Cæsar, accepitOrientem. Aurelius Victor is too liberal in giving. him the whole portion of Diocletian.


RTEENTH CHAPTER.
[fi] His diligence and fidelity are acknowledgedeven by Lactantius, de M. P. e. 18.
[7] These schemes however rest only on the verydoubtful authority of Lactantius, de M. P. c. ao.
[£] This tradition, unknown to the contempo­raries of Constantine, was invented in the darknessof monasteries, was embcllistied by Jeffrey of Mon-mouth, and the writers of the xiith century, hasbeen defended by our antiquarians of the last age,and is seriously related in the ponderous history ofEngland, compiled by Mr. Carte, (vol. i. p. 147.).He transports, however, the kingdom of Coil, theimaginary father of Helena, from Essex to the wallof Antoninus.
[9] Eutropius (x. 2.) expresses, in a sew words,the real truth, and the occasion of the error,"/'* cb-"scuritri malrim'inio ejus filius." Zosimus (1. ii.p. 78.) eagerly seized the most unfavourable report,and is followed by Orosius (vii. 25»)> whose authorityis oddly enough overlooked by the indefatigablebut partial Tillemont. By insisting on the divorceof Helena, Diocletian acknowledged her marriage.
[io] There are three opinions with regard tothe place of Constantine's birth. I, Our Englishantiquarians were used to dwell with raptureon the words of his panegyrist; '* Britannia*illic oriendo nobiles fectsti." But this cele­brated passage may be referred with as much pro­priety to the accession as to the nativity of Con­stantine. 2. Some of the modern Greeks haveascribed the honour of his birth to Drepanum, atown on the gulf of Nicomedia, (Cellarius, torn. ii.p. 174.) which Constantine dignified with the name
of







OCR Output








jzc* THE DECLINE AND PALL


tive vigour, that the women were more fruitful, and the humanspecies more prolific, than in warmer or more temperate climates *^We may assert, with greater confidence, that the keen air of Ger­many formed the large and masculine limbs of the natives^ who*were, iri general, of a more lofty stafture than the people of theSouth 9, gave them a kind of strength better adapted to violent ex­ertions, than to patient labour, and inspired them with- constitu­tional bravery, which is the result 6f nerves and spirits. Theseverity of a winter campaign, that chilled the courage of the-Roman troops, was scarcely felt by these hardy children of theNorth '% Who, in their turn, were Unable to resist the summer heats,,and dissolved away in languor and sickness under the beams of anItalian fun ".
Gwmanf he There is not any where upon the globe* a large tract of country,,which we have discovered destitute of inhabitants, or whose first?population can be fixed, with any degree of historical certainty..And yet, as the most philosophic minds can seldom refrain from in­vestigating the infancy of great nations, our curiosity consumes itselfin toilsome and disappointed efforts. When Tacitus considered thepurity of the German blood, and the forbidding aspect of this country,he was disposed to pronounce those barbarians Indigent) or Natives ofthe foil. We may allow with safety, and perhaps with truth,that ancient Germany was not originally peopled by any foreign-colonies, already formed into a political society "; but that the name-and nation received their existence from the gradual union of somewandering savages of the Hercynian woods. To assert those sa­vages to have been the spontaneous production of the earth whichthey inhabited* would be a conclusion condemned by religion, and.unwarranted by reason.
fo^eauref Such rational doubt is but ill suited with the genius of popularvanity. Among the nations who have adopted the Mosaic history ofthe world, the ark of Noah has been of the fame use, as was formerly
to>







OCR Output








; Of.THP. ROMAN EMPIRE. 383


ornament was of a more singular nature, a Persian, victory followedby an .important conquest. The represeatations of rivers* moun­tains, and provinces, were carried before tbe imperial cw?. Theimages of the captive wives, sisters, and children of the great king*afforded a new and grateful spectacle to the vanity of the people 8z.In the eyes of posterity this triumph is remarkable, by a distinctionof a less honourable kind. It was the last that Rome ever be­held. Soon after this period, the emperors ceased to vanquish.) andRome ceased to be the capital of the empire.
The spot on which Rome was founded, had been consecrated Long absence
* • • • -i n-n r oftheempe-
by ancient ceremonies and imaginary miracles. The pretence rorsfromof some god, or the memory of some hero, seemed to animate Rome*Ævery part of the city* and the empire of the world had beenpromised to the Capitol8S. The native Romans felt and confessedthe power of this agreeable illusion- It was derived from theirancestors, had grown up with their earliest habits of life, and wasprotected, in some measure, by the opinion of political utility.The form and the seat of government were intimately blendedtogether, nor was it esteemed possible to transport the one withoutdestroying the other S'. But the sovereignty of the capital wasgradually annihilated in the extent of conquest ; the provinces rose tothe same level, and the vanquished nations acquired the nameand privileges, without imbibing the partial affections, of Romans.During a long period, however, the remains of the ancient con­stitution, and the influence of custom, preserved the dignity ofRome. The emperors, though perhaps of African or Ulyrianextraction, respected their adopted country, as the feat of theirpower, and the center of their extensive dominions. The emer­gency of war very frequently required their presence on the fron­tiers ; but Diocletian and Maximian were the first Roman princeswho fixed, in time of peace, their ordinary residence in the pro»«vinces j and their conduct, however it might be suggested by private
4 motives*







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE, 323


memory of their deceased sovereign. Such acknowledgments as.gratitude could inspire, they returned to the faithful armies of therepublic, who entertained so just a sense of the legal authority ofthe senate in the choice of an emperor. Yet, notwithstanding thisflattering appeal, the most prudent of the assembly declined ex­posing their safety and dignity to the caprice of an armed multi­tude. The strength of the legions was, indeed, a pledge of theirsincerity ; but could it. naturally be expected, that a hasty repent­ance would correct the inveterate habits of fourscore years ? Shouldthe soldiers relapse into their accustomed seditions, their insolencemight disgrace the majesty of the senate, and prove fatal to theobject of its choice. Motives like these dictated a decree, by whichthe election of a new emperor was referred to the suffrage of themilitary order. , .
. The contention that ensued is one of the best attested, but most A. D. t7y.improbable events in the history of mankind \ The troops, as if ,A£3fJ'satiated with the exercise of power, again conjured the senate to in- rfSJff1^*vest one of its own body with the imperial purple. The senate months'still persisted in its refusal; the army in its request. The recipro­cal offer was pressed and rejected at least three times, and whilst theobstinate modesty of either party was resolved to receive a masterfrom the hands of the other, eight months insensibly elapsed: anamazing period of tranquil anarchy, during which the Romanworld remained without a sovereign, without an usurper, and with­out a sedition. The generals and magistrates appointed by Aure-lian continued to execute their ordinary functions, and it is observed,that a proconsul of Asia was the only considerable person removedfrom his office, in the whole course of the interregnum.
An event somewhat similar, but much less authentic, is supposedto have happened after the death of Romulus, who, in his life andcharacter, bore some affinity with Aurelian. The throne was va­cant during twelve months, till the election of a Sabine philosopher,
T t 2 and







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


coast lest destitute by nature of secure harbours '°9. The city waslarge and populous; a double enclosure of walls seemed to defy thefury of the Goths, and the usual garrison had been strengthened by areinforcement of ten thousand men. But there are not any advan­tages capable of supplying the absence of discipline and vigilance.The numerous garrison of Trebizond, dissolved in riot and luxury,disdained to guard their impregnable fortifications. The Goths soondiscovered the supine negligence of the besieged, erected a lofty pileof fascines, ascended the walls, in the silence of the night, andentered the defenceless city, sword in hand. A general massacre ofthe people ensued, whilst the affrighted soldiers escaped through theopposite gates of the town. The most holy temples, and the mostsplendid edifices, were involved in a common destruction. Thebooty that fell into the hands of the Goths was immense: the wealthof the adjacent countries had been deposited in Trebizond, as in asecure place of refuge. The number of captives was incredible, asthe victorious barbarians ranged without opposition through theextensive province of Pontus "°. The rich spoils of Trebizondfilled a great fleet of ships that had been found in the port. Therobust youth of the sea coast were chained to the oar; and theGoths, satisfied with the success of their first naval expedition,returned in triumph to their new establishments in the kingdom ofBosphorus "*. . . , ',
'The second expedition of the Goths was undertaken with Second e
dicion of
greater powers of men and ships, but they steered a different Goths.course, and disdaining the exhausted provinces of Pontus, followedthe western coast of the Euxine, passed before the wide mouths ofthe Borysthenes, the Niester, and the Danube, and increasing theirfleet by the capture of a great number of fishing barks, they ap­proached the narrow out-let through which the Euxine sea pours itswaters into the Mediterranean, and divides the continents of Europeand Asia. The garrison of Chalcedon was encamped near the
- ..M m 2 temple







OCR Output








NOTES ON THE FIRST CHAPTER.


[37] Vegetius, I. ii. and the rest of his firstbook.
[38] The Pyrrhic Dance is extremely well illus­trated by M. le Beau, in the Academie des Inscrip­tions, torn. xxxv. p. 262, &c. That learned aca­demician, in a series of memoirs, has collected allthe passages of the ancients that relate to the Ro­man legion.
[30] Joseph, de Bell. Judaico, 1. Hi. c. 5. Weare indebted to this Jew for some very curious de­tails of Roman discipline.
[40] Plin. Panegyr. c. 13. Life of Hadrian, inthe Augustan history.
[41] See an admirable digression on the Ro­man discipline, in the sixth book of his history.
[42] Vegetius de Re Militari, 1. ii. c. 4, Sec.considerable part of his very perplexed abridgment,was taken from the regulations of Trajan and Ha­drian; and the legion, as he describes it, cannotsuit any other age os the Roman empire.
[43] Vegetius de Re Militari, 1. ii. c. t. In thepurer age of Cæsar and Cicero, the word miltswas almost confined to the infantry. Under thelower empire, and in the times of chivalry, it wasappropriated almost as exclusively to the men atarms, who fought on horseback.
[44] In the time of Polybius and Dionylius ofHalicarnassus, (I. v. c. 4$.) the steel point of thepilum seems to have been much longer. In thetime of Vegetius, it was reduced to a foot, or evennine inches. I have chosen a medium.
[4;] For the legionary arms. See Lipfius deMilitia Romana, 1. iii. c. 2—7.
[46] See the beautiful comparison of Virgil,Georgic. ii. v. 279.
[47] M. Guichardt, Memoires Militaircs, torn. i.c. 4. and Nouveaux Memoires, torn. i. p. 293—311, has treated the subject like a scholar and anofficer.
[48] °ee Arrian's Tactics. With the true par­tiality of a Greek, Arrian rather chose to describethe phalanx of which he had read, than the legionswhich he had commanded.
[49] Polyb. 1. xrii.


[50] Veget. de Re Militari, I. ii. c. 6. Hispositive testimony, which might be supported bycircumstantial evidence, ought surely to silencethose critics who refuse the Imperial legion itsproper body of cavalry.
[51] See Livy almost throughout, particularlyxlii. 61. .
[52] Plin. Hist. Natur. xxxiii. 2. The truefense of that very curious passage was first discoveredand illustrated by M. de Beaufort, RepubliqueRomaine, 1. ii. c. 2.
[53] As in the instance of Horace and Agricola.This appears to have been a defect in the Romandiscipline; which Hadrian endeavoured to remeJy,by ascertaining the legal age of a tribune.
[54] See Arrian's Tactics.
[5$] Such, in particular, was the state of theBatavians. Tacit. Germania, c. 29.
[5' ] Marcus Antoninus obliged the vanquistiedQuadi and Marcomanni to supply him with a latgebody of troops, which he immediately sent intoBritain. Dion Caffius, 1. Ixxi.
[57] Tacit. Annal. Iv. c. Those who fix aregular proportion of as many foot, and twice atmany horse, confound the auxiliaries of the em­perors, with the Italian allies of the republic.
[58] Vegetius, ii. 2. Arrian, in his order ofmarch and battle against the Alani.
[59] The subject of the ancient machines istreated with great knowledge and ingenuity by theChevalier Folard (Polybe, torn. ii. p. 233—290).He prefers them in many respects to our moderncannon and mortars. We may observe, that theuse of them in the field gradually became moreprevalent, in proportion as personal valour andmilitary skill declined with the Roman empire.When men were ro longer found, their place wassupplied by machines. See Vegetius, ii. 2;. Ar­rian.
[60] Vegetius finishes his second book, snd thedescription of the legion, with the following em­phatic words, "Universe qua; in queque belli
"genere







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AND FALL


nor did Severus claim the arrogant superiority of suffering hisrivals to live in a private station. But his unforgiving temper*stimulated by avarice, indulged a spirit of revenge, where therewas no room for apprehension. The most considerable of the pro­vincials, who, without any dislike to the fortunate candidate, hadobeyed the governor, under whose authority they were accidentallyplaced, were punished by death, exile, and especially by the con­fiscation of their estates. Many cities of the east were stript of theirancient honours, and obliged to pay, into the treasury of Severus,four times the amount of the sums contributed by them for the ser­vice of Niger S*.
Till the final decision of the war, the cruelty of Severus was, insome measure, restrained by the uncertainty of the event, and hispretended reverence for the senate. The head of Albinus, accom­panied with a menacing letter, announced to the Romans, that hewas resolved to spare none of the adherents of his unfortunate com­petitors. He was irritated by the just suspicion, that he had neverpossessed the affections of the senate, and he concealed his old male­volence under the recent discovery of some treasonable correspond­ences. Thirty-five senators, however, accused of having favouredthe party of Albinus, he freely pardoned; and by his subsequentbehaviour, endeavoured to convince them, that he had forgotten*as well as forgiven, their supposed offences. But, at the fame time,he condemned forty-one 57 other senators, whose names history hasrecorded; their wives, children, and clients, attended them indeath, and the noblest provincials of Spain and Gaul were in­volved in the fame ruin. Such rigid justice, for so he termed it,was, in the opinion of Severus, the only conduct capable of ensur­ing peace to the people, or stability to the prince; and he con­descended slightly to lament, that, to be mild, it was necessary thathe should first be cruel s%
The







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AND FALL


emperor Hadrian must have succeeded to the throne, before Tacitus,in the regular prosecution of his work, could relate the sire of thecapital and the cruelty of Nero towards the unfortunate Christians.At the distance of sixty years, it was the duty of the annalist toadopt the narratives of contemporaries; but it was natural for thephilosopher to indulge himself in the description of the origin, theprogress, and the character of the new sect, not so much accord­ing to the knowledge or prejudices of the age of Nero, as accord­ing to those of the time of Hadrian, 3. Tacitus very frequentlytrusts to the curiosity or reflection of his readers to supply thoseintermediate circumstances and ideas, which, in his extreme con­ciseness, he has thought proper to suppress. We may thereforepresume to imagine some probable cause which could direct thecruelty of Nero against the Christians of Rome, whose obscurity, aswell as innocence, should have shielded them from his indignation,and even from his notice. The Jews, who were numerous in thecapital, and oppressed in their own country, were a much fitterobject for the suspicions of the emperor and of the people; nor didit seem unlikely that a vanquished nation, who already discoveredtheir abhorrence of the Roman yoke, might have recourse to themost atrocious means of gratifying their implacable revenge. But theJews possessed very powerful advocates in the palace, and even inthe heart of the tyrant; his wife and mistress, the beautiful Poppæa,and a favourite player of the race of Abraham, who had alreadyemployed their intercession in behalf of the obnoxious peopleIn their room it was necessary to offer some other victims, and itmight easily be suggested, that although the genuine followers ofMoses were innocent of the fire of Rome, there had arisen amongthem a new and pernicious sect of Galilæans, which was capable ofthe most horrid crimes. Under the appellation of Galilæans,two distinctions of men were confounded, the most opposite to eachother in their manners and principles; the disciples who had em-7 braced







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 47


stadium which he constructed at Athens. It was six hundred feetin length, built entirely of white marble, capable of admitting thewhole body of the people; and finished in four years, whilstHerod was president of the Athenian games. To the memory ofhis wife Regilla, he dedicated a theatre, scarcely to be paralleled inthe empire: no wood except cedar, very curiously carved, was em­ployed in any part of the building. The Odeum, designed byPericles for musical performance, and the rehearsal of new tragedies,was a trophy of the victory of the arts over Barbaric greatness;as the timbers employed in the construction consisted chiefly of themasts of the Persian vessels. Notwithstanding it had been oncerepaired by a king of Cappadocia, it was again fallen to decay.Herod restored its ancient beauty and magnificence. Nor was theliberality of that illustrious citizen confined to the walls of Athens.The most splendid ornaments bestowed on the temple of Neptunein the Isthmus, a theatre at Corinth, a stadium at Delphi, a bathat Thermopylæ, and an aqueduct at Canusi uni in Italy^ wereinsufficient to exhaust his treasures. The people of Epirus, Thef-faly, Eubœa, Bceotia, and Peloponnesus, experienced his favours;and many inscriptions of the cities of Greece and Asia gratefullystyle Herodes Atticus, their patron and benefactor 7°.
In the commonwealths of Athens and Rome, the modest sim- Molt of the-plicity of private houses announced the equal condition of freedom; numems"^whilst the sovereignty of the people was represented in the ma- fempL^he-jestic edifices destined to the public use 7": nor was this republican a^cue"spirit totally extinguished by the introduction of wealth and mo­narchy. It was in works of national honour and benefit,that the most virtuous of the emperors affected to display theirmagnificence.' The golden palace of Nero excited a just indigna­tion, but the vast extent of ground which had been usurped by hisselfish luxury, was more nobly silled under the succeeding reign*by the Coliseum, the baths of Titus, the Claudian portico, and


4 the







OCR Output








n6 THE DECLINE AND FALL


 


joy and duty; that the important place of Ravenna had surrenderedwithout resistance, and that the Hadriatic fleet was in the hands ofthe conqueror. The enemy was now within two hundred and fiftymiles of Rome; and every moment diminished the narrow span oflife and empire allotted to Julian.


Distress of pje attempted, however, to prevent, or at least to
Julian. r
ruin. He implored the venal faith of the Prætorians, filled thecity with unavailing preparations for war, drew lines round thesuburbs, and even strengthened the fortifications of the palace;as if those last intrenchments could be defended without hope ofrelief against a victorious invader. Fear and shame prevented theguards from deserting his standard ■, but they trembled at the nameof the Pannonian legions, commanded by an experienced general,and accustomed to vanquish the barbarians on the frozen DanubeThey quitted, with a sigh, the pleasures of the baths and theatres*to put on arms, whose use they had almost forgotten, and beneaththe weight of which they were oppressed. The unpractised elephants,whose uncouth appearance, it was hoped, would strike terror intothe army of the north, threw their unskilful riders; and the awk­ward evolutions of the marines, drawn from the fleet of Miscnum,were an object of ridicule to the populace; whilst the senate enjoyed,with secret pleasure, the distress and weakness of the usurper ".His uncertain Every motion of Julian betrayed his trembling perplexity. Heinsisted that Severus should be declared a public enemy by the se­nate. He intreated that the Pannonian general might be associatedto the empire. He sent public ambassadors of consular rank to ne_gociate with his rival; he dispatched private assassins to take awayhis life. He designed that the Vestal virgins, and all the col!egesof priests, in their sacerdotal habits, and bearing before them thesacred pledges of the Roman religion, mould advance, in solemnprocession, to meet the Pannonian legions ; and, at the fame time,
he


conduct.







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


CHAP. IXr.


The State of Germany till the invasion of the Barhariam>in the time of the Emperor Decius.
'TT^HE government and religion of Persia have deserved some


**■ notice from their connexion with the decline and fall of theRoman empire. We shall occasionally mention the Scythian, orSarmatian tribes, that, with their arms and horses, their flocks andherds, their wives and families, wandered over the immense plainswhich spread themselves from the Caspian Sea to the Vistula, fromthe confines of Persia to those of Germany. But the warlike Ger­mans, who first resisted, then invaded, and at length overturnedthe western monarchy of Rome, will occupy a much more im­portant place in this history, and pofless a stronger, and, if we mayuse the expression, a more domestic claim to our attention andregard. The most civilized nations of modern Europe issued fromthe woods of Germany, and in the rude institutions of those harha-rians, we may still distinguish the original principles of our pre­sent laws and manners. In their primitive state of simplicity andindependence, the Germans were surveyed by the discerning eye,and delineated by the masterly pencil of Tacitus, the first of his­torians who applied the science of philosophy to the study of facts.In his incomparable treatise, which contains, perhaps, more ideasthan words, he has comprehended a description of the Germanmanners, that has formerly exercised the diligence of innumerableantiquarians, and employed the genius and penetration of the philo­sophic historians of our own times. The subject, however variousand important, has already been so frequently, so ably, and so


 


Vol. I.


F f


sue­







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


querors were distinguished from the vanquished nations, only as the■first and most honourable order of subjects; and their increase,however rapid, was no longer exposed to the same dangers. Yetthe wisest princes, who adopted the maxims of Augustus, guardedwith the strictest care the dignity of the Roman name, and diffusedthe freedom of the city with a prudent liberality ts.
Till the privileges of Romans had been progressively extended Italy«to all the inhabitants of the empire, an important distinction waspreserved between Italy and the provinces. The former was es­teemed the centre of public unity, and the firm basis of the con­stitution. Italy claimed the birth, or at least the residence, of theemperors and the senate **. The estates of the Italians were exemptfrom taxes, their persons from the arbitrary jurisdiction of gover­nors. Their cities, formed after the perfect model of the capital,were intrusted, under the immediate eye of the supreme power,with the execution of the laws. From the foot of the Alps to theextremity of Calabria, all the natives of Italy were born citizens ofRome. Their partial distinctions were obliterated, and they in­sensibly coalesced into one great nation, united by language, man­ners, and civil institutions, and equal to the weight of a powerfulempire. The republic gloried in her generous policy, and wasfrequently rewarded by the merit and services of her adopted sons.Had she always confined the distinction of Romans to the an­cient families within the walls of the city, that immortal namewould have been deprived of some of its noblest ornaments. Virgilwas a native of Mantua; Horace was inclined to doubt whether hemould call himself an Apulian or a Lucanian; it was in Padua thatan historian was found worthy to record the majestic series of Ro­man victories. The patriot family of the Catos emerged fromTusculum; and the little town of Arpinum claimed the doublehonour of producing Marius and Cicero, the former of whom de­served, after ftom'uiu* and Camilhrs, to be staled the Third Founder


F 2 of







OCR Output








NOTES ON THE THIRTEENTH CHAPTER. Ivii


Aurel. Victor, who has treated the character ofDiocletian with good fense, though in bad Latin.
[ic6] Solus omnium, post conditum RomanumImperium, qui cx tanto falligio fponte ad privatævit<e datum civilitatemque remearet. Hutrop.ix. 28.
[107] The particulars of the journey and illnessare taken from Lactantius (c. 17,) who may sometimesbe admitted as an evidence of public facts, thoughvery seldom of private anecdotes.
[108] Aurelius Victor ascribes the abdication,which had been so variously accounted for, to twocauses. 1st, Diocletian's contempt of ambition;and 2dly, His apprehension of impending troubles.One of the panegyrists (vi. 9 ) mentions the ageand infirmities of Diocletian, as a very naturalreason for his retirement.
[icq] The difficulties as well as mistakes at­tending the dates both of the year and of the day ofDiocletian's abdication, arc perfectly cleared up byTillemont, Hist, des Empereurs, torn. iv. p. 525.Note 19, and by Pagi ad annum.
[110] See Panegyr. Veter. vi. 9. The orationwas pronounced after Maximian had reaslumed thepurple. »
[111] Eumenius pays him a very fine compliment,"At enim divinum ilium virum, qui primus Im-"perium et participavit et posuit, consilii et facti"sui non pœnitet; nec amisiile se putat quod sponte"transcripsit. F.elix beatusque vere quem vestra,*' tantorum principum, colunt obsequia privatum."Panegyr. Vet. vii. 15.
[ 11 z] We are obliged to the younger Victor forthis celebrated bon mft. Eutropius mentions thething in a more general manner.
[113] Hist. August, p. Z23 224. Vopiscus hadlearned this conversation from his father.
[114] The younger Victor slightly mentions thereport. But as Diocletian had disobliged a power­ful and successful party, his memory has beenloaded with every crime and misfortune. It hasbeen affinred that he died raving mad, that he wascondemned as a ciiminal by the Roman senate, &c.
VOL I.


[115] See the Itineraries, p. 269. 272. Edit.Wesseling.
[116] The Abate Fortis, in his Viaggio in Dal-mazia, p. 43. (printed at Venice, in the year 1774,in two small volumes in quarto) quotes a MS.account of the antiquities of Salona, composed byGiambattiila Giustiniani about the middle of thexvith century.
[117] Adam's antiquities of Diocletian's palaceat Spalatro, p. 6. We may add a circumstance ortwo from the -Abate Fortis: the little stream ofthe Hyader, mentioned by Lucan, produces mostexquisite trout, which a sagacious writer, perhapsa monk, supposes to have been one of the principalreasons that determined Diocletian in the choice ofhis retirement. Fortis, p. 45. The fame author(p. 38.) observes, that a taile for agriculture isreviving at Spalatro; and that an experimental farmhas lately been established near the city, by asociety of Gentlemen.
[iiC'] Constantin. Orat. ad Cœtum Sanct. c. 25.In this sermon, the emperor, or the biffiop who com­posed it for him, affects to relate the miserable endof all the persecutors of the church.
[119] Constantin. Porphyr. de slatu Imper.p. 86.
[110] Danville, Geographie Ancienne, p. 162.
[121] Mesfieurs Adam and Clerisseau, attendedby two draughtsmen, visited Spalatro in the monthos July 1757. The magnificent work which theirjourney produced, was publifned in London sevenyears afterwards.
[122] I (hail quote the words of the AbateFortis "E'bastevolmente nota agli a ma tori dell*"Architettura, e dell' Aatichtta, I'opera del Signor"A dams, chc a donato moko a quo' sjpcrbi ^estgi"co'I'abirualc eleganza del sua toccalapis e del"bulino. In generale la rozzczza del scalptllo,*• e'l cativo gusto del secolo vi gareggiano colla"magnificenza del fabricato." See Viaggio inDalmazia, p. 40.
[123] The orator Eumenius was secretary to thsemperors Maximian and Conilantius, and Proressorof Rhetoric in the college of Autun. His salarywas six hundred thoa and sesterces, which, accord,h ing







OCR Output








NOTES ON THE TENTH CHAPTER.


-1*Academic des Inscriptions, torn, xviii. p. 48—71.It is seldom that the antiquarian and the philoso­pher are so happily blended.


[87] Should we suspect that Athens containedonly 21,000 citizens, and Sparta no more than39,000? See Hume and Wallace on the numberof mankind in ancient and modern times.


NOTES ON THE
[1] 'TT'HE expjeffion used by Zosimus andX Zonaras may signify that Marinus com­manded a century, a cohort, or a legion.
[a] His birth at Bubalia, a little village inPannonia (Eutrop. ix. Victor, in Cæsarib. etEpitom.) seems to contradict, unless it was merely.accidental, his supposed descent from the Decii.Six hundred years had bellowed nobility on theDecii ; but at the commencement of that period,they were only Plebeians of merit, and among thefirst who shared the consulship with the haughtyPatricians. Plebeix Deciorum animæ, &c. Ju­venal, Sat. viii. 254. See the spirited speechof Decius in Livy, x. 9, 10.
[3] Zosimus, 1. i. p. 20. Zonaras, 1. xii.p. 624. Edit. Louvre. <
[4] See the prefaces of Cassiodorus and Jor­nandes: it is surprising that the latter should beomitted in the excellent edition published by GrO-tius, of the Gothic writers.
[5] On the authority of Ablavius, Jornandesquotes some old Gothic chronicles in verse. DeReb. Geticis, c. 4.
[6] Jornandes, c. 3.
[7] Seethe large extracts from Adam of Bremen,and Saxo-Grammaticus in the Prolegomena ofGrotius. The former wrote in the year 1077, thelatter flourished about the year 1200.
[8] Voltaire, Histoire de Charles Xlf. 1. Hi.When the Austrians desired the aid of the court ofRome against Guslavus Adolphus, they alwaysrepresented that conqueror as the lineal successorof Alaric. Harte's History of Gustavus, voL ii.P- 12 J.


TENTH CHAPTER.
[9] See Adam of Bremen in Grotii Prolego-menis, p. 104. The temple of Upsal was destroyedby Ingo king of Sweden, who began his reign inthe year 1075, a°d about fourscore years after­wards a Christian Cathedral was erected on itsruins. See Dalin's History of Sweden in theBibliotheque Raisonnee.
[10] Mallet, Introduction a l'Hiuoire du Dan-nemarc.
[11] Mallet, c. iv. p. 55, has collected fromStrabo, Pliny, Ptolemy, and Stephanos Byzan-tinus, the vestiges of such a city and people.
[12] This wonderful expedition of Odin, which,by deducing the enmity of the Gotbs and Romansfrom so memorable a cause, might supply the nobleground-work of an Epic Poem, cannot safely bereceived as authentic history. According to theobvious sense of the Edda, and the interpretationof the most skilful critics, As-gard, instead of de­noting a real city of the Asiatic Sarmatia, is thefictitious appellation of the m\stic abode of thegods, the Olympus of Scandinavia; from whencethe prophet was supposed to descend, when he an­nounced his new religion to the Gothic nations,who were already seated in the southern parts ofSweden.
[13] Tacit. G er mania, c. 44.
[14] Tacit. Annal. ii. 62. If we could yield afirm assent to the navigations of Pytheas of Mar­seilles, we must allow that the Goths had passedthe Baltic at least three hundred years before Christ.
[15] Ptolemy, L ti.
[16] By the German colonies who followed thearms of the Teutonic knights. The conquest and
conversion







OCR Output








6 THE DECLINE AND FALL


dred miles in circumference. Its natural bqundaries were theNiester, the Teyss, or Tibiscus, the Lower Danube, and the EuxineSea. The vestiges of a military road may still be traced from thebanks of the Danube to the neighbourhood of Bender, a placefamous in modern history, and the actual frontier of the Turkishand Ruffian empires ,s.Conquests of Trajan was ambitious of fame; and as long as mankind shall
Trajan in the . ,„
east. continue to bestow more liberal applause on their destroyers than
on their benefactors, the thirst of military glory will ever be thevice of the most exalted characters. The praises of Alexander,transmitted by a succession of poets and historians, had kindled adangerous emulation in the mind of Trajan. Like him the Romanemperor undertook an expedition against the nations of the east, buthe lamented with a sigh that his advanced age scarcely left him anyhopes of equalling the renown of the son of Philip". Yet thesuccess of Trajan, however transient, was rapid and specious. Thedegenerate Parthians, broken by intestine discord, fled before hisarms. He descended the river Tigris in triumph, from the moun­tains of Armenia to the Persian gulph. He enjoyed the honour ofbeing the first, as he was the last, of the Roman generals, whoever navigated that remote sea. His fl eets ravaged the coasts ofArabia; and Trajan vainly flattered himself that he was approach­ing towards the confines of India *\ Every day the astonishedsenate received the intelligence of new names and new nations, thatacknowledged his sway. They were informed that the Kings ofBosphorus, Colchos, Iberia, Albania, Osrhoene, and even the Par­thian monarch himself, had accepted their diadems from the handsof the emperor; that the independent tribes of the Median andCarduchian hills had implored his protection, and that the richcountries of Armenia, Mesopotamia, and Assyria, were reduced in­to the state of provinces*'. But the death of Trajan soon cloudedthe splendid prospect; and it was justly to be dreaded, that so many
distant







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AND FALL


almost without business. The names and forms of the ancient!administration were preserved by Augustus with the most anxiouscare. The usual number of consuls, prætors, and tribunes ,s, wereannually invested with their respective ensigns of office, and con­tinued to discharge some of their least important functions. Thosehonours still attracted the vain ambition of the Romans, and theemperors themselves, though invested for life with the powers of theconsulship, frequently aspired to the title of that annual dignity, which,they condescended to share with the most illustrious of their fellow-citizens'6. In the election of these magistrates .the people, duringthe reign of Augustus, were permitted to expose all the incon­veniences of a wild democracy. That artful prince, instead ofdiscovering the least symptom of impatience, humbly solicited theirsuffrages for himself or his friends, and scrupulously practised allthe duties of an ordinary candidate'7. But we may venture to-ascribe to his councils, the first measure of the succeeding feign, bywhich the elections were transferred to the senate The as­semblies of the- people were for ever abolished, and the emperorswere delivered from a dangerous multitude, who, without re­storing liberty, might have disturbed, and perhaps endangered, the-established government.
By declaring themselves the protectors of the people, Marius-and Cæsar had subverted the constitution of their country; But as'soon as the senate had been humbled and disarmed, such an assembly,consisting of five or six hundred'persons, was found1 a very tracta­ble and useful instrument of dominion. It was on the dignity of;the senate, that Augustus and his successors founded their new em­pire; and they affected, on every occasion, ta adopt the languageand principles of Patricians. In the administration of their ownpowers, they frequently consulted the great national council, andseemed to refer to its decision the most important concerns of peace'and war. Rome, Italy, and the internal, provinces were subject to
the







OCR Output








 







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AND FALL


54*


Inconsider­able numberof martyrs.


Example ofCyprian,bishop ofCarthage;


triumph of an emperor, might speedily restore them by a generalpardon to their former state. The martyrs, devoted to immediateexecution by the Roman magistrates, appear to have been selectedfrom the most opposite extremes. They were either bishops andpresbyters, the persons the most distinguished among the Christiansby their rank and influence, and whose example might strike terrorinto the whose sect t9; or else they were the meanest and mostabject among them, particularly those of the servile condition whoselives were esteemed of little value, and whose sufferings were viewed'by the ancients with too careless an indifference 70. The learnedOrigen who, from his experience as well as reading, was intimatelyacquainted with the history of the Christians, declares, in the mostexpress terms, that the number of martyrs was very inconsiderable7'.His authority would alone be sufficient to annihilate that formidablearmy of martyrs, whose relics, drawn for the most part from thecatacombs of Rome, have replenished so many churches 7%t andwhose marvellous atchievements have been the subject of so manyvolumes of Holy Romance 75. But the general assertion of Origenmay be explained and confirmed by the particular testimony of his friendDionysius, who in the immense city of Alexandria, and under therigorous persecution of Decius, reckons only ten men and sevenwomen who suffered for the profession of the Christian name 7+.
During the same period of persecution, the zealous, the eloquent,the ambitious Cyprian governed the church, not only of Carthage,but even of Africa. He possessed every quality which could engagethe reverence of the faithful, or provoke the suspicions and resent­ment of the Pagan magistrates. His character as well as his stationseemed to mark out that holy prelate as the most distinguished objectof envy and of danger 75. The experience, however, of the lifeof Cyprian, is sufficient to prove, that our fancy has exaggerated theperilous situation of a Christian bishop ; and that the dangers to whichhe was exposed were less imminent than those which temporal ar3 - . bit ion







OCR Output








62 THE DECLINE AND FALL


Resigns his Before an assembly thus modelled and prepared, Augustus pro~
usurped 't , ..... . .
power. nounced a studied oration, which displayed his patriotism, and
disguised his ambition. "He lamented, yet excused, his past
"conduct. Filial piety had required at his hands the revenge of
"his father's murder; the humanity of his own nature had some-
M times given way to the stern laws of necessity, and to a forcetl
"connexion with two unworthy colleagues; as long as Antony
"lived, the republic forbade him to abandon her to a degenerate
"Roman, and a barbarian queen. He was now at liberty to
"satisfy his duty and his inclination. He solemnly restored the
"senate and people to all their ancient rights; and wished only to
"mingle with the crowd of his fellow-citizens, and to share the
"blessings which he had obtained for his country
is prerailed It would require the pen of Tacitus, (if Tacitus had assisted at
samt h under tms &^m^y) to describe the various emotions of the senate; those
the title of were sUppressed, and those that were affected. It was danger-
emperor or rr
gerfeitf. ous to trust the sincerity of Augustus; to seem to distrust it, was stillmore dangerous. The respective advantages of monarchy and arepublic have often divided speculative inquirers; the present great­ness of the Roman state, the corruption of manners, and the licenceof the soldiers, added new weight to the advocates- of monarchy jand these general views of government were again warped by thehopes and fears of each individual. Amidst this confusion of sen­timents, the answer of the senate was unanimous and decisive.They refused to accept the resignation of Augustus; they conjuredhim not to desert the republic, which he had saved. After a de­cent resistance, the crafty tyrant submitted to the orders of thesenate; and consented to receive the government of the provinces,and the general command of the Roman armies, under the wellknown names of Proconsul and ImpErator5. But he would!receive them only for ten years. Even before the expiration of
a that







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 149


brated with every circumstance of cost and solemnity. The richestwines, the most extraordinary victims, and the rarest aromatics, wereprofusely consumed on his altar. Around the altar a chorus ofSyrian damsels performed their lascivious dances to the found of bar­barian music, whilst the gravest personages of the state and army,clothed in long Phœnician tunics, officiated in the meanest functions,with affected zeal and secret indignation
To this temple, as to the common center of religious worship,the Imperial fanatic attempted to remove the Ancilia, the Palladium 54,and all the sacred pledges of the faith of Numa. A crowd of in­ferior deities attended in various stations the majesty of the god ofEmefa; but his court was still imperfect, till a female of distin­guished rank was admitted to his bed. Pallas had been first chosenfor his consort; but as it was dreaded that her warlike terrors mightaffright the soft delicacy of a Syrian deity, the Moon, adored bythe Africans under the name of Astarte, was deemed a more suitablecompanion for the Sun. Her image, with the rich offerings of hertemple as a marriage portion, was transported with solemn pomp fromCarthage to Rome, and the day of these mystic nuptials was a gene­ral festival in the capital and throughout the empire JJ.
A rational voluptuary adheres with invariable respect to the tern- Hs profligateperate dictates of nature, and improves the gratifications of fense by natekxury.,social intercourse, endearing connexions, and the soft colouring oftaste and the imagination. But Elagabalus, (I speak of the emperorof that name) corrupted by his youth, his country, and his fortune,abandoned himself to the grossest pleasures with ungoverned fury,and soon found disgust and satiety in the midst of his enjoyments.The inflammatory powers of art were summoned to his aid: theconfused multitude of women, of wines, and of dishes, and thestudied variety of attitudes and fauces, served to revive his languidappetites. New terms and new inventions in these sciences, theonly ones cultivated and patronised by the monarch sS, signalized his



