


OCR Output








388 [book XI. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


when Cyrus read this, and admired the di­vine power, an earnest desire seized uponhim, to fulfil what was so written. So hecalled for the most eminent Jews that werein Babylon, and said that he gave them leaveto go back to their own country, and to re­build* their city Jerusalem and the templeof God, for that he would be their assistant;and that he would write to the rulers and
fovernors that were in the neighbourhood ofudea, that they should contribute gold andsilver, for the building of the temple, and be­sides that, beasts for their sacrifices.
When Cyrus had said this to the Israelites,the rulers of the two tribes of Judah and Ben­jamin, with the Levites and priests, went inhaste to Jerusalem. Yet did many of themstay at Babylon, as not willing to leave theirpossessions. And when they were come thi­ther, all the king's friends assisted them, andbrought in, for the building of the temple^some gold, and some silver, and some a greatmany cattle and horses. So they performedtheir vows to God: and offered the sacrificesthat had been accustomed of old time; I meanthis upon the rebuilding of their city, and therevival of the ancient practices relating totheir worship. Cyrus also sent back the ves­sels of God which king Nebuchadnezzar hadpillaged out of the temple, and had carried toBabylon.f So he committed these things toMithridates the treasurer, to be sent away;with an order to give them to Sanabasser,that he might keep them till the temple wasbuilt; and when it was finished, he mightdeliver them to the priests and rulers of themultitude, in order to their being restored tothe temple. Cyrus also sent the followingepistle to the governors that were in Syria:


KING CYRUS TO SISINNES AND SATHRABUZANESSENDETH GREETING.
I have given permission to as many of theJews in my country as please to return totheir own country, and to rebuild their city,and to build the temple of God at Jerusalem,on the same place where it was before. Ihave also sent my treasurer Mithridates, andZorobabel, the governor of the Jews, thatthey may lay the foundations of the temple,and may build it sixty cubits high, and ofthe same latitude: making three edifices ofpolished stones, and one of the wood of thecountry; and tbe same order extends to thealtar whereon they offer sacrifices to God. Irequire also that the expenses for these thingsbe given out of my revenues. I have alsosent the vessels which king Nebuchadnezzarpillaged out of the temple, and have giventhem to Mithridates the treasurer; and toZorobabel the governor of the Jews; thatthey may have them carried to Jerusalem,and may restore them to the temple of God.Now their Jnumber is as follows: fifty char­gers of gold, and five hundred of silver; fortyThericlean cups of gold and five hundred ofsilver; fifty basons of gold and five hundredof silver; thirty vessels for pouring the drink-offerings, and three hundred of silver; thirtyvials of gold, and two thousand four hundredof silver; with a thousand other vessels. Ipermit them to have the same honour whichthey were used to have from their forefathers,as also for their small cattle, and for wine,and oil, two hundred and five thousand andfive hundred drachmae; and for wheat flour,twenty thousand and five hundred artabae.And I give order that these expenses shall


* This permission to build Jerusalem, and this epistleof Cyrus to Sisinnes and Sathrabuzanes, to the same pur­pose, are, most unfortunately, omitted in all our othercopies, but this best and completest copy of Josephus;and by such omission the famous prophecy of Isaiah, xliv.28. where we are informed, that God said of, or to Cyrus—He is my shepherd, and shall perform all my pleasure;even saying to Jerusalem, thou shalt be built; and to thetemple, thy foundation shall be laid: could not hithertobe demonstrated from the sacred history to have beencompletely fulfilled; I mean as to that part of it whichconcerned his giving a commission, for the rebuilding thecity Jerusalem, as distinct from the temple; whose re­building is^alone permitted or directed in the decree ofCyrus in all our copies.
t Some are of opinion, that, among the eacred things
which Cyrus ordered to be restored, the ark of the cove­nant was one; but it no where appears, that this ark wascarried from Jerusalem to Babylon. They tell us, in­deed, that in the second temple, sacrifices were offered,as in the first, and all solemn days observed, especiallythe great day of expiation, when the law ordained, thatthe blood should be sprinkled before the mercy-seat;and the mercy-seat, say they, was part of the ark: butbesides that the ark, without the Shechinah, or divineglory, (which was then withdrawn,) would have been ofno great significance, the Jews universally acknowledgedthat the ark was one of the five things that were wantingin the second temple. B.
t Of the true number of golden and silver vessels, hereand elsewhere belonging to the temple of Solomon, seethe description of the temples, chap. 13.







OCR Output








AN. 1148.] 183 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


and together with it. However there werethose that said, they should not do so, norsuffer themselves to be deluded, as ascribingthe cause of their miseries to it; because itcould not have such power and force uponthem. For had God had such a regard to it,it would not have been delivered into thehands of men. So they exhorted them to bequiet, and to bear what had befallen them,and to suppose there was no other cause of itbut nature, which at certain revolutions oftime produces such mutations in the bodies ofmen, in the earth, in plants, and in all thingsthat grow out of the earth. But the counselthat prevailed over those already described,was that of certain men, who were believedto have distinguished themselves in formertimes fop their understanding and prudence,and who in their present circumstancesseemed above all the rest to speak properly.These men said, it was not right either tosend the ark away, or to retain it; but todedicate five golden images, one for everycity, as a thank-offering to God, on accountof his having taken care of their preservation,and having kept them alive when their liveswere likely to be taken away by such distem­pers as they were not able to bear up against.They also would have them make five golden*mice, like those that had devoured and de­stroyed their country; to put them in a bag,and lay them upon the ark, to make a newcart also for it, and to yoke milchf kine to it;but to shut up their calves, and keep themfrom them, lest by following after them, theyshould prove a hindrance to their dams; andthat the dams might return the faster, out of adesire of those calves; then to drive thesemilch kine that carried the ark, and to leaveit in a place where three ways meet, and toleave the kine to go along which of those ways


they pleased; that in case they went the wayto the Hebrews, and ascended to theircountry, they should suppose that the arkwas the cause of their misfortunes; but ifthey turned into another road, they shouldpursue after it, and conclude that it had nosuch force.
So they determined that these men spakewell, and they immediately confirmed theiropinion by doing accordingly. And whenthey had done as hath been already de­scribed, they brought the cart to a placewhere three ways met, and left it there. Butthe kine went the right way, as if some per­sons had driven them, while the rulers of thePhilistines followed, as desirous to knowwhere they would stand still, and whitherthey would go. Now there was a certainvillage of the tribe of Judah, called Bethshe-mesh, and to that village did the kine go; andthough there was a great and good plain be­fore them to proceed in, they w ent no farther,but stopped the cart there. This was a joyfulsight to those of that village, and they werevery glad. For it being then summer time,and all the inhabitants being in their fields,gathering in their fruits, they left off the la­bours of their hands for joy, as soon as theysaw the ark, and ran to the cart; and takingthe ark down, and the vessel that had theimages in it, and the mice, they set them upona certain rock, which was in the plain. Andwhen they had offered a splendid sacrifice toGod, and feasted, they offered the cart andthe kine as a burnt-offering.;}: And when thelords of the Philistines saw this they returnedback.
But now it was that the wrath of God over­


 


took them, and struck


| seventy persons dead


of the village of Bethshemesh; who not beingpriests, and so not worthy to touch the ark,


* Spanheim informs us, that upon the coins of Tenedos,and those of other cities, a field mouse is engraven;together with Apollo Sminthous, or Apollo the driveraway of field mice; on account of his being supposed tohave freed certain tracts of ground from those mice.Which coins shew how great a judgment such mice havesometimes been; and how the deliverance from them wasthen esteemed the effect of a divine power. Which ob­servations arc highly suitable to this history.
f This device of the Philistines, of having a yoke of kineto draw the cart, into which they put the ark of the He­brews, is greatly illustrated by Sanchoniatho's account,under his ninth generation, that Agrouerus, or Agrotes,
the husbandman, had a much worshipped statue, and atemple, carried about with one or more yoke of oxen orkine in Phoenicia; in the neighbourhood of these Philis­tines. See Cumberland's Sanchoniatho, p. 27, and 247,and Essay on the Old Test. Append, p. 172.
% 1 Sam. vi. 14.
II These 70 men, being not so much as Levites, touchedthe ark in a rash or profane manner; and were slain bythe hand of God for that rashness and profaneness, ac­cording to the divine threatenings, Numb. iv. 15, 20 ; buthow our other copies come to add such an incredible num­ber, 50,000, in, this one town, or small city, 1 know not.See Dr. Wall's critical notes on 1 Sam. vi. 10.


 







OCR Output








AN. 44.] 511 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


"For their sins they would not be able to es­cape his hands." Which things will be re­lated in their proper places.
But when Hyrcanus saw that the membersof the Sanhedrim were ready to pronouncethe sentence of death upon Herod, he put oft*the trial till another day, and sent privatelyto Herod, and advised him to flee out of thecity: for that by this means he might escape.So he retired to Damascus, as though he fledfrom the king. And when he had been withSextus Caesar, and had put his own affairs ina secure posture, he resolved to do thus; thatin case he were again summoned before theSanhedrim, to take his trial, he would notobey that summons. Hereupon the membersof the Sanhedrim were highly incensed, andendeavoured to persuade Hyrcanus, that allthese things were against him. This, indeed,he was not ignorant of: but his temper wasso unmanly, and so foolish, that he was ableto do nothing at all. But when Sextus hadmade Herod general of the army of Coelesy-ria, (for he sold him that post for money,)Hyrcanus was in fear lest Herod should makewar upon him. Nor was the effect of whathe feared long in coming upon him. ForHerod came, and brought an army alongwith him, to fight with Hyrcanus; as beingangry at the trial he had been summoned toundergo before the Sanhedrim. But hisfather Antipater and his brother Phasaelusmet him, and hindered him from assaultingJerusalem. They also pacified his vehementtemper, and persuaded him to do no rash ac­tion, but merely to affright them with threat-enings, and to proceed no farther against onewho had given him the dignity he had: theyalso desired him not only to be angry that hewas summoned, and obliged to come to histrial; but to remember withal, how he wasdismissed without condemnation; and how heought to give Hyrcanus thanks for the same.So they desired him to consider, that since itis God that turns the balance of war, thereis great Uncertainty in the issue of battle,and that therefore he ought not to expectthe victory, when he should fight with hisking, and him that had supported him, andbestowed many benefits upon him; and had


* If we read here for a5tjXov, uncertainty, a5ixov, in­justice; as in the history Of the War, I. 10. the sensewill run very clear: otherwise the two accounts will


done nothing very severe to him: for thathis accusation, which was derived from evilcounsellors, and not from himself, had ratherthe suspicion of some severity, than any thingreally severe in it. Accordingly Herod waspersuaded by these arguments: and believedthat it was sufficient for his future hopes tohave made a shew of his strength before thenation. And in this state were the affairs ofJudea at this time.
CHAP. X.
OF THE HONOURS THAT WERE PAID THE JEWS; AND THELEAGUES THAT WERE MADE BY THE ROMANS AND OTHERNATIONS, WITH THEM.
NOW when Caesar was come to Rome, hewas ready to sail into Africa, to fightagainst Scipio and Cato; when Hyrcanussent ambassadors to him, desiring that hewould ratify that league of friendship andmutual alliance which was between them.And it seems necessary here to give an ac­count of all the honours that the Romans andtheir emperors have paid to our nation; andof the leagues of mutual assistance they havemade with it; that all the rest of mankindmay know what regard the kings of Asia andEurope have had to us; and that they havebeen abundantly satisfied of our courage andfidelity. For whereas many will not believewhat hath been written about us, by the Per­sians and Macedonians, because those writ­ings are not every where to be met with, nordo lie in public places; but among ourselves,and certain other barbarous nations; whilethere is no contradiction to be made againstthe decrees of the Romans; for they are laidup in the public places of the cities, and areextant still in the capitol, and engraven uponpillars of brass. Nay, besides this, JuliusCaesar made a pillar of brass for the Jews atAlexandria, and declared publicly that theywere citizens of Alexandria. Out of theseevidences will I demonstrate what I say; andwill now set down the decrees made both bythe senate, and by Julius Caesar, which relate to Hyrcanus, and to our nation.
"Caius Julius Caesar, imperator, and high-priest, and dictator the second time, to the
be somewhat different; and tne sense of the placemore doubtful.







OCR Output








AN. 21.] 567 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS


and commanded that they should do everything with his approbation. And, in short,he arrived at that pitch of felicity, thatwhereas there were but two men that govern­ed the vast Roman empire, first Caesar, andAgrippa, who was his principal favourite:Caesar preferred no one to Herod, besidesAgrippa: and Agrippa made no one hisgreater friend than Herod, besides Caesar.And when he had acquired such freedom, hebegged of Caesar a tetrarchy *for his brotherPheroras; while he did himself bestow uponhim a revenue of a hundred talents, out ofhis own kingdom: that in case he came toany harm himself, his brother might be insafety; and that his sons might not haveany dominion over him. So when he hadconducted Caesar to the sea, and was re­turned home, he built a most beautiful templeof the whitest stone, in Zenodorus's country,near the place called Penium. This is avery fine cave in a mountain, under whichthere is a great cavity in the earth; and thecavern is abrupt, and prodigiously deep, andfull of still water. Over it hangs a vast moun­tain; and under the caverns arise the springsof the river Jordan. Herod adorned thisplace, which was already a very remarkableone, still farther, by the erection of this tem­ple, which he dedicated to Caesar.
At this time Herod released to his subjectsthe third part of their taxes: under pretenceindeed of relieving them, after the dearth theyhad had; but the main reason was, to recovertheir good will, which he now wanted. Forthey were uneasy because of the innovationshe had introduced in their practices; of thedissolution of their religion; and of the disuseof their own customs. And the people everywhere talked against him, like those that werestill more and more provoked and disturbedat his procedure. Against these discontentshowever, he greatly guarded himself, andtook away the opportunities they might haveto disturb him; and enjoined them to be alwaysat work. Nor did he permit the citizens either


to assemble, or to walk, or eat together; butwatched every thing they did; and when anywere caught, they were severely punished.And many there were who were brought tothe citadel Hyrcania, both openly and secret­ly; and were there put to death. And therewere spies set every where, both in the city,and in the roads, who watched those that mettogether. Nay, it is reported, that he did nothimself neglect this part of caution; but thathe would oftentimes assume the habit of aprivate man, and mix among the multitude,in the night time: and make trial what opinionthey had of his government. And as for thosethat could no way be reduced to acquiesceunder his scheme of government he prose­cuted them all manner of way. But for therest of the multitude, he required that theyshould be obliged to take an oath of fidelityto him; and at the same time compelled themto swear that they would bear him good will,and continue certain so to do in his manage­ment of the government. And indeed a greatpart of them, either to please him, or out offear of punishments, yielded to what he re­quired. But for such as were of a more openand generous disposition, and had indignationat the force he used to them, he by one meansor other made away with them. He endea­voured also to persuade Pollio, the Pharisee,and Sameans and the greatest part of theirscholars to take the oath. But these wouldneither submit so to do; nor were they pu­nished together with the rest, out of the rever­ence he bore to Pollio. The Essenes also,as we call a sect of ours, were excused fromthis imposition. These men live the samekind of life as do those whom the Greeks callPythagoreans: concerning whom I shall dis­course more fully felsewhere. However, itis proper to set down here the reasons where­fore Herod had these Essenes in such honor,and thought higher of them than their mortalnature required. Nor will this account be un­suitable to the nature of this history; as it willshew the opinion men had of these Essenes.


* A tetrarchy properly and originally denoted thefourth part of an entire kingdom, or country: and a te-trarch, one that was ruler of such a fourth part: which al­ways implies somewhat less extent of dominion and powerthan belong to a kingdom, and to a king. But this firstexactness has not always been adhered to in the use ofthese words, and Pliny reckons no fewer than six
about Decapolis, as Noldius takes notice, De Herod,page 368. But that Zenodorus was once tetrarch or go­vernor of Trachonitis, we learn from Dio; as Spanheimobserves here. This tetrarchy of Pheroras was in Perea,beyond Jordan,t See Of the Wars.Book ii. chap. 8.







OCR Output








an. 1532.J 75 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS


more plague he would compel the Egyptiansto let the Hebrews go, he commanded Mosesto tell the people, that they should have asacrifice ready; and that they should preparethemselves on the tenth day of the monthXanthicus, against the fourteenth; whichmonth is called by the Egyptians Pharmuthi,and Nisan by the Hebrews; but the Mace­donians call it Xanthicus. And that he shouldcarry away the Hebrews, with all they had.Accordingly Moses having got the Hebrewsready for their departure, and having gather­ed the people into tribes, kept them togetherin one place. But when the fourteenth daywas come, and all were ready to depart, theyoffered sacrifice, and purified their houseswith the blood; using bunches of hyssop forthat purpose: and when they had supped,they burnt the remainder of the flesh as justready to depart. Whence it is, that we dostill offer this sacrifice in like manner, andcall this festival Pasch; which signifies thefeast of the Passover; because on that dayGod passed us over, and sent the plague uponthe Egyptians. For the destruction of thefirst-born came upon the Egyptians that night;so that many of the Egyptians who lived nearthe king's palace, persuaded Pharaoh to letthe Hebrews go. Accordingly he called forMoses, and bid them be gone; as supposingthat if once the Hebrews were gone out ofthe country, Egypt should be freed from itsmiseries. They also honoured the Hebrewswith gifts,* some in order to get them to de­part quickly, and others on account of theirneighbourhood, and the friendship they hadwith them.
CHAP. XV.
OF THE DEPARTURE OF THE HF.BREWS FROM EGYPT, UNDERTHE COSDUCT OF MOSES.
HUS the Hebrews went out of Egypt,while the Egyptians wept, and repented


T


* These large presents made to the Israelites, of vesselsof silver, and vessels of gold, and raiment, were, as Jose-phustruly calls them, gifts, really given them; not lentthem, as our English falsely renders them. They werespoils required, not borrowed of them ; Gen. xv. 14. Exod.iii. 29. xi. 2. Ps. cv. 37. as the same version falsely ren­ders the Hebrew word here used. Exod. xii. 35, 36.God had ordered the Jews to demand these as their payand reward, during their long and bitter slavery in Egypt;as atonements for the lives of the Egyptians; and as thecondition of the Jews' departure, and the Egyptian deliver­ance from these terrible judgments; which had they notnow ceased, they had soon been all dead men, as they
voL. I.—No. 7.


they had treated them so hardly. Now theytook their journey by Letopolis, a place atthat time deserted, but where Babylon wasbuilt afterward, when Cambyses ravagedEgypt. But as they went away hastily, onthe third day they came to a place calledBaalzephou, on the Red Sea; and when theyhad no food out of the land, because it was adesert, they eat of loaves kneaded of flour,only warmed by a gentle heat; and this foodthey made use of thirty days: for what theybrought with them out of Egypt, would notsuffice them any longer time; and this onlywhile they dispensed it to each person to useso much only as would serve for necessity,but not for satiety. Whence it is, that inmemory of the want we were then in, wekeep a feast for eight days, which is calledthe feast of Unleavened-bread. Now theentire multitude of those that went out, in­cluding the women and children, was noteasy to be numbered; but those that were ofan age fit for war, were six hundred thousand.
They left Egypt in the month of Xanthicus,on the fifteenth day of the lunar month: fourhundred and thirty years after our forefatherAbraham came into Canaan. But two hun­dred and fifteen yearst only after Jacob re­moved into Egypt; it was the eightieth yearof the age of Moses, and of that of Aaronthree more. They also carried out the bonesof Joseph with them, as he charged his sonsto do.
The Egyptians, however, soon repentedthat the Hebrews were gone;J and the kingalso was greatly concerned that this had beenprocured by the magical arts of Moses; sothey resolved to go after them. Accordinglythey took their weapons, and other warlikefurniture, and pursued after them, in order tobring them back, if once they overtook them;because they would have no pretence to pray
themselves confess, xii. 23. Nor was there any sense inborrowing or lending, when the Israelites were finally de­parting out of the land.
t Why our Mazorete copy so groundlessly abridges thisaccount in Exod. xii. 40. as to ascribe four hundred andthirty years to the sole peregrination of the Israelites inEgypt: when it is clear, even by that Mazorete chrono­logy elsewhere; as well as from the express text itself inthe Samaritan, Septuagint, and Josephus, that they so­journed in Egypt but half that time, and that by conse­quence the other half of their peregrination was in theland of Canaan, before they came into Egypt, is hard to say.
| Exod. xiv. 5.
u







OCR Output








AM. 103.] 487 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


sand. As for the rest, they were part of themtaken captives; and the other part ran awayto their own country.
After this victory Ptolemy overran all thecountry; and when night came on, he abodein certain villages of Judea, where he com­manded his soldiers to strangle the womenand children, and to cut them in pieces, andto cast them into boiling caldrons, and then todevour their limbs, as sacrifices. This com­mandment was given, that such as fled fromthe battle, and came to them, might supposetheir enemies were cannibals, and might onthat account be still more terrified at them,upon such a sight. And both Strabo andNicolaus of Damascus affirm, that they usedthese people after this manner. Ptolemy alsotook Ptolemais by force.
CHAP. XIII.
OF Alexander's expedition against ccelesyria; his
DESTRUCTION OF THE CITY GAZA, AND OF MANY THOU­SANDS OF JEWS THAT REBELLED AGAINST HIM. ALSOCONCERNING ANTIOCHUS GRYPUS, SELEUCUS, ANTIOCHUSCYZICENUS, ANTIOCHUS PIUS, AND OTHERS.
WHEN Cleopatra saw* that her son wasgrown great, and laid Judea waste,without disturbance, and had gotten the cityof Gaza under his- power, Bhe resolved nolonger to overlook what he did, when he wasalmost at her gates; and she concluded thatnow he was so much stronger than before, hewould be very desirous of the dominion overthe Egyptians. But she immediately marchedagainst him with a fleet at sea, and an armyoi foot at land; and made "fChelcias and Ana­nias the Jews, generals of her whole army;while she sent the greatest part of her riches,with her grandchildren, and her testament,to the people of JCos. Cleopatra also orderedher son Alexander to sail with a great fleetto Phoenicia; and when that country had re­volted, she came to Ptolemais; and becausethe people of Ptolemais did not receive her,she besieged the city. But Ptolemy went outof Syria, and hastened into Egypt; supposingthat he should find it destitute of an army,and soon take it; though he failed of his hopes.


At this time Chelcias, one of Cleopatra'sgenerals, happened to die in Coslesyria; ashe was in pursuit of Ptolemy.
When Cleopatra heard of her son's attempt,and that his Egyptian expedition did not suc­ceed, according to his expectations, she sentthither|| part of her army, and drove him outof that country. So when he was returnedout of Egypt, he abode, during the winter, atGaza. In which time Cleopatra took thegarrison that was in Ptolemais by siege; aswell as the city. And when Alexander cameto her he gave her presents, and such marksof respect as were but proper; since underthe miseries he endured by Ptolemy he hadno other refuge but her. Now there weresome of her friends who persuaded her toseize Alexander, and to overrun and takepossession of the country; and not to sit stilland see such a multitude of brave Jews sub­ject to one man. But Ananias's counsel wascontrary to theirs: who said, that she woulddo an unjust action if she deprived a man thatwas her ally of that authority which belongedto him; and this a man who is related to us."For," said he, " I would not have thee igno­rant of this, that what injustice thou doest tohim will make all that are Jews to be thyenemies." This desire of Ananias's Cleopatracomplied with, and did no injury to Alexander;but made a league of mutual assistance withhim, at Scythopolis, a city of Coslesyria.
So when Alexander was delivered from thefear he was in of Ptolemy, he presently madean expedition against Coelesyria. He thentook Gadara, after a siege often months. Hetook also Amathus, a very strong fortress be­longing to the inhabitants above Jordan;where Theodorus, the son of Zeno, had hischief treasure; and what he esteemed mostprecious. This Zeno fell unexpectedly uponthe Jews, and slew ten thousand of them; andseized upon Alexander's baggage. Yet didnot this misfortune terrify Alexander; but hemade an expedition upon the maritime partsof the country, Raphia, and Athedon, (thename of which king Herod afterward changedto Agrippias,) and took even that by force:


* An. 103.
\ The sons of Onias IV. that high-priest who built thetemple in Egypt. See Book XIII. chap. 3 and 10.
J This city or island Cos, is not that remote island inthe Egean sea, famous for the birth of the great Hippo-
crates; but a city or island of the same name adjoining toEgypt; mentioned both by Stephanus and Ptolemy; asDr. Hudson informs us. Of which Cos, and the treasuresthere laid up by Cleopatra and the Jews, see XIV. 7.II An. 102.







OCR Output








An. 60.] 503 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


many considerable actions, and particularlymade war with Alexander; since Hyrcanuswas not yet able to oppose his power; butwas already attempting to rebuild the wall ofJerusalem, which Pompey had overthrown;although the Romans, who were there, re­strained him from that design. However,Alexander went over all the country roundabout, and armed many of the Jews, and sud­denly assembled ten thousand armed footmen,and fifteen hundred horsemen; and fortifiedAlexandrium, a fortress near to Coreae, andMacherus, near the mountains of Arabia.Gabinius therefore came upon him, havingsent Marcus Antonius, with other command­ers, before. These armed such Romans asfollowed them; and, together with them,such Jews as were subject to them: whoseleaders were Pitholaus, and Malichus: theyalso took with them their friends that werewith Antipater, and met Alexander; whileGabinius himself followed with his legion.Hereupon Alexander retired to the neigh­bourhood of Jerusalem; where they came toa pitched battle; in which the Romans slewof their enemies about three thousand; andtook a like number alive.
At this time Gabinius came to Alexandrium,and invited those that were in it to deliver itup on certain conditions; promising that theirformer offences should be forgiven. But as agreat number of the enemy had pitched theircamp before the fortress, whom the Romansattacked, Marcus Antonius fought bravely,and slew a great number; and seemed tocome off with the greatest honour. So Gabi-nius left part of his army there, in order totake the place; and he himself went intoother parts of Judea, and gave order to re­build all the cities that he met with that hadbeen demolished. At which time were re­built Samaria, Ashdod, Scythopolis, Anthe-don, Raphia, Dora, Marissa, and Gaza; andnot a few others besides. And as the menacted according to Gabinius's command, itcame to pass, that at this time these cities.were securely inhabited; which had beendesolate for a long time.
When Gabinius had done thus in the coun­try, he returned to Alexandrium: and when


he urged on the siege of the place, Alexandersent an ambassage to him; desiring that hewould pardon his former offences; he alsodelivered up the fortresses, Hyrcania, andMacherus; and at last Alexandrium itself.These fortresses Gabinius demolished. Butwhen Alexander's mother, who was on theside of the Romans, as having her husbandand other children at Rome, came to him, hegranted her whatsoever she asked. Andwhen he had settled matters with her, hebrought Hyrcanus to Jerusalem, and com­mitted the care of the temple to him. Andwhen he had ordained five councils, he dis­tributed the nation into the same number ofparts. So these councils governed the people:the first was at Jerusalem; the second atGadara; the third at Amathus; the fourth atJericho; and the fifth at Sepphoris, in Gali­lee. So the Jews were now freed from mo­narchical authority; and were governed byan *aristocracy.
CHAP. VI.
ARISTOBULUS ESCAPES FROM ROME INTO JUDEA, BUT ISDEFEATED AND RETAKEN; GABINIUS OVERCOMES ALEX­ANDER AND THE NABATEANS IN BATTLE.
NOW Aristobulus ran away from Rometo Judea, and set about the buildingof Alexandrium; which had been recentlydemolished. Hereupon Gabinius sent sol­diers against him, under the command of Si-senna, Antonius, and Servilius; in order tohinder him from getting possession of thecountry, and to take him again. And indeedmany of the Jews ran to Aristobulus on ac­count of his former glory; as also they shouldbe glad of an innovation. Now there wa3one Pitholaus, a lieutenant at Jerusalem, whodeserted to him, with a thousand men: al­though a great number of those that came tohim were unarmed. And when Aristobulushad resolved to go to Macherus, he dismissedthose people, because they were unarmed;so they could not be useful to him in whatactions he was going about. But he tookwith him eight thousand that were armed,and marched on. And as the Romans fellupon them severely, the Jews fought stoutly;


* Dean Prideaux well observes, that " Notwithstandingthe clamour against Gabinius at Rome, Josephus gives hima laudable character; as if he had acquitted himself with
honour in the charge committed to him in Judea." At theyear 65. Marg.







OCR Output








AN. 44.] 509 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


enemies, instead of rulers. For that theywould never suffer him to be set aside, whomthey had appointed to govern. And whenAntipater had said this to them, he settledthe affairs of this country.
And seeing that Hyrcanus was of a slowand slothful temper, he made Phasaelus, hiseldest son, governor of Jerusalem, and of theplaces adjacent; but committed Galilee toHerod, his next son, who was then *fifteenyears of age. That youth of his, however,was no impediment to him: but as he pos­sessed a great mind, he presently met with anopportunity of signalizing his courage. Forfinding that there was one Hezekias, a cap­tain of a band of robbers, who overran theneighbouring parts of Syria, he seized andslew him; as well as a great number of therobbers that were with him. By this actionhe acquired the love of the Syrians: for whenthey were very desirous to have their countryfreed from this nest of robbers, he purged itof them. So they sang songs in his commen­dation in their villages and cities, as havingprocured them peace, and the secure enjoy­ment of their possessions. And on this ac­count it was that he became known to SextusCaesar, who was the relation of the greatCaesar's, and was now president of Syria.
Now Phasaelus, Herod's brother, wasmoved with emulation at his actions; andenvied the fame he had acquired, and becameambitious not to be behind-hand with him indeserving it. So he made the inhabitants of


Jerusalem bear him the greatest good will;while he held the city himself, but did neithermanage its affairs improperly nor abuse hisauthority therein. This conduct procuredfrom the nation of Antipater such respect asis due to kings; and such honours as he mightpartake of if he were absolute lord of thecountry. Yet did not this splendour of his, asfrequently happens, in the least diminish inhim that kindness and fidelity which he owedto Hyrcanus.
But now, the principal men among theJews, when they saw Antipater and his sonsto grow so much in the good will of the na­tion, and in the revenues which they receivedout of Judea, and out of Hyrcanus's ownwealth; became ill disposed to him. For in­deed Antipater had contracted a friendshipwith the Roman emperors: and when he hadprevailed with Hyrcanus to send them money,he took it to himself, and purloined the pre­sent intended; and sent it, as if it were hisown, and not Hyrcanus's gift to them. Hyr­canus heard of this management, but took nocare about it: nay he was rather glad of it.But the chief men of the Jews were in fearbecause they saw that Herod was a violentand bold man, and very desirous of actingtyrannically. So they came to Hyrcanus, andaccused Antipater openly, and said to him,"How long wilt thou be quiet under suchactions as are now done? Or dost thou notsee that Antipater and his sons have alreadyseized upon the government, and that it is


* Take Reland's and Hudson's notes on this celebratedplace. "Isaac Casaubon, in his Epistle to Thuanus,which is the 936th in number, affirms, that instead of isor 15, we should read xs or 25, where he thus writes:"We affirm, and most evidently demonstrate, that thereading ought to be xs 25. Nor are we to be dissuadedby the consent of the copies, nor the assent of Photius tothem. He had said just before, that this place is of greatconsequence for the discovery of the chronology of ourSaviour." So for Reland. To which Hudson adds,"Since I have never allowed myself the liberty to changeany numbers, without the authority of MSS. neither haveI here set down xe 25, for is 15, which yet many verylearned men have asserted ought to be done; who arecited by Casaubon in Exercit. contr. Baron. § 34. andwith whom Casaubon himself agrees in Epist. 299. as alsoMontacutius, in Exercit. 10. page 34. and in Apparatu,
J>age 194. Lydiat. in Emendet. Temp, page 114. andKep-er, De Ann. Nat. Christi. page 52. Nay indeed, that itought to be so read some have demonstrated: as Usher,in Annal. Vet. Test, page 252. Edit. Lond. & Norris inCenotaphiis Pisanis. Disert. II. c. 6. page 160. The verylearned Antonius Pagi giving his assent to them, in Appa-
rat. ad Annal. Baron, page 12. which arguments induce usto have no regard to Pere Harduin: who (in his book DeNummis Herodiadum, page 334. Edit. Amst.) takes occa­sion from the slip of the pen of the scribes to fall upon Jo-sephus himself. And as for his defence from the words,"When Herod was very young," all those who will com­pare with him Is. Casaubon, and Antonius Pagi in theplaces already cited, will see how indifferently he does it."See the notes here on I. 12. and Of the War, I. 10. Toall which I shall venture to add, that those who will care­fully observe the several occasional numbers and chrono­logical characters in the life and death of this Herod, andof his children hereafter noted, will see that 25 years, andnot 15, must certainly have been here Josephus's ownnumber, for the age of Herod, when he was made governorof Galilee; and will not need to consult any of thoselearned men for his satisfaction. See chap. 23 and 24. andparticularly XVII. 8. where about 44 years afterwardHerod dies an old man, at about seventy. Also XVI. 8,10, and 11. Of the War, I. 30. where Herod is old, andgrey headed, and XVII. 4. where even his son Antipateiis growing old in Herod's lifetime.


4L2







OCR Output








558 [book XV. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


Salome chose to follow not the law of hercountry, but the law of her authority; and so .renounced her wedlock; and told her brotherHerod, that she left her husband out of hergood will to him; because she perceived,that he, with Antipater, and Lysimachus, andDositheus, were raising a sedition against him.As an evidence of which she alleged the caseof the sons of Babas; that they had been byhim preserved alive already for the intervalof twelve years: which proved to be true.But when Herod thus unexpectedly heard ofit, he was greatly surprised at it: and themore so, because the relation appeared in­credible to him. As for the fact relating tothese sons of Babas, Herod had formerlytaken great pains to bring them to punish­ment, as being enemies to his government.But they were now forgotten by him, on ac­count of the length of time since he had or­dered them to be slain. Now the cause of hisill will and hatred to them arose hence; thatwhile Antigonus was king, Herod, with hisarmy, besieged the city of Jerusalem; wherethe distress and miseries which the besiegedendured were so pressing, that the greatnumber of them invited Herod into the city,and already placed their hopes on him. Nowthe sons of Babas were of great dignity, andhad power among the multitude; and werefaithful to Antigonus, and were always raisingcalumnies against Herod; and encouragedthe people to preserve the government tothat royal family which held it by inheritance.So these men acted thus politically, and, asthey thought, for their own advantage. Butwhen the city was taken, and Herod hadgotten the government into his hands, andCostobarus was appointed to hinder menfrom passing out at the gates, and to guardthe city; that those citizens that were of theparty opposite to the king might not get outof it; Costobarus, being sensible that thesons of Babas were had in respect and honourby the whole multitude, and supposing thattheir preservation might be of great advan­tage to him in the changes of governmentafterward; set them by themselves, and con­cealed them in his own farms. And whenthe thing was suspected, he assured Herodupon oath that he knew nothing of the matter:and so overcame the suspicions that lay uponhim. Nay, after that, when the king had


publicly proposed a reward for the discovery,and had put in practice all sorts of methodsfor searching out this matter, he would notconfess it. But being persuaded that whenhe had at first denied it, if the men werefound, he should not escape unpunished, hewas forced to keep them secret; not only outof his good will to them, but out of a neces­sary regard to his own preservation. Butwhen the king knew the thing, by his sister'sinformation, he sent men to the places wherehe had the intimation they were concealed;and ordered both them, and those that wereaccused as guilty with them, to be slain.Insomuch that there were now none left ofthe kindred of Hyrcanus: and the kingdomwas entirely in Herod's power; and there wasnobody remaining of such dignity as couldput a stop to what he did against the Jewishlaws. v
CHAP. VIII.
OF A CONSPIRACY AGAINST HEROD, FOR THE FOREIGNPRACTICES HE HAD INTRODUCED J AND OF THE BUILD­ING OF SEBASTE, CESAREA, AND OTHER EDIFICES.
ON this account Herod revolted from thelaws of his country, and corrupted theirancient constitution, by the introduction offoreign practices: which constitution yetought to have been preserved inviolable.By which means we became guilty of greatwickedness afterward; while those religiousobservances, which used to lead the multi­tude to piety, were now neglected. For, inthe first place, he appointed solemn gamesto be celebrated every fifth year, in honourof Caesar; and built a theatre at Jerusalem;as also a very great amphitheatre in theplain. Both of them were indeed costlyworks; but opposite to the Jewish customs.For we have had no such shews delivereddown to us fit to be used or exhibited by us.Yet did he celebrate these games every fiveyears, in the most solemn and splendid man­ner. He also made proclamation to theneighbouring countries, and called men to­gether out of every nation. The wrestlersalso, and the rest of those that strove for theprizes in such games, were invited out ofevery land; both by the hopes of the rewardsthere to be bestowed; and by the glory ofvictory to be there gained. So the principal







OCR Output








an. 587.] 375 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


Babylonians. Accordingly both the people,and Johanan, disobeyed the counsel of God,which he gave them by the prophet, and re­moved into Egypt, and carried Jeremiah andBaruch along with them.*
While they were there, God signified tothe prophet, that the king of Babylon wasabout making an expedition against theEgyptians; and commanded him to foretellto the people that Egypt should be taken,and that the king of Babylon should slaysome of them, and should take others cap­tive, and bring them to Babylon; which thingscame to pass accordingly. For on the fifthyear after the destruction of Jerusalem, whichwas the twenty-third of the reign of Nebu­chadnezzar, he made an expedition againstCoele Syria; and when he had possessedhimself of it, he made war against the Am­monites, and Moabites; and when he hadbrought all those nations under subjection,he fell upon Egypt, in order to overthrow it.And he slew the fking that then reigned, andset up another; and took those Jews thatwere there captives, and Jled them away toBabylon.|| And such was the end of the na­tion of the Hebrews; it having twice gonebeyond Euphrates. For the people of theten tribes were carried out of Samaria bythe Assyrians, in the days of king Hoshea.After which the people of the two tribes, thatremained after Jerusalem was taken, werecarried away by Nebuchadnezzar, king ofBabylon and Chaldea. Now as to Shalma-
* Jeremiah xliii. 6.
t Herodotus says, this king of Egypt, (Pharaoh Hophra,or Apries,) was slain by the Egyptians; as Jeremiah fore­told his slaughter by his enemies, xliv. 29, 30. and thatas a sign of the destruction of Egypt, by NebuchadnezzarJosephus says, this king was slain by Nebuchadnezzarhimself. Which assertion is supposed by Dr. Hudson tocontradict Herodotus. If it do, the question will remain,whether Herodotus or Josephus had the more authenticaccounts of Egypt at that time. Nor is such a questioneasily decided, for want of some more authentic and ori­ginal monuments of that^country.
J Of this real captivity of the Jews in Egypt to Baby­lon, and particularly as to Jeremiah and Baruch, contraryto our common copies, Jer. xliv. 12, 13, 27. see Authent.Rec. Part I. pages 6, 7.
II Since the people were thus carried into captivity, thesons of the royal family, and of the nobility of the land,made eunuchs and slaves in the palace of the king ofBabylon; the vessels of the temple carried thither, theking made a tributary, and the whole land now broughtinto vassalage under the Babylonians; from hence wemast reckon the beginning of the seventy years' captivity


neser, he removed the Israelites out of theircountry, and placed therein the nation of theCutheans; who had formerly belonged to theinterior of Persia and Media; but were thencalled Samaritans; by taking the name of thecountry to which they were removed. Butthe king of Babylon, who brought out thetwo tribes,§ placed no other nation in theircountry. By which means all Judea, andJerusalem, and the temple, continued to bea desert for seventy years. But the entireinterval of time which passed from the cap­tivity of the Israelites, to the carrying awayof the two tribes, proved to be a hundred andthirty years, six months, and ten days.
CHAP. X.
CONCERNING DANIEL, AND WHAT BEFELL HIM AT BABYLON.
NEBUCHADNEZZAR, king of Babylon,took some of the most noble of theJews that were children, and the kinsmen ofZedekiah their king; such as were remark­able for the beauty of their bodies, and thecomeliness of their countenances; and de­livered them into the hands of tutors, and tothe improvement to be made by them. Healso made some of them to be eunuchs; whichcourse he took also with other nations whomhe had taken in the flower of their age,** andafforded them their diet from his own table;and had them instructed in the institutes ofthe country, and taught the learning of the
foretold by the prophet Jeremiah, chap. xxv. 11. and xxix.10. and in the fourth year of Jehoiakim must be the firstyear in that computation. Prideavx's Connection, an.606. B.
§ We see here that Judea was left in a manner deso­late, after the captivity of the two tribes, and was notre-peopled with foreign colonies; perhaps as an indica­tion of Providence that the Jews were to re-people itwithout opposition themselves. I esteem the latter andpresent desolate condition of the same country withoutbeing re-peopled by foreign colonies, to be a like indica­tion, that the same Jews are hereafter to re-people itagain at their long-expected restoration.
** That Daniel was made one of those eunuchs of whomIsaiah prophesied, xxxix. 7. and the three children hiscompanions also, seems to me plain, both here and in ourcopies of Daniel, i. 3, 6, 7.—11, 18. Although it mustbe granted, that some married persons, that had children,were sometimes called eunuchs, in a general acceptationfor courtiers, on account that so many of the ancientcourtiers were real eunuchs. See Gen. xxxix. 1. withAntiq. 6. X. 8, 9, and 10.







OCR Output








,356 [book X. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


-r£?i *L£aw«~%«£'jj£j3^sag


fusing to admit his army into the city? Is iton account of the Egyptians, and in hopesthat his army would be beaten by them?Whereupon he lets him know, that if this bewhat he expects, he is a foolish man, andlike one who leans on a broken reed;* whilesuch a one will not only fall down, but willhave his hand pierced and hurt by it: forhe ought to know, he makes this expeditionagainst him by the will of God; who hathgranted this favour to him, that he shalloverthrow the kingdom of Israel; arid that inthe very same manner he shall destroy thosethat are his subjects also." When Rab-shakeh had made this speech in the Hebrewtongue, for he was skilful in that language,Eliakim was afraid lest the multitude thatheard him should be disturbed. So he de­sired him to speak in the Syrian tongue.But the general, understanding what hemeant, and perceiving the fear that he wasin, replied with a louder voice in the He­brew tongue; and said, "Since they all hearwhat are the king's commands, they willconsult their own advantage in delivering upthemselves to us: for it is plain that bothyou and your king dissuade the people fromsubmitting by vain hopes; and so inducethem to resist. But if you be courageous,and think to drive our forces away, I amready to deliver to you two thousand ofthese horses that are with me, for your use;if you can set as many horsemen on theirbacks, and shew their strength. But whatyou have not, you cannot produce. Whytherefore do you delay to deliver up your­selves to a superior force, who can take youwithout your consent? although it will besafer for you to deliver yourselves up volun­tarily; while a forcible capture, when youare beaten, must appear more dangerous,and will bring farther calamities upon you."fWhen the people, as well as the ambassa­dors, heard what the Assyrian commander
L * The words in the text are,—Now behold thou trustestupon the staff of this bruised reed, even upon Egypt,2 Kings xviii. 21. The comparison is excellent, to de­note an ally that is not only weak and unable to help, butdangerous likewise to those that rely upon him for suc­cour; and his representing the power of Egypt to be asbrittle as the canes or reeds that grow on the banks of theNile, (for it is to this, no doubt, that the Assyrian oratoralludes,) is a great beauty in the similitude. This how­ever must be allowed, that what he here speaks in con-


said, they related it to Hezekiah: who there­upon put off his royal apparel, and clothedhimself with sackcloth, and took the habitof a mourner; and, after the manner of hiscountry, he fell upon his face, and besoughtGod, and entreated him to assist them, nowthey had no other hope of relief. He alsosent some of his friends, and some of thepriests to the prophet Isaiah, desiring thathe would pray to God, and offer sacrificesfor their common deliverance; and so put upsupplications to him, that he would have in­dignation at the expectations of their enemies,and have mercy upon his people. And whenthe prophet had done accordingly, an oraclecame from God to him, and encouraged theking and his friends that were about him:and foretold, that their enemies should bebeaten without fighting, and should go awayin an ignominious manner; and not with thatinsolence which they had now shewn: forthat God would take care they should be de­stroyed. He also foretold that Sennacherib,the king of Assyria, should fail of his purposeagainst Egypt, and that when he came homehe should perish by the sword.
About the same time also, the king of As­syria wrote an epistle to Hezekiah; in whichhe said, he was a foolish man, in supposingthat he should escape from being his servant;since he had already brought under many andgreat nations; and he threatened, that whenhe took him he would utterly destroy him, un­less he now opened the gates, and willinglyreceived his army into Jerusalem. When hehad read this epistle, he despised it; on ac­count of the trust that he had in God; but herolled up the epistle, and laid it up within thetemple. And as he made his farther prayersto God for the city, and for the preservationof all the people, the prophet Isaiah said, thatGod had heard his prayer; and that he shouldnot be besiegedJ at this time by the king ofAssyria; that for the future he might be se­


tempt of the Egyptian strength, has more of ostentationin it than truth; because the Assyrian army, havinglately made an attempt to subdue that kingdom, was nowreturned into Judea with disgrace. Patrick's, Le Clerc'i,and Calmet's Commentaries. B.
t 2 Kings xviii. 19—35.
J What Josephus says here, how Isaiah the prophetassured Hezekiah, that "At this time he should not bebesieged by the king of Assyria; that for the future hemight be secure of being not at all disturbed by him; and







OCR Output








I'M [book ▼. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


tious to obtain the glory of wisdom, togetherwith the gains, desired him to propose hisriddle': he said, " A great devourer producedsweet food out of itself; though itself werevery disagreeable." And when they werenot able in three days' time, to find out themeaning of the riddle, they desired the damselto discover it by the means of her husband,and tell it them; and they threatened to burnher, if she did not tell it them. So when thedamsel intreated Sampson to tell it her, he atfirst refused; but when she lay hard at him,and fell into tears, and made his refusal to tellit a sign of his unkindness to her, he informedher of his slaughter of a lion, and how hefound bees in his breast, and carried awaythree honey-combs, and brought them to her.Thus he, suspecting nothing of deceit, in­formed her of all; and she revealed it to thosethat desired to know it. Then on the seventhday, whereon they were to expound the riddleproposed to them, they met together beforethe sun setting, and said, "Nothing is moredisagreeable than a lion, to those that lighton it; and nothing is sweeter than honey to


Thy spousal ornament neglected lies:Arise, prepare the bridal train, arise.
Odyas. vi. 29. Pope.
Dacier is of opinion, that the custom now alluded to pre­vailed amongst the Israelites, and that the proposition madeby Sampson is grounded upon it. From this sentimentMr. Pope dissents: "I am rather of opinion," he says,"that what is said of Sampson has relation to another cus­tom amongst the ancients, of proposing an aenigma at fes­tivals, and adjudging a reward to him that solved it. Thesethe Greeks called ygupxs ffufjwroTixos." B.
* There is reason to think that there was nothing newor uncommon in this operation, as it was most obvious forthe end proposed that the wit of man could devise. Weaccordingly find that Ovid alludes to the practice, andmentions that foxes and fire-brands were every year ex­hibited at Rome, and killed in the Circus. For it was thecustom in many places to sacrifice by way of retaliationevery animal, whether goat or swine, which did particularinjury to the fruics of the earth. In consequence of thisthey introduced these foxes, which had been employedfor that purpose with fire-brands.
Cur igitur missae vinctis ardentia teedisTerga ferant vulpes causa docenda mihi.
He then mentions an instance of much injury done by afox so accoutred by fire.
Qua fugit incendit vestitos messibus agros,Daninosis vires ignibus aura da bat.
On this account the whole race, according to the poet,were condemned, at the festival called Cerealia, to be intheir turns set on fire.


those that make use of it." To which Samp­son made this reply, "Nothing is more de­ceitful than a woman; for such was the per­son that discovered my interpretation to you."Accordingly he gave them the presents hehad promised them; making such Askelonitesas met him upon the road his prey; who werethemselves Philistines also. But he divorcedhis wife, and the girl despised his anger, andwas married to his companion, who made theformer match between them.
At this injurious treatment Sampson was soprovoked, that he resolved to punish all thePhilistines, as well as her. So it being thensummer time, and the fruits of the land beingalmost ripe enough for reaping, he caughtthree hundred foxes, and joining lightedtorches to their tails, he sent them into thefields of the Philistines; by which means thefruits of the land perished.* Now when thePhilistines knew that this was Sampson'sdoing, and knew also for what cause he didit, they sent their rulers to Timnath, and burnthis former wife, and her relations; who hadbeen the occasion of their misfortunes.
Ut ne luat paenas gens haec, Cerealibus ardet,Qjioque modo segetes perdidit ipsa perit.
Fast. lib. iv. 681, 707.
It is alluded to proverbially more than once by Lyco-phron, and seems to have been well known in Greece.He makes Cassandra represent Ulysses as a man both ofcunning and mischief, and styles him very properlyyafjwroupis, a fox with a fire-brand at his tail; for whereverhe went, mischief followed, v. 344. Suidas also takesnotice of this custom, when he speaks of a kind of beetlewhich the Boeotians named Tipha. They imagined thatif to this they were to fasten some inflammable matter, itwould be easy to set any thing on fire. He adds, that thiswas sometimes practised with foxes. Bryant's Observa­tions, p. 164.
The Caliph Vathek being under the necessity, when onhis travels, of lighting torches, and making extraordinaryfires to protect himself and his attendants from the fury ofthe wild beasts that were ready to make an attack on them,set fire to a forest of cedar that bordered on their way.Accidents of this kind in Persia are not unfrequent. Hist,of Caliph Vathek, p. 250. "It was an ancient customwith the kings and great men to set fire to large bunchesof dry combustibles, fastened round wild beasts and birds;which being then let loose, the air and earth appeared onegreat illumination; and as those terrified creatures natu­rally fled to the woods for shelter, it is easy to conceivethat conflagrations would often happen, which must havebeen peculiarly destructive." Richardson's Dissert, p.185. This circumstance reminds us of the destructionoccasioned among the standing corn, the vineyards, andolives of the Philistines. In Psalm Ixxxiii. 14. there is areference to one of these fires, though arising from anothercause. See also Homer, II. ii. 455. B.







OCR Output








160 [book v. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


However, when they were a great way fromthe city, the Hebrews turned back to fightthem, and gave the preconcerted signal tothose that lay in ambush; who rose up, andwith a great noise fell upon the enemy. Now,as soon as they perceived themselves to bedeceived, they knew not what to do; andwhen they were driven into a certain hollowplace, which was in a valley, they were shotat by those that encompassed them, till theywere all destroyed, excepting six hundred,which formed themselves into a close body ofmen, and forced their passage through themidst of their enemies, and tied to the neigh­bouring mountains; but the rest, being abouttwenty-five thousand, were slain. Then didthe Israelites burn Gibeah, and slew thewomen, and the males that were under age.They did the same also to the other cities ofthe Benjamites. And indeed they were en­raged to that degree, that they sent twelvethousand men out of the army, and gave themorders to destroy Jabesh Gilead; becausethey did not join with them in fighting againstthe Benjamites. Accordingly those that weresent slew the men of war, with their childrenand wives, excepting four hundred virgins.To such a degree had they proceeded in theiranger, because they not only had the suffer­ing of the Levite's wife to avenge, but theslaughter of their own soldiers.
However, they afterward were sorry forthe calamity they had brought upon the Ben­jamites, and appointed a fast upon that ac­count; although they supposed those menhad suffered justly for their offence againstthe laws. So they recalled, by their ambas­sadors, those six hundred which had es­caped. These had seated themselves on acertain rock called Rimmon, which was inthe wilderness. So the ambassadors lamentednot only the disaster that had befallen theBenjamites, but themselves also, by this de­struction of their kindred; and persuadedthem to take it patiently, and to come andunite with them; and not, so far as in themlay, to give their suffrage to the utter destruc-


tion of the tribe of Benjamin; and said tothem, " We give you leave to take the wholeland of Benjamin to yourselves, and as muchprey as you are able to carry away with you."So these men with sorrow confessed, thatwhat had been done was according to thedecree of God, and had happened for theirown wickedness, and assented to those thatinvited them, and came down to their owntribe. The Israelites also gave them the fourhundred virgins of Jabesh Gilead* for wives.But as to the remaining two hundred, theydeliberated how they might obtain wives forthem. And whereas they had before the wartaken an oath, that no one would give hisdaughter to wife to any Benjamite; some ad­vised them to have no regard to what theyhad sworn; because the oath had not beentaken advisedly and judiciously, but in a pas­sion; and thought that they should do nothingagainst God, if they were able to save a wholetribe, which was in danger of perishing; andthat perjury was only a sad dangerous thing,not when it is committed out of necessity, butwith a wicked intention. But when the senatewere affrighted at the very name of perjury,a certain person told them, that he couldshew them a way whereby they might pro­cure wives for the Benjamites, and yet keeptheir oath. And on their asking what hisproposal was, he said, "Three times in ayear, when we meet in Shiloh, our wives andour daughters accompany us. Let then theBenjamites be allowed to steal away, andmarry such women as they can catch; whilewe will neither incite nor forbid them. Andwhen their parents take it ill, and desire usto inflict punishment upon them, we will tellthem, that they were themselves the cause ofwhat had happened, by neglecting to guardtheir daughters; and that they ought not tobe over angry at the Benjamites, since thatanger had been permitted to rise up too highalready." So the Israelites were persuadedto follow this advice; and decreed, that theBenjamites should be allowed thus to stealthemselves wives. So when the festivalf was


* Judg. xxi. 14.
t All the three great festivals were to be observed inthe place where God settled his habitation, which was nowat Shiloh; and therefore some are of opinion, that thefeast here mentioned, was one of these; particularly, theythink it was the feast of tabernacles, because this was a
season of great joy, for having newly gathered their vin­tage, and the only season wherein the Jewish virgins wereallowed to dance. At this time they dwelt in booths too,behind which the Benjamites (as they fancy) might veryconveniently conceal themselves, and so watch an oppor­tunity of carrying away the virgins. But what seems to







OCR Output








aN. 1532.J 79 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


a song unto God, containing his praises, anda thanksgiving for his kindness, in hexameterverse.
As for myself, I have delivered every partof this history as I found it in the sacredbooks; nor let any one* wonder at thestrangeness of the narration, if a way werediscovered to those men of old time, whowere free from the wickedness of the modernages, whether it happened by the will of God,or whether it happened of its own accord;while, for the sake of those that accompaniedAlexander, king of Macedonia, who yet livedcomparatively but a little while ago, thePamphylian sea retired, and afforded them apassage through itself, when they had noother way to go; I mean, when it was the will


of God to destroy the monarchy of the Per­sians; and this is confessed to be true by allthat have written about the actions of Alex­ander; but as to these events let every onedetermine as he pleases.
On the next day Moses gathered togetherthe weapons of the Egyptians, which werebrought to the camp of the Hebrews by thecurrent of the sea, and the force of the windsassisting it; and he conjectured that this alsohappened by Divine providence, that so theymight not be destitute of weapons. So whenhe had ordered the Hebrews to arm them­selves with them, he led them to Mount Sinai,in order to offer sacrifice to God, and to ren­der oblations for the salvation of the multi­tude, as he had been previously commanded.


* Take here the original passages of the four old authorsthat still remain, as to the transit of Alexander the Greatover the Pamphylian Sea, (for most of the oldest authors,seen by Josephus, are entirely lost,) I mean of Callis-thenes, Strabo, Arrian, and Appian. As to Callisthenes,who himself accompanied Alexander in this expedition,Eustatius, in his notes upon the third Iliad of Homer, tellsus, that "this Callisthenes wrote how the PamphylianSea did not only open a passage for Alexander, but byrising and elevating its waters did pay him homage as itsking." Strabo's account is this, Geog. XIV. page 666,** Now about Phaselis is that narrow passage by the sea­side, through which Alexander led his army. There is amountain called Climax, which adjoins to the sea of Pam-phylia, leaving a narrow passage on the shore; which incalm weather is bare, so as to be passable by travellers;but when the sea overflows, it is covered to a great degreeby the waves. Now the ascent by the mountains beinground about, and steep, in still weather they make use ofthe road along the coast. But Alexander fell into thewinter season, and committing himself chiefly to fortune,he marched on before the waves retired; and so it hap­pened that they were a whole day journeying over it,and were under water up to the navel." Arrian's ac­count is this, I. page 72, 73, "When Alexander removedfrom Phaselis, he sent some part of his army over themountains to Perga, which road the Thracians shewedhim. A difficult way it was, but short. However, hehimself conducted those that were with him by the sea­shore. The road is impassable at any other time thanwhen the north wind blows; but if the south wind prevail,there is no passing by the shore. Now at this time, afterstrong south winds, a north wind blew, and that not with­out the Divine providence, as both he and they that were
with him supposed, and afforded him an easy and quickpassage." Appian, when he compares Caesar and Alex­ander together, (DeBell. Civil. II. page 522,) says, " Thatthey both depended on their boldness and fortune, asmuch as on their skill in war. As an instance of which,Alexander journeyed over a country without water, in theheat of summer, to the Oracle of Jupiter Ammon; andquickly passed over the bay of Pamphylia, when by Di­vine providence the sea was cut off; this Providence re­straining the sea on his account, as it had sent him rainwhen he travelled over the desert."
N. B. Since, in the days of Josephus, as he here assuresus, all the more numerous original historians of Alexandergave the account he has here set down, as to the provi­dential going back of the waters of the Pamphylian Sea,when he was going with his army to destroy the Persianmonarchy, which the afore-named authors now remainingfully confirm; it is without any foundation that Josephusis here blamed, by some late writers, for quoting thoseancient authors upon the present occasion. Nor can thereflections of Plutarch, or any other author later thanJosephus, be in the least here alledged to contradict him.Josephus went by all the evidence he then had, and thatevidence of the most authentic sort. So that whateverthe moderns may think of the thing itself, there is hencenot the least colour for finding fault with Josephus. Hehad rather been to blame had he omitted these quotations.However, since the pretended epistles of Alexanderomitted what all the ancient historians asserted about thismatter, and which I know no sufficient grounds to con­tradict, as Plutarch informs us, De Vit. Alexand. page674: there will be reason to question those Epistles,whether they were genuine, or at least to think they werean imperfect collection of them.
VOL. I.—No. 7.







OCR Output








ks. 107.] 485 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


had conferred many benefits on his owncountry, and made war against Iturea, andadded a great part of it to Judea, and com­pelled the inhabitants, if they would continuein that country, to be circumcised and tolive according to the Jewish laws. He wasnaturally a man of candour, and of greatmodesty; as Strabo bears witness, in thename of Timagenes; who says thus, "Thisman was a person of candour, and very ser­viceable to the Jews: for he added to thema part of the nation of the Itureans, and uni­ted them by the bond of circumcision."
CHAP. XII.
op Alexander's succession to the government; hisexpedition against ptolemais, and the war whichptolemy lathyrus made against him.
WHEN Aristobulus was dead, his wifeSalome, who by the Greeks wascalled Alexandra, liberated his brethren fromprison: (for Aristobulus had kept them inbonds, as we have said already:) and madeAlexander Janneus king; who was the supe­rior in age, and in moderation. This childhappened to be hated by his father, as soonas he was born, and was never permitted tocome into his father's sight, till he died.The occasion of which hatred is thus report­ed. When Hyrcanus chiefly loved the twoeldest of his sons, Antigonus and Aristobulus,God appeared to him in his sleep. Of whomhe inquired which of his sons should be hissuccessor? Upon God's representing to himthe countenance of Alexander, he was griev­ed that he was to be the heir of all hisgoods; and suffered him to be brought up in♦Galilee. However, God did not deceiveHyrcanus: for after the death of Aristobulus,he took the kingdom; and one of his breth­ren, who affected the kingdom, he slew: butthe other, who chose to live private, he heldin esteem.
When Alexander Janneus had settled thegovernment, in the manner that he judgedbest, he made an expedition against Ptole-mais. And having overcome the men in bat-


tie, he shut them up in the city, and satround about it, and besieged it. For of themaritime cities there remained only Ptolemaisand Gaza to be conquered; besides Strato'sTower, and Dora, which were held by thetyrant Zoilus. Now while Antiochus fPhi-lometor, and Antiochus, who was called Cy-zicenus, were making war against each other,and destroying one another's armies, thepeople of Ptolemais could have no assistancefrom them. But when they were distressedwith this siege, Zoilus, who possessed Strato'sTower, and Dora, and maintained a legion ofsoldiers, and on occasion of the contest be­tween the kings, affected tyranny himself;came and brought some small assistance tothe people of Ptolemais. Nor indeed had thekings such a friendship for them, as that theyshould hope for any advantage from them.Both those kings were in the case of wres­tlers, who finding themselves deficient instrength, and yet being ashamed to yield,put off the contest by lying still as long asthey can. The only hope they had remain­ing, was from the kings of Egypt, and fromPtolemy Lathyrus, who came to Cyprus whenhe was driven from the government of Egyptby Cleopatra his mother. So the people ofPtolemais sent to this Ptolemy Lathyrus;and desired him to come, as a confederate,to deliver them, now they were in such dan­ger, out of the hands of Alexander. Andthe ambassadors gave him hopes, that, if hewould pass over into Syria, he would havethe people of Gaza, on the side of those ofPtolemais; and that Zoilus, with the Sido-nians, and many others would assist them;so that he was elevated at this, and got hisfleet ready as soon as possible.
In the mean time, however, Demetrius, onethat was of abilities to persuade men to doas he would have them, and a leader of thepopulace, made those of Ptolemais changetheir opinions, and said to them, that it wasbetter to run the hazard of being subject tothe Jews, than to admit of evident slavery,by delivering themselves up to a master;and besides that, to have not only a war at


* The reason why Hyrcanus suffered not this son ofhis, whom he did not love, to come into Judea; but or­dered him to be brought up in Galilee, is suggested byDr. Hudson; that Galilee was not esteemed so happy andwell cultivated a country as Judea. See Matt. xxvi. 73,
Job vii. 52, Acts ii. 7. Although another obvious reasonoccurs also, that he was farther out of his sight in Galilee,than he would have been in Judea.
t The same with Antiochus Grypus, chap. 10.


4H2







OCR Output








AN. 459 150.] ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS


himself for his slowness, that he had not pre­vented Alexander, and got the good will ofJonathan: but had given him time so to do.However, he also wrote a letter to Jonathan,and to the people: the contents whereof arethese:—
"King Demetrius to Jonathan, and to thenation of the Jews, sendeth greeting. Sinceyou have preserved your friendship for us,and when you have been tempted by our ene­mies, you have not joined yourselves to them;I both commend you for your fidelity, and ex­hort you to continue in the same disposition:for which you shall receive rewards from us.For I will free you from the greatest part ofthe tributes and taxes which you formerlypaid to the kings, my predecessors, and tomyself. And I do now set you free from thosetributes, which you have ever paid: and be­sides I forgive you the tax upon salt, and *thevalue upon crowns which you used to offerto me. And instead of the third part of thefruits of the field, and the half of the fruits ofthe trees, I relinquish my part of them fromthis day. And as to the poll-money, whichought to be given me for every head of theinhabitants of Judea, and of the three topar-chies that adjoin to Judea; Samaria, Galilee,and Perea, that I relinquish to you for alltime to come. I will also that the city ofJerusalem be holy and inviolable, and freefrom tithes and taxes unto its utmost bounds.And I so far recede from my title to thecitadel, as to permit Jonathan, your high-priest, to possess it; that he may place sucha garrison in it, as he approves of for fidelityand good will to himself; that they may keepit for us. I also make free all those Jewsthat have been made captives and slaves inmy kingdom: and give order that the beastsof the Jews be not pressed for our service.And let their sabbaths, and all their festivals,and three days before each of them, be freefrom any imposition. In the same manner Iset free the Jews that are inhabitants in mykingdom, and order that no injury be done


them. I also give leave to such of them asare willing to enlist themselves in my army,that they may do it, and those as far as thirtythousand: which Jewish soldiers, whereso­ever they go, shall have the same pay thatmy own army hath. And some of them I willplace in my garrisons; and some as guardsabout mine own body, and as rulers overthose that are in my court. I give them alsopermission to use the laws of their forefa­thers; and I will that they have power overthe three toparchies that are added to Judea;and it shall be in the power of the high-priestto take care, that no one Jew shall have anyother temple for worship, but only that atJerusalem. I bequeath also out of my ownrevenues, yearly, for the expenses about thesacrifices, one hundred and fifty thousanddrachmae; and what money is to spare shallbe your own. I also release to you those tenthousand drachmae which the kings receivedfrom the temple; because they appertain tothe priests that minister in that temple. Andwhosoever shall flee to the temple at Jerusa­lem, or to the places thereto belonging; orwho owe the king money; or are there onany other account; let them be set free, andlet their goods be in safety. I give you leaveto repair and rebuild your temple; and thatall be done at my expense. I also allow youto build the walls of your city; and to erecthigh towers; and that they be erected at mycharge. And if there be any fortified townthat would be convenient for the Jewishcountry to have very strong, let it be sobuilt at my expense."
This was what Demetrius promised, andgranted to the Jews, by this letter. But kingAlexander raised a great army of mercenarysoldiers, and of those that deserted to himout of Syria; and made an expedition againstDemetrius. And when they came to a bat­tle, the left wing of Demetrius* put thosewho opposed them to flight, and pursuedthem a great way, and slew many of them,and spoiled their camp. But the right


* Take Grotius's notes here. "The Jews," says he,"were wont to present crowns to the kings of Syria.Afterwards that gold, which was paid instead of thosecrowns, or which was expended in making them, wascalled the crown gold, and the crown tax." On 1 Mace,x. 29.
t In the first onset, Demetrius's left wing put the op­posite wing of the enemy to flight: but as he pursuedvoL. I.—NOS. 39 & 40.
them too far, (a fault in war which has lost many victo­ries,) by the time that they came back, the right wing,in which Demetrius fought in person, was overborne, andhe slain in the rout: for his horse having plunged himinto a bog, they who pursued him shot at him there withtheir arrows, till he died. Joseph. Antiq. lib. 13, c. 5.Justin, lib. 35, c. 1 ; Apipn, de Syriacis; and Polybiiis.lib. 3. B.
4E







OCR Output








364 [book X. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


kids of the goats and lambs, and three thou­sand oxen For burnt-offerings. The prin­cipal of the priests also gave to the priestsagainst the passover, two thousand and sixhundred lambs; and the principal of the Le-vites gave to their brethren, five thousandlambs, and five hundred oxen. By whichmeans great plenty of sacrifices were offeredaccording to the laws of Moses, while everypriest explained the matter, and ministeredto the multitude. And indeed there hadbeen no other festival thus celebrated bythe Hebrews from the time of Samuel theprophet;* and the plenty of sacrifices nowwas the occasion that all things were per­formed according to the laws, and accordingto the custom of their forefathers.
CHAP. V.
»F THE EXPEDITION OF NECHO, KING OF EGYPT; THE DEATHOF JOSIAH J THE CAPTIVITY OF HIS SUCCESSOR JEHOAHAZ,AND THE ACCESSION OF JEHOIAKIM; ALSO OF THE PRO­PHETS JEREMIAH AND EZEKIEL.
NOW Necho,f king of Egypt, raised anarmy,J and marched to the river Eu­phrates; in order to fight with the Medes•and Babylonians who had ||overthrown thedominion of the Assyrians. For he had a


desire to reign over Asia. But when he waecome to the city Mendes, which belonged tothe kingdom of Josiah, he brought an army tohinder him from passing through his country,in his expedition against the Medes. NowNecho sent a herald to Josiah, and told himthat he did not make this expedition againsthim; but was making haste to Euphrates;and desired that he would not provoke him tofight against him, because he obstructed hismarch to the place whither he had resolvedto go. But Josiah did not admit of this ex­cuse, but put himself into a posture to hinderhim from his intended march. I suppose itwas Sfate that pushed him on this conduct;that it might take an occasion against him.For as he was setting his **troops in array,and rode about in his chariot,ff from onewing of his army to another, one of theEgyptians shot an arrow at him, and put anend to his eagerness of fighting: for beingsorely wounded, he commanded a retreat tobe sounded for his army; and returned toJerusalem, and died of that wound, and hewas magnificently buried in the sepulchreof his fathers, when he had lived thirty-nineyears, and of them had reigned JJthirty-one.But all the people mourned greatly for him;lamenting and grieving on his account many


magnificence seen," when we mean no more than thatthe thing we speak of was very splendid and magnifi­cent; unless we suppose, with some, that a preferenceis given to this passover above all the rest, in respect ofthe exact observation of the rites and ceremonies belong­ing to it, which, at other times, were performed accordingto custom, and several things either altered or omitted;whereas at this, every thing was performed accordingto the prescribed form of the law, from which, sincethe finding of this authentic copy of it, Josiah enjoinedthem not to vary one tittle. Calmefs and Le Clerc'sCommentaries. B.
* 2 Chron. xxxv. 18.
t Pharaoh signifies no more, in the Egyptian language,than king; and was therefore given to any one that satupon that throne: but Necho (according to Herodotus)was his proper name, though some will have it to be anappellative which signifies lame, because this Pharaoh (asthey suppose, had a lameness, which proceeded fromsome wound he had received in the wars. The samehistorian tells us, that he was the son and successor ofPsammetichus king of Egypt, and a man of a bold, en­terprising spirit; that he made an attempt to join the Nileand the Red Sea, by drawing a canal from one to theother; that though he failed in this design, yet, by sendinga fleet from the Red Sea through the streights of BabelMandel, he discovered the coasts of Africa, and, in thishis expedition to the Euphrates, resolved to bid fair(by destroying the united force of the Babylonians and
Medes) to be the whole monarch of Asia. Prideavx'tConnection, anno 610, and Marsham'i Canon, ag. win/.18. B.
J An. 610.
II This is a remarkable passage of Chronology in Jose-phus; that about the latter end of the reign of Josiah, theMedes and Babylonians overthrew the empire of theAssyrians; or, in the words of Tobit's contmuator, thatbefore Tobias died, he heard of the destruction of Nineveh,which was taken by Nabuchodonosor, the Babylonian, andAssuerus, the Mede. Tobit xiv. 15. Of which see DeanPridcaux,$ Connection, at the year 612.
§ Or Divine Providence; for this procedure wasagainst a divine admonition.
** This battle is justly esteemed the very same thatHerodotus mentions, when he says, that Necho joinedbattle with the Syrians (or Jews) at Magdolum (Megiddo,)and beat them: as Dr. Hudson here observes.
tt It was the custom of war in former times for greatofficers to have their led horses, that if one failed theymight mount another. The kings of Persia (as QuintusCurtius informs us) had horses attending their chariots,which, in case of an accident, they might make to; and,in like manner, we might presume, that, when it becamea mighty fashion to fight in chariots, all great captains hadan empty one following them, into which they might betakethemselves if any mischance befell the other. Bochart'sHieroz. part I. c. 2. and 9. B.
Jt From an. 641 to an. 610.







OCR Output








AN. 62.] 501 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


those sacrifices, if any melancholy accidenthappened, by the stones that were thrownamong them. For although the city was ta­ken on *the third month, on the day of thefast, upon the hundred and seventy-ninthOlympiad: when Caius Antonius and MarcusTullius Cicero were consuls; and the enemythen fell upon them, and cut the throats ofthose that were in the temple; yet could notthose that offered the sacrifices be compelledto run away; neither by the fear they werein of their own lives, nor by the number thatwere already slain. As thinking it better tosuffer whatever came upon them, at theirvery altars, than to omit any thing that theirlaws required of them. And that this is nota mere boast, or an encomium to manifest adegree of our piety that was false; I appealto those that have written of the acts ofPompey: and among them to fStrabo, andNicolaus of Damascus; and besides these toTitus Livius, the writer of the Roman histo­ry; who all bear witness to this thing.J
But when the battering engine was broughtnear, the greatest of the towers was shakenby it, and fell down; and brake down a partof the fortifications. So the enemy pouredin apace: and Cornelius Faustus, the son ofSylla, with his soldiers, first of all ascendedthe wall; and next to him Furius, the cen­turion, with those that followed, on the otherpart: while Fobius, who was also a centu­rion, ascended it in the middle with a strongbody of men after him. And now all wasfull of slaughter: some of the Jews beingslain by the Romans, and some by one an­other. Nay, some there were who threwthemselves down the precipices, or set fire


* That is, on the 23d of Sivan, the annual fast for thedefection and idolatry of Jeroboam, who made Israel tosin. See Harm, of the Evang. page 152, 153. Or pos­sibly some other fast might fall in that month before,and in the days of Josephus.
t To these testimonies of Strabo, Nicolaus of Damas­cus, and Titus Livius; Hudson and Spanheim desire usto add, Tacitus Histor. V. 9. but that is, for the taking ofJerusalem by Pompey only. And since almost all thatTacitus knew in earnest about the Jews, was by him di­rectly taken out of Josephus, it is not necessary that heshould be often quoted as a distinct authority from him.Only we may here observe, by the way, that our Josephusnever quotes any Latin author, but Titus Livius; and himin this place only.
\ It deserves here to be noted, that this Pharisaical su­perstitious notion, that offensive fighting was unlawful to


to their houses, and burnt them; as not ableto bear the miseries they were under. Ofthe Jews there fell twelve thousand; but ofthe Romans very few. Absalom, who was atonce both uncle and father-in-law to Aristo-bulus, was taken captive. And no smallenormities were committed about the temple:which, in former ages, had been inaccessible,and seen by none. For Pompey went intoit, and not a few of those that were with himalso; and saw all which it was unlawful forany other men to see, but only for the high-priests. There were in that temple thegolden table, the holy candlestick, and thepouring vessels; and a great quantity of spi­ces: and besides these there were among thetreasures two thousand talents of sacredmoney. Yet ||did Pompey touch nothing ofall this; on account of his regard to religion:and in this point also he acted in a mannerthat was worthy of his virtue. The next dayhe gave order to those that had the chargeof the temple to cleanse it, and to bring whatofferings the law required to God; and re­stored the high-priesthood toHyrcanus: bothbecause he had been useful to him in otherrespects; and because he hindered the Jewsin the country from giving Aristobulus anyassistance in his war against him. He alsocut off those that had been the authors ofthat war; and bestowed proper rewards onFaustus, and those others that mounted thewall with such alacrity; and he made Jeru­salem tributary to the Romans; and tookaway those cities of Coelesyria which the in­habitants of Judea had subdued; and putthem under the government of the Romanpresident; and confined the whole nation,
Jews, even under the utmost necessity, on the Sabbathday; of which we hear nothing before the times of theMaccabees, was the proper occasion of Jerusalem's beingtaken by Pompey, by Sosius, and by Titus: as appearsfrom the places already quoted in the note on XIII. 8,and partly by Ptolemy Logi, also XI. 1, which scrupuloussuperstition, as to the observance of such a rigorous restupon the Sabbath day, our Saviour always opposed; whenthe Pharisaical Jews insisted on it; as is evident in manyplaces in the New Testament. Though he still intimatedhow pernicious that superstition might prove to them, intheir flight from the Romans. Matt. Xxiv. 20.
I! This is fully confirmed by the testimony of Cicero;who says, in his oration for Flacus, that "CneiusPompeius, when he was conqueror, and had taken Je­rusalem, did not touch any thing belonging to thattemple."


4K2







OCR Output








AN. 43.] 519 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


and got together an army, partly of Arabs,and partly of his own countrymen. How­ever Malichus being one of great cunning,denied that he had laid any snares for him;and made his defence with an oath, both tohimself and his sons: and said that whilePhasaelus had a garrison in Jerusalem, andHerod had the weapons of war in his custody,he could never have a thought of any suchthing. So Antipater perceiving the distressthat Malichus was in, was reconciled to him;and made an agreement with him. Thiswas when Marcus was president of Syria,who yet perceiving that this Malichus wasmaking a disturbance in Judea, proceededso far, that he had almost killed him: butstill, at the intercession of Antipater, hesaved him.
Antipater, however, little thought that bysaving Malichus, he had preserved his ownmurderer. For now Cassius and Marcus hadgot together an army, and entrusted the en­tire care of it with Herod, and made himgeneral of the forces of Coelesyria, and gavehim a fleet of ships, and an army of horse­men and footmen; and promised that, afterthe war was over, they would make him kingof Judea. For a war was already begun be­tween Antony and the younger Caesar. Butas Malichus was most afraid of Antipater, hetook him out of the way: and by the offer ofmoney persuaded the butler of Hyrcanus,with whom they were both to feast, to killhim by poison.* This being done, and hehaving armed men with him, settled the af­fairs of the city. But when Antipater's sons,Herod and Phasaelus, were acquainted withthis conspiracy against their father, and hadindignation at it, Malichus denied all; andutterly disclaimed any knowledge of themurder. And thus died Antipater; a manthat had distinguished himself for piety, andjustice, and love to his country. And where­as Herod resolved immediately to revengehis father's death, and was coming uponMalichus with an army for that purpose; theeldest of his sons, Phasaelus, thought it bestrather to get this man into their hands bypolicy, lest they should appear to begin acivil war in the country. So he accepted ofMalichus's defence for himself, and pretend-
* An. 43.


ed to believe him that he had no hand in theviolent death of Antipater his father: buterected a fine monument for him. Herodalso went to Samaria; and when he foundthem in great distress, he revived their spi­rits, and composed their differences.
A short time after this, Herod, upon theapproach of a festival, came with his soldiersinto the city: whereupon Malichus was alarm­ed, and persuaded Hyrcanus not to permithim to come into the city. Hyrcanus com­plied: and for a pretence of excluding himalledged, that a rout of strangers ought notto be admitted when the multitude weretpurifying themselves. But Herod had littleregard to the messengers that were sent tohim, and entered the city in the night time,and affrighted Malichus. Yet did he remitnothing of his former dissimulation; but weptfor Antipater, and bewailed him as a friendof his, with a loud voice. But Herod and hisfriends thought it proper not openly to con­tradict Malichus's hypocrisy; but to givehim tokens of mutual friendship, in order toprevent his suspicion of them.
However, Herod sent an account of hisfather's murder to Cassius; who knowingwhat sort of man Malichus was, as to hismorals, sent him back word, that he shouldrevenge his father's death; and also sent pri­vately to the commanders of his army atTyre, with orders to assist in the executionof a very just design. Now when Cassiushad taken Laodicea, they all went togetherto him, and carried him garlands and money,and Herod thought that Malichus might bepunished while he was there. But he wassomewhat apprehensive of the thing, and de­signed to make some great attempt; and be­cause his son was then a hostage at Tyre, hewent to that city, and resolved to steal himaway privately, and to march thence intoJudea; and as Cassius was in haste to marchagainst Antony, he thought to bring the coun­try to revolt, and to procure the governmentfor himself. But Providence opposed hiscounsels; and Herod, being a shrewd man,and perceiving what his intention was, senta servant thither beforehand, in appearanceindeed to get a supper ready; (for he hadsaid before, that he would feast them all
t See John xi. 55.







OCR Output








120 [book viiL ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


be killed. But Zedekiah, one of those falseprophets, came near, and exhorted him notto hearken to Micaiah, for he did not at allspeak truth. As a demonstration of which,he instanced in what Elijah had said,* whowas a better prophet in foretelling futuritiesthan Micaiah; for he foretold that the dogsshould lick his blood in the city Jezreel, inthe field of Nahoth; as they licked the bloodof Naboth, who by his means was there stonedto death by the multitude;f that therefore itwas plain that this Micaiah was a liar, ascontradicting a greater prophet than himself;and saying, that he should be slain at threedays' journey distance. "And," said he,"you shall soon know whether he be a trueprophet, and hath the power of the DivineSpirit: for I will smite him, and let him thenhurt my hand, as Jadon caused the hand ofJeroboam the king to wither, when he wouldliave caught him; for I suppose thou hastcertainly heard of that accident." So when,upon his smiting Micaiah, no harm happenedto him, Ahab took courage, and readily ledhis army against the king of Syria. For, as Isuppose, Jfate was too hard for him; andmade him believe that the false prophetsspake truer than the true one; that it mighttake an occasion of bringing him to his end.However, Zedekiah made horns of iron, andsaid to Ahab, that God made those horns sig­nals; that by them he should overthrow allSyria. But Micaiah replied, that Zedekiah,in a few days, should go from one secretchamber to another, to hide himself, that he


might escape the punishment of his lying.Then did the king give order that they shouldtake Micaiah away, and guard him to Amon,the governor of the city; and give him no­thing but bread and water.||
Then Ahab and Jehoshaphat the king ofJerusalem took their forces, and marched toRamoth, a city of Gilead. And when theking of Syria heard of this expedition, hebrought out his army to oppose them; andpitched his camp not far from Ramoth. NowAhab and Jehoshaphat had agreed, that Ahabshould lay aside his royal robes;§ but thatthe king of Jerusalem should put on his(Ahab's) proper habit, and stand before thearmy, in order to disprove, by this artifice,what Micaiah had foretold. But Ahab's fatefound him out, without his robes. For Ben-hadad, the king of Assyria, had charged hisarmy, by the means of their commanders, tokill nobody else; but only the king of Israel.So when the Syrians, upon their joining battlewith the Israelites, saw Jehoshaphat standbefore the army, and conjectured that he wasAhab, they fell Violently upon him, and en­compassed him round. But when they werenear, and knew that it was not he, they allreturned back. And while the fight lastedfrom the morning light, till late in the evening,and the Syrians were conquerors, they killednobody; as their king had commanded them.And when they sought to kill Ahab alone,but could not find him, there was a youngnobleman belonging to king Benhadad, whosename was Naaman; he drew his bow against


* These reasonings of Zedekiah, the false prophet, inorder to persuade Ahab not to believe Micaiah the trueprophet, are plausible: but, being omitted in our othercopies, we cannot now tell whence Josephus had them;whether from his own temple copy, from some otheroriginal author, or from certain ancient notes. That somesuch plausible objection was now raised against Micaiah,is very likely; otherwise Jehoshaphat, who used to dis­believe all such false prophets, could never have beeninduced to accompany Ahab in these desperate circum­stances.
| There is a great dispute among the learned, as to theaccomplishment of this prophecy. At first, it was, nodoubt, intended to be literally fulfilled; but upon Ahab'srepentance, as we find below, the punishment was trans­ferred from him to his son Joram, in whom it was actuallyaccomplished; for his dead body was cast into the portionof the field of Naboth the Jezreelite, for the dogs to de­vour, 2 Kings ix. 25. Since Ahab's blood therefore waslicked by dogs, not at Jezreel, but at Samaria, it seemsnecessary that we should understand the Hebrew word
which our translation renders in the place where, not asdenoting the place, but the manner in which the thing wasdone; and so the sense of the passage will be—That asdogs licked, or in like manner as dogs licked Naboth'sblood; even so shall they lick thine; observe what I say,even thine. Pool's Annotations. B.
I Or Divine Providence.
II 1 Kings xxii. 27.
§ This reading of Josephus's, and of the Septuagint,that Jehoshaphat put on, not his own, but Ahab's robe$.in order to appear to be Ahab, while Ahab was withoutany robes at all, and hoped thereby to escape his own evilfate, and disprove Micaiah's prophecy against him, is ex­ceeding probable. It gives great light also to this wholehistory; and shews, that although Ahab hoped Jehosha­phat would be mistaken for him, and run the only risk ofbeing slain in the battle, yet was he entirely disappointed:while still the escape of the good man, Jehoshaphat, andthe slaughter of the bad man, Ahab, demonstrated thegreat distinction that Divine Providence made betwixtthem.







OCR Output








an. 1532.] 89 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


 


lawful for us to set them down directly, wewill declare their import.
The first commandment teaches us, thatthere is but one God, and that we ought toworship him only. The second, commandsus not to make the image of any living crea­ture to worship it. The third, that we mustnot swear by God in a false matter. Thefourth, that we must keep the seventh day, byresting from all sort of work. The fifth, thatwe must honour our parents.* The sixth,that we must abstain from murder. Theseventh, that we must not commit adultery.The eighth, that we must not be guilty oftheft. The ninth, that we must not bear falsewitness. The tenth, that we must not admitof the desire of any thing that is another's.f
Now when the multitude had heard Godhimself giving those precepts which Moseshad discoursed of, they rejoiced at what wassaid; and the congregation was dissolved.But on the following day they came to histent, and desired him to bring them besidesother laws from God. Accordingly he ap­pointed such laws, and afterward informedthem in what manner they should act in allcases; which laws I shall mention in theirproper place: but I shall reserve most ofthem for\ another work: and make there adistinct explication of them.
When matters were brought to this state,Moses went up again to mount Sinai, of whichhe had told them beforehand. He made hisascent in their sight; but when he had beenabsent from them forty days, fear seized uponthe Hebrews, lest he should have come toany harm. Nor was there any thing that somuch troubled them, as the idea that Moseshad perished. Now there was a variety intheir sentiments about it; some saying thathe was fallen among wild beasts; and thosethat were of this opinion were chiefly such aswere ill disposed to him; but others sayingthat he was departed and gone to God. Thewiser sort were led, by their reason, to em­brace neither of those opinions with anysatisfaction; thinking that as it was a thing


that sometimes happens to men, to fall amongwild beasts and perish that way, so it wasprobable enough that he might depart andgoto God, on account of his virtue; theytherefore were quiet, and expected the event;though they were exceeding sorrowful uponthe probability that they were deprived of agovernor, and a protector; such an one, in­deed, as they could never recover again.Nor would this suspicion give them leave toexpect any comfortable event about this man:nor could they prevent their trouble and me­lancholy upon this occasion. However thecamp durst not move all this while: becauseMoses had commanded them to stay there.
When forty days and as many nights wereexpired, Moses came down; having tastednothing of food usually appointed for thenourishment of men. His appearance filledthe army with gladness; and he declared tothem, what care God had of them, and bywhat manner of conduct they might live hap­pily: telling them that, during his absence,God had suggested to him|| also that he wouldhave a tabernacle built for him, into whichhe would descend when he came to them;and how they^hould carry it about with themwhen they removed: and that there shouldbe no longer any occasion for going up tomount Sinai; but that he would himself comeand pitch his tabernacle amongst them, andbe present at their prayers. As also that thetabernacle should be of such measures andconstruction as he had shewed him; and thatthe work must he immediately begun, andprosecuted diligently. When he had saidthis, he shewed them the two tables, with theTen Commandments engraven upon them,five upon each table, and the writing was bythe hand of God.
CHAP. VI.


OF THE TABERNACLE WHICH MOSES BUILT IN THE WILDER­NESS, FOR THE HONOUR OF COD.


N


OW the Israelites rejoiced at what theyhad seen and heard of their conductor;


* As disobedience to parents is, by the law of Moses,threatened to be punished with death; so, on the contrary,long life is promised to the obedient; and that in theirown country, which God had peculiarly enriched withabundance of blessings. Heathens also gave the verysame encouragement, saying, that such children should bedear to the gods, both living and dying. So Euripides.
It was also one of their promises, Thou shalt live long,if thou nourish thy ancient parents. Whence children arecalled by Xenophon TspoSoirxoi. Patrick, in locum. B.
t Exod. xx. I to 18.
J This other work of Josephus's, here referred to,does not appear to have been ever published.
II It is a query whether Josephus, in all his own trans-







OCR Output








an. 820.] 345 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


in *Cilicia. And upon the rise of a most ter­rible stoxm,f which was so great that the shipwas in danger of sinking, the mariners, themaster, and the pilot himself, made prayersand vows, in case they escaped the sea. ButJonah lay still and covered in the ship,without imitating any thing which the othersdid. But as the waves grew greater, and thesea became more violent by the winds, theysuspected, as is usual in such cases, thatsome one of the persons that sailed with themwas the occasion of this storm; and agreedto discover by lots which of them it was.When they had cast lots4 the lot fell uponthe prophet. And when they asked him,whence he came, and what he had done? hereplied that he was a Hebrew by nation,and a prophet of Almighty God; and he per­suaded them to cast him into the sea, if theywould escape the danger they were in; forthat he was the occasion of the storm. Now,at the first they durst not do so; as esteeming


it a wicked tiling to cast a man who was astranger, and who had committed his life tothem, into such manifest destruction. But atlast, when their ship was just going to bewrecked; and when they were animated todo it by the prophet himself, and by the fearconcerning their own safety, they cast himinto the sea; upon which the storm immedi­ately subsided. It is also related that Jonahwas swallowed by a whale; and that whenhe had been there three days, and as manynights, he was vomited out upon the Euxinesea, without having sustained any injury.And there, on his prayer to God, he ob­tained pardon for his sins, and went tothe city of Nineveh: where he stood so asto be heard; and preached, that in a verylittle time they should lose the dominion ofAsia. And when he had published this, hereturned. Now I have given this accountabout him, as I have found it written in ourbooks. ||


by the valour and bravery of Perseus, who afterwardsmarried her. For in the times of Mela and Pliny, therewere some marks remaining (as they themselves testifynempe, Mela, lib. i. c. 11. Pliny, lib. 5. c. 13. Joseph.De Bello Jud. lib. iii. c. 15.) of the chain wherewith thisroyal virgin was bound to the rock which projects into thesea. But all this is mere fiction, 6rst founded upon theadventure of Jonah, who set sail from this port, and thenimproved with the accession of some particular circum­stances. Calmcfs Commentaire svr Jonas, c. i. v. 3. B.
* When Jonah- is said in our Bibles to have gone toTarshish, Jonah i. 3. Josephus understood it, that hewent to Tarshish, in Cilicia, or to the Mediterranean Seaupon which Tarsus lay. So that he does not appear tohave read the text, 1 Kings xxii. 48. as our .copies do,that ships of Tarshish could lie at Ezion Geber, upon theRed Sea. See the note on IX. 1. But as to Josephus'sassertion, that Jonah's fish" was carried by the strength ofthe current upon a storm, as far as the Euxine Sea; it isno way impossible. And since the storm might havedriven the ship, while Jonah was in it, near to that EuxineSea; and since in three more days, while he was in thefish's beHy, that current might bring him to the Assyriancoast; and since withal that coast could bring htm nearerto Nineveh than could any coast of the Mediterranean, itis by no mean? an improbable determination in Josephu?.
t The Jewish doctors, who ate great lovers of prodi­gies, are not even satisfied with what they meet with inthis history of Jonah, hut have over and above added, thatas soon as the ship, wherein he was embarked, was undersail, it, all on a sudden, stood stockstill, so that it couldbe made to move neither backward nor forward, notwith­standing all the pains that the mariners took in rowing.But others, with more probability, say, that while all therest of the ships were quiet and unmolested, the stormfell upon none but that wherein Jonah was, which madethe seamen think that there was something miraculous in
it; and thereupon called upon the company that sailedwith them, to come and cast lots, (as the superstitiouscustom among the Heathens was, whenever they were inany great distress ;) that accordingly they cast lots threedifferent times, which still fell upon Jonah; and that theylet him down several times with a rope, without plunginghim into the sea, and as often as they did it, found thestorm abate, and whenever they pulled him up again,found it increase; so, that at last, they were forced tocommit him to the mercy of the waves. All which arecircumstances which the Scripture account neither favoursnor contradicts. Calmet's Commentary. B.
J This ancient piece of religion, of supposing therewas great sin, where there was great misery; and ofcasting lots to discover great sinners, not only among theIsraelites, but among these Heathen mariners, seems aremarkable vestige of the ancient tradition, which pre­vailed of old over all mankind, that Providence used tointerpose visibly in all human affairs, and never to bring,or at least not long to continue, notorious judgments, butfor notorious sins; which the most ancient book of Jobshews to have been the state of mankind for about theformer 3000 years of the world, till the days of Job andMoses.
II The book of Jonah ends as abruptly as it begins. Itbegins with a conjunctive copulative, And the word of theLord came upon Jonah, (so it should be read) which hasmade some commentators think, that it was but an appendixto some of his other writings; and it ends without givingus any manner of account, either whot became of theNinevites, or of Jonah himself, after this expedition. Itis likely indeed, from the compassionate expressionswhich God makes use of towards the Ninevites, that, forthat time, he reversed their doom; and it is not improba­ble that Jonah, when he had executed his commission,and been satisfied by God concerning his merciful proce­dure, returned into Judea; but the author of the Lives







OCR Output








an. 1769.] 47 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


the night-time to the pit, resolved to saveJoseph without the privity of his brethren;and when, upon his calling to him, he madeno answer, he was afraid that they had de­stroyed him after he was gone; he accord­ingly complained to his brethren, but waspacified when they had told him what theyhad done.
When Joseph's brethren had done thus tohim, they considered how they should escapeihe suspicions of their father. Now theyhad taken away from Joseph the coat which.he had on when he came to them, at the timethey let him down into the pit; so theythought proper to tear that coat to pieces,and to dip it into goat's blood, and then tocarry it, and shew it to their father, that hemight believe he was destroyed by wildbeasts; and when they had so done, theycame to the old man, but this not till whathad happened to his son had already cometo his knowledge. Then they said that theyhad not seen Joseph, nor knew what mishaphad befallen him, but that they had found hiscoat bloody, and torn to pieces, whence theyhad a suspicion that he had fallen amongwild beasts, and so perished, if that were thecoat he had on when he came from home.Jacob had before some better hopes that hisson was only made a captive, but now helaid aside that notion, and considered thiscoat as a sufficient proof of his death, for hewell remembered that this was the coat hehad on when he sent him to his brethren.He therefore lamented the lad as now dead,. and as if he had been the father of no morethan one, without taking any comfort in therest; and so he was also affected with hismisfortune before he met with Joseph'sbrethren, when he also conjectured thatJoseph was destroyed by wild beasts. Hesat down also clothed in sackcloth,* and inheavy affliction, insomuch that he found noease when his sons comforted him,f neitherwas his sorrow assuaged by length of time.


CHAP. IV.
or Joseph's signal continent.
NOW Potiphar, an Egyptian, who waschief cook to king I'haraoh, boughtJoseph of the merchants.J He had him inthe greatest honour, taught him the learningthat became a free man, and gave him leaveto make use of a diet better than was allottedto slaves; he also entrusted the care of hishouse to him. Joseph, however, did not for­get that virtue which he had before, uponsuch a change of his condition; but he de­monstrated that wisdom was able to governthe uneasy passions of life, in such as have itin reality, and do not only put it on for a shew,under a present state of prosperity.
His master's wife soon fell in love with himboth on account of his beauty of body, andhis skilful management of affairs; and sup­posed that if she should make it known tohim, she should easily persuade him to cometo her bed: and that he would consider it asa piece of happy fortune that his mistressshould intreat him; as regarding that stateof slavery he was in, and not his moral cha­racter, which continued after his conditionwas changed. So she made known her illicitinclinations: however he rejected her in-treaties, not thinking it agreeable to religionto yield so far to her, as to do what wouldtend to the injury of one who had purchasedhim, and vouchsafed him so great honours.He therefore exhorted her to govern thatpassion, and laid before her the impossibilityof obtaining her desires, which he thoughtmight be conquered, if she had no hope ofsucceeding, and he said that, as to himself,he would endure any thing whatever beforebe. would be persuaded to it: for although itwas the duty of a slave, as he was, to donothing contrary to his mistress, he mightwell be excused in a case where the contra­diction was to such sort of commands: but


* Jacob is represented by Moses not only as beingclothed in sackcloth, but as rending his clothes on thisoccasion. Rending the clothes was an eastern way of ex­pressing either grief for calamity, or horror for sin. Reubenwas the first we read of, who, to denote his exceeding sor­row, rent his clothes; and as Jacob we find does thelike, we may well suppose that it was an usual mannerof expressing all grief and uneasiness of mind in thosedays; and, by putting on sackcloth, (which Jacob is
voL. I. No. 4.
here the first precedent of doing, but was afterwardscommonly used upon all mournful occasions,) he seemedto signify, that since he had lost his beloved son, helooked upon himself as reduced to the meanest andlowest condition of life. Bibliotheca Bibl. and HaweWsHistory. B.
t Gen. xxxvii. 35.
t Gen. xxxix. 1.







OCR Output








ait. 879.] 339 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


brought the child into the midst of them, andput on him the royal crown; and Jehoiadaanointed him with the oil, and made himking. And the multitude rejoiced, andshouted " God save the king."*
When Athaliah unexpectedly heard theseacclamations, she was disturbed in her mind,and suddenly issued out of the royal palacewith her own army, and when she was cometo the temple, the priests received her; butas for those that stood round about thetemple, as they were ordered by the high-priests to do, they hindered the armed menthat followed her from going in. But whenAthaliah saw the child standing on a pillar,twith the royal crown upon his head, sherent her clothes, and cried out vehemently,and commanded her guards to kill him thathad laid snares for her, and endeavoured todeprive her of the government. But Je­hoiada called for the captains of hundreds,and commanded them to bring Athaliah tothe valley of Cedron, and slay her there; forhe would not have the temple defiled withthe punishment of this pernicious woman.And he gave order, that if any one camenear to help her, he should be slain also.Wherefore those that had the charge of herslaughter led her to the gate of the king'smules and slew her there.
Jehoiada now called together the people,and the armed men into the temple; andmade them take an oath, that they wouldbe obedient to the king, and take care of hissafety, and of the safety of his government.After which he obliged the king to givesecurity, upon oath, that he would worshipGod, and not transgress the laws of Moses.They then ran to the house of Baal, whichAthaliah and her husband Jehoram hadbuilt to the dishonour of the God of theirfathers, and to the honour of Ahab; and de-


molished it, and slew Mattan, that had thepriesthood. But Jehoiada intrusted the careand custody of the temple to the priests andLevites, according to the appointment ofDavid; and enjoined them to bring theirregular burnt-offerings twice a day; and tooffer incense according to the law. He alsoordained some of the Levites with the por­ters, to be a guard to the temple; that noone that was defiled might come there.
When Jehoiada had set these things inorder, he, with the captains of hundreds, andthe rulers, and all the people, took Jehoashout of the temple into the king's palace:and when he had set him upon the king'sthrone, the people shouted for joy, and kepta festival for many days. But the city wasquiet upon the death of Athaliah. Now Je­hoash was seven years old when he took thekingdom. His mother's name was Zibiah,of the city Beersheba. And all the time thatJehoiada lived, Jehoash]: was careful that thelaws should be kept, and was very zealousin the worship of God. And when he wasof age he married two wives, who were givento him by the high-priest; by whom wereborn to him both sons and daughters.
CHAP. VIII.
OF HAZAEL'S EXPEDITION AOAINST THE PEOPLE OF ISRAEL,AND THE INHABITANTS OF JERUSALEM; THE DEATH OFJEHU, AND SUCCESSION OF JEHOAHAZ; THE CONDUCT OFJEHOASH, KING OF JUDAII; AND THE ACCESSION OFAMAZIAH.
NOW Hazael, king of Syria, foughtagainst the Israelites, and spoiled theeastern parts of the country beyond Jordan,which belonged to the Reubenites and Gad-ites, and to the half tribe of Manassites; asalso Gilead and Bashan; burning, spoiling,and offering violence to all that he could


-» 2 Kings xi. 12.
t The words in the text are,—And when she looked,behold the king stood by a pillar, as the manner was,2 Kings xi. 14. Now there were two famous pillars,which Solomon erected in the porch of the temple,whereof that on the right hand was called Jachin, andthat on the left Booz, and were each of them (accordingto the account we have) eighteen cubits high, 1 Kings vii.15, 21. Solomon's design in setting up these two pillars,is generally supposed to have been, in order to representthe pillar of the cloud, and the pillar of fire, which wentbefore the Israelites, and conducted them in the wilder-
VOL. I.—NOS. 29 & 30.
ness. The pillar on the right hand represented the pillarof the cloud, and that on the left the pillar of fire; andnear one of these pillars, in all probability, the royalthrone was erected; unless we can suppose, that, what ishere called a pillar, was that brazen scaffold, five cubitslong, five broad, and five high, which Solomon made atfirst upon his dedicating the temple, but was afterwardscontinued for the king, upon any solemn occasion, to ap­pear upon, and where doubtless there was a throne ofstate. Calmet's Commentary, and Bedford's ScriptureChronology, lib. vi. c. 2. B.| 2 Kings xii. 2.
3N







OCR Output








AN. 1108.] 193 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


and ever to remember the miseries that hadbefallen them on account of their departurefrom virtue; as also to remember the strangesigns that God had shewed, and the body oflaws that Moses had given them; if they hadany desire of being preserved, and madehappy with their king. But he said, if theyshould grow careless of these things, greatjudgments would come from God upon them,and upon their king. And when Samuel hadthus prophesied to the Hebrews, he dismissedthem to their own homes; having confirmedthe kingdom to Saul the second time.
CHAP. VI.
OF AN EXPEDITION OF THE PHILISTINES AGAINST THE HE­BREWS, AND ITS ILL SUCCESS.
NOW* Saul chose out of the multitudeabout three thousand men, and tooktwo thousand of them to be his own body­guards, and abode in the city Bethel; but hefave the rest of them for guards to Jonathanis son, and sent him to Gibeah, where hebesieged and took a certain garrison of thePhilistines, not far fromf Gilgal. For thePhilistines of Gibeah had beaten the Jews,and taken their weapons away; and had putgarrisons into the strongest places of thecountry, and had forbidden them to carry anyinstrument of iron, or to make use of any ironin any case whatsoever. And on account ofthis prohibition it was that the husbandmen,if they had occasion to sharpen any of their


* Josephus here omits the first words of this history;as does the Septuagint, 1 Sam. xiii. 1. The text runsthus in. the present Hebrew: Saul was ... 1 years oldwhen he began to reign, and he reigned two years. Wherein one, if not in both places, the decads are wanting. Noris it fit to invent idle excuses, and far-fetched interpreta­tions, in order to evade such difficulties; as the learnedand judicious Dr. Wall has frequently observed, in his veryvaluable, but posthumous critical notes on the Old andNew Testament. If the text be at all genuine, it mightbe written at first thus: Saul was 21 or 31 years old whenhe began to reign, and he reigned two years.
t This was Galgal by Michmas and Bethel, not the fa­mous Galgal, or Gilgal near Jericho.
J The words in the original, and in our translation ofthe Bible, are thirty thousand; but the Syriac and Arabicversions, (which we have thought proper to follow,) makethem no more than three thousand; and indeed whoeverconsiders, that Pharaoh king of Egypt when he had mus­tered all his forces together, could bring no more than sixhundred of these chariots into the field, and all the otherprinces, whose equipages are related in Scripture, muchfewer, must needs think it a thing incredible, that the


tools, whether it were the coulter, the spade,or any other instrument of husbandry, theycame to the Philistines to do it. Now as soonas the Philistines heard of this slaughter oftheir garrison, they were in a rage about it;and looking on this contempt as a terribleaffront offered them, they made war againstthe Jews,J with three hundred thousand foot­men, thirty thousand chariots, and six thou­sand horses; and they pitched their camp atthe city Michmash.|| When Saul, the king ofthe Hebrews, was informed of this, he wentdown to the city Gilgal, and made proclama­tion over all the country, that they shouldtry to regain their liberty, and called them tothe war against the Philistines, diminishingtheir forces, and despising them, as not sogreat, but they might hazard a battle withthem. But when the people about Saul ob­served how numerous the Philistines were,they were under great consternation; andsome of them hid themselves in caves, and indens under ground; but the greater part fledinto the land beyond Jordan, which belongedto Gad and Reubel.
But Saul sent to the prophet, and calledhim to consult with him about the war, andthe public affairs. So he commanded him tostay there for him, and to prepare sacrifices;for he would come to him within seven days,that they might offer sacrifices on the seventhday, and might then join battle with theirenemies.^ So he waited, as the prophetcommanded him to do. Yet did not he ob-
Philistines, out of their small territories, which extendedno farther than the two tribes of Simeon and Dan, alongthe coasts of the Mediterranean sea, could ever be able toraise so vast an armament; no, nor all the nations thatthey could possibly call in to their assistance. For be­sides that, in the account of all armies, the cavalry isalways more numerous than the chariots of war, (whichis different here,) the largest armies that we ever read ofwere able to compass a very few of these chariots, in com­parison of the number here specified. Mithridates, in hisvast army, had but a hundred; Darius but two; and An-tiochus Epiphanes, (2 Mac. xiii. 2.) but three. So thatwe must either say, that the transcribers made a mistakein the Hebrew copy, or (with some other commentators,)suppose that these thirty thousand chariots, were notchariots of war, but most of them carriages only, for theconveyance of the baggage belonging to such a vast mul­titude of men, or for the deportation of the plunder theyhoped to be master of by having conquered the country,Le Gere's Commentary, and Universal History. B.
II 1 Sam. xiii. 5.
§ Saul seems to have staid till near the time of theevening sacrifice, on the seventh day; which Samuel had







OCR Output








308 [book vm. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


he left off building and fortifying Ramah,and returned to assist his own people underthe distresses they were in. But Asa madeuse of the materials that were prepared forbuilding that city, for erecting in the sameplace two strong cities; the one of whichwas called Geba, and the other Mizpah. Sothat after this, Baasha had no leisure to makeexpeditions against Asa, for he was preventedby death, and was buried in the city Tirzah.*Elah, his son, took the kingdom; but whenhe had reigned two years, he was treache­rously slain by Zimri, the captain of half hisarmy: for when he was at a feast of Arza,his steward's house, he persuaded some ofthe horsemen, that were under him, to as­sault Elah; and by that means he slew himwhen he was without his armed men, andhis captains. For they were all busied inthe siege of Gibbethon, a city of the Philis­tines.
When Zimri, the captain of the army, hadkilled Elah, he took the kingdom himself;and, according to Jehu's prophecy, slew allthe house of Baasha. For it came to passthat Baasha's house utterly perished, on ac­count of his impiety, in the same manner aswe have already described the destruction ofthe house of Jeroboam. But the army thatwas besieging Gibbethon, when they heardwhat had befallen the king, and that whenZimrif had killed him he had gained thekingdom, they bestowed the government onOmri their general, who drew off his armyfrom Gibbethon, and came to Tirzah, wherethe royal palace was, and assaulted the city,and took it by force. But when Zimri sawthat the city had none to defend it, he fled


into the inmost part of the palace, and set iton fire, and burnt himself with it;J when hehad reigned only seven days. Hereupon thepeople of Israel were presently divided; andpart of them would have Tibni to be king,and part Omri; but when those who were forOmri's ruling had beaten Tibni, Omri reignedover all the multitude.
Now it was in the ||thirtieth year of thereign of Asa, that Omri reigned for twelveyears: six of these years he reigned in thecity Tirzah, and the rest in the city calledSamareon, but named by the Greeks Samaria.But he himself called it Semareon, fromSemer, who sold him the mountain whereonhe built it. Now Omri was no way differentfrom those kings that reigned before him; butonly that he grew worse than they. For theyall sought how they might turn people awayfrom God, by their daily wicked practices.And on that account it was that God madeone of them to be slain by another; and thatno one person of their families should remain.This Omri also died at Samaria, and Ahabhis son succeeded him.§
Now by these events we may learn whatconcern God hath for the affairs of mankind;and how he loves good men, and hates thewicked, and destroys them root and branch.For many of these kings of Israel, they andtheir families, were miserably destroyed, andtaken away one by another, in a short time,for their transgressions. But Asa, who wasking of Jerusalem, and of the two tribes, at­tained, by God's blessing, a long and a feli­citous old age, for his piety and his righteous­ness; and died happily, when he had reignedforty-one years. And when he was dead,**


that belonged to the land of Israel, and bordered on thecountry of Damascus, is supposed both by Hudson andSpanheim to be the same with Abel or Abila, whence cameAbilene, Luke iii. 1. This may be that city so denomi­nated from Abel the righteous, there buried, concerningthe shedding of whose blood within the compass of theland of Israel, I understand our Saviour's words, aboutthe fatal war and overthrow of Judea by Titus, and hisRoman army, " That upon you may come all the righteousblood shed upon the land, from the blood of righteousAbel, to the blood of Zacharias, son of Barachias, whomye slew between the temple and the altar. Verily I sayunto you, all these things shall come upon this genera­tion," Matt, xxiii. 35, 36. Luke xi. 51. See Authent.Rec. P. II. page 884, 885.
* 1 Kings xvi. 6.
t About an. 930.
t 1 Kinzs xvi. 18.
II The thirty-first, Heb. and Septuagint.
§ An. 919.
** The words in the text are these,—They laid him onthe bed, which was filled with sweet odours, and diverskinds of spices, prepared by the apothecaries' art: andthey made a great burning for him, 2 Chron. xvi. 26.But then the question is, whether the body itself wasburnt, or only some spices and odoriferous drugs to pre­vent any bad smell that might attend the corpse. TheGreeks and Romans indeed, when they burnt any deadbodies, threw frankincense, myrrh, cassia, and other fra­grant things into the fire, and this in such abundance, thatPliny, (Nat. Hist. cap. 18.) represents it as a piece ofprofaneness, to bestow such heaps of frankincense upon adead body, when they offered it so sparingly to their gods.The Jews, however, (say the maintainers of this side ofthe question,) were accustomed to inter, and not to burntheir dead, though they might possibly lenm from (he







OCR Output








354 [book IX. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


in twelve ships, and the enemies were dis­persed, they took five hundred men prisoners.And the reputation of all the citizens of Tyrewas thereby increased. But the king ofAssyria returned, and placed guards at theirriver and aqueducts; who should hinder theTyrians from drawing water. This continuedfor five years; and still the Tyrians sustainedthe siege, and drank of the water they hadout of the wells they dug." And this is whatis written in the Tyrian archives concerningShalmaneser, king of Assyria.
But now the Cutheans, who removed intoSamaria, (for that is the name they have beencalled by to this time; because they werebrought out of the country called Cuthah,which is a country of Persia, and there is ariver of the same name in it,) each of themaccording to their nations, which were innumber five, brought their own gods into Sa­maria; and by worshipping them, as was thecustom of their own countries, they provokedAlmighty God to send a plague* upon them,by which they were destroyed. And whenthey found no cure for their miseries, theylearned by an oracle, that they ought to wor-


ship Almighty God, as the method for theirdeliverance. So they sent ambassadors tothe king of Assyria; and desired him to sendthem some of those priests of the Israeliteswhom he had taken captive. And when hethereupon sent them, and the people wereby them taught the laws, and the holy wor­ship of God, they worshipped him in a re­spectable manner; and the plague ceasedimmediately. And indeed they continued tomake use of the same customs to this verytime; and are called in the Hebrew tongue,Cutheans, but in the Greek tongue, Samari­tans. And when they see the Jews in pros­perity, they pretend that they are allied tothem, and call them kinsmen; as though theywere derived from Joseph, and had by thatmeans an original alliance with them. Butwhen they see them falling into a low con­dition, they say they are no way related tothem; and that the Jews have no right toexpect any kindness from them; but theydeclare that they are sojourners, that comefrom other countries. But of these we shallhave a more seasonable opportunity to dis­course hereafter.t


* Josephus says here, that instead of lions, as in ourother copies, 2 Kings xvii. 26. a plague or pestilence wassent among these Cutheans or Samaritans. He also con­firms this afterwards, XII. 5. by an epistle of these Cu­theans or Samaritans to Antiochus Epiphanes; which
says nothing of lions; but expressly mentions these fre­quent plagues. So that Josephus's reading seems to bethe most accurate in this place.
t See Book XI. chap. 8. and XII. 5.







OCR Output








144 [BOOK V. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


so far, she said, she had been assured bythose divine miracles of which she had beeninformed. So these spies acknowledged thatthey owed her thanks for what she had donealready, and withal swore to requite her kind­ness not only in words, but in deeds; but theygave her this advice, that when she shouldperceive that the city was about to be taken,she should put her goods and all her family,by way of security, in her inn; and hang outscarlet threads before her doors or windows,that the commander of the Hebrews mightknow her house, and take care to do her noharm. "For,"' said they, "we will inform himof this matter, because of the concern thouhast had to preserve us; but if any of thyfamily fall in the battle, do not blame us; andwe beseech that God by whom we have sworn,not then to be displeased with us, as thoughwe had broken our oaths." So these men,when they had made this agreement, wentaway; letting themselves down by a ropefrom the wall, and escaped; and came andtold their own people whatsoever they haddone in their journey to this city. Joshuaalso told Eleazar the high-priest, and thesenate, what the spies had sworn to Rahab,who confirmed what had been sworn.
Now while Joshua, the commander, was infear about their passing over Jordan, for theriver ran with a strong current, and could notbe passed over with bridges, for there neverhad been bridges laid over it hitherto; andwhile he suspected that if he should attemptto make a bridge, the enemies would notafford him time to perfect it; and ferry boatsthey had none; God promised so to disposeof the river that they might pass over it, and(hat by taking away the main part of its wa­ters. So Joshua, after two days, caused thearmy and the whole multitude to pass over inthe following manner:—The priests went first,having the ark with them; then went the Le-vites, bearing the tabernacle and the vesselsthat belonged to the sacrifices; after whichthe entire multitude followed, according totheir tribes, having their children and theirwives in the midst of them, as being afraid for


them lest they should be borne away by thestream. But as soon as the priests had en­tered the river first, it appeared fordable; thedepth of the water being restrained, and thesand appearing at the bottom, because thecurrent was neither so strong nor so swift, asto carry it away by its force; so they allpassed over the river without fear, finding itto be in the very same state as God had fore­told he would put it in. But the priests stoodstill in the midst of the river, till the multi­tude should be passed over, and should getto the shore in safety; and when all weregone over, the priests came out also and per­mitted the current to run freely as it used todo before. Accordingly, the river, as soonas the Hebrews were gone out of it, aroseagain presently, and came to its proper heightas before.*
So the Hebrews went on farther fifty fur­longs, and pitched their camp at the distanceof ten furlongs from Jericho. But Joshuabuilt an altar of those stonest which all theheads of the tribes, at the command of theprophet, had taken out of the river; to beafterward a memorial of the division of thestream, and upon it offered sacrifice to God;and in that place celebrated the passover,and had great plenty of all things which theyhad wanted hitherto. For they reaped thecorn of the Canaanites, which was now ripe;and took other things as prey; for then it wasthat their former food, which was manna,and of which they had eaten forty years,failed them.
While the Israelites did this, and the Ca­naanites did not attack them, but remainedquiet within their own walls, Joshua resolvedto besiege them. So on the first day of thefeast of the passover, the priests carried theark, round about which was some part of thearmed men to be a guard to it. These priestswent forward, blowing with their seven trum­pets, and exhorted the army to be of goodcourage, and went round the city with thesenate following them, and when the priestshad only blown with their trumpets,J for theydid nothing more at all, they returned to the


* Josh. iv. 10.
t It has been a custom in all nations to erect monumentsof stone, in order to preserve the memory of covenants,victories, and other great transactions; and though therewas no inscription upon these stones, yet the number ofthem, and the place where they lay, which was not at all
stony, was sufficient to signify some memorable thing,which posterity would not fail to hand down from onegeneration to another. Patrick's Commentary on Joshua,iv. 7. B.| Josh. vi. IS.







OCR Output








140 [book IV ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


that this should be the day of my departure tothem, I return him thanks, while 1 am stillalive and present with you, for that provi­dence he hath exercised over you, which hathnot only delivered us from the miseries theylay under, but hath bestowed a state of pros­perity among us; as also that he hath assistedme in the pains I took, and in all the contri­vances I had in my care about you, in orderto better your condition; and hath on all oc­casions shewed himself favourable to us. Orrather he it was who first conducted our af­fairs, and brought them to a happy conclu­sion, by making use of me as a general un-,der him, and as a minister in those matterswherein he was willing to do you good. Onwhich accounts I think it proper to bless thatdivine power which will take care of you forthe time to come; and this in order to repaythat debt which I owe him; and to leave be­hind me a memorial that we are obliged toworship and honour him, and to keep thoselaws which are the most excellent gift of allthose he hath already bestowed upon us; orwhich, if he continue favourable to us, he willbestow upon us hereafter. Certainly, a hu­man legislator is a terrible enemy, when hislaws are affronted, and are made to no pur-
Sose. And may you never experience thatispleasure of God, which will be the conse­quence of the neglect of those laws, which he,who is your Creator, hath given you."
When Moses had spoken thus, at the endof his life, and had foretold what would be­fall* every one of their tribes afterward, withthe addition of a blessing to them, the multi­tude fell into tears; insomuch that even thewomen, by beating their breasts, evinced thedeep concern they had when he was aboutto die. The children also lamented still more,as not able to contain their grief; and therebydeclared that even at their age they weresensible of his virtue, and mighty deeds; and


truly there seemed to be a strife between theyoung and the old, who should most grievefor him. The aged grieved, because theyknew what a careful protector they were tobe deprived of, and so lamented their futurestate; but the young grieved, not only forthat, but also because it so happened, thatthey were to be left by him before they hadwell tasted of his virtue. Now one may formsome idea of the excess of this sorrow and la­mentation of the multitude, from what hap­pened to the legislator himself. For althoughhe was always persuaded that he ought notto be cast down at the approach of death;since the undergoing it was agreeable to thewill of God, and the law of nature; yet whatthe people did, so affected him, that he wepthimself. Now as he went thence to the placewhere he was to vanish out of their sight,they all followed after him, weeping. ButMoses beckoned with his hand to those thatwere remote from him, and bid them stay be­hind in quiet; while he exhorted those thatwere near him, that they would not renderhis departure so lamentable. Whereuponthey thought it their duty to let him departaccording as he desired; so they restrainedthemselves, though weeping still towards oneanother. All those who accompanied himwere the senate, and Eleazar the high-priest,and Joshua their commander. Now as soonas they were come to the mountain calledAbarim, which is a very high mountain situ­ate over against Jericho, and one that affordsto such as are upon it a prospect of the great­est part of the excellent land of Canaan, hedismissed the senate; and, as he was goingto embrace Eleazar and Joshua, and was stilldiscoursing with them, a cloud suddenly over­shadowed him, and he disappeared, in a cer­tain valley;t although he wrote in the holybooks that he died; which was done out offear lest they should venture to say, that be­


* Since Josephus assures us here, as is most naturallyto be supposed, and as the Septuagint gives the text, Deut.xxxiii. 6, that Moses blessed every one of the tribes ofIsrael; it is evident that Simeon was not omitted in hiscopy, as it unhappily now is both in our Hebrew and Sa­maritan copies.
t Deut. xrxiv. 6. But notwithstanding all this pre­caution of God, the Christians boast, that they have dis­covered the sepulchre, which had been kept secret for somany ages. For in the year 1655, some goats that wereseparated from the rest of the flock, went to feed in a cer-
tain place, in the mountain Nebo, and returned from thenceso odoriferous and perfumed, that the shepherds, asto­nished at so wonderful a prodigy, ran presently to consultwith the patriarch of the Maronites, who sent "thither twomonks from mount Lebanon, and they discovered a monu­ment, on which was this inscription, Moses, the servant ofthe Lord. But there is too much reason to think that thisis all a fiction, on purpose to raise the reputation of theMaronites; as Basnage, in his History and Religion of theJews, has sufficiently proved, lib. 4. cap. 17. B.







OCR Output













OCR Output








an. 226.] 431 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


tion out of Babylon into Phrygia. The epistlewas this:


XING ANTIOCHUS, TO ZEUXIS HIS FATHER, SEND-ETH GREETING.
"If thou be in good health, it is well: for Iam also in health. Having been informedthat a sedition is arisen in Lydia and Phrygia,I thought that matter required great care.And upon advising with my friends what wasfit to be done, it hath been thought proper toremove two thousand families of Jews, withtheir effects, out of Mesopotamia and Baby­lon, unto the castles and places that lie mostconvenient. For I am persuaded that theywill be well disposed guardians of our pos­sessions; because of their piety towards God;and because I know that my predecessorshave borne witness to them, that they arefaithful, and with alacrity perform what theyare desired. I will therefore, though it be alaborious work, that thou remove these Jews:under a promise that they shall be permittedto use their own laws. And when thou shalthave brought them to the aforementioned
{daces, thou shalt give every one of theiramilies a place for building their houses, anda portion of land for their husbandry, and forthe plantation of their vines: and thou shaltdischarge them from paying taxes of thefruits of the earth, for ten years. And letthem have a proper quantity of wheat for themaintenance of their servants, until they re­ceive bread-corn out of the earth. And leta sufficient share be given to such as ministerto them in the necessaries of life: that byenjoying the effects of our humanity, theymay shew themselves the more willing andready about our affairs. Take care also ofthat nation, as far as thou art able; that theymay not have any disturbance given them byany one."'"
Now these testimonials which I have'pro-duced, are sufficient to declare the friend­ship that Antiochus the Great bare to theJews.


CHAP. IV.


OF A LEAGUE BETWEEN ANTIOCHUS AND PTOLEMY J THEOFFENCE GIVEN TO PTOLEMY EUERGETES BY 0NIAS JTHE PRUDENT CONDUCT OF JOSEPH J AND THE AFFAIRSOF HIS SON HYRCANU8.
AFTER this, Antiochus made a friend­ship and a league with Ptolemy; andgave him his daughter Cleopatra to wife,*and yielded up to him Coelesyria, Samaria,Judea, and Phoenicia, by way of dowry. Andupon the division of the taxes between thetwo kings, all the principal men farmed thetaxes of their several countries; and, collect­ing the sum that was settled for them, paidthe same to the two kings. Now at this timethe Samaritans were in a nourishing con­dition, and much distressed the Jews: cut­ting off part of their land, and carrying offslaves. This happened when Onias washigh-priest. For after Eleazar's death, hiauncle Manasseh took the priesthood: andafter he had ended his life, Onias receivedthat dignity. He was the son of Simon, whowas called the Just; which Simon was thebrother of Eleazar, as I fsaid before. ThisOnias was one of a little soul, and a greatlover of money: and for that reason, becausehe did not pay that tax of twenty talents ofsilver, which his forefathers paid to thesekings, out of their own estates, he provokedking Ptolemy Euergetes to anger; who wasthe father of Philopator. This Euergetessent an ambassador to Jerusalem, and com­plained that Onias did not pay his taxes; andthreatened that if he did not receive them,he would seize upon their land, and sendsoldiers to live upon it. When the Jews heardthis message of the king's, they were con­founded. But so sordidly covetous was Onias,that nothing of this nature made him ashamed.There was now one Joseph,J young in agebut of great reputation among the people ofJerusalem, for gravity, prudence, and justice.His father's name was Tobias, and his motherwas the sister of Onias, the high-priest: whoinformed him of the coming of the ambas­sador: for he was then sojourning at a vil­lage named Phicol,|| where he was born,


* Spanheim notes here, that thh marriage of Ptolemyjyith Cleopatra is related by Appian, in bis Syriaca, p. 88.t Chap. Ill,
t About an. 226.
ft The name of this place, Phicol, is the very samewith that of the chief captain of Abimelech's host in the







OCR Output








AN. 521.] 391 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


for his great men, his princes, and toparchsof Persia and Media; and set himself downin the place where he used to give audience;and bade each of his body guards to declarewhat they thought proper concerning the pro­posed questions, in the hearing of them all.
Accordingly the first of them began tospeak of the strength of wine; and demon­strated it thus: "When," said he, "I am togive my opinion of wine, O ye men, I findthat it exceeds every thing by the followingindications. It deceives the mind of thosethat drink it, and reduces that of the king tothe same state with that of the orphan, andhe who stands in need of a tutor; and erectsthat of the slave to the boldness of him thatjs free, and that of the needy becomes likethat of the rich man. For it changes and re­news the souls of men, when it gets into them:and it quenches the sorrow of those that areunder calamities, and makes men forget thedebts they owe to others, and makes themthink themselves to be of alLmen the richest;it makes them talk of no small things, but oftalents, and such other names, as becomewealthy men only. Nay, more, it makesthem insensible of their commanders, andof their kings, and takes away the remem­brance of their friends and companions.For it arms men even against those that aredearest to them, and makes them appear thegreatest strangers to them. And when theyare become sober, and they have slept outtheir wine in the night, they arise withoutknowing any thing they have done in theircups. I take these for signs of power, andby them discover that wine is the strongest,and most insuperable of all things."
As soon as the first had given the afore­mentioned demonstrations of the strength ofwine; the next to him began to speak aboutthe strength of a king, and demonstrated thathe was the strongest of all, and more power­ful than any thing else, that appears to haveany force or wisdom. "They are men," saidhe, "who govern all things: they force theearth and the sea to become profitable tothem, in what they desire: and over thesemen do kings rule: and over them they haveauthority. Now those who rule over thatanimal which is of all the strongest, andmost powerful, must needs deserve to beesteemed insuperable jn po^er and force.


For example, when kings command theirsubjects to make wars and undergo dangers,they are hearkened to: and when they sendthem against their enemies, their power isso great, that they are obeyed. They com­mand men to level mountains, and to pulldown walls and towers: nay, when they arecommanded to be killed, and to kill, theysubmit to it; that they may not appear totransgress the king's commands. And whenthey have conquered, they bring what theyhave gained in the war to the king. Thosealso who are not soldiers, but cultivate theground, after they have endured the labour,and all the inconveniences of such works ofhusbandry, and have reaped and gathered intheir fruits, they bring tributes to the king.And whatsoever it is which the king saysor commands, it is done of necessity, andthat without any delay. While he, in themean time, is satiated with all sorts of foodand pleasure, and sleeps in quiet. He isguarded by such as watch; and such as are,as it were, fixed down to the place throughfear. For no one dares leave him, evenwhen he is asleep; nor does any one goaway and take care of his own affairs; buthe esteems this one thing to be the onlywork of necessity, to guard the king; andaccordingly to this he wholly addicts himself.How then can it be otherwise, but that theking exceeds all in strength, ^ hile so greata multitude obey his injunctions?"
Now when this man had held his peace,the third of them, who was Zorobabel, be­gan to speak concerning women and truth."Wine," said he, "is strong; as is the kingalso, whom all men obey; but women aresuperior to them in power. For it was awoman who brought the king into the world;and those who plant the vines, and make thewine, they are women who bear them, andbring them up. Nor indeed is there anything which we do not receive from them.For these women weave garments for us;and our household affairs are by their meanstaken care of, and preserved in safety. Norcan we live separate from women.. Andwhen we have got a great deal of gold andsilver, and any other thing that is of fjreatvalue, and see a beautiful woman, we leaveall these things; and with open mou'.h fixour eyes upon her countenauce; and are







OCR Output








AN. 20.] 571 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


in order to secure and guard the temple, hegratified Antonius, who was his friend, andthe Roman ruler; and he then gave it thename of the tower of Antonia.
Now in the western quarters of the inclo-sure of the temple, there were four gates.The first led to the king's palace, and wentto a passage over the intermediate valley;two more led to the suburbs of the city; andthe last led to the other city, where the roaddescended down into the valley by a greatnumber of steps, and thence up again by theascent. For the city lay over against thetemple, in the manner of a theatre, and wasencompassed with a deep valley, along theentire south quarter. But the fourth front ofthe temple, which was southward, had indeeditself *gates in its middle; as also it had theroyal cloisters, with three walks, whichreached in length from the east valley, untothat on the west: for it was impossible itshould reach any farther. And this cloisterdeserves to be mentioned better than anyother under the sun. For while the valleywas very deep, and its bottom could not beseen, if you looked from above into thedepth, this farther vastly high elevation ofthe cloister stood upon that height: insomuchthat if any one looked down from the top ofthe battlements or down both those altitudes,he would be giddy; while his sight could notreach to such an immense depth. Thiscloister had pillars that stood in four rows,one over against the other all along; for thefourth row was interwoven into the wall,which also was built of stone. And thethickness of each pillar was such, that threemen might, with their arms extended, fathomit round, and join their hands again: whileits length was twenty-seven feet, with adouble spiral at its basis. And the numberof all the pillars in that court was a hundredand sixty-two. Their chapiters were adornedwith sculptures, after the Corinthian order;and caused an amazement to the spectators,by reason of the grandeur of the whole.These four rows of pillars included three


intervals for walking in the middle of thiscloister. Two of which walks were madeparallel to each other, and were contrivedafter the same manner: the breadth of eachof them was thirty feet; the length was atfurlong; and the height fifty feet. ' But thebreadth of the middle part of the cloisterwas one and a half of the breadth of theother; and the height was double; for it wasmuch higher than those on each side. Butthe roofs were adorned with deep sculpturesin wood; representing many sorts of figures.The middle was much higher than the rest;and the wall of the front was adorned withbeams, resting upon pillars, that were inter­woven into it; and that front was all of po­lished stone; insomuch that its fineness, tosuch as had not seen it, was incredible; andsuch as had seen it, was greatly amazing.Thus was the first inclosure. In the midst ofwhich, and not far from it, was the second;to be gone up to by a few steps. This wasencompassed by a stone wall, for a partition;with an inscription, which forbade any fo­reigner to go in under pain of death. Nowthis inner inclosure had on its southern andnorthern quarters three gates, equidistantfrom each other. But on the east quarter,towards the sun-rising, there was one largegate: through which such as were pure camein together with their wives. But the templefarther inward in that gate was not allowedto the women. But still more inward wasthere a third court of the temple; whereintoit was not lawful for any but the priests aloneto enter. The temple itself was within this:and before that temple was the altar; uponwhich we offer our sacrifices and burnt-offer­ings to God. IntoJ none of these three didHerod enter: for he was forbidden; becausehe was not a priest. However, he took careof the cloisters, and the outer inclosures; andthese he built in eight years.
But the temple itself was built by thepriests in a year and six months. Upon whichall the people were full of joy: and presentlythey returned thanks, in the first place to God,


* The number of these gates is wanting.
t Four hundred cubits, each cubit about twenty-oneinches.
{ Into none of these three did king Herod enter, i. e.1. Not into the court of the priests: 2. Nor into the holyhouse itself: 3. Nor into the separate place belonging to
voL. I.—NOS. 47 & 48.
the altar; as the words following imply. For none butthe priests, or their attendants the Levites, might comeinto any of them. See XVI. 4. Where Herod goes intothe temple, and makes a speech in it to the people. Butthat could only be into the court of Israel; whither thepeople could come to hear him.
4T







OCR Output








256 [book VII ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


belied his master; but said to him, that as hehad before granted all his estate to Ziba,because he did not come along with him; sohe now promised to forgive him, and orderedthat the one half of his estate should be re­stored to him. Whereupon Mephiboshethsaid, "Nay, let Ziba take all; it suffices methat thou hast recovered thy kingdom."*
But David desired Barzillai, the Gileadite,that great and good man, and one that hadmade a plentiful provision for him at Maha-naim, and had conducted him as far as Jor­dan, to accompany him to Jerusalem; for hepromised that he would treat him in his oldage with all manner of respect, and wouldtake care of and provide for him. But Bar­zillai was so desirous to live at home, that heintreated him to excuse him from attendanceon him; and said, "that his age was too greatto enjoy the pleasures of a court, since he wasfourscore years old, and was making provi­sion for his death and burial. So he desiredhim to gratify him with this request, and dis­miss him, for that he had no relish of hismeat or his drink, by reason of his age: andthat his ears were too much shut up to hearthe melody of musical instruments, such as allthose that live with kings delight in." Whenhe intreated for this so earnestly, the kingsaid, "I dismiss thee, but thou shalt grant methy son Chimham; and upon him will I be­stow' all sorts of good things." So Barzillaileft his son with him, and worshipped theking, and wished him a prosperous conclusionof all his affairs according to his own mind,and then returned home. But David cameto Gilgal; having about him half the people, of Israel, and the whole tribe of Judah.
Now the principal men of the country cameto Gilgal to David, with a great multitude,and complained of the tribe of Judah; thatthey had come to him in a private manner;whereas they ought all conjointly, and with


one and the same intention to have givenhim the meeting. But the rulers of the tribeof Judah desired them not, to be displeased,if they had been prevented by them:—"For,"said they, "we are David's kinsmen; and onthat account, we the rather took care of him,and loved him, and so came first to him; yethave we not by our early coming, receivedany gifts from him; which might give you, whocame last, any uneasiness." When the rulersof the tribe of Judah had said this, the rulersof the other tribes were not satisfied, but saidfarther, "O brethren! we cannot but wonderat you, when you call the king your kinsmanalone; whereas he that hath received fromGod the power over all of us in common,ought to be esteemed a kinsman to us all;for which reason the whole people haveelevent parts in him, and you but one part.We also are elder than you.J Wherefore youhave not done justly in coming to the king inthis private and concealed manner."
While the rulers were thus disputing, acertain wicked man, named Sheba, the son ofBichri, of the tribe of Benjamin, stood in themidst of the multitude, and cried aloud, "Wehave no part in David, nor inheritance in theson of Jesse." And when he had used thesewords, he blew a trumpet, and declared waragainst the king. And they all left David,except the tribe of Judah,|| who staid withhim, and settled him in his royal palace atJerusalem. But as for his concubines, withwhom his son Absalom had accompanied, heremoved them to another house, and orderedthose that had the care of them to make aplentiful provision for them; but he came notnear them any more. He also appointedAmasa for the captain of his forces, and gavehim the same high office which Joab beforehad; and he commanded him to gather to­gether, out of the tribe of Judah, as great anarmy as he could, and to come to him within


as he did before; but only forgives him, if he had beenat all guilty. Nor is this odd way of mourning that Me­phibosheth made use of here, and 2 Sam. six. 24. whollyfree from suspicion and hypocrisy. If Ziba neglected orrefused to bring Mephibosheth an ass of his own, onwhich he might ride to David, it is hard to suppose thatso great a man as he was should not be able to procuresome other beast for the same purpose.
* 2 Sam. xix. 30.
t I clearly prefer Josephus's reading here, when itsupposes eleven tribes, including Benjamin, to be on one
side: and the tribe of Judah alone on the other: sinceBenjamin in general had been still fonder of the house ofSaul, and less firm to David hitherto than any of therest; and so cannot be supposed to be joined with Judahat this time to make it double, especially when the fol­lowing rebellion was headed by a Benjamite. See 2 Sam.xx. 2—4.
J Reubel, Simeon, and Levi, were elder than JudahGen. xxix. 32—35.
|| 2 Sam. xx. 2.







OCR Output








400 [book XI, ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


of the temple where the elders also werepresent, but were uneasy because of thecold; Esdras stood up, and told them, theyhad sinned, in marrying wives that were notof their own nation. But that now theywould do a thing both pleasing to God andadvantageous to themselves, if they wouldput those wives away. Accordingly they allcried out that they would do so: that how­ever the multitude was great, and the seasonof the year was winter, and this work wouldrequire more than one or two days. "Lettheir rulers therefore," said they, "and thosethat have married strange wives, come hitherat a proper time while the elders of everyplace, that are in common to estimate thenumber of those that have thus married, areto be there also.* Accordingly this was re­solved on. And they began the inquiry afterthose that had married strange wives, on thefirst day of the tenth month; and continuedthe inquiry till the first day of the next month;and found a great many of the posterity ofJeshua the high-priest, and of the priests andLevites, and Israelites, who had fa greaterregard to the observance of the law, than totheir natural affection: and immediately cast,out their wives, and the children which wereborn of them. And in order to appease God,they offered sacrifices and slew rams, as ob­lations to him. But it does not seem neces­sary to set down the names of these men.So when Esdras had reformed this sin,about the marriages of the aforementionedpersons, he reduced that practice to purity;so that it continued in that state for the timeto come.
Now when they kept Jthe feast of taber­nacles in the seventh month, and almost allthe people were come together to it, theywent up to the open part of* the temple, tothe gate that looked eastward, and desired of


Esdras that the laws of Moses might be readto them. Accordingly he stood in the midst ofthe multitude, and read them from the morn­ing to noon. Now by hearing the laws readto them, they were instructed to be righteousmen for the present and for the future. Butas for their past offences, they were dis­pleased at themselves, and proceeded toshed tears on their account; as consideringwith themselves, that if they had kept thelaw, they had endured none of those miserieswhich they had experienced. But when Es­dras saw them in this disposition, he badethem go home, and not weep; for that it wasa festival, and that they ought not to weepthereon; for that it was not lawful so to do.|jHe exhorted them rather to proceed imme­diately to feasting, and to do what was agree­able to a day of joy, but let their repentanceand sorrow for their former sins be a security,and a guard to them, that they fall no moreinto the like offences. So upon Esdras's ex­hortation, they began to feast; and when theyhad so done for eight days in the tabernacles,they departed to their own homes: singinghymns to God, and returning thanks to Es­dras, for his reformation of what corruptionshad been introduced into their settlement.So it came to pass, that after he had ob­tained this reputation among the people, hedied an old man; and was buried in a mag­nificent manner at Jerusalem. About thesame time it happened also, that Joacim, thehigh-priest died; and his son Eliasib suc­ceeded to the high-priesthood.
Now§ there was one of those Jews that hadbeen carried captive, who was cup-bearer toking Xerxes. His name was Nehemiah. Asthis man was walking before Susa, the metro­polis of the Persians, he heard some strangersthat were entering the city, after a long jour­ney, speaking to one another in the Hebrew


* Ezra*. 13, 14.
t This procedure of Ezra, and of the best part of theJewish nation, after the return from the Babylonish Cap­tivity, of reducing the Jewish marriages, one for all, tothe strictness of the law of Moses; without any regard tothe greatness of those who had broken it; and withoutregard to that natural affection or compassion for theirheathen wires, and their children by them, which madeit so hard for Ezra to correct them; deserves greatly tobe observed among Christians. The contrary conducthaving ever been the bane of true religion, both amongJews and Christians; while political views, human pas­sions, or prudential motives, are suffered to take place,
instead of the divine laws; and the blessing of God isforfeited, and the,church suffered to continue corrupt,from one generation to another.
J This Jewish feast of tabernacles was imitated in seve­ral heathen solemnities: as Spanheim here observes, andproves. He also farther observes presently, what greatregard many heathens had to the monuments of theirforefathers, as Nehemiah had here.
II This rule of Ezra's, not to fast on a festival day, isquoted in the Apostolical Constitutions, as obtainingamong Christians also, V. 20.
§ An. 462







OCR Output








an. 1076.] 241 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


should remember this accident, and not comenear the enemy's wall; for that the best me­thod of making war with success, was to callto mind the accidents of former wars; andwhat good or bad success had attended themin the like dangerous cases; that so they mightimitate the one and avoid the other." Butwhen the king was in this disposition, themessenger told him that Uriah was slain also;whereupon he was pacified. So he bade themessenger go back to Joab, and tell him thatthis misfortune was no other than what wascommon among mankind; and that such wasthe nature, and such the accidents of war,that sometimes the enemy would have suc­cess therein, and sometimes others: but heordered him to go on still in his care aboutthe siege, that no ill accident might befallhim in it hereafter; that they should raisebulwarks, and use machines in besieging thecity: and when they had got it to overturnits very foundation, and to destroy all the in-


habitants. Accordingly the messenger car­ried the king's message with which he wascharged, and made haste to Joab. Bath­sheba, the wife of Uriah, when she was in­formed of the death of her husband, mournedfor him many days. But when her mourning*was over, and the tears which she shed lorUriah were dried up, the king took her towife, and a son was born to him by her.
With this marriage God was not wellpleased;f but was angry at David. And heappeared to Nathan the prophet in his sleep,and complained of the king. Now Nathan.!was a prudent man; and considering thatkings when they fall into a passion, are guidedmore by that passion than by justice, he re­solved to conceal the threatenings that pro­ceeded from God, and made a good-natureddiscourse to him; and this after the followingmanner,|| desiring that the king would givehim his opinion in the following case:§—"There were," said he, "two men, inhabiting


* How long widows were to mourn for their husbands,there is no express precept in the law; but the usual timefor common mourners was no more than seven days; andwe cannot suppose that Bathsheba was much longer, con­sidering the reason we have to apply to her the words ofLucan:
Lachrymas non sponte cadentes
Kffudit, geinitusque expressit pectore laeto. B.
t According to the Jewish doctors, it was utterly un­lawful for any to marry another man's wife in case he haddelilcd her before. The canonical law declares suchmarriages null and void, as are contracted between anadulterous man, and a woman that was partner with himin the crime; and though the law of Moses does not ex­pressly forbid them, yet we may not thence infer thatthey were permitted among the Jews. For these rea­sons, some have thought, that this marriage of David andBathsheba was null and invalid; but others, upon bettergrounds, have supposed, that though there were many cri­minal circumstances attending it, yet these did not vacateits effect, and, in short, though it ought not to have beendone, yet, being done, the marriage was good, and thechildren, which were afterwards born, were legitimate:CalmeCs and Patrick's Commentaries. B.
| We learn little more of this great man in the sacredwritings, but that he was David's prophet, intimate coun­sellor, and historiographer. Josephus says of him, thathe was a polite and a prudent man, one who knew how totemper the severity of wisdom with sweetness of man­ners. And Grotius compares him to Manius Lepidus, ofwhom Tacitus says, that he had a talent of turning awayTiberus's mind from those cruel purposes, to which thevile flattery of others inclined him, and was, at the sametime, in equal favour and authority with him. Nathancertainly knew the art of reproving kings with authority,and yet without giving offence. So far from that, he grewin his prince's favour and estimation, as long as he lived;
insomuch, that David (as tradition tells us) called one sonafter his name, and committed another (even his belovedSolomon) to his care and tuition; The History of the Lifeof King David, vol. iii. B.
|| 2 Sam. xii. 1—15.
§ There is a passage of Seneca, (Epist. 59.) where hetreats of the style fit for philosophic writing, which suitsso well with this parable of Nathan's, that I choose to giveit in his own words, as a fit preamble to the short commentwhich follows of it. "Invenio, inquit, imagines, quibus siquis nobis uti vetat, et poetis illas, solis judicat esse con-cessas neminem mihi videtur ex antiquis legisse apnd quosnondum captabatur plausibilis oratio. Illi, qui simpliciter,et demonstrandsB rei causa loquebantur, parabolis referttsunt, quas existimo necessarias non ex eadem causa quapoetis, sed ut imbecillitatis nostra; adminicula sint, et utdiscentem et audientem in rem prassentem addueant:" Forparables, like histories, wherein we have no concern, areheard with more attention, and are so contrived as to giveno offence, even though they provoke the man to whom-they are addressed to condemn himself. "There weretwo men in one city, the one rich, and the other poor:And the rich man had exceeding many flocks and herds;"as David had many wives and concubines, with whom hemight have been well satisfied, without violating anotherman's bed; "but the poor had nothing, save one little ewelamb, which he had bought and nourished up." Bath­sheba, very likely, was the only wife that Uriah had, withwhom he was highly pleased and delighted, and she veryprobably with him, till David's temptations had pervertedher mind. "And it grew up together with him, and withhis children; it did eat of his own meat, and drank of hisown cup, and lay in his bosom, and was unto him as adaughter." Nathan, in his resemblance, cannot be saidto have surpassed the truth, considering how fond manypersons were anciently, not only of lambs, but of severalother creatures, which they suffered to eat with them attheir tables, and lie with them in their beds; and Uiut







OCR Output








AN. 166.] 443 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


own children, had frequently conquered manythousands. By this speech he induced hismen to contemn the multitude of the enemy,and to tall upon Seron. And upon joiningbattle with him, he defeated the Syrians; andwhen their general fell among the rest, theyall ran away with speed; as thinking that tobe their best way of escaping. So he pur­sued them into the plain, and slew abouteight hundred of the enemy; but the rest es­caped to the region which lay near to the sea.
When king Antiochus heard of these things,he was very angry at what had happened.So he assembled all his own army;* withmany mercenaries whom he had hired fromthe islands, and took them with him, andprepared to break into Judea, about the be­ginning of the spring. But upon musteringhis soldiers, he perceived that his treasureswere deficient, and there was a want ofmoney in them; for all the taxes were notpaid, by reason of the seditions there hadbeen among the nations; he having been somagnanimous and so liberal, that what hehad was not sufficient for him. He there­fore resolved first to go into Persia, and col­lect the taxes of that country. Hereupon heleft one Lysias, who was in great repute withhim, governor of the kingdom; as far as thebounds of Egypt, and of the lower Asia, andreaching from the river Euphrates; and com­mitted to him a certain part of his forces,and of his elephants; and charged him tobring up his son Antiochus with all possiblecare, until he came back; and that he shouldconquer Judea, and take its inhabitants forslaves, and utterly destroy Jerusalem, andabolish the whole nation. And when kingAntiochus had given these things in chargeto Lysias, he went into Persia, and in thehundred and forty-seventh year he passedover Euphrates, and went up to the superiorprovinces.
Upon this Lysias chose Ptolemy, the sonof Dorymenes, and Nicanor, and Gorgias,very potent men among the king's friends;and delivered to them forty thousand footsoldiers, and seven thousand horsemen; andsent them against Judea. Accordingly, theycame as far as the city Emmaus, and pitchedtheir camp in the plain country. There


came also to them auxiliaries out of Syria,and the country round about; as also manyof the runagate Jews. And besides thesecame some merchants, to buy those thatshould be carried captives; (having bondswith them, to bind those that should be madeprisoners;) with that silver and gold whichthey were to pay for their price. And whenJudas saw their camp, and how numerous theirenemies were, he persuaded his own soldiersto be of good courage; and exhorted them toplace their hopes of victory in God; and tomake supplication to him, according to thecustom of their country, clothed in sackcloth;and to shew what was their usual habit ofsupplication in the greatest dangers; andthereby to prevail with God to grant themthe victory over their enemies. So he setthem in the ancient order of battle used bytheir forefathers; under their captains ofthousands, and other officers; and dismissedsuch as were newly married, as well as thosethat had newly gained possessions; that theymight not fight in a cowardly manner, out ofan inordinate love of life, in order to enjoythose blessings. When he had thus disposedhis soldiers, he encouraged them to fight bythe following speech: "O my fellow-soldiers,no other time remains more opportune thanthe present for courage and contempt ofdanger; for if you fight manfully, you mayrecover your liberty, which, as it is a thingof itself agreeable to all men, so it proves tobe to us much more desirable, by its affordingus the liberty of worshipping God. You arein such circumstances at present, that youmust either recover that liberty, and so re­gain a happy and blessed way of living, whichis according to our laws, and the customs ofour country; or submit to the most oppro­brious sufferings; nor will any seed of yournation remain, if you be beaten in this battle.Fight therefore manfully, and suppose thatyou must die though you do not fight. But be­lieve, that besides such glorious rewards asthose of the liberty of your country, of yourlaws, and of your religion, you shall obtaineverlasting glory. Prepare yourselves there­fore, and put yourselves into such a posture,that you be ready to fight with the enemy, assoon as it is day to-morrow morning.'t


* 1 Mace. iii. 27.voL. I.—NOS. 37 & 38.
t 1 Mace. iii. 58.4C







OCR Output








282 [book vra. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


also made aD. its vessel* of brass; the pots,and the shovels, and the basoiis, and besidesthese the snuffers, and the tongs; and all itsother vessels he made of such brass as wasin splendor and beauty like gold. The kingalso dedicated a * great number of tables;but one was large and made of gold; uponwhich they set the loaves of God, and hemade ten thousand more that resembledthem, but were done after another manner;upon which lay the vials, and the cups; thoseof gold were twenty thousand, those of silverwere forty thousand. He also made ten thou­sand candlesticks, according to the commandof Moses; one of which he dedicated for thetemple, that it might burn in the day-time,according to the law, and one table withloaves upon it, on the north side of the tem­ple, over against the candlestick: for this heset on the south side; but the golden altarstood between them. All these vessels werecontained in that part of the holy house whichwas forty cubits long; and were before theveil of that most secret place, wherein theark was to be set .
The king also made eighty thousand pour­ing vessels, and a hundred thousand goldenvials, and twice as many silver vials. Ofgolden dishes, to offer kneaded fine flour atthe altar, there were eighty thousand, andtwice as many silver. Of large basons also,wherein they mixed fine flour with oil, sixtythousand of gold, and twice as many of silver.Of the measures like those which Mosescalled the hin, and the assaron,t there weretwenty thousand of gold, and twice as manyof silver. The other censers, in which theycarried fire from the great altar, to the littleone within the temple, were fifty thousand.The sacerdotal garments, which belonged tothe high-priest, with the long robes, theoracle, and the precious stones, were a thou­sand. But the crown, upon which Moseswrote the name of God, was only one; andhath remained to this day 4 He also madeten thousand sacerdotal garments of fine


linen, with purple girdles, for every priest:and two hundred thousand trumpets, ac­cording to the command of Moses. Alsotwo hundred thousand garments of tine linenfor the singers, that were Levites. And hemade musical instruments, and such as wereinvented for singing of hymns, called IN a bisand Cinyrae, (psalteries and harps,) which,were made ot electrum, (the finest brass,)forty thousand.
Solomon made all these things for thehonour of God, with great variety and mag­nificence; sparing no cost, but using all pos­sible liberality in adorning the temple: andthese things he dedicated to the treasure oiGod. He also placed a partition round aboutthe temple, winch in our own tongue we callGison; but it is called epiyxos by the Greeks:and he raised it up to the height of threecubits; and it was for the exclusion of themultitude from coming into the temple, andshewing that it was a place that was free andopen only for the priests. || He also builtbeyond this court a temple, whose figurewas that of a quadrangle, and erected for itgreat and broad cloisters: this was enteredby very high gates; each of which had itsfront exposed to one of the four winds, andwere shut by golden doors. Into this templeall the people entered that were distinguishedfrom the rest by being pure, and observant ofthe laws. But he made that temple whichwas beyond this a wonderful one indeed;and such as exceeds all description inwords: nay, if I may so say, is hardly be­lieved upon sight. For when he had filledup great valleys with earth, which on ac­count of their immense depth could not belooked on, when you bended down to seethem, without pain; and had elevated theground four hundred cubits, he made it tobe on a level with the top of the mountain,on which the temple was built: and by thismeans the outermost temple, which was ex­posed to the air, was §even with the templeitself. He encompassed this also with a


* Of these prodigious and extravagant numbers, seethe description of the temple, chap. 13.
t A tenth deal.
{ Of the golden plate on the high-priest's forehead thatwas in being in the days of Josephus, and a century ortwo at least later. See the note on III. 7.
U When Josephus here speaks of the court of the
priests, as inclosed, and kept distinct from the rest of thetemple, he does not mean to exclude the Levites, theirbrethren; who all ministered to the priests in that court,and ordinarily not elsewhere.
§ When Josephus here says, that the floor of the outer­most temple, or court of the Gentiles, was with vast labourraised to be even, or of equal height with the floor of the







OCR Output








AN. 1158. J 175 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


When Sampson had slain many of the Phi­listines, in the plain country, he dwelt atEtam; which is a strong rock of the tribe ofJudah. For the Philistines at that time madean expedition against that tribe. But thepeople of Judah said, they did not act justlywith them, in inflicting punishments uponthem, while they paid their tribute; and thisonly on account of Sampson's offences. Theyanswered, that in case they would not beblamed themselves, they must deliver upSampson, and put him into their power. Sothey, being desirous to exculpate themselves,came to the rock with three thousand armedmen, and complained to Sampson of the boldinsults he had made upon the Philistines; whowere men able to bring calamity upon thewhole nation of the Hebrews; and they toldhim, they were come to take him, and to de­liver him up to them, and put him into theirpower. So they desired him to bear thiswillingly. Accordingly when he had receivedassurance from them upon oath, that theywould do him no other harm than only to de­liver him into the enemy's hands, he camedown from the rock, and put himself into thepower of his countrymen. Then did theybind him with two cords, and lead him on,in order to deliver him to the Philistines, andwhen they came to a certain place, which isnow called the Jaw Bone, on account of thegreat action there performed by Sampson;though of old it had no particular name; thePhilistines, who had pitched their camp not


far off, came to meet them with joy andshouting; as having done a great thing, andgained what they desired. But Sampsonbrake his bonds asunder, and catching up thejaw bone of an ass, that lay at his feet, he fellupon his enemies, and smiting them with hisjaw bone slew a thousand of them;* and putthe rest to flight in great disorder, f
Upon this slaughter, Sampson was tooproud of what he had performed, and saidthat this did not come to pass by the assist­ance of God, but that his success was to beascribed to his own courage, and vauntedhimself, that it was out of dread of him thatsome of his enemies fell, and the rest ranaway, upon his use of the jaw bone. Butwhen a great thirst came upon him, he con­sidered that human courage is nothing, andbare his testimony that all is to be ascribedto God; and besought him, that he would notbe angry at any thing he had said, nor givehim up into the hands of his enemies; butafford him help under his affliction, and de­liver him from the misfortunes he was under.Accordingly God was moved with his in-treaties, and raised him up a plentiful foun­tain of sweet water, at a certain rock. Whenceit was that Sampson called the placeJ theJaw Bone, and so it is called to this day.
After this fight Sampson held the Philis­tines in contempt, and came to Gaza, andtook up his lodging in a certain inn. Whenthe rulers of Gaza were informed of his com­ing thither, they seized upon the gates, and


* Judg. xv. 15.
t Setting aside the various interpretations which havebeen given of this expression, the Editor of Calmet'sDictionary proposes to illustrate it by the following ex­tract: "It appears probable from the following circum­stances, that the exercise of wrestling, as it is now per­formed by the Turks, is the very same that was ancientlyused in the Olympic games. For, besides the previouscovering of the palaestra with sand, that the combatantsmight fall with more safety, they have their pellowanbashee, or master wrestler; who, like the ayuvoderiis ofold, is to observe and superintend the jura palaestra, andto be the umpire in all disputes. The combatants, afterthey are anointed all over with oil, to render their nakedbodies the more slippery, and less easily to be taken holdof, first of all look one another stedfastly in the face, asDiomede or Ulysses does the palladium upon antiquegems. They then ran up to, and retire from, each otherseveral times, using all the while a variety of antic andother postures, such as are commonly used in the courseof the ensuing conflict: after this prelude they drawnearer together, and challenge each other, by clapping thepalms of their hands, first upon their own knees or thighs,
then upon each other, and afterwards upon the palms oftheir respective antagonists. The challenge being thusgiven, they immediately close in and struggle with eachother, striving with all their strength, art, and dexterity,(which are often very extraordinary,) which shall give hisantagonist a fall, and become the conqueror. Durtngthese contests I have often seen their arms, legs, andthighs, so twisted and linked together, that they have bothfallen together, and left the victory dubious, too difficultsometimes for the pellowan bashee to decide." Shaw'sTrav. p. 217.
Do not these well deserve the description of leg andthigh men, or shoulder and thigh men? The name seemsto be taken from their very attitudes, and correctly to ex­press them. If this idea be admitted, it cannot be difficultto understand the above cited expression. B.
J This fountain, called Leti, or the Jaw Bone, is still inbeing, as travellers assure us; and was known by this veryname in the days of Josephus; and hath been known bythe same name in all past ages. See Antiq. VII. 12. theAnnals of Glycas, and the itinerary of Antoninus; apReland, Palestin. torn. II. p. 752.







OCR Output








ax. 168.] 439 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


the finest buildings: and when he had over­thrown the city walls, he built *a citadel inthe lower part of the city, for the place washigh, and overlooked the temple. On whichaccount he fortified it with high walls andtowers, and put into it a garrison of Mace­donians. However, in that citadel dweltthe impious and wicked part of the Jewishmultitude: from whom it proved that thecitizens suffered many and sore calamities.And when the king had built an idol altarupon God's altar, he slew swine upon it, andso offered a sacrifice neither according tothe law, nor the Jewish religious worship inthat country. He also compelled them toforsake the worship which they paid theirown God, and to adore those whom he tookto be gods, and made them build temples,and raise idol altars in every city and vil­lage, and offer swine upon them every day.He also commanded them not to circumcisetheir sons; and threatened to punish anythat should be found to have transgressedhis injunction. He also appointed overseers,who should compel them to do what he com­manded. And indeed many Jews there werewho complied with the king's commands, ei­ther voluntarily or out of fear of the penaltythat was denounced. But the best men, andthose of the noblest spirits, did not regardhim; but continued to pay a greater respectto the customs of their country, than concernas to the punishment which he threatened tothe disobedient. On this account they everyday underwent great miseries and bitter tor­ments: for they were whipped with rods, andtheir bodies were torn to pieces, and werecrucified, while they were still alive. Theyalso strangled those women and their sonswhom they had circumcised, as the king hadappointed; hanging their sons about theirnecks as they were upon the crosses. Andif there were any sacred book or law found,it was destroyed; and those with whom theywere found miserably perished also.


When the Samaritans saw the Jews underthese sufferings, they no longer confessedthat they were of their kindred; nor thatthe temple on mount Gerizzim belonged toAlmighty God. But they now said, that theywere a colony of Medes and Persians. Andindeed they were a colony of theirs. Sothey sent ambassadors to Antiochus, and anepistle; whose contents are these:—
"To king Antiochus Epiphanes, the god:a memorial from the Sidonians, who live atShechem. Our forefathers, upon certain fre­quent tplagues, and as following a certainancient superstition, had a custom of observ­ing:): that day which by the Jews is called theSabbath. And when they had erected a tem­ple at the mountain called Gerizzim, thoughwithout a name, they offered upon it the pro­per sacrifices. Now upon the just treatmentof these wicked Jews; those that managethy affairs, supposing that we were of kin tothem, and practised as they do, make usliable to the same accusations, although webe originally Sidonians, as is evident fromthe public records. We therefore beseechthee, our benefactor and saviour, to give or­der to Apollonius, the governor of this partof the country, and Nicanor, the procuratorof thy affairs, to give us no disturbance, norto lay to our charge what the Jews are ac­cused for, since we are aliens from theirnation, and from their customs; but let ourtemple, which at present hath no name at all,be named the Temple of Jupiter Hellenius.If this were once done, we should be no longerdisturbed; but should be more intent on ouroccupations with quietness; and so bring ina greater revenue to thee."
When the Samaritans had petitioned forthis, the king sent them back the followinganswer in an epistle:—
"King Antiochus to Nicanor. The Sido­nians, who live at Shechem, have sent methe memorial enclosed. When therefore wewere advising with our friends about it, the


* This citadel, of which we have such frequent men­tion in the following history, both in the Maccabees, andin Josephus, seems to have been a castle built on a hill,lower than mount Sion, though upon its skirts, andhigher than mount Moriah, but between them both:which hill the enemies of the Jews now got possession of,and built on it this citadel, and fortified it; till a goodwhile afterward, the Jews regained it, demolished it, andlevelled the hill itself with the common ground, that their
enemies might no more recover it, and thence mightoverlook the temple, and do them such mischief m theyhad long undergone from it, XIII. 6.
t See the note in Book IX. chap. XIV.
\ This allegation of the Samaritans is remarkable; thatthough they were not Jews, yet did they, from ancienttimes, observe the Sabbath day; and, as they elsewherepretend, the Sabbatic year also. XI. 8.







OCR Output








70 . [book ft. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


to God against them, since they had alreadybeen permitted to go out . And they thoughtthey should easily overcome them, as theyhad no armour, and would be weary withtheir journey. So they made haste in theirpursuit, and enquired of every one they met,which way they were gone? And indeedthat land was difficult to be travelled over,not only by armies, but single persons. NowMoses led the Hebrews this way, that in casethe Egyptians should repent, and be desirousto pursue after them, they might undergo the
Eunishment of their wickedness, and of thereach of those promises they had made tothem: he also chose this route on account ofthe Philistines, who had quarrelled withthem, and hated them of old; that by allmeans they might not know of their depar­ture, for their country is near that of Egypt:and thence it was that Moses led them notalong the road that tended to the land of thePhilistines, but he was desirous that theyshould go through the desert; and so, after along journey, and after many afflictions, theymight enter upon the land of Canaan. Ano­ther reason was, that God had commandedhim to bring the people to mount Sinai; thatthere they might offer him sacrifices.
Now, when the Egyptians had overtakenthe Hebrews, they prepared to fight them,and by their multitude they drove them intoa narrow place: for the number that pursuedafter them was six hundred chariots, withfifty thousand horsemen, and two hundredthousand footmen, all armed. They alsoseized on the passages, by which they ima­gined the Hebrews might fly, shutting them*up between inaccessible mountains and the


sea, for there was on each side a ridge ofmountains that terminated at the sea, whichwas impassable by reason of their roughness,and obstructed their flight; wherefore theythere pressed upon the Hebrews, with theirarmy, where the ridges of the mountains wereclose with the sea, which army they placedat the defiles of the mountains, that so theymight deprive them of any passage into theplain.
When the Hebrews, therefore, were neitherable to bear up, being thus, as it were, be­sieged, because they wanted provisions, norsaw any possible way of escaping; and i!they should have thought of fighting, theyhad no weapons; they expected an universaldestruction, unless they delivered themselvesup voluntarily to the Egyptians: so they laidthe blame on Moses, and f forgot all the signsthat had been wrought by God for the reco­very of their freedom, and this so far, thattheir incredulity prompted them to throwstones at the prophet, while he encouragedthem, and promised them deliverance, andthey resolved that they would deliver them­selves up to the Egyptians; so there was sor­row and lamentation among the women andchildren, who had nothing but destructionbefore their eyes, while they were encom­passed with mountains, the sea, and the ene­mies, and discerned no way of flying fromthem.
But Moses, though the multitude lookedfiercely at him, did not relinquish the care otthem, but despised all dangers, out of histrust in God, who, as he had afforded themthe several steps already taken for the reco­very of their liberty, which he had foretold,


* Take the main part of Reland's excellent note here,which greatly illustrates Josephus and the Scriptures inthis history, with the small map thereunto belonging, asfollows:—" A traveller," says Reland, " whose name wasEneman, when he returned out of Egypt, told me, that hewent the same way from Egypt to mount Sinai, which hesupposed the Israelites of old travelled, and that he foundseveral mountainous tracts that ran down towards the RedSea, as he delineated them to me. See A, B, C. Hethought the Israelites had proceeded as far as the desert ofEtham, (see Exod. xiii. 20.) when they were commandedby God to return back, (see Exod. xiv. 2.) and to pitchtheir camp between Migdol and the sea; and that when-they were not able to fly, unless by sea, they were in theplace here denoted by the letter B, where they were shutin on each side by mountains, and that on the part wherestands D was the army of Pharaoh. He also thought we
might evidently learn hence how it might be said that theIsraelites were in Etham before they crossed the sea, andyet might be said to have come into Etham, after they hadpassed over the sea. Besides, he gave me an account howhe passed over the river in a boat near the city Suez,which he said must needs be the Heroopolis of the an­cients, since that city could not be situated any where elsein that neighbourhood."
As to the famous passage produced here by Dr. Ber­nard, out of Herodotus, as the most ancient heathen tes­timony of the Israelites coming from the Red Sea intoPalestine, Bishop Cumberland has shewn that it belongs tothe old Canaanite, or Phoenician shepherds, and their re­tiring out of Egypt into Canaan, or Phoenicia, long beforethe days of Moses.
t Exod. xiv. 11.







OCR Output








210 [BOOK Yt. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


him, either sword or spear? Now there wasat Nob a servant of Saul's, by birth a* Syrian,whose name was Doeg; one that kept theking's mules. The high-priest said, that hehad no such weapon: but he added, "Hereis the sword of Goliath, which, when thouhadst slain the Philistine, thou didstf dedi­cate to God."
When David had received the sword, hefled out of the country of the Hebrews, intothat of the Philistines, over which Achishreigned. And when the king's servants knewhim, and he was made known to the kinghimself, the servants informing him that hewas that David, who had killed many tenthousands of the Philistines, David was afraidlest the king should put him to death, andthat he should experience that danger fromhim which he had escaped from Saul, so hepretended to be distracted and mad; lettinghis spittle run out of his mouth, and doingother actions before the king of Gath, whichmight make him believe that they proceededfrom such a distemper. Accordingly, theking was very angry at his servants that theyhad brought him a madman;J and gave orderthat they should eject David immediately outof the city.
When David had escaped in this mannerout of Gath, he came to the tribe of Judah,and abode in a cave, by the city of Adullam.Then it was that he sent to his brethren, andinformed them where he was, who then cameto him with all their kindred, and as manyothers as were either in want, or in fear ofking Saul, came and made a body together,and told him they were ready to obey hisorders. They were in all four hundred.Whereupon he took courage, now such aforce and assistance was come to him. So heremoved hence, and came to the king of theMoabites, and desired him to entertain hisparents in his country, while the issue of hisaffairs were in such an uncertain condition.The king granted him his favour, and payedgreat respect to David's parents, all the timethey were with him.
As for himself,|| upon the prophet's com­manding him to leave the desert, and go intothe portion of the tribe of Judah, and abide


* Edomite in the Hebrew, Syrian in the Septuagint.t Antiq. vi. 9.| 1 Sam. xvi. 15.


there, he complied: and coming to the cityHareth, which was in that tribe, he remainedthere. Now when Saul heard that David hadbeen seen with a multitude about him, he fellinto no small disturbance and trouble. Butas he knew, that David was a bold and cou­rageous man, he suspected that somewhat ex­traordinary would appear from him, and thatopenly also, which would make him weep,and put him into distress. So he called toge­ther his friends and his commanders, and thetribe from which he was himself derived, tothe hill where his palace was, and sitting upona place called Aroura, his courtiers that werein dignities, and the guards of his body beingwith him, he spake thus to them: "you thatare men of my own tribe, I conclude, remem­ber the benefits that I have bestowed uponyou; that I have made some of you owners ofland, and made you commanders, and be­stowed posts of honour upon you, and setsome of you over the common people, andothers over the soldiers. I ask you, there­fore, whether you expect greater donationsfrom the son of Jesse? for I know that youare all inclined towards him; even my ownson Jonathan is of that opinion, and persuadesyou to be of the same. For I am not unac­quainted with the oaths and covenants thatare between him and David; and that Jona­than is a counsellor, and an assistant to thosethat conspire against me; and none of youare concerned about these things; but youkeep silence, and watch to see what will bethe result." When the king had concludedhis speech, not one of the rest of those thatwere present made any answer; but Doegthe Syrian,§ who fed his mules, said, that hesaw David, when he came to the city Nob,to Ahimelech the high-priest; and that helearned future events by his prophesying;that he received food from him, and thesword of Goliath, and was conducted by himwith security whither he desired to go.
Saul therefore sent for the high-priest, andfor all his kindred, and said to them, "whatterrible or ungrateful thing hast thou sufferedfrom me, that thou hast received the son ofJesse, and hast bestowed on him both foodand weapons, when he was contriving to get
II About an. 1099.§ Or Edomite.







OCR Output








146 [book XII. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


CHAP. VIII.
OF THE CONTINUED SUCCESSES OF THE MACCABEES.
WHEN these things were over, the na­tions round about the Jews werevery uneasy at the revival of their power;and rose up together, and destroyed many ofthem: as gaining advantage over them bylaying snares for them, and making secretconspiracies against them.* Judas made per­petual expeditions against these men: andendeavoured to restrain them from those in­cursions, and to prevent the mischiefs theydid to the Jews. So he fell upon the Idume-ans, the posterity of Esau, at Acrabattene;and slew a great many of them; and tooktheir spoils. He also shut up the sons ofBean, that laid wait for the Jews; and he satdown about them, and besieged them; andburnt their towers, and destroyed the menthat were in them. After this he went thencein haste against the Ammonites; who had agreat and a numerous army; of which Timo-theus was the commander. And when hehad subdued them, he seized on the city Ja-zer, and took their wives and their childrencaptives, and burnt the city, and then return­ed into Judea. But when the neighbouringnations understood that he was returned, theyassembled, in great numbers, in the land ofGilead; and came against those Jews thatwere at their borders: who then fled to thegarrison of Dathema, and sent to Judas toinform him, that Timotheus was endeavour­ing to take the place whither they were fled.And as soon as these epistles were reading,there came other messengers out of Galilee,who informed him, that the inhabitants ofPtolemais, and of Tyre, and Sidon, and stran­gers of Galilee, were gotten together.
Accordingly Judas, upon considering whatwas proper to be done, with relation to thenecessity both these cases required, gave or­der, that his brother Simon should take threethousand chosen men, and go to the assist­ance of the Jews in Galilee: while he andanother of \m brothers, Jonathan, made hasteinto the land of Gilead, with eight thousandsoldiers. And he left Joseph, the son ofZacharias, and Azarias, to be over the restof the forces, and charged them to keep Ju-
* 1 Mace. v. 1, 2.


dea very carefully, and to fight no battleswith any person, until his return. According­ly Simon went into Galilee, and tought theenemy and put them to flight, and pursuedthem to the very gates of Ptolemais; andslew about three thousand of them; and tookthe spoils of those that were slain, and thoseJews whom they had made captives, withtheir baggage: and then returned home.
Now as for Judas Maccabeus, and hisbrother Jonathan, they passed over the riverJordan:f and when they had gone three days'journey, they met with the Nabateans, whocame to meet them peaceably, and told themhow the affairs of those in the land of Gileadstood; and how many of them were in distress,and driven into garrisons, and into the cities ofGalilee; and exhorted him to make haste togo against the foreigners, and to endeavourto save his own countrymen out of theirhands. Accordingly Judas returned into thewilderness: and in the first place fell uponthe inhabitants of Bosor; and took the city,and beat the inhabitants, and destroyed allthe males, and all that were able to fight;and burnt the city. Nor did he stop evenwhen night came on, but he journeyed in it tothe garrison where the Jews happened to beshut up; and where Timotheus lay round theplace with his army. And Judas came uponthe city in the morning: and when he foundthat the enemy were making an assault uponthe walls; and that some of them broughtladders, on which they might get upon thosewalls, and that others brought engines to bat­ter them; he bade the trumpeter sound histrumpet, and encouraged his soldiers to un­dergo dangers cheerfully for the sake of hisbrethren and kindred: he also parted his ar­my into three bodies, and fell upon the backsof their enemies. But when Timotheus's menperceived that it was Maccabeus that wasupon them: of whose courage and good suc­cess in war they formerly had sufficient ex­perience; they were put to flight. But Judasfollowed them with his army, and slew abouteight thousand of them. He then turnedaside to a city of the foreigners, calledMalle, and took it, and slew all the males,and burnt the city itself. He then removedfrom thence, and overthrew Casphom, and
t 1 Mace. t. 24.







OCR Output








480 [book xnr. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


pened, that one and the same Cleopatra wasmarried to two, who were brethren: as wehave *related elsewhere. But AntiochusCyzicenus coming into Syria, continued manyyears at war with his brother. Now Hyrca-nus lived all this while in peace. For afterthe death of Antiochus, he "frevolted fromthe Macedonians; nor did he any longer paythem the least regard; either as their sub­ject, or their friend: but his affairs were ina very improving and flourishing condition inthe time of Alexander Zebina, and especiallyunder these brethren. For the war whichthey had with one another gave Hyrcanusan opportunity of enjoying himself in Judeaquietly; insomuch that he got an immensequantity of money. However, when Antio­chus Cyzicenus distressed his land, he thenopenly shewed what he meant. And whenhe saw that Antiochus was destitute ofEgyptian auxiliaries, and that both he andhis brother were in an ill condition in thestruggles they had one with another; hedespised them both.
So he made an expedition against Sama­ria; which was a very strong city; of whosepresent name Sebaste, and its rebuilding byHerod, we shall speak at a proper time. Buthe made his attack against it, and besieged itwith a great deal of pains. For he was dis­pleased with the Samaritans, for the injuriesthey had done to the people of Marissa, acolony of the Jews, and confederate withthem; and this in compliance with the kingsof Syria. When he had therefore drawn aditch, and built a double wall round the city,which was eighty furlongs long, he set hissons Anligonus and Anstobulus over thesiege. This brought the Samaritans to suchgreat distress by famine, that they wereforced to eat what used not to be eaten;and to call for Antiochus Cyzicenus to helpthem. Accordingly he came to their as­sistance; but was beaten by Aristobulus:and when he was pursued as far as Scytho-polis by the two brethren, he got away. Sothey returned to Samaria, and shut themagain within the wall, till they were forced
* See chap. 7.
t Dean Prideaux takes notice at the year 133, that Jus­tin, in agreement with Josephus, says, "The power of theJews was now grown so great, that after this Antiochus,they would not have any Macedonian king over them;


to send for the same Antiochus a secondtime to help them. He then procured aboutsix thousand men from Ptolemy Lathyrus,which were sent them without his mother'sconsent, who had then in a manner turnedhim out of his government. With theseEgyptians Antiochus at first overran andravaged the country of Hyrcanus, after themanner of a robber: for he durst not meethim openly to fight with him; as not havingan army sufficient for that purpose: but onlyfrom this supposal, that by thus harassing hisland he should force Hyrcanus to raise thesiege of Samaria. But because he fell intosnares, and lost many of his soldiers therein,he went away to Tripoli, and committed theprosecution of the war against the Jews toCallimander and Epicrates.
But Callimander attacked the enemy toorashly, and was put to flight, and destroyedimmediately. And as to Epicrates, he wassuch a lover of money, that he openly be­trayed Scythopolis and other places near itto the Jews: but was not able to make themraise the siege of Samaria. And when Hyr­canus had taken that city, after a year'ssiege, he demolished it entirely; and broughtrivulets to it to drown it. For he dug suchhollows as might let the water run under it.Nay he took away the very marks that therehad ever been such a city there. Now avery surprising thing is related of this high-priest, Hyrcanus; now God came to dis­course with him. For they say that on thevery same day on which his sons fought withAntiochus Cyzicenus, he was alone in thetemple, as high-priest, offering incense, andheard a Jvoice, informing him, that his sonshad just then overcome Antiochus. And thishe openly declared before all the multitudeupon his coming out of the temple. And itaccordingly proved true.
Now it happened at this time, that notonly those Jews who were at Jerusalem andin Judea were in prosperity, but also those ofthem who were in Egypt, and Cyprus. ForCleopatra, the queen, was at variance withher son Ptolemy Lathyrus; and appointed for
and that they set up a government of their own, and in­fested Syria with great wars."
J The oracle of Urim. See the note on Book IIIchap. 8.







OCR Output








an. 1064.] 257 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


three days, that he might deliver to him hisentire army; and might send him to fightagainst Sheba, the son of Bichri. Now whileAmasa was gone out, and made some delayin gathering the army together, and so wasnot yet returned; on the third day the kingsaid to Joab,* "It is not fit we should makeany delay in this affair of Sheba, lest he geta numerous army about him, and be theoccasion of greater mischief, and hurt ouraffairs more than did Absalom himself. Donot thou, therefore, wait any longer, buttake such forces as thou hast at hand, andthat old fbody of six hundred men, andthy brother Abishai with thee; and pursueafter our enemy, and endeavour to fighthim wheresoever thou canst overtake him.Make haste to prevent him; lest he seizeupon some fenced cities, and cause us greatlabour and pains before we take him."
So Joab resolved to make no delay; buttaking with him his brother, and those sixhundred men, and giving orders that the restof the army which was at Jerusalem shouldfollow him, he marched with great speedagainst Sheba. And when he was come toGibeon, which is a village forty furlongs dis­tant from Jerusalem; Amasa brought a greatarmy with him, and met Joab. Now Joabwas girded with a sword, and had his breast­plate on; and when Amasa came near him tosalute him, he took particular care that hissword should fall out, as it were of its ownaccord. So he took it up from the ground,and while he approached Amasa, who wasthen near him, as though he would kiss him,he took hold of Amasa's beard}: with his otherhand, smote him in his belly when he did notforesee it, and slew him.|| This impious and


altogether profane action Joab§ did to a goodyoung man, and his kinsman, and one that haddone him no injury; and this out of jealousythat he would obtain the chief command ofthe army, and be equal in dignity with him­self about the king. And for the same causeit was that he killed Abner. But as to thatformer wicked action, the death of his brotherAsahel, which he seemed to revenge, affordedhim a decent pretence, and made that crimea pardonable one; but in this murder ofAmasa there was no such covering for it.Now when Joab had killed this general, hepursued after Sheba, having left the deadbody in the care of a person who was orderedto proclaim aloud to the army, that Amasawas justly slain, and deservedly punished.—"But," said he, "if you be for the king, fol­low Joab, his general; and Abishai, Joab'sbrother." But because the body lay in theroad, and all the multitude came runningto it; and, as is usual with the multitude,stood wondering a great while at it; he thatguarded it removed it thence, and carried itto a certain place that was very remote fromthe road, and there laid it, and covered itwith his garment. When this was done allthe people followed Joab. Now as he pur­sued Sheba through all the country of Israel,one told him, that he was in a strong citycalled Abel-bethmaachah. Hereupon Joabwent thither, and set about it with his army,and cast up a bank round it, arid ordered thesoldiers to undermine the walls and to over­throw them. And since the people of thecity did not admit him, he was greatly dis­pleased at them.
Now there was a woman of small account,**and yet both wise and intelligent, who seeing


* Abishai, 2 Sam. xx. 6. But I prefer Josephus'scopy.
t Cherethites and Pelethites. Heb. and Septuagint,2 Sam. xx. 7.
J It was an ancient custom among the Grecians, totake the person, to whom they had any address to make,by the dim, or beard: Antiquis Graeciae in supplicandomentem attingere moverat, says Pliny, lib. II, c. 45; andeven to this day, the Turks, in their salutations, do veryfrequently take one another by the beard, (vide Theve-not's Travels, c. 22.) The Arabians have a great regardto the beard. The wives kiss their husbands, and thechildren their father's beards, when they come to salutethem: and, when two friends meet together, their customis, in the course of their compliments., to interchangekisses in this manner, (vide Darvieus Coutumes des
Arabes, c. 7,) as the like custom is still preserved amongthe eastern people, the Indians, who take one another bythe chin, when they would give a hearty salute, and sayBobba, i. e. Father; or Bii, Brother, as the author of theVoyage to the East-Indies relates. Vide Peter de Falles'sTravels. B.
II 2 Sam. xx. 10.
§ So insolent was Joab become, upon the presumptionthat David durst not punish him, that as he venturedupon the bloody fact, so he imagined, that though thesieht of Amasa's dead body might stop the march of thosethat came by it, yet upon its being given out that he wasagain become their general, their love for him was such,that they would not scruple to follow him. Patrick'sCommentary. B.
** It seems not unlikely, that this woman was a go­







OCR Output













OCR Output








an. 462.] 401 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


tongue. So he went to them and asked them,whence they came? and when their answerwas that they came from Judea, he began toinquire of them again, in what state the mul­titude was? and in what condition Jerusalemwas? They replied, that they were in a badstate;* for that their walls were thrown downto the ground: and that the neighbouring na­tions did a great deal of mischief to the Jews;while in the day time they over-ran the coun­try, and pillaged it, arid in the night did themmischief; insomuch that not a few were ledaway captive out of the country, and out ofJerusalem itself: and that the roads were, inthe day time, found full of dead men. Here­upon Nehemiah shed tears, out of commisera­tion of the calamities of his countrymen: andlooking up to heaven, he said, "How long,O Lord, wilt thou overlook our nation, whileit suffers so great miseries; and while we aremade the prey and the spoil of all men?"And while he stayed at the gate, and la­mented thus, one told him that the king wasgoing to sit down to supper. So he madehaste, and went as he was, without washinghimself, to minister to the king in his office ofcup-bearer. But as the king was very plea­sant after supper, and more cheerful thanusual, he cast his eyes on Nehemiah, andseeing him look sad, he asked him why hewas sad? Whereupon he prayed to God togive him favour, and afford nim the power ofpersuading by his words, and said:—"Howcan I, O king, appear otherwise than thus,and not be in trouble, while I hear that thewalls of Jerusalem: the city where the sepul­chres of my fathers are, thrown down to thefround, and that its gates are consumed byre? But do thou grant me the favour to goand build its wall, and to finish the buildingsof the temple."f Accordingly the king gavehim a signal, that he freely granted him whathe asked; and told him, that he should carryan epistle to the governors, that they mightpay him due honour, and afford him what-
* This miserable condition of the Jews, and the capi­tal, must have been after the death of Ezra, their formergovernor, and before Nehemiah came with his commis­sion to build the walls of Jerusalem. Nor is that atall disagreeable to these histories in Josephus; sinceEzra came on the seventh, and Nehemiah not till thetwenty-fifth of Xerxes; at the interval of eighteenyears., t Nehemiah ii. 1—6.


ever assistance he wanted, and as he pleased."Leave off thy sorrow then," said the king,"and be cheerful in tbs performance of thyoffice hereafter." So Nehemiah worshippedGod, and gave the king thanks for his pro­mise; and cleared up his sad and cloudycountenance, by the pleasure he had fromthe king's promises. Accordingly the kingcalled for him the next day, and gave him anepistle to be carried to Adeus the governor ofSyria, and Phoenicia, and Samaria: whereinhe sent to him to pay due honour to Nehe­miah, and to supply him with what he wantedfor his building.
Now when he was come to Babylon, andhad taken with him many of his countrymen,who voluntarily followed him, he came to Je­rusalem in the twenty-fifth year of the reignof Xerxes. And when he had shewn theepistle to God,J he gave them to Adeus, andto the other governors. He also called to­gether all the people to Jerusalem, and stoodin the midst oi the temple, and made the fol­lowing speech to them. "Ye know, O Jews,that God hath kept our fathers, Abraham,and Isaac, and Jacob, in mind continually;and for the sake of their righteousness hathnot left off the care of you. Indeed he hathassisted me in granting this authority of theking to raise up our wall, and finish what iswanting of the temple. I desire you there­fore, wno well know the ill will the neigh­bouring nations bear to us, and that whenthey once are made sensible that we are inearnest about building, they will come uponus, and contrive many ways of obstructingour works, that you will, in the first place,put your trust in God, as in him that will as­sist us against their hatred; and to intermitbuilding neither night nor day; but to useall diligence, and to hasten on the work, nowwe have this especial opportunity for it."When he had said this, he gave order thatthe rulers should measure the wall, and partthe work of it among the people, according
J This shewing king Xerxes's epistles to God, orlaying them open before God in the temple, is very likethe laying open the epistles of Sennacherib, before himalso by Hezekiah, 2 Kings xix. 14. Isaiah xxxvii. 14.although this last was for a memorial, to put him in mindof the enemies, in order to move the divine compassion;and the present, as a token of gratitude, for merciesalready received: as Havercamp well observes on thliplace.







OCR Output













OCR Output








AN. 14»3.] 119 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


stroyed.* So Moses passed over the riverJabbok, and over-ran the kingdom of Og.He overthrew their cities, and slew all theirinhabitants; who exceeded in riches all themen in that part of the continent, on accountof the goodness of the soil, and the greatquantity of his wealth. Now Og had veryfew equals, either in the largeness of his body,or the beauty of his appearance. He wasalso a man of great activity; so that his ac­tions were not unequal to the vast largeness,and handsome appearance of his body. Andmen could easily guess at his strength andmagnitude, when they took his bed at Rab-bath, the royal city of the Ammonites. Itsstructure was of iron; its breadth four cubits,and its length a cubit more than doublethereto. However, his fall did not only im­prove the circumstances of the Hebrews forthe present; but by his death he was the oc­casion of further good success to them; forthey presently took those sixty cities whichwere encompassed with excellent walls, andhad been subject to him; and all the peoplegot, both in general and particular, a greatprey.
CHAP. VI.
op Balaam's attempt to curse Israel, and of the ARr
TIFICE BY WHICH THE HEBREWS WERE WEAKENED.
WHEN Moses had brought his army toJordan, he pitched his camp in thegreat plain over against Jericho.f This citywas a very happy situation, and very fit forproducing palm-trees and balsam. And nowthe Israelites began to be very proud of them­selves, and were very eager for fighting. Mo­ses then, after he had offered for a few days
* See Numb. xxi. 35. Deut. iii. 3. Josh. xii. 4. Ps.exxxv. 11, 12. and Philo. p. 643.
t Numb. xxii. 1.
J What Josephus here remarks is worthy our remark,viz. that the Israelites were never to meddle with theMoabites, Ammonites, or any other people, but those be­longing to the land of Canaan, and the countries of Sihonand Og beyond Jordan, as far as the desert and Euphrates;and that, therefore, no other people had reason to fear theconquests of the Israelites; but that those countries giventhem by God were their proper and peculiar portionamong the nations, and that all who endeavoured to pos­sess them might ever be justly destroyed by them.
H Numb. xxii. 6. An opinion prevailed both in thosedays, and in after ages, that some men had a power, bythe help of their gods, to devote not only particular per-


voL. I.—No. 10.


sacrifice of thanksgiving to God, and feastedthe people, sent a party of armed men to laywaste the country of the Midianites, and totake their cities. Now the occasion whichhe took for making war upon them was asfollows:
When Balak, the king of the Moabites,who had from his ancestors a friendship andleague with the Midianites, saw how greatlythe Israelites were increased, he was muchaffrighted on account of his own and his king­dom's danger. For he was notJ acquaintedwith this; that the Hebrews would not med­dle with any other country: but were to becontented with the possession of the land ofCanaan, God having forbidden them to goany farther. So he, with more haste thanwisdom, resolved to make an attempt uponthem by words; but he did not judge it pru­dent to fight against them, after they had hadthe prosperous successes, and even becameout of ill successes more happy than before;but he thought to hinder them, if he could,from growing greater; and so he resolved tosend ambassadors to the Midianites aboutthem. Now these Midianites, knowing therewas one Balaam, who lived by Euphrates, andwas the greatest of the prophets at that time,and one that was in friendship with them,sent some of their honourable princes alongwith the ambassadors of Balak, to intreat theprophet to come to them; that he might im­precate curses to the destruction of the Is­raelites.! So Balaam received the ambassa­dors, and treated them very kindly. Andwhen he had supped, he inquired what wasGod's will, and what this matter was for whichthe Midianites intreated him to come to them:but when God opposed his going, he came to
sons, but whole armies, to destruction. This they aresaid to have done sometimes by words of imprecation, ofwhich there was a set form among some people, whichJZschines calls Siap^opevrpi apav, the determinate curse.Sometimes they also offered sacrifices, and used certainrites and ceremonies, with solemn charms. A famous in­stance of this we find in the life of Crassus, where Plu­tarch tells us, that Atticus, tribune of the people, made afire at the gate out of which Crassus was to march to thewar against the Parthians, into which he threw certainthings to make a fume, and offered sacrifices to the mostangry gods, with horrid imprecations upon him; these, hesays, according to ancient tradition, had such a power, thatno man who was loaded with them could avoid being un­done. 8.
Hb







OCR Output








an. 1492.] 141 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


cause of his extraordinary virtue he went toGod.
Now Moses lived in all one hundred andtwenty years,* a third part of which time,abating one month, he was the people's ruler.And he diedf in the last month of the year,which is called by the Macedonians Dystrus;but by us Adar; on the first day of the month.He was one that exceeded all men in under­standing, and made the best use of what thatunderstanding suggested to him. He had avery pleasing way of speaking, and addressingthe multitude; and, as to his other qualifica­tions, he had such a full command over hispassions, as if he hardly had any such in hissoul, and only knew them by their names; asrather perceiving them in other men, than in
* Deut. xxxiv. 7.
t Nothing can be plainer from the text, than that Mo­ses did die, and was really buried; nay, Josephus tells us,that the Scripture affirms, that he died lest people shouldthink, because of the excellency of his person, that hewas still alive, and with God. And yet, notwithstandingthis, some of the Jewish doctors do positively affirm, thathe was translated into heaven, where he stands and minis­ters before God: and of those who admit of his death,


himself. He was also such a general of anarmy as is seldom seen, as well as such a pro­phet as was never known,J and this to such adegree, that whatsoever he pronounced, youwould think you heard the voice of God him­self. So the people mourned for him thirtydays.
Nor did ever any grief so deeply affect theHebrews as did this upon the death of Mo­ses. Nor were those that had experiencedhis conduct the only persons that desiredhim; but those also that perused the laws heleft behind him had a strong desire after him,and by them gathered the extraordinary vir­tue he was master of. And this shall sufficefor the declaration of the manner of the deathof Moses.


and that his soul and body were really separated, the ma­jor part will not allow that he died a common death; fortheir notion is, that his soul departed with a kiss, becausehe is said to die, al pi, at the mouth, (as it is literally in theHebrew, i. e. according to the word) of God; but if therebe any sense in the expression, it must be, that he partedwith his soul with great cheerfulness and serenity of mindWitsius's Miscel. lacra. B.{ Deut. xxxiv. 10.


LIS







OCR Output








AN. 469 144.] ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


and Europe, and to the governors of thecities, that they might safely conduct themto their own country. Accordingly, as theyreturned, they came to Sparta; and deliveredthe epistle which they had received of Jona­than to them. A copy of which here follows:"Jonathan the high-priest of the Jewishnation, and the senate, and body of the peo­ple of the Jews, to the Ephori, and senate,and people of the Lacedaemonians, sendgreeting. If you be well, and both yourpublic and private affairs be agreeable toyour mind, it is according to our wishes. Weare well also.* When in former times anepistle was brought to Onias, who was thenour high-priest, from Areus, who at that timewas your king, by Demoteles, concerning thekindred that was between us and you, a copyof which is here subjoined; we both joyfullyreceived the epistle, and were well pleasedwith Demoteles, and Areus. Although wedid not need such a demonstration; becausefwe were satisfied about it, from the sacredwritings; yet did not we think fit first to be­gin the claim of this relation to you; lest weshould seem too early in taking to ourselvesthe glory which is now given us by you. It isa long time since this relation of ours to youhath been renewed: and when we, upon holyand festival days, offer sacrifices to God, wepray to him for your preservation and victory.As to ourselves, although we have had manywars that have compassed us round, by rea­son of the covetousness of our neighbours,yet did not we determine to be troublesomeeither to you, or to others that were relatedto us. But since we have now overcome our


* See Book XII. chap. 4.
t This clause is otherwise rendered in the first book ofMaccabees xii. 9. "For that we have the holy booksof Scripture in our hands to comfort us." The Hebreworiginal being lost, we cannot certainly judge which wasthe truest version. Only the coherence favours Josephus.But if this were the Jews' meaning, that they were satis­fied out of their Bible, that the Jews and Lacedaemonianswere of kin; that part of their Bible is now lost; for wefind no such assertion in our present copies.
J Those that suppose Josephus to contradict himself inhil three several accounts of the notions of the Pharisees;this here, and that earlier one, which is the largest. Of theWar, II. 8. and that later, Antiq. XVIII. I. as if he some­times said they introduced an absolute fatality, and deniedall freedom of human actions, is almost wholly groundless.He ever, (as the learned Casaubon here truly observes ;)asserting that the Pharisees were between the Essenes and


enemies, and have occasion to send Nume-nius, the son of Antiochus, and Antipater,the son of Jason, who are both honourablemen belonging to our senate, to the Romans,we give them this epistle to you also: thatthey might renew that friendship which isbetween us. You will therefore do well towrite to us, and send an account of what youstand in need of from us: since we are in allthings disposed to act according to your de­sires." So the Lacedaemonians received theambassadors kindly; and made a decree forfriendship and mutual assistance, and sent itto them.
At this time there were three sects amongthe Jews, who had different opinions concern­ing human actions. The one was called thesect of the Pharisees; another the sect oftheSadducees; and the other the sect of theEssenes. Now the JPharisees say that someactions, but not all, are the works of fate:and some of them are in our own power;and that they are liable to fate, but are notcaused by it. But the sect of the Essenesaffirm, that fate governs all things; and thatnothing befalls men but what is according toits determination. And for theSadducees,theysay there is no such thing as fate, and that theevents of human affairs are not at its disposal:but they suppose that all our actions are inour own power; so that we are ourselves thecauses of what is good, and receive what isevil from our own folly. However, I havegiven a more exact account of these opinions,in the second book of the Jewish War.
Now the generals of Demetrius being will­ing to recover the defeat they had sustained,
Sadducees, and did only so far ascribe all to fate or DivineProvidence, as was consistent with the freedom of humanactions. However, their perplexed way of talking aboutfate or Providence, as overruling all things, made it com­monly thought they were willing to excuse their sins byascribing them to fate; as in the Apostolical Constitutions,VI. 6. and Jerom advers. Pelag. 10. Perhaps under thesame general name some difference of opinions in thispoint might be propagated: as is very common in all par­ties: especially in points of metaphysical subtility. How­ever our Josephus, who in his heart was a great admirerof the piety of the Essenes, was in practice a Pharisee;as he himself informs us, in his own life. And his accountof this doctrine of the Pharisees is certainly agreeable tohis own opinion: who ever both fully allowed the free­dom of human actions; and yet strongly believed the pow­erful interposition of Divine Providence. See concerningthis matter a remarkable clause, Antiq. XVI. 11.


4 F2







OCR Output








AN. 164.] 447 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


Bosor, and many other cities of the land ofGilead.
But not long after this Timotheus prepareda great army, and took many others as aux­iliaries; and induced some of the Arabians,by the promise of rewards, to go with him inthis expedition; and came with his army be­yond the brook, over against the city Raphon.And he encouraged his soldiers, if it came toa battle with the Jews, to fight courageously,and to hinder their passing over the brook:for he said to them beforehand, "If theycome over it we shall be beaten." And whenJudas heard that Timotheus prepared himselfto fight, he took all his own army and went inhaste against his enemy: and when he hadpassed over the brook, he fell upon his ene­mies: and some of them he slew, and othersof them he so terrified, that he compelledthem to throw down their arms and fly. Andsome of these escaped: but some of themfled to what was called the temple at Car-naim; and hoped thereby to preserve them­selves. But Judas took the city, and slewthem, and burnt the temple, and so usedseveral ways of destroying his enemies.
When he had done this, he gathered theJews together, with their children and wives,and the substance that belonged to them, andwas going to bring them back into Judea.But as soon as he was come to a certain city,called Ephron, that lay upon the road; (andas it was not possible for him to go any otherway, he was not willing to go back again:)he sent to the inhabitants, and desired thatthey would open their gates, and permit themto go on their way through the city: for theyhad stopped up the gates with stones, and cutoflT their passage through it. And when theinhabitants of Ephron would not agree to thisproposal, he encouraged those that were with


him, and encompassed the city round, andbesieged it, and lying round it by day andby night, took the city, and slew every malein it, and burnt it down: and so obtained away through it. And the multitude of thosethat were slain was so great, that they wentover the dead bodies. So they came overJordan; and arrived at the great plain; overagainst which is situate the city Bethshan,which is called by the Greeks *Scythopolis.And going away hastily from thence, theycame into Judea: singing psalms and hymnsas they went; and indulging such tokens ofmirth as are usual in triumphs, upon victory.They also offered thank-offerings both fortheir good success, and for the preservationof their army. For fnot one of the Jewswas slain in these battles.
But Joseph, the son of Zacharias, and Aza-rias whom Judas left generals of the forces;at the same time when Simon was in Galilee,fighting against the people of Ptolemais, andJudas himself, and his brother Jonathan, werein the land of Gilead; did also affect the gloryof being courageous generals in war; in orderwhereto they took the army that was undertheir command, and came to Jamnia. ThereGorgias, the general of the forces of Jamnia,met them: and upon joining battle with himthey lost Jtwo thousand of their army; andfled away, and were pursued to the very bor­ders of Judea. And this misfortune befellthem by their disobedience to Judas, whohad enjoined them not to fight with any onebefore his return. For besides the rest ofJudas's sagacious counsels, one may won­der that this concerning the misfortune thatbefell the forces commanded by Joseph andAzarias; which he understood would happen,if they brake any of the injunctions he hadgiven them. But Judas and his brethren


* The reason why Bethshan was called Scythopolis, iswell known from Herodotus, I. page 105, and Syncellus,page 214, that the Scythians, when they over-ran Asia,in the days of Josiah, seized on this city; and kept itas long as they continued in Asia. From which time itretained the name of Scythopolis, or the city of the Scy­thians. It is so called by the author of the second bookof Maccabees, from Jason of Cyrene, xii. 29. as well as byJosephus, and long before him: while yet Josephus couldnot well take it from either of them; whose writings, orany other such Greek sacred authors, he never appearsto have seen. See Essay on the Old Testament, page184—195, and Supplement, page 45, 46.
t This most providential preservation of all the reli-
gious Jews in this expedition, which was according to thewill of God, is observable often among God's people theJews: and some very like it in the changes of the fourmonarchies, which were also highly providential. SeePrideaux at the years 334, 333, and 331.
J Here is another great instance of Providence; thatwhen, even at the very time that Simon, and Judas,and Jonathan were so miraculously preserved, andblessed, in the just defence of their laws and religion;these other generals of the Jews who went to fight forhonour, in a vain-glorious way, and without any commis­sion from God, or the family he had raised up to deliverthem, were miserably disappointed and defeated. Sec1 Mace. v. 61, 62.







OCR Output








an. 1769.] 51 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


/


interpretation of his dreams; but when theyfesitated about them the king was so muchthe more disturbed. And now it was that thememory of Joseph's skill came into the mindof the king's cup-bearer, when he saw theconfusion Pharaoh was in; so he came andmentioned Joseph to him, as also the visionhe had seen in prison, and how the eventproved as he had said; as also that the chiefbaker was crucified on the very same day; andthat this also happened to him according tothe interpretation of Joseph: that Josephhimself was laid in bonds by Potiphar as aslave, but he said he was one of the noblestof the stock of the Hebrews, and that hisfather lived in great splendour. "If, there­fore," said he, " thou wilt send for him, andnot despise him on account of his misfortunes,thou wilt learn what thy dreams signify."The king, thereby, commanded that theyshould bring Joseph into his presence; andthose who received the command came andbrought him with them, having taken care ofhis habit, that it might be decent, as the kinghad enjoined them to do.
The king took him by the hand, and said,"O young man, for my servant bears witnessthat thou art at present the best and mostskilful person I can consult with; vouchsafeme the same favours which thou bestowedon this servant of mine, and tell me whatevents are predicted by the visions of mydreams: and I desire thee to suppress nothingout of fear, nor to flatter me with lying words,or with what may please me, although thetruth should be of a melancholy nature. Itseemed to me that as I walked by the river,I saw kine fat and very large, seven in num­ber, going from the river to the marshes; andother kine of the same number like them met


pretations of his dreams, made use of some, at least, if notall, these arts; and the jr.wish doctors would make lis be­lieve, that after several attempts of divers kinds, they cameat last to this exposition, that Pharaoh's daughters (for theysuppose him to have seven) should die, and that he shouldhave seven others born to him in their stead: but thisbeing not at all satisfactory to their master, put the cup­bearer in mind of Joseph's great abilities that way. LeQerc's and Patrick's Commentary. B. .
* In Barhary one stalk of wheat, or barley, will some­times bear two ears, while each of these ears will ai oftenshoot out into a number of less ones, thereby affording amost plentiful increase. May not these large prolific ears,when seven are said to come upon one stalk, explain what
voL. I.—No. 5.


them out of the marshes, exceeding lean andill-favoured; which ate up the fat and largekine, and yet were no better than before, andnot less miserably pinched with famineAfter I had seen this vision I awoke out olmy sleep; but being in disorder, and con­sidering with myself what this appearanceshould be, I fell asleep again, and saw anotherdream much more wonderful than the fore­going, which did still more affright and dis­turb me.* I saw seven ears of corn growingout of one root, having their heads bornedown by the weight of the grains, and bend­ing down with the fruit, which was now ripe,and fit for reaping: and near these I sawseven other ears of corn, meagre and weakfor want of rain, which fell to eating and con­suming those that were fit for reaping, andput me into great astonishment."
Joseph replied; "This dream, O king,although seen under two forms, signifies oneand the same event of things; for when thousawest the kine, which is an animal made forthe plough and for labour, devoured by thepoorer kine; and the cars of corn eaten upby the smaller ears, they foretel a famine,and want of the fruits of the earth for thesame number of years, and equal with thosewhen Egypt was in a happy state; and thisso far, that the plenty of these years will bespent in the same number of years of scarcity,and that scarcity of necessary provisions willbe very difficult to be corrected: as a signwhereof the ill-favoured kine, when they haddevoured the better sort, could not be satis­fied. But still God foreshows what is to comeupon men, not to grieve them, but that whenthey know it beforehand, they may, by pru­dence, make the actual experience of what isforetold the more tolerable. If thou there-is further mentioned of the seven fruitful years in Egypt,that is, that the earth brought forth by handfuls?
This latter passage may, indeed, mean, that the earthbrought forth handfuls of stalks from single grains, and nothandfuls of ears from single stalks, agreeably to the following passage from Dr. Shaw: "In Barbary it is common tosee one grain produce ten or fifteen stalks. Even somegrains of the munvaany wheat, which I brought with meto Oxford, and sowed in the physic garden, threw out eachof them fiftv. Bnt Muzeratty, one of the late kaleefas, orviceroys, of the province of Tlemsan, brought once withhim to Algiers a root that yielded fourscore: telling us,that the prince of the western pilgrims sent once to thebashaw of Cairo one that yielded six score. Pliny mentionssome that bore three or four hundred." B.
o







OCR Output








AN. 31.] 549 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


delay, he should by it have his camp fortified.And as the Arabians had the same intentionsupon that place, a contest arose about it. Atfirst they were but skirmishes; but afterwardsthere came more soldiers, and it proved asort of engagement, and some fell on bothsides; till those of the Arabian side werebeaten and retreated. This was no smallencouragement to the Jews: and when Herodobserved that the enemy's army were dis­posed to any thing rather than to come to anengagement, he ventured boldly to attemptthe bulwark itself, and to pull it to pieces;and so to get nearer to their camp, in orderto fight them. For when they were forcedout of their trenches, they went out in dis­order, and had not the least alacrity, or hopeof victory. Yet did they fight hand to hand;because they were more numerous than theJews; and because they were in such a dis­position of war, that they were under a ne­cessity of coming on boldly. So they cameto a terrible battle; while not a few fell oneach side. However, at length the Arabiansfled; and so great a slaughter was made upontheir being routed, that they were not onlykilled by their enemies, but became the au­thors of their own deaths also; and weretrodden down by the multitude, and thegreat current of people in disorder; andwere destroyed by their own armour. Sofive thousand men lay dead upon the spot,while the rest of the multitude soon ranwithin the bulwark for safety; but had nofirm hope of safety, by reason of their wantof necessaries, and especially of water. TheJews pursued them, but could not get in withthem; but sat round about the bulwark, andwatched any assistance that would get in tothem; and prevented any, that had a mind toit, from running away.
When the Arabians were in these circum­stances, they sent ambassadors to Herod; inthe first place to propose terms of accommo­dation, and after that to offer him, (so press­ing was their thirst upon them,) to undergo


whatsoever he pleased, if he would free themfrom their present distress. But he wouldadmit of no ambassadors, of no price of re­demption, nor of any other moderate termswhatever; being very desirous to revengethose unjust actions which they had beenguilty of towards his nation. So they werenecessitated by other motives, and particu­larly by their thirst, to come out, and deliverthemselves up to him, to be carried awaycaptives. And in five days' time the numberof four thousand were taken prisoners: whileall the rest resolved to make a sally upontheir enemies, and to fight it out with them:choosing rather, if so it must be, to dietherein, than to perish gradually and inglo-riously. When they had taken this resolu­tion, they came out of their trenches; butwere unable to sustain the fight; being toomuch debilitated both in mind and body; andhaving not room to exert themselves; andthought it an advantage to be killed, and amisery to survive. So at the first onset therefell about seven thousand of them. Afterwhich stroke, they let all the courage theyhad put on before fall; and stood amazed atHerod's warlike spirit under his own cala­mities. So, for the future, they yielded, andmade him ruler of their nation. He wasgreatly elevated at so seasonable a success;and returned home, taking great authorityupon him, on account of his bold and gloriousexpedition
CHAP. VI.
HEROD CAUSES HYRCANUS TO BE PUT TO DEATH; ANDOBTAINS THE CONFIRMATION OF HIS OWN DIGNITY FROMOCTAVIUS CESAR, WHOM HE ENTERTAINED IN A SUMP­TUOUS MANNER.
HEROD's other affairs were now veryprosperous; and he was not to be easilyassaulted on any side. Yet did there comeupon him a danger that would hazard his en­tire dominions, after Antony had been beatenat the battle of Actium by Octavius Caesar.*


* Antony had provoked Octavinnus against him, by thewrong done to Octavia his sister, whom Antony had mar­ried, and yet divorced her for the gratification of hisadulterous love to Cleopatra, though Octavia was muchthe handsomer of the two. Antony had likewise givenout, that Cleopatra had been married to Julius Caesar, andthat Caesanon, whom she had by him, was his lawful son,
and consequently had the proper right to the inheritance,which Octavianus held only as his adopted son. Thesethings were objected against Antony; and Antony, byhis agents and letters, was not forgetful to recriminate.But these things were no more than pretences: thetrue reason of their disagreement was, that both thesetwo great men, being not contented with half of the


4 Q2







OCR Output








an. 1532.] 77 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


he would not now suffer them to he suhduedby their enemies; to be either made slaves,or be slain by them; and standing in themidst of them, he said, " It is not just for us todistrust even men, when they have hithertowell managed our affairs, as if they would notbe the same men hereafter; but it is no bet­ter than madness, at this time, to despair ofthe providence of God, by whose power allhas been performed which he promised, whenyou expected no such things: I mean all thatI have been concerned in for your deliv­erance, and escape from slavery. Nay, whenwe are in the utmost distress, as you see wenow are, we ought the rather to hope thatGod will succour us, by whose operation it is,that we are now encompassed within thatnarrow place, that he may deliver us out ofsuch difficulties as are otherwise insurmount­able, and out of which neither you nor yourenemies expect you can be delivered, andmay at once demonstrate his own power, andhis providence over us; nor does God use togive his help in small difficulties to thosewhom he favours, but in such cases where noone can see how any hope in man can bettertheir condition. Depend, therefore, uponsuch a Protector as is able to make smallthings great, and to shew that this mightyforce against you is nothing but weakness;and be not affrighted at the Egyptian army;nor do you despair of being preserved, be­cause the sea before, and the mountains be­hind, afford you no opportunity of flying; foreven these mountains, if God so please, maybe made plain ground for you, and the seabecome dry land."*
CHAP. XVI.
OF THE MIRACULOUS DIVISION OF THE SEA FOR THE HE­BREWS, WHEN THEY WERE PURSUED BY THE EGYPTIANS;AND OF THE OVERTHROW OF THEIR ENEMIES.
HEN Moses had said this, he led themto the sea,f while the Egyptians look-


w


ed on, for they were within sight. Now thesewere so distressed by the toil of their pursuit,that they thought proper to put off fightingtill the next day; but when Moses was cometo the sea-shore, he took his rod, and madethe supplications to God, and called upon himto be their helper and assistant: and said,"Thou art not ignorant, O Lord, that it isbeyond human strength, and human contri­vance, to avoid the difficulties we are nowunder; but it must be thy work altogether toprocure deliverance to this army, which hasleft Egypt at thy appointment. We despairof any other assistance or contrivance, andhave recourse only to that hope we have inthee: and if there be any method that canpromise us an escape by thy providence, welook up to thee for it; and let it come quickly,and manifest thy power to us, and do thouraise up this people unto good courage, andhope of deliverance, who are deeply sunkinto a disconsolate state of mind. We are ina helpless place; but still it is a place thatthou possessest, for the sea is thine, and themountains that enclose us are thine: so thatthese mountains will open themselves if thoucomraandest them; and the sea also, if thoucommandest it, will become dry land: nay,we might escape by a flight through the air,if thou shouldest determine we should havethat way of salvation."
When Moses had thus addressed himself toGod, he smote with his rod upon the s^a,which parted asunder at the stroke, and, re­ceiving those waters into itself, left the grounddry as a road4 and a place of flight for theHebrews. || Now when Moses saw this ap­pearance of God, and that the sea went outof its own place, and left dry land, he wentfirst of all into it, and bid the Hebrews followhim along that divine road, and to rejoice atthe danger their enemies, that followed them,were in; and gave thanks to God for thissurprising deliverance which appeared fromhim.


* This speech is very short in our copies. Exod. xiv.13, 14.
t The Red Sea, called hy the ancients Sinus Arabicus,and now Gulfo de Mecca, is that part or branch of thesouthern sea which interposes itself between Egypt on thewest; Arabia-Felix, and some parts of Petraea, on theeast: while the northern bounds of it touch upon Idumea,or the coast of Edoro. Edom, in the Hebrew tongue, sig­nifies Red, and was the nickname given Esau for selling his
birth-right for a mess of pottage. The country which hisposterity possessed was called after his name, and so wasthe sea which adjoined to it; but the Greeks, not under­standing the reason of the appellation, translated it intotheir tongue, and called it sguSga SaXaffrfa, thence theLatin, Mare Rubrum, and we, the Red Sea. The He»brews call it the Sea of Suph, or Flags, by reason of thegreat abundance of that kind of weed, which grows at thebottom of it; and the Arabs at this day name it Bubr el







OCR Output








300 [book VIII. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


God to grant him that request. So the kinghaving his hand recovered to its naturalstate, rejoiced at it; and invited the prophetto sup with him. But Jadon said, he couldnot endure to come into his house, nor totaste of bread or water in that city.* Forthat was a thing God had forbidden him todo; as also to go back by the same waywhich he came: but he said, he was to re­turn by another way. So the king wonderedat the abstinence of the man; but was him­self in fear, as suspecting a change of hisaffairs for the worse, from what had beensaid to him.
CHAP. IX.
or jadon's return to bethel at the instigation of a
FALSE PROPHET, AND HIS AWFUL END J THE EFFECT OFTHE LVINC PROPHET'S ARGUMENTS ON THE MIND OFJEROBOAM, &C.
NOW there was a certain wicked manin that city, who was a false prophet,whom Jeroboam had in great esteem: buthe was deceived by him, and his flatteringwords. This man was then bed-ridden, byreason of the infirmities of old age. How­ever he was informed by his sons concerningthe prophet that was come from Jerusalem,and concerning the signs done by him: andhow when Jeroboam's right hand had beenenfeebled, at the prophet's prayer he had itrevived again. Whereupon he was afraidthat this stranger and prophet should be inbetter esteem with the king than himself,and obtain greater honour from him; and hegave order to his sons to saddle his ass im­mediately, and make all ready, that he mightgo out. Accordingly they made haste to dowhat they were commanded; and he gotupon the ass, and followed after the prophet.And when he had overtaken him, as he was


resting himself under a thick and shady oak,he at first saluted him, but presently he com­plained of him, because he had not comeinto his house, and partaken of his hospi­tality. And when the other said, that Godhad forbidden him to taste of any one's pro­vision in that city, he replied, "CertainlyGod had not forbidden that I should set foodbefore thee: for I am a prophet as thou art,and worship God in the same manner thatthou dost: and I am now come, as sent byhim, in order to bring thee into mine house,and make thee my guest." Now Jadon gavecredit to this lying prophet, and returnedback with him. But when they were at din­ner, and were merry together, God appearedto Jadon, and said, that he should sutlerpunishment for transgressing his commands:and he told him what that punishment shouldbe; for he said, that on his return "he shouldmeet with a lion, by which he should be tornto pieces, and be deprived of burial in thesepulchres of his fathers." Which thingscame to pass, as I suppose, according to thewill of God: that so Jeroboam might notgive heed to the words of Jadon, as of onethat had been convicted of lying. However,as Jadon was again going to Jerusalem, alion assaulted him, and pulled him off thebeast he rode on, and slew him: yet did henot at all hurt the ass; but sat by him, andkept him, as also the prophet's body. Thiscontinued till some travellers that saw itcame and told it in the city to the false pro­phet, who sent his sons, and brought the bodyunto the city, and made a funeral for him, atgreat expenses. He also charged his sonsto bury himself with him, and said, "that allwhich he had foretold against that city, andthe altar, and priests, and false prophets,would prove true:f and that if he were bu­ried with him he should receive no injurious


* Why this prophet was forbid to eat or drink with thepeople of Bethel, the reason is obvious, because he wasto have no familiarity with idolaters; but why he shouldnot return by the same way that he went, is not so veryevident. There is a passage in Isaiah concerning Sen­nacherib, which helps, as some think, to elucidate thismatter, where God tells him, that he would turn him backby the same way that he came, Isaiah xxxvii. 29, 34, i. e.he should return home without doing any thing. All histhreats and all his great projects should have no effectagainst Jerusalem. And in like manner, when God com­manded the prophet not to return by the same way, itwas at much as if he had said, "See that thou be constant,
and steadfast in executing the charge committed to thee;let nothing hinder or divert thee, but take abundant carethat thou do thy business effectually." But this construc­tion is a little too much strained; nor can I see, why wemay not say, that God enjoined his prophet not to returnby the same way, lest Jeroboam, or any other of the in­habitants of Bethel, either to satisfy their curiosity uponan occasion so uncommon, or to do him some mischieffor his severe denunciations against their altar and way otworship, might send men after him to bring him back.Caltnefs and he Clerc't Commentaries. B.t 1 Kings xiii. 32.







OCR Output








AN. 1071.] 245 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


she told him, he comforted her, and desiredher to be quiet, and to take all patiently,and not to esteem her being corrupted byher brother, as an injury. So she yielded tohis advice, and left off crying out, and disco­vering the force offered her to the multitude.And she continued as a widow,* with herbrother Absalom a long time.
When David knew this, he was grieved atthe actions of Amnon. But because he hadan extraordinary affection for him, for he washis eldest son, he was compelled not to af­flict him. But Absalom watched for a conve­nient opportunity of revenging this crime, forhe thoroughly hated him. Now the secondyear after this wicked affair was over, andAbsalom was about to shear his own sheep atBaalhazor, a city in the portion of Ephraim,he besought his father, as well as his bre­thren, to come and feast with him. Butwhen David excused himself, as not beingwilling to be burdensome, Absalom desiredhe would, however, send his brethren, whomhe did send accordingly. Then Absalomcharged his servants, that when they shouldsee Amnon disordered and drowsy with wine,and he should give them a signal, they shouldfear nobody, but kill him.
When they had done as they were com­manded, the rest of his brethren were asto­nished and alarmed for themselves. So theyimmediately got on horseback, and rode awayto their father.f But somebody preventedthem, and told their father that they wereall slain by Absalom. Whereupon he wasovercome with sorrow, as for so many of hissons that were destroyed at once, and bythis consideration, that it was their brotherthat appeared to have slain them, he aggra­vated his sorrow for them. So he neitherinquired what was the cause of this slaughter,


nor stayed to hear any thing else; which yetit was but reasonable to have done, when sovery great, and by that greatness so in­credible a misfortune was related to him.He rent his clothes, and threw himself uponthe ground, and there lay lamenting the lossof all his sons, both those who as he was in­formed, were slain, and of him that slew them.But Jonadab the son of his brother Shimeah,intreated him not to indulge his sorrow so far;for as to the rest of his sons he did not be­lieve they were slain, for he found no causefor such a suspicion. But he said it mightdeserve inquiry as to Amnon. For it was notunlikely that Absalom might venture to killhim, on account of the injury he had offeredto Tamar. In the mean time a great noiseof horses, and a tumult of some people thatwere coming, excited their attention. Theywere the king's sons who were fled awayfrom the feast. So their father met them,as they were in their grief, and he himselfgrieved with them. But it was more than heexpected to see those his sons again, whomhe had a little before heard to have perished.However, there were tears and groans onboth sides; they lamenting their brother whowas killed, and the king lamenting his son,who was killed also: but Absalom fled toGeshur, to his grandfather,^ by his mother'sside, who was king of that country, and heremained with him three whole years.
Now David had a design to send to Ab­salom ;|| not that he should come to bepunished, but that he might be with him. Forthe effects of his anger were abated by lengthof time. It was Joab, the captain of his host,that chiefly persuaded him so to do. For hesuborned a woman that was stricken in age,to go to the king in mourning apparel,§ whosaid to him, that two of her sons had some


* 2 Sam. xiii. 20.
t 2 Sam. xiii. 29.
j 2 Sam. iii. 3.
II About an. 1068 B. C.
§ The art and contrivance of this widow of Tekoah'sspeech is very remarkable. "When the woman of Te-koah spake to the king, she fell on her face to the ground,and did obeisance, and said, Help, O king! And the kingsaid to her, What aileth thee? And she said, I am indeeda widow woman, and my husband is dead, and thy hand­maid had two sons, and the two strove together in the6eld, and there was none to part them, but the one smotethe other, and slew him; and behold this family is risenagainst thy handmaid, and they say, Deliver him that
smote his brother, that we may kill him, for the life ofhis brother, whom he slew, and we will destroy the heiralso; and so they shall quench my coal that is left, (i. e.deprive me of the little comfort of my life which remains,and is, as it were, a coal buried in the ashes,) and leaveto my husband neither name nor remainder upon theearth." 2 Sam. xiv. 4, &c. Now the scope of all thisspeech was to frame a case as like to David's as she coulddevise, that by prevailing with him to determine it in herfavour, he might be convinced, how much more reasonableit was to preserve Absalom. But, how plausible soeverthe likeness might be, there was a wide difference be­tween her case and his; for her son, as she pretended,was slain in a scuffle with his brother; whereas Amnon


3A2







OCR Output








26 [book I ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


rious actions." He answered, "And whatadvantage will it be to me to have such re­wards, when I have none to enjoy them afterme?" for he was hitherto childless. AndGod promised that, he should have a son,and that his posterity should be very nu­merous; insomuch that their number shouldbe like the stars. When he heard that, heoffered a sacrifice to God, as he commandedhim. The manner of the sacrifice wasthis:* He took an heifer of three years old,and a she-goat of three years old, and aram in like manner of three years old, and aturtle dove, and a pigeon; and as he was en­joined, he divided the three former,f but thebirds he did not divide. After which, beforehe built his altar, where the birds of preyflew about as desirous of blood, a divine voicecame to him declaring that their neighbourswould be grievous to his posterity, when theyshould be in Egypt, for four hundred years 4during which time they should be afflicted,but afterwards shall overcome their enemies,should conquer the Canaanites in war, andpossess themselves of their land, and of theircities.


Now Abram dwelt near the oak calledOgyges: the place belongs to Canaan, notfar from the city of Hebron. But being un­easy at his wife's barrenness, he intreatedGod to grant that he might have male issue:and God required of him to be of goodcourage, and said, that he would add to allthe rest of the benefits he had bestowed uponhim, ever since he led him out of Mesopota­mia, the gift of children. Accordingly Sarai,at God's command, brought to his bed one ofher handmaidens, a woman of Egyptian de>scent, in order to obtain children by her: andwhen this handmaid was pregnant, she tri­umphed, and ventured to affront Sarai, as ifthe dominion were to come to a son to beborn of her. But when Abram resigned herinto the hands of Sarai, to punish her, shecontrived to flee away, as not able to bearthe instances of Sarai's severity to her: andshe intreated God to have compassion onher. Now a divine angel met her as she wasgoing forward in the wilderness, and bid herreturn to her master and mistress: for if shewould submit to that wise advice, she shouldlive better hereafter: for that the reason of


* It is worthy of remark, that God required no othersacrifices under the law of Moses, than what were takenfrom these five kinds of animals which he here requiredof Abram. Nor did the Jews feed upon any other do­mestic animals than the three here named, as Reland ob­serves on Antiq. iv. 4.
t It was a customary thing to cut the victim, which wasto be offered as a sacrifice upon the occasion, into twoparts, and so placing each half upon two different altars,to cause those who contracted the covenant to pass be­tween both. This rite was practised both by believersand heathens at their solemn leagues: at first, doubtless,with a view to the great sacrifice, who was to purge oursins in his own blood: and the offering of these sacrifices,and passing between the parts of the divided victim, wassymbolically staking their hopes of purification and salva­tion on their performance of the conditions on which itwas offered. This remarkable practice may be clearlytraced in the Greek and Latin writers. Homer has the fol­lowing expression: Opjpa ifica «f*ov«ff. II. ii. 124. Hav­ing cut faithful oaths. Eustathius explains the passage bysaying, they were oaths relating to important matters, andwere made by the division of the victim. See also Virgil,JEn. viii. ver. 640. The editor to the Fragments, Sup­plementary to Calmet, No. 129. is of opinion that what isyet practised of this ceremony may elucidate that passagein Isaiah xxviii. 15. We have made a covenant with death,and with hell are we at agreement: when the overflowingscourge shall pass through, it shall not come unto us, for wehave made lies our refuge, and under falsehood have we hidourselves. That is, we have cut off a covenant sacrifice, apurification offering with death, and With the grave we have
settled, so that the scourge shall not injure us. May notsuch a custom have been the origin of (he following super­stition related by Pitts: "If they (the Algerine Corsairs)at any time happen to be in a very great strait or distress, asbeing chased, or in a storm, they will gather money, lightup candles in remembrance of some dead marrabot (saint)or other, calling upon him with heavy sighs and groans. Ifthey find no succour from their before-mentioned rites andsuperstitions, but that the danger rather increases, thenthey go to sacrificing a sheep, (or two or three upon occa­sion as they think needful) which is done after this man­ner: having cut off the head with a knife, they immedi­ately take out the entrails, and throw them and the headoverboard; and then, with all the speed they can (withoutskinning) they cut the body into two parts by the middle,and throw one part over the right side of the ship, and theother over the left, into the sea, as a kind of propitiation.Thus those blind infidels apply themselves to imaginaryintercessors, instead of the living and true God." Travels,p. 18. In the case here referred to, the ship passes be­tween the parts thus thrown on each side of it. This be­haviour of the Algerines may be taken as a pretty accuratecounterpart to that of making a covenant with death, andwith imminent danger of destruction, by appeasing the an­gry gods. Festivities always accompanied the ceremoniesattending oaths. Isaac and Abimelech feasted at makingtheir covenant, Gen. xxvi. 30. and xxxi. 54. This prac­tice was also usual among the heathen nations. OrientalCustoms, Vol. I. 294. B.
J As to this affliction of Abraham's posterity for fourhundred years, see II. 9







OCR Output








AW. 451 163.] ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


CHAP. X.


OF THE UNSUCCESSFUL EXPEDITION OF BACCHIDES, THEGENERAL OF DEMETRIUs's ARMV, AGAINST JUDEA J THESUBSEQUENT DEFEAT OF N1CANOR; THE DEATH OF AL-CIMUS, AND THE SUCCESSION OF JUDAS.
ABOUT the same time Demetrius, theson of Seleucus, fled away from Rome,and took Tripoli, a city of Syria, and set thediadem on his own head. He also gatheredcertain mercenary soldiers together, and en­tered into his kingdom; and was joyfullyreceived by all, who delivered themselvesup to him. And when they had taken An-tiochus the king, and Lysias, they broughtthem to him alive: both of whom were im­mediately put to death by the command ofDemetrius,* when Antiochus had reignedtwo years. But there were now many ofthe wicked Jewish runagates, that cametogether to him; and with them Alcimus thehigh-priest, who accused the whole, nation,and particularly Judas and his brethren,and said, that they had slain all his friends;and that those in his kingdom that were ofhis party, and waited for his return, wereby them put to death; that these men hadejected them out of their own country; andcaused them to be sojourners in a foreignland; and they desired, that he would sendsome one of his own friends, and know fromhim what mischief Judas's party had done.
At this Demetrius was very angry, andsent Bacchides, a friend of Antiochus Epi-phanes, fa good man, and one that had beenintrusted with all Mesopotamia; and gavehim an army, and committed Alcimus, thehigh-priest, to his care; and gave him chargeto slay Judas, and those that were with him.So Bacchides made haste, and went out ofAntioch, with his army; and when he wascome into Judea, he sent to Judas and hisbrethren, to discourse with him about a leagueof friendship and peace. For he had a mindto take him by treachery. But Judas did notgive credit to him: for he saw that he camewith so great an army, as men do not bring


* 1 Mace. vii. 2, 3.
t It is no way probable that Josephus would call Bac­chides, that bitter enemy of the Jews, as our presentcopies have it, av<W xflS0V> "a good man," or "kind andgentle:" (in which latter sense he uses the word xfIS°Ssoon afterward:) what the author of the first book of
voL. I.—NOS. 37 & 38.


when they come to make peace, but to makewar. However, some of the people acqui­esced in what Bacchides caused to be pro­claimed. And supposing they should undergono considerable harm from Alcimus, who wastheir countryman, they went over to them;and when they had received oaths from bothof them, that neither they themselves, northose of the same sentiments, should cometo any harm, they intrusted themselves withthem. But Bacchides troubled not himselfabout the oaths he had taken; but slewthreescore of them: although by not keepinghis faith with those that first went over, hedeterred all the rest, who had intentions togo over to him, from doing it. But as he wasgone out of Jerusalem, and was at the villagecalled Bethzetho, he sent out and caughtmany of the deserters, and some of the peo­ple also, and slew them all; and enjoinedall that lived in the country to submit to Al­cimus. So he left him there, with some partof the army; that he might have wherewithto keep the country in obedience; and re­turned to Antioch, to king Demetrius.
But Alcimus was desirous to have the do­minion more firmly assured to him. And un­derstanding that if he could bring it aboutthat the multitude should be his friends, heshould govern with greater security, he spakekind words to them all, and discoursed toeach of them after an agreeable and pleasantmanner. By which means he quickly had agreat body of men, and an army about him:although the greater part of them were of thewicked and the deserters. With these, whomhe used as his servants and soldiers, he wentall over the country, and slew all that hecould find of Judas's party. But when Judassaw that Alcimus was already become great;and had destroyed many good and holy men,he also went all over the country, and destroy­ed those that were of the other party. WhenAlcimus saw that he was not able to opposeJudas, nor was equal to him in strength, heresolved to apply himself to king Demetriusfor his assistance. So he came to Antioch,
Maccabees, whom Josephus here follows, instead of thatcharacter, says of him is this; that he was a great manin the kingdom, and zsigmru Gaifikii faithful to the king.Which was very probably Josephus's meaning also.Perhaps, therefore, he wrote wjov, faithful, for XflS0V>good or gentle.
4D







OCR Output








372 [book X. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


were three in number; and the eunuch whowas over the armed men; and seven friendsof Zedekiah, and his scribe, and sixty otherrulers; all of whom, together with the vesselswhich they had pillaged, he carried to theking of Babylon, to Riblah, a city of Syria.So the king commanded the heads of thehigh-priest, and of the rulers, to be cut offthere. But he himself led all the captives,and Zedekiah to Babylon. He also led Jo-sedek, the high-priest, away bound. He wasthe son of Seraiah, the high-priest, whom theking of Babylon had slain in Riblah, a city ofSyria, as we have just now related.
And now, because we have enumerated thesuccession of the kings, and who they were,and how long they reigned; I think it neces­sary to set down the names of those who suc­ceeded one another in the high-priesthood,under the kings. The first high-priest thenat the temple, which Solomon built, wasZadok. After whom his son Achimas re­ceived that dignity. After Achimas wasAzarias. His son was Joram, and Joram'sson was Isus. After him was Axioramus.His son was Phideas, and Phideas's son wasSudeas, and Sudeas's son was Juelus, andJuelus's son was Jotham, and Jotham's sonwas Urias, and Urias's son was Nereias, andNereias's son was Odeas, and his son wasSallumus, and Sallurnus's son was Elicias,and his son was Azarias,* and his son wasSareas, and his son was Josedek, who wascarried captive to Babylon. All these re­ceived the high-priesthood, by succession,the sons from their fathers.
When the king was come to Babylon, hekept Zedekiah in prison until he died; andthen buried him magnificently. He also de­dicated the vessels he had pillaged out of


the temple of Jerusalem to his gods; andplanted the people in the country of Babylon;but freed the high-priest from his bonds.
CHAP. IX.
OF THE APPOINTMENT OF GEDALIAH, AS GOVERNOR OF THEJEWS LEFT IN JUDEA J HIS ASSASSINATION BV ISHMAEL;THE REMOVAL OF THE PEOPLE INTO EGYPT J AND THEIRSUBSEQUENT CAPTIVITV.
NOW the general of the army, Nebuzara-dan, when he carried the people of theJews into captivity, left the poor, and thosethat had deserted, in the country; and ap­pointed for their governor one Gedaliah, theson of Ahikam, a person of a noble family,and of a gentle and righteous disposition. Hecommanded that they should cultivate theground, and pay an appointed tribute to theking. He took Jeremiah the prophet out ofprison, and would have persuaded him to goalong with him to Babylon; for that-he hadbeen enjoined by the king to supply him withwhatever he wanted; and if he did not liketo do so, he desired him to inform him wherehe resolved to dwell; that he might signifythe same to the king. But the prophet hadno inclination to follow him, nor to dwell anywhere else: but expressed a wish to live inthe ruins of his country, and in the miserableremains of it. When the general understoodwhat his purpose was, he enjoined Gedaliah,whom he had left behind, to take all possiblecare of him, and to supply him with whateverhe wanted. So when he had given him richpresents, he dismissed him.f AccordinglyJeremiah abode in a city of that countrywhich was called Mispah; and desired ofNebuzaradan that he would set at libertyhis disciple Baruch,J the son of Neriah;|J


* I have here inserted, this high-priest Azarias, thoughhe be omitted in all Josephus's copies, out of the Jewishchronicle, Seder Olam: of how little authority soever Igenerally esteem such later Rabbinical historians; be­cause we know from Josephus himself, that the numberof the high-priests belonging to this interval was eighteen.Antiq. XX. 10. whereas his copies have here but seven­teen. And note, that so many of these names are spelleddifferently from those that occur in our Bible. 1 Chron.vi. 15. Ezra vii.l—5. 1 Esdras vii. 1,2. that I have here,contrary to my usual method, set them all down fromthe Greek spelling in Josephus.
t Jeremiah xl. 5.
I Of this character of Baruch, the son of Neriah, andthe genuineness of his book that stands now in our Apo-
crypha, and that it is really a canonical book, and anappendix to Jeremiah, see Authentic Records, part I.page 1—11.
II Baruch, the son of Neriah, and grandson of Maase-iah, was of an illustrious birth, and of the tribe of Judah.Seraiah, his brother, had a considerable employment inthe court of king Zedekiah, but himself kept close to theperson of Jeremiah, and was his most faithful disciple,though his adherence to his master drew upon him severalpersecutions, and a great deal of bad treatment. Afterthe destruction of Jerusalem by Nebuchadnezzar, Baruchand his master were permitted to stay in the land of Ju-dea; but when the remains of the people which were leftbehind, after having slain their governor Gedaliah, werefor retiring into Egypt, they compelled Jeremiah and his







OCR Output








AN. 107.] 483 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


reject them; and say, that we are to esteemthose observances to be obligatory which arein the written word; but are not to observewhat are derived from the tradition of ourforefathers. And concerning these things itis that great disputes and differences havearisen among them. The Sadducees are ableto persuade none but the rich, and have notthe populace obsequious to them: but thePharisees have the multitude on their side.But about these two sects, and that of theEssenes, I have treated accurately in the*second book of Jewish affairs.
After Hyrcanus had put an end to this se­dition, he lived happily, and administered thegovernment in the best manner for tthirty-one years; and then Jdied: leaving behindhim five sons. He was esteemed by Godworthy of three of the greatest privileges:the government of his nation, the dignity ofthe high-priesthood, and prophecy. For Godwas with him, and enabled him to know fu­turities: and to foretel this in particular, thatas to his two eldest sons, he foretold that theywould, not long continue in the governmentof public affairs. Their unhappy catastrophewill be worth our description: that we maythence learn, how much they were inferiorto their father's happiness.
CHAP. XI.
OF THE SUCCESSION OF ARISTOBULUS TO THE GOVERN­MENT J HIS ASSUMPTION OF REGAL HONOURS; HIS CRU­ELTY TO HIS MOTHER AND HIS BRETHREN; AND HISMISERABLE DEATH.
WHEN Hyrcanus was dead, his eldestson, Aristobulus, intending to changethe government into a kingdom, first of allput a diadem upon his head, four hundred


and eighty-one years and three months afterthe people had been delivered from the Ba­bylonish slavery, and were returned to theirown country again. This Aristobulus lovedhis next brother Antigonus, and treated himas his equal: but the others he held in bonds.He also cast his mother into prison; becauseshe disputed the government with him; forHyrcanus had left her to be mistress of all.He even proceeded to that degree of barba­rity, as to starve her to death in prison. Nayhe was alienated from his brother Antigonusby calumnies, and added him to the rest whomhe slew; yet he seemed to have an affectionfor him, and made him above the rest a part­ner with him in the kingdom. Those calum­nies he at first did not give credit to: partlybecause he loved him, and so did not giveheed to what was said against him: and partlybecause he thought the reproaches were de­rived from the envy of the relators. But whenAntigonus was once returned from the army,and the feast of tabernacles was at hand, ithappened that Aristobulus was fallen sick,and that Antigonus went up most splendidlyadorned, and with his soldiers about him intheir armour, to the temple; to celebrate thefeast, and to offer up prayers for the recoveryof his brother. Now some wicked personswho had a great mind to raise a differencebetween the brethren, made use of this op­portunity of the pompous appearance of An­tigonus, and of the great actions which hehad done; and went to the king, and spite­fully aggravated his pompous shew at thefeast; and pretended that all these circum­stances were not like those of a private per­son: that these actions were indications ofan affectation of royal authority'; and that


* See Of the War, Book II. chap. 8.
t From an. 136 to an. 107, B. C.
J Here ends the high-priesthood, and the life of thisexcellent person, John Hyrcanus: and together withhim, the Holy Theocracy, or Divine Government of theJewish nation; and its concomitant oracle by Urim.Now follows the profane and tyrannical Jewish monarchy;first of the Asmoneans, or Maccabees, and then of Herodthe Great, the Idumean; till the coming of the Messiah.See the note on HI. 8. Hear Strabo's testimony on thisoccasion, XVI. page 761, 762. "Those," says he, "thatsucceeded Moses continued for some time in earnest, bothin righteous actions, and in piety. But after a while,,there were others that took upon them the high-priest­hood; at first superstitious, and afterwards tyrannical per­sons—Such a prophet was Moses, and those that suc­ceeded him: beginning in a way not to be blamed; but
VOL. I.—NOS. 41 & 42.
changing for the worse. And when it openly appearedthat the governmentwas become tyrannical, Alexander wasthe first that set up himself for a king, instead of a priest:and his sons were Hyrcanus and Aristobulus." This isin perfect agreement with Josephus: excepting (hatStrabo omits the first king, Aristobulus; who reigningbut a single year, seems hardly to have come to hisknowledge. Nor indeed does Aristobulus, the son ofAlexander, pretend that the name of king was taken be­fore his father Alexander took it himself, XIV. 3. Seealso chap. 12, which favour Strabo also. Also indeed, ifwe may judge from the very different characters of thqEgyptian Jews under high-priests, and of the PalestineJews under kings, in the two next centuries; we maywell suppose, that the divine Shechinah was removed intoEgypt; and that the worshippers at the temple of Oniaiwere better men than those at the temple of Jerusalem.4H
>







OCR Output








AN. 1532.] 87 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


them by twenties and by tens. And let therebe one commander over each number, to benominated from the number of those overwhom they are rulers; but such as the wholemultitude have tried and approve* of, as be­ing good and righteous men; and let theserulers decide the controversies they have onewith another; if any great cause arise, letthem bring the cognizances of it before therulers of a higher dignity; and if any greatdifficulty arise, that is too hard for even theirdetermination, let them send it to thee. Bythese means two advantages will be gained;that the Hebrews will have justice donethem, and thou wilt be able to attend con­stantly on God, and procure him to be morefavourable to the people.
This was the admonition of Raguel, whichMoses received very kindly, and acted accor­ding to his suggestion: nor did he conceal theinvention of this method, nor pretend to ithimself, but informed the multitude who itwas that invented it; nay, he has named Ra­guel in the books he wrote, as the personwho invented the ordering of the people, asthinking it right to give a true testimony toworthy persons, although he might have ob­tained reputation by ascribing to himself theinvention of other men; whence we may learnthe virtuous disposition of Moses; but of thatdisposition we shall have occasion to speak inother places.
CHAP. V.


OF MOSES S ASCENT TO MOUNT SINAI; AND OF THE DIVINELAWS WHICH HE RECEIVED FROM GOD, AND DELIVEREDTO THl HEBREWS.


N


OW Moses called the multitude together,and told them that he was going unto


mount Sinai, to converse with God, to receiveand to bring back with him a certain oracle.But he enjoined them to pitch their tents nearthe mountain: and prefer the habitation thatwas nearest to God, before one more remote.When he had said this, he ascended up tomount Sinai, which is the highest of all themountains,f that are in that country, and isnot only very difficult to be ascended by menon account of its vast altitude, but becauseof the sharpness of its precipices. Nay, in­deed, it cannot be looked at without pain tothe eyes; and besides this, it was terrible andinaccessible on account of a general rumourthat God dwelt there. But the Hebrews re­moved the tents, as Moses had bidden them,and took possession of the lowest parts of themountain; and were elevated in their minds,in expectation that Moses would return withpromises of the good things he had proposedto them. So they feasted, and waited fortheir conductor, and kept themselves purefoT three days, as he had before ordered themto do. And they prayed to God, that he wouldfavourably receive Moses in his conversingwith him, and bestow some such gifts uponthem by which they might live well. Theyalso lived more plentifully as to their diet;and put on their wives and children moreornamental clothing than they usually wore.Two days passed in this way of feasting;but on the thirdJ day, before sun-rise, a cloudspread itself over the whole camp of the He­brews; such an one as none had before seen,and encompassed the place where they hadpitched their tents. And while all the restof the air was clear, there came strong windsthat raised up large showers of rain, whichbecame a mighty tempest. There was alsosuch lightningjl as was terrible to those that


* This manner of electing the judges and officers of theIsraelites by the testimonies and suffrages of the people,before they were ordained by God or Moses, deserves tobe carefully noted, because it was the pattern of the likemanner of the choice and ordination of bishops, presby­ters, and deacons, in the Christian church. See Constitut.Apost. VIII. 4, 16, 18.
t Since this mountain Sinai is here said to be the high­est of all the mountains in that country, it must be thatnow called St. Catharine's, which is one third higher thanthat within a mile of it now called Sinai, as MonsieurThevenot informs as, Travels, Part I. chap, xxviii. page168, 169. The other name of it, Horeb, is never used by-Tosephus, and perhaps was its name among the Egyptiansonly, whence the Iraelites were lately come, as Sinaiwas its name among the Arabians. Oanaanites, and other
voL. I. No. 8.
nations. Accordingly, when 1 Kings, ix. 8, the Scripturesays that Elijah came to Horeb, the mount of God, Jose-phus justly says, Anliq. VIII. 13, that he came to themountain called Sinai: and Jerome, here cited by Dr.Hudson, says, that he took this mountain to have twonames, Sinai and Choreb. De Nomin. Heb. j age 427,(Edit. Benedict.)
X Exod. xix. 16.
II That fire and lightning should attend the presence ofGod is a notion so frequent in the most ancient and Orien­tal theology, that it might possibly give occasion to theworship of fire among the Chaldeans and Persians; to themagi, among the Cappadocians, called Purrethi, whichStrabo mentions, and to the vestal fires among the Greeksand Romans, as well as the ancient Britons.







OCR Output








AN. 461 149.] ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


And this was what Onias wrote to kingPtolemy; whose piety and that of his sisterand wife Cleopatra will appear, by that epis­tle which they wrote in answer to it. Forthey laid the blame and the transgression ofthe Jaw upon the head of Onias. And thiswas their reply: "King Ptolemy and queenCleopatra, to Onias send greeting. We haveread thy petition; wherein thou desirest per­mission to purge that temple which is fallendown at Leontopolis in the Nomus of Helio­polis, and which is named from the countryBubastis. On which account we cannot butwonder that it should be pleasing to God tohave a temple erected in a place so unclean,and so full of sacred animals. But sincethou sayest that Isaiah the prophet foretoldthis long ago; we give thee leave to do it;if it may be done according to your law;and so that we may not appear to have atall offended God herein."
Accordingly Onias took the place; andbuilt a temple, and an altar to God; like in­deed to that in Jerusalem, but smaller, andpoorer. 1 do not think it proper for me nowto describe its dimensions, or its vessels:which have been already described in myseventh book of The Wars of the Jews.*However, Onias found other Jews also liketo himself, together with priests and Levitesthat there performed divine service.
Now it came to pass that the AlexandrianJews, and those Samaritans who payed theirworship to the temple that was built in thedays of Alexander at mount Gerizzim, didnow make a sedition one against another, anddisputed about their temples before Ptolemyhimself: the Jews saying, that, according to


the laws of Moses, the temple was to be builtat Jerusalem: and the Samaritans saying thatit was to be built at Gerizzim. They desiredtherefore that the king would sit with hisfriends, and hear the debates about thesematters; and punish those with death whowere baffled. Now Sabbeus and Theodosiusmanaged the argument of the Samaritans;and Andronicus, the son of Messalamus,for the people of Jerusalem. And they tookan oath by God and the king to make theirdemonstrations according to the law. Andthey desired of Ptolemy, that whosoever heshould find that transgressed what they hadsworn to, he would put him to death. Ac­cordingly the king took several of his friendsinto the council, and sat down in order tohear what the pleaders said. Now the Jewsthat were at Alexandria were in great con­cern for those men, whose lot it was to con­tend for the temple at Jerusalem. For theytook it very ill that any should pretend totake away the reputation of that temple,which was so ancient, and so celebrated,all over the habitable earth. Now whenSabbeus and Theodosius had given leave toAndronicus to speak first, he began to demon­strate out of the law, and out of the succes­sions of the high-priests, how they every onein succession from his father had received j~that dignity, and ruled over the temple; andhow all the kings of Asia had honoured thattemple with their donations, and with themost splendid gifts. But as for that at Ge­rizzim, he made no account of it, nor re­garded it as if it had ever had a being. Bythis speech, and other arguments, Andronicuspersuaded the king to ^determine, that the


phecy contained many other predictions relating to thisplace, besides the words by him recited, it is highly pro­bable that these were especially meant by him; and thatone main reason why he applied this prediction to him­self, and to his prefecture of Heliopolis, which DeanPrideaux well proves was in that part of Egypt; andwhy he chose to build in that prefecture of Heliopolis,though otherwise an improper place, was, that he hadthe same authority for building this temple in his ownprefecture of Heliopolis as in Egypt. Dean Prideauxhas much difficulty to avoid seeing this corruption of theHebrew. But it being in support of his own opinionabout this temple, he durst not see it: and indeed hereasons here in the most injudicious manner. See himat the year 149.
* See War of the Jews, Book VII. chap. 10.
t A very unfair disputation this! while the Jewishdisputant, knowing that he could not properly prove out
of the Pentateuch, that the place which the Lord theirGod should choose to place his name there, so often re­ferred to in the book of Deuteronomy, was Jerusalemany more than Gerizzim: that being not determined tillthe days of David: see VII. 13. proves only what theSamaritans did not deny, that the temple at Jerusalemwas much more ancient, and much more celebrated andhonoured than that at Gerizzim: which was nothing to thepresent purpose. The whole evidence, by the very oathsof both parties being obliged to be confined to the law ofMoses, or to the Pentateuch alone. However, worldlypolicy, and interest, and the multitude prevailing, thecourt gave sentence, as usual, on the stronger side; andSabbeus and Theodosius, the Samaritan disputants, weremartyred: and this, so far as appears, without any directhearing at all. Which is like the usual practice of suchpolitical courts about matters of religion. Our copiessay, that the body of the Jews were in great concern


4 E 2







OCR Output








312 [book viii. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


the multitude made no answer to what hesaid, Elijah desired, that for a trial of the
Sower ot the strange gods, and of their ownrod, he, who was his only prophet, whilethey had four hundred, might take a heifer,and kill it, as a sacrifice, and lay it on piecesof wood, and not kindle any fire; and thatthey should do the same things, and callupon their own gods to set* the wood onfire: for if that were done, they wouldthence learn the nature of the true God.fThis proposal pleased the people. So Elijahbade the prophets choose out a heifer first,and kill it, and to call on their gods. Butwhen there appeared no effect of the prayer,or invocation of the prophets upon their sa­crifice, Elijah derided them, and bade themcall upon their gods with a loud voice; forthey might either be on a journey, or asleep.And when these prophets had done so frommorning till noon, and cutJ themselves withswords and lances,|| according to the customof their country, and he was about to offerhis sacrifice, he bade the prophets go away,but desired the people to come near and ob­serve what he did, lest he should privatelyhide fire among the pieces of wood. Soupon the approach of the multitude, hetook twelve stones, one for each tribe of thepeople of the Hebrews; and built an altarwith them, and dug a very deep trench.And when he had laid the pieces of woodupon the altar, and upon them had laid thepieces of the sacrifice, he ordered them tofill four barrels of the water of the fountain,


and to pour it upon the altar, till it ran overit; and till the trench was filled with thewater poured into it. When he had donethis, he began to pray to God, and to intreathim to manifest his power to a people thathad been in an error a long time. Uponwhich words a fire came on a sudden fromheaven in the sight of the multitude, andfell upon the altar, and consumed the sacri­fice, till the very water was set on fire, andthe place was become dry.
Now when the Israelites saw this, they felldown upon the ground, and worshipped oneGod, and called him the only great and theonly true God: but they called the othersmere names, framed by the wild opinions ofmen. So they caught their prophets; and,at the command of Elijah, slew them. Elijahalso said to the king, that he should go todinner, without any farther concern; for thatin a little time he would see God send themrain. Accordingly Ahab went his way; butElijah went up to the highest top of MountCarmel, and sat down upon the ground, andleaned his head upon his knees; and badehis servant go up to a certain elevatedplace, and look towards the sea: and whenhe should see a cloud rise any where, heshould give him notice of it; for till thattime the air had been clear. When the ser­vant had gone up, and had said many timesthat he saw nothing; at the seventh time ofhis going up he said, that he saw a smallblack thing in the sky, not larger than aman's foot. When Elijah heard that, he


* This was the ancient way of God's declaring himselfpleased with sacrifices. See Gen. xv. 17.
t This is not the first time wherein God had declaredhis approbation of his worshippers, by sending down fireto consume the sacrifices, Lev. ix. 24, and Judges vi. 21.and though perhaps it may be possible for evil spirits, whomay have great knowledge how to manage meteors andexhalations to their purposes, to make fire descend fromthe clouds; yet, since they can do nothing without adivine permission, it is absurd to think, that in a matterof competition between him and false gods, he shouldgive evil spirits any license to rival him in his miracles.he Clerc's Commentary. B.
I Mr. Spanheim takes notice here, that in the worshipof Mithra, the god of the Persians, the priests cut them­selves in the same manner as did these priests in theirinvocations of Baal, the god of the Phoenicians.
|| A strange method one would think to obtain the fa­vour of their gods! And yet, if we look into antiquity weshall find, that nothing was more common in the religiousrites of several nations than this barbarous custom. To
this purpose we may observe, that (as Plutarch, De Su-perstitione, tells us) the priests of Bellona, when they sa­crificed to that goddess, were wont to besmear the victimwith their own blood; but the Persian Magi (accordingto Herodotus, lib. vii. c. 191.) used to appease tempests,and allay the winds, by making incisions in their flesh;that they who carried about the Syrian goddess, (as Apu-leius, lib. viii. relates,) among other mad pranks, were,every now and then, cutting and slashing themselveswith knives, till the blood gushed out: and that even tothis day some modern travellers tell us, that in Turkey,Persia, and several parts of the Indies, there are a kind offanatics, who think they do a very meritorious thing, andwhat is highly acceptable to the Deity, in cutting andmangling their own flesh. "Dii autum nullo debent colligenere" (says Seneca, as he is quoted by St. Austin De Civ.Dei. vi. c. 10.) " si et hoc volunt. Tantus est perturbataementis, et sedius suis pulsae furor, ut sic dii placentur,quemadtnodum ne homines quidem saeviunt teterrimi, etin fabulas traditae crudelitatis," &c. Calmet's and LeCUrc1} Commentaries. B.







OCR Output








AN. 153.] 457 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


dea, wrote to all his friends, both Jews andauxiliaries, that they should seize upon Jona­than, and bring him to him. But when, uponall their endeavours, they were not able toseize upon Jonathan, (for he was sensible ofthe snares they laid for him, and very care­fully guarded against them,) Bacchides wasangry at these deserters as having imposedupon him, and upon the king, and slew fiftyof their leaders. Thereupon Jonathan, withhis brother, and those that were with him,retired to Bethagla, a village that lay in thewilderness, out of his fear of Bacchides. Healso built towers in it, and encompassed itwith walls, and took care that it should besafely guarded. Upon the hearing of which,Bacchides led his own army along with him,and besides took his Jewish auxiliaries, andcame against Jonathan, and made an assaultupon his fortifications, and besieged himmany days. But Jonathan did not abate ofhis courage at the zeal Bacchides shewed inthe siege, but courageously opposed him.And while he left his brother Simon in thecity, to fight with Bacchides, he went pri­vately out into the country, and got a greatbody of men together of his own party, andfell upon Bacchides's camp in the night time,and destroyed a great many of them. Hisbrother Simon knew also of his falling uponthem; because he perceived that the ene­mies were slain by him: so he sallied outupon them, and burnt the engines which theMacedonians used, and made a great slaugh­ter of them. And when Bacchides saw him­self encompassed with enemies, he fell intodespair, as confounded at the unexpected illsuccess of this siege. However, he ventedhis displeasure at these misfortunes uponthose deserters who sent for him from theking; as having deluded him. So he had amind to finish this siege after a decent man­ner, if it were possible for him so to do, andthen to return home.


* 1 Macc. ix. 72.
t This Alexander Bala, who certainly pretended to bethe son of Antiochus Epiphanes, and was owned as suchby the Jews, and Romans, and many others, and yet is byseveral historians deemed to be an impostor; is, however,by Josephus, believed to have been the real son of thatAntiochus; and by him always spoken of accordingly.And truly since the original contemporary and authenticauthor of the first book of Maccabees x. 1. calls him byhis father's name, Epiphanes; and says he was the son of


When Jonathan understood his intentions,he sent ambassadors to him about a leagueof friendship, and mutual assistance; andthat they might restore those whom they hadtaken captive on both sides. So Bacchidesthought this a decent way of retiring home;and made a league of friendship with Jona­than; by which it was mutually agreed thatthey would not any more make war oneagainst another. Accordingly he restored thecaptives, and took his own men with him, andreturned to the king to Antioch. And afterthis departure he never came into Judeaagain.* Then did Jonathan take the oppor­tunity of this quiet state of things, and wentand lived in the city Michmash; and theregoverned the multitude, and punished thewicked; and by that means purged the na­tion of them.
CHAP. II.
OF THE ADVANTAGES GRANTED TO JONATHAN, FIRST BYDEMETRIUS, AND AFTERWARDS BY ALEXANDER BALA, INORDER TO OBTAIN HIS ASSISTANCE; AND OF THE DEATHOF DEMETRIUS.
NOW in the hundred and sixtieth year,Alexander, the tson of Antiochus Epi­phanes, came up into Syria, and took Ptole-mais 4 the soldiers within having betrayed itto him. For they were at enmity with De­metrius, on account of his insolence and dif­ficulty of access. For he shut himself up ina palace that had four towers; which he hadbuilt himself not far from Antioch, and ad­mitted nobody. He was also slothful, andnegligent about the public affairs: whichrendered him odious to his subjects. Whentherefore Demetrius heard that Alexanderwas in Ptolemais, he took his whole army,and led it against him: he also sent ambas­sadors to Jonathan, about a league of mutualassistance and friendship. For he resolvedto be beforehand with Alexander: lest the
Antiochus, I suppose the other writers, who are all muchlater, are not to be followed against such evidence, thoughperhaps Epiphanes might have him by a woman of no fami­ly . The king of Egypt also, Philometor, soon gave him hisdaughter in marriage: which he would hardly have donehad he believed him to be a counterfeit, and of so mean abirth as the historians pretend. He is also called Biovarup,one of a divine lineage in the coins: as Spanheim assures.us. Nor does any original evidence appear against it.% 1 Macc. x. 1.







OCR Output








104 [book ra. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


people, and set them apart to be a holy tribe,and purified them by water, taken from per­petual springs, and with such sacrifices aswere usually offered to God on the like occa­sions. He also delivered to them the taber­nacle, and the sacred vessels, and the othercurtains which were made for covering thetabernacle, that they might minister underthe conduct of the priests, who had beenalready consecrated to God.
He also determined concerning animals,which of them might be used for food, andwhich they were obliged to abstain from,which matters, when this work shall give meoccasion, shall be farther explained, and thecauses shall be added by which he was in­duced to allot some of them to be our food,and enjoined us to abstain from others. How­ever, he forbade us entirely the use of bloodfor food, and esteemed it to contain the souland spirit. He also forbade us to Cat theflesh of the animal that died of itself, as alsothe caul, and the fat of goats, and sheep, andbulls.
He also ordered that those whose bodieswere afflicted with leprosy, and that had agonorrhoea, should not come into the city;*nay, he removed the women, under certainsituations, till the seventh day, after which helooked upon them as pure, and permittedthem to come in again. The law permitsthose also who have taken care of funerals tocome in after the same manner, when thisnumber of days is over; but if any continuedlonger than that number of days in a state ofpollution, the law appointed the offering twolambs for a sacrifice, one of which they are topurge by the fire, and the other the prieststake for themselves. In the same manner dothose sacrifice who have had the gonorrhoea;but for the lepers he suffered them not tocome into the city at all, nor to live with anyothers, as if they were in effect dead persons.But if any one had obtained, by prayer toGod, a recovery from that distemper, and hadgained a healthful complexion again, such aone returned thanks to God with several sortsof sacrifices, concerning which we will speakhereafter.
.Hence one cannot but smile at those who
— - ■ H—"^——-' ■
* We may. here note that Josephus frequently calls thecamn the city, and the court of the Mosaic tabernacle atemple, and the tabernacle itself a holy house, with allu-


say, that Moses was himself afflicted with theleprosy when he fled out of Egypt, and thathe became the conductor of those who onthat account left that country, and led theminto the land of Canaan: for had this beentrue, Moses would not have made these lawsto his own dishonour, which indeed it wasmore likely he would have opposed if othershad endeavoured to introduce them: and thisthe rather, because there are lepers in manynations who are yet in honour, and not onlyfree from reproach and avoidance, but whohave been great captains of armies, and beenentrusted with high offices in the common­wealth, and have had the privilege of enter­ing into holy places and temples: so thatnothing hindered, but if either Moses himself,or the multitude that was with him, had beenliable to such a misfortune, he might havemade laws about them for their credit andadvantage, and have laid no manner of diffi­culty upon them. Accordingly, it is a plaincase that it is out of violent prejudice onlythat they report these things about us. ButMoses was pure from any such distemper,and lived with countrymen who were pure ofit also, and thence made the laws which con­cerned others that had the distemper. Hedid this for the honour of God; but, as tothese matters, let every one consider themafter what manner he pleases.
As to the women, when they have borne achild, Moses forbade them to come into thetemple, or to touch the sacrifices, before fortydays were over, supposing it be a boy; butif she hath borne a girl, the law is that shecannot be admitted before twice that numberof days be over; and when, after the afore­mentioned time appointed for them, they per­form their sacrifices, the priests distributethem before God.
But if any one suspected that his wife hadbeen guilty of adultery, he was to bring atenth deal of barley flour: they then cast onehandful to God, and gave the rest of it to thepriests for food. One of the priests set thewoman at the gates that are turned towardfethe temple, and took the veil from her head,and wrote the name of God on parchment,and enjoined her to swear that she had not
■..<" 'i v."T—T- ..t -""* ."' .* *" "' ** "* "" "" '"
sion to the latter city, temple, and holy house, which heknew so well long afterwards. - --•/.,-i?







OCR Output













OCR Output








262 OOOT-ftl. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


ordered him to answer quickly, that hemight declare what he had chosen to God;the king reasoned with himself that in casehe should ask for famine, he would appearto do it for others, and without danger tohimself; since he had a great deal of cornhoarded up; that in case he should chooseto be overcome by his enemies for threemonths, he would appear to have chosen war,because he had valiant men and strong holds;and that therefore he feared nothing there­from; so he chose that affliction which iscommon to kings, and to their subjects; andin which the fear was equal on all sides; andsaid that it was much better to fall into thehands of God, than into those of his enemies.When the prophet had heard this, he de­clared it to God; who thereupon sent a pes­tilence and a mortality upon the Hebrews.Now the miserable disease was one indeed;but it carried them off by ten thousand causesand occasions, which those that were afflicted,could not understand; for one died upon theneck of another; and the terrible maladyseized them before they were aware, andbrought them to their end suddenly. Somegave up the ghost immediately, with verygreat pains and bitter grief; and some wereworn away by their distempers, and hadnothing remaining to be buried; but as soonas ever they fell, were entirely macerated:some were choked, and greatly lamentedtheir case, as being also stricken with asudden darkness; and some there were who,as they were burying a relation, fell downdead,* without finishing the rites of thefuneral. Now there perished of this disease,which began with the morning, and lastedtill the hour of dinner, seventy thousand.fNay, the angel stretched out his hand overJerusalem, as sending this terrible judgmentupon it. But David had put on sackcloth,and lay upon the ground intreating God, andbegging that the distemper might now cease;and that he would be satisfied with those that
* Whence Josephus took these distinct and melancholyaccounts of the particular symptoms, and miserablemethods of dying in this terrible pestilence, we cannotnow tell; our other copies affording us no such account.
t 2 Sam. xxiv. 15.
t Six hundred shekels of gold, 1 Chron. xxi. 26.
11 The mountain of the house, or mount Moriah, byMr. Maundrell's measures, page 105, was about five hun­dred and seventy-one cubits wide, and about nine hun-


had already perished. And when the kinglooked up into the air, and saw the angelcarried along thereby unto Jerusalem, withhis sword drawn, he said to God, that hemight justly be punished, who was theirshepherd; but that the sheep ought to bepreserved, as not having sinned at all; andhe implored God that he would send hiswrath upon him, and upon all his family; butspare the people.
When God heard his supplication, hecaused the pestilence to cease; and sentGad the prophet to him, and commandedhim to go up immediately to the threshingfloor of Araunah the Jebusite; and build analtar there to God, and offer sacrifices. WhenDavid heard that, he did not neglect his duty,but made haste to the place appointed him.Now Araunah was threshing wheat; andwhen he saw the king, and all his servantscoming to him, he ran to him and worshippedhim. He was by his lineage a Jebusite, buta particular friend of David's, and for thatcause it was, that when he overthrew the city,he did him no harm; as we have already in­formed the reader. Now Araunah inquired,"Wherefore is my lord come to his servant?"He answered, to buy of him the threshingfloor; that he might therein build an altar toGod, and offer a sacrifice. Araunah replied,that he freely gave him both the threshingfloor, and the ploughs, and the oxen for aburnt-offering; and he besought God gra­ciously to accept his sacrifice. The kingsaid, that he took his generosity and magna­nimity kindly, and accepted his good will;but he desired him to take the price of themall; for that it was not just to offer a sacrificethat cost nothing. And When Araunah saidhe might do as he pleased, he bought thethreshing floorJ for ||nfty shekels. And whenhe had built an altar, he performed divineservice, and brought a burnt-offering, andoffered peace-offerings. With these God waspacified, and became gracious to them again.
dred and eighty cubits long=thirty-five acres, which if itall belonged to Araunah, might well be worth those sixhundred shekels of gold or 1251. which we have 1 Chron.xxi. 25. and a small part of it with the oxen and instru­ments, would be much more worth than those fifty shekelsof silver=5l. 18s. which we have 2 Sam. xxiv. 24. andhere. So that the larger number in the Chronicles is, inall probability, the true number-







OCR Output








154 [book v. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


recourse to arms, and to a battle for yourpunishment immediately; but, on account ofour kindred, and the probability that youmay be reclaimed, we have taken this methodof sending an ambassage; that when we havelearned the true reasons by which you havebeen moved to build this altar, we may neitherseem to have been too rash in assaulting youby our weapons of war, if it prove that youmade the altar for justifiable reasons, andmay then justly punish you, if the accusationprove true; for we can hardly suppose thatyou, who have been acquainted with the willof God, and have been hearers of those lawswhich he himself hath given us, now you areseparated from us, and gone to that patrimonyof yours, which you, through the grace ofGod, and that providence he exercises overyou, have obtained by lot, can forget him, andcan leave that ark, and that altar which ispeculiar to us, and can introduce strangegods, and imitate the wicked practices of theCanaanites. Now this will appear to havebeen a small crime, if you repent now, andproceed no farther in your madness, but paya due reverence to, and keep in mind, thelaws of your country. But if you persist inyour sins, we will not grudge our pains topreserve your laws, but will pass over Jor­dan, and defend them, and defend God also;and shall esteem of you as of men no waydiffering from the Canaanites, but shall de­stroy you in the like manner as we destroyedthem; for do not you imagine that becauseyou are got over the river you are beyond thereach of God's power. You are every wherein places that belong to him, and it is impos­sible to overrun his power, and the punish­ment he will bring on men thereby. But ifyou think that your settlement here will beany obstruction to your conversion to what isgood, nothing need hinder us from dividingthe land anew, and leaving this old land tobe for the feeding of sheep; but you will dowell to return to your duty, and to leave offthese new crimes. And we beseech you, byyour wives and children, not to force us topunish you. Take therefore such measuresin this assembly, as supposing that your ownsafety, and the safety of those that are dearestto you. is therein concerned; and believe thatit is better for you to be conquered by words,


than to continue in your purpose, and therebyto experience deeds and war."
When Phineas had discoursed thus, thegovernors of the assembly, and the wholemultitude, began to make an apology forthemselves, concerning what they were ac­cused of; and they said, "We neither willdepart from the relation we bear to you, norhave we built the altar in way of innovation;we own one and the same God with all theHebrews, and that brazen altar which is be­fore the tabernacle, on which we will offer oursacrifices. As to the altar we have raised,on account of which we are thus suspected,it was not built for worship; but that it mightbe a sign and a monument of our relation toyou for ever; and a necessary caution to us toact wisely, and to continue in the laws of ourcountry; but not a handle for transgressingthem, as you suspect. And let God be ourauthentic witness, that this was the occasionof our building this altar. Whence we begyou will have a better opinion of us; and donot impute such a thing to us as would renderany of the posterity of Abraham well worthyof perdition; in case they attempt to bring innew rites, and such as are different from ourusual practices."
When they had made this answer, andPhineas had commended them for it, he cameto Joshua, and explained before the peoplewhat answer they had received. Now Joshuawas glad that he was under no necessity ofsetting them in array, or of leading them toshed blood, and make war against men thatwere of their own kindred; and accordinglyhe offered sacrifices of thanksgiving to Godfor the same; so Joshua, after that, dissolvedthis great assembly of the people. and sentthem to their own inheritances, while himselflived at Shechem. But in the* twentieth yearafter this, when he was very old, he sent forthose of the greatest dignity in the severalcities, with those in authority, and the senate;and gathered together as many of the com­mon people as he could; and when they werecome, he put them in mind of all the benefitsGod had bestowed on them; which could notbut be a great many, since from a low estatethey were advanced to so great a degree ofglory and plenty; and exhorted them to take


* An. 1467.







OCR Output








aN. 1897.] 33 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


prayed to God that Rebeka might be foundamong them, or her whom Abraham sent himas his servant to espouse to his son, in casehis will were that this marriage should beconsummated; and that she might be madeknown to him by this sign, that while othersdenied him water to drink, she might give ithim.
With this intention he went to the well,and desired the maidens to give him somewater to drink: but while the others refused,on pretence that they wanted it all at home,and could spare none for him, one only of thecompany rebuked them for their peevish be­haviour towards the stranger, and said,." What is there that you will ever communi­cate to any body, who have not so much asgiven the man some water?" She then offeredhim water in an obliging manner, and he be­gan to hope that this grand affair would suc­ceed; but desiring still to know the truth, hecommended her for her generosity and goodnature, that she did not scruple to afford asufficiency of water to those who wanted it,though it cost her some pains to draw it. Hethen asked her who were her parents, andwished them joy of such a daughter; "andmayest thou be espoused," said he, " to theirsatisfaction, into the family of an agreeablehusband, and bring him legitimate children."Nor did she disdain to satisfy his enquiriesbut told him her family. "They call me Re­beka," said she: "my father was Bethuel,but he is dead; and Laban is my brother,


See also Odyss. lib. x. 105.
A similar custom prevailed also in Armenia, as may beseen in Xenophon's Anabasis, b. iv. B.
* The weight of the ornaments put upon Rebeka ap­pears extraordinary. But CJiardin assures us, that evenheavier were worn by the women of the East when hewas there. He says that the women wear rings andDracelets of as great weight as this, and even heavier,through all Asia. They are rather manacles than brace­lets. There are some as large as the finger. The womenwear several of them, one above the other, in such amanner as sometimes to have the arm covered with themfrom the wrist to the elbow. Poor people wear as manyof glass or horn. They hardly ever take them off. Theyare their riches. Mariner's Observations, vol. ii. p. 600.
Among the several female ornaments which Abrahamsent by his servant, whom he employed to search out awife for his son Isaac, were jewels of silver and jewels ofgold, exclusive of raiment, which probably was very richand valuable for the age in which Abraham lived. Richand splendid apparel, especially such as was adorned withgold, was very general in the eastern nations, from theearliest ages: and as the fashions and customs of the


and, together with my mother, takes care ofall our family affairs, and is my guardian."When the servant heard this, he was veryglad at what had happened, and at what wastold him, as perceiving that God had thusplainly directed his journey; and producinghis bracelets,* and some other ornamentswhich it was esteemed decent for virgins towear, he gave them to the damsel, by way ofacknowledgment, and as a reward for herkindness in giving him water to drink, say­ing, it was but just that she should have them,because she was so much more obliging thanany of the rest. She desired also that hewould come and lodge with them since theapproach of the night gave him not time toproceed farther. 1 hen producing his pre­cious ornaments for women, he said, he de­sired to trust them to none more safely, thanto such as she had shewed herself to be; andthat he believed he might guess at the hu­manity of her mother and brother, that theywould not be displeased from the virtue hefound in her, for he would not be burthen-some, but would pay the hire for his enter­tainment, and spend his own money: towhich she replied, that he guessed rightly asto the humanity of her parents, but com­plained that he should think them so par­simonious as to take money, for that heshould have all his wants supplied freely;but she said, she would first inform her bro­ther Laban, and if he gave her leave, shewould conduct him in.
Orientals are not subject to much variation, so we findthat this propensity to golden ornaments, prevails even inthe present age, among the females in the countries bor­dering on Judea. Thus Mungo Park, in the account ofhis travels in Africa, mentions the following singular cir­cumstance, respecting the ornamental part of the dress ofan African lady. "It is evident from the account of theprocess by which negroes obtain gold in Manding, that thecountry contains a considerable portion of this preciousmetal. A great part is converted into ornaments for thewomen: and, when a lady of consequence is in full dress,the gold about her person may be worth, altogether, fromfifty to eighty pounds sterling."
We find also that the same disposition for rich orna­mental apparel prevailed in the times of the Apostles; forSt. Peter cautioned the females of quality in the first agesof Christianity, when they adorned themselves, not tohave it consist, in the outward adorning, of plaiting the hair,and of wearing gold, or of putting on apparel. 1 Pet. iii.3. See also Psalm xlv. 9, 13. Upon thy right hand didstand the queen in gold of Ophir.—Her clothing is of wroughtgold. B.







OCR Output








518 [book XIV. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


decrees of the cities, and rescripts of thepraetors to such epistles as concerned ourrights and privileges. And certainly such asare not ill disposed to what we write, maybelieve that they are all to this purpose; andthat by these specimens which we have in­serted. For since we have produced evidentmarks, that may still be seen, of the friend­ship we have had with the Romans, and de­monstrated that those marks are engravenupon columns and tables of brass in thecapitol, that are still in being, and preservedto this day, we have omitted to set them alldown, as needless and uninteresting. For Icannot suppose any one so perverse, as notto believe the friendship we have had withthe Romans; while they have demonstratedthe same by such a great number of theirdecrees relating to us. Nor will they doubtof our fidelity as to the rest of those decrees;since we have shewn the same in those wehave produced. And thus have we sufficient­ly explained that friendship and confederacywe at those times had with the Romans.
CHAP. XI.
MARCUS* SUCCEEDS TO THE PRESIDENCY OF SYRIA, ON THEASSASSINATION OF SEXTUS CESAR; CASSItTS COMES INTOSYRIA, AND DISTRESSES JUDEA; AND MALICHUS, AFTERTREACHEROUSLY KILLING ANTIPATER, IS SLAIN BYHEROD.
ABOUT this timet the affairs of Syriawere in great disorder, on the followingoccasion. Cecilius Bassus, one of Pompey'sparty, laid a treacherous design against Sex-tus Caesar, and slew him: and then took hisarmy, and got the management of public af­fairs into his own hands. So there arose agreat war about Apamia; while Caesar's ge­nerals came against him, with an army ofhorsemen and footmen. To these Antipateralso sent succours, and his sons with them;as calling to mind the kindnesses they hadreceived from Caesar; and on that accounthe thought it but just to require punishmentfor him, and to take vengeance on the man


that had murdered him. And as the warwasJ drawn out into a great length, Marcuscame from Rome to take Sextus's governmentupon him. But Caesar was slain by Cassiusand Brutus, in the senate-house, after he hadretained the government three years and sixmonths.
As the war that arose upon the death ofCaesar was now|| begun, and the principalmen were all gone, some one way, and someanother, to raise armies, Cassius came fromRome into Syria, in order to receive the armythat lay in the camp at Apamia; and havingraised the siege, he brought over both Bassusand Marcus to his party. He then went overthe cities, and got together weapons and sol­diers; and laid great taxes upon those cities.And he chiefly oppressed Judea, and exactedof it seven hundred talents. But Antipater,when he saw the state to be in so great con­sternation and disorder, he divided the col­lection of that sum, and appointed his twosons to gather it. And so, that part of it wasto be exacted from Malichus, who was ill dis­posed to him; and part by others. And be­cause Herod did exact what was required ofhim from Galilee before others, he was in thegreatest favour with Cassius. For he thoughtit prudent to cultivate a friendship with theRomans; and to gain their good will at theexpense of others. Whereas the curators ofthe other cities, with their citizens, were soldfor slaves: and Cassius reduced four citiesinto a state of slavery; the two most potentof which were Gophna and Emmaus: andbesides these, Dydda and Thamna. Nay,Cassius was so very angry at Malichus, thathe would have killed him, had not Hyrcanus,by the means of Antipater, sent him a hun­dred talents of his own, and thereby pacifiedhis anger.
After Cassius was gone out of Judea, Ma­lichus laid snares for Antipater: as thinkingthat his death would be the preservation ofHyrcanus's government. But Antipater per­ceived his design, and retired beyond Jordan,


* For Marcus, this president of Syria, sent as successorto Sextus Caesar, the Roman historians require us to readMurcus in Josephus; and this perpetually, both in theseAntiquities, and in his history of the War: as the learnedgenerally agree. Whether he himself originally wrotethe name Marcus or Murcus; or whether the transcribershave not put a usual for an unusual name; which is sup­posed to have been a practice not uncommon amongst
them; cannot now be known.
t An. 45.
j The reason of the protraction of this war at Apamia,before the murder of Caesar, Dr. Hudson observes, maybe seen in Strabo, XVI. page 752. though the entire pas­sage be too large for this place. See Prideaux at theyears 46, 45, 44, 43.
11 An. 44.







OCR Output








:J28 [book IX ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


 


Ahab's steward came to him, and said, hewas not ignorant how her husband had pre­served the prophets, that were to be slainby Jezebel, the wife of Ahab: for she saidthat he hid a hundred of them; and hadborrowed money for their maintenance; andthat after her husband's death, she and herchildren were carried away to be madeslaves,* by the creditors, and she desired ofhim to have mercy upon her, on account ofwhat her husband did; and afford her someassistance. And when he asked her whatshe had in the house? she said, Nothing buta very small quantity of oil in a cruse. So theprophet bade her go away, and borrow agreat many empty vessels of her neighbours;


the good steward of Abab, as Joscphus affirms, is con­firmed, as Dr. Hudson informs us, by the Chaldee Pa-raphrast, and by the Rabbins, and others besides. Noris that unlikely, which Josephus here adds, that thesedebts were contracted by her husband for the support ofthose hundred of the Lord's prophets whom he main­tained by fifty in a cave in the days of Ahab and Jezebel,1 Kings xviii. 4, which circumstance rendered it highlyfit that the prophet Elisha should provide her a remedy,and enable her to redeem herself and her sons from thatslavery which insolvent debtors were liable to, by thelaw of Moses, Lev. xxv. 39, Matt, xviii. 25, and whichhe did accordingly, with God's help, at the expense ofa miracle.
* The Jewish law looked upon children as the propergoods of their parents, who had power to sell them forseven years, as their creditors had to compel them to doit in order to pay their debt; and from the Jews thiscustom was propagated to the Athenians, and from themto the Romans. The Romans indeed had the most abso­lute control over their children. By the decree of Ro­mulus they could imprison, beat, kill, or sell them forslaves. But Numa Pompilius first moderated this, andthe emperor Dioclesian made a law, that no free personshould be sold upon account of debt. The ancient Athe­nians had the like jurisdiction over their children; butSolon reformed this cruel custom; as indeed it seemeda little hard, that the children of a poor man, who haveno manner of inheritance left them, should be compelledinto slavery, in order to pay their deceased father's debts:and yet this was the custom, as appears from this passage,wherein the prophet does not pretend to reprove the cre­ditor, but only puts the woman in a method to pay him.Calmtt,s and he Clere's Commentaries. B.
t Dr. Hudson, with very good reason, slispects thatthere is no small defect in our present copies of Josephus,just before the beginning of this paragraph, and thatchiefly as to that distinct account which he had given usreason to expect in the preceding one, and to which heseems to refer, chap. viii. concerning the glorious miracleswhich Elisha wrought; which indeed in our Bibles arenot a few, 2 Kings iv—ix. but of which we have severalomitted in Josephus's present copies. Nor does the fol­lowing incoherence here, which requires Joram to bewareof that place, as 2 Kings vi. 10. whereas no certain place


and, when she had shut her chamber door,to pour the oil into them all: for that Godwould fill them. And when the woman haddone what she was commanded, and badeher children bring every one of the vessels,and all were filled, she came to the prophet,and told him they were full. Upon whichhe advised her to go and sell the oil, and
S>ay the creditors what was owing to them:or that there would be some surplus ofthe price of oil; which she might makeuse of for the maintenance of her children.And thus did Elisha discharge the woman'sdebts, and free her from the vexation of hercreditors.
Elishaf also sent a hasty message to Jo-had, in his present copies, been mentioned before, at allagree with the foregoing coherence, and context, asit does in our other copies. One of those histories,omitted at present, was evidently in his Bible. I meanthat of curing Naaman's leprosy, 2 Kings v. for heplainly alludes to it, 111. 11. where he observes, that"There were lepers in many nations, who yet have beenin honour; and not only free from reproach, and avoid­ance; but who have been great captaius of armies, andbeen intrusted with high offices in the commonwealth,and have had the privilege of entering into holy placesand temples." But what makes me most to regret thewant of that history in our present copies of Josephus, isthis, that we have here, as it is commonly understood,one of the greatest difficulties in all the Bible, I meanthat in 2 Kings v. 18, 19. where Naaman, after he hadbeen miraculously cured by a prophet of the true God,and had thereupon promised, that he would thenceforthoffer neither burnt-offering nor sacrifices unto other gods,but unto the Lord; adds, "In this thing the Lord pardonthy servant, that when my master goeth into the houseof Rimmon to worship there, and he leaneth on myhand, and I bow myself in the house of Rimmon; whenI bow down myself in the house of Rimmon, theLord pardon thy servant in this thing." And Elisha saidunto him, "Go in peace." This looks like a prophet'spermission for being partaker in idolatry itself, out ofcompliance with an idolatrous court. The Septuagint inour ordinary copies, plainly understood it so, by usingthe verb bowing down, in the future tense; althoughTheodoret cites it as in the past tense. And the greatBochart has shewn, that in the original, it more properlybelongs to the times past, Op. page 892, 894, 898. andonly contains his desire of pardon for what he had for­merly done, while he was a gross idolater; and not ofbeing indulged in any such thing for the time to come.The permission of which seems utterly inconsistent withboth the Old ai*New Testament. It is therefore a greatpity that Josephus's copies should be defective in so re­markable a place. Nor is it very unlikely, that whatJosephus promised to speak of afterward, V. 1. concerningthe curse on the rebuilder of Jericho, but is not nowfound in his present books, was contained in what is herewanting upon occasion of Elisha's miracle there, 2 Kingsii. 18—22.







OCR Output








AiV. 233 1083.] ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS


and so they brought the ark to Jerusalem.But as they came to the threshing floor of*Chidon, a place so called, Uzzahf wasslain by the anger of God. For as the oxenshook the ark, he stretched out his hand andwould needs take hold of it. Now becausehe was not a priest, and yet touched the ark,God struck him dead. Hereupon both theking and the people were displeased at thedeath of Uzzah; and the place where he diedis called the Breach of UzzahJ unto this day.So David was afraid, and supposing that ifhe received the ark to himself into the city,he might suffer in the like manner as Uzzahhad suffered, who, upon his barely puttingout his hand to the ark, died in the manneralready mentioned: he did not receive it tohimself into the city; but he took it asideunto a certain place belonging to a righteousman, whose name was Obededom, who was,by his family, a Levite, and deposited the arkwith him. And it remained there three entiremonths. This augmented the house of Obed­edom, and conferred many blessings upon it:and when the king heard what had befallenObededom; how he was become of a poorman, in a low estate, exceeding happy, andthe object of envy to all those that saw or in-


quired after his houseThe took courage; and,hoping that he should meet with no misfortunethereby, he transferred the ark to his ownhouse;|j the priests carrying it, while sevencompanies of singers, who were set in thatorder by the king, went before it; and whilehe himself played upon the harp, and joinedin the music;§ insomuch, that when his wifeMichal, the daughter of Saul, saw him so do­ing, she laughed at him. But when they hadbrought in the ark, they placed it under thetabernacle which David had pitched for it;and he offered costly sacrifices, and peace-offerings; and treated the whole multitude,and dealt both to the women, and the men,and the infants, a loaf of bread and a cake,and another cake baked in a pan, with a por­tion of the sacrifice. So when he had thusfeasted the people, he sent them away, andreturned to his own house.
But when Michal his wife, the daughter ofSaul, came and stood by him, she wished himall other happiness; and intreated, that what­ever he should farther desire, to the utmostpossibility, might be given by God, and thathe might be favourable to him. Yet did sheblame him,** that so great a king as he wasshould dance after an unseemly manner; and,


* 1 Chron. xiii. 9.
t Josephus seems to be partly in the right, when heobserves here, that Uzzah was no priest, (though perhapshe might be a Levite,) and was therefore struck dead fortouching the ark, contrary to the law; and for which pro­fane rashness death was the penalty by that law, Numb.iv. 15, 20. See the like before, VI. 1. It is not impro­bable that the putting this ark in a cart, when it ought tohave been carried by the priests or Levites, as it waspresently here in Josephus so carried from Obededom'shouse to David's, might be also an occasion of the angerof God on that breach of the law. See Numb. iv. 15.1 Chron. xv. 13.
t 2 Sam. vi. 8. 1 Chron. xv. 13.
ft It is supposed by some, that this bringing back of theark was appointed to be one of the great festivals; andthe reason why David might summon so many of hisprincipal ministers and officers to accompany him in theexpedition might be, to possess the young people,who perhaps had heard little or nothing of the ark, byreason of its having been absent so long, with a mightyveneration for it when they saw the king, and so many ofthe chief nobility waiting on it, with such a variety ofmusic, and such public declarations of joy. Miller's His­tory of the Church.
§ Strabo teHs us, that it was customary among theGreeks, as well as other nations, to use music and dancingin the processions before their gods, lib. 10. Callima-chus mentions the chori, and dancings of the youth at thealtar of Apollo; Plato observes that among the Egyptians,
all kinds of music, songs, and dances, were consecrated totheir gods. De Legibus, 1. 3. And even Lucian (DeSaltatione) expressly says, that among the ancients, noceremonial of religion, no expiation, no atonement, wasaccounted rightly accomplished without dancing. So thatDavid was far from being singular in his behaviour uponthis occasion; nor was his behaviour, in this particular,any disparagement to his regal dignity. His dancing, i. e.his moving in certain serious and solemn measures, suitedto music of the same character and tendency, was an ex­ercise highly conducive to the purposes of piety, and hismixing with the public festivities of his people was a con­descension, (as Tacitus relates of Augustus the Romanemperor,) not unbecoming the greatest monarch. Policytaught Augustus to put himself upon a level with his sub­jects in the public rejoicings; piety taught David, that allmen are upon a- level in the solemnities of religion. Sothat David was not singular in his behaviour upon thisoccasion* Patrick's Commentary, and The History of theLife of King David, vol. 2. B.
**" The words of Michal, wherein she upbraids David.are these :—How glorious was the king of Israel to-day.who uncovered himself to-day, in-the eyes of the hand­maids of his servants, as one of the vain fellows shame­lessly uncovereth himself! 2 Sam. vi. 20. At first read­ing, they seem to intimate, that David, in his dancing,had exposed his naked body, and acted some way or otheiimmodestly. But these words, we are to consider, werespoken in a fit of passion, and when Michal was mindedto aggravate matters; for it is not to be doubted, but that







OCR Output








AN. 1104.] 207 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


a* goat's liver; and when her father, as soonas it was day, sent to seize David, she said tothose that were there, that he had not beenwell during that night; and shewed them thebed cover; and made them believe, by theleaping of the liver, which caused the bed­clothes to move also, that David breathedlike one that was asthmatic. So when thosethat were sent told Saul, that David had notbeen well in the night, he ordered him to bebrought in that condition; for he intended tokill him. Now when they came, and unco­vered the bed, and found out the woman'scontrivance, they told it to the king. Andwhen her father complained that she hadsaved his enemy and had put a trick uponhimself; she invented this plausible defence,and" said, that when he threatened to kill her,she lent him her assistance for his preser­vation, out of fear, for which assistance sheought to be forgiven, because it was not doneof her own free choice, but out of necessity."For," said she, " I do not suppose that thouwast so zealous to kill thy enemy, as thouwast that I should be saved." AccordinglySaul forgave the damsel. But David, whenhe had escaped his danger, came to the pro­phet Samuel, at Ramah, and told him whatsnares the king had laid for him; and howhe was very near to death by Saul throwinga spear at him; although he had been no wayguilty with relation to him; nor had he beencowardly in his battles with his enemies; buthad succeeded well in them all, by God'sassistance, which thing was indeed the causeof Saul's hatred to David.
When the prophet was made acquaintedwith the unjust proceedings of the king, heleft the city Ramah, and took David with him,


to a certain place called Naioth;t and therehe abode with him. But when it was toldSaul, that David was with the prophet, hesent soldiers to him, and ordered them to takehim, and bring him to him. And when theycame to Samuel, and found there a congre­gation of prophets, they became partakers ofthe Divine Spirit, and began to prophesy.Which when Saul heard of, he sent others toDavid, who prophesying in like mariner asdid the first, he again sent others; whichthird sort prophesying also, at last he wasangry, and went thither in great haste him­self. But when he was just by the place,Samuel, before he saw him, made him pro­phesy also. And when Saul came to him,}he was disordered in mind, and under thevehement agitation of a spirit; and|| puttingoff his garments, he fell down, and lay on theground all that day and night, in the presenceof Samuel and David.
And David went thence, and came to Jona­than, the son of Saul, and lamented to himwhat snares were laid for him by his father,and said, that though he had been guilty ofno evil, nor had offended against him, yet hewas very zealous to get him killed. Here­upon Jonathan exhorted him not to give creditto such suspicions, nor to the calumnies ofthose that raised those reports, if there wereany that did so; but to depend on him, andtake courage; for that his father had no suchintentions; since he would have acquaintedhim with that matter, and take his advice,had it been so; as he used to consult withhim in common when he acted in other affairs.But David sware to him, that so it was; andhe desired him rather to believe him, and toprovide for his safety, than to despise what


* Since the modern Jews have lost the signification ofthe Hebrew word here used, Cebir; and since the Septu-agint, as well as Josephus, render it the liver of the goat;and since this rendering, and Josephus's account are hereso much more clear and probable than those of others; itis most unaccountable that our commentators should hesi­tate about its true interpretation.
t 1 Sam. xix. 18.
J It seems that these violent agitations of Saul were noother than demoniacal; and that the same demon whichused to seize him, since he was forsaken of God, and whichthe divine hymns and psalms which were sung to the harpby David used to expel, was now in a judicial way broughtupon him; not only in order to disappoint his intentionsagainst innocent David, but to expose him to the contemptof all that saw him, or heard of his agitations; such violent
and wild agitations being never observed in the true pro­phets, when they were under the inspiration of the Spiritof God. Our other copies, which say the Spirit of Godcame upon him, seem not so right here, as Josephus'scopy, which mentions nothing of God at all. Nor doesJosephus seem to ascribe this impulse and ecstacy of Saul'sto any other than his own demoniacal spirit; which on allaccounts appears the most probable. Nor does the formerdescription of Saul's real inspiration by the Divine Spirit,1 Sam. x. 9—12. Antiq. VI. 4. (which was before he wasbecome wicked,) well agree with the description before us.II What is meant by Saul's lying down naked all thatday, and all that night, 1 Sam. xix. 24. and whether anymore than his laying aside his royal apparel, or uppergarments, as Josephus seems to understand it, is by nomeans certain.







OCR Output








AM. 1741.] 61 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


When Jacob was come to the king, andhad saluted him, and wished all prosperity tohis government, Pharaoh asked how old hewas? Upon whose answer, that he was ahundred and thirty years old, he admiredJacob on account of the length of his life.And when he had added, that still he hadnot lived so long as his fore-fathers, he gavehim leave to live with his children in Heli-opolis; for in that city the king's shepherdshad their pasturage.
The famine now increased among theEgyptians, and this heavy judgment grewmore oppressive to them, because neither didthe river overflow the ground, for it did notrise to its former height; nor did God sendrain* upon it . Nor did they, indeed, makethe least provisions for themselves, so igno­rant were they what was to be done. ButJoseph sold them corn for their money; andwhen their money failed them, they boughtcorn with their cattle and their slaves; and ifany of them had a small piece of land, theygave up that to purchase them food. By whichmeans the king became the owner of all theirsubstance; and they were removed some toone place, and some to another; that so thepossession of their country might be firmlyassured to the king; excepting the lands ofthe priests; for their country continued stillin their own possession. And indeed thissore famine made their minds as well as theirbodies slaves; and at length compelled themto procure a sufficiency of food by such dis­honourable means. But when this miseryceased, and the river overflowed the ground,and the earth brought forth its fruits plenti­fully, Joseph came to every city, and gatheredthe people thereto belonging together, andgave them back entirely the land which, bytheir own consent, the king might have pos-


Whereas Bishop Cumberland has shewn, that they ratherhated such Phoenician or Canaanite shepherds as had longenslaved the Egyptians of old time. See his Sanchoniath,page 361—362.
* Reland here puts the question, how Josephus could"complain of its not raining in Egypt during this famine,while the ancients affirm that it never does naturally rainthere? His answer is, that when the ancients deny thatit rains in Egypt, they only mean the upper Egypt, abovethe Delta, which is called Egypt in the strictest sense;hut that in Delta, and consequently in the lower Egyptadjoining to it, it did not hold, and still does rain sometimes.See the note on III. 1.
t Josephus suppose* that Joseph now restored the


sessed alone, and alone enjoyed the fruits ofit. He also exhorted them to look on it astheir own possession; to resume their laboursof husbandry with cheerfulness; and to payas a tribute to the crown, the fifth party ofthe fruits of the land which the king, when itwas his own, restored to them. 1 hese menrejoiced upon their becoming unexpectedlyowners of their land, and diligently observedwhat was enjoined them. And by this meansJoseph procured to himself a greater autho­rity among the Egyptians, and a greater loveto the king from them. Now this law, thatthey should pay the fifth part of their fruitsas tribute, continued until the time of theirlater kings.
CHAP. VIII.
OF THE DEATH OF JACOB AND JOSEPH.
WHEN Jacob had lived seventeen yearsin Egypt, he fell into a disease, anddied in the presence of his sons; but not tillhe had made his prayers for their prosperity;and had foretold prophetically how every oneof them was to dwell in the land of Canaan.But this happened many years afterwards.He also enlargedJ upon the praises of Joseph;how he had not remembered the evil doingsof his brethren to their disadvantage: nay,on the contrary, was kind to them; bestowingupon them so many benefits, as seldom arebestowed on men's own benefactors. Hethen commanded his own sons that theyshould admit Joseph's sons, Ephraim andManasseh, into their number; and divide theland of Canaan in common with them; con­cerning whom we shall treat hereafter. How­ever, he made it his request, that he mightbe buried at Hebron. So he died; when hehad lived a hundred and forty-seven years ;||
Egyptians their lands again, upon the payment of a fifthpart as tribute. It seems to me rather that the land wasnow considered as Pharaoh's; and this fifth part as itsrent, to be paid to him, as he was their landlord, and theyhis tenants; and that the lands were not properly restored,and this fifth part reserved as a tribute only, till the daysof Sesostris.
J As to this encomium upon Joseph, as preparatory toJacob's adopting Ephraim and Manasseh into his ownfamily, and to be admitted into his two tribes, which Jose­phus here mentions; all our copies of Gen. omit it, cxlviii. nor do we know whence he took it; or whether itbe his own embellishment.
I I Gen xlvii 28.







OCR Output








nu vn.] 427 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


• acclamation Wak made by the whole com­pany: and when that was over, they fell toeating their supper, and to the enjoyment ofwhat was set before them. And at a littleinterval afterward, when the king thought asufficient time had elapsed, he began to talkphilosophically to them, and he asked everyone of them a philosophical question;* andsuch a one as might give light in those in­quiries. And when they had explained allthe problems that had been proposed by theking, about every point, he was pleased withtheir answers. This took up the twelvedays in which they were treated. And hethat pleases may learn the particular ques­tions in that book of Aristeus's, which hewrote on this very occasion.
And while not the king only, but the phi­losopher Menedemus also, admired them,and said, that "All things were governed byProvidence; and that it was probable, thatthence it was that such force and beautywas discovered in these men's words," theythen left off asking any more such questions.But the king said, he had gained very greatadvantages by their coming; for that he hadreceived this profit from them, that he hadlearned how he ought to rule his subjects.And Jie gave order that they should haveevery one three talents given them; and thatthose that were to conduct them to theirlodging should do it. Accordingly, whenthree days were over, Demetrius took them,and went over the causeway seven furlongslong. It was a bank in the sea, to an island.And when they had gone over the bridge,he proceeded to the northern parts, andshewed them where they should meet, whichwas in a house that was built near the shore;and was a quiet place, and fit for their dis­coursing together about their work. Whenhe had brought them thither, he intreatedthem, now they had all things about themwhich they wanted for the interpretation oftheir law, that they would suffer nothing tointerrupt them in their work. Accordinglythey made an accurate interpretation, withgreat zeal, and great pains. And this they


continued to do till the ninth hour of the day.After which time they relaxed and took careof their body; while their food was providedfor them in great plenty; besides which,Dorotheus, at the king's command, broughtthem a great deal of what was provided forthe king himself. But in the morning theycame to the court, and saluted Ptolemy;and then went away to their former place:where, when they had fwashed their hands,and purified themselves, they betook them­selves to the interpretation of the laws. Nowwhen the law was transcribed, and the la­bour of interpretation was over, which cameto its conclusion in seventy-two days; Deme­trius gathered all the Jews together to theplace where the laws were translated, andwhere the interpreters were; and read themover. The multitude did also approve ofthose elders that were the interpreters ofthe law. They also commended Demetrius,for his proposal, as the inwntor of what wasgreatly for their happiness; and desired thathe would give leave to their rulers also toread the law. Moreover, they all, both thepriests, and the most ancient of the elders,and the principal men of their common-weal,made it their request, that since the inter­pretation was happily finished, it might con­tinue in the state it now was, and might notbe altered. And when they all commendedthat determination of theirs, they enjoined,that if any one observed either any thingsuperfluous, or any thing omitted, that hewould take a view of it again, and have itlaid before them, and corrected; which wasa wise action of them, that when the thingwas judged to have been well done, it mightcontinue for ever.
So the king rejoiced, when he saw that hiadesign was brought to perfection, to so greatadvantage. And he was chiefly delightedwith hearing the laws read to him; and wasastonished at the deep meaning and wisdomof the legislator. And he began to ask of De­metrius, how it came to pass, that when thislegislation was so wonderful, no one either ofthe poets, or of the historians had made men­


* They were rather political questions and answers;tending to the good and religious government of mankind.
t This purification of the interpreters, by washing inthe sea, before they prayed to God, every morning, andbefore they set about translating, may be compared with
voL. I.—NOS. 35 il 36.
the like practice of Peter the apostle, in the recognitionsof Clement IV. 3. V. 36. VIII. 1. and with the places ofthe Proseucha?, or of prayer, which were sometimes builtnear the sea or rivers also. Of which matter, see XIV.10. and Acts xvi. 13, 16.
4A







OCR Output








an. 1492.] 135 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


tempt of us; reform thyself, and act morewisely for the time to come. Considering thatGod is displeased with those that are inso­lent towards their parents; because he ishimself the Father of the whole race of man­kind; and seems to bear part of that disho­nour which falls upon those that have thesame name, when they do not meet with duereturns from their children. And on such thelaw inflicts inexorable punishment; of whichpunishment mayst thou never have the expe­rience!" Now if the insolence of young menbe thus cured, let them escape the reproachwhich their former errors deserved; for bythis means the lawgiver will appear to begood, and parents happy, while they neverbehold either a son or a daughter brought topunishment. But if it happen that thesewords, and the instructions conveyed bythem, in order to reclaim the man, appear tobe useless; then the offender renders the lawan implacable enemy to the insolence he hasoffered his parents. Let him therefore be*brought forth, by these very parents, out ofthe city, with a multitude following him; andlet him be stoned ;f and when he has con­tinued there for one whole day, that all thepeople may see him, let him be buried in thenight. And thus it is that we bury all whomthe laws condemn to die, upon any accountwhatsoever. Let our enemies that fall inbattle be also buried; nor let any one deadbody lie above ground, or suffer a punishmentbeyond what justice requires.
Let no one lend to any of the Hebrewsupon usury, neither usury of what is eaten, orwhat is drank.J For it is not just to makeadvantage of the misfortunes of one of thyown countrymen; but when thou hast admi­nistered to his necessities, think it thy gain,if thou obtainest his gratitude to thee; andwithal that reward, which will come to theefrom God, for thy humanity towards him.
Those who have borrowed either silver, orany sort of fruits, whether dry or wet; (Imean this, when the Jewish affairs shall bythe blessing of God be to their own mind;) letthe borrowers bring them again, and restorethem with pleasure to those who lent them;
* See Herod the Great insisting on the execution of thislaw, with relation to two of his own sous, before the judgesat Berytus.
t Deut. xxi. 21


laying them up, as it were, in their own trea­suries, and justly expecting to receive themthence, if they shall want them again. But ifthey be without shame, and do not restore it,let not the lender go to the borrower's house,))and take a pledge himself, before judgmentbe given concerning it; but let him requirethe pledge, and let the debtor bring it of him­self, without the least opposition to him thatcomes upon him under the protection of thelaw. And if he that gave the pledge be rich,let the creditor retain it, till what ne lent bepaid him again; but if he be poor, let him thattakes it return it before the going down of thesun; especially if the pledge be a garment,that the debtor may have it for a covering inhis sleep, God himself naturally shewingmercy to the poor. It is also not lawful totake a mill-stone, nor any utensil thereto be­longing, for a pledge; that the debtors maynot be deprived of instruments to get theirfood withal, and lest they should be undoneby their necessity.
Let death be the punishment for stealing aman;§ but he that hath purloined gold orsilver, let him pay double. If any one kill aman that is stealing something out of hishouse, let him be esteemed guiltless; althoughthe man were only breaking in at the wall.Let him that hath stolen cattle pay fourfoldwhat is lost, excepting the case of an ox; forwhich let the thief pay fivefold. Let him thatis so poor that he cannot pay what mulct islaid upon him, be his servant to whom he wasadjudged to pay it.
If any one be sold to one of his own nation,let him serve him six years; and on the se­venth let him go free.** But if he have a sonby a woman servant, in his purchaser's house;and if on account of his good will to his mas­ter, and his natural affection to his wife andchildren, he will be his servant still, let himbe set free only at the coming of the year ofJubilee, which is the fiftieth year; and let himthen take away with him his wife and chil­dren, and let them be free also.
If any one find gold or silver in the road,let him enquire after him that lost it, andmake proclamation of the place where he


I


Deut. xxiii. 19.Il Deut. xxiv. 10.§ Exod. xxi. 16.** Deut. xv. 12.







OCR Output








336 [book rx. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


place; for that, as they sat behind Ahab'schariot, they heard the prophet say so; andit was now come to pass according to hisprophecy. Upon the fall of Joram, Ahaziahwas afraid of his own life, and turned hischariot into another road; supposing heshould not he seen by Jehu. But he fol­lowed after him, and overtook him at a cer­tain acclivity, and drew his bow, andwounded him. So he left his chariot, andgot upon his horse, and fled from Jehu toMegiddo; and though he was under cure, ina little time he died of that wound; and wascarried to Jerusalem and buried there; afterhe had reigned one year, and had proved amore unrighteous man than his father.
When Jehu was come to Jezreel, Jezebeladorned herself,* and stood upon a tower,and said, "He was a fine servant that hadkilled his master." And when he looked upto her, he asked who she was, and com­manded her to come down to him. At lasthe ordered the eunuchsf to throw her downfrom the tower: and being thrown down,Jshe sprinkled the walls with her blood, and


was trodden upon by the horses, and so died.When this was done, Jehu came to the palacewith his friends, and took some refreshmentafter his journey. He also bade his servantstake up Jezebel and bury her, because of thenobility of her blood; for she was descendedfrom kings.|| But those that were appointedto bury her, found nothing remaining but theextreme parts of her body, for all the restwere eaten by dogs. When Jehu heard this,he admired the prophecy of Elijah, which§foretold that she should perish in this mannerat Jezreel.
Now Ahab had seventy sons brought up inSamaria. So Jehu sent two epistles,** theone to them that brought up the children, theother to the rulers of Samaria; desiring themto set up the most valiant of Ahab's sons forking; for that they had abundance of chariots,and horses, and armour, and a great army,and fenced cities; and that by so doing theymight avenge the murder of their master.This he wrote to try the intentions of thoseof Samaria. Now when the rulers, and thosethat had brought up the children had read


* The words in the original import, She put her eyesin paint, i. e. she used stibium or antimony pulverised, tomake her eyes and eyebrows look black and large, which,in several countries, was accounted a great beauty. Theuse of paint has been of ancient date, and the art ofblacking the hair, and beautifying the face may be in­dulged by the vanity of the female sex; but it raises one'sindignation to read of a Sardanapalus painting his eyes andeyebrows; of the ancient Greeks running into the samecustom; and much more of the martial Romans; butthere were fops in all nations then as well as now.
Ille supercilium madida fuligine, tinctumObliqua producit acu, pingitque trementesAttollens oculos. Juv. Sat. 2. B.
t According to the custom of the eastern nations, thebusiness of this sort of people was to attend upon queensin their chambers, who, by their great fidelity and obse­quiousness, gained generally the esteem, and were ad­mitted to the confidence of those they served, and fromthence into places very often of great trust and profit. Itis remarked, however, of Jezebel's eunuchs, that theywere far from being faithful to her, to let us see howsuddenly courtiers are wont to change with the fortune oftheir masters. Patrick's Commentary. B.
\ Some of the Jewish doctors look upon this as apunishment, according to the lex talionis; for as she haddone, so she suffered. She had caused Naboth to beStoned, and now she is condemned to be stoned herself.For there were two wavg of stoning, either by throwingstones at malefactors till they had knocked them downand killed them; or by throwing them down upon thestones from a high place, and so dashing them to pieces.Patrick's Commentary. B.
II She was the daughter of Eth-baal king of Tyre; thewife of Ahab, and mother of Joram, kings of Israel; themother-in-law of Jehoram king of Judah; and the auntof Ahaziah, who was likewise king of Judah. Calmet'sCommentary. B.
§ See Book VIII. chap. 13.
** The words in the original, which our translation hasfollowed, are, Jehu wrote letters, and sent to Samaria,unto the rulers of Jezreel, to the elders, and to them thatbrought up Ahab's children, 2 Kings x. 1. But then thequestion is, How the rulers of Jezreel came to be atSamaria? Some have imagined indeed a mistake in thetranscriber, and that, instead of Jezreel, the word shouldbe Israel, which is no great variation: but why may wenot suppose, that, upon hearing how Jehu had slainJoram, the great men of his court might take the children,and, for fear that they should fall into his hands, flee withthem into Samaria, as the capital, and strongest place inthe kingdom, where they might think of defending them­selves against his usurpation, and (as his letters seem toimport) of filling, with one of Ahab's family, the vacantthrone. It was customary for princes of the blood, inthose days, to be brought up in the families of the primenobility of the nation; and therefore, whatever persons ofthis quality had these princes under their care, and sawthe revolution that was like to happen, they might thinkit the most advisable way to hasten with them to Samaria,as a place of the most security; or, for this very reason.Joram. when he went against Ramoth Gilead, might havesent them thither, that they might be under cover fromany ill accident that might possibly happen in his warwith the king of Syria. Patrick's Commentary, and PooPsAnnotations. B.







OCR Output








496 [book XIV. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


nus's, an Idumean, called Antipater; whowas very rich, and in his nature an activeand seditious man, he was at enmity withAristobulus, and had differences with himon account of his good will to Hyrcanus.Nicolaus of Damascus indeed says, thatAntipater was of the stock of the principalJews who came out of Babylon into Judea.But that assertion of his was to gratify Herod,who was his son: and who, by certain revo­lutions of fortune, came afterward to be kingof the Jews; whose history we shall giveyou in its proper place hereafter. How­ever, this Antipater was at first called *An-tipas: and that was his father's name also.Of whom they relate, that king Alexanderand his wife made him general of all Idumea:and that he made a league of friendship withthose Arabians, Gazites, and Ascalonites,that were of his own party, and had, bymany and large presents, made them his fastfriends. But now, this younger Antipaterwas suspicious of the powers of Aristobulus;and was afraid of some mischief he might dohim, because of his hatred to him. So hestirred up the most powerful of the Jews,and talked against him to them privately;and said, it was unjust to overlook the con­duct of Aristobulus; who had assumed thegovernment unrighteously; and had ejectedhis brother, who was the elder, and ought toretain what belonged to him by the preroga­tive of his birth. And the same speecheshe perpetually made to Hyrcanus: and toldhim that his own life would be in danger,unless he guarded himself, and got rid ofAristobulus. For, he said, that the friendsof Aristobulus omitted no opportunity of ad­vising him to kill him; as being then and notbefore sure to retain his principality. ButHyrcanus gave no credit to these words, asbeing of a gentle disposition, and one thatdid not easily admit of calumnies againstother men. This temper of his not dis­posing him to meddle with public affairs,occasioned him to appear to spectators tobe degenerate and unmanly: while Aristo­bulus was of a contrary temper; an active
* That the famous Antipater's, or Antipas's father, wasalso Antipater or Antipas: (which two may justly be es­teemed one and the same name; the former with a Greekor Gentile; the latter with a Hebrew or Jewish termina­tion:) Josephus here assures us. Though Eusebius indeed,


man, and one of a great and generoussoul.
Since therefore t Antipater saw that Hyrca­nus did not attend to what he said, he neverceased day by day to charge feigned crimesupon Aristobulus; and to calumniate him,before him, as if he had a mind to kill him.And so by urging him perpetually, he per­suaded him to flee to Aretas, king of Arabia;and promised that if he would comply withhis advice, he would also himself assist him,and go with him. When Hyrcanus heardthis, he said, that it was for his advantage toflee away to Aretas. However he sent An­tipater first to the king of Arabia, in orderto receive assurances, that when he shouldcome in the manner of a supplicant to him, hewould not deliver him up to his enemies. SoAntipater having received such assurances,returned to Jerusalem, and took Hyrcanus,and stole out of the city by night; and con­ducted him to the city called retra; wherethe palace of Aretas was. And as he was avery familiar friend of that king's, he per­suaded him to bring back Hyrcanus into Ju­dea; and this persuasion he continued everyday, without any remission. He also pro­posed to make him presents on that account.At length he prevailed with Aretas in hissuit. Moreover Hyrcanus promised him,that when he had been brought thither, andhad received his kingdom, he would restorethat country, and those twelve cities whichhis father Alexander had taken from theArabians, viz. Medaba, Naballo, Libias,Tharabassa, Agalla, Athone, Zoar, Orone,Marissa, Rudda, Lussa, and Oruba.
CHAP. II.
OF THE EXPEDITION OP ARETAS AND HYRCANUS AGAINSTARISTOBULUS; THEIR INVESTMENT OF JERUSALEM J THEINTERFERENCE OF SCAURUS, THE ROMAN GENERAL J ANDTHE DEATH OF ONIAS.
AFTER these promises had been given toAretas, he made an expedition againstAristobulus, with an army of fifty thousandhorse and foot; and defeated him in battle.
Hist. Eccl. I. 6, says it was Herod, I am clearly of Dr.Hudson's and Noldius's minds; that we ought to followJosephus rather than Eusebius in this matter. See Nold-de Vit. and Gest. Herod. § 1—6.t An. 65.







OCR Output








An. 1507.] 167 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


ter made; and as the report of Gideon's vic­tory came to the Israelites, they took theirweapons and pursued their enemies, andovertook them in a certain valley, encom­passed with torrents, a place which thesecould not get over, so they encompassedthem, and slew them all, with their kings,Oreb and Zeeb;* but the remaining captainsled those soldiers that were left, which wereabout eighteen thousand, and pitched theircamp a great way off the Israelites. How­ever, Gideon pursued them with all his army,and joining battle with them, cut off thewhole enemies' army, and took the otherleaders, Zebah and Zalmunna, and madethem captives. Now there were slain in thisbattle of the Midianites, and of their auxil­iaries the Arabians, about a hundred andtwenty thousand; and the Hebrews took agreat prey, gold, and silver, and garments,and camels, and asses: and when Gideon wascome to his own country of Ophrah, he slewthe kings of the Midianites.
The tribe of Ephraim, however, was so dis­pleased at the good success of Gideon, thatthey resolved to make war against him; ac­cusing him because he did not tell them ofhis expedition against their enemies.f ButGideon, as a man of temper, and that excelled. in every virtue, pleaded that it was not theresult of his own authority or reasoning thatmade him attack the enemy without them;but that it was the command of God; andthat still the victory belonged to them, aswell as to those that were in the army; andby this method of cooling their passions, he"brought more advantage to the Hebrews,than by the success he had against their ene­mies, for he thereby delivered them from a


sedition which was arising among them. Yetdid this tribe afterwards suffer the punish­ment of this their injurious treatment ofGideon, of which we will give an account indue time.
Hereupon Gideon would have resigned thegovernment, but being over-persuaded re­tained it forty years;J and distributed justiceto them as the people came to him in theirdifferences; and what he determined was es­teemed valid by all; and when he died hewas buried in his own country of Ophrah.
CHAP. VII.
..-'•'-•
OF THE JTTDGES WHO SUCCEEDED GIDEON, AND THEIR WARiWITH THE ADJOINING NATIONS.
NOW Gideon had seventy sons that werelegitimate, for he had many wives; buthe had also by his concubine Drumah, onethat was spurious, whose name was Abiine-lech,[| who, after his father's death, retired toShecnem, to his mother's relations, for theywere of that place; and when he had gotmoney of such of them as were eminent formany instances of injustice, he came withthem to his father's house, and slew all hisbrethren, except Jotham, for he had the goodfortune to escape and be preserved. ButAbimelech made tho government tyrannical,and constituted himself a lord, to do what hepleased, instead of obeying the laws; and heacted most rigidly against those that were thepatrons of justice.
Now when, on a certain time,§ there was apublic festival at Shechem, and all the multi­tude was there gathered together, Jotham hisbrother, whose escape we before related,went up to mount Gerizzim, which hangs over


* Jndg. vii. 25. As the language of the Ishmaelites,the Midianites, and the Amalekites, who dwelt in Arabia,was originally the same, because they all descended fromAbraham their common father; so we may infer, thatthere was little or no difference in them at this time.Oreb, in the Hebrew, signifies a crow, and Zeeb, a wolf;and these are no improper words to represent the saga-ciousness and fierceness which should be in two suchgreat commanders. Nor was it an uncommon thing forgreat families in ancient times to derive their names fromsuch like creatures, (hence the Corvini, Gracchi, Aquilini,&c. among the Romans,) either as omens, or monumentsof their undaunted courage and dexterity in militaryachievements. But after all it seems every whit as pro­bable, that these were only nick names, which the Israel­ites gave these two princes of Midian, to denote their
fierceness and rapaciousness of prey. Bedford's ScriptureChronology, lib. v. c. 3. and Le Clerc's Commentary, B.
t Judg. viii. 1.
J From an. 1307 to an. 1267.
II What the names of his other sons were, we have nomention made in sacred writ; but the name of this one isparticularly set down, because the following story de­pends upon it; and not only so, but his mother perhapsmight give him this name, which signifies, my father aking, out of pride and arrogance, that she might be lookedupon as the wife of one who was thought to deserve akingdom, though he did not accept it: and it is not im­probable, that the very sense of this might be one meansto inflame the mind of her son afterwards, to affect theroyal dignity. Patrick's Commentary, B.
§ An. 1267


 







OCR Output








-\


 







OCR Output








aw. 896.] 323 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


tion into that country which belonged to hiskingdom: at which news he was affrighted,and called the people of Jerusalem to a con­gregation in the temple.* And standing overagainst the temple itself, he called upon Godto afford him power to inflict punishmentupon those invaders; for that those who builthis temple had prayed that he would protectthat city, and take vengeance on those thatwere so bold as to come against it. When henad prayed thus, he was affected even totears; and the whole multitude, togetherwith their wives and children, made theirsupplications also. Hereupon a certain pro­phet, Jahaziel by name, came into the midstof the assembly, and cried out, both to themultitude and to the king, that God heardtheir prayers, and promised to fight againsttheir enemies. He also gave order, that theking should draw his forces out the next day;for that he should find them between Jeru­salem, and the ascent of Engedi; at a placecalled Eminence;f and that he should notengage their forces, but only stand still, andsee how God would fight against them. Whenthe prophet had said this, both the king andthe multitude fell upon their faces, and gavethanks to God, and worshipped him, and theLevites continued singing hymns to God, withtheir instruments of music.
As soon as it was day, and the king wascome into that wilderness which was underthe city of Tekoa, he said to the multitude,that they ought to give implicit credit to whatthe prophet had said; and not to set them­selves in array for fighting; but to set thepriests, with their trumpets, and the Levites,with the singers of hymns, to give thanks to


God, as having already delivered the countryfrom its enemies. This opinion of the kingpleased the people, and they did as he de­sired. So God caused a terror and commo­tion to arise among the Ammonites;J whothought one another to be enemies, and slewone another; insomuch that not one man outof so great an army escaped. And whenJehoshaphat looked upon that valley whereintheir enemies had been encamped, and sawit full of dead men, he rejoiced at this surpri­sing assistance of God; who by his ownpower, and without their labour, had giventhem the victory. He also permitted hisarmy to take the prey of the enemies' camp,and to spoil their dead bodies; and indeedso they did for three days together, till theywere weary; so great was the number ofthe slain. And on the fourth day, all thepeople were gathered together unto a certainhollow place, or valley, and blessed Godfor his power and assistance; from which theplace was called the valley of Berachah orBlessing.||
When the king had brought his army backto Jerusalem, he celebrated festivals andoffered sacrifices for many days. And indeedafter the destruction of his enemies, and whenit came to the ears of the foreign nations, theywere all greatly affrighted; as supposing thatGod would openly fight for him hereafter.So Jehoshaphat from that time lived in greatglory and splendour, on account of his righte­ousness and his piety towards God. He wasalso in friendship with Ahab's son,§ who wasking of Israel; and he joined with him in thebuilding of ships that'were to sail to Pontusand the commercial cities of Thrace;** but


* 2 Chron. xx. 3, 4.
t The cliff of Ziz, 2 Chron. xx. 16.
j The words in the text are, The Lord set ambushmentagainst the children of Amnion, Moab, and mount Seir,which were come against Judah, and they were smitten,2 Chron. xx. 22. And there are two ways wherein theslaughter may be supposed to have happened: either,1st. By the ministry of God's angels, who might appearin the shape of men, and putting on the appearance ofMoabites or Ammonites, might smite some part of thearmy privately, and they supposing this to be done bytheir neighbours, might turn about and fall upon themlike enemies, and so break forth into mutual slaughters.Or 2d. By some jealousies and animosities among them­selves, which by degrees brake forth, first into secretambushments, which one party laid for another, and theninto open hostilities and outrages to their total destruction.
TOL. I.—NOS. 27 & 28.
So easy a thing it is for God to defeat his enemies, whocan, when he pleases, infatuate their designs, or arm theirown passions and mistakes against them. Pool's Annota­tion on 2 Chron. xx. 22. B.
II 2 Chron. xx. 26.
§ This certainly was a great weakness in him, to makefriendship with the son, when he had been so sharply re­proved for joining with his father Ahab, especially sincethe son was as great an idolater as his father; but untothis he was betrayed by the affinity that was betweenthem; and though he did not join with him in war, butonly in trade, yet God was nevertheless displeased withhim; which shews how dangerous a thing it is to havetoo near a familiarity or commerce with idolaters, or anyother very wicked men. Patrick's Commentary. B.
** What are here Pontus and Thrace, as the placeswhither Jehoshaphat's fleet sailed, are in our other copies
3L







OCR Output








334 [book IX. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


CHAP. VI.


OF THE ANOINTING OF JEHU; THE DEATH OF JORAM ANDAHAZIAH; AND THE PUNISHMENT OF THE IDOLATROUSISRAELITES.
NOW* Joram, king of Israel, after thedeath of Benhadad, hoped that hemight take Ramoth, a city of Gilead, fromthe Syrians. Accordingly he made an ex­pedition against it, with a great army. Butas he was besieging it, an arrow was shot athim by one of the Syrians; but the woundwas not mortal. So he returned to have hiswound healed in Jezreel; but left his wholearmy in Ramoth, and Jehu the son of Nimshifor their general: for he had already takenthe city by force: and he proposed, after hewas healed, to make war with the Syrians.But Elisha the prophet sent one of the dis-ciplest to RamothJ to anoint Jehu;|| and totell him, that God had chosen him to be theirking. He also sent him to say other things


to him, and bade him take his journey, as ifhe fled; that when he came away, he mightescape the knowledge of all men. So whenhe was come to the city, he found Jehu sit­ting in the midst of the captains of the army:and said, that he desired to speak with himabout certain matters. And when he had fol­lowed him into an inner chamber, the youngman took the holy oil, and poured it on hishead, and said, that God ordained him to beking, in order to his destroying the house ofAhab; and that he might revenge the bloodof the prophets, that were unjustly slain byJezebel, that so their house might utterlyperish; as those of Jeroboam the son ofNebat. and of Baasha had perished for theirwickedness, and no seed might remain ofAhab's family. And when he had said this,he went hastily out of that chamber, and en­deavoured not to be seen by any of the army.When Jehu§ returned to the place wherehe before sat with the captains, they asked


* An. 886.
t The Jewish doctors are of opinion, that the prophetwhom Elisha sent upon this message, was Jonah; butupon this supposition, he must at this time, have beena very young man, because Jeroboam the Second (inwhose reign Jonah prophesied, did not ascend the thronetill about fifty years after this unction of Jehu king ofIsrael. However this be, it is reasonable to think, thatElisha himself did not go to perform this office, eitherbecause he was now grown old, and unfit for such ajourney, or because he was a person too well known,and not so proper to be employed in an affair that re­quired secrecy. Calmefs and Patrick's Commenta­ries. B.
{ It is supposed by some interpreters, that the cityof Raraoth-Gilead was taken by Joram, before he de­parted from it to be cured of his wounds. This theygather from the mention made of the inner chamber,2 Kings ix. 2. the top of the stairs, ver. 13. and from thatcaution which Jehu thinks advisable, Let none go forth,or escape out of the city, ver. 15. But these argumentswill not do. What we render out of the city, does sig­nify, every whit as properly, from before the city, i. e.out of the camp or army that is besieging the city. Buteven, if this be not so, the Israelites might, at this time,have the suburbs, or out-buildings belonging to thecity, in their possession, where the general might havehis head-quarters, and from whence he might give orderso the picket-guard, (as we call it,) that none should bepermitted to move. For had the town been already intheir hands, we cannot see why Joram should havekept all Israel there, ver. 14. i. e. all the military force ofIsrael, when a strong garrison would have been sufficient.Pool's Annotations. B.
II The Jews are of opinion, that none of the kings ofIsrael were anointed, but those that were of the house ofDavid, and these only, when there was a question about
their succession, as Solomon, they say needed not to havebeen anointed, had it not been for the faction of Ado-nijah. But in the case of Jehu, in whom the successionof the kingdom of Israel was to be translated out of theright line of the family of Ahab, into another family whichhad no right to the kingdom, but merely the appointmentof God, there was a necessity for his unction, in orderboth to convey to him a title, and to invest him in the ac­tual possession of the kingdom: for if that (which someimagine from 1 Kings xix. 16) be true, viz. that the pro­phet Elisha did, before this time, anoint Jehu, that unctiondid only confer on him a remote right to the kingdom,in the same manner as Samuel's unction did to David,1 Sam. xvi. 13. Patrick's Commentary, and Pool's Anno­tations. B.
§ The officers who were in company with Jehu, mighteasily perceive by the habit, and air, and manner ofspeech of the person who accosted Jehu so boldly, andwhen he had done his business, vanished so suddenly,that he was a prophet; but then there might be severalreasons which might induce men of the profession tohave a contemptible opinion of men of that order. Therigid and obscure course of life which the prophets led,their neglect of themselves, and of the things of thisworld, might pass with them for a kind of infatuation;and the holy exercises to which they devoted themselves,for no more than a religious frenzy. Besides this, thefalse prophets which they had seen in the court of Ahabhad given just offence; and by their affected gestures,and studied contortions, (whereby they thought to re­commend their crude enthusiasm,) made themselvesjustly ridiculous and contemptible. And tkerefore it isno wonder that these officers, at first sight, should censurea true, as they thought they had reason to judge of thefalse prophet, with whom they had been acquainted;especially when we find some leading men in the tribeof Judah treating the prophets of the Lord (as in the case







OCR Output








442 [book XII. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


V


that, either by their own inclination, or outof necessity betray it; but to become suchsons as are worthy of me, to be above allforce and necessity; and so to dispose yoursouls as to be ready, when it shall be neces­sary, to die for your laws, as sensible of thisby just reasoning; that if God see that youare disposed, he will not overlook you, butwill have a great value for your virtue; andwill restore to you again what you have lost,and will return to you that freedom in whichyou shall live quietly, and enjoy your owncustoms. Your bodies are mortal and sub­ject to fate; but they receive a sort of im­mortality by the remembrance of what ac­tions they have done. And I would haveyou so in love with this immortality, that youmay pursue after glory; and that, when youhave undergone the greatest difficulties, youmay not scruple for such things, to lose yourlives. I exhort you especially to agree onewith another; and in what excellence anyone of you exceeds another, to yield to himso far; and by that means to reap the advan­tage of every one's own virtues. Do youthen esteem Simon as your father; becausehe is a man of extraordinary prudence; andbe governed by him, in what counsels hegives you. Take Maccabeus for the generalof your army; because of his courage andstrength. For he will avenge your nation,and will bring vengeance on your enemies.Admit among you the righteous and religious,and augment their power."
When Mattathias had thus discoursed tohis sons, and had prayed to God to be theirassistant, and to recover to the people theirformer constitution; he died a little after­ward; and was buried at Modin; all thepeople making great lamentation for him.His son Judas then took upon him the ad­ministration of public affairs; in the hundredand forty-sixth year.* And thus by the ready
* 1 Mace. ii. 70.
t This, in all probability, was the same Apolloniuswhom Antiochus sent at first to plunder Jerusalem, andafterwards to set up the statue of Jupiter Olympius, andto compel the Jews to relinquish their religion. Calmet'sCommentary. B.
t 1 Mace. iii. 12.
II At this time Jerusalem was in the hands of the Hea­thens, and the sanctuary trodden under foot; so that Judascould not assemble his men there, to implore the assist­ance of God in this time of imminent danger; and there-


assistance of his brethren, and of others,Judas cast their enemies out of the country;and put those of their own country to deathwho had transgressed its laws; and purifiedthe land of all the pollutions that were in it.
CHAP. VII.
OF THE SUCCESSES OF THE JEWISH ARMS UNDER JUDASMACCABEUS J AND THE PURIFICATION OF THE TEMPLE.
WHEN Apollonius,f the general of theSamaritan forces, heard this, he tookhis army and hastened to go against Judas.But having joined battle, he was defeatedand slain by Judas, who seized upon hissword, and kept it for himself, as a trophy ofvictory.J The number of Apollonius's armythat were slain, was also very great; that ofthe wounded was still more considerable;and the victors took a great deal of prey.But when Seron, who was general of thearmy of Coelesyria, heard that many hadjoined themselves to Judas; and that he hadabout him an army sufficient for making war,he determined to make an expedition againsthim; as thinking it became him to endeavourto punish those that transgressed the king'sinjunctions. He then got together an army.||as large as he was able, and joined it to therunagate and wicked Jews, and came as faras Beth-horon, a village of Judea, and therepitched his camp. Judas met him, and re­solved to give him battle; but as his soldierswere backward to fight, because their numberwas small, and because they wanted food,for they were fasting; he encouraged them,and reminded them, that victory and con­quests of enemies are not derived from themultitude in armies, but in the exercise ofpiety towards God; and that they had theplainest instances in their forefathers; whoby their righteousness, and exerting them­selves on behalf of their own laws, and their


fore he repaired to Mizpeh, a place where the peopleoftentimes used to assemble to prayer, Judges xx. 1.1 Kings xv. 22. 2 Chron. xvi. 6. Here he and all hisarmy addressed themselves to God, in solemn fasting andprayer, for his assistance and protection: and herein heacted the part of a wise and religious commander, asknowing that the battle was the Lord's, and that thereforeit would be impious to begin any such enterprise, withoutfirst imploring the divine aid. Prideaux,s Connection,anno 166. 6.







OCR Output








iv EDITOR'S PREFACE.


But a still more important and useful guide in exploring the path of scripture history, is thelight shed upon it by the study of Jewish and Oriental Antiquities. The subject is copious,but amply repays the attention it demands. Of course, in the former branch of it, Jewishwriters deserve our primary notice, because it may reasonably be presumed that they are bet­ter acquainted with the affairs of their own nation than other persons. They are accustomed,indeed, to blend in their accounts the mention of circumstances which judicious readerswill not receive; but this does not detract from the value of the sound information whichthey communicate. Our business in this case is to separate the dross from the pure metal:and while we reject the one, to value the other. Among the most ancient, authentic, andinteresting authors of this denomination, Josephus may certainly be placed. His works havealways been highly esteemed, and were considered by the early Christian writers as pecu­liarly valuable: what he has recorded is in general harmonious with the scripture history,though, in some instances, he either enlarges upon or deviates from it. I shall endeavour,therefore, to ascertain the weight of his testimony, and to shew in what degree of esteem heought to be held. This cannot be done with more accuracy and certainty than in the wordsof the learned Dr. Lardner, Jewish Testimonies, chap. iii. and iv.
"When Jotapata, in which Josephus was shut up, was besieged and taken by Vespasian,strict search was made for him, for if that general was once taken, Vespasian reckoned thatthe greatest part of the war would be over. However, he had hid himself in a deep cavern,the opening of which was not easily discerned above ground. Here he met with forty per­sons of eminence, who had concealed themselves, and had with them provisions enough forseveral days. On the third day the Roman soldiers seized a woman that had been with them.She made a discovery of the place where they were: whereupon Vespasian sent two tribunes,inviting him to come up, with assurances that his life should be preserved. Josephus, how­ever, refused. Vespasian therefore sent a third tribune, named Nicanor, well known toJosephus, with the like assurance. Josephus, after some hesitation, was then willing to sur­render himself. But the men who were with him exclaimed against it, and were for killinghim and themselves, rather than come alive into the hands of the Romans. Hereupon hemade a long speech to them, shewing that it was not lawful for them to kill themselves, andthat it was rather a proof of pusillanimity than courage: but all without effect. He then pro­posed an expedient; which was, that they should cast lots, two by two, who should die first.He who had the second lot should kill the first, and the next him, and so on, and the lastshould kill himself. It happened that Josephus and another were preserved to the last lot.When all the rest were killed, he without much difficulty persuaded that other person toyield up himself to the Romans. So they two escaped with their lives. This has been judgedto be a remarkable providence, by which Josephus was preserved to write the history, of which we arenow able to make so good a use.
"Though the Jewish people never had any great respect for the writings of Josephus,yet they have been much esteemed, and often quoted, by Christian, and other writers, in early and lattertimes.
"The works of Josephus, notwithstanding many things in them liable to exception, whichmay be observed by careful and impartial readers, are very valuable. In his larger work, theJewish Antiquities, he confirms the truth of the history of the Old Testament; and, as in several ofthe last books of that work, he has brought down the Jewish history from the ceasing of pro­







OCR Output








an. 334.] 417 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


renounced Darius; and, taking with him seventhousand of his own subjects, he came toAlexander. And finding him beginning thesiege of Tyre, he said to him, that he de­livered up to him these men, who came out ofplaces under his dominion; and gladly ac­cepted of him for his lord, instead of Darius.So when Alexander had received him kindly,Sanballat thereupon took courage, and spaketo him about his present affair. He told him,that he had a son-in-law, Manasseh, who wasbrother to the high-priest Jaddua; and thatthere were many others of his own nation nowwith him, that were desirous to have a templebuilt in the places subject to him: that itwould be for the king's advantage to havethe strength of the Jews divided into twoparts; lest the nation being of one mind andunited, upon any attempt for innovation,might prove troublesome to kings; as it hadformerly proved to the kings of Assyria.Hereupon Alexander gave the desired per­mission to Sanballat; who used the utmostdiligence, and built the temple, and madeManasseh the priest: and deemed it a greatreward, that his daughter's children shouldhave that dignity. But when the sevenmonths of the siege of Tyre were over, andthe two months of the siege of Gaza, San­ballat died. Now Alexander, when he hadtaken Gaza, made haste to go up to Jerusa­lem. And Jaddua the high-priest, when heheard that, was in an agony, and under ter­ror; as not knowing how he should meet theMacedonians; since the king was displeasedat his disobedience. He therefore ordainedthat the people should make supplications,and should join with him in offering sacrificeto God; whom he besought to protect thatnation, and to deliver them from the perilsthat were coming upon them. God howeverwarned him in a dream, which came uponhim after he had offered sacrifice, that heshould take courage, and adorn the city, andopen the gates; that the rest should appearin white garments; but that he and the priestsshould meet the king in the habits proper totheir order; without the dread of any illconsequences; which the providence of Godwould prevent. When Jaddua rose from hissleep, he greatly rejoiced; and declared toall the warning he had received from God:and having acted entirely according to his


dream, he awaited the coming of the king.
When he understood that Alexander wasnot far from the city, he went out in proces­sion, with the priests, and the multitude ofthe citizens. The procession was venerable,and the manner of it different from that ofother nations. It reached to a place calledSapha; which name, translated into Greek,signifies a prospect; for you have thence aprospect both of Jerusalem and of the tem­ple: and when the Phoenicians and the Chal-dees* that followed him, thought they shouldhave liberty to plunder the city, and tormentthe high-priest to death; which the king'sdispleasure fairly promised them, the veryreverse happened. For when the multitudeappeared at a distance in white garments,while the priests stood clothed with fine linen,and the high-priest in purple and scarletclothing, with his mitre on his head; havingthe golden plate whereon the name of Godwas engraven; Alexander approached byhimself, and adored that name, and first sa­luted the high-priest. The Jews also didaltogether salute Alexander, and encompasshim about. Hereupon the kings of Syria,and the rest were surprised at what Alexan­der had done, and supposed him disorderedin his mind. However, Parmenio alone wentup to him, and asked him how it came topass, that when all others adored him, heshould adore the high-priest of the Jews?To whom he replied, "I did not adore him,but that God who hath honoured him withhis high-priesthood. For I saw this personin a dream, in this very habit, when I was atDios in Macedonia. Who, when I was con­sidering with myself, how I might obtain thedominion of Asia, exhorted me to make nodelay; but boldly to pass over the sea thither:for that he would conduct my army, andwould give me the dominion over the Persians.Whence it is that having seen no other in thathabit, and now seeing this person in it, andremembering that vision, and the exhortationwhich I had in my dream, I believe that Ibring this army under the divine conduct, andshall therewith conquer Darius, and destroythe power of the Persians; and that all thingswill succeed according to what is in my ownmind."
When he had said this to Parmenio, and


* Cutheans.







OCR Output








220 [book VI. ANTIQUITIES OP THE JEWS.


commandments, as I foretold to thee while Iwas alive. Know, therefore, that the peopleshall be made subject to their enemies; andthat thou, with thy sons, shall fall in the battleto-morrow; and thou s-halt then be with* mein Hades."
When Saul had heard this, he could notspeak for grief; but fell down on the floor.Whether it were from the sorrow that aroseupon what Samuel had said, or from hisemptiness; for he had taken no food the fore-
Soing day aitd night; he easily fell quiteown. And when with difficulty he had re­covered himself, the woman would force himto eat; begging this of him as a favour, onaccount of her concern in that dangerous in­stance of fortune-telling, which it was notlawful for her to have done, because of thefear she was under of the king; while sheknew not who he was; yet did she undertakeit, and go through with it. On which accountshe intreated him to admit that a table andfood might be set before him; that he mightrecover his strength, and so get safe to hisown camp. And when he opposed her mo­tion, and entirely rejected itT by reason of hisanxiety, she forced him; and at last persuadedhim to it. Now she had one calf, that shewas very fond of, and one that she took agreat deal of care of, and fed it herself; forshe was a woman that got her living by thelabour of her own hands, and had no otherpossession but that one calf This she killed,and made ready its flesh, and set it before hi*servants and himself. So Saul returned to thecamp while it was yet night.
Now it is but just tof commend the gene­rosity of this woman; because, when the kinghad forbidden her to use that art, whence hercircumstances were improved; and when shehad never seen the king before, she still didnot remember to his disadvantage that he hadcondemned her sort of learning, and did notrefuse him as a stranger, and one that shehad no acquaintance with; but she had com­passion upon him, and comforted him, andexhorted him to do what he was greatly averseto; and offered him the only creature shehad, as a poof woman; and that earnestly,


and with great humanity; while she receivedno requital for her kindness, nor hunted afterany future favour from him; for she knew hewas to die. Whereas men are naturally eitherambitious to please those that bestow benefitsupon them, or are very ready to serve thosefrom whom they may receive some advantage.It would be well therefore to imitate the ex­ample of this woman, and to do kindness toall such as are in want; and to think thatnothing is better, nor more becoming thansuch a general beneficence; nor what willsooner render God favourable, and ready tobestow good things upon us. And so far maysuffice to have spoken concerning this woman.But I shall speak farther upon another sub­ject; which will afford me the opportunity ofdiscoursing on what is for the advantage ofcities, people, and nations, and suited to thetaste of good men; and will encourage themall in the prosecution of virtue, and is capableof shewing them the method of acquiringglory, and an everlasting fame; and of im­printing on the kings of nations, and the rulersof cities, great inclinations and diligence bidoing well; as also of encouraging them toundergo dangers, and to die for their coun­tries, and of instructing them how to disposeall the most terrible adversities. And I havea fair occasion offered me to enter on such adiscourse by Saul, the king of the Hebrews.For although he knew what was coming uponhim, and that he was to die immediately, bythe prediction of the prophet, he did not re­solve to fly from death, nor so far to indulgethe love of life, as to betray his own peopleto the enemy* of to bring disgrace on theroyal dignity. But exposing himself, as wellas all his family, to dangers, he thought it abrave thing to fall together with them, as hewas fighting for his subjects; and that it wasbetteF his sons- should die thus, shewing theircourage, than to leave them to their uncertainconduct afterwards; while instead of succes­sion and posterity they gained commendation,and a lasting name. Such an one alone seemsto me to be a just, a courageous, and a pru­dent man; and when any one has arrived atthese dispositions, or shall hereafter arrive at


* I Sam. xjviii. 19.
t These great commendations of this necromantic wo­man of Endor, and of Saul's martial courage, when yet heVnew he should die in the" battle, are somewhat unusual
digressions in Josephus. They seem to me extractedfrom some speeches or declamations of his, composed for­merly in the way of oratory, that lay by him; and whichhe thought fit to insert upon this occasion.







OCR Output








AN. 1080.] 235 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


CHAP. V.


op david's successes against the Philistines, and themoabites, and the kings op sophene and of damas­cus, the syrians, and the idumeans; of his leaguewith the king op hamath; and his gratitude forthe friendship of jonathan.
A LITTLE while after* this David con­sidered, that he ought to make waragainst the Philistines, and not see any indo­lence permitted in his management; that soit might prove as God had foretold to him,that when he had overthrown his enemies, heshould leave his posterity to reign in peace.So he called together his army, and chargedthem to be ready and prepared for war; andwhen he thought that all things were in agood state, he removed from Jerusalem, andcame against the Philistines; and when hehad overcome them in battle, and had cut offa great part of their country, and united it tothe country of the Hebrews, he transferredthe war to the Moabites. And when he hadovercome two parts of their army in battle,he took the remaining part captive ;f andimposed tribute upon them to be paid annu-


ally.J He then made war against Hadadezer,the son of Rehob,|| king of Sophene; andwhen he had joined battle with him, at theriver Euphrates, he destroyed twenty thou­sand of his footmen, and about seven thousandof his horsemen. He also took a thousandof his chariots, and destroyed the greatestpart of them; and ordered that no more than§one hundred should be kept.
Now when** Hadad, king of Damascus, andof Syria, heard that David fought againstHadadezer, who was his friend, he came tohis assistance, with a powerful army, in hopesto rescue him; but when he had joined battlewith David, at the river Euphrates, he failedof his purpose, and lost a great number of hissoldiers; for there were slain of the army ofHadad twenty thousand, and all the rest fled.Nicolaus also, of Damascus, makes mentionof the king, in the fourth book of his histories,where he speaks thus: "A great while afterthese things had happened, there was one ofthat country whose name was Hadad, whowas become very potent. He reigned overDamascus, and the other parts of Syria, ex­cepting Phoenicia. He made war against


* About an. 1081.
t There is no small obscurity in the words of the text,which are these :—He smote Moab, and measured themwith a line, casting them down to the ground; even intwo lines measured he to put to death, and with one lineto keep alive. Which words seem to allude to a customamong the kings of the east, when they were thoroughlyincensed against any nation, viz. to make the captives allcome together in one place, and prostrate themselvesupon the ground; that, being divided into two parts, as itwere with a line, their conqueror might appoint whichpart he pleased either for death or life, which was some­times determined by casting of lots. Some are of opinion,that David made three lots or parts of these Moabites, twoof which he ordered to be slain, and one part only to bekept alive. The reason of this severity against thismiserable people, the Rabbins assure us, was, becausethey had slain his parents and brethren, whom he hodcommitted to the custody of the king of Moab during hisexile. But of the reality of this motive there is no mannerof appearance; and since this execution which David in­flicted may relate either to the whole nation, or the armyonly, to clear David from the imputation of too muchcruelty, we should rather conceive it of the third, or halfpart at most, of the army. Le Clerks and Calmefs Com­mentaries. B.
% 2 Sam. viii. 2.
II Whether Syria Zobah, 2 Sam. iii. 8. ,1 Chron. xviii.3—8, be Sophene, as Josephus here supposes: which yetPtolomy places beyond Euphrates, as Dr. Hudson ob­serves here ; whereas Zobah was on this side ; or whetherJosephus was not here guilty of a mistake in his geog­raphy, I cannot certainly determine.
voL. I.—NOS. 19 & 20-
§ David's reserving only 100 chariots for himself, outof 1000 he had taken from Hadadezer, was most probablydone in compliance with the law of Moses, which forbadethe king of Israel to multiply horses to himself, Deut.xvii. 16. One of the principal uses of horses in Judeaat that time being for drawing their chariots: see Jo­seph. Antiq. V. 1. and Bp. Sherlock's discourse on thatsubject.
** It deserves here to be remarked, that this Hadad,being a very great king, was conquered by David; whoseposterity yet for several generations were called Ben­hadad, or the son of Hadad, till the days of Hazael; whoseson Adar or Ader is also in our Hebrew copy, 2 Kings xiii.24. written Benhadad; but in Josephus Adad or Adar.And strange it is, that the son of Hazael, said to be such inthe same text, and in Josephus, IX. 8. should still becalled the son of Hadad. I would therefore here correctour Hebrew copy from Josephus's; which seems to havethe true reading. Nor does the testimony of Nicolaus ofDamascus produced in this place by Josephus, seem to befaultless; when it says, that he was the third of the Ha-dads, or second of the Benhadads, who besieged Samaria,in the days of Ahab. He must rather have been theseventh or eighth, if there were ten in all of that name,as we are assured there were. For testimony makes allthe Hadads or Benhadads of the same line; and to haveimmediately succeeded one another. Whereas Hazaelwas not of that line, nor is he called Hadad or Benhadad,in any copy. And note that from this Hadad, in thedays of David, to the beginning of Hazael, were near200 years, according to the most exact chronology ofJosephus.
Zz







OCR Output








w [book VI. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


Now Saul's watchman told the king, thatthe camp of the Philistines was in confusion.Then he enquired, whether any body weregone from the army? and when he heard thathis son, and his armour-bearer were absent,he bade the high-priest take the pontificalgarments and predict what success theyshould have. The high-priest said, theyshpuld get the victory, and prevail againsttheir enemies. So he went out after the Phi­listines, and set upon them, as they wereslaying one another. Those also came run­ning to him, who had fled before to dens andcaves; upon their hearing that Saul wasgaining a victory. When therefore the numberof the Hebrews that came to Saul amountedto about ten thousand; he pursued the enemy,who were scattered all over the country.But then he fell into an action, which was avery unhappy one, and liable to be very muchblamed. For whether out of ignorance, orwhether out of joy for a victory gained sostrangely, (for it frequently happens that per­sons so fortunate are not able to use theirreason consistently,) he was so desirous toavenge himself, and to exact a due punish­ment of the Philistines, that he denounced a*curse on the Hebrews, to this purport. "Ifany one put a stop to his slaughter of theenemy, and began eating, and left off theslaughter, or the pursuit before night cameon, and obliged them so to do; he should beaccursed." Now after Saul had denouncedthis curse, since they were in a wood be­longing to the tribe of Ephraim, which wasthick and full of bees; Saul's son, who didnot hear his father denounce that curse, norhear of the approbation the multitude gave toit; brake off a piece of a honey-comb, and
upon them; that the army of the Philistines, being madeup of different nations, might be in the greatest confusion,as either not understanding or else suspecting one ano­ther; and (what might complete their consternation) thatGod at this time might send a panic fear upon them, which,whenever he does it, even in the opinion of Heathensthemselves, is enough to make the stoutest tremble, andthe most heroic spirits betake themselves to flight.


'Ev yap <Sai/Aovioirfi <po?oij*6uyov7ai£ xoi iraiJes ©suv.
Pind. Nemes. 9.


B.


ate part of it. But in the mean time, he wasinformed with what a curse his father hadforbidden them to taste any thing before sun-setting: so he left off eating, and said hisfather had not done well in this prohibition;because had they taken some food, they hadpursued the enemy with greater vigour andalacrity, and had both taken and slain manymore of their enemies, f
When therefore they had slain many tenthousands of the Philistines, they beganspoiling their camp, but not till late in theevening. They also took a great deal of prey,and cattle, and killed them and ate them withtheir blood. The scribes therefore told theirsovereign that the multitude were sinningagainst God, as they sacrificed; and wereeating before the blood was well washedaway, and the flesh was made clean. Thendid Saul give order, that a great stone shouldbe rolled into the midst of them, and he madeproclamation that they should kill their sacri­fices upon it, and not feed upon the flesh withthe blood; for that was not acceptable toGod. And when all the people did as theking commanded, SaulJ erected an altar, andoffered burnt-offerings to God. This was thefirst altar that Saul built.||
So when Saul was desirous of leading hismen to the enemies' camp before it was day,in order to plunder it; and when the soldierswere not unwilling to follow him, but indeedshewed great readiness to do as he com­manded them; the king called Ahitub thehigh-priest, and enjoined him to know of Godwhether he would grant them permission togo against the camp, in order to destroy thosethat were in it. But the priest said, that Godwould not give any answer. Then said Saul,


* This rash vow, or curse of Saul's, which Josephus*ays was confirmed by the people, and yet not executed,(I suppose principally because Jonathan did not know ofit,) is very remarkable; it being of the essence of theobligation of all laws, that they be sufficiently known and
promulgated. Otherwise the conduct of Providence, asto the sacredness of solemn oaths and vows, in God's re­fusing to answer by Urim, till this breach of Saul's vowor curse was understood and set right, and God propitiatedby public prayer, is here very remarkable; as indeed it isevery where else in the Old Testament. See ScripturePolitics, p. 54—65.
t t Sam. xiv. 29, 30.
\ Here we have still more indications of Saul's affecta­tion of despotic power, and of his intrenching upon thepriesthood, and making and endeavouring to execute arash vow or curse without consulting Samuel or the San­hedrim. In this view it is also that I look upon this erec­tion of a new altar by Saul, and his offering of burnt-offer­ings himself upon it, and not as any proper instance of de­votion or religion.
II 1 Sam. xiv. 35.







OCR Output








AN. 1219.] 171 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


But he did not admit of their intreaty; andaccused them, that they did not come to hisassistance when he was unjustly treated, andthis in an open manner, by his brethren. Forthey cast him off, as not having the samemother with the rest, but born of a strangemother, that was introduced among them byhis father's fondness; and this they did out ofa contempt of his inability to vindicate him­self. So he dwelt in the country of Gilead,as it is called; and received all that came tohim, let them come from what place soever,and paid them wages. However, when theypressed him to accept the dominion, andsware that they would grant him the govern­ment all his life, he led them to the war.*
When Jephtha had taken immediate care oftheir affairs,f he placed his army at the cityMispeh, and sent a message to the Ammoniteking, complaining of his unjust possession oftheir land. But that king sent a contrarymessage, and complained of the exodus of theIsraelites out of Egypt; and desired him togo out of the land of the Amorites, and yieldit up to him, as his paternal inheritance. ButJephtha returned this answer; that he did notjustly complain of his ancestors about theland of the Amorites, and ought rather tothank them, that they left the land of the Am­monites to them; since Moses could have ta­ken it also; and that neither would he recedefrom that land of their own, which God hadobtained for them; and they had now in­habited:): above three hundred years; butwould fight with them about it.
When he had given this answer, he sentthe ambassadors away. And when he hadprayed for victory, and had|| vowed to per­form sacred offices; and if he came home insafety, to offer in sacrifice whatever livingcreature should first meet him, he joinedbattle with the enemy, and gained a great


victory; and in the pursuit slew the enemiesall along, as far as the city Minnith. He thenpassed over the land of the Ammonites, andoverthrew many of their cities, and took theirprey, and freed his own people from that sla­very which they had undergone for eighteenyears. But as he came back, he fell into acalamity no way correspondent to the greatactions he had performed. For it was hisdaughter that came to meet him; she wasalso an only child, and a virgin. Upon thisJephtha heavily lamented the greatness of hisaffliction, and blamed his daughter for beingso forward in meeting him; for he had vowedto sacrifice her to God. However, this acci­dent that was to befall her, was not ungratefulto her, since she should die upon occasion ofher father's victory, and the liberty of herfellow-citizens. She only desired her fatherto give her leave for two months to bewail heryouth, with her companions; and then sheagreed, that at the aforementioned time hemight do with her according to his vow.§Accordingly when that time was over, he sa­crificed his daughter as a burnt-offering; offer­ing such an oblation as was neither conform­able to the law, nor acceptable to God; norweighing with himself what opinion thehearers would have of such a practice.
Now the tribe of Ephraim fought againsthim. because he did not take them along withhim in his expedition against the Ammonites;but because he alone had the prey, and theglory of what was done to himself. In an­swer to their accusation, he said, first, thatthey were not ignorant, how his kindred hadfought against him, and that when they wereinvited they did not come to his assistance;whereas they ought to have come quickly,even before they were invited. And in thenext place, that they were going to act un­justly; for while they had not courage enough


* Judg. -xi. 11.
t An/1201.
J Most copies want the word above. By Josephus'slarge chronology it was much above 300 years'; but bythe best chronology it was but 291 years; which in around number, are justly called 300 years.
II Josephu« justly condemns Jephtha, as do the Aposto­lical Constitutions, VII. 37. for his rash vow; whether it-were for sacrificing his daughter, as Josephus thought; orfor dedicating her, who was his only child, to perpetualvirginity, at the tabernacle, or elsewhere ; which I rathersuppose. If he had vowed her for a sacrifice she oughtto have been redeemed; Levit. xxvii. 1—8, but of the
VOL. 1.—NOS. 15 & 16
sense of verses 28, 29, as relating not to things vowed toGod, but devoted to destruction, see note on V. 1.
N. B. It here deserves to be remarked, that in theApostolical Constitutions, VII. 37. we have it distinctlyobserved among the many prayers of good men that wereheard of God, that the sacrifices and prayers of Gideon,both at the rock and the fleeces, were accepted only be­fore his sins: of Sampson in his thirst before his trans­gression; of Jephtha in the war before his rash vow;
of Manasseh in the land of the Chaldeans after his trans­gression was repented of; but not otherwise; which factsare all true in the Old Testament History.
§ Judg. xi. 27.







OCR Output








318 [book via. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


doing he would please God: but when hewould not do so, he foretold to him, thatsince he disobeyed the commands of God,he should meet with a lion, and be destroyedby him. When that sad accident had be­fallen the man, the prophet came again toanother, and gave him the same injunction.So he smote him, and wounded his skull.Upon which he bound up his head, andcame to the king, and told him, that he hadbeen a soldier of his, and had the custodyof one of the prisoners committed to him byan officer, and that the prisoner being runaway, he was in danger of losing his ownlife, by the means of that officer; who hadthreatened him, that if the prisoner escapedhe would kill him. And when Ahab hadsaid, that he would justly die; he took offthe binding about his head, and was knownby the king to be Micaiah the prophet: whomade use of this artifice as a prelude to hisfollowing words. For he said, that Godwould punish him, who had suffered Ben-hadad, a blasphemer against him, to escapepunishment; that he would so bring itabout, that he should die by the other'smeans, and his people by the other's army.*Ahab was very angry at th*1 prophet, andgave command that he snould be put inprison, and there kept. But for himself hewas in confusion at the words of Micaiah,and returned to his own house. f
CHAP. XV.
OF JEHOSHAPHAT, KINO OF JERUSALEM ; ALSO OF AH AB's EXPE­DITION AGAINST THE SYRIANS, AND HIS DEFEAT AND DEATH.
I NOW return to Jehoshaphat, king of Je­rusalem; who augmented his kingdom,:}:


and set garrisons in the cities of the countrybelonging to his subjects; and put no lessgarrisons into those cities which were takenout of the tribe of Ephraim, by his grand­father Abijah, when Jeroboam reigned overthe ten tribes, than he did in the other. Butthen he had God favourable and assisting tohim; as being both righteous and religious,and seeking to do somewhat every day thatshould be agreeable and acceptable to God.The neighbouring kings also honoured himwith presents, till the riches that he hadacquired were immensely great, and theglory he had gained was of a most exaltednature.
Now, in the third year of his reign, hecalled together the rulers of the country,and the priests; and commanded them togo round the land, and teach all the peoplethat were under him, city by city, the lawsof Moses; and to keep them, and to be dili­gent in the worship of God. With this thewhole multitude was pleased, that theywere not so eagerly set upon, or affectedwith any thing so much as the observanceof the laws. The neighbouring nations alsocontinued to love Jehoshaphat, and to be atpeace with him. The Philistines paid theirappointed tribute; and the Arabians suppliedhim with three hundred and sixty lambs,||and as many kids of the goats.
He also fortified the great cities, whichwere many in number, and of great conse­quence: and he prepared a mighty army ofsoldiers, and weapons against their enemies.Now the army of men that wore their ar­mour, was three hundred thousand of thetribe of Judah: of whom Adnah was the


slaughter by a lion had lately come to pass, was noother than Micaiah, the son of Imlah; who as he nowdenounced God's judgments on disobedient Ahab, seemsdirectly to have been that very prophet, whom the sameAhab in 1 Kings xxii. 8—18. complains of, as one whomhe hated; because he did not prophesy good concerninghim, but evil; and who, in that chapter, openly repeatshis denunciations against him; all which came to passaccordingly. Nor is there reason to doubt but this andthe former were the very same prophet. The otherancient Jews agreeing herein with Josephus; as bishopPatrick assures us, on 1 Kings xx. 28. This is one ofthose very many instances, in which the excellency ofJosephus's Temple copy, above all our other copies,most evidently appears.
* What is most remarkable in this history, and in manyhistories on other occasions in the Old Testament, is thatduring the Jewish theocracy, God acted entirely as the
supreme king of Israel, and the supreme general of theirarmies, and always expected that the Israelites shouldbe in such absolute subjection to him, their supremeand heavenly king, and general of their armies, as sub­jects and soldiers are to their earthly kings and generate;and that usually without knowing the particular reasonsof their injunctions. See Dr. Harris's Queries, 8—22,after his comment on Isa. liii. My Commentary on thebook of Job, and my Scripture Politics, page 4—7, wherehe will see that the particular Jewish theocracy did notcommence till the rest of the idolatrous and wickedworld had rejected that general theocracy, which tillthen extended over all mankind.
t 1 Kings xx. 43.
j About an. 914.
II Seven thousand and seven hundred, Hebrew andSeptuagint. 2 Chron. xvii. 1I,







OCR Output








an. 587.] 377 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


the Hebrews, and among the Chaldeans. Asespecially did Daniel, who, being alreadysufficiently skilful in wisdom, was very busyabout the interpretation of dreams. AndGod manifested himself to him.
Two years after the destruction of Egypt,king Nebuchadnezzar saw a wonderful dream;the accomplishment of which God shewedhim in his sleep.* But when he arose out ofhis bed he forgot the accomplishment. Sohe sent for the Chaldeans, magicians, andprophets, and told them he had seen a dream;and informed them that he had forgotten theaccomplishment of what he had seen; and heenjoined them to tell him, both what thedream was, and what was its signification.They replied, that this was a thing impos­sible to be discovered by men; but they pro­mised that if he would explain to them whatdream he had seen, they would tell him itssignification. Hereupon he threatened toput them to death unless they told him hisdream, and he gave command accordingly,since they confessed they could not do whatthey were commanded. Now when Danielheard that the king had given a command,that all the wise men should be put to death;and that among them himself and his threekinsmen were in danger; he went to Arioch,who was captain of the king's guards, anddesired to know the reason why the king hadgiven command that all the wise men, Chal­deans, and magicians, should be slain? Sowhen he had, learned that the king had had adream, and had forgotten it; and that whenthey were enjoined to inform the king of it,they had said they could not do it, and hadthereby provoked him to anger; he desired


* Some are of opinion, that Nebuchadnezzar's dreamand the interpretation thereof, were both revealed toDaniel, while he was asleep; but others rather think,that it was in a vision, while he was awake, because theprayer and thanksgiving which he made to God seem toinsinuate, that he was awake; though we cannot see,why he might not receive the revelation in his sleep, andreturn God thanks for it as soon as he awoke. CalmefsCommentary. B.
t The prophet Daniel makes mention of these sort ofpeople, and ranks them under the«e four different kinds.The Chartumim, the Asaphim, the Mecasphim, and theChasdim, chap. ii. 2. Chartumim, according to the Septu-agint, signifies sophists; but according to St. Jerom, divi­ners, fortune-tellers, casters of nativity, &c. Asaphimhas no derivation from the Chaldee tongue, but no smallresemblance to the Greek word sophos, (whether theGreeks took this word from the Babylonians, or the


of Arioch, that he would go in to the king,and desire respite for the magicians for onenight; and to put off their slaughter so long;for that he hoped in that time, to obtain byprayer to God the knowledge of the dream.Accordingly Arioch informed the king ofwhat Daniel desired. So the king bade themdelay the slaughter of the magicians, till heknew what Daniel's promise would come to.The young man then retired to his ownhouse, with his kinsmen, and besought Godthat whole night to discover the dream, andthereby deliver the magicians and Chaldeans,with whom they were themselves to perish,from the king's anger, by enabling him todeclare his vision, and to make manifest whatthe king had seen the night before in hissleep, but had forgotten it. Accordingly God,out of pity to those that were in danger, andout of regard to the wisdom of Daniel, madeknown to him the dream and its interpreta­tion, so that the king might understand byhim its signification also. When Daniel hadobtained this knowledge from God, he arosejoyfully, and told it his brethren; and madethem to hope that they should now preservetheir lives, of which they despaired before,and had their minds full of nothing but thethoughts of dying. So when he had with themreturned thanks to God, who had commise­rated their youth; he came to Arioch, anddesired him to bring him to the king, becausehe would discover to him that dream whichhe had seen the night before".
When Daniel was come in to the king, heexcused himself first, that he did not pretendto be wiser than the other Chaldeans andmagicians,t when, upon their entire inability
Babylonians from them;) and therefore the Septuaginthas rendered it by philosophers. Mecasphim is thoughtby some to be necromancers, such as pretend to raise thedead, to gain intelligence of things future; but the Sep­tuagint has rendered it by a word that denotes such en­chanters as made use of noxious herbs and drugs, theblood of victims, and the bones of the dead, for their su­perstitious operations. The other word Chasdim is thesame with Chaldeans, and here signifies a sort of philoso­phers among the Babylonians, who dwelt in a separatepart of the city, and were exempt from all employments.Their study was natural philosophy, astrology, divination,or the foretelling of future events by the observation ofthe stars, the interpretation of dreams, the science ofauguries, the worship of their gods, &c. as Diodorus Si-culus, lib. 1. gives us an account of them. CalmestDictionary, under the word Magicians. B.







OCR Output








110 [book it. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


BOOK IV.


Containing an Interval of Thirty-eight Years.


FROM THE REJECTION OF THAT GENERATION, TO THE DEATH OF MOSES.


CHAP. I.
OF THE ENGAGEMENT WHICH TOOK PLACE BETWEEN THEHEBREWS AND THE CANAANITES, WITHOUT THE CONSENTOF MOSES.
THE residence of the Hebrews in thewilderness was so disagreeable to them,and they were so uneasy at it, that althoughGod had forbidden them to meddle with theCanaanites, yet could they not be persuadedto be obedient to the words of Moses, and tobe quiet; but supposing they should be ableto beat their enemies, even without his appro­bation, they accused him; and suspected thathe made it his business to keep them in adistressed condition, that they might alwaysstand in need of his assistance. Accordinglythey resolved to fight with the Canaanites,and said, that God gave them his assistance,not out of regard to their leader's interces­sions, but because he took care of their entirenation, on account of their forefathers: whoseaffairs he took under his own conduct: as alsothat it was on account of their own virtue,that he had formerly procured them theirliberty, and would assist them, now they werewilling to take pains for it. They also said,that they were of themselves of abilities suffi­cient for the conquest of their enemies, al­though Moses should have a mind to alienateGod from them; and that however it was fortheir advantage to be their own masters, andnot so far to rejoice in their deliverance fromthe indignities they endured under the Egyp­tians, as to bear the tyranny of Moses, and tosuffer themselves to be deluded, and live ac­cording to his pleasure: as though God did


only foretel what concerned them, out of hiskindness to him; and as though they were notall the posterity of Abraham, and that Godmade him alone the author of all their know­ledge, and they must still learn it from him.They said it would be prudent to oppose hisarrogant pretences, and to put their confi­dence in God; and to resolve to take posses­sion of that land which he had promisedthem, and not to give ear to him, who, on thisaccount, and under the pretence of divineauthority, forbade them so to do. Consider­ing, therefore, the distressed state they werein at present, and that in those desert placesthey were still to expect things would beworse with them, they resolved to fight withthe Canaanites; as submitting only to God,their supreme commander, and not waitingfor any assistance from their legislator.
When they had come to this resolution,they went against their enemies; but thoseenemies were not dismayed either at the at­tack itself, or at the great multitude that madeit: but received them with such courage, thatmany of the Hebrews were slain, and the re­mainder of the army, upon the disorder oftheir troops, were pursued, and fled after ashameful manner* to their camp. Where­upon this unexpected misfortune made themquite despond, and they hoped for nothingthat was good, as gathering from it, that thisaffliction came from the wrath of God, be­cause they rashly went out to war without hisapprobation.
When Moses saw how deeply they wereaffected with this defeat, and when he was
* Numb. xiv. 45.







OCR Output








96 [book III. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


ephielis, for so this calyx may be called, didnot cover the forehead; but was covered witha* golden plate, which had inscribed uponit the name of God, in sacred characters:and such were the ornaments of the high-priest.
Now here one may wonder at the ill willwhich men bear to us, and which they pro­fess to be on account of our despising thatDeity which they pretend to honour; for ifany one do but consider the fabric of thetabernacle, and take a view of the garmentsof the high-priest, and of those vessels whichwe make use of in our sacred ministration, hewill find that our legislator was a divine man,and that we are unjustly reproached byothers; for if anyone, without prejudice, andwith judgment, look upon these things, he willfind they were every one made in imitationand representation of the universe; for whenMoses distinguished the tabernacle into threeparts,f and allowed two of them to the priests,as a place accessible and common, he deno­ted the land and the sea, for these are acces­sible to all; but when he set apart the thirddivision for God, it was because heaven isinaccessible to men. When he ordered twelveloaves to be set on the table, he denoted theyear, as distinguished into so many months.When he made the candlestick of seventyparts, he secretly intimated the decani,! orseventy divisions of the planets: and as to theseven lamps upon the candlesticks, they re­ferred to the course of the planets, of whichthat is the number; and for the veils, whichwere composed of four things, they declaredthe four elements, for the fine linen was pro-


per to signify the earth, because the flaxgrows out of the earth; the .purple signifiedthe sea, because that colour is dyed by theblood of a shell-fish; the blue is fit to signifythe air; and the scarlet will naturally be anindication of fire. Now the vestment of thehigh-priest being made of linen, signified theearth; the blue denoted the sky, being likelightning in its pomegranates, and in the noiseof its bells resembling thunder; and theephod shewed that God had made the uni­verse of four elements; and as for the goldinterwoven, I suppose it related to the splen­dour by which all things are enlightened. Healso appointed the breast-plate to be placedin the middle of the ephod, to resemble theearth, for that has the very middle place inthe world; and the girdle which encomf assedthe high-priest round, signified the ocean,which goes round about, and includes theuniverse. Each of the sardonyxes declaresto us the sun and the moon; those I meanthat were in the nature of buttons on the high-priests' shoulders. And for the twelve stones,whether we understand by them the months,or the like number of the signs of that circlewhich the Greeks call the Zodiac, we shallnot be mistaken in their meaning. The mitre,which was of a blue colour, seems to me todenote heaven; for how otherwise could thename of God be inscribed upon it? It wasalso illustrated with a crown of gold, becauseof that splendour with which God is pleased.Let this explication|| suffice at present, sincethe course of my narration will, on many occa­sions, afford an opportunity of enlarging onthe virtue of our legislator.


* The reader ought to take notice, that the very Mo­saic «£TaXov, or golden plate, for the forehead of theJewish high-priest, was itself preserved, not only till thedays of Josephus, but of Origen; and that its inscription,Holiness to the Lord, was in the Samaritan characters.See Antiq. VIII. 3, and Reland, De Spol. Templi, page132, 133.
t When Josephus, both here and chap. 6, supposes thetabernacle to have been divided into three parts, he seemsto esteem the bare entrance to be a third division, dis­tinct from the holy, and the most holy places:' and this therather, because in the temple afterward there was a dis­tinct third part, which was called the porch. OtherwiseJosephus would contradict his own description of thetabernacle, which gives us a particular account of nomore than two parts.
J These Decani, or seven times ten parts for the pla­nets, are described in Julius Firmicus Maturnus; to whomthe reader is referred.
|| This explication of the mystical meaning of the Jew-
ish tabernacle, and its vessels, with the garments of thehigh-priest, is taken out of Philo, and adapted to Gentilephilosophical notions. This may possibly be forgiven inJews greatly versed in heathen learning and philosophy,as Philo had ever been, and as Josephus had long beenwhen he wrote these Antiquities. In the mean time it isnot to be doubted but in their education they must haveboth learned more Jewish interpretations, such I mean aswe meet with in the epistle of Barnabas, in that to the He­brews, and elsewhere among the old Jews. Accordingly,when Josephus wrote his books of the Jewish War, for theuse of the Jews, at which time he was comparatively youflg,and less used to Gentile books, we find one specimen ofsuch a Jewish interpretation: for there, VII. 5, he makesthe seven branches of the temple candlesticks, with theirseven lamps, an emblem of the seven days of creation andrest, which are here emblems of the seven planets; norought ancient Jewish emblems to be explained any other­wise than according to ancient Jewish, and not Gentile,notions. See of the War. I. 33.







OCR Output








452 [book v. ANTIQUITIES OP THE JEWS.


month they returned to the city of Shiloh,where they had set up the tabernacle.
Joshua now took both Eleazar, and thesenate, and with them the heads of the tribes,and distributed the land to the nine tribes,and to the half tribe of Manasseh; appointingthe dimensions according to the largeness ofeach tribe.* So when he had cast lots, Judahhad assigned him by lot, the upper part ofJudea, reaching as far as Jerusalem, and itsbreadth, extending to the lake of Sodom; andthe lot of this tribe included the cities of As-calon and Gaza. The lot of Simeon, whichwas the second, comprehended that part ofIdumea, which bordered upon Egypt andArabia. As to the Benjamites, their lot fellso, that its length reached from the river Jor­dan to the sea; but in breadth, it was boundedDy Jerusalem and Bethel; and this lot wasthe narrowest of all, by reason of the good­ness of the land; for it included Jericho, andthe city of Jerusalem. The tribe of Ephraimhad the land that extended in length, fromthe river Jordan, to Gezer; but in breadth,as far as from Bethel to the great plain. Thehalf tribe of Manasseh had the land from Jor­dan, to the city of Dora; but its breadth wasat Bethshan, which is now called Scythopolis.And after these was Issachar, which had itslimits, in length, mount Carmel and the river;but its limit, in breadth, was mount Tabor.The tribe of Zabulon's lot included the landwhich lay as far as the lake of Gennesareth,and that which belonged to Carmel and thesea. The tribe of Aser had that part whichwas called The Valley, for such it was; andall that part that lay over against Sidon. Thecity Arce belonged to their share, which isalso named Actipus. The Naphthalites re­ceived the eastern parts, as far as the city ofDamascus, and the Upper Galilee, unto mountLibanus, and the fountains of Jordan, whicharise out of that mountain: that is, out of thatpart of it, whose limits belong to the neigh­bouring city Arce. The Danites' lot includedall that part of the valley which respects thesun-setting, and were bounded by Azotus andDora; they also had all Jamnia and Gath,from Ekron to that mountain where the tribeof Judah begins.
After this manner did Joshua divide the six
* If I were writing to the learned, I must have madeparticular notes on this and the rest of Josephus's geogra-


nations that bear the names of the sons of Ca­naan, with their land, to be possessed by thenine tribes and a half; for Moses had pre­vented him, and had already distributed theland of the Amorites, which was so calledfrom one of the sons of Canaan, to the twotribes and a half, as we have shewed already;but the parts about Sidon, as also those thatbelonged to the Arkites, the Amathites, andthe Arabians, were not yet regularly dis­posed of.
But now Joshua was hindered by his age,from executing what he intended, and thosewho succeeded him in the government tooklittle care of what was for the advantage ofthe public; so he gave it in charge to everytribe to leave none of the race of the Canaan-ites in the land that had been divided to themby lot; for, that Moses had assured them be­forehand, and they might rest fully satisfied,that their own security, and their observanceof their own laws depended wholly upon itHe also enjoined them to give thirty-eightcities to the Levites, for they had alreadyreceived ten in the country of the Amorites;and three of these he assigned to fugitiveman-slayers, who were to inhabit there, for hewas very solicitous that nothing should beneglected which Moses had ordained. Thesecities were. of the tribe of Judah, Hebron;of that of Ephraim, Shechem; and that ofNaphthali, Cadesh, which is a place of theUpper Galilee. He also distributed amongthem the rest of the prey not yet distributed,which was very great, whereby they had anaffluence of great riches, both all in general,and every one in particular; and this of gold,vestments, and other furniture, besides amultitude of cattle, whose number cannot betold.
After this he gathered the army together,and spake thus to those tribes that had theirsettlement in the land of the Amorites beyondJordan; for fifty thousand men of them hadarmed themselves, and had gone to the waralong with them: "Since that God, who isthe Father and Lord of the Hebrew nation,has now given us this land for a possession,and promised to preserve us in the enjoymentof it as our own for ever; and since you havewith alacrity offered yourselves to assist us,
phy of Canaan; but in this version it shall suffice to referthe English reader to my map of Palestine.







OCR Output








a


M


y


c


 







OCR Output








438 [book XII. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


retired to Antiochus, and informed him thatthey were desirous to leave the laws of theircountry, and the Jewish customs; and to fol­low the king's laws, and the Grecian mode ofliving. Wherefore they desired his permis­sion to build them a gymnasium at Jerusalem.Accordingly they left off all the customs thatbelonged to their own country, and imitatedthe practices of the other nations.
Now Antiochus, upon the agreeable situa­tion of the affairs of his kingdom, resolved tomake an expedition against Egypt: both be­cause he had a desire to gain it, and becausehe contemned the sons of Ptolemy, as not yetof abilities to manage affairs of such conse­quence. So he came with great forces toPelusium, and circumvented Ptolemy Philo-metor by treachery, and seized upon Egypt.He then came to the places about Memphis;and when he had taken them, he hastenedto Alexandria, in hopes of taking it by siege,and of subduing Ptolemy, who reigned there.But he was driven not from Alexandria, butout of all Egypt by the declaration of theRomans, who charged him to let that countryalone. I will now give a particular accountof what concerns this king, how he subduedJudea and the temple. For in my formerwork I mentioned those things very brieflyand have therefore now thought it necessaryto go over that history again, and that withgreat accuracy.
King Antiochus* returning out of Egypt,for ffear of the Romans, made an expeditionagainst the city of Jerusalem; and when hewas there, in the hundred and forty-thirdJyear of the kingdom of the Seleucidse, hetook the city without fighting; those of his


own party opening the gates to him. Andwhen he had gotten possession of Jerusalem,he slew many of the opposite party; andwhen he had plundered it of a great deal ofmoney, he returned to Antioch.
Now it came to pass, after two years, in thehundred and forty-fifth year, on the twenty,fifth day of that month, which is by us calledCasleu, and by the Macedonians, Apelleus;in the hundred and fifty-third Olympiad, thatthe king came up to Jerusalem; and pretend­ing peace, he got possession of the city bytreachery.|| At which time he spared not somuch as those that admitted him into it; onaccount of the riches that lay in the temple.But led by his covetous inclination, (for hesaw there was in it a great deal of gold, andmany ornaments that had been dedicated toit of very great value,) and in order to plun­der its wealth, he returned to break theleague he had made. So he left the templebare; and took away the golden candle­sticks, and the golden altar of incense, andtable of shew-bread, and the altar of burnt-offering; and did not abstain from even theveils, which were made of fine linen andscarlet. He also emptied it of its secrettreasures, and left nothing at all remaining;and by this means cast the Jews into greatlamentation. For he forbade them to offerthose daily sacrifices which they used tooffer to God, according to the law. Andwhen he had pillaged the whole city, someof the inhabitants he slew, and some he car­ried captive, together with their wives andchildren: so that the multitude of thosecaptives that were taken alive amounted toabout ten thousand. He also burnt down


* Hereabout Josephug begins to follow the first Bookof the Maccabees; a most excellent and authentic his­tory. And accordingly it is here, with great fidelity andexactness, abridged by him. Between whose presentcopies there seem to be fewer variations than in any othersacred Hebrew book of the Old Testament whatsoever:(for this book also was originally written in Hebrew;)which is very natural: because it was written so muchnearer to the times of Josephus than the rest were.
t What Josephus says here, that Antiochus returnedout of Egypt from his first expedition thither, out of fearof the Romans; if it refer to Popilius Laenas, and theother Roman ambassadors' peremptory threatnings, is agreat mistake; that not happening till two years after­wards at his second expedition. And that Antiochus nowassaulted Jerusalem, the 2d of the Maccabees says no­thing. But since the words before us may possibly referto some other cause of fear from the Romans, of which
we know nothing from any other author now extant, wecannot, with any certainty, pronounce it to be a mistake.However, Spanheim takes notice of this second expeditionof Antiochus, as made mention of by Polybius, in Vale-siu9's Excerpta, page 132, and out of Polybius, by Dio-dorus Siculus, in the Supplement to those Excerps, page312. By whom, and by Dr. Hudson, we are referredfor his exclusion out of Egypt by the Romans to Livy.XIV. 18. and to Justin Histor. XXXIV. who give us re­markable accounts of it. See the places already cited.However, I cannot agree with Dean Prideaux, who mul­tiplies these two expeditions into Egypt into four, at theyear 171, 170, 169, 168, B. C.
J See 1 Mace. i. 20. But verses 21, 22. contain whatJosephus ascribes to the second expedition of Antiochusagainst Jerusalem.
I! 1 Mace. i. 29, 30.







OCR Output








an. 1492.] 139 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


them for what mischief they did them whenthey were in the wilderness; and that whenthey had got possession of the land of theCanaanites, and when they had destroyed thewhole multitude of its inhabitants, as theyought to do, they should erect an altar thatshould face the rising sun, not far from thecity Shechem; between the two mountains,that of Gerizim, situate on the right hand,and that called Ebal, on the left;* and thatthe army should be divided, that six tribesshould stand upon each of the two mountains,and with them the Levites and the priests.And that first, those that were upon mountGerizim should pray for the best blessingsupon those who were diligent about the wor­ship of God, and the observance of his laws,and who did not reject what Moses had saidto them, while the other wished them allmanner of happiness also. And when theselast put up the like prayers, the formerpraised them. After this, curses were de­nounced upon those who should transgressthose laws; they answering one another alter­nately by way of confirmation of what hadbeen said. Moses also wrote their blessingsand their curses; that they may learn themso thoroughly, that they might never be for­gotten by length of time. And when he wasready to die, he wrote these blessings andcurses upon the altar on each side of it;where he says also the people stood, and thensacrificed, and offered burnt offerings, thoughafter that day they never offered upon it anyother sacrifice, for it was not lawful so to do.These are the constitutions of Moses, and theHebrew nation still live according to them.
On the next day Moses called the peopletogether, with the women and children, to acongregation; so as the very slaves were pre­sent also, that they might engage themselvesto the observance of these laws by oath; andthat duly considering the meaning of God inthem, they might not, either for favour of theirkindred, or out of fear of any one, or indeedfor any motive whatsoever, think any thingought to be preferred to these laws, and so


* Deut. xxvii. 12.
t Dr. Bernard well observes here, how unfortunate thisneglect of consulting the Urim was to Joshua himself, inthe case of the Gibeonites; who put a trick npon him,and ensnared him, together with the rest of the Jewishrulers with a solemn oath to preserve them; contrary to
voL. I.—NOS. 11 & 12.


might transgress them; that in case any oneof their own blood, or any city, should at­tempt to confound or dissolve their constitu­tion of government, they should take ven­geance upon them both, all in general, andeach person in particular; and when theyhad conquered them, should overturn theircity to the very foundations, and, if possible,should not leave the least vestige of suchmadness; but if they were not able to takesuch vengeance, they should still demonstratethat what was done was contrary to theirwills. So the multitude bound themselves byoath so to do.
Moses taught them also by what means theirsacrifices might be most acceptable to God;and how they should go forth to war, makinguse off the stones in the high-priest's breast­plate for their direction, as I have before sig­nified. Joshua also prophesiedJ while Moseswas present. And when Moses had recapitu­lated whatsoever he had done for the preser­vation of the people, both in their wars andin peace; and had composed them a body oflaws, and procured them an excellent form ofgovernment, he foretold, as God had declaredto him, that if they transgressed that institu­tion for the worship of God, they should ex­perience the following miseries: their landshould be full of weapons of war from theirenemies, their cities should be overthrown,and their temple should be burnt; that theyshould be sold for slaves to such men aswould have no pity on them in their afflic­tions; and that they would repent, when thatrepentance would no way profit them undertheir sufferings. "Yet," said he, "will thatGod who founded your nation, restore yourcities to your citizens, with their temple also,and you shall lose these advantages not onceonly, but often."
Now when Moses had encouraged Joshuato lead out the army against the Canaanites,by telling him that God would assist him inall his undertakings, and had blessed thewhole multitude, he said, "Since T am goingto my forefathers, and God has determined
his commission to extirpate all the Canaanites; which oathyet he and the other rulers never durst break And thissnare they were brought into because they did not askcounsel at the moutb of the Lord. Josh. ix. 14.I Deut . xxxiv 9


LI







OCR Output








258 [BOOK VJI. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


her native city lying at the last extremity,ascended upon the wall, and by means of thearmed men, called for Joab; and when hecame to her, she said, "God ordained kingsand generals of armies that they might cut offthe enemies of the Hebrews, and introducean universal peace among them; but thou artendeavouring to overthrow and depopulate acity of the Israelites, which hath been guiltyof no offence." But he replied, "God con­tinue to be merciful unto me; I am disposedto avoid killing any one of the people, muchless would I destroy such a city as this: and,if they will deliver me up Sheba, the son ofBichri, who hath rebelled against the king, Iwill raise the siege, and withdraw my armyfrom the place." Now as soon as the womanheard what Joab said, she desired him tointermit the siege a little while; for that heshould have the head of his enemy thrownout to him presently. So she went down tothe citizens, and said to them, "Will you beso wicked as to perish miserably, with yourchildren and wives, for the sake of a vile fel­low; and one whom nobody knows? And willyou have him for your king instead of David,who has been so great a benefactor to you,and oppose your city alone to such a mightyand strong army?" So she prevailed withthem, and they cut off the head of Sheba, andthrew it into Joab's army. When this wasdone the king's general sounded a retreat,and raised the siege.* And when he was


come to Jerusalem he was again appointedto be general of all the people. The kingalso constituted Benaiah captain of theguards,! and of the six hundred men: andset Adoiam over the tribute, and }Sabathesand Achilaus over the records. He alsomade Sheva die scribe, and appointed Zadokand Abiathar to be the high-priests.
CHAP. XII.
OF THE DELIVERANCE OF THE HEBREWS FROH A FAMINE,WHEN THE GIBEONITES HAD CAUSED PUNISHMENT TO BEINFLICTED FOR THOSE OF THEM THAT HAD BEEN SLAIN;AND OF THE GREAT ACTIONS l'ERFORMED AGAINST THKPHILISTINES BY DAVID AND HIS ADHERENTS.
AFTER this,J| when the country wasgreatly afflicted with a famine, Davidbesought God to have mercy on the people,and to discover to him what was the cause ofit, and how a remedy might be found for thatdistemper. The prophets§ answered, thatGod would have the Gibeonites avenged,whom Saul was so wicked as to betray toslaughter; and had not observed the oathwhich Joshua the general, and the senate,had sworn to them: and that if the kingwould permit such vengeance to be takenfor those that were slain as the Gibeonitesshould desire, God would be reconciled tothem, and free the multitude from their mise­ries. As soon therefore as David understoodthis, he sent for the Gibeonites, and asked


verness in this city; for though that office was most com­monly occupied by men, yet there want not instances ofwomen, (as in the case of Deborah, Judg. iv. 4, and QueenAthaiiah, 2 Kings xi,) who have been employed in theadministration of civil affairs. If she was invested withany such authority, she was the properest person to de­sire a parley with the general; and good reason she hadto desire it, because she knew the present temper andfear of the citizens and soldiers, viz. that considering theimminent danger they were in, they were generally de­sirous of peace, and restrained from it only by Sheba'spower and authority. Pool's Annotations. In the be­ginning of this woman's speech to Joab, there is some­thing that seems both abrupt and obscure. They werewont to speak in old time, saying, They should surelyask counsel at Abel, and so they ended the matter, 2 Sam.xx. 18: according to this translation, the sense of theword is,—" This city, which thou art about to destroy, isno mean and contemptible one, but so honourable andconsiderable for its wisdom, and the wise people in it,that when any difference did arise among any of theneighbouring places, they used proverbially to say, Wewill ask the opinion and advice of the men of Abel aboutit, and we will stand to their arbitration; and so all parties
were satisfied, and disputes ended." So that her words,according to this sense, are a high commendation of thecity of Abel, for its being a place, (time out of mind,)very eminent for the wisdom and prudence of its inhabit­ants. But there is another translation in the margin olour Bible, which seems to be more natural, and makesthe woman speak in this manner:—M When the peoplesaw thee lay siege to the city, they said, Surely he will.ask, if we will have peace; for the law prescribes-, thathe should offer peace to strangers, much more then toIsmelitish cities; and if he would once do this,. we shouldsoon bring things to an amicable agreement; for we arepeaceable people, and faithful to our prince." So that,according to this interpretation, the woman both modestlyreproved Joab for the neglect of his duty, and artfullyengaged him in the performance of it. Patrick's Com­mentary, and Pool's Annotations. B.
* 2 Sam. xx. 22.
t Cherethites and Pelethites, 2 Sam. xx. 23.
I Jehoshaphat, the son of Aliud, Heb. and Septuagint,2 Sam. xx. 24.
|| About an. 1062 B. C.
§ Perhaps the two high-priests, Zadok and Abiathar.







OCR Output








an. 453.] 411 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


Now while his friends were talking one toanother, Esther's eunuchs hastened Hainanaway, to come to supper. But one of the eu­nuchs, named Sabuchadas, saw the gallowsthat was fixed in Haman's house, and inquiredof one of his servants for what purpose theyhad prepared it? So he knew that it was forthe queen's uncle: because Haman was aboutto petition the king that he might be punished.But at present he held his peace. Now whenthe king, with Haman, were at the banquet,he desired the queen to tell him what giftshe desired to obtain; and assured her, thatshe should have whatsoever she had a mindto. She then lamented the danger her peo­ple were in; and said, that she and her nationwere given up to be destroyed: and that she,on that account, made this petition. Thatshe would not have troubled him if he hadonly given order that they should be sold intoservitude: for such a misfortune would nothave been intolerable. But she desired thatthey might be delivered from such a destruc­tion. And when the king inquired of herwho was the author of this misery to them?she only accused Haman: and convicted him,that he had been the wicked instrument ofthis; and had formed this plot against them.When the king was hereupon in disorder,and was gone hastily out of the banquet intothe gardens, Haman began to intercede withEsther; and to beseech her to forgive him,as to what he had offended; for he perceivedthat he was in a very bad case. And as hehad fallen upon the queen's bed,* and wasmaking supplication to her, the king camein: and being still more provoked at what hesaw, "O thou wretch!" said he, "thou vilestof all mankind! dost thou aim to force mywife?" And when Haman was astonished atthis, and not able to speak one word more,Sabuchadas the eunuch came in, and accusedHaman; and said, he found a gallows fiftycubits high at his house prepared for Mor-decai: for that the servant told him so much,upon his inquiry, when he was sent to him tocall him to supper. When the king heard


this, he determined that Haman should bepunished after no other manner than thatwhich had been devised by him againstMordecai. So he gave order immediately,that he should be hung upon that gallows,and be put to death after that manner.fAnd from hence I cannot forbear to admireGod; and to learn hence his wisdom and hisjustice: and not only in punishing the wick­edness of Haman, but in so disposing it, thathe should undergo the very same punish­ment which he had contrived for another.As also because thereby he teaches othersthis lesson, that what mischiefs any one pre­pares against another, he, without knowingof it, first contrives it against himself.
Wherefore Haman, who had immoderatelyabused the honour he had from the king, wasdestroyed after this manner: and the kinggranted his estate to the queen. He alsocalled for Mordacai, (for Esther had informedhim that she was related to him:) and gavehim that ring which he had before given toHaman. The queen also gave Haman's es­tate to Mordecai; and prayed the king to de­liver the nation of the Jews from the fear ofdeath; and shewed him what had been writ­ten over all the country by Haman, the son ofAmedatha. For that if her country weredestroyed, and her countrymen were to perishshe could not bear to live any longer. So theking promised that he would not do any thingthat should be disagreeable to her, nor con­tradict what she desired: but he bade herwrite what she pleased about the Jews, in theking's name, and seal it with his seal; andsend it to all his kingdom; for that those whoread epistles whose authority was secured byhaving the king's seal to them, would no waycontradict what was written therein. So hecommanded the king's scribes to be sent for,and to write to the nations, on the Jews' be­half: and to his lieutenants, and governors,that were over his hundred and twenty-sevenprovinces, from India to Ethiopia. Now thecontents of the epistle were these: {"Thegreat king Artaxerxes to our rulers, and those


* It was a custom of the Persians, as well as other na­tions, to sit, or rather to lie upon beds, when they eat ordrank; and therefore, when Haman fell down as a suppli­cant at the feet of Esther, and, as the manner was amongthe Greeks and Romans, and not improbably among thePersians, embraced her knees, the king might pretend that
voL. I.—NOS. 35 & 36.
he was offering violence to the queen's chastity. Not thathe believed that this was his intention, but, in his furiouspassion, he turned every thing to the worst sense, and madeuse of it to aggravate his crime. Patrick's Commentary. B.
t Esther vii. 10.
X The true reason why king Artaxerxes did not here
3Y


 







OCR Output













OCR Output








422 [BOOK XII. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


When this decree was read to the king, thatfirst contained the rest that is here inserted,and omitted only those Jews that had former­ly been brought, and those brought after­wards: which had not been distinctly men­tioned: so he added these clauses out of hishumanity, and with great generosity. He alsogave order that the payment, which was like­ly to be made in a hurry, should be dividedamong the king's ministers, and among theofficers of his treasury. When this was over,what the king had decreed was brought to aconclusion in seven days' time: the numberof the talents paid for the captives beingabove four hundred and sixty: and this, be­cause their masters required the hundredand twenty drachmae for the children also:the king having, in effect, commanded, thatthese should be paid for, when he said inhis decree, that they should receive theaforementioned sum for every slave.
When this had been done after so magnifi­cent a manner according to the king's incli­nation, he gave order to Demetrius to givehim in writing his sentiments concerning thetranscribing of the Jewish books. For nopart of the administration is done rashly bythese kings; but all things are managed with'great circumspection. On which account Ihave subjoined a copy of these epistles, andset down the multitude of the vessels sent asgifts, to Jerusalem: and the construction ofevery one; that the exactness of the artifi­cer's workmanship, as it appeared to thosethat saw them, and which workman madeevery vessel, may be made manifest: and thison account of the excellency of the vesselsthemselves. Now the copy of the epistle wasto this purpose:
"DEMETRIUS TO THE GREAT KING.
"When thou, O king, gavest me a chargeconcerning the collection of books that werewanting to fill your library: and concerningthe care that ought to be taken about such asare imperfect; I have used the utmost dili­gence about these matters. And I let youknow, that we want the books of the Jewishlegislation, with some others. For they are
and being in


written in Hebrew characters:


1 * We have a very great encomium of this Simon theJust, the son of Gnias I. in the fiftieth chapter of Eccle-


the language of that nation are to us unknown.It hath also happened to them, that they havebeen transcribed more carelessly than theyought to have been; because they have nothad hitherto royal care taken about them.Now it is necessary that thou shouldst haveaccurate copies of them. And indeed thislegislation is full of hidden wisdom, and en­tirely blameless; as being the legislation ofGod. For which cause it is, as Hecateusof Abdora says, that the poets and historiansmake no mention of it, nor of those men wholead their lives according to it: since it isa holy law, and ought not to be publishedby profane mouths. If then it please thee,O king, thou mayest write to the high-priestof the Jews, to send six of the elders out ofevery tribe; and those such as are most skil­ful in the laws: that by their means we maylearn the clear and agreeing sense of thesebooks, and may obtain an accurate inter­pretation of their contents: and so may havesuch a collection of these as may be suitableto thy desire."
When this epistle was sent to the king, hecommanded that an epistle should be drawnup for Eleazar the Jewish high-priest, con­cerning these matters: and that they shouldinform him of the release of the Jews thathad been in slavery among them. He alsosent fifty talents of gold for the making oflarge basons, and vials, and cups; and animmense quantity of precious stones. Healso gave order to those who had the custo­dy of the chests that contained those stones,to give the artificers leave to choose out whatsorts of them they pleased: at the same timeappointing that a hundred talents in moneyshould be sent to the temple, for sacrifices,and for other uses. Now I will give a de­scription of these vessels, and the manner oftheir construction; but not till after I haveset down a copy of the epistle which waswritten to Eleazar, the high-priest; who hadobtained that dignity on the following occa­sion. When Onias, the high-priest, was dead,his son Simon became his successor. Hewas called * Simon the Just; because of bothhis piety towards God, and his kind disposi­tion to those of his own nation. When he
siasticus, through the whole chapter. Nor is it improperto consult that chapter itself upon this occasion.







OCR Output








an. 1532.J 81 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


water changed for the better; he bid thestrongest men among them that stood there,to draw up water; and told them that whenthe greatest part was drawn up, the remain­der would be potable.* So they laboured atit till the water was so agitated and purgedas to be fit to drink.
Removing from thence, they came to Elim,fwhich place looked well at a distance, forthere was a grove of palm-trees, but whenthey came nearer, it appeared to be a badplace, for the palm-trees were no more thanseventy, and they were ill-grown, and creep­ing trees, by the want of water, for the coun­try about was all parched, and no moisturesufficient to water them, and make them hope­ful and useful, was derived to them from thefountains, which were twelve in number;they were rather a few moist places, thansprings, which not breaking out of the ground,nor running over, could not sufficiently waterthe trees. And when they dug into the sand,they met with no water, and if they took afew drops of it into their hands, they foundit to be useless on account of its mud. Thetrees also were too weak to bear fruit, forwant of being sufficiently cherished and enli­vened by the water. So they laid the blameon their conductor, and made heavy com­plaints against him; and said, that this theirmiserable state, and the experience they hadof adversity, were owing to him: for that theyhad then journeyed thirty days, and hadspent all the provisions they had broughtwith them, and meeting with no relief, theywere in a very desponding condition. Thusby fixing their attention upon nothing buttheir present misfortunes, they were hinderedfrom remembering what deliverances theyhad received from God, and those by thevirtue and wisdom of Moses also; so they-were very angry at their conductor, and


were zealous to stone him, as the direct oc­casion of their present miseries.
But while the multitude were irritated andbitterly set against him, Moses cheerfully re­lied upon God, and upon his consciousnessof the care he had taken of his own people,and he came into the midst of them, evenwhile they clamoured against him, and hadstones in their hands, in order to despatchhim. Now he was of an agreeable presence,and very able to persuade the people by hi9speeches: accordingly he began to mitigatetheir anger, and exhorted them not to be overmindful of their present adversities, lest theyshould thereby suffer the benefits that hadformerly been bestowed on them, to slip outof their memories; and he desired them byno means on account of their present uneasi­ness, to cast those great and wonderful fa­vours and gifts, which they had obtained ofGod, out of their minds: but to expect deli­verance out of their present troubles, whichthey could not free themselves from; and thisby the means of that Divine providence whichwatched over them: as it was probable thatGod merely tried their virtue, and exercisedtheir patience by these adversities, that itmight appear what fortitude they had, andwhat memory they retained of his formerwonderful works in their favour: and whetherthey would not think of them upon occasionof the miseries they now felt. He told them,it appeared they were not really good meneither in patience, or in remembering whathad been successfully done for them, some­times by contemning God, and his commands,when, by those commands, they left the landof Egypt; and sometimes by behaving them­selves ill towards him who was the servant ofGod, and this when he had never deceivedthem, either in what he said, or had orderedthem to do by God's command. He also re­


* The additions here to Moses's account of the sweet­ening the waters at Marah, seem derived from some an­cient profane author, and he such an author also, as looksless authentic than are usually followed by Josephus.Philo has not a syllable of these additions; nor any otherancient writer that we know of. Had Josephus written hisAntiquities for the use of the Jews, he would hardly havejriven them these very improb-ible circumstances; butwriting to Gentiles, that they might not complain of hisomission of any accounts of such miracles derived fromGentiles, he did not think proper to conceal what he hadmet with there about this matter. Which procedure isperfectly agreeable to the character and usage of Josephus
upon many occasions. This is, however, barely conjectu­ral; and since Josephus never tells us when his own copy,taken out of the temple, had such additions; or when anyancient notes supplied them; or indeed when they werederived from Jewish, and when from Gentile antiquities,we can go no farther than bare conjecture in such cases.Only the notions of Jews were generally so different fromthose of Gentiles, that we may sometimes make no impro­bable guesses to which sort such additions belong. Seealso somewhat like these additions in Josephus's accountof Elisha's making sweet the bitter and barren spring neaxJericho. Of the War, IV, 8.t Exod. xv. 27.







OCR Output








122 [BOOK IV. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


Balaam upon his face, and foretold what ca­lamities would befal the several kings of thenations, and the most eminent cities; some ofwhich of old were not so much as inhabited;which events have come to pass among theseveral people concerned, both in the pre­ceding ages, and in this, till my own memory,both by sea and land. From which comple­tion of these predictions, one may naturallyexpect that the rest will have their comple­tions in time to come.
Balak, being very angry that the Israeliteswere not cursed, sent away Balaam, withoutthinking him worthy of any honour. Where­upon, when he was just upon his journey, inorder to pass the Euphrates, he sent for Ba­lak, and tor the princes of the Midianites, andspake thus to him: "O Balak, and you Mi­dianites that are here present, I am obliged,even without the will of God, to gratify you.It is true, no entire destruction can seize uponthe nation of the Hebrews; neither by war,nor by plague, nor by scarcity of the fruits ofthe earth; nor can any other unexpected ac­cident be to their entire ruin. For the pro­vidence of God is concerned to preserve themfrom such a misfortune; nor will it permit anysuch calamity to come upon them, wherebythey may all perish. But some small misfor­tunes, and those for some time, whereby theymay appear to be brought low, may still befalthem. But after that they will flourish again,to the terror of those who brought those mis­chiefs upon them. So that if you are desirousof gaining a victory over them for a shortspace of time, you will obtain it by followingmy directions. Do you therefore,* set out thecomeliness of such of your daughters as aremost eminent for beauty, and proper to con­quer the modesty of those that behold them;and these decked and ornamented to thehighest degree you are able. Then send themto the Israelites' camp; and give them incharge, that when the young men of the He­brews desire their company, they allow it


them. And when they see that they are ena­moured of them, let them take their leave;and if they entreat them to stay, let them notgive their consent, till they have persuadedthem to neglect their own laws, and the wor­ship of that God who established them, andto worship the gods of the Midianites andMoabites: for by this means God will be in­censed againstt them." Accordingly whenBalaam had suggested this course, he wenthis way.
When the Midianites had sent their daugh­ters, as Balaam had exhorted them, the He­brew young men were allured by their beauty;and besought them not to grudge them theenjoyment of their beauty, nor to deny themtheir conversation. These daughters of theMidianites received their words gladly, andconsented to stay with them. But when theyhad brought them to be perfectly enamoured,they began to talk of departing. Then it wasthat these men became greatly disconsolate atthe women's departure; and were urgent withthem not to leave them; but begged theywould continue there, and become theirwives, and promised them they should beowned as mistresses of all they had. Thisthey said with an oath, calling God for thearbitrator of what they promised; and thiswith tears in their eyes, and such other marksof concern as might show how miserable theythought themselves without them, and somight move their compassion. So the women,as soon as they perceived they had madethem their slaves, and had enamoured themwith their conversation, began to speak thusto them:
"O ye illustrious young men; we havehouses of our own at home, and great plentyof good things there; together with the na­tural affectionate love of our parents andfriends. Nor is it out of our want of any suchthings that we are come to discourse withyou; nor did we admit of your invitation withdesign to prostitute our beauty for gain: but,


offering sacrifice, he meant twice beside the first timealready mentioned, which is not yet very probable; can­not now be certainly determined. In the mean time - allother copies have three such attempts of Balaam to cursethem in the present history.
* Such a large and distinct account of this perversion ofthe Israelites by the Midianite women, of which our othercopies give us but short intimations, Numb. xxxi. 16.2 Pet. ii. 15. Jude 11. Apoc. ii. 14. is preserved, as Roland
informs us, in the Samaritan chronicle, in Philo, and inother writings of the Jews, as well as here by Josephus.t This grand maxim, that God's people of Israel couldnever be hurt, nor destroyed, but by drawing them to sinagainst God; appears to be true, by the entire history ofthat people, both in the Bible, and in Josephus; and isoften noticed in them both. See in particular a most re­markable Ammonite testimony to this purpose: Judith v5,21.







OCR Output








aN. 1487.] 155 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


notice of the intentions of God, which hadbeen so gracious towards them; and toldthem that the Deity would continue theirfriend by nothing else but their piety, andthat it was proper for him, now he was aboutto depart out of this life, to leave such anadmonition to them; and he desired that theywould keep in memory this his exhortationto them.
So Joshua, when he had thus discoursed tothem, died; having lived an hundred and tenyears,* forty of which he lived with Moses,in order to learn what might be for his ad­vantage afterwards. He also became theircommander after Moses's deathf for twenty-five years. He was a man that wanted nowisdom nor eloquence to declare his inten­tions to the people; but was eminent on bothaccounts. He was of great courage andmagnanimity in action and in dangers; andvery sagacious in procuring the peace of thepeople, and of great virtue at all proper sea­sons. He was buried in the city of Timnath,of the tribe of Ephraim.J Aboutj| the sametime died Eleazar, the high-priest; leavingthe high-priesthood to his son Phineas. Hismonument also and sepulchre are in the cityGabatha.
CHAP. II.


OF THE AFFAIRS OF THE ISRAELITES AFTER THE DEATH OFJOSHUA J THEIR TRANSGRESSION OF THE LAWS OF THEIRCOUNTRY J AND THE DESTRUCTION OF THE TRIBE OFBENJAMIN, EXCEPTING ONLY SIX HUNDRED MEN.


A


FTER the death of Joshua and Eleazar,Phineas prophesied§ that, according to


God's will, they should commit the govern­ment to the tribe of Judah, and that ibis tribeshould destroy the race of the Canaanites;for then the people were concerned to learnwhat was the will of God. They also tookto their assistance the tribe of Simeon; butupon this condition, that when those that hadbeen tributary to the tribe of Judah should beslain, they should do the like for the tribe ofSimeon.
But the affairs of the Canaanites were atthis time in a nourishing condition; and theyexpected the Israelites with a great army atthe city Bezek; having put the governmentinto the hands of Adonibezek; which namedenotes the lord of Bezek, for Adoni in theHebrew tongue is called Lord. Now theyhoped to have been too hard for the Israel­ites, because Joshua was dead; but when theIsraelites had joined battle with them, I meanthe two tribes before-mentioned, they foughtvaliantly, and slew above ten thousand ofthem, and put the rest to flight; and in the
Cursuit they took Adonibezek; who, whenis fingers and toes were cut off by them, said,"Nay, indeed, I was not always to lie con­cealed from God, as I find by what I now en­dure; while I have not been ashamed to dothe same to** seventy-two kings."ff So theycarried him alive as far as Jerusalem; andwhen he was dead they buried him in theearth, and went on still in taking the cities;and, when they had taken the greatest partof them, they besieged Jerusalem; and whenthey had taken the lower city, which was notunder a considerable time, they slew all theinhabitants. But the upper city was not to
come to inhabit here." See the note there. Nor is itunworthy our notice what Moses Chorenensis adds, page53, and this upon a diligent examination, viz. that " Oneof those eminent men among the Canaanites came at thesame time into Armenia, and founded the Genthunianfamily or tribe; and that this was confirmed by the man­ners of the same family or tribe, as being like those of theCanaanites." •
§ By prophesying, when spoken of a high-priest, Jose-phus, both here and frequently elsewhere, means no morethan consulting God by Urim; which the reader is still tobear in mind upon all occasions. And if St. John, whowas contemporary with Josephus, and of the same country,made use of his style, when he says that Caiaphas, beinghigh-priest that year, prophesied that Jesus should die forthat nation, and not for that nation only, but that also heshould gather together in one the children of God, thatwere scattered abroad, xi. 51, 52, he may possibly mean,that this was revealed to the high-priest by an extraordt-
Nn


* Josh. xxiv. 29.t From An. 1492 to An. 1467.
\ This place is, in Judges ii. 9. called Timnath Heres,because of the image of the sun engraven on his sepulchre,in memory of that famous day when the sun stood still tillbe had completed his victory. This is asserted by severalof the Jewish authors, that memorials alluding to particu­lar transactions in the lives of great men were frequentlymade use of to adorn their tombs. Tully has recordedconcerning Archimedes, that a sphere and a cylinder were-put upon his monument. B.
|| Since not only Procopius and Suidas, but an earlierauthor, Moses Chorenensis, p. 52, 53, and perhaps from.his original author, Mariba Catina, one as old as Alexanderthe Great, sets down the famous inscription at Tangier,concerning the old Canaanites driven out of Palestine byJoshua, take it here in that author's own words: " Weare those exiles that were governors of the Canaanites;but have been driven out by Joshua, the robber; and are
VOL I.—NOS. 13 & 14.
y







OCR Output








482 [book XIII. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


him according to the common sentiments ofall the Pharisees:* and that this would bemade manifest if he would but ask them thequestion, what punishment they thought thisman merited? For that he might dependupon it, that the reproach was not laid onhim with their approbation; if they were forpunishing him as his crime deserved. So thePharisees made answer, that he deservedstripes and bonds; but that it did not seemright to punish reproaches with death. Andindeed -the Pharisees, even upon other occa­sions, are not apt to be severe in punish­ments. At this gentle sentence Hyrcanuswas very angry: and thought that this man


reproached him by their approbation. Itwas this Jonathan, who chiefly irritated him,and influenced him so far, that he made himleave the party of the Pharisees, and abolishthe decrees they had imposed on the peo­ple; and to punish those that observed them.From this source arose that hatred, whichhe and his sons met with from the multitude.But of these matters we shall speak here­after. What I would now explain is this.that the Pharisees have delivered to thepeople, a great many observances by suc­cession from their fathers, which are notwritten in the laws of Moses: and for thatreason it is, that the sect of the Sadducees


opinion, 1st, Because the Sadducees taught and prayed inthe temple, where the prophets, and other holy writers,were read, as appears from the example of Christ, whoexplained a passage out of Isaiah. 2dly, Because Jose-phiis, who ought to have been well acquainted with theprinciples of his sect, relates of them, (lib. VI. c. 9.) thatthey received what was written. And, 3dly, Because thePharisees, in their disputes with them about the doctrineof the resurrection, quote, not only the writings of Moses,but those of the prophets likewise, and other hagiogra-phers, whose authority the others do not deny, but onlyendeavour to elude the force of the passages that arehence produced against them. Upon the whole, there­fore, Scaliger (Elench. Trihser, c. 16.) is of opinion, thatthese Sadducees did not absolutely reject all the sacredwritings, but rather looked upon them as books composedby holy men, whose memoirs they reverenced, thoughthey could not believe them of the like authority withthe law of Moses, which to them was the only rule offaith. But notwithstanding this, "the account which isj;iven us in the Gospel, (says the learned Prideaux,) ofthe disputation which Christ had with the Sadducees,plainly proves the contrary. For seeing there, are so manytexts in the prophets and hagiographa, which plainlyand directly prove a future state, and the resurrectionfrom the dead, no other reason can be given why Christwaved all these proofs, and drew his argument, only byconsequence, from what is said in the law, but that heknew, that the Sadducees, had rejected the prophets andthe hagiographa, and therefore would admit of no argu­ments, but from the law only." Anno 107. B.
* The Pharisees were so called from the Hebrew wordPharas, which signifies to separate; because the prevail­ing passion, or rather ambition, of this sect was, to dis­tinguish and separate itself from the rest of the people,by a greater degree of holiness and piety, but accom­panied with very much affectation and abundance of vainobservances. Vide Lamifs Introduction, and Prideaux'sConnection. At what time this sect began first to ap­pear, is no easy matter to determine. Josephus makesmention of them in the government of Jonathan, a hun­dred and forty years before Christ, as a very powerfulbody of men at that time; nor is it improbable, thattheir origin was somewhat earlier, and that, as soon asthe Sadducees discovered their principles to the world,these men of different sentiments might not long afterrise up in opposition to them: for it is evident from the
character which the Jewish historian gives of them, that,in the main articles of their belief, they were entirelyrepugnant to the Sadducees. Joseph, de Bella Jvd. lib.II. c. 12. The Pharisees believe in a fate, says he, andattribute all things to it, but nevertheless they acknow­ledge the freedom of man; but how they made thesetwo apparent incompatibles consist together, is no wheresufficiently explained. They teach, that God will oneday judge the world, and punish or reward men accord­ing to their merits. They maintain, that souls are im­mortal, and that, in the other world, soine will be shut upin an eternal prison, and others sent back again; butwith this difference, that those of good men shall enterinto the bodies of men, those of wicked men into thebodies of beasts; which exactly agrees with the famoustransmigration of Pythagoras. Their adherence to thelaw was so exact, that, for fear of violating the least pre­cept of it, they scrupulously observed every thing thathad the least relation to it, even though the law had nei­ther commanded nor forbidden them. Their zeal for thetraditions of the elders was such, that they derived tbemfrom the same fountain with the written word itself, pre­tending, that Moses received both of them from God onmount Sinai, and therefore ascribing an equal authorityto both. They had a notion, that good works were me­ritorious; and therefore they invented a great number ofsupererogatory ones, upon which they valued themselvesmore than upon a due observance of the law itself. Theirfrequent washings and ablutions, Matt. vi. 5, &c. theirlong prayers in public places, Luke vii. 39. their niceavoidance of reputed sinners, their fasting and great ab­stinence, their penance and mortification, their minutepayment of tithes, their strict observance of the Sabbath,and ostentatious enlargement of phylacteries, were allworks of this kind; which nevertheless gained them suchesteem and veneration, that while the common peopleloved, the great ones dreaded them, so that their powerand authority in the state was considerable, though gene­rally attended with pernicious consequences, becausetheir hearts were evil: for notwithstanding their shew oimighty zeal and great austerity, they were in reality, nobetter than what our Saviour calls them, vain and osten­tatious, spiteful and malicious, griping and voracious,lovers of themselves only, and despisers of others; inso­much, that it was hard to say which was most predomi­nant in them, their insatiable avarice, their insupportablepride, or abominable hypocrisy. B.







OCR Output








4*. 1532.] 101 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS,


CHAP. IX.


OF THE MANNER OF OFFERING SACRIFICES.
1WILL now make mention of a few of ourlaws, which belong to purifications, andthe like sacred offices, since I am accidentallycome to this matter of sacrifices: these sacri­fices are of two sorts, one being offered forprivate persons, and the other for the peoplein general: and they are done in two differ­ent ways. In one case, what is slain is burnt,as a whole burnt-offering: whence that nameis given to it: but the other is a thank-offer­ing, and as designed for feasting those thatsacrifice. I will speak of the former: Sup­pose a private man offer a burnt-offering, hemust slay either a bull, a lamb, or a kid of thegoats, and the two latter of the first year;though of bulls he is permitted to sacrificethose of a greater age: but all burnt-offer­ings are to be of males. When they are slain,the priests sprinkle the blood* round aboutthe altar: they then cleanse the bodies, di­vide them into parts, salt them, and lay themupon the altar; while the pieces of wood arepiled one upon another, and the fire is burn­ing. They then cleanse the feet of the sacri­fices, and the inwards, in an accurate man­ner: and so they lay them to the rest, to bepurified by the fire, while the priests receivethe hides: this is the way of offering a burnt-offering.
Those who offer thank-offerings do indeedsacrifice the same creatures; but such as are


unblemished, and above a year old: howeverthey may take either males or females. Theyalso sprinkle the altar with their blood; butthey lay upon the altar the kidneys, the caul,and all the fat, and the lobe of the liver; withthese they bring also the rump of the lamb;they give also the breast and the rightshoulder to the priests; so they feast uponthe remainder of the flesh for two days; andwhat remains they burn.
The sacrifices for sins are offered in thesame manner, as is the thank-offering: butthose who are unable to purchase completesacrifices offer two pigeons, or turtle doves;one of which is made a burnt-offering to God,and the other is given as food for the priests.But we shall treat more accurately aboutthe oblation of these creatures, in our dis­course concerning sacrifices; but if a personfall into sin by ignorance, he offers an ewelamb or female kid of the goats of the sameage; and the priest sprinkles the blood at thealtar; not after the former manner, but at thecorners of it. They also bring the kidneys,and the rest of the fat, together with the lobeof the liver, to the altar: while the priestsbear away the hides, and the flesh, and spendit in the holy place,f on the same day; for thelaw does not permit them to leave of it untilthe morning. But if any one sin, and is con­scious of it himself, but hath nobody that canprove it upon him, he offers a ram; the fleshof which the priests eat, as before, in the holyplace, on the same day. And if the rulersoffer sacrifices for their sins, they bring the


* It is, says Bp. Patrick, no improbable conjecture ofFortunatus Scacchus, that from hence the heathens learnedtheir Taurobolia, and Criobolia, which in process of timethey disguised with infernal rites and ceremonies. "TheTaurobolium of the ancients was a ceremony in which thehigh-priest of Cybele was consecrated, and might be calleda baptism of blood, which they conceived imparted a spi­ritual new birth to the liberated spirit. In this dreadfuland SfHiguinary ceremony, according to the poet Pruden-tiu.s, cited at length by Banier on the ancient sacrifices, thehigh-priest about to be inaugurated was introduced into adark excavated apartment, adorned with a long silkenrobe, and a crown of gold. Above this apartment was afloor perforated in a thousand places with holes like a=ie ve, through which the blood of a sacred bull, slaughteredfor the purpose, descended in a copious torrent upon theinclosed priest, who received the purifying stream onevery part of his dress, rejoicing to bathe with the bloodyshower his hands, his cheeks, and even to bedew his lipsand his tongue with it: when all the blood had run fromthe throat of the immolated bull, the carcass of the victim
was removed, and the priest issued forth from the cavity,a spectacle ghastly and horrible, his head and vestmentsbeing covered with blood, and clotted drops of it adheringto his venerable beard. As soon as the pontifex appearedbefore the assembled multitude, the air was rent with con­gratulatory shouts; so pure and so sanctified however washe now esteemed, that they dared not approach his per­son, but beheld him at a distance with awe and veneration."Maurice's Ind. Ant. voL v. p. 196. B.
t What Reland observes here, out of Josephus, as com­pared with the law of Moses, Levit. vii. 15, (that the eat­ing of the sacrifice the same day it was offered, seems tomean only before the morning of the next, although thelatter part, i. e. the night, be in strictness part of the nextday, according to the Jewish reckoning,) is greatly to beobserved upon other occasions also. The Jewish maxim,in such cases, it seems, is this: that the day goes beforethe night, and this appears to me to be the language bothof the Old and New Testament. See alsothe note on IV.4, and Reland's note on IV. 8.







OCR Output








an. 570.] 379 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


When Nebuchadnezzar heard this, andrecollected his dream, he was astonished atthe nature of Daniel:* and fell upon his face,and saluted Daniel in the manner that menworship God; and gave command that heshould be sacrificed to as a god. He alsoimposed the name of his own god Baltasarupon him, and made him and his kinsmen,rulers of the whole kingdom. These kins­men, however, happened to fall into dangerby the envy and malice of their enemies: forthey offended the king upon the followingoccasion. The king made an image of gold,whose height was sixty cubits, and its breadthsix cubits; and set it in the great plain ofBabylon;! and when he was going to dedi­cate the image, he invited all the principalmen that were under his dominion, and com­manded, that when they should hear thesound of the trumpet, they should then falldown and worship the image; and he threat­ened that those who did not do so, should becast into a fiery furnace.J When thereforeall the rest, upon hearing the sound of the
* Nebuchadnezzar seems, in a sudden transport, tohave looked upon Daniel as having something more thanhuman in him, just as the barbarians thought of St. Paul,Acts xxviii. 6. and therefore it is said, that he fell on hisface and worshipped him; because the doing of reve­rence, by way of prostration, is not only an act of worshippaid to God, but frequently given to kings and great menin the Old Testament, according to the custom of easterncountries, 2 Sam. ix. 6. and sometimes even to prophets, onaccount of the sanctity of their office, 1 Kings xviii. 7. norwas it usually refused by them, except such circumstanceswere added to it, as made it look like divine worship, andthen it was always rejected, as in the case of St. Peter,Acts x. 26. Lowtk's Commentary on Daniel ii. 43. B.
t Grotius is of opinion that the image which Nebuchad­nezzar set up was the figure of his father Nebopolassar,whom, by this means, he intended to deify; but othersthink, that it was his own statue which he erected, togain the adorations of his people in this form. We can­not, however, in what we find Nebuchadnezzar saying toDaniel's friends, perceive that he any where upbraidsthem with contempt offered to his person, or his statue,bat only that they would not serve his gods, nor worshipthe image which he had set up, Daniel iii. 14. Andtherefore others have imagined, that this was neither hisown nor his father's statue, but that of Jupiter, which wasafterward found in the temple of Belus, when Xerxesplundered it of its immense riches, among which wereseveral images of massy gold, but one more especially fiftyfeet high, which might be the same that Nebuchadnezzarconsecrated in the plains of Dura. For though that issaid to have been sixty cubits, i. e. ninety feet high, yetwe may suppose that it stood upon a pedestal of forty feethigh, and so the image and the pedestal together, mightmake ninety, (vide vol. i. page 310, in the notes,) other-
VOL. I.—NOS. 31 & 32.


trumpet, worshipped the image; Daniel'skitismen did not do it, because they wouldnot transgress the laws of their country. Sothese men were convicted, and cast imme­diately into the fire; but were saved byDivine Providence, and after a surprisingmanner escaped death: for the fire did nottouch them. And I suppose it touched themnot, as if it reasoned with itself, that theywere cast into it without any fault of theirs;and that therefore it was too weak to burn theyoung men when they were in it. This wasdone by the power of God, who made theirbodies so far superior to the fire, that it couldnot consume them. This it was which recom­mended them to the king as righteous men,and men beloved of God: on which accountthey continued in great esteem with him.
A little after this, the king saw in his sleepanother vision: intimating that he should fallfrom his dominion, and feed among the wildbeasts;|| and that when he had lived in thismanner in the desert for seven years,§ heshould recover his dominion again. When


wise there would be no proportion between its height andits breadth, according to the description we have of it inDaniel iii. 1. Prideaux's Connection, anno 573. B.
J This kind of punishment was pretty common in theseparts of the world, so that some will have it, that Abra­ham, before he departed from Chaldea, was made toundergo it, but escaped by a miraculous preservation,founding their opinion on Gen. xi. 31. Of this furnace, inparticular, it is related, that the king's servants having re­ceived the command to heat it seven times hotter, ceasednot to make the oven hot with rosin, pitch, tow, and smallwood; so that the flame streamed forth above the furnaceforty and nine cubits; and passed through and burnt theChaldeans it found about the furnace. The Song of theThree Holy Children, ver. 23, &c. B.
|| God delayed the execution of his threats against thisprince, and gave him a whole year's reprieve, chap. iv.29. to see if he would repent, and turn unto him; butperceiving that he still persisted in his crimes, as soon asthe measure of his iniquity was full, he smote and re­duced him to the condition of a beast. This is Theodoret'snotion of the matter; but St. Jerome rather thinks, thatthis king being terrified with the threats, and touched withthe exhortations of the prophet, began to set about his re­formation, and by acts of charity and mercy, to reconcilehimself to God, for which he obtained a delay of hispunishment for a year's space; but that instead of perse­vering in these good purposes, he suffered himself to fallinto pride, upon the contemplation of the mighty workshe had done, and so, by his vanity, lost what he hadgained by his charity. Bonum misericordiae perdidit malosuperbiae. Calmet't Commentary. B.
§ Since Josephus here explains the seven prophetictimes which were to pass over Nebuchadnezzar, Danieliv. 16. to be seven years, we thence learn how he most
3S


.







OCR Output








AN. 267 1057.] ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


tity of gold, and a hundred thousand talentsof silver. But God prohibited me by theprophet Nathan; because of the wars I hadon your account; and because my right handwas polluted with the slaughter of our ene­mies. But he commanded that my son, whowas to succeed me in the kingdom, shouldbuild a temple for him. Now therefore, sinceyou know of the twelve sons whom Jacob ourforefather had, Judah was appointed to beking; and that. I was preferred before my sixbrethren, and received the government fromGod; and that none of them were uneasy atit; so I do also desire that my sons be notseditious one against another, now Solomonhas received the kingdom; but to bear himcheerfully for their lord: as knowing that Godhath chosen him. For it is not a grievousthing to obey even a foreigner as a ruler, ifit be God's will; but it is natural to rejoicewhen a brother hath obtained that dignity;since the rest partake of it with him. And Ipray that the promises of God may be ful­filled; and that this happiness, which hehath promised to bestow upon king Solomon,over all the country, may continue thereinfor all time to come. And these promises, Oson! will be firm, and come to a happy end,if thou shewest thyself to be religious, and arighteous man, and an observer of the lawsof thy country. But if not, expect adversityupon thy disobedience to them."
Now when the king had said this, he leftoff: but gave the description and pattern ofthe building of the temple, in the sight ofthem all, to Solomon; of the foundations, andof the chambers, inferior and superior; howmany they were to be, and how large inheight and in breadth; as also he determinedthe weight of the golden and silver vessels:moreover he earnestly excited him with hiswords, to use the utmost alacrity about thework: he exhorted the rulers also, and par­ticularly the tribe of Levi, to assist him; bothbecause of his youth, and because God hadchosen him to take care of the building of thetemple, and of the government of the king­dom. He also declared to them, that thework would not be very laborious to them;because he had prepared for it many talentsof gold, and more of silver, with timber, and


* 2 Sam. *xii. 11. Psal. xviii. 10.voL. I.—NOS. 23 & 24.


a great many carpenters, and stone-cutters,and a large quantity of emeralds, and allsorts of precious stones: and he said, thateven now he would give of the proper goodsof his own dominion two hundred talents;and three hundred other talents of pure goldfor the most holy place, and for the chariotof God,* the cherubim, which are to standover and cover the ark. Now when Davidhad done speaking, there appeared greatalacrity among the rulers, and the priests,and the Levites, who now contributed, andmade great and splendid promises for a fu­ture contribution. For they undertook tobring in of gold five thousand talents, andten thousand drachms;f and of silver, tenthousand talents; and many thousand talentsof iron. And if any one had a preciousstone, he brought it to be put among thetreasures; of which Jehiel, one of the pos­terity of Moses, had the care.
Upon this occasion all the people rejoiced;as in particular did David, when he saw thezeal and forward ambition of the rulers, andthe priests, and of all the rest: and he beganto bless God with a loud voice, calling himthe father and parent of the universe, andthe author of human and divine things, withwhich he had adorned Solomon, the patronand guardian of the Hebrew nation, and ofits happiness, and of that kingdom which hehad given his son. Besides this, he prayed forhappiness to all the people; and to Solomonhis son, a sound and a righteous mind, in allsorts of virtue; and then he commanded themultitude to bless God. Upon which theyall fell down upon the ground, and wor­shipped him. They also gave thanks toDavid on account of all the blessings whichthey had received ever since he had takenthe kingdom. On the next day he presentedsacrifices to God, a thousand bullocks, and asmany lambs; which they offered for burnt-offerings. They also offered peace-offerings,and slew many ten thousand sacrifices; andthe king feasted all day, together with all thepeople: and they anointed Solomon a secondtime with the oil, and appointed him to beking, and Zadok to be the high-priest of thewhole multitude. And when they had broughtSolomon to the royal palace, and had set him
t Staters.
3D







OCR Output








an. 1493.] 129 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


the sight. Let the ascent to it be* not bysteps, but by an acclivity of raised earth.And let there be neither an altar, nor a tem­ple, in any other city. For God is but one,and the nation of the Hebrews is but one.
He that blasphemeth God let him bestoned,f and let him hang upon a tree all thatday: and then let him be buried in an igno­minious and obscure manner.
Let those that live as remote as the boundsof the land which the Hebrews shall possess,come to that city where the temple shall be,and this three timesJ every year; that theymay give thanks to God for his former bene­fits, and may entreat him for those they shallwant hereafter: and let them, by this means,maintain a friendly correspondence with oneanother with such meetings and feastings to­gether. For it is a good thing for those thatare of the same stock, and under the sameinstitutions, not to be unacquainted with eachother; which acquaintance will be maintained"by thus conversing together, and by seeingand talking with one another, and so renew­ing the memorials of this union; for if they donot thus converse together continually, theywill appear like mere strangers to one ano­ther.
Let there be taken out of your fruits atenth,|| besides that which you have allottedto give to the priests and Levites. This youmay indeed sell in the country: but it is to beused in those feasts and sacrifices that are tobe celebrated in the holy city. For it is fitthat you should enjoy the fruits of the earth,which God gives you to possess, so as may beto the honour of the donor.
You are not to offer sacrifices out of the§


hire of a harlot; for the Deity is not pleasedwith any thing that arises from such abusesof nature; of which sort none can be worsethan this prostitution of the body; in likemanner no one may take the price of the co­vering of a bitch, either of one that is used inhunting, or in keeping of sheep, and thencesacrifice to God.**
Let no oneff blaspheme the godsJJ whichother cities esteem such. Nor may one stealwhat belongs to strange temples, nor takeaway the gitts that are dedicated to any god.
Let not any one of you wear a garmentmade of woollen|||| and linen; for that is ap­pointed to be for the priests only.
When the multitude are assembled togetherunto the holy city for sacrificing: every se­venth year, at the feast of tabernacles, letthe high-priest stand upon a high desk,whence he might be heard, and let him readthe laws to all§§ the people. And let neitherwomen, children, nor servants, be hinderedfrom hearing. For it is a good thing thatthose laws should be engraven in their souls,and preserved in their memories; that so itmay not be possible to blot them out. Forby this means they will not be guilty of sin,when they cannot plead ignorance of whatthe laws have enjoined them. The laws alsowill have a great authority among them, asforetelling what they will suffer if they breakthem; and imprinting in their souls by thishearing what they command them to do.That so there may always be within theirminds that intention of the laws which theyhave despised, and broken, and have therebybeen the causes of their own mischief. Letthe children also learn the laws, as the first


* This law, both here and Exod. xx. 25, 26, of notgoing up to God's altar by ladder-steps, but on an accli­vity , seems not to have belonged to the altar of the taber­nacle; which was in all but three cubits high: Exod.xxvii. 1, nor to that of Ezekiel, which was expressly to begone up to by steps, xliii. 17, but rather to occasionalaltars of any considerable altitude and largeness; as alsoprobably to Solomon's altar, to which it is here appliedby Josephus; as well as that of Zorobabel's and Herod'stemple; which were, I think, all ten cubits high. See2 Chron. iv. 1, and Joseph. Antiq. VIII. 3. And the reasonwhy these temples, and these only, were to have this as­cent on an acclivity, and not by steps, is obvious; that be­fore the invention of stairs, such as we now use, decencycould not be otherwise provided for in the loose garmentswhich the priests wore, as the law required. See Lamyof the Tabernacle and Temple, p. 444.
t Levit. xxiv. 86.
J Exod. xxiii. 14. Deut. xvi. 16.
II Levit. xxvii. 30.
§ The hire of public harlots was given to Venus inSyria, as Lucian informs us, page 878. And against somesuch vile practice of the old idolaters this law seems tohave been made.
** Deut. xxiii. 18.
tt The Apostolical Constitutions II. expound this lawof Moses, Exod. xxii. 28: "Thou shaltnot revile or blas­pheme the gods," of magistrates; which is a much moreprobable exposition than this of Josephus'*, of Heathengods.
%t Exod. xxii. 28.
IIII Levit. xix. 19.
§§ What book of the law was thus publicly read, seethe note on X. 5. and 1 Esd. Ix. 60—55.







OCR Output








.322 [book XIV. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


merit of our adversaries. Since therefore wehave undertaken a war for obtaining the go­vernment; and have taken care to do whatwas agreeable to piety and justice: and havebrought to punishment those that had neitherany remembrance of the kindnesses theyhad received, nor had kept their oaths; Iwill that you be at peace with those that areour confederates: as also that what you havetaken by the means of our adversaries shallnot be reckoned your own, but be returnedto those from whom you took them. Fornone of them took their provinces or theirarmies by the gift of the senate; but theyseized them by force, and bestowed them byviolence upon such as became useful to themin their unjust proceedings. Since thereforethose men have received the punishment dueto them, we desire that our confederates mayretain whatsoever it was that they formerlypossessed, without disturbance: and that yourestore all the places which belonged toHyrcanus, the ethnarch of the Jews, whichyou have had, though it were but one daybefore Caius Cassius began an unjustifiablewar against us, and entered into our province.Nor do you use any force against him, in or­der to weaken him, that he may not be ableto dispose of that which is his own. But ifyou have any contest with him about yourrespective rights, it shall be lawful for you toplead your cause, when we come upon theplaces concerned. For we shall alike pre­serve the rights, and hear all the causes, ofour confederates."
"Marcus Antonius, imperator, to the ma­gistrates, senate, and people of Tyre, sendethgreeting. I have sent you my decree; ofwhich 1 will that you take care that it beengraven on the public tables, in Roman andGreek letters; and that it stand engraven inthe most illustrious places; that it may beread by all. Marcus Antonius, imperator,one of the triumvirate over the public affairs,made this declaration. Since Caius Cassius,in the revolt he hath made, hath pillaged thatprovince, which belonged not to him, andwas held by garrisons there encamped; while


they were our confederates; and hath spoiledthat nation of the Jews that was in friendshipwith the Roman people as in war: and sincewe have overcome his madness by arms, wenow correct by our decrees and judicial de­terminations what he hath laid waste: thatthose things may be restored to our confede­rates. And as for what hath been sold of theJewish possessions, whether they be bodiesor possessions, let them be released: thebodies into that state oi' freedom they wereoriginally in; and the possessions to theirformer owners. I also will that he who shallnot comply with this decree of miue, shallbe punished for his disobedience. And ifsuch a one be caught, I will take care thatthe offender suffer condign punishment."
The same thing did Antony write to theSidonians, the Antiochians, and the Aradians.We have produced these decrees, therefore,as marks for futurity of the truth of what wehave said, that the Romans had a great con­cern about our nation.
CHAP. XIII.
HEROD AND PHASAELUS ARE MADE TETRARCHS, AFTERHAVING BEEN ACCUSED TO NO PURPOSE: THE PAR-THIANS BRING ANTIGONUS INTO JUDEA, AND TAREHYRCANUS AND PHASAELUS CAPTIVES: HEROD SAVESHIMSELF BY FLIGHT.
WHEN Antony came into *Syria, hefell in love with queen Cleopatra,who met him in Cilicia. There came nowalso a hundred of the most potent of theJews to accuse Herod, and those about him;and set men of the greatest eloquence amongthem to speak. But Messala contradictedl hem on behalf of the young men: and this inthe presence of Hyrcanus, who was tHerod'sfather-in-law already. When Antony hadheard on both sides, at Daphne, he askedHyrcanus, who they were that governed thenation best? He replied, Herod, and hisfriends. Hereupon Antony, by reason of theold friendship he had made with his father,Antipater, when he was with Gabinius, madeboth Herod and Phasaelus tetrarchs, andcommitted the public affairs of the Jews to


* An. 41.
t We may here observe that espousals alone were ofold esteemed a sufficient foundation for affinity. Hyrcanusbeing here called father-in-law to Herod, because hisgrand-daughter Mariamne was betrothed to him; although
the marriage was not completed till four years afterward.Thus does Virgil style Chorebus the son-in-law to Prk-mus, before he had actually married his daughter: Ened.II. v. 344. See the notes here; see also Matth. i. 16.with Grotius's note upon that place







OCR Output








 







OCR Output








an. 1492.] 145 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


camp. And when they had done this for sixdays, on the seventh Joshua gathered thearmed men, and all the people together, andtold them the city should now be taken; sinceGod would on that day give it them, by thefalling down of the walls; and this of their ownaccord and without their labour. However,he charged them to kill every one whom theyshould take; and not to abstain from theslaughter of their enemies, either for weari­ness or for pity; and not to fall on the spoiland be thereby diverted from pursuing theirenemies as they ran away; but to destroy allthe animals, and to take nothing for their ownpeculiar advantage. He commanded themalso to bring together all the silver and gold,that it might be set apart as first-fruits untoGod, out of this glorious exploit, as havinggotten them from the first city they took; onlythat they should save Rahab and her kindredalive, because of the oath which the spieshad sworn to her.
When he had said this, and had set hisarmy in order, he brought it against thecity; so they went round the city again, theark going before them, and the priests en­couraging the people to be zealous in thework; and when they had gone round itseven times, and had stood a little, the wallfell down; while no instruments of war, norany other force was applied to it by the He­brews.
So they entered into Jericho, and slew allthe men that were therein, while they were


affrighted at the surprising overthrow of thewalls, and their courage was become useless,and they were not able to defend themselves;so they were slain, and their throats cut, somein the ways, and others as caught in theirhouses; nothing afforded them assistance, butthey all perished, even to the women and thechildren, and the city was filled with deadbodies, and not one person escaped. Theyalso burnt the whole city, and the countryabout it, but they saved alive Rahab, withher family, who had fled to her inn; and whenshe was brought to him, Joshua owned thatthey owed her thanks for her preservation ofthe spies. He also said he would not appearto be behind her in his benefaction to her,and therefore he gave her certain lands im­mediately, and held her in great esteem everafterwards.
If any part of the city escaped the fire, heoverthrew it from its foundation, and de­nounced a curse* against its inhabitants, ifany one should desire to rebuild it; how uponhis laying the foundations of the walls heshould be deprived of his eldest son, and uponfinishing it he should lose his youngest son;fbut what happened hereuponJ we shall speakof hereafter.
Now there was an immense quantity of sil­ver and gold, and besides those of brass also,that was heaped together out of the city whenit was taken; no one transgressing the decree,nor purloining for their own peculiar advan­tage; which spoils Joshua delivered to the


* Upon occasion of this devoting of Jericho to destruc­tion, and the exemplary punishment of Achar, who brokethat cherem or anathema, and of the punishment of thefuture breaker of it, Hiel, 1 Kings xvi. 34. as also of thepunishment of Saul for breaking the like cherem or ana­thema against the Amalekites, 1 Sam. xv. we may observewhat was the true meaning of that law, Levit. xxvii. 28.None devoted, which shall be devoted of men, shall beredeemed, but shall surely be put to death, i. e. When­ever any of the Jews' public enemies had been for theirwickedness solemnly devoted to destruction, according tothe divine command, as were generally the seven wickednations of Canaan, and those sinners the Amalekites,1 Sam. xv. 18. (see the note on IV. 7.) it was utterly un­lawful to permit those enemies to be redeemed, but theywere to be all utterly destroyed. See also Numb. xxi. 2,3. The words of Joshua's execration are these:—Cursedbe the man before the Lord, that raiseth up, and buildeth thiscity Jericho; he shall lay the foundation thereof in his first­born, and in his youngest son shall he set up the gates of it,Josh, vi- 26. "This anathema (says Maimonides) waspronounced, that the miracle of the subversion of Jericho
might be kept in perpetual memory; for whosoever sawthe walls sunk deep in the earth, (as he understands it.)would clearly discern, that this was not the form of abuilding destroyed by men, but miraculously throwndown by God." Hiel, however, in the reign of Abab,'either not remembering, or not believing this denuncia­tion, was so taken with the beauty of its situation, that herebuilt Jericho, and, as the sacred history informs us, laidthe foundation thereof in Ahiram, his first-born, and set upthe gates thereof in his youngest son Segub, according to theword of the Lord, which he spake to Joshua, the son of Nun,1 Kings xvi. 34. However, after that Hiel had venturedto rebuild it, no scruple was made of inhabiting it; for itafterwards became famous upon many accounts. Herethe prophet sweetened the waters of the spring that sup­plied it, and the neighbouring countries. Here Herodbuilt a sumptuous palace; it was the dwelling-place ofZaccheus, and was honoured with the presence of Christ,who vouchsafed likewise to work some miracles here.Univer. Hist. lib. 1. c. 7. B.
t Josh. vi. 26.
J This is now wanting in Josephus.







OCR Output








^"■HHS


 


AW& Siify? Sestm -







OCR Output








Air. 1099.] 211 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


the kingdom; and farther, why didst thou de­liver oracles to him concerning futurity? forthou couldst not be unacquainted that hehad fled away from me; and that he hatedmy family." But the high-priest did not at­tempt to deny what he had done, but con­fessed boldly that he had supplied him withthose things; not to gratify David, but Saulhimself; and he said, " I did not know that hewas thy adversary, but a servant of thine,who was very faithful to thee; and a captainover a thousand of thy soldiers; and what ismore than these, thy son-in-law. Men do notchoose to confer such favours on their adver­saries; but on those who are esteemed tobear the highest good will and respect tothem. Nor is this the first time that I pro­phesied for him; but have done it at othertimes, as well as now. And when he told methat he was sent by thee to perform some­thing in great haste; if I had furnished himwith nothing that he desired, I should havethought it was rather in contradiction to thee,than to him. Wherefore do not thou enter­tain any ill opinion of me, nor do thou have asuspicion of what I then thought an act ofhumanity, from what is now told thee ofDavid's attempts against thee; for I did tohim as to thy friend, and son-in-law, and cap­tain of a thousand; and not as to thine adver­sary."
The high-priest's defence, however, hadno effect upon Saul, for his fear was so pre­valent, that he could not give credit to anyapology that was very just. So he commandedhis armed men to kill him, and all his kindred.But as they durst not touch the high-priest,but were more afraid of disobeying God thanthe king; he ordered Doeg the Syrian to kill


* Eighty-five, Hebrew. Three hundred and five,Septuagint.
t Nob was not a city allotted to the priests; nor hadthe prophets, that we know of, any particular cities allottedto them. It seems the tabernacle was now at Nob; andprobably a school of the prophets was here also. It wasfull two days journey on foot from Jerusalem. The num­ber of priests here slain, in Josephus, is 385, and but 85,in our Hebrew copies; yet are they 305 in the Septuagint.I prefer Josephus's number: the Hebrew having, I sup­pose, only dropped the hundreds, the other the tens. Thiscity Nob seems to have been the chief, or perhaps theonly seat of the family of Ithamar; which here perished,according to God's former terrible threatenings to Eli,1 Sam. ii. 27—36. iii. 11—18.
J 1 Sam. xxii. 20.
voL. I.—NOS. 17 & 18.


them. Accordingly he took to his assistancesuch wicked men as were like himself, andslew Ahimelech and his family; which werein all three hundred and eighty-five.* Saulalso sent men to Nob,f the city of the priests,and slew all that were there, without sparingeither women or children, or any other age,and burnt it. Only there was one son ofAhimelech, whose name was Abiathar, whoescaped.J However, these things came topass as God had foretold to Eli the high-priest; when he said that his posterity shouldbe destroyed, on account of the transgressionsof his two sons.
Now Saul,|| by perpetrating so barbarousa crime, and murdering the whole pontificalfamily, by having no pity for the infants, norreverence for the aged; and by the over­throwing the city also which God had chosenfor the property and support of the priestsand prophets which were there; and hadordained as the only city allotted for the edu­cation of such men; gives all to understandand consider the disposition of men: thatwhile they are private persons, and in a lowcondition, because it is not in their power toindulge, nor to venture upon what they wishfor, they are equitable and moderate, andpursue nothing but what is just; and bendtheir whole minds and labours that way; thenit is that they have this belief about God, thathe is present to all the actions of their lives,and that he does not only see the actions thatare done, but clearly knows those thoughts,also whence their actions arise. But whenonce they are advanced into power and au­thority, they put offall such notions; and, asif they were no other than actors upon atheatre, they lay aside their disguised parts
II We have here an admirable reflection of Josephus's,concerning the general wickedness of men in great au­thority, and the danger they are in of rejecting that regardto justice and humanity; to divine providence and thefear of God, which they either really had, or pretended tohave while they were in a lower condition. It can neverbe too often perused by kings and great men; nor by thosewho expect to obtain such elevated dignities among man­kind. See the like reflections of our Josephus's, VII. 1.at the end, and VIII. 10. at the beginning, also XIII. 7.about the middle. They are to the like purport with onebranch of Agur's prayer: "One thing have I required ofthee ; deny me not before I die: give me not riches, lest Ibe full, and deny thee, and say, who is the Lord?" Prov.xxx. 7, 8, 9.
Uu







OCR Output








ax. 453.] 407 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


Now when Mordecai was informed of whatwas done, he rent his clothes, and put onsackcloth, and sprinkled ashes upon his head,and went about the city,* crying out, that anation that had been injurious to no man, wasto be destroyed. And he went on saying thusas far as to the king's palace, and there hestood. For it was not lawful for him to gointo it, in that habit. The same thing wasdone by all the Jews that were in the severalcities, wherein this decree was published;with lamentation and mourning, on accountof the calamities denounced against them.But as soon as certain persons had told thequeen, that Mordecai stood before the courtin a mourning habit, she was disturbed at thisreport; and sent out such as should changehis garments. But when he could not be in­duced to put off his sackcloth, because the sadoccasion that forced him to put it on was notyet ceased; she called the eunuch Aeratheus,for he was then present; and sent him toMordecai, in order to learn what sad acci­dent had befallen him, for which he was inmourning, and would not put off that habit,at her desire. Then did Mordecai inform theeunuch of the occasion of his mourning, andof the decree which was sent by the king intoall the country, and of the promise of moneywhereby Haman bought the destruction oftheir nation. He also gave him a copy of


what was proclaimed at Shushan, to be car­ried to Esther: and he charged her to petitionthe king about this matter, and not to think ita dishonourable thing in her to put on a hum­ble habit, for the safety of her nation: whereinshe might deprecate the ruin of the Jews,who were in danger of it. For that Haman,whose dignity was only inferior to that of theking, had accused the Jews, and had irritatedthe king against them. When she was in­formed of this, she sent to Mordecai again, andtold him that she was not called by the king,and that he who should presume to go in tohim without being called, would certainly beslain;f unless it happened that the king heldout his golden sceptre to him; in which casealone he could obtain pardon, and be entirelypreserved. Now when the eunuch carriedthis message from Esther to Mordecai, hebade him tell her, that she must not only pro­vide for her own safety, but for the commonpreservation of her nation. For that if shenow neglected this opportunity, there wouldcertainly arise help to them from God someother way; but she and her father's housewould be destroyed by those whom she nowdespised. But Esther sent the same eunuchback to Mordecai, to desire him to go to Shu­shan, and to gather the Jews that were theretogether to a congregation; and to fast, andto abstain from all sorts of food on her ac­


shan, might be concerned at this horrid decree, eitherbecause they were related to them, or engaged with themin worldly concerns, or perhaps out of mere humanity andcompassion to so vast a number of innocent people, nowappointed as sheep for the slaughter. They might ap­prehend likewise, that upon the execution of the decree,some sedition or tumult might ensue; that, in so great aslaughter, it was hard to tell, who would escape withoutoeing killed or plundered, because those who were em­ployed in this bloody work would be more mindful toenrich themselves than to observe their orders. Pool't An­notations, and Patrick's and Le Clerc's Commentaries. B.
* The latter Targum, upon the book of Esther, givesus this account of Mordecai's behaviour upon this sadoccasion, viz. that in the midst of the streets he made hiscomplaint, saying, What a heavy decree is this, which theking and Haman have passed, not against a part of us butagainst us all, to root us out of the earth! Whereupon allthe Jews flocked about him, and having caused the bookof the law to be brought to the gate of Shushan, he, beingcovered with sackcloth, read therein these words out ofDeut. iv. 30, 31. "When thou art in tribulation, and allthese things are come upon thee, in the latter days, if thouturn to the Lord thy God, and shalt be obedient to hisvoice, (for the Lord thy God is a merciful God,) he willnot forsake thee, nor destroy thee, nor forget the covenant
of thy fathers, which he sware unto them:" After which heexhorted them to fasting, humiliation, and repentance, ac­cording to the example of the Ninevites. Patrick's Com. B.t Ever since the reign of Dejoces king of Media,Herodotus, lib. I. informs, that, for the preservation ofroyal majesty, it was enacted, "That no one should beadmitted into the king's presence; but that, if he hadany business with him, he should transact it by the inter­course of his ministers." The custom passed from theMedes to the Persians; and therefore we find it in thesame historian, lib. 3. that after the seven Persian princeshad killed the Magian, who had usurped the throne,they came to this agreement, that whoever should beelected king, should allow the others to have at all timesa ready access to his presence, which is an implication,that they had it not before, whenever they should desireit, except only when he was accompanied with any ofhis wives. This, therefore, was the ancient law of thecountry, and not procured by Haman, as some imagine;though it cannot be denied, but that the reason of the lawat first might be, not only the preservation of the majestyand safety of the king's person, but a contrivance likewiseof the great officers of state, that they might engross theking to themselves, by allowing admittance to none butwhom they should think proper to introduce. Pool'sAnnotations, and Le Clerc's Commentary. B,







OCR Output








AN. 168.] 441 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


who compelled them to sacrifice, with a fewof his soldiers. He also overthrew the idolaltar; and cried out, "If any one be zealousfor the laws of his country, and for the wor­ship of God, let him follow me." And whenhe had said this, he hastened into the desertwith his sons, and left all his substance in thevillage. Many others did the same, and fledwith their children and wives into the desert;and dwelt in caves. But when the king'sgenerals heard this, they took all the forcesthey then had in the citadel at Jerusalem,and pursued the Jews into the desert. Andwhen they had overtaken them, they, in thefirst place, endeavoured to persuade them torepent, and to choose what was most fortheir advantage; and not put them to the ne­cessity of using them according to the law ofwar. But when they would not comply withtheir persuasions, but continued to be of adifferent mind, they fought against them onthe sabbath day; and they burnt them, asthey were in the caves, without resistance;and without so much as stopping up the en­trances of the caves. And they avoided todefend themselves on that day, because theywere not willing to break in upon the honourthey owed the sabbath, even in such dis­tresses. For our law requires that we restupon that day. There were about a thousand,with their wives and children, who weresmothered, and died in these caves. Butmany of those that escaped, joined them­selves to Mattathias, and appointed him to


be their ruler; who taught them to fight, evenon the sabbath day;* and told them, thatunless they would do so, they would becometheir own enemies, by observing the law sorigorously, while their adversaries would stillassault them on this day, and they would notthen defend themselves; and that nothingcould hinder, but they must all perish, with­out fighting. This speech persuaded them;and this rule continues among us to the pre­sent time; that if there be a necessity, wemay fight on sabbath days. So Mattathiasassembled a great army and overthrew theiridol altars, and slew those that brake thelaws; even all that he could get under hispower. For many of them were dispersedamong the nations round about them, for fearof him. He also commanded that those boyswhich were not yet circumcised, should becircumcised now; and he drove those awaythat were appointed to hinder such circum­cision.
But when he had ruled one year, and wasfallen into a distemper, he called for hissons,f and set them round about him, andsaid, " O my sons, I am going the way of allthe earth, and I recommend to you my reso­lution; and beseech you not to be negligentin keeping it; but to be mindful of the de­sired of him who begat you, and brought youup; and to preserve the customs of yourcountry; and to recover your ancient form ofgovernment, which is in danger of being over­turned; and not be carried away with those


* By the law of Moses, the Jews were commanded todo no manner of work on the sabbath day; but this wasa precept which would admit of some exceptions, andwhat some people took in a more rigorous sense thanothers. The Samaritans, for instance, thought themselvesobliged to observe it to such a degree of strictness, as notto stir out of their places on that day, because the law isliterally so expressed, Exod. xvi. 29. but the Jews wereof opinion, that they were permitted to make their escapefrom danger, or to walk such a compass of ground, (whichthey call a sabbath day's journey,) if it were for anynecessary occasion, on that day. In our Saviour's time,it was allowable, they thought, to pull any animal out of apit, or a ditch, on that day, Matt. xii. 11. but the Talmu-dical doctors were for revoking that permission, andfound fault with him for even healing the sick and thelame, on the sabbath. Mattathias, and his company, bysundry experiences, were convinced, that too scrupulousan observance of the sabbath had brought several cala­mities upon their nation; that Ptolemy, the son of Lagus,the first king of Egypt of that name, by assaulting Jeru­salem on the sabbath day, (wherein the Jews would do
nothing to defend themselves,) became master of it with­out opposition; and that (but just lately,\ a great numberof their brethren had been passively slain, because theywould not so much as handle their arms on that day; andthereupon they came to a resolution to defend themselves,whenever they were attacked, be the day what it would;but we do not find, that they came to any decision, whe­ther they themselves were to attack the enemy on thesabbath. On the contrary, it seems as if they had de­termined that they were only permitted to repel force byforce; and therefore we read, that, when Pompey be­sieged the temple, observing that the Jews did barelydefend themselves on the seventh day, he ordered hismen to offer no hostilities, but only to raise the batteries,plant their engines, and make their approaches on thatday, being well assured, that in doing of this, he shouldmeet with no molestation from them; and, by this meanshe carried the place much sooner than he otherwisewould have done. Jemsh Antiq. lib. 14. c. 8. JewishWars, lib. 1. c. 5. and Calmefs Commentary on 1 Macca­bees ii. 14. B.t 1 Mace. ii. 49.







OCR Output








a*. 1096] 223 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


tines sending after them those that threwjavelins and shot arrows, he lost all his com­pany, except a few. As for himself he foughtwith great bravery; and when he had re­ceived so many wounds, that he was unableto bear up, or to oppose any longer, and yetwas not able to kill himself; he bade hisarmour-bearer draw his sword, and run himthrough, before the enemy should take himalive. But his armour-bearer not daring tokill his master, he drew his own sword, andplacing himself over against its point, hethrew himself upon it; and when he couldneither run it through him, nor, by leaningagainst it, make the sword pass through him;he turned round, and asked a certain youngman that stood by, who he was? and whenhe understood that he was an Amalekite, hedesired him to force the sword through him;because he was not able to do it with his ownhands, and thereby to procure him such adeath as he desired. 1 his the young mandid accordingly; and he took the goldenbracelet that was on Saul's arm, and his royalcrown that was on his head, and ran away.And when Saul's armour-bearer saw that hewas slain, he killed himself. Nor did any ofthe king's guards escape; but they all fellupon the mountain Gilboa. But when thoseHebrews that dwelt in the valley, beyondJordan, and those who had their cities in theplain, heard that Saul and his sons werefallen, and that the multitude about themwere destroyed; they left their own cities,and fled to such as were best fortified. Andthe Philistines finding those cities deserted,came and dwelt in them.
On the next day, when the Philistines cameto strip their enemies that were slain; they


got the bodies of Saul, and of his sons, andstripped them, and cut off their heads. Andthey sent messengers all about their country,to acquaint them that their enemies werefallen. And they dedicated their armour inthe temple of Astarte; but hung their bodieson crosses, at the walls of the city of Beth-shan; which is now called Scythopolis. Butwhen the inhabitants of Jabesh Gilead heardthat they had dismembered the dead bodiesof Saul, and of his sons, they deemed it sohorrid a thing to overlook this barbarity, andto suffer them to be without funeral rights,that the most courageous and hardy amongthem; (and indeed that city had in it menthat were very stout, both in body and mind,)journeyed all night, and came to Bethshan,and approached the enemies' wall, and takingdown the bodies of Saul, and of his sons, theycarried them to Jabesh; while the enemywere neither powerful, nor bold enough tohinder them, because of their great courage.So the people of Jabesh wept all in general,and buried their bodies in the best place intheir country, which was named Aroura; andthey observed a public mourning for themseven days, with their wives and children;beating their breasts, and lamenting the kingand his sons without either tasting drink ormeat,* till the evening.
To this end did Saul come, according to theprophecy of Samuel; because he disobeyedthe commandments of God,f about the Amale-kites, and on the account of his destroyingthe family of Ahimelech, the high-priest, withAhimelech himself, and the city of the high-priests. Now Saul, when he had reigned eigh­teen years,J while Samuel was alive, and afterhis death two, ended his life in this manner.


* This way of speaking in Josephus, of fasting seven(1 lys, without meat or drink, is almost like that of St.Paul's, Acts xzvii. 33. "This day is the fourteenth daythat ye have tarried, and continued fasting, having takennothing;" and as the nature of the thing, and the impos­sibility of strictly fasting so long, require us here to un­derstand both Josephus, and the sacred author of thishistory, 1 Sam. xxxi. 13. from whom he took it, of onlyfasting till the evening; so must we understand St. Paul,either that this was really the fourteenth day that theyhad taken nothing till the evening, or else that this wasthe fourteenth day of their tempestuous weather in the
Adriatic sea, as verse 27, and that on this fourteenth dajalone they had continued fasting, and had takon nothingbefore the evening. The mention of their long absti­nence, verse 21, inclines me to believe the former ex­plication to be the truth, and that the case was then for afortnight, what it was here for a week, that they kept allthose days entirely as fasts till the evening, but notlonger. See Judg. xx. 26. xxi. 2. 1 Sam. xiv. 24. 2 Sam,i. 12. Antiq. VII. 7.
t 1 Chron. x. 13. ^
% From an. 1114 to 1096 B. C.


 







OCR Output








526 [book XIV. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


more; because he was maimed: while the*law required that this dignity should belongto none but such as had all their membersentire. But now one cannot but here admirethe fortitude of Phasaelus; who, perceivingthat he was to be put to death, did not thinkdeath any terrible thing at all: but to die thusby the means of his enemy, he thought mostpitiable and dishonourable: and therefore,since he had not his hands at liberty, but thebonds he was in prevented him from killinghimself thereby, he dashed his head against agreat stone, and thereby took away his ownlife; which he thought to be the best thinghe could do in such distress as he was in. Itis also reported, that when he had made agreat wound in his head, Antigonus sent phy­sicians to him, in order to cure it; and byordering them to infuse poison into the woundkilled him. However, Phasaelus hearing,before he was quite dead, by a certain wo­man, that his brother Herod had escaped theenemy, underwent his death cheerfully; sincehe now left behind him one who would re­venge his death, and who was able to inflictpunishment on his enemies.
CHAP. XIV.
ov the ingratitude of the kino of arabia; and ofherod's successful application to the roman se­nate; BY WHOM HE IS MADE KING OF THE JEWS.
THE great misfortunes of Herod did notdiscourage his mind, but propelled himto new and surprising undertakings. For hewent to Malchus, king of Arabia, whom hehad formerly been very kind to, in order toreceive somewhat by way of requital, now hewas in more than ordinary want of it; anddesired he would let him have some money;either by way of loan, or as his free gift; onaccount of the many benefits he had receivedfrom him. For not knowing what was be­come of his brother, he was in haste to re­deem him out of the hand of his enemies; aswilling to give three hundred talents for theprice of his redemption. He also took withhim the son of Phasaelus, a child of but sevenyears of age, that he might be a hostage forthe repayment of the money. But there came


messengers from Malchus to meet him, bywhom he was desired to be gone: for thatthe Parthians had laid a charge upon him notto entertain Herod. This, however, was onlya pretence, which he made use of, that hemight not be obliged to repay what he owedhim: and this he was farther induced to, bythe principal men among the Arabians; thatthey might cheat him of what sums they hadreceived from his father Antipater, and whichhe had committed to their fidelity. He madeanswer that he did not intend to be trouble­some to them by his coming thither; but thathe desired only to discourse with them aboutcertain affairs, that were to him of the greatestimportance.
Hereupon he resolved to go away, andaccordingly took the road to Egypt. Andthen it was that he lodged in a certain tem­ple; for he had left a great many of his fol­lowers there. On the next day he came toRhinocolura; and there he heard what badbefallen his brother. Though Malchus soonrepented of what he had done, and came run­ning after Herod; but with no manner ofsuccess. For he was gone a great way off,and made haste into the road to Pelusium.And when the stationary ships that lay therehindered him from sailing to Alexandria, hewent to their captains: by whose assistance,and that out of great regard to him, he wasconducted into Alexandria, and was retainedthere by Cleopatra. Yet was she not able toprevail with him to stay there, because hewas making haste to Rome; even though theweather was stormy, and he was informedthat the affairs of Italy were very tumultuousand in great disorder.
So he set sail for Pamphylia: and fallinginto a violent storm, he had much difficultyto escape to Rhodes; with the loss of theship's burden. And there it was that two ofhis friends, Sappinas and Ptolemeus, met withhim. And as he found that city very muchdamaged in the war against Cassius, thoughhe were in necessity himself, he neglectednot to do it a kindness; but did what hecould to recover it to its former state. Healso built there a three-decked ship: and setsail thence, with his friends, for Italy; and


* This law of Moses, that the priests were to be with­out blemish, as to all the parts of their bodies, is in Lerit.wi. 17—24. And Spanheim, on the parallel place of the
history Of the War, I. 9, 13. observes that the same lawobtained at Athens also.







OCR Output








aN. H92.J 149 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


to be destroyed by these Canaanites, but tosuppose that they should be saved by thosethat came for the destruction of the Canaan­ites, because of the league of friendship thatwas between them. Accordingly Joshua has­tened with his whole army to assist them, and,marching day and night, in the morning hefell upon the enemies as they were going up
* Josh. x. 11.
t This miracle is thus related in holy writ: "Joshuasaid, in the sight of all Israel, Sun, stand thou still uponGibeon, and thou Moon in the valley of Ajalon; and thesua stood still, and the moon stayed, until the people hadavenged themselves of their enemies. Is not this writtenin the book of Jasher? So the sun stood still in the midstof heaven, and hastened not to go down about a wholeday; and there was no day like that, before it or after it,that the Lord hearkened unto the voice of a man; for theLord fought for Israel." (Josh. x. 12, &c.) Now, forthe better understanding of these words, we must ob­serve,—
I. That nothing is more common in Scripture, than toexpress things, not according to the strict rules of philoso­phy, but according to their appearances, and the vulgarapprehension concerning them. The sun and moon, forinstance, are called two great lights; (Gen. i. 16.) buthowever that title may agree with the sun, it is plain, thatthe moon is but a small body, the least that has yet beendiscovered in the planetary system, and that it has no lightat all, but what it borrows, and reflects from the rays ofthe sun; and yet, because it is placed near us, it appearsto us larger than other heavenly luminaries, and from thatappearance the holy Scriptures give it such an appellation.
And in like manner, because the sun seems to us tomove, and the earth to be at rest, the Scriptures speak agreat deal of the pillars, and basis, and foundations, of theearth, and of the sun's, rejoicing, like a giant, to run itsrace, (Psalm xix. 5.) and of his arising, and going do-am,and hasting to the place where it arose, <$-c. (Eccles. i. 6.)Whereas it is certain, that if the sun were made to revolveround about the earth, the general law of nature wouldthereby be violated; the harmony and proportion of theheavenly bodies destroyed; and no small confusion anddisorder brought into the frame of the universe; but, onthe contrary, if the earth turned upon its own axis everyday, be made to go round the sun in the space of a year,it will then perform its circulation, according to the samelaw which the other planets observe; and, without theleast exception, there will be a most beautiful order andharmony of motions every where preserved through thewhole frame of nature. As therefore the Scriptures weredesigned to teach us the art of holy living, and not to in­struct us in the rudiments of natural knowledge, it can bedeemed no diminution either to their perfection, or divineauthority, that they generally speak according to the com­mon appearance of things, and not according to their realityor philosophic truth. The plain matter of fact is, that inthe early ages, both before, and long after the days ofJoshua, the most learned astronomers had no notion of theimprovements which our modern professors have since-attained to. They never once dreamed of the earth's ro­tation upon its own axis ; but according to common appear­ance, were fully persuaded, that the sun and moon, had


to the siege, and when he had discomfitedthem, he followed and pursued them downthe descent of the hills. The place is calledBeth-horon, where he also understood thatGod assisted him, which he declared by thun­der and thunderbolts, as also by the falling ofhail* larger than usual. Moreover it hap­pened that the day was lengthened,f that the
their respective courses. Upon this supposition theyformed their schemes, and thought themselves able to an­swer every phenomenon by them. And therefore, if Godhad prompted Joshua to desire the prolongation of the dayin a manner more agreeable to our new astronomy, or torecord the miracle in terms more suitable to it, this wouldhave been a plain contrariety to all the rules of sciencethen in use. The people who heard him utter the words,Earth, rest upon thy axis, would have thought him dis­tracted, and those who read his account of what had hap­pened, if related in suitable expressions, would have de­cried it as false in fact, or passed it by with contempt anddisregard, as a wild fancy or blunder of his own. |
II. In relation to the places over which the two hea­venly bodies were to stand, the sun over Gibeon and themoon over the valley Ajalon. we must observe, that (evenupon the supposition of the sun's motion) the Jewisn ge­neral cannot be thought to speak in a proper and philo­sophical sense. For since the sun is almost a million oftimes bigger than the earth, and 95 millions of miles dis­tant from it, to justify the strict sense of the words, a linedrawn from the centre of the sun to that of the earth, mustexactly pass by Gibeon, which we know it cannot do, be­cause no part of the Holy Land lies within the tropics; andtherefore we must conclude, that Joshua here speaks ac­cording to the outward appearance of things, which makesthe sense of his words plain and intelligible. |
Wherever we are, (if so be we are not hindered by ob­jects immediately surrounding us,) we can cast our eyesupon part of the surface of the earth, and at the same timetake into our prospect some small extent of the firmamentof heaven, which seems, as it were, to cover the other;and each celestial body which we perceive in this extentabove, appears to us to be directly over such and suchpart of the earth, as we alternately turn our eyes to: andit is thus, that the sun, when Joshua spake, seemed tohim, and to those that were with him, to he over Gibeon,and the moon to be over the valley of Ajalon. This valley,in all likelihood, took its name from some adjacent town;but then, as there are three Ajalons mentioned in scrip­ture, one in the tribe of Ephraim, (1 Chron. vi. 69.)another in Zabulon, (Judg. xii. 12.) and another in Dan,(Josh. xix. 42.) it is reasonable to think, that the placehere spoken ofwas in Dan, the most remote province inGibeon; for we must suppose that these two places wereat some considerable distance, otherwise Joshua could notsee the sun and moon both appear at the same time, as itis probable they were both in his eye, when he utteredthese words.
III. In relation to the time when this miracle began,and how long it lasted, the Scripture's expression is, thatthe sun stood still in the midst of heaven, and hasted not togo down about a whole day; which words can import noless, than that the sun stood still in the meridian, or muchabout noon, and that in this position it continued for th -


Mm2







OCR Output








ah. 54.] 505 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


was busy in gathering money, and was infear for the entire ornaments of the temple,he gave him this beam of gold, as a ransomfor the whole; but not till he had given hisoath that he would remove nothing else outof the temple, but be satisfied with this onlywhich he should give him; being worth manythousand shekels. Now this beam was con­tained in a wooden beam that was hollow;but was known to no others, but Eleazaralone. Yet did Crassus take away this beam,upon the condition of touching nothing elsethat belonged to the temple; and then brakehis oath, and carried away all the gold thatwas in the temple.
And let no one wonder that there was somuch wealth in our temple; since all theJews throughout the habitable earth, andthose that *worshipped God; nay, even thoseof Asia and Europe sent their contributionsto it; and this from very ancient times. Noris the largeness of these sums without its at­testation; nor is that greatness owing to ourvanity, as raising it without ground to sogreat a height. But there are many witnessesto it, and particularly Strabo of Cappadocia;who says thus—" Mithridates sent to Cos,and took the money which queen Cleopatrahad deposited there; as also eight hundredtalents belonging to the Jews." Now wehave no public money but what appertainsto God. And it is evident, that the AsiaticJews removed this money out of fear ofMithridates. For it is not probable thatthose of Judea, who had a strong city andtemple, should send their money to Cos. Noris it likely that the Jews who are inhabitantsof Alexandriaf should do so neither; sincethey were in no fear of Mithridates. AndStrabo himself bears witness to the samething, in another place; and at the same timethat Sylla passed over into Greece, in orderto fight against Mithridates, he sent Lucullusto put an end to a sedition that our nation, ofwhom the habitable earth is full, had raisedin Cyrene. Where he speaks thus: "Therewere four classes of men among those of Cy­rene; that of citizens; that of husbandmen;
* The proselytes.
t Spanheim here takes notice of a great deal of otherevidence for the privileges the Jews had at the city Alex­andria. See his note on this place.
+ Thia citation, I suppose, is wanting. However, see


the third of strangers; and the fourth of Jews.Now these Jews are already gotten into allcities; and it is difficult to find a place in thehabitable earth that hath not admitted thistribe of men, and is not possessed by it. Andit hath come to pass that Egypt and Cyreneras having the same governors, and a greatnumber of other nations, imitate their wayof living; and maintain great bodies of theseJews in a peculiar manner; and grow up togreater prosperity with them; and make useof the same laws with that nation. Accord­ingly the Jews have places assigned them inEgypt, wherein they inhabit; besides whatis peculiarly allotted to this nation at Alex­andria; which is a large part of that city.There is also an ethnarch allowed them, whogoverns the nation, and distributes justice tothem; and takes care of their contracts, andof the laws to them belonging; as if he werethe ruler of a free republic. In Egypt there­fore this nation is powerful; because the Jewswere originally Egyptians; and because theland wherein they inhabit, since they wentthence, is near to Egypt. They also removedinto Cyrene, because that this land adjoinedto the government of Egypt, as well as doesJudea; or rather was formerly under thesame government.
When Crassus had settled all things as hepleased, he marched into Parthia; whereboth himself, and all his army perished; ashath been Jrelated elsewhere. But Cassiusyas he fled from Rome to Syria, took posses­sion of it; and was an impediment to the Par-thians; who, by their victory over Crassus,made incursions upon it. And as he cam&back to Tyre, he went up into Judea alsorand fell upon Taricheoe, and presently tookit, and carried about thirty thousand Jewscaptives, and slew Pitholaus, who succeeded"Anstobulus in his seditious practices; andthat by the persuasion of Antipater; whoproved to have great interest in him, andwas at that time in great repute with the Idu-means also; for he married a wife, who wasthe daughter of one of their eminent men,and her name was ||Cypros: by whom he
Of the War, Book 1. chap. 8.
II Dr. Hudson observes, that the name of this wife ofAntipater in Josephus, was Cypres, as a Hebrew termi­nation; but not Cypris, the Greek name for Venus, assome critics were induced to correct it







OCR Output








204 [book ti. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


brook, and had put into his shepherd's bag,and fitted it to his sling, he slang it againstthe Philistine. The stone fell upon his fore­head, and sank into his brain, insomuch thatGoliath was stunned, and fell upon his face.So David ran, and stood upon his adversaryas he lay down, and cut off his head with hisown sword; for he had no sword himself.And upon the fall of Goliath, the Philistineswere beaten, and fled; for when they sawtheir champion prostrate on the ground, theywere afraid of the issue of their affairs, andresolved not to stay any longer; but com­mitted themselves to an ignominious and in­decent flight; and thereby endeavoured tosave themselves from the danger they werein. But Saul, and the entire army of the He­brews, made a shout and rushed upon themand slew a great number of them; and pur­sued the rest to the borders of Gath, and tothe gates of Ekron.* So that there were slainof the Philistines thirty thousand; and twiceas many wounded. Saul then returned totheir camp, and pulled their fortification to
Eieces, and burnt it. But David carried theead of Goliath into his own tent, and dedi­cated his sword to God at the tabernacle.f
CHAP. X.
of saul's envv at david's brilliant success, and ofthe marriage of that conqueror with the king'sdaughter.
NOW the women were an occasion ofSaul's envy and hatred to David. Forthey came to meet their victorious army withcymbals and drums, and all demonstrationsof joy, and sang thus: the wives said, "Saulhath slain his many thousands of the Philis-


tines." The virgins replied, "David hathslain his ten thousands.":}: Now when theking heard them singing thus, and that tiehad himself the smallest share in their com­mendations; and that the greater number, theten thousands, were ascribed to the youngman; and when he considered there wasnothing more wanting to David, after suchapplause, but the kingdom; he began to beafraid, and suspicious of David. Accordinglyhe removed him from the station he was inbefore; for he was his armour-bearer, whichout of fear seemed to him much too near astation for him; and so he made him captainover a thousand, and bestowed on him a post,better indeed in itself, but, as he thought,more for his own security. For he had a mindto send him against the enemy, and into battle;as hoping he would be slain in such danger­ous conflicts.
But David had God going along with himwhithersoever he went; and accordingly hegreatly prospered in his undertakings, and itwas visible that he had mighty successes;insomuch that Saul's daughter, who was stilla virgin, fell in love with him, and her affec­tion so far prevailed over her, that it couldnot be concealed; and her father becameacquainted with it. Now Saul heard thisgladly;|| as intending to make use of it for asnare against David; and he hoped that itwould prove the cause of destruction and ofhazards to him. So he told those that in­formed him of his daughter's affection, that hewould willingly give David the virgin in mar­riage, and said, "I engage myself to marrymy daughter to him, if he will bring me sixhundred heads of my enemies."§ Supposingthat when a reward so ample was proposed


i


1 Sam. xviii. 7.


to the art from their infancy, by slinging from a great dis­tance at a circular mark of a moderate circumference. Bylong practice they took so nice an aim, that they were sureto hit their enemies not only on the head, but on any partof the face they chose. Their slings were of a differentkind from the Balearians, whom they far surpassed in dex­terity." Polyb, p. 125. B.
* 1 Sam. xvii. 52.
t Niebuhr presents us with a very similar scene in hisDescript. de l'Arabie, p. 263; where a son of an Arabchief kills his father's enemy and rival, and, according tothe custom of the Arabs, cuts off his head, and carries itin triumph to his father. In a note he adds, " cutting off thehead of a slain enemy, and carrying it in triumph, is an an­cient custom." Xenophon remarks that it was practised bytheChalybes, (Retreat of the ten thousand, lib. iv.) Hero­dotus attributes it to the Scythians, lib. iv. cap. 60. B.
1 Sam. xviii. 20.§ Josephus says thrice in this chapter, and twice after­wards, chap. 11. and Book VII. chap. 1. i. e. five times inall, that Saul required not a bare hundred of the foreskinsof the Philistines, but six hundred of their heads. TheSeptuagint has one hundred foreskins; but the Syriacand Arabic two hundred. Now that these were not fore­skins, with other copies, but heads with Josephus's copy,seems somewhat probable from 1 Sam. xxix. 4. where allcopies say, that it was with the heads of such Philistinesthat David might reconcile himself to his master Saul.And if Josephus's copy be right there, against all the rest;I should also prefer it before the rest here, especially asso often repeated in the number; six hundred instead ofone hundred in the Septuagint, or two hundred in thfeSvrinc and Arabic.







OCR Output








-....1U-AJ=1


 







OCR Output








286 [book VIII. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


and implore thy pardon, do thou then pardonthem, and hear their prayer. For hereby allshall learn that thou wast pleased with thebuilding of this house; and that we are notourselves of an unsociable nature, nor behaveourselves like enemies to such as are not ofour own people; but are willing that thyassistance should be communicated to allmen in common; and that they may havethe enjoyment of thy benefits bestowed uponthem."
When Solomon had said this, and had casthimself upon the ground, and worshipped along time, he arose up, and brought sacrificesto the altar; and when he had filled it withunblemished victims, he evidently discoveredthat God had with pleasure accepted of allthat he had sacrificed to him; for there camea fire running out of the air, and rushed withViolence upon the altar, in the sight of all;and caught hold of and consumed the sacri­fices. Now when this divine appearance wasseen, the people supposed it to be a demon­stration of God's abode in the temple, andwere pleased with it; and fell down upon theground and worshipped. Upon which theking began to bless God, and exhorted themultitude to do the same; as now havingsufficient indication of God's favourable dis­position to them; and to pray that they mightalways have the like indications from him,and that he would preserve in them a mindpure from all wickedness, in righteousnessand religious worship, and- that they mightcontinue in the observance of those preceptswhich God had given them by Moses; be­cause by that means the Hebrew nationwould be so happy, and indeed the mostblessed of all nations among all mankind.He exhorted them also to be mindful, that bywhat methods they had obtained their presentgood things, by the same they must preservethem to themselves, and make them greaterand more than they were at present. Forthat it was not sufficient for them to supposethey had received them on account of theirpiety and righteousness; but that they hadno other way of preserving them for the timeto come; for it is not so great a thing for mento acquire somewhat which they want, as topreserve what they have acquired, and to beguilty of no sin, whereby it may be hurt.
So when the king had spoken thus, he dis­


solved the congregation; but not till he hadcompleted his oblations, both for himself, andfor the Hebrews; insomuch that he sacrificedtwenty-two thousand oxen; and a hundredand twenty thousand sheep. For then it wasthat the temple did first taste of the victims;and all the Hebrews with their wives andchildren feasted therein. Nay, besides this,the king then observed splendidly and mag­nificently the feast of tabernacles, before thetemple for fourteen days; and he then feastedtogether with all the people.
When all these solemnities were performed,and nothing was omitted that concerned thedivine worship, the king dismissed them; andthey every one went to their own homes;giving thanks to the king for the care he hadtaken of them, and the works he had donefor them; and praying to God to preserveSolomon to be their king for a long time,they also took their journey home with re­joicing, and singing hymns to God. And in­deed the pleasure they enjoyed took awaythe sense of the pains they all underwent intheir journey home. So when they hadbrought the ark into the temple, and hadseen its greatness, and had been partakersof the sacrifices that had been offered, and ofthe festivals that had been solemnized, theyreturned to their own cities. But a dreamthat appeared to the king in his sleep in­formed him, that God had heard his prayers;and that he would not only preserve thetemple, but would always abide in it; that is,in case his posterity, and the whole multi­tude, would be righteous. And for himself,if he continued obedient to the admonitionsof his father, God would advance him to animmense degree of dignity and happiness; sothat then his posterity should be kings ofthat country of the tribe of Judah, for ever.But that still, if he should be a betrayer ofthe ordinances of the law, and forget them,and turn away to the worship of strange gods,he would cut him off by the roots; and wouldneither suffer any remainder of his family tocontinue, nor would watch over the peopleof Israel, nor preserve them any longer fromafflictions; but would utterly destroy themwith wars and misfortunes; would cast themout of the land which he had given theirfathers, and make them sojourners in strangelands; and deliver that temple which was







OCR Output








AH. 161.] 455 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


BOOK XIII.


Containing an Interval of Eighty-two Years.


FROM THE DEATH OF JUDAS MACCABEUS TO THE DEATH OF QUEEN ALEXANDRA,


CHAP. I.
OB THE SUCCESSION OF JONATHAN TO THE GOVERNMENT,AFTER THE DEATH OF HIS BROTHER JUDAS; AND OK THEWAR WHICH HE, TOGETHER WITH HIS BROTHER SIMON,WAGED AGAINST BACCHIDES.
BY what means the nation of the Jewsrecovered their freedom, when theyhad been brought into slavery by the Mace­donians; and what struggles and conflictsJudas, the general of their army, underwenttill he was slain, as he was fighting for them;hath been related in the preceding book. Butafter he was dead, all the wicked, and thosethat transgressed the laws of their forefatherssprang up again in Judea; and grew uponthem, and distressed them on every side. Afamine also assisted their wickedness, andafflicted the country; till not a few, who, byreason of their want of necessaries, and be­cause they were not able to bear up againstthe miseries that both the famine, and theirenemies brought upon them, deserted theircountry, and went to the Macedonians. Andnow Bacchides gathered those Jews togetherwho had apostatized from their neighbours:and committed the care of the country tothem. Accordingly they caught the friends


of Judas, and those of his party, and deliver­ed them up to Bacchides: who when he had,in the first place, tormented them at his plea­sure, he by that means at length killed them.And when this calamity of the Jews was be­come so great, as they never had experienceof the like since their return out of Babylon;those that remained of the companions ofJudas, seeing that the nation was ready to bedestroyed after a miserable manner, came tohis brother Jonathan, and desired that hewould imitate his brother, in that care whichhe took of his countrymen; for whose libertyin general he died also; and that he wouldnot permit the nation to be without a go­vernor, especially in those destructive cir­cumstances wherein it now was. And whenJonathan said that he was ready to die forthem, and was indeed esteemed no way infe­rior to his brother, he was appointed to bethe general of the Jewish army.
When Bacchides heard this, and was afraidthat Jonathan might prove very troublesometo the king and the Macedonians,* as Judashad been before him, he sought how he mightslay him by treachery. But this intentionwas known to Jonathan, and to his brotherSimon; who took all their companions, and


* Bacchides, as soon as he arrived in Judea, went afterJonathan; but, upon his approach, Jonathan left Simonhis brother with one part of the forces to defend the place,whilst himself, with the other part, took the field toharass the enemy abroad; in which capacities they bothacted so well, Jonathan, by cutting off several of theirparties, and now and then falling upon the outskirts oftheir army employed in the siege; and Simon, by makingfrequent sallies upon them, and burning the engines theyhad brought against the place; that Bacchides, 1 Macc.ix. 69—73. Joseph. Antiq. lib. 12. c. 1 and 2. growing
weary of this undertaking, and not a little enraged at thosewho were the occasion of his return and disgrace, putseveral of them to death. This opportunity Jonathanlaid hold on, and therefore sent messengers to him, to de­sire an accommodation, which Bacchides readily came into,so that a peace was concluded. The prisoners whom hehad in his custody were all restored, and himself took anoath never to molest the Jews any more; which accord­ingly he fulfilled; for as soon as the peace was ratified onboth sides he went away, and never more returned intothe country. B.







OCR Output








440 [book XII. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


messengers sent by them represented to us,that they are no way concerned with accusa­tions which belong to the Jews; but chooseto live after the customs of the Greeks. Ac­cordingly we declare them free from suchaccusations: and order that, agreeable totheir petition, their temple be named *theTemple of Jupiter Hellenius." He alsosent the like epistle to Apollonius, the go­vernor of that part of the country, in theforty-si xthf year, and the eighteenth day ofthe month Hecatombeon.
CHAP. VI.
OF THE EXPLOITS OF MATTATHIAS, GRANDSON TO ASMO-NEUS J HIS DEATH, AND THE SUCCESSION OF JUDAS.
NOW at this time there was one Matta­thias,J who dwelt at Modin, the son ofJohn, the son of Simeon, the son of Asmo-neus; a priest of the order of Joarib,|| anda citizen of Jerusalem. He had five sons:John, who was called Gaddis; Simon, whowas called Matthes; Judas, surnamed §Mac-cabeus; Eleazar, who was called Auran;and Jonathan, who was called Apphus.Now this Mattathias lamented to his chil­dren the sad state of their affairs, and theravage made in the city, and the plunderingof the temple, and the calamities the multi-


* This title of Jupiter, Zsug 'EXXrjvi©-, or GrecianJupiter, is mentioned in the coins of Syracuse, and byAristophanes, and by Pindar also: as Spanheim hereinforms us.
t Instead of the 46th year in the copies, we ought nodoubt, to read here the 146th year: i. e. of the Seleu-cidae: to which this rescript naturally belongs. But howHecatombeon, an Attic or Athenian name of a month,comes into a Syromacedonian rescript, we cannot tell.Nobody can think it original. Nor ought we to supposeit so written by Josephus: who does not use to corrupthis ancient monuments so absurdly. But how it ought tobe corrected does not appear.X See 1 Mace. ii. 1—14.
II This was the first of the twenty-four courses of thepriests that served in the temple, 1 Chron. xxiv. 7. andbecause Mattathias undertook to determine for the neces­sity of fighting on the sabbath, in case they were as­saulted by the enemy, some have from hence inferred, thatthe people had made choice of him for their high-priest:but, besides that, this decision is not sufficient to provethis, and that it no where appears, that he ever per­formed the office of high-priest, but only put himself atthe head of a poor distressed people, as being a personof the greatest power and authority among them, it iscertain that both Menelaus and Alcimus were then alive;and though they were wicked men, and intruders intothe office, yet they were nominated by king Antiochus,


tude were under; and he told them, that itwas better for them to die for the laws oftheir country, than to live so ingloriously asthey then did.
When those that were appointed by theking were come to Modin, that they mightcompel the Jews to do what they ordered,and to enjoin those that were there to offersacrifice, as the king had commanded, theydesired that Mattathias, a person of thegreatest character among them, both onother accounts, and particularly on accountof such a numerous, and so deserving a fa­mily of children, would begin the sacrifice;because his fellow-citizens would follow hisexample, and because such a procedurewould make him honoured by the king.But Mattathias boldly replied he would notdo it; and that if all the other nations wouldobey the commands of Antiochus, either outof fear, or to please him; yet would not henor his sons forsake the religious worship oftheir country. But as soon as he had endedhis speech, there came one of the Jews intothe midst of them, and sacrificed, as Antio­chus had commanded: at which Mattathiashad great indignation, and ran upon him vio­lently, with his sons, who had swords withthem; and slew both the man himself thatsacrificed, and Apelles the king's general,
(who then assumed the right of nomination,) and so werelooked upon as high-priests. Calmet's Dictionary, underthe word Mattathias. B.
§ That this appellation of Maccabee, was not first ofall given to Judas Maccabeus, nor was derived from anyinitial letters of the Hebrew words on his banner, MiKamoka Be Elim, Jehovah? Who is like unto thee amongthe gods, O Jehovah? Exod. xv. 11. as the modern Rab­bins vainly pretend, see Authentic Records, part I. page205, 206. Only we may note, that the original name ofthese Maccabees, and their posterity, was Asmoneans,which was derived from Asmoneus, the great grandfatherof Mattathias, as Josephus here informs us.
Dean Prideaux observes, that abbreviations of thisand several other kinds, were very frequent amongthe Jews, and that the Romans bore upon their ensignsthe letters S. P. Q,. R. Senatus Populusque Romanus; butstill (he adds) it must be owned, that Judas was calledby this name, 1 Mace. ii. 4—66. before ever he set upthis standard; and therefore others choose rather to de­rive it from the Hebrew words Mak-ke baiah, i. e. a con­queror in the Lord, which explication both the doubleof which occurs in the word Maccabee, and his father'saccount of Judas, viz. that he had been mighty andstrong even from his youth, seem to favour. Prideaux'sConnection, anno 167, and Calmet's Commentary on1 Mace. ii. 4. B.







OCR Output








aN. 4456.] 15 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


he settled his abode: where he also hadchildren. However, he did not accept of hispunishment in order to amendment, but to in­crease his wickedness; for he only aimed toprocure every thing that was for his ownbodily pleasure, though it obliged him to beinjurious to his neighbours. He augmented hishousehold substance with much wealth by ra­pine and violence; he excited his acquaint­ance to procure pleasure and spoils by rob­bery; and became a great leader of men intowicked courses. He also introduced a changein that way of simplicity wherein men livedbefore, and was the author of measures andweights. And whereas they lived innocentlyand generously while they knew nothing ofsuch arts, he changed the world into cunningand craftiness. He first of all set boundariesabout lands; he built a city, and fortified itwith walls; and he compelled his family tocome together to it: and called that cityEnoch, after the name of his eldest* son. NowJared was the son of Enoch, whose son wasMalaliel, whose son was Mathusela, whose sonwas Lamech, who had seventy-seven childrenby two wives, Silla and Ada. Of those chil­dren by Ada, one was Jubal: he erected tents,and loved the life of a shepherd. But Jubal,who was born of the same mother with him,exercised himself in music,f and invented thepsaltery and the harp. Tubal, one of hischildren by the other wife, exceeded all menin strength, and was very expert and famousin martial performances; he procured whattended to the pleasures of the body by thatmethod, and first invented the art of makingbrass; Lamech also was the father of a daugh­ter whose name was Naamah. And becausehe was so skilful in matters of divine revela­tion, that he knew he was to be punished forCain's murder of his brother, he made thatknown to his wives. Nay, even while Adam


* Gen. iv. 17.
t From this Jubal not improbably came Jobel, thetrumpet of Jobel, or Jubilee: that large and loud musicalinstrument used in proclaiming the liberty at the Year ofJubilee.
J The number of Adam's children, as says the old tra­dition, was thirty-three sons, and twenty-three daughters.
II What is here said of Seth and his posterity, that theywere very good and virtuous, and at the same time veryhappy, without any considerable misfortunes for seven ge­nerations, is exactly agreeable to the state of the world,and the conduct of Providence in all the first ages.
§ Of Josephus's mistake here, when h* took Seth theTOL. I.—No. 2.


was alive, the posterity of Cain became ex­ceeding wicked; every one successively dy­ing one after another more wicked than theformer. They were intolerable in war, andvehement in robberies, and if any one wereslow to murder people, yet was he bold inhis profligate behaviour in acting unjustlyand doing injuries for gain.
Now Adam, who was the first man, andmade out of the earth (for our discourse mustnow be about him,) after Abel was slain, andCain fled away on account of his murder, wassolicitous for posterity, and had a vehementdesire for children, he being two hundred andthirty years old, after which time he livecL^other seven hundred, and then died. He haer^indeed,J many other children, but Seth inparticular. As for the rest it would be tediousto name them: I will therefore only endea­vour to give an account of those that pro­ceeded from Seth. Now this Seth, when hewas brought up, and came to those years inwhich he could discern what was good, be­came a virtuous man; and as he was himselfof an excellent character, so did he leave ||children behind him who imitated his virtues.All these proved to be of good dispositions;they also inhabited the same country withoutdissensions, and in happy condition, withoutany misfortunes falling upon them, till theydied. They also were the inventors of thatpeculiar sort of wisdom which is concernedwith the heavenly bodies, and their order.And that their inventions might not be lostbefore they were sufficiently known, uponAdam's prediction that the world was to be .destroyed at one time by the force of fire, fand at another time by the violence andquantity of water, they made two pillars :§the one of brick, the other of stone; they in­scribed their discoveries on them both, that incase the pillar of brick should be destroyed
son of Adam, for Seth or Sesostris King of Egypt, theerector of these pillars, in the land of Siriad, see Essay orithe Old Testament, Appendix, page 159—160. Althoughthe main of this relation might be true, and Adam mightforetel a conflagration and a deluge, which all antiquity wit­nesses to be an ancient tradition; and, Seth's posteritymight engrave their inventions in astronomy on two suchpillars; yet it is no way credible that they could survivethe deluge, which buried all such pillars and edifices farunder ground, in the sediment of its waters; especiallysince the like pillars of the Egyptian Seth or Sesostris wereextant, after the flood, in the land of Siriad, and perhapsin the days of Josephua also.
E


}H~*







OCR Output








16ft [book V ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


the city Shechem, and cried out bo as to beheard by the multitude, who were attentiveto him. He desired they would considerwhat he was going to say; so when silencewas made,* he said, "When the trees had ahuman voice, and there was an assembly ofthem gathered together, they desired that thefig-tree would rule over them. But when thattree refused so to do, because it was con­tented to enjoy that honour which belongedpeculiarly to the fruit it bare, and not thatwhich should be derived to it from abroad,the trees did not leave off their intentions tohave a ruler; so they thought proper to makethe offer of that honour to the vine. Butwhen the vine was chosen, it made use of thesame words which the fig-tree had used be­fore, and excused itself from accepting thegovernment; and when the olive-tree haddone the same, the briar, a sort of wood goodfor firing, promised to take the government,and to be zealous in the exercise of it; butthat then they must sit down under its shadow;and if they should plot against it to destroy it,the principle of fire that was in it should de-


stroy them."—He added, "that what he hadsaid was no laughing matter: tor that whenthey had experienced many blessings from, Gideon, they overlooked Abimelech, whenhe overruled all, and had joined with him inslaying his brethren, and that he was no bet­ter than a fire himself." So when he hadsaid this, he went away, and lived privatelyin the mountains for three years, out of fearof Abimelech.f
A little while after this festival, the She-chemites, who had now repented of havingslain the sons of Gideon, drove Abimelechaway, both from,their city and their tribe;whereupon he contrived how he might dis­tress their city. Now at the season of vintage,the people were afraid to go out, and gathertheir fruits, for fear Abimelech should dothem some mischief. Now it happened thatthere had come to them a man of authority,one Gaal, that sojourned with them, havinghis armed men and his kinsmen with him, sothe Shechemites desired that he would allowthem a guard during their vintage. Accord­ingly he accepted of their desires, and the


* This is the first fable that we find any where uponrecord; and from hence it appears, that such fictions asthese, wherein the most serious truths are represented,were in use among the Jews, as they are still in the easterncountries, long before the time of jEsop, or any otherauthor that we know of. Various are the reasons that maybe assigned for the first invention of them; but these twoseem to be the principal: 1. Because men would sufferthemselves to be reprehended in this guise, when theywould not endure plain words: and, 2. Because theyheard them with delight and pleasure, and rememberedthem better than any grave or rational discourses. Thetrees went forth on a time, to anoint a king over them, (sothat anointing was in use 200 years before the first king ofIsrael;) and they said unto the olive-tree, Reign over us.But the olive-tree said unto them, Should I leave my fatness,wherewith by me they honour God and man, (because oilwas offered in sacrifice to God, and fed the lamps of hishouse, besides all the other uses wherein it was service­able to man,) and go to be promoted over the trees? Andthe trees said to tlie fig-tree, Come thou and reign over us.But the Jig-tree said to them, Should I forsake my sweetness,and my good fruit, (an apt representation of that contentand fulness of pleasure which may be enjoyed in a privatelife, and cannot, without folly, be exchanged for the trou­bles and cares that men meet with in the managery ofpublic affairs,) and go to be promoted over the trees? Thensaid the trees unto tlte vine, Come thou and reign over us.And the vine said unto them, Should I leave my wine, whichcheereth God and man, (a form of speech imitated by Hea­then authors, especially by Virgil, (Georg. lib. 2.) wherespeaking of some generous wine, he terms it—mensis etdiis accepta secundis, since wine, as well as oil, was usedboth in Jewish and Heathen sacrifices,) and go to be pro-
moted over the trees? Then said all the trees unto the bramble,(the meanest of all trees, good for nothing but to be burnt,and therefore fitly resembling Abimelech, from whom theShechemites could expect no manner of benefit, but agreat deal of trouble and vexation,) Come thou, and reignover us. And the bramble said unto the trees, If, in truth,ye anoint me king, then come and put your trust in myshadow, (an apt emblem of Abimelech's ridiculous vanity,to imagine that he should be able to maintain the authorityof a king, any more than the bramble could afford a shadowor shelter,) and if not, let fire come out of the bramble, anddevour the cedars of Lebanon; (words that carry a livelyimage of Abimelech's ostentatious spirit, and menaces totake severe vengeance on the nobles of Shechem, such asthe house of Millo, who had been chiefly instrumental inhis promotion, in case they should desert him.) This isthe parable, and, in some measure, the interpretation.The only difficulty is, to know whom these trees are setto signify. And here, some have thought, that by theolive-tree we are to understand Othniel; by the fig-tree,Deborah, and by the vine, Gideon; for to the two former;they suppose the offer of the kingdom was made for theservices done their country, and by them rejected, as wella« by the last. But for this there is no authority; neitheris there any necessity, in the explication of such fables, toassign a particular reason for every image that is drawn inthem. -It is sufficient if we can but hit off their main in­tendment, which, in this of Jotham, was to convince theShechemites of their folly in choosing a man for their king,who was no more able to protect them, than a bramblewas to cover other trees that should resort to it, under theshadow of its branches. Saurin't Dissertations, and Pa.trick's Commentary. Bt Judg. ix. 21.







OCR Output








476 [book XIII. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


spread out her hands, and begged of him,that he would not grow remiss on her ac­count; but indulge his indignation so muchthe more; and that he would do his utmostto take the place quickly, in order to gettheir enemy under his power; and then toavenge upon him what he had done to thosethat were dearest to himself. For that deathto her would be sweet, though attended withtorment; if that enemy of theirs might but bebrought to punishment for his wicked deal­ings to them. Now when his mother said so,he resolved to take the fortress immediately:but when he saw her beaten, and torn topieces, his courage failed him; and he couldnot but sympathize with what his mothersuffered, and was thereby overcome. And asthe siege was drawn out into length by thesemeans, that year on which the Jews use torest came on; for the Jews observe this restevery seventh year, as they do every seventhday. So Ptolemy, being* for this cause re­leased from the war, slew the brethren ofHyrcanus, and his mother. And when hehad so done, he fled to Zeno, surnamed Co-tylas; who was then tyrant of the city Phila­delphia.
But Antiochus, being very uneasy at themiseries that Simon had brought upon him,invaded Judea, in the fourth year of his reign;and the first year of the principality of Hyr­canus, in the fhundred and sixty-secondOlympiad. And when he had burnt thecountry, he shut up Hyrcanus in the city;which he encompassed round with sevenencampments; but did nothing at the first;because of the strength of the walls, and thevalour of the besieged; although they were


once in want of water; which yet they weredelivered from by a copious shower of rain,which fell at the Jsetting of the Pleiades.However, about the north part of the wall,where it happened the city was upon a levelwith the outward ground, the king raised ahundred towers of three stories high, andplaced bodies of soldiers upon them; and ashe made his attacks every day, he cut adouble ditch, deep, and broad; and confinedthe inhabitants within it, as within a wall.But the besieged contrived to make frequentsallies; and if the enemy were not any whereupon their guard, they fell upon them, anddid them a great deal of mischief; and ifthey perceived them, they then retired intothe city with ease. But because Hyrcanusdiscerned the inconvenience of so great anumber of men in the city; while the pro­visions were the sooner spent by them, andyet, as is natural to suppose, those greatnumbers did nothing; he separated the use­less part, and excluded them out of the city;and retained that part only which were inthe flower of their age, and fit for war. How­ever, Antiochus would not let those that wereexcluded go away. Who therefore wanderingabout between the walls, and consumingaway by famine, died miserably. But whenthe feast of the tabernacles was at hand,those that were within commiserated theircondition, and received them in again. Andwhen Hyrcanus sent to Antiochus, and de­sired there might be a truce for seven days,because of the festival; he gave way to thispiety towards God, and made that truce ac­cordingly. And besides that, he sent in amagnificent sacrifice, bulls with their ||homs


* Hence we learn that, in the days of this excellenthigh-priest, John Hyrcanus, the observance of the sab­batic year, as Josephus supposed, required a rest fromwar; as did that of the weekly sabbath from work. Imean this, unless in the case of necessity, when the Jewswere attacked by their enemies; in which case indeed,and in which alone, they allowed defensive fighting to belawful, even on the sabbath day; as we see in severalplaces of Josephus, Antiq. XII. 6. XIII. 1. XIV. 4.XVHI. 9. Of the War, I. 7. IV. 2. But then it must benoted, that this rest from war no way appears in the firstbook of Maccabees, chap. xvi. but the direct contrary.Though indeed the Jews, in the days of Antiochus Epi-phanes, did not venture upon fighting on the sabbath day,even in the defence of their own lives; till the Asmo-neans or Maccabees decreed so to do. 1 Mace. ii. 32—-41.Antiq. XII. 6.
| Josephus's copies, both Greek and Latin, have here
a gross mistake; when they say, that this first year ofJohn Hyrcanus, which we have just now seen to havebeen a sabbatic year, was in the 162d Olympiad, whereasit was certainly the second year of the 161st. See thelike before, XII. 7.
J This heliacal setting of the Pleiades, or seven stars,was in the days of Hyrcanus and Josephus, early in thespring, about February, the time of the latter rain in Ju­dea. And this so far as I remember, is the only astrono­mical character of time, besides one eclipse of the moon,in the reign of Herod, that we meet with in all Josephus.The Jews being little accustomed to astronomical obser­vations: any farther than for the use of their calendar;and utterly forbidden those astrological uses which theHeathens commonly made of them.
|| Dr. Hudson tells us here, that the custom of gildingthe horns of those oxen that were to be sacrificed, is aknown thing, both in the poets and orators.







OCR Output








206 [BOOK ▼!. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


and began to introduce a discourse aboutDavid. "What unjust action, O father, eitherlittle or great," said he, "hast thou found soexceptionable in David, as to induce thee toorder us to slay a man, who hath been a greatadvantage to thy own preservation; and ofstill greater punishment to the Philistines? aman who hath delivered the people of theHebrews from reproach and derision, whichthey underwent for forty days together; whenhe alone had courage to sustain the challengeof the adversary; and after that brought asmany heads of our enemies as he was ap­pointed to bring; and had, as a reward forthe same, my sister in marriage. Insomuchthat his death would be very sorrowful to us,not only on account of his virtue, but on ac­count of the nearness of our relation: for thydaughter must be injured at the same timethat he is slain; and must be obliged to ex­perience widowhood, before she can come toenjoy any advantage from their mutual con­versation. Consider these things, and changethy mind to a more merciful temper, and donot mischief to a man who, in the first place,hath done us the great kindness of preservingthee. For when an evil spirit and demonshad seized upon thee, he cast them out, andprocured rest to thy soul from their incursions;and in the second place, he hath avenged usof our enemies. For it is a base thing to forgetsuch benefits." So Saul was pacified withthese words; and sware to his son, that hewould do David no harm: for a righteous dis­course proved too hard for the king's angerand fear. So Jonathan sent for David, andbrought him good news from his father, thathe was to be preserved. He also conductedhim to his father; and David continued withthe king as formerly.*
About this time itf was, that, upon the Phi-


listines making a new expedition against theHebrews, Saul sent David with an army tofight with them; and joining battle with them,he slew many; and after his victory he re­turned to the king. But his reception bySaul was not as he expected upon such suc­cess; for he was grieved at his prosperity,because he thought he would be more dan­gerous to him by having acted so gloriously.But when the demoniacal spirit came uponhim, and put him into disorder, and disturbedhim, he called for David into his bed chamber,wherein he lay; and having a spear in hishand, he ordered him to charm him withplaying on his harp,J and with singing hymns;which when David did, at his command, he,with great force, threw the spear at him.But David, being aware of it before he came,avoided it, and fled to his own house, andabode there all that day.||
But at night the king sent officers, andcommanded that he should be watched tillthe morning, lest he should get quite away;that he might come into the judgment hall,and so might be delivered up, and condemned,and slain. But when Michal, David's wife,understood what her father designed, shecame to her husband, as having small hopesof his deliverance; and as greatly concernedabout her own life also; for she could notbear to live, in case she was deprived of him.And she said," Let not the sun find theehere when it rises; for if it do, that will bethe last time it will see thee. Fly therefore,while the night may afford thee opportunity;and may God lengthen it for thy sake; for ifmy father find thee, thou art a dead man."So she let him down by a cord out of thewindow, and saved him. And after she hadso done, she fitted up a bed for him as if hewere sick;§ and put under the bed-clothes


* 1 Sam. xix. 7.
t About 1104 B. C.
j The power of music upon the affections is very great.Its effect upon Saul was no more than it has produced inmany other instances. Tiraotheus the musician could ex­cite Alexander the Great to arms with the Phrygian sound,and allay his fury with another tone, and excite him tomerriment. So Eric, king of Denmark, by a certain mu­sician, could be driven to such a fury, as to kill some of hisbest and most trusty servants. Ath. Kiroh. Phonurg. 1. ii. s.I. h. Vossius it Poemntum cantu et rhythmi viribiu. B.
I I 1 Sam. xix. 10.
§ A kind of net of goat's hair placed before the tera-pbim is what is here meant. Such a net Dr. Shaw (Trav.
p. 221. 2d edit.) says is " a close curtain of gauze or finelinen, used all over the East by the people of betterfashion, to keep out the flies." That they had such an­ciently cannot be doubted. Thus when Judith had be­headed Holofemes in his bed, she pulled down the mos­quito net wherein he did lie in his drunkenness, from thepillars, Judith xiii. 9, 15. So Horace, speaking of the Ro­man soldiers serving under Cleopatra queen of Egypt, say*
Interque signa (turpe !) militaria
Sol aspicit Conopeum. Epod. ix. 15.
Amidst the Roman eagles Sol survey'd(O shame 1) th' Egyptian canopy displayed.
Francis B.
^V







OCR Output








252 [book VII. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


enemy will naturally suppose that he hathanother army with him." So David waspleased with this advice, and resolved totarry at Mahanaim. And as he sent hisfriends and commanders to the battle, hedesired them to shew all possible alacrity andfidelity, and to bear in mind what advantagesthey had received from him; which thoughthey had not been very great, yet had theynot been quite inconsiderable; and he beggedof them to spare the young man Absalom,lest some mischief should befall himself, ifhe should be killed.* And thus did lie sendout his army to the battle, and wished themvictory therein.
Then did Joab put his army in array overagainst the enemy, in the great plain, wherehe had a wood behind him. Absalom alsobrought his army into the field to oppose him.Upon the joining of the battle both sides per­formed great actions; the one side exposingthemselves to the greatest hazards and usingtheir utmost alacrity, that David might re­cover his kingdom; and the other being noway deficient either in doing or suffering,that Absalom might not be deprived of thatkingdom, and to be brought to punishmentby his father for his impudent attempt againsthim. Those also that were the most nu­merous were solicitous that they might notbe conquered by those few that were withJoab, and with the other commanders, be­cause that would be the greatest disgrace tothem; while David's soldiers strove greatlyto overcome so many ten thousands as theenemy had with them. Now David's men


were conquerors, as superior in strength andskill in war. So they followed the others asthey fled away through the forests and valleys;and some they took prisoners, and many theyslew; and more in the flight than in thebattle ;f for there fell about twenty thousandthat day. But all David's men ran violentlyupon Absalom; for he was easily known byhis beauty and stature. He was himself alsoafraid lest his enemies should seize him. Sohe got upon the king's mule and fled. Butas he was carried along with violence, and agreat motion, as he being himself light, heentangled his hair in the large spreadingbough of a knotty tree, and there he hungafter a surprising manner. And as for thebeast, it went on swiftly; as if his master hadbeen still upon his back. But he hanging inthe air upon the boughs was left to his ene­mies. Now when one of David's soldiers sawthis, he informed Joab of it; and when thegeneral said, that if he had shot at and killedAbsalom, he would have given him fiftyshekels, he replied, " I would not have killedmy master's son if thou wouldest have givenme a thousand shekels; especially when hedesired that the young man might be sparedin the hearing of us all." But Joab madehim shew him where it was that he saw Ab­salom hang. Whereupon he shot him to theheart, and slew him,J and Joab's armour-bearers stood round about the tree, andpulled down his dead body, and cast it into agreat chasm that was out of sight, and laid aheap of stones|| upon him till the cavity wasfilled up; and had the appearance of a grave.


* 2 Sam. xviii. 5.
t The expression in the text is, The wood devouredmore people that day than the sword devoured, 2 Sam.,xviii. 8. which some think was occasioned by their fallinginto pits, pressing one another to death in strait places,creeping into lurking holes, and there being starved todeath, or otherwise devoured by wild beasts, which metthem in their flight. But the most easy and simplemeaning of the passage is, that there were more slain inthe wood than in the field of battle. The field of battlewas a plain, with a wood contiguous to it; and therefore,when Absalom's army was put to the rout, and betookthemselves to the wood for refuge, their pursuers made agreater slaughter of them there, than they otherwisewould have done, because they could not run away sofast in the wood, as they might have done in the openfield. Patrick's Commentary. B.
% 2 Sam. xviii. 14.
II In the description of the Holy Land, some geogra­phers tell us, that this heap of stones remained even to
their days, and that all travellers, as they passed by it,were wont to throw a stone to add to the heap, in detesta­tion of his rebellion against his father. For though it be­came a custom among the Greeks, to raise a heap of stonesin the place where any great person was interred, as amonument of honour and respect; yet it is plain, thatnone of David's army intended any honour to Absalom'smemory in accumulating stones upon him; nor can wethink, that David himself, though too fond of this rebelson, made any alteration afterwards in the form of hisburial, for fear of enraging the people against him. Some,however, are of a quite contrary opinion, viz. that David,who lamented him with such excess, removed him fromthis pit, in order to have him laid in the sepulchre be­longing to the kings, or perhaps somewhere about theplace where the monument which goes under his name,and even to this day is shewn to travellers, was dug in arock. It is a litUe chamber wrought with a chisel, out ofone piece of rock, which stands at some distance from therest of the mountain, and is a square of eight paces from







OCR Output








an. 1492.] 143 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


When he had pitched his camp, the spies*came to him immediately, well acquaintedwith the whole state of the Canaanites. Forat first, hefore they were all discovered, theytook a full view of the city of Jericho withoutdisturbance, and saw which parts of the wallswere strong, and which parts were insecure,and which of the gates were so weak as mightafford an entrance to their army. Now thosethat met them took no notice of them whenthey saw them, and supposed they were onlystrangers, who used to be very curious in ob­serving every thing in the city, and did nottake them for .enemies. At even they retiredto a certain inn that was near the wall,whither they went to eat their supper, butwhen they had finished their repast, and wereconsidering how to get away, information wasgiven the king, that there were some personscome from the Hebrews' camp to view thecity, as spies; and that they were in the innkept by Rahab, and were very solicitous thatthey might not be discovered. So he sentimmediately and commanded to catch them,and bring them to him that he might examinethem by torture, and learn what their businesswas there. As soon as Rahab understood thatthese messengers were coming, she hid thespies under stalks of flax, which were laid to


dry on the top of her house, and said to themessengers that were sent by the king, thatcertain unknown strangers had supped withher, a little before sun-setting, and were goneaway; who might easily be taken, if theywere any terror to the city, or likely to bringany danger to the king. So these messengersbeing thusf deluded by the woman, and sus­pecting no imposition, went their ways, with­out so much as searching the inn; but theyimmediately pursued them along those roadswhich they most probably supposed them tohave gone, and those particularly which ledto the river; but could hear no tidings ofthem, so they left off any farther pursuit. Butwhen the tumult was over, Rahab broughtthe men down, and desired them, as soon asthey should have obtained possession of theland of Canaan, when it would be in theirpower to make her amends for her preserva­tion of them, to remember what danger shehad undergone for their sakes; for, that ifshe had been caught concealing them, shecould not have escaped a terrible destruc­tion, she and all her family; and so bid themgo home, and desired them to swear to her,to preserve her and her family when theyshould take the city, and destroy all its in­habitants, as they had resolved to do. For


* The eastern writers tell us, that these spies (whomthey make to be Caleb and Phineas) were valiant and re­ligious men, and in the prime of their youth; that to passunobserved, they changed their habits, as if they hadcome from a distant country; and if any one asked themany questions, their reply was to this effect: "We arepeople from the east, and our companions have heard ofthis powerful people, who were forty years in the wilder­ness, without either guide or provision; and it was re­ported to us, that they had a God whom they called tlieKins, of- Heaven and earth, and who (as they say) hathgiven them both your and our country. Our principalshave therefore sent us to find out the truth hereof, and toreport it to them.—We have likewise heard of their cap­tain, whom they call Joshua, the son of Nun, who put theAmalekiteslo flight, who destroyed Sihon and Og, thekings of Mmian and Moab. Woe therefore be to us, andyou, and all that flee to us for shelter! They are a peoplewho pity none, leave none alive, drive all out of theircountry, and make peace with none. We are all accountedby them infidels, profane, proud, and rebellious. Who­ever of us or you, therefore, that intend to take care ofthemselves, let them take their families, and be gone, lestthey repent of their stay, when it is too late." By thismeans they imposed upon the people; and, as Josephusinforms us, went whither they would, and saw whateverthey had a mind to, without any stop or question. Theytook a view of the wills, the gates, the ramparts, andpassed the whole day for men of curiosity only, without
any design. So that if any credit may be given to this ac­count, it was but just that they who thus imposed upon theCanaanites should, in the same manner, be imposed uponby the Gibeonites. Chronicon Samaritanum Jtrabice scrip-turn, page 65. B.
t It plainly appears by the history of these spies, andthe innkeeper Rahab's deception of the king of Jericho'smessengers, by telling them what was false, in order tosave tlie lives of the spies, and yet the great commendationof her faith and good works in the New Testament, Heb.xi. 32. Jam. ii. 25. as well as by many other parallel ex­amples both in the Old Testament, and in Josephus, thatthe best men did not then scruple to deceive those publicenemies, who might justly be destroyed; as also to de­ceive ill men, in order to save life, and deliver themselvesfrom the tyranny of their unjust oppressors; and this bytelling direct falsehoods. I mean all this where no oath'was demanded of them; otherwise they never durst ven­ture on such a procedure. Nor was Josephus himself ofany other opinion or practice; as I shall remark in thenote on Antiq. IX. 4, 3. And observe, that I still call thiswoman Rahab an innkeeper not a harlot; the whole his­tory, both in our other copies, and especially in Josephus,implying no more. It was indeed so frequent a thing thatwomen, who were innkeepers, were also harlots, or main-tainers of harlots, that the word commonly used for realharlots was usually given them. See Dr. Bernard's notehere, and Judg. xi. 1. and Josephus, Antiq. V, 7.







OCR Output








490 [BOOK XIII. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


them in the war against him, as they haddone ten thousand other things that tendedto affront and reproach him. However, thisbarbarity seems to have been without anjrnecessity; and in consequence of it he borethe name of a *Thracian among the Jews.The soldiers that had fought_ against him,being about eight thousand in number, nowran away by night; while Alexander beingnow freed from any farther disturbancefrom them, reigned the rest of his time inthe utmost tranquillity.
When Demetrius was departed out of Ju-dea, he went to Berea, and besieged his bro­ther Philip: having with him ten thousandfootmen, and a thousand horsemen. How­ever, Strato, the tyrant of Berea, the confede­rate of Philip, called in Zizon, the ruler ofthe Arabian tribes, and Mithridates Sinax,the ruler of the Parthians: who coming witha great number of forces, and besieging De­metrius in his encampment, into which theyhad driven him with their arrows; com­pelled those that were with him by thirst todeliver up themselves. So they took a greatmany spoils out of the country, and Deme­trius himself; whom they sent to Mithridates,who was then king of Parthia. But as tothose whom they took captives of the.peopleof Antioch, they restored them to the Antio-chians, without any reward. Now Mithri­dates, the king of Parthia, had Demetrius ingreat honour; till Demetrius ended his lifeby sickness. So Philip, presently after thebattle was over, came to Antioch, and tookit, and reigned over Syria.
CHAP. XV.


OF THE EXPEDITIONS OF ANTIOCHUS, CALLED DIONYSIUS;AND OF ARETAS, AGAINST JUDEA.''—AND OF THE CON­QUESTS AND DEATH OF ALEXANDER.
AFTER this, Antiochus, who was calledtDionysius, and was Philip's brother,aspired to the dominion, and came to Damas­cus, and got the supreme power into his hands.


But as he was making war against the Ara­bians, his brother Philip heard of it, and cameto Damascus; where Milesius, who had beenleft governor of the citadel, and the Damas­cenes themselves delivered up the city to him.Yet because Philip was become ungrateful,and had bestowed upon him nothing of that inhopes whereof he had received him into thecity; but had a mind to have it believed thatit was rather delivered up out of fear, than bythe kindness of Milesius; and because he hadnot rewarded him as he ought to have done,he became suspected by him; and so he wasobliged to leave Damascus again. For Mile­sius caught him marching out into the JHip-Bodrome, and shut him up in it; and kept•amascus for Antiochus Eucerus; who hear­ing how Philip's affairs stood, came back outof Arabia. He also made an expedition.against Judea, with eight thousand armedfootmen; and eight hundred horsemen. SoAlexander, out of fear of his coming, dug adeep ditch, beginning at Chabarzaba, whichis now called Antipatris, to the sea of Joppa,on which part only his army could be broughtagainst him. He also raised a wall, anderected wooden towers, with intermediateredoubts for a hundred and fifty furlongs inlength; and there expected the coming ofAntiochus. But he soon burnt them all; andmade his army pass by that way into Arabia.The Arabian king Aretas at first retreated;but afterward appeared suddenly with tenthousand horsemen. Antiochus gave themthe meeting, and fought desperately; butwhen he had gained the victory, and wasbringing some auxiliaries to that part of hisarmy that was in distress, he was slain.When Antiochus was fallen, his army fled tothe village Cana: where the greatest part ofthem perished by famine.
After him ||Aretas reigned over Coelesyria-.being called to the government by those thatheld Damascus; by reason of the hatredthey bore to Ptolemy Menneus. He alsomade thence an expedition against Judea,and defeated Alexander, near a place called


* This name, Thracida, which the Jews gave Alexan­der, must, by the coherence, denote "as barbarous as aThracian," or somewhat like it. But what it properlysignifies is not known.
t Spanheim takes notice that this Antiochus Dionysius,the brother of Philip and of Demetrius Eucerus, and of two
others, was the fifth son of Antiochus Grypus: and that heis styled on the coins, Antiochus Epiphanes Dionysius.
J The place for horse-races.
II This Aretas was the first king of the Arabians, whotook Damascus, and reigned there. Which name becameafterwards common to such Arabian kings, both at Petra


i







OCR Output








an, J 532.] 67 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


ner, and came to the age of maturity, madehis virtue manifest to the Egyptians, andshewed that he was born for the bringingthem down, and raising the Israelites: and theoccasion he laid hold of was this: the Ethio­pians, who are next neighbours to the Egyp­tians, made an incursion into their country,which they seized upon, and carried off theeffects of the Egyptians, who, in their rage,fought against them, and revenged the affrontsthey had received; but being overcome inbattle, some of them were slain, and the restran away in a shameful manner, and by thatmeans saved themselves. Hereupon the Ethi­opians followed after them in the pursuit, andthinking it would be a mark of cowardice ifthey did not subdue all Egypt, they went onto subdue the rest with great vehemence;and when they had tasted the sweets of thecountry, they never left off the prosecutionof the war, and as the nearest parts had notcourage enough at first to fight with them,they proceeded as far as Memphis, and thesea itself, while not one of the cities were ableto oppose them. The Egyptians, under thissad oppression, betook themselves to theiroracles and prophecies; and when God hadgiven them his counsel, to make use of Moses,the Hebrew, and take his assistance, the kingcommanded his daughter to produce him, thathe might be the general of their army;* uponwhich, when she had made him swear hewould do him no harm, she delivered him tothe king, and supposed his assistance wouldbe of great advantage to them. She also re­proached the priest, who although he hadbefore admonished the Egyptians to kill him,was not ashamed now to own their want ofhis help.
Moses, at the persuasion both of Thermu-this and the king himself, cheerfully under­took this business: and the sac rod scribes ofboth nations were glad; those of the Egyp­tians, that they should at once overcome their


* This history of Moses, as general of the Egyptiansagainst the Ethiopians, is wholly omitted in our bibles; butis thus cited by Irerweus, from Josephus, and that soon-after his own age: "Josephus said that when Moses wasnourished in the king's palace, he was appointed generalof the army against the Ethiopians, and conquered them,irhen he married that king's daughter, because out of heraffection for him, they delivered the city up to him." Seethe fragments of Irenaeus, ap. edit. Grab, page 472. Nor,perhaps, did St. Stephen refer to any thing else, when he
voL. I.—No. 6.


enemies by his valour, and that by the samepiece of management Moses would be slain:but those of the Hebrews, that they shouldescape from the Egyptians, because Moseewas to be their general.
Moses took and led his army before theirenemies were apprised of his attacking them;for he did not march by the river, but byland, where he gave a wonderful demonstra­tion of his sagacity: for when the ground wasdifficult to be passed over, because of themultitude of serpents, which it produces invast numbers, and indeed is singular in someof those productions which other countries donot breed, and yet such as are worse thanothers in power and mischief, and an unusualfierceness of sight, some of which ascend outof the ground unseen, and also fly into the air,and so come upon men at unawares, and dothem a mischief. Moses invented a wonder­ful stratagem to preserve the army safe, andwithout hurt, for he made baskets, like untoarks of sedge, and filled them with ibes,f andcarried them along with them, which animalsare the greatest enemies to serpents imagi­nable, for they fly from them when they comenear them, and as they fly, they are caughtand devoured; but the ibes are tame crea­tures, and only enemies to the serpentine kind.Of these ibes, however, I say no more at pre­sent, since the Greeks are not themselves un­acquainted with this sort of bird. As soon,therefore, as Moses was come to the landwhich was the breeder of these serpents, helet loose these ibes, and by their means re­pelled the serpentine kind, and used them forhis assistants before the army came upon thatground. When he had, therefore, proceededthus on his journey, he came upon the Ethio­pians before they expected him; and, join­ing battle with them, he beat them, and de­prived them of the hopes they had of successagainst the Egyptians, and went on in over­throwing their cities, and indeed made a great
said of Moses, before he was sent by God to the Israelites:that he was not only learned in all the wisdom of theEgyptians, but was also mighty in words and in deeds. Actsvii. 82.
t Pliny speaks of these -birds called ibes, and says theEgyptians invoked them against the serpents. Hist. Nat.X. 28. Straho speaks of this island, Meroe, and theserivers Astapusaad Aslaborus, XVI. page 771. 786, XVII.page 821.


S







OCR Output








an. 1307.] 16* ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


mm*


the same time, the Midianites called theAinalekiles and Arabians to their assistance,and made war against the Israelites, andwere too hard for those that fought againstthem; and when they had burnt the fruits ofthe earth, they carried off the prey. Nowwhen they had done this for three years, themultitude of the Israelites retired to themountains, and forsook the plain country.They also made themselves hollows underground, and caverns; and preserved thereinwhatsoever had escaped their enemies. Forthe Midianites made expeditions in harvesttime, but permitted them to plough the landin winter; that so, when the others had takenthe pains, they might have fruits for them tocarry away. Indeed, there ensued a famine,and a scarcity of food; upon which they be­took themselves to their supplications to God,and besought him to save them.*
Gideon also,f the son of Joash, one of theprincipal persons of the tribe of Manasseh,brought his sheaves of corn privately, andthreshed them at the wine-press; for he wastoo fearful of the enemies to thresh themopenly in the threshing-floor. At this timesomewhat appeared to him, in the shape of ayoung man, and told him, that he was a happyman, and beloved of God. To which he im-


mediately replied, "A mighty indication ofGod's favour to me^ that i am forced to usethis wine-press instead of a threshing-floor.":}:But the appearance exhorted him to be ofgood courage, and to make an attempt for therecovery of their liberty. He answered, thatit was impossible for him to recover it, be­cause the tribe to which he belonged was byno means numerous; and because he was butyoung himself, and too inconsiderable to thinkof such great actions. But the other pro­mised him, that God would supply what hewas defective in; and would afford the Israel­ites victory under his conduct.
Now, therefore, as Gideon was relating thisthing to some young men, they believed him;and immediately an army of ten thousandmen got ready for fighting. But God stood byGideon in his sleep, and told him, that man­kind were too fond of themselves; and wereenemies to such as excelled in virtue. Nowthat they might not pass God over, but as­cribe the victory to him, and might not fancyit obtained by their own power, because theywere a great army, and able of themselves tofight their enemies, but might confess that itwas owing to his assistance, he advised him tobring his army about noon, in the violence ofthe heat, to the river,|| and to esteem those


* Judg. vi. 6.
t It is generally supposed that Gideon's father had beena worshipper, if not a priest of Baal-; and therefore it isnot unlikely, that he had by this time been convinced byhis son, that God had given him a commission to recoverhis people, and to begin with this reformation, and thismade him appear so boldly in his son's cause, because heknew it was the cause of God. Pool's Annot. and Patrick'sCommentary. B.
\ He supposed that the dew which was distilled fromheaven, was a Divine gift, as the Scripture after testifies;and therefore, he desired that it might be directed by God,that though it commonly falls every where, by his extra­ordinary providence, it might now only water his fleece.Some are apt to think, that he chose a fleece for this pur­pose, not only because it was ready at hand, but the betterto express how the land was shorn by the Midianites, evenas the sheep had been by him: that when he begged thedew, as a sign of the divine favour, might fall upon thefleece, it was to represent the kindness of God to him;and when he begged it might fall upon the whole ground,to represent his favour to all the people. But there isfurther reason why he might desire to have the miracleinverted. For, as it is in the very nature of the wool todraw moisture to it, some might be apt to think, that therewas no great matter in this; and therefore he requestedof God a second miracle, which was contrary to the former.Patrick's Commentary. B.
|| M. Le Clerc is of opinion, that the sacred historianhas omitted one circumstance, which, nevertheless, in thevery nature of the thing, is implied, viz. that Gideon,when he led his men down to the water, did forbid themto make use of any cup or pot, or such like thing; for liethinks it incongruous (as well he may) that among such anumber as ten thousand men, no one should be furnishedwith some drinking vessel or other. But then, had any ofthese been permitted to be used upon this occasion, theexperiment could not have been made. (Comment, onJudg. vii. 6.) Interpreters are at a sad puzzle to conceivefor what possible reason God made a distinction betweenthe soldiers who lapped water in their hands, and thosethat laid themselves down to drink. Some of the Jewishdoctors are of opinion, that all except three hundred, wholapped, had been accustomed to the worship of Baal, whichthey unwarily discovered by their kneeling to drink. Butthis is groundless and far-fetched conceit. The notion ofthose who imputed these three hundred men's lapping,some to their sloth and idleness, and others to their timo-rousness, and the great fear they were in of being sur­prised by the enemy, is of no great validity. For thoughGod, if he thought fit, might have employed the most das­tardly among them upon this expedition, that the glory ofthe victory might entirely redound to himself; yet since weare told all the fearful persons were dismissed before, andsince it but badly befits the character of the courageous tobe lazy, this action of lapping is rather to be accounted a


Oo2







OCR Output








 







OCR Output








an. 742.] 349 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


some to my readers. All which things hap­pened to Nineveh a hundred and fifteenyears afterward.*
CHAP. XII.
OF THE DEATH OF JOTHAM, AND THE ACCESSION OF AHAZ;THE INVASION OF JERUSALEM BY THE KINGS OF SYKIAAND ISRAEL; AND THE SUBSEQUENT ASSISTANCE WHICHAHAZ RECEIVED FROM TIOLATH-PILESER, KING OF AS­SYRIA.
NOW Jotham died, when he had livedforty-one years, and of them reignedsixteen ;f and he was buried in the sepul­chres of the kings. The kingdom then cameto his son Ahaz; who proved most impioustowards God,J and a transgressor of thelaws of his country. He imitated the kingsof Israel, and reared altars in Jerusalem,and offered sacrifices upon them to idols; towhich also he offered his own son as a burnt-offering;|| according to the practice of theCanaanites. His other actions were also ofthe same sort. Now as he was going on inthis mad course, Rezin, king of Syria andDamascus, and Pekah, king of Israel, whowere now at amity, made war with him.And when they had driven him into Jeru­salem, they besieged that city a long while:making but a small progress, on account ofthe strength of its walls. And when theking of Syria had taken the city Elath uponthe Red Sea, and had slain the inhabitants,he peopled it with Syrians; and when hehad slain those in the other garrisons, andthe Jews in their neighbourhood, and haddriven away much prey, he returned with


his army back to Damascus.§ Now whenthe king of Jerusalem knew that the Syrianswere returned home, he, supposing himselfa match for the king of Israel, drew out hisarmy against him, and joining battle withhim was beaten. And this happened be­cause God was angry with him, on accountof his many and great enormities. Accord­ingly there were slain by the Israelites onehundred and twenty thousand of his menthat day: whose general, Amaziah, slewZachariah the king's son in this conflict withAhaz; as well as the governor of the king­dom, whose name was Azricam. He alsocarried Elkanah, the general of the troops ofthe tribe of Judah, into captivity; togetherwith the women and children of the tribe ofBenjamin. And when they had got a greatdeal of prey, they returned to Samaria.**
Now there was one Obed who was a pro­phet at that time in Samaria; he met thearmy, before the city walls: and with a loudvoice told them, that they had got the vic­tory, not by their own strength, but by thereason of God's anger against king Ahaz:and he complained that they were not satis­fied with the good success they had hadagainst him: but were so bold as to makecaptives out of their kinsmen, the tribes ofJudah and Benjamin. He also gave themcounsel to let them go home, without doingthem any harm; for that if they did not obeyGod herein, they should be punished. Sothe people of Israel came together to theirassembly, and considered of these matters:when a man whose name was Berechiah, andwho was one of chief reputation in the


* About an. 611.
t From an. 759 to 743.
J See what great light is given by the exact know­ledge of this history of Ahaz, Pekah, Rezin, and Tig-lath Pul Assur to the famous prophecy of Isaiah, chap,vii. concerning the deliverance of the family of Davidfrom destruction at this time; and its continuance till thebirth of the Messiah of this family, and that of a virginalso, and concerning some other predictions here con­cerned; in the Supplement to the Literal Accomplishmentsof Prophecies, page 41—54.
II 2 Kings xvi. 3.
§ In the time of Abraham, Damascus was in being;and some of the ancients inform us, that this patriarchreigned there immediately after Damascus, its founder.This much is certain, that one whom he had made free,and appointed steward of his house, was of Damascus,Gen. xv. 2. at the time that he pursued Chedorlaomer, andthe five confederated kings, as far as Hobah, which lies
northward of Damascus, Gen. xiv. 15. The Scripturessay nothing more of this city, until the time of David,when Hadad, who according to Josephus, Jewish Antiq.lib. vii. c. 6. was the first who took upon him the titleof king of Damascus, sending troops to the assistance ofHadadezer king of Zobah, was himself defeated by David,and his country subdued. Towards the end of Solomon'sreign, Rezin recovered the kingdom of Damascus, andshook off the Jewish yoke, 1 Kings xi. 23, &c. Sometime after this, Asa king of Judah implored the help ofBenhadad king of Damascus against Baasha king of Israel,1 Kings xv. 18. And from his time the kings of Damascus were generally called Benhadad, till in this last con­troversy with them, Ahaz called in the assistance of theking of Assyria, who killed their king, and carried hissubjects into captivity, according to the predictions ofIsaiah, chap. vii. 9. and Amos, chap. vii. Calmefs Dic­tionary, under the word. B.** 2 Chron. xxviii. 8.


302







OCR Output








460 [book XIII. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


wing, where Demetrius happened to be, wasbeaten: and the rest ran away. Demetriusindeed fought courageously, and slew greatnumbers of the enemy: but as he was in pur­suit of the rest, his horse carried him intoa deep bog, where it was hard to get out.And there it happened, that upon his horse'sfalling down, he could not escape beingkilled. For when his enemies saw whathad befallen him, they returned back, en­compassed him round, and all threw theirdarts at him. He being now on foot, foughtbravely: but at length received so manywounds, that he was not able to bear up anylonger, but fell.* And this is the end thatDemetrius came to, when he had reignedfeleven years.
CHAP. III.
OF THE FRIENDSHIP THAT SUBSISTED BETWEEN ONIAS ANDPTOLEMY PHILOMETOR J AND OF THE TEMPLE WHICHONIAS BUILT IN EGYPT, LIKE TO THAT AT JERUSALEM.
rilHE son of Qnias, the high-priest, who
I was of the same name with his father,and who fled to Ptolemy Philometor, livednow at Alexandria; as we have Jsaid al­ready. When this Onias saw that Judeawas oppressed by the Macedonians, and theirkings; out of desire to purchase to himselfa memorial and eternal fame, he resolved tosend to king Ptolemy and queen Cleopatra,to ask leave of them that he might build atemple in Egypt, like to that at Jerusalem:and might ordain Levites and priests out oftheir own stock. The chief reason why hewas desirous so to do, was that he relied


upon the prophet Isaiah, who lived aboutsix hundred years before, and foretold thatthere certainly was to be a temple built toAlmighty God in Egypt, by a man that was aJew. Accordingly Onias was elevated withthis prediction: and wrote the followingepistle to Ptolemy and Cleopatra:—
"Having done many and great things foryou in the affairs of the war, by the assistanceof God; and that in Coelesyria and Phoenicia:I came at length with the Jews to Leontopo-lis, and to other places of your nation. WhereI found that the greatest part of your peoplehad temples in an improper manner; and thaton this account they bare ill will one againstanother: which happens to the Egyptians,by reason of the multitude of the temples,and the difference of opinions about divineworship. Now I found a very fit place in acastle that hath its name from the countryDiana; this place is full of materials of seve­ral sorts, and replenished with sacred ani­mals. I desire therefore that you will grantme leave to purge this holy place: which be­longs to no master, and is fallen down; andto build there a temple to Almighty God,after the pattern of that in Jerusalem, andof the same dimensions: that may be for thebenefit of thyself, and thy wife, and children:that those Jews which dwell in Egypt mayhave a place whither they may come andmeet together in mutual harmony one withanother, and be subservient to thy advan­tages. For the prophet Isaiah foretold thatjjthere should be an altar in Egypt to theLord God.§ And many such things did heprophesy relating to that place."


* 1 Mace. x. 50.
t Since the rest of the historians now extant give thisDemetrius 13 years; and Josephus only 11 years; DeanPrideaux does not amiss in ascribing to him the meannumber 12.
t Book XII. chap. 9.
II Isaiah xix. 19.
§ It seems to me, contrary to the opinion of Josephus,and of the moderns, both Jews and Christians, that thisprophecy of Isaiah xix. 10, &c. "In that day there shallbe an altar to the Lord in the midst of the land of Egypt,"&c. directly foretold the building of the temple of Oniasin Egypt, and was a sufficient warrant to the Jews forbuilding it, and for worshipping the God of Israel therein..See Authentic Records, part II. page 755. God indeedseems to have better accepted of the sacrifices and prayershere offered him, than of those at Jerusalem. And trulythe marks of Jewish corruption or interpolation in this<ext in order to discourage their people from approving
of the worship of God here, are very strong; and highlydeserve our consideration and correction. The fore­going verse in Isaiah runs thus, in our common copies':"In that day shall five cities in the land of Egypt speakthe language of Canaan [the Hebrew language; shall befull of Jews whose sacred books were in Hebrew;] andswear to the Lord of Hosts. One [or the first] shall becalled the city of Destruction," Isa. xx. 18. A strangename, City of Destruction! upon so joyful an occasion!and a name never heard of in the land of Egypt, or per­haps any other nation! The old reading was evidently,the City of the Sun, or Heliopolis; and Onkelos in effect,and Symmachus, with the Arabic version, entirely con­fess that to be the true reading. The Septuagint also,though they have the text disguised in the commoncopies, and call it Asedek, the City of Righteousness;yet in two or three other copies the Hpbrew word itselffor the sun, Achares or Thares, is preserved. And sinceOnias insists with the king and queen, that Isaiah's pro-







OCR Output








an. 1097.] 219 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


body after the victory, supposing that thebattle with the enemy succeeded to theirmind: which promise of honour and confi­dence he made on purpose to increase hiszeal for his service.
Now Saul, the king of the Hebrews, hadcast out of the country the fortune-tellers, thenecromancers, and all such as exercised thelike arts; excepting the prophets. But whenhe heard the Philistines were already come,and had pitched their camp very near to thecity Shunem, situate in the plain, he hastenedto oppose them with his forces. And whenhe was come to a certain mountain calledGilboa, he pitched his camp over against theenemy. But when he saw the enemy's armyhe was greatly troubled; because it appearedto him to be numerous, and superior to hisown; and he inquired of God, by the pro­phets, concerning the battle, that he mightknow beforehand what would be the event.And when God did not answer him, Saul wasunder a still greater dread, and his couragefell; foreseeing, as was but reasonable to sup­pose, that mischief would befall him, nowGod was not there to assist him. Yet did hebid his servants to inquire for some womanthat was a necromancer, and called up thesouls of the dead; that so he might knowwhether his affairs would succeed to his mind.For this sort of necromantic women, whobring up the souls of the dead, do by themforetel future events to such as desire them.And one of his servants told him, that therewas such a woman in the city Endor, but shewas known to nobody in the camp. Here­upon Saul put off his royal apparel, and tooktwo of those servants whom he knew to bemost faithful to him, and came to Endor to thewoman, and intreated her to act the part of afortune-teller, and to bring up such a soul tohim as he should name. But the woman op­posed his motion; and said, she did not de­spise the king, who had banished this sort offortune-tellers; and that he did not do wellhimself when she had done him no harm, to


endeavour to lay a snare for her, and to dis­cover she exercised a forbidden art, in orderto procure her to be punished. Saul, how­ever, sware that nobody should know whatshe did; and that he would not tell any oneelse what she foretold; but that she shouldincur no danger. As soon, therefore, as hehad induced her by this oath to fear no harm,he bade her bring up to him the soul ofSamuel. She not knowing who Samuel was,called him out of Hades. When he appeared,and the woman saw one that was venerable,and of a divine form, she was in disorder;and being astonished at the sight, she said,"Art not thou king Saul?" for Samuel hadinformed her who he was. When he hadowned that to be true, and had asked her,whence her disorder arose? she said that shesaw a certain person ascend, who in his formwas like to a god. And when he bade hertell him what he resembled; in what habithe appeared; and of what age he was; shetold him he was an old man, and of a gloriouspersonage, and had on a sacerdotal mantle.*So the king discovered by these signs that hewas Samuel; and he fell down upon theground, and saluted, and worshipped him.And when the soul of Samuel asked him,why he had disturbed him, and caused himto be brought up, he lamented the necessityhe was under: for, he said, his enemiespressed heavily upon him; that he was indistress what to do in his present circum­stances; that he was forsaken of God, andcould obtain no prediction of what wascoming, neither by prophets, nor by dreams.And these were the reasons why he had re­course to him. Butf Samuel seeing the endof Saul's life was come, said, "It is in vainfor thee to desire to learn of me any thingfarther, when God hath forsaken thee. How­ever, hear what I say:—David is to be king,and to finish this war with good success, andthou art to lose thy dominion and thy life;because thou didst not obey God in the warwith the Amalekites, and hast not kept his


* 1 Sara zxviii. 14.
t This history of Saul's consultation, not with a witch,as we render the Hebrew word here; but with a necro­mancer, as the whole history shews, is easily understood;especially, if we consult the recognitions of Clement, 1.5. 11. 13. at large; and more briefly, and nearer the daysof Samuel, Ecclus. xlvi. 20. "Samuel prophesied afterhis death; and shewed the king his end; and lift up hisvoL. I.—NOS. 19 Jj 20.
voice from the earth in prophecy, to blot out the wicked­ness of the people." Nor does the exactness of the ac­complishment of this prediction the very next day, permitus to suppose any imposition upon Saul in the presenthistory. For as to all modern hypotheses, against thenatural sense of such ancient and authentic histories, 1consider them of very small value or importance.
Xx







OCR Output








an. 1492.] 14* ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


orders, by giving us victory, which will bothtake away the grief we are in at present, andprevent our distrust at what is to come."
These intercessions Joshua put up to God,as he layprostrate on his face; whereupon Godanswered him, that he should rise up, and pu­rity his host, from the pollution which was gotinto it, for that consecrated things had beenimpudently stolen, and that this was the oc­casion which this defeat had happened tothem, and that when they should search outand punish the offender, he would ever takecare they should have the victory over theirenemies. This Joshua told the people; andcalling Eleazar, the high-priest, and the menin authority, he cast lots, tribe by tribe; andwhen the lot shewed that this wicked actionwas done by one of the tribe of Judah, hethen again proposed the lot to the severalfamilies thereto belonging, so it was found tobelong to the family of Zachar; and when theenquiry was made man by man, they tookAchar, who, upon God's reducing him to aterrible extremity, could not deny the fact,but confessed the theft, and produced whathe had taken in the midst of them; so thisman was immediately put to death,* and at­tained no more than to be buried in the night,in a disgraceful manner, and such as wassuitable to a condemned malefactor.
When Joshua had thus purified the host,he led them against Ai; and having by nightlaid an ambush round about the city, he at­tacked the enemies as soon as it was day;but as they advanced boldly against the Is-


* Josh. Til. 25. Since the law against sacrilege con­demns transgressors to the flames, and God commandedthe person here guilty to be burnt accordingly, Josh. vii.18. the Jews affirm, that Achar was actually burnt, andwhereas it is said in the text, that he was stoned, they thinkthat this was done, not judicially, but accidentally, by thepeople who were so highly provoked, that they could notforbear casting stones at him as he was led to execution.Vid. Munst. on Joshua vii. B.
t It is a question among the casuists, whether the Gibe-onites could, with a good conscience, pretend that theywere foreigners, and tell a lie to save their lives? Andto this Puffendorf (Droit de la Nature, lib. 4. c. 2.) thusreplies, " The artifice of the Gibeonites," says he, " hadnothing blameable in it, nor does it properly deserve thename of a lie; for what crime is there in any one's ma­king use of an innocent fiction, in order to elude the furyof an enemy that would destroy all before them? Nor didthe Israelites, indeed properly receive any damage fromthis imposture; for what does any one lose in not shed­ding the blood of another, when he has it in his power to
voL. I.—NOS. 13 & 14.


raelites, because of their former victory, hemade them believe he retired, and by thatmeans drew them a great way from the city,they still supposing that they were pursuingtheir enemies, and despised them, as thoughthe case had been the same with that in theformer battle; after which Joshua orderedhis forces to turn about, and placed themagainst their front. He then made the signalsagreed upon to those that lay in ambush, andso excited them to fight; so they ran suddenlyinto the city, the inhabitants being upon thewalls, nay others of them being in perplexity,and coming to see those that were withoutthe gates. Accordingly these men took thecity, and slew all that they met with; butJoshua forced those that came against him tocome to a close fight, and discomfited them,and made them run away; and when theywere driven towards the city, and thought ithad not been touched, as soon as they saw itwas taken, and perceived it was burnt, withtheir wives and children, they wanderedabout in the fields in a scattered condition,and were no where able to defend them­selves, because they had none to supportthem. Now when this calamity was comeupon the men of Ai, there were a great num­ber of children, and women, and servants,and an immense quantity of furniture. TheHebrews also took herds of cattle, and agreat deal of money, for this was a rich coun­try; so when Joshua came to Gilgal, he di­vided all these spoils among the soldiers.But the Gibeonitesf who inhabited very
take from him all his substance, after having so weakenedand disarmed him that he is no more able to rebel againsthim?" But the opinion of this great man seems to be alittle erroneous in this case. Had the Israelites indeedbeen a pack of common murderers, who, without anycommission from Heaven, were carrying blood and deso­lation into countries where they had no right; or had theGibeonites been ignorant that a miraculous Providence con­ducted these conquerors; the fraud which they here putupon them might then be deemed innocent. For there isno law that obliges us under the pretence of sincerity, tosubmit to such incendiaries, and merciless usurpers, as arefor setting fire to our cities, and putting us and our fami­lies to the edge of the sword. But the case of the Gibeo­nites was particular; and if in other things they went con­trary to truth, in this they certainly adhered to it, whenthey told Joshua, We are come, bemuse, of the name of theLord thy God, for we have heard of the fame of him, andall that he did in Egypt, and all that he did to the two kingsof the Amorites, that were beyond Jordan, fyc. Josh. ix. 9,10. The idea which they had conceived of the God of
Mm







OCR Output








AN. 1531.] 113 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


one should have it for all time to come, andhad made it secure and firm to him, to haverefused it. However, he himself will judgeagain, who it shall be whom he would haveto offer sacrifices to him, and to have the di­rection of matters of religion. For it is ab­surd that Corah, who is ambitious of this ho­nour, should deprive God of the power ofgiving it to whom he pleases. Put an end,therefore, to your sedition and disturbanceon this account, and to-morrow morning letevery one who desires the priesthood bring acenser from home, and come hither with in­cense and fire.* And do thou, O Corah,leave the judgment to God; and await to seeon what side he will give his determinationupon this occasion. But do not thou makethyself greater than God. Do thou also come,that this contest about this honourable em­ployment may receive determination. Andsuppose we may admit Aaron without of-ence, to offer himself to this scrutiny; sincele is of the same lineage with thyself; andlas done nothing in his priesthood that canbe liable to exception. Come ye thereforetogether, and offer your incense in public be­fore all the people: and when you offer it,he whose sacrifice God shall accept shall beordained to the priesthood, and shall be clearof the present calumny on Aaron, as if I hadgranted him that favour because he was mybrother."
CHAP. Ill


OF THE DESTRUCTION OF THOSE WHO FOMENTED THE SE­DITION J AND OF THE DIVINE APPROVAL OF AARON'SPRIESTHOOD.
WHEN Moses had said this, the multi­tude left off the turbulent behaviourthey had indulged, and the suspicion they hadentertained of Moses; and commended whathe had said: for those proposals were good,and were so esteemed of the people. At thattime therefore they dissolved the assembly.But on the next day they came to the congre­gation, in order to be present at the sacrifice,and at the determination that was to be madebetween the candidates for the priesthood.Now this congregation proved a turbulentone, and the multitude were "in great sus-
* Numb. xiv. 6,7.


pense in expectation of what was to be done.And some of them would have been pleasedif Moses had been convicted of evil practices:but the wiser sort desired that they might bedelivered from the present disorder and dis­turbance; for they were afraid that if thissedition went on, the good order of theirsettlement would be destroyed. But thewhole body of people do naturally delightin clamours against their governors; and, bychanging their opinions upon the haranguesof every speaker, disturb the public tran­quility. And now Moses sent messengers forAbiram and Dathan; and ordered them tocome to the assembly, and wait there for theholy offices that were to be performed. Butthey answered the messengers, that theywould not obey his summons; nay, would notoverlook Moses's behaviour, who was grow­ing too great for them by evil practices. Nowwhen Moses heard this answer, he desiredthe heads of the people to follow him, and hewent to the faction of Dathan, not fearing togo to these insolent people; so they made noopposition, but went along with him. But Da­than and his associates, when they understoodthat Moses, and the principal of the people,were coming to them, came out with theirwives and children, and stood before theirtents; and looked to see what Moses woulddo. They had also their servants at hand todefend them, in case Moses should use force.But he came near, and lifted up his handsto heaven, and cried out with a loud voice,in order to be heard by the whole multitude;and said, " O Lord of the creatures that arein the heaven, in the earth, and in the sea: forthou art the most authentic witness to what Ihave done, that it has all been done by thyappointment; and that it was thou that afford-est us assistance when we attempted anything, and shewed mercy to the Hebrews inall their distresses. Do thou come now, andhear all I say; for no action nor thought es­capes thy knowledge; so that thou wilt notdisdain to speak what is true, for my vindica­tion; without any regard to the ungratefulimputations of these men. As for what wasdone before I was born, thou knowest best:as not learning them by report, but seeingthem, and being present with them when theywere done. But for what has been done oflate, and which these men, although they







OCR Output








an. 1955.] 27 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


her being in such a miserable case was, thatshe had been ungrateful and arrogant towardsher mistress. He also told her, that it" shedisobeyed God, and went on still on her way,she should perish: but if she would returnback, she should become the mother of a son,who should reign over that country. Theseadmonitions she obeyed, and returned to hermaster and mistress, and obtained forgive­ness.
A little while afterwards, she gave birth toIsmael,* which may be interpreted Heard ofGod: because God heard his mother's prayer.
This son was born to Abram when he waseighty-six years old.f But when he wasninety-nine, God appeared to- him, and pro­mised that he should have a son by Sarai,and commanded that his name should beIsaac; and shewed him that from this sonshould spring great nations and kings; andthat they should obtain the land of Canaan bywar from Sidon to Egypt. But he charged,in order to keep his posterity unmixt withothers, that they should be circumcised in theflesh of their foreskin, and that this should bedone on the eighth day after they were born.The reason of which circumcision I will ex­plain in another place. And Abram enquiringalso concerning Ismael, whether he shouldlive or not; God signified to him that heshould live to be very old, and should be thefather of great nations. Abram therefore gavethanks to God for these blessings; and thenhe, with his son Ismael, and all his family,were circumcised immediately: the son beingthat day thirteen years of age, and Abramninety-nine.
CHAP. XL
OF THE DESTRUCTION OF THE SODOMITE NATION, ONACCOUNT OF THEIR SINS.
ABOUT this time the Sodomites grewproud on account of their riches andgreat wealth: they became unjust towardsmen, and impious towards God; insomuchthat they did not call to mind the advantagesthey received from him: they hated strangersand abused themselves with unnatural prac­tices. God was therefore much displeased


* An. 1966.t Gen. xvi. 16.
voL. I.—No. 3.


at them, and determined as a punishment fortheir pride, to overthrow their city, and laywaste their country, till there should neitherplant nor fruit grow out of it.
When God had thus resolved concerningthe Sodomites, Abraham, as he sat by theoak of Mambre, at the door of his tent, sawthree angels;% and thinking them to bestrangers, he rose up, and saluted them, anddesired they would accept of an entertain­ment, and abide with him: to which whenthey agreed, he ordered cakes of meal to bemade, and when he had slain a calf, heroasted it, and brought it to them as they satunder the oak. Now they made a shew ofeating; and besides they asked him abouthis wife Sarah, where she was, and when hesaid she was within, they said they shouldcome again hereafter, and find her become amother. Upon which the woman laughed,and said, that it was impossible she shouldbear children, since she was ninety years ofage, and her husband was an hundred. Thenthey concealed themselves no longer, butdeclared that they were angels of God; andthat one of them was sent to inform themabout the child, and two for the overthrowof Sodom.
When Abraham heard this, he was grievedfor the Sodomites; and he rose up, and be­sought God for them, and intreated him thathe would not destroy the righteous with thewicked. But when God had replied, thatthere was no good man among the Sodomites,for if there were but ten such men amongthem he would not punish any of them fortheir sins, Abraham held his peace. And theangels came to the city of the Sodomites, andLot intreated them to accept a lodging withhim ;|j for he was a very generous and hos­pitable man, and one that had learned toimitate the goodness of Abraham. Now whenthe Sodomites saw the young men to be oibeautiful countenances and this to an extra­ordinary degree; and that they took up theirlodgings with Lot, they resolved to possessthose beautiful boys by force; and when Lotexhorted them to sobriety, and not to offerany thing immodest to the strangers, but tohave regard to their lodging in his house,


J Gen. xxviii. 2.II Gen. xix. 2.


H







OCR Output








508 [book xiy ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


Antiochus, and Alexander, the son of Dosi-theus, ambassadors of the Jews, good andworthy men, proposed: who came to renewthat league of good will and friendship withthe Romans, which was in being before. Theyalso brought a shield of gold, as a mark ofconfederacy; valued at fifty thousand piecesof gold; and desired that letters might begiven them, directed both to the free cities,and to the kings; that their country and theirhavens might be at peace, and that no oneamong them might receive any injury. Ittherefore pleased the senate to make a leagueof friendship and good will with them; and tobestow on them whatsoever they stood inneed of; and to accept of the shield whichwas brought by them. This was done in the*ninth year of Hyrcanus, the high-priest andethnarch, in the month of Panemus."
Hyrcanus also received honours from thepeople of Athens; as having been useful tothem on many occasions. And when theywrote to him, they sent him the followingdecree:—
"Under the Prutaneia and priesthood ofDionysius, the son of Esculapius; on the fifthday of the latter part of the month Panemus;this decree of the Athenians was given totheir commanders; when Agathocles wasarchon, and Eucles the son of Menander ofAlimusia was the scribe. In the "fmonthMunychion, on the eleventh day of the Pru­taneia, a council of the presidents was heldin the theatre. Dorotheus the high-priest,and the fellow presidents with him, put it tothe vote of the people; and Dionysius, the sonof Dionysius, gave the sentence. Since Hyr­canus, the son of Alexander, the high-priest,and ethnarch of the Jews, continues to beargood will to our people in general, and toevery one of our citizens in particular, andtreats them with all sorts of kindness; andwhen any of the Athenians come to him, eitheras ambassadors, or on any private occasion,he receives them in an obliging manner, andsees that they are conducted back in safety;of which we have had several former testimo­nies: it is now decreed, at the report of The-odosius, the son of Theodorus, and upon hisputting the people in mind of the virtue of thisman, and that his purpose is to do us all the


good that is in his power; to honour him witha crown of gold, the usual reward accordingto the law; and to erect his statue in brassin the temple of Demus and of the gracesand that this present of a crown shall be pro­claimed publicly in the theatre, in the Dio-nysian shows, while the new tragedies areacting; and in the Panathenean, Eleusinian.and Gymnical shows also; and that the com­manders shall take care, while he continuesin his friendship, and preserves his good willto us, to return all possible honour and favourto this man for his affection and generosity.That by this treatment it may appear howour people receive the good kindly, and re­pay them a suitable reward; and he may beinduced to proceed in his affection towardsus, by the honours we have already paid him.That ambassadors be also chosen out of allthe Athenians, who shall carry this decree tohim; and desire him to accept of the honourswe do him; and to endeavour always to bedoing some good to our city."
And this shall suffice as to the honours thatwere paid by the Romans, and the people ofAthens to Hyrcanus.
CHAP. IX.
ANTIPATER BESTOWS THE GOVERNMENT OF GALILEE OSHEROD; AND THAT OF JERUSALEM ON PHASAELUS. BUTHEROD, UPON THE JEWS' ENVY AT ANTIPATER, IS AC­CUSED BEFORE HYRCANUS.
NOWJ when Caesar had settled the af­fairs of Syria, he sailed away. And assoon as Antipater had conducted him out ofSyria, he returned to Judea. He then raisedup the wall which had been thrown down byPompey, and by coming thither he pacifiedthat tumult which had been in the country;and this by both threatening, and advisingthem to be quiet. For, he said, if they wereof Hyrcanus's side, they would live happily,and lead their lives without disturbance, inthe enjoyment of their own possessions; butif they were addicted to the hopes of whatmight come by innovation, and aimed to getwealth thereby, they should have him a severemaster, instead of a gentle governor; andHyrcanus a tyrant, instead of a king; andthe Romans, together with Caesar, their bitter


* An. 127.
t Read here the first of Munychion; and the 10th of
the Prutaneia.X An. 44.







OCR Output








ah. 2578.] 21 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


but from Javan and Jonia all the Greciansare derived. Thobel founded the Thobelites,now called Iberes: and the Mosocheni, nowcalled Cappadocians, were founded by Mo-soph. There is also a mark of their ancientdenomination still to be shewn, for there iseven now among them a city called Mazaca,which may inform those who are able to un­derstand, that so was the nation once called.Thiras also called those whom he ruled overThirasians, but the Greeks changed the nameinto Thracians; and so many were the coun­tries that had the children of Japhet for theirinhabitants.
Of the three sons of Gomer, Aschanaxfounded the Aschanaxians, who are nowcalled by the Greeks Rheginians; Riphathfounded the Ripheans, now called Paphlago-nians; and Thrugramma the Thrugrammeans,who, as the Greeks resolved, were namedPhrygians. Of the three sons of Javan also,the son of Japhet. Elisa gave name to theEliseans, who were his subjects; they arenow the iEolians. Tharsus to the Tharsians,for so was Cilicia of old called; the sign ofwhich is, that the noblest city they have, anda metropolis also, is Tausus, the letter Taubeing by change put for Theta. Cethimuspossessed the island Cethima. It is now calledCyprus, and from that all islands, and thegreatest part of the sea-coasts, are namedCethim by the Hebrews; and one city thereis in Cyprus that has been able to preserveits denomination; it is called Citius by thosewho use the language of the Greeks, and hasnot, by the use of that dialect, escaped thename of Cethim; and so many nations havethe children and grand-children of Japhetpossessed. Now when I have premised some­what which, perhaps, the Greeks do not know,I will return and explain what I have omitted;for such names are pronounced here after themanner of the Greeks, to please my readers,for our own language does not so pronouncethem; but the names in all cases are of oneand the same ending; for the name we herepronounce Noeus, is there Noah, and in everycase retains the same termination.
The children of Ham possessed the landfrom Syria and Amanus, and the mountainsof Libanus, seizing upon all the maritime
• One observation ought not here to be neglected, with


parts, and keeping them as their own. Some,indeed, of its names are utterly vanished:others of them being changed, and anothersound given them, are hardly to be discover­ed; yet there are a few which have kepttheir denominations entire; for of the foursons of Ham, time has not at all hurt the nameof Chus; for the Ethiopians, over whom hereigned, are even at this day, both by them­selves and by all men in Asia, called Chu-sites. The memory also of the Mesraites ispreserved in their name, for all we who in­habit the country of Judea call Egypt Mestre,and the Egyptians Mestrians. Phut also wasthe founder of Libya, and called the inhabi­tants Phutites, from himself; there is also ariver in the country of the Moors which bearsthat name, whence the greatest part of theGrecian historians mention that river, and theadjoining country, by the appellation of Phut;but the name it has now is derived from oneof the sons of Mestraim, who was calledLybyos. We will inform you presently whathas been the occasion why it has been calledAfrica also. Canaan, the fourth son of Ham,inhabited the country now called Judea, andcalled it from his own name Canaan. Thechildren of these four were, Sabas, whofounded the Sabeans: Evilas, who foundedthe Evileans, now called Getuli; Sabatheswho founded the Sabathens, called by theGreeks Astoborans; Sabactas, who settled theSabactens: and Ragmus, who founded theRagmeans. This latter had two sons, one ofwhom, Judadas, settled the Judadeans, a na­tion of the western Ethiopians, and left themhis name; as did Sabas, to the Sabeans. ButNimrod, the son of Chus, stayed and tyran­nized at Babylon, as we have already ob­served.
Now all the children of Mesraim, beingeight in number, possessed the country fromGaza to Egypt, though it retained the nameof one only, the Philistim, for the Greeks caLpart of that country Palestine. As for therest, Ludieim, Enemim, andLabim, who aloneinhabited Libya, and called the country fromhimself; Nedim and Phethrosim, and Ches-loim and Cephthorim, we know nothing ofthem besides their names: for the Ethiopicwar,* which we wiall describe hereafter,
regard to that Ethiopic war, which Moses, as General ol


v*







OCR Output








an. 1493.] 131 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


cured, let the magistrates and senate of thosecities that lie near the place in which themurder was committed assemble together,and measure the distance from the placewhere the dead body lies: then let the ma­gistrate of the nearest city purchase a heifer;and bring it to a valley, and to a place thereinwhere there is no land ploughed, or treesplanted; and let them cut the sinews of theheifer: then the priests, and Levites, andsenate of that city, shall take water, and washtheir hands over the head of the heifer; andthey shall openly declare, that their handsare innocent of this murder, and that theyhave neither done it themselves, nor beenassisting to any that did it.* They shall alsobeseech God to be merciful to them, that nosuch horrid fact may any more be done in thatland.
Aristocracy, and the way of living under it,is the best constitution. And may you neverhave any inclination to any other form of go­vernment: and may you always love thatform, and have the laws for your governors,and govern all your laws according to them.For you need no supreme governor, but God.But if you shall desire a king, let him be oneof your ownt nation; let him be always care­ful of justice, and other virtues perpetually;let him submit to the laws, and esteem God'scommands to be his highest wisdom. But lethim do nothing without the high-priest, andthe votes of the senators: let him not have agreat number of wives, nor presume abun­dance of riches, nor a multitude of horses;whereby he may grow too proud to submit tothe laws. And ii he affect any such things,let him be restrained; lest he become so po­tent that his state be inconsistent with yourwelfare.
Let it not be esteemed lawful to removeboundaries; neither our own, nor of thosewith whom we are at peace. Be careful thatyou do "not take thoseJ landmarks away;


* Dent. xxi. 1—9.
t Dent. xvii. 16.
j Deut. xix. 14. It was the common practice both withthe Hebrews and with the Romans to erect landmarks todistinguish the boundaries of particular estates; and insetting apart land for any use, they erected a pillar, uponwhich was marked its length and breadth. From manyancient inscriptions it is evident that the Romans addedthe following letters: H. M. H. N. S. Hoc monumentumha redes non sequitur. See Horace, b. i. sat. viii. 12.
voL. I. NOS. 11 & 12


which are, as it were, a divine and unshakenlimitation of rights made by God himself, tolast for ever; since this going beyond limits,and gaining ground upon others, is the occa­sion of wars and seditions: for those that re­move boundaries are not far off an attempt U>subvert the laws.
He that plants a piece of land, whose treesproduce fruits before the fourth year, is notto bring thence any first-fruits to God: noris he to make use of that fruit himself, for it isnot produced in its proper season. For whennature has a force put upon it at an unseason­able time, the fruit is not proper for God, norfor the master's use; but let the owner gatherall that is grown on the fourth year; for thenit is in its proper season. And let him thathas gathered it carry it to the holy city, andspend that, together with the tythe of his otherfruits, in feasting with his friends, with theorphans, and the widows. But on the filthyear the fruit is his own, and he may use itas he pleases. ||
You are not to sow a piece of land withseed, which is planted with vines; for it isenough that it supply nourishment to thatplant, and be not harassed by ploughing also.You are to plough your land with oxen, andnot to oblige other animals to come under thesame yoke with them; but to till your landwith those beasts that are of the same kindwith each other. The seeds are also to bepure and without mixture, and not to be com­pounded of two or three sorts: since naturedoes not rejoice at the union of things thatare not in their own nature alike; nor areyou to permit beasts of different kinds togender together.§ For there is reason tofear, that this unnatural abuse may extendfrom beasts of different kinds to men; thoughit takes its first rise from evil practices aboutsuch smaller things. Nor is any thing to beallowed by imitation, whereof any degree ofsubversion may creep into the constitution.
The heathens had a deity called Jupiter Terminalig, ap­pointed to preside over bounds and landmarks. NumaPompilius appointed stones to be set as bounds to everyman's land, and dedicated them to Jupiter Terminalis. Heordered that those who removed them should be slain assacrilegious persons, and they and their oxen devoted todestruction. B.
I! Levit. xix. 25.
§ Levit. xix. 19.
Kk







OCR Output








an. 589.] 371 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


who had fled out of the city with him, whenthey saw their enemies near them, theyleft him, and dispersed themselves someone way, and some another: every one en­deavouring to save himself. So the enemytook Zedekiah alive; when he was desertedby all but a few, with his children and his'wives, and brought him to the king.
When he was come, Nebuchadnezzarbegan to call him a wicked wretch, and acovenant breaker; and one that had for­gotten his former words, when he promisedto keep the country for him. He also re-
Eroached him for his ingratitude; that whene had received the kingdom from him, whohad taken it from Jehoiachin, and given it him,he made use of his power against him thatgave it. "But," said he, "God is great,who hateth that conduct of thine, and hathbrought thee under us." And when he hadused these words to Zedekiah, he com­manded his sons, and his friends to be slain;while Zedekiah, and the rest of the cap­tains, looked on. He then put out the eyesof Zedekiah, and bound him, and carriedhim to Babylon.* And these things hap­pened as tJeremiah and Ezekiel had fore­told to him, that he should be caught, andbrought before the king of Babylon, andshould speak to him face to face; and shouldsee his eyes with his own eyes. And thus fardid Jeremiah prophesy. He was also madeblind and brought to Babylon, but did not seeit: according to the prediction of Ezekiel.
We have said thus much, because it issufficient to shew the nature of God to suchas are ignorant of it; that it is various, andacts many different ways, and that all eventshappen after a regular manner, in their pro­per season, and that it foretells what mustcome to pass. It is also sufficient to shew theignorance and incredulity of men, wherebythey are not permitted to foresee any thingthat is future; and are without any guard,exposed to calamities; so that it is impos­sible for them to avoid the experience ofthose calamities.


After this manner have the kings of Da­vid's race ended their lives, being in numbertwenty-one, until the last king; who alto­gether reigned five hundred and fourteenyears, six months, and ten days. Of whomSaul, who was the first king, retained thegovernment twenty years; though he wasnot of the same tribe with the rest.
Now the king of Babylon sent Nebuzara-dan, the general of his army, to Jerusalem,to pillage the temple: who had it also incommand to burn it, and the royal palace,and to lay the city even with the ground,and to transplant the people into Babylon.Accordingly he came to Jerusalem in the{eleventh year of king Zedekiah, and pillagedthe temple, and carried out the vessels ofGod, both gold and silver; and particularlythat large laver which Solomon dedicated; asalso the pillars of brass, and their chapiters,with the golden tables, and the candlesticks.And when he had carried these off, he setfire to the temple in the fifth month, the firstday of the month, in the eleventh year ofthe reign of Zedekiah, and in the eighteenthyear of Nebuchadnezzar. He also burntthe king's palace, and overthrew the city.|jNow the temple was burnt four hundred anaseventy years, six months, and ten days afterit was first built. It was then one thousand,sixty-two years, six months, and ten days,from the departure from Egypt; and fromthe deluge to the destruction of the temple,the whole interval was one thousand, ninehundred, fifty-seven years, six months, andten days; but from the generation of Adam,there were three thousand, five hundred andthirteen years, six months, and ten days.So great was the number of years heretobelonging. And what actions were doneduring those years, we have particularlyrelated. But the Babylonish general nowoverthrew the city, to the very foundations,and removed the people, and took forprisoners the high-priest, Seraiah, andZephaniah, the priest that was next to him;and the rulers that guarded the temple, who


* Jeremiah xxxix. 7.
t This observation of Josephus's, about the seemingdisagreement of Jeremiah xxxii. 4. xxxiv. 3. and Eze­kiel xii. 13. but real agreement at last, concerning thefate of Zedekiah, is very true, and very remarkable. Seechap. 7. Nor is it at all unlikely that the courtiers and
voL. I.—N0S. 31 & 32.
false prophets might make use of this seeming contradic­tion to dissuade Zedekiah from believing either of thoseprophets; as Josephus here intimates.
J The twelfth, Hebrew and Septuagint
II 2 Kings xxv. 9.
3R







OCR Output








368 {book X. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


coming upon the people: which when heheard he sent accounts of them unto Jeru­salem. But Zedekiah did not believe theirprophecies, for the following reason. It hap­pened that the two prophets agreed withone another in what they said as to all otherthings; that the city should be taken, andZedekiah himself should be taken captive.But Ezekiel disagreed with him, and said,that Zedekiah should not see Babylon: whileJeremiah said, that the king of Babylonshould carry him away thither in bonds.*And because they did not both say the samething as to this circumstance, he disbelievedwhat they both appeared to agree in; andcondemned them as not speaking truththerein; although all the things predicteddid come to pass according to their prophe­cies; as we shall shew upon a fitter oppor­tunity.
Now when Zedekiah had preserved hisleague with the Babylonians for eight years,fhe broke it, and revolted to the Egyptians;in hopes, by their assistance, of overcomingthe Babylonians. When the king of Babylonknew this, he made war against him, laid hiscountry waste, and took his fortified towns;and came to the city Jerusalem itself to be­siege it. But when the king of Egypt heardwhat circumstances Zedekiah, his ally, wasin, he took a great army with him, and cameinto Judea; as if he would raise the siege.Upon which the king of Babylon departedfrom Jerusalem, and met the Egyptians; andjoined battle with them, and defeated them:and when he had put them to flight, he pur­sued them, and drove them out of all Syria.Now as soon as the king of Babylon was de­parted from Jerusalem, the false prophetsdeceived Zedekiah, and said, that the kingof Babylon would not make any more war
Zedekiah. The chief business of this embassy was to re­quest of Nebuchadnezzar, a restitution of the sacred ves­sels of the temple which he had taken away, when hecarried Jehoiachin captive into Babylon. Our translation,however, is not at all significant in this place, when itstyles this Seraiah a quiet prince. The Septuagint hasvery properly rendered the words ap^uv Supuv (theprince of the presents,) which some apply to the pre­sents which king Zedekiah made to the temple, and othersto the things they daily supplied for sacrifices; but themost natural sense in this place is, that he was chargedwith the presents and tribute which Zedekiah was obligedto send to Nebuchadnezzar; that his business was, topresent them to the empep<»". and imnn that occasion, to


against him or his people; nor remove themout of their own country into Babylon; andthat those then in captivity would return, withall those vessels of which the king of Baby­lon had despoiled the temple. But Jeremiahcame among them, and prophesied what con­tradicted those predictions, and what provedto be true: that they did ill, and deluded theking; that the Egyptians would be of noadvantage to them; but that the king ofBabylon would renew the war against Jeru­salem, and besiege it again, and would de­stroy the people by famine, and carry awaythose that remain into captivity; and wouldtake away what they had as spoils, and wouldcarry off those riches that were in the temple.Nay that besides this, he would burn it, andutterly overthrow the city; and that theyshould serve him and his posterity seventyyears. That then the Persians and thfcMedes should put an end to their servitude,and overthrow the Babylonians; and that theJews should be dismissed, and return to theirland, Jrebuild the temple, and restore Jeru­salem.
When Jeremiah said this, the greater partbelieved him; but the rulers and those thatwere wicked despised him, as one disorderedin his senses. Now he had resolved to go tohis own country, which was called Anatnoth,and was twenty furlongs distant from Jeru­salem. But as he was going, one of the rulersmet him, and seized upon him, and accused-him falsely; as though he were going as a,deserter to the Babylonians. Jeremiah saidthat he accused him falsely; and added, thathe was only going to his own country. Butthe other would not believe him; but seizedupon him, and led him away and accusedhim to the rulers; under whom he enduredall sorts of torments, and was reserved to be


solicit the restoration of the sacred vessels; upon whichaccount, the Vulgate has rendered the words princepsprophetic, the chief person in the embassy, who at thetime of nudience, was to make a speech to the emperorin his prince's name. Calmet's Commentary. B.
* See Jeremiah xxxii. 4. and Ezekiel xii. 13.
t An. 591.
X Josephus says here, that Jeremiah prophesied notonly of the return of the Jews from the Babylonian cap­tivity, and this under the Persians and Medes, as in ourother copies; but of their rebuilding the temple, and eventhe city Jerusalem, which do not appear in our copiesunder his name.







OCR Output








an. 377.] 42$ ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


ened them to the table by buttons and button­holes, at the place where the crown wassituate: that so on what side soever of thetable one should stand, it might exhibit thevery same view of the exquisite workman­ship, and of the vast expense bestowed uponit. But upon the table itself they engraveda meander: inserting into it very valuablestones, in the middle, like stars of variouscolours; the carbuncle, and the emerald;each of which sent out agreeable rays oflight to the spectators; with such stones ofother sorts also as were most curious, andbest esteemed, as being most precious intheir kind. This meander was surroundedby a texture of net-work: the middle of whichappeared like a rhombus, into which wereinserted rock crystal, and amber: which, bythe appearance they made, gave wonderfuldelight to those that saw them. The chapi­ters of the feet imitated the first buddings oflilies; while their leaves were bent, and laidunder the table: but so that the chives wereseen standing upright within them. Theirbases were made of a carbuncle; and theplate at the bottom, which rested on thatcarbuncle, was one palm deep, and eightfingers in breadth. Now they had engravedupon it, with a very fine tool, and with a greatdeal of pains, a branch of ivy and tendrils ofthe vine, sending forth clusters of grapes:that you would guess they were no way dif­ferent from real tendrils. For they wereeo very thin, and so far extended at theirextremities, that they were moved with thewind, and made one believe they were theproduct of nature, and not the represen­tation of art. They also made the entireworkmanship of the table appear to be three­fold; while the joints of the several partswere so united together as to be invisible,and the places where they joined could notbe distinguished. Now the thickness of thetable was not less than half a cubit. So thatthis gift by the king's great generosity, bythe great value of the materials, and the va­riety of its exquisite structure, and the arti­ficers' skill in imitating nature with gravingtools, was at length brought to perfection:while the king was very desirous, thatthough in largeness it were not to be dif­ferent from that which was already dedicatedto God; yet that in the exquisite workman­


ship, novelty of contrivance, and splendourof construction, it should far exceed it.
Now there were two cisterns of gold; eachof which was engraven with scale-work, fromits basis to its belt-like circle, with varioussorts of stones inchased in the spiral circles.Next to which there was upon it a meander,of a cubit in height, and composed of stonesof all sorts of colours. And next to this wasthe rod-work engraven; and next to that wasa rhombus, in a texture of net-work, drawnout to the brim of the bason: while smallshields made of beautiful stones, and of fourfingers' depth, filled up the middle parts.About the top of the bason were wreathedthe leaves of lilies, and of the convolvulus,and the tendrils of vines, in a circular man­ner. And this was the construction of thetwo cisterns of gold; each containing twofirkins. But those which were of silverwere much more bright and splendid thanlooking-glasses; and you might in them seethe images that fell upon them more plainlythan in the other. The king also orderedthirty vials, those of which the parts thatwere of gold, and not filled up with preciousstones, were shadowed over with the leavesof ivy, and of vines artificially engraven. Andthese were the vessels that were after an ex­traordinary manner brought to this perfec­tion; partly by the skill of the workmen, whowere admirable in such fine work; but muchmore by the diligence and generosity of theking; who not only supplied the artificer*abundantly, and with what they wanted, buteven suspended public audiences for the time;and came and stood by the workmen, andsaw the whole operation. And this was thecause why the workmen were so accurate intheir performance: because they had regardto the king, and to his great concern aboutthe vessels: and so the more indefatigablyattended to the work.
And these gifts were sent by Ptolemy toJerusalem, and dedicated to God there. Butwhen Eleazar, the high-priest, had devotedthem to God, and had paid due respects tothose that brought them; and had given thempresents to be carried to the king, he let themgo back to the king. And when they werecome, and the seventy elders were come also,he presently sent for Andreas and Aristeus,his ambassadors. Accordingly they came to


?/


V







OCR Output








202 [book ti. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS


about him weapons suitable to the largenessof his body; for he had a breast-plate on thatweighed five thousand shekels. He had alsoa helmet, and greaves of brass as large asyou would naturally suppose might cover thelimbs of so vast a body. His spear was alsosuch as was not carried like a light thing inhis right hand; but he carried it as lying onhis shoulders. He had also a lance of sixhundred shekels, and many followed him tocarry his armour. Wherefore this Goliathstood between the two armies, as they werein battle array; and sent out a loud voice,and said to Saul and to the Hebrews: "I willfree you from fighting and from dangers. Forwhat necessity is there that your army shouldfall, and be afflicted? Give me a man of youthat will fight with me; and he that conquersshall have the reward of the conqueror, anddetermine the war; for these shall serve thoseothers to whom the conqueror shall belong.And certainly it is much better and moreprudent to gain what you desire by the hazardof one man, than of all."* When he had saidthis, he retired to his own camp. But thenext day he came again, and used the samewords; and did not leave off for forty daystogether to challenge the enemy in the samewords, till Saul and his army were therewithterrified; while they put themselves in arrayas if they would fight, but did not come to anengagement.


Now while this war between the Hebrewsand the Philistines was going on, Saul sentaway David to his father Jesse, and con­tented himself with those three sons of his,whom he had sent to his assistance, and to bepartners in the dangers of the war. Andat first, David returned to feed his flocks; butafter no long time he came to the camp ofthe Hebrews, being sent by his father tocarry provisions to his brethren,f and toknow what they were doing; while Goliathcame again, and challenged them, and re­proached them, that they had no man ofvalour among them that durst come down andfight him. Now as David was talking withhis brethren about the business for which hisfather had sent him, he heard the Philistinereproaching and abusing the army, and hadindignation at it; and said to his brethren,"I am ready to fight a single combat withthis adversary." Hereupon Eliab, and hiselder brother, reproved him, and said, thathe spake too rashly and improperly for oneof his age; and bade him go to his flocks,and to his father. So he was abashed at hisbrother's words, and went away; but stillspake to some of the soldiers, that he waswilling to fight with him that challengedthem. And when they had informed Saulwhat was the resolution of the young man,the king sent for him to come to him. Andwhen the king asked what he had to say, he


their behalf, when he gives us an account of some bonesof a prodigious size which were found in Hebron; asAcosta, in his history of the Indies, lib. 1. c. 10. makesmention of bones of an incredible bigness, and of a race ofgiants of such a height, that an ordinary man could scarcereach their knees. Le Gere's and Patrick's Comment.Calmet's Dictionary, under the word Goliath, and Dis. ofthe Giants. B.
* The words in which Goliath's challenge is expressed,are these, Why are you come out to set your battle in array?Am I not a Philistine, and you servants to Saul? Chooseyou a man for you, and let him come down to me: If he beable to fight with me, and to kill me, then will we be yourservants; but if J prevail against him and kill him, then yeshall be our servants, and serve us. 1 Sam. xviii. 8. Anti­quity furnishes us with examples of several such likezombats, as Goliath here proposes, but with none moreremarkable, than that between the Horatii and Curiatii,related by Livy, lib. 1. c. 23. "In which case (as Gro-tius expresses himself, Be jure belli et pads, lib. 2. c. 23.)though the champions perhaps cannot, with all the inno­cence imaginable, engage in the combat, yet their re­spective states may, at least, allow of it, as a less evil; asan expedient whereby a decision is made, without the effu­sion of much blood, or any considerable loss on either side,which of the two nations shall have the dominion over the
other. Strabo (says he) makes mention of this as anancient custom among the Greeks; and iEneas appeals tothe Latins, whether it is not highly just and equitable, thathe and Tumus should determine the controversy betweenthem even in this manner." But whether there was anycombat stipulated to be decisive of the quarrel betweenthe two contending nations, it is certain that this speech ofGoliath's was a mere bravado, proceeding from a highopinion he had of his own matchless strength, as if he hadbeen the whole support of the nation, which was to standor fall together with him. For that he had no authorityfrom the prince of the Philistines to make any such decla­ration, is evident from the event: since so far were thePhilistines from yielding themselves slaves to the He­brews, upon the death of this champion, that thry madethe best of their way into their own country, and theredefended themselves, and fought many battles with themafterwards. Saurin's Dissert, vol. 4. Dissert. 32, andPatrick's and Le Clerc's Comrrent. B.
t In those days it was customary for men to serve theirking and country in the wars at their own expense; andtherefore Jesse sent a supply of provisions to such of hissons as were in the service; but since he had other sonsat home, while David was chiefly in (he fields, it seems tobe by a divine direction that he sent him from the sheepupon this errand. B.







OCR Output








342 £&OOK IX. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


which they cut off from thy kingdom in thereign of thy father. So when the king hadheard that, he departed; and a little whileafter the prophet died. He was a mancelebrated for righteousness, and in eminentfavour with God: he also performed manywonderful works by prophecy, and such aswere gloriously preserved in memory bythe Hebrews. He obtained a magnificentfuneral: such a one indeed as it was fit aperson so beloved of God should have. Italso happened that at that time certain rob­bers cast a man, whom they had slain, intoElisha's grave, and upon the dead corpsecoming close to Elisha's body, it revivedagain.* And thus far have we enlargedabout the actions of Elisha the prophet;both such as he did while he was living,and how he had a divine power after hisdeath also.
Now upon the death of Hazael, king ofSyria, that kingdom came to Adad his son;with whom Joash king of Israel made war;and when he had beaten him in three battles,he took from him all that country, and thosecities and villages which his father Hazaelhad taken from the kingdom of Israel; whichcame to pass according to the prophecy ofElisha. But when Joash happened to die,he was buried in Samaria: and the govern­ment devolved on his son Jeroboam.


CHAP. IX.
of amaziah's expedition against the edomites andamalekites; his defeat in the subsequent waragainst joash, king of israel; and the accessionof uzziah.
IN the second year of the reign of Joash,tover Israel, Amaziah reigned over thetribe of Judah in Jerusalem. His mother's
* 2 Kings xiii. 21.t An. 840.
I The two murderers (mongrel fellows, whose fatherswere Jews, but their mothers aliens) perhaps were of hisbed-chamber, and having constant access to the king,might more easily accomplish their design. However,he was so weak and feeble, that he could make no re­sistance, and had fallen into that contempt and dis-esteem, that his guards minded not what became of him.Patrick's Commentary. B.
II Deut. xxiv. 16.
§ If these be reckoned for talents of silver, as theygenerally are, each talent, at a hundred and twenty-five


name was Jehoaddan, who was born at Je­rusalem. He was exceeding careful of doingwhat was right, and this when he was veryyoung. But when he came to the manage­ment of affairs, and to the government, heresolved that he ought first ol all to revengehis father Jehoash; and to punish thosethat had laid violent hands upon him. Sohe seized upon them all, and put them todeath: J yet did he execute no severity ontheir children; but acted therein accordingto the law of Moses, who did not think itjust to punish the children for the sins oftheir fathers.j| After this he chose an armyout of the tribes of Judah and Benjamin, ofsuch as were in the flower of their age, andabout twenty years old. And when he hadcollected about three hundred thousand ofthem together, he set captains of hundredsover them. He also sent to the king ofIsrael, and hired a hundred thousand of hissoldiers, for a hundred talents of silver;§for he had resolved to make an expeditionagainst the nations of the Amalekites, Edom­ites, and Gebalites. But as he was pre­paring for his expedition, and ready to goout to the war, a prophet gave him counselto dismiss the army of the Israelites; becausethey were bad men, and because God fore­told that he should be beaten, if he madeuse of them as auxiliaries; but that he shouldovercome his enemies, though he had but afew soldiers, when it so pleased God. Andwhen the king grudged at his having alreadypaid the hire of the Israelites, the prophetexhorted him to do what God would havehim: because he should thereby obtain muchwealth from God. So he dismissed them, andsaid that he still freely gave them their pay,and went himself with his own army, andmade war with the aforementioned nations:and when he had beaten them in battle, he


pounds weight, and each pound weight at four poundsvalue, the whole will amount to fifty thousand pounds ster­ling, which will be but ten shillings to each man, officersincluded. Very low pay! unless we suppose, that thiswhole sum was given to the king of Israel for the loan ofso many men, and that the men were to have no otherpay besides; or rather, that they were to have no otherpay but the booty which they took from the enemy; andthat this was the true reason why they were so exaspe­rated at their dismission, as to fall upon the cities of Judah,from Samaria even unto Beth-horon, 2 Chron. xxv. 13.Patrick's and CalmeCs Commentaries. B.


s







OCR Output








484 [book xm ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


his coming with a strong body of men, mustbe with an intention to kill him: and that hisway of reasoning was this; that it was a sillything in him, while it was in his power toreign himself, to look upon it as a great fa­vour that he was honoured with a lower dig­nity by his brother.
Aristobulus yielded to these imputations:but took care both that his brother shouldnot suspect him, and that he himself mightnot run the hazard of his own safety: so heordered his guards to lie in a certain placethat was under ground and dark; (he him­self then lying sick in the tower which wascalled Antonia;) and he commanded them,that in case Antigonus came in to him un­armed, they should not touch any body; butif armed, they should kill him. Yet did hesend to Antigonus, and desire that he wouldcome unarmed. But the queen, and thosethat joined with her in the plot against Anti­gonus, persuaded the messenger to tell himthe direct contrary: how his brother hadheard, that he had made himself a fine suitof armour for war, and desired him to cometo him in that armour; that he might seehow fine it was. So Antigonus, suspectingno treachery, but depending on the goodwill of his brother, came to Aristobulus arm­ed, as he used to be, with his entire armour;in order to shew it to him. But when he wascome at a place which was called Strato'stower, where the passage happened to beexceeding dark, the guards slew him. Thiscatastrophe of his demonstrates, that nothingis stronger than envy and calumny; and thatnothing does more certainly divide the goodwill and natural affections of men than thosepassions. But here one may take occasionto wonder at one Judas, who was of the sectof the Essenes, and who never missed thetruth in his predictions. For this man, whenhe saw Antigonus passing by the temple,cried out to his companions, and friends, whoabode with him, as his scholars, in order tolearn the art of foretelling things to come;"It would be good for me to die now; sinceAntigonus is still alive, and I see him passing.by: although I foretold he should die at the
* Hence we learn, that the Essenes pretended to haverules, whereby men might foretell things to come; andthat this Judas the Essene, taught those rules to hisicholars, But whether their pretences were of an as-


place called Strato's Tower, this very day:while yet the place is six hundred furlongs off,where 1 predicted he should be slain; and agreat part of the day is already past: so that II am in danger of proving a false prophet."*As he was saying this, in a melancholy tone,the news came that Antigonus was slain, ina place under ground; which was also calledStrato's Tower: or of the same name withthat Cesarea which is seated at the sea.
But Aristobulus repented immediately ofthis slaughter of his brother: on which ac­count his disease increased upon him, and hewas disturbed in his mind, upon the guilt ofsuch wickedness: insomuch that his entrailswere corrupted by his intolerable pain, andhe vomited blood. At which time one of theservants that attended upon him, and wascarrying his blood away, did, by Divine Pro­vidence, as I suppose, slip down, and shedpart of his blood at the very place wherethere were spots of Antigonus's blood stillremaining. And when there was a cry madeby the spectators, as if the servant had onpurpose shed the blood in that place; Aris­tobulus heard it, and inquired what the mat­ter was? And as they did not answer him,he was the more earnest to know: it beingnatural to men to suspect that what is thusconcealed is very bad. So upon his threat­ening, and forcing them to speak, they atlength told him the truth. Hereupon he shedmany tears in that disorder of mind whicharose from his consciousness of what he haddone; and gave a deep groan, and said, "1am not therefore, 1 perceive, to be concealedfrom God, in the impious and horrid crimesI have been guilty of: but a sudden punish­ment is coming upon me, for shedding theblood of my relations. And now, 0 thoumost impudent body of mine, how long wiltthou retain a soul, that ought to die, in orderto appease the ghosts of my brother, andmother? Why dost thou not give it all up atonce? And why do I deliver up my blooddrop by drop, to those whom I have so wick­edly murdered?" In uttering these lastwords he died: having reigned one year.He was called a lover of the Grecians; and
trological or magical nature; which yet in such religiousJews, who were utterly forbidden such arts, is no wayprobable: or to any Bath Col. spoken of by the laterRabbins, or otherwise, I cannot tell. See of the War, U. 8.







OCR Output








296 [book nn. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


Syria. There he met with one Rezon,* whohad run away from Hadadezer,f king ofZobah, his master, and was become a robberin that country; and joined friendship withhim, who had already a band of robbersabout him. So he went up and seized uponthat part of Syria, and was made kingthereof. He also made incursions into theland of Israel, and did in it no small mischief,and spoiled it, and that in the life time ofSolomon. And such was the calamity whichthe Hebrews suffered by Hadad.
There was also one of Solomon's ownnation that made an attempt against him,Jeroboam, the son of Nebat; who had an ex­pectation of rising, from a prophecy that hadbeen made to him long before. He was lefta child by his father, and brought up by hismother; and when Solomon saw that he wasof an active and bold disposition, he madehim the curator of the walls which he builtround about Jerusalem. And he took suchcare of those works, that the king approvedof his behaviour, and gave him as a rewardfor the same, the charge over the tribe ofJoseph. And when about that time Jeroboamwas once going out of Jerusalem, a prophetof the city Shilo, whose name was Ahijah,met him, and saluted him; and when he hadtaken him a little aside to the place wherethere was no one present, he rent the gar­ment he had into twelve pieces, and badeJeroboam take ten of them; saying, " This isthe will of God; he will part the dominion of


Solomon, and give one tribe, with that whichis next it, to his son; because of the promisemade to David for his succession; and willgive ten tribes to thee; because Solomon hathsinned against him, and delivered himself upto women, and to their gods. Seeing, there­fore, thou knowest the cause for which Godhath changed his mind, and is alienated fromSolomon, be thou righteous, and keep thelaws; because thou hast proposed to thee thegreatest of all rewards for thy piety, and thehonour thou shalt pay to God; namely, to beas greatly exalted as thou knowest David tohave been."
So Jeroboam was elevated by these wordsof the prophet, and being a young manJ ofwarm temper, and ambitious of greatness, hecould not be quiet. And when he had sogreat a charge in the government, and calledto mind what had been revealed to him byAhijah, he endeavoured to persuade thepeople to forsake Solomon; to make a dis­turbance, and to bring the government overto himself. But when Solomon understoodhis intention and treachery,|| he sought tocatch him and kill him. But Jeroboamwas informed of it beforehand; and fled toShishak, king of Egypt; and there abode tillthe death of Solomon. By which means hegained these two advantages; to suffer noharm from Solomon, and to be preserved forthe kingdom. So Solomon died when hewas already an old man, having reigned§eighty years,** and lived ninety-four. He


* 1 Kings xi. 23.
t When David made war against Hadadezer, Rezon,one of his generals, escaped from the field of battle, withthe troops under his command; and, having lived for alittle while hy plunder and robbery, at length seized onDamascus, and reigned there. But his reign was not long.For David took Damascus, as well as the other parts ofSyria, and left it in subjection to his son Solomon, till Godwas pleased to suffer this Rezon to recover Damascus,and there re-establish himself, to the great disturbance ofthe latter part of Solomon's reign. Calmef s Comment. B.
SThis youth of Jeroboam when Solomon built theIs of Jerusalem, not very long after he had finished histwenty years' building of the temple, and his own palace;or not very long after the twenty-fourth year of his reign,1 Kings ix. 24. 2 Chron. viii. 11. and his youth here stillmentioned, when Solomon's wickedness was become in­tolerable; fully confirm my former observation, that suchhis wickedness began early, and continued yery long.See Eccltis. xlvii. 14. Had we this discourse of Jose-phus's, wherein he intended to enlarge on this part ofSolomon's life (which part is only in brief touched upon
in our other copies, 1 Kings xi. and is wholly omitted inthe books of Chronicles) we had probably been morefully informed of this matter,
I! How Solomon came to know what was thus transactedbetween Ahijah and Jeroboam alone, is a question of nogreat difficulty. For perhaps the prophet made no scrupleto report what he delivered in the name of the Lord; per­haps Jeroboam himself, being puffed up with this assu­rance, could not contain, but told it to some of his confi­dants, who spread it abroad; or perhaps his servants,though they heard not the words the prophet spake, yet.seeing him rend the garment into twelve parts, and giveten to him, might speak of this strange and unaccountableaction, which Solomon, as soon as he came to hear of it,might easily understand, because the same prophet verylikely had told him but just before, that the kingdomshould be rent from him, and given to his servant, 1 Kingsxiv. 8. Patrick1!! Commentary. B.
§ From an. 1056 to 976 B.' C.
** That Josephus justly ascribes eighty years to thereign of Solomon, see Essay on the Old Testament,page 31, 32.







OCR Output








AIT. 405 454.] ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


four hundred. And when the eunuch thoughtthe virgin had been sufficiently purified, inthe aforementioned time, and were now fit togo to the king's bed, he sent one to be withthe king every day. So when he had ac­companied with her, he sent her back to theeunuch. And when Esther had come tohim, he was pleased with her, and fell inlove with the damsel, and married her; andmade her his lawful wife,* and kept a wed­ding feast for her on the twelfth month, ofthe seventh year of his reign; which wascalled Adar. He also sent Angari, as theyare called, or messengers into every nation;and gave orders that they should keep a feastfor his marriage: while he himself treated thePersians, and the Medes, and the principalmen of the nations, for a whole month. Ac­cordingly Esther came to his royal palace,and he set a diadem pn her head, and thuswas she married;f without making known tothe king what nation she was derived from.Her uncle also removed from Babylon toShushan, and dwelt there: being every dayabout the palace, and inquiring how thedamsel did: for he loved her as though shehad been his own daughter.
Now the king had made a law, that noneof his own people should approach him4 un­less he were called, when ne sat upon histhrone. And men with axes in their handsstood round about his throne; in order to


punish such as approached to him, withoutbeing called. However the king sat with agolden sceptre in his hand; which he held outwhen he had a mind to save any one of thosethat approached to him, without being called;and he who touched it was free from danger.
Some time after this two eunuchs,|| Big-than and Teresh, conspired against theking: and Barnabazus, the servant of oneof the eunuchs, being by birth a Jew, wasacquainted with their conspiracy, and dis­covered it to the queen's uncle. And Mor-decai, by the means of Esther, made theconspirators known to the king.§ This trou­bled the king: but he discovered the truth,and hanged the eunuchs upon a cross. Atthat time, however, he gave no reward toMordecai, who had been the occasion of hispreservation. He only bade the scribes toset down his name in the records; and badehim stay in the palace as an intimate friendof the king's.
Now there was one Haman, the son ofAmedatha, by birth an Amalekite, that usedto go in to the king: and the foreigners andPersians worshipped him; as Artaxerxes hadcommanded that such honour should be paidto him. But Mordecai was so wise, and soobservant of his country's laws, that he wouldnot worship the man*** When Haman ob­served this, he inquired whence he came?and when he understood that he was a Jew,


, * Esther ii. 17.
t According to this account of things, this Persian mo­narch seems to have had but one wife, at least but one inchief favour and esteem with him, though it is certain, hecould not fail of having an infinite number of secondarywives or concubines. This was the name of every onethat was taken from among the virgins, who had a separatehouse for themselves, and conducted to the king's bed;where having passed a night, she returned no more to thevirgins' apartments, but was, the next morning, receivedinto the house of the concubines, and there treated in thestate and port of one of the king's wives: for such theyWere accounted. No man was permitted to marry them,as long as the king lived; and upon his demise, theygenerally fell to his successor. Of these Darius Nothusis reckoned to have had no less than three hundred andsixty. Pool's Annotations. The manner of the Persianking was to give his queens, at their marriage, such acity to buy them clothes; another for their hair; anotherfor their necklaces; and so on for the rest of their ex­penses. And as it was customary for him, according tothe testimony of Herodotus, upon his accession to thethrone, to remit the tribute that was due to him from allthe cities; so he might, upon this occasion, out of hisabundant joy, make a release to the provinces, and forgive
them some of the duties and imposts that they were boundto pay him. Patrick's Commentary. B:
J Take here Dr. Hudson's note, which ie this: Hero­dotus shews, lib. I. cap. 99. that this law against any one'scoming uncalled to the kings of Persia, when they weresitting on their thrones, was first enacted by Dejoces, i. e.by him who first withdrew the Medes from the dominionof the Assyrians, and himself first reigned over thera.Thus also, says Spanheim, stood guards, with their axes,about the throne of Tenus, or Tenelus, that the offendermight by them be punished immediately.
II Those were two great men, who perhaps kept thedoor of the king's bed-chamber, and being either incensedat the divorce of Vashti, (whose creatures they were,)or at the advancement of Esther, who, in all probability,would raise her kinsman Mordecai to a superiority overthem, took disgust thereat, and so resolved to revengethemselves on the king for" it. Prideaux's Connection,and Patrick's Commentary. B.
§ Esther ii. 21, 22.
** Whether this adoration required of Mordecai to Ha­man, were by hhn deemed too like the adoration due onlyto God; as Josephus- seems here to think ; as well as theirSeptuagint interpreters also, by their translation of Estherxiii. 12, 13, 14. of whether he thought he ought to pay


3X2







OCR Output








22 [book I. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


was the cause that those cities were over­thrown.
The sons of Canaan were these; Sidonius,who built a city of the same name, but calledby the Greeks Sidon; Amathus inhabitedAmathine, which is even now called Amatheby the inhabitants, although the Macedoniansnamed it Epiphania, from one of his pos­terity; Arudeus possessed the island Aradeus;Arucus possessed Arce, which is in Libanus.But of the seven others, Ghetteus, Jebuceus,Amorreus, Gergesseus, Eudeus, Sineus, andSamareus, we have nothing in the sacredbooks but their names; for the Hebrewsoverthrew their cities, and their calamitiescame upon them on the occasion following.
When, after the deluge, the earth was re­settled in its former condition; Noah setabout its cultivation, and planted it withvines; and when the fruit was ripe, and hehad gathered the grapes in their season, andthe wine was ready for use, he offered sacri­fice,* and feasted; and being inebriated, hefell asleep, and lay naked in an unseemlymanner.* When his youngest son saw this,he came laughing, and shewed him to hisbrethren, but they covered their father'snakedness; and when Noah was made sen­sible of what had been done, he prayed forprosperity to his other sons; but for Ham, hedid not curse him by reason of his nearnessin blood, but cursed his posterity, and whenthe rest of them escaped that curse, Godinflicted it on the children of Canaan. But ofthese matters we shall speak more hereafter.
Shem, the third son of Noah, had five sons,twho inhabited the land that began at Eu­phrates, and reached to the Indian ocean.For Elam left behind him the Elamites, theancestors of the Persians. Ashur lived at the
the Egyptians, put an end to, II. 10. and about whichmodern writers seem very much unconcerned ; viz. that itwas a war of that consequence, as to occasion the removalor destruction of six or seven nations of the posterity ofMesraim, with their cities, which Josephus would not havesaid, if he had not had ancient records to justify his asser­tions, though those records be now lost.
* Gen. ix. 21.
t Gen. x. 21.
% That the Jews were called Hebrews from their pro­genitor Heber, our author Josephus here rightly affirms;and not from Abram the Hebrew^or passenger over Eu­phrates, as many of the modems suppose. Shem is alsocalled the Father of all the Children of Heber, or of all the


city Ninive, and named his subjects Assyrians,who became the most fortunate nation beyondothers. Arphaxad named the Arphaxadites,who are now called Chaldeans. Aram hadthe Aramites, whom the Greeks call Syrians;as Lud founded the Ludites, who are nowcalled Lydians. Of the four sons of Aram,Uz founded Trachonitis and Damascus; thiscountry lies between Palestine and Celesyria.Ul founded Armenia; and Gather the Bac-trians; and Mesa the Mesaneans: it is nowcalled Charax Spasina. Sala was the son ofArphaxad: and his son was Heber, fromwhom they originally called the Jews He­brews.:*; Heber begat Joctan and Phaleg.He was called Phaleg because he was born||at the dispersion of the nations to their se­veral countries, for Phaleg among the He­brews signifies division. Now Joctan, oneof the sons of Heber had these sons, Elmo-dad, Saleph, Asermoth, Jera, Adoram, Aizel,Decla, Ebal, Abimeal, Sabeus, Ophir, Euilar,and Jobab: these inhabited from Cophen, anIndian river, and in part of Asia adjoining toit; and this may suffice concerning the sonsof Shem.
I will now treat of the Hebrews. The sonof Phaleg, whose father was Heber, was Ra-gau, whose son was Serug, to whom was bornNahor; his son was Terah, who was thefather of Abraham, who accordingly was thetenth§ from Noah, who was born in the twohundred and ninety-second year after thedeluge: for Terah begat Abram in his seven­tieth year. Nahor begat Haran when he wasone hundred and twenty years old: Nahorwas born to Serug at his hundred and thirty-second year; Ragau had Serug at one hun­dred and thirty; at the same age also Phaleghad Ragau; Heber begat Phaleg in his hun-
Hebrews in a history long before Abram passed overEuphrates. Gen. x. 21.
II If Phaleg were so called at his birth, as Josephus hererightly asserts, it is plain the short Hebrew, or Masoretechronology was not the chronology of Josephus, by whichthe confusion of languages, and the dispersion of mankindfell no later than the 100th year after the deluge, which isimpossible to be supposed, and is a great deal too soon forsuch confusion of languages and dispersion of mankind,which, by the best chronology, did not happen till 300years later, or till 400 years after the flood.
§ Therefore the second Cainan is spurious. See Ber .nard's note.







OCR Output








28 [book I. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


and promised that if their inclinations couldnot be governed, he would expose his daugh­ters to their lust, instead of these strangers;neither thus were they made ashamed.
But God was much displeased at their im­pudent behaviour, so that he both smote thosemen with blindness,* and condemned theSodomites to universal destruction; but Lot,upon God's informing him of the future de­struction of the Sodomites, went away, takingwith him his wife and two daughters, whowere still virgins, for those that were be-trothedt to them were above the thoughts ofgoing, and deemed Lot's words trifling. Godthen cast a thunderbolt upon the city, andset it on fire, with its inhabitants, and laidwaste the country with the like burning, as Iformerly said when I wrote the Jewish war;Jbut Lot's wife continually turning back toview the city, as she went from it, and beingtoo inquisitive what would become of it,although God had forbidden her so to do, waschanged into a pillar|| of salt; for I have seenit, and it remains at this day. Now he andhis daughters fled to a certain small place,encompassed with the fire, and settled in it.It is to this day called Zoar, for that is theword which the Hebrews use for a smallthing. There it was that he lived a miserablelife, on account of his having no company, andhis want of provisions.
But his daughters thinking that all man­kind were destroyed, approached§ to theirlather, though taking care not to be per­ceived. This they did, that the human racemight not utterly fail; and they bare sons, theson of the elder was called Moab, which de­notes one derived from his father: the youngerbare Ammon, which name denotes one de­rived from a kinsman. The former was the


father of the Moabites, which is even still agreat nation; the latter was the father of theAmmonites, and both of them are inhabitantsof Celesyria. And such was the departureof Lot from among the Sodomites.
CHAP. XII.
OP ABIMELECH's CONDUCT TOWARDS ABRAHAM; OF ISMAEL
THE SON OF ABRAHAM; AND THE ARABIANS, HIS POS­TERITY.
ABRAHAM now removed to Gerar ofPalestine, leading Sarah along withhim, under the name of his sister, using thelike dissimulation that he had used before:for he was afraid of Abimelech, the king ofthat country; who actually fell in love withSarah, and was disposed to corrupt her, buthe was restrained from satisfying his desiresby a dangerous distemper, which befel himfrom God. Now when his physicians des­paired of curing him, he fell asleep, and waswarned in a dream not to abuse the stranger'swife; and when he recovered he told hisfriends, that God had inflicted that diseaseupon him, by way of punishment for his injuryto the stranger, and in order to preserve thechastity of his wife; for that she did not ac­company him as his sister, but as his legitimatewife; and that God had promised to be gra­cious to him for the time to come, if this per­son were once secure of his wife's chastity.When he had said this, by the advice of hisfriends he sent for Abraham, and told him notto be in the least concerned about his wife,for that God took care of him; and that itwas by his providence he received his wifeagain, without suffering any abuse; and heappealed to God, and to his wife's conscience,and said he had not any inclination at first to


* Gen. xix. 11.
t These sons-in-law to Lot, as they are called, Gen.six. 12, 14,mi?htbe so styled because they were be­trothed to Lot's daughters, though not yet married tothem. See the Note on XIV. 13.
t Of the War, IV. 8.
II This pillar of salt was, we see here, standing in thedays of Josephus, and he had seen it. That it was stand­ing then is also attested by Clement of Rome, contempo­rary with Josephus; as also it was standing in the nextoentury, is attested by Irenaeus, with the addition of an hy­pothesis, how it came to last so long, with all its membersintire. Whether the account that some modern travellersgive be true, that it is still standing, I do not know. Itsremote situation, at the utmost southern point of the sea
of Sodom, in the wild and dangerous deserts of Arabia,makes it exceeding difficult for inquisitive travellers toexamine the place, and for common reports of countrypeople at a distance, they are not very satisfactory.
§ I see no wicked intention of these daughters of Lot,in a case which appeared to them as an unavoidable neces­sity. Incest is certainly a horrid crime; but whether insuch a case of necessity as they apprehended this to be,according to Josephus, it was any such crime, I am not sa­tisfied. In the mean time, their making their father in­ebriated, and their solicitous concealment of what they didfrom him, shewed that they despaired of persuading him toan action, which at the best, could not but be very shock­ing to so good a man.







OCR Output








AN. 29.] 557 ANTIQUITIES OP THE JEWS.


ing of these strong holds; that it was properfor them to deliver the same to her, and toHerod's sons; lest, upon his death, any otherperson should seize upon the government.And that upon his recovery none could keepthem more safely for him than those of hisown family. These words, however, were notby them taken in good part; for as they hadbeen in former times faithful to Herod, theyresolved to continue so now more than ever;both because they hated Alexandra; and be­cause they thought it a sort of impiety todespair of Herod's recovery, while he wasyet alive. For they had been his old friends;and one of them, whose name was Achiabus,-was his cousin german. They sent messen­gers therefore to acquaint him with Alexan­dra's design. So he made no longer delay,*but gave orders to have her slain. Yet wasit still with difficulty, and after he had en­dured great pain that he got clear of his dis­temper. He was still sorely afflicted both inmind and body; and made very uneasy; andreadier than ever upon all occasions to inflictpunishment upon those that fell under hishand. He also slew the most intimate of hisfriends, Costobarus, and Lysimachus, andGadias, who was also called Antipater; asalso Dositheus: and that upon the followingoccasion:—
Costobarus was an Idumean by birth; andone of principal dignity among them; andone whose ancestors had been priests to theKoze, whom the Idumeans had formerly es­teemed as a god. But after Hyrcanus hadmade a change in their political government,and made them receive the Jewish customs,and law, Herod made Costobarus governorof Idumea, and Gaza; and gave him his sisterSalome to wife. And this was upon hisslaughter of his uncle Joseph, who had thatgovernment before; as we have "{related


already. When Costobarus had gotten to beso highly advanced, it pleased him; and wasmore than he hoped for; and he was moreand more puffed up by his good success; andin a little while he exceeded all bounds, anddid not think fit to obey what Herod, as theirruler, commanded him; or that the Idumeansshould make use of the Jewish customs, or besubject to them. He therefore sent to Cleo­patra, and informed her, that the Idumeanshad been always under his progenitors; andthat for the same reason it was but just sheshould desire that country for him of Antony;for that he was ready to transfer his friend­ship to her. And this he did, not because hewas better pleased to be under Cleopatra'sgovernment; but because he thought that,upon the diminution of Herod's power, itwould not be difficult for him to obtain theentire government over the Idumeans, andsomewhat more also. For he raised his hopesstill higher; as having no small pretences,both by his birth, and by these riches, whichhe had gotten by his constant attention tofilthy lucre. And accordingly it was not asmall matter that he aimed at. So Cleopa­tra desired this country of Antony; but failedof her purpose. Herod, on receiving intelli­gence of this, was ready to kill Costobarus:yet upon the entreaties of his sister and mo­ther he forgave him, and vouchsafed to par­don him entirely, though he still had a suspi­cion of him afterward for this his attempt.
But some time afterward, when Salomehappened to quarrel with Costobarus, sheJsent him a bill of divorce, and dissolved hermarriage with him. Though this was notaccording to the Jewish laws: for with us itis lawful for a husband to do so; but a wife,if she depart from her husband, cannot ofherself be married to another, unless herformer husband put her away. However,


* An. 28.
t Chap. 3.
J Here is a plain example of a Jewish lady giving abill of divorce to her husband: though in the days ofJosephus it was not by the Jews esteemed lawful for awoman so to do. See the like XX. 7. and among theParthians, XVIII. 9. However the Christian law, whenit allowed divorce for adultery, Matt. v. 32. allowed theinnocent wife to divorce her guilty husband; as well asthe innocent husband to divorce his guilty wife; as welearn from the shepherd of Hennas, Mand. IV. and fromthe second apology of Justin Martyr: where a prosecu­tion was brought upon the Christians upon such a di-
vorce. And I think the Roman laws permitted it at thattime, as well as the laws of Christianity. Now this Ba-bas, who was one of the race of the Asmoneans, or Mac­cabees, is related by the Jews, as Dr. Hudson here re­marks, to have been so eminently religious in the Jew­ish way, that excepting the day following the tenthof Tisri, the great day of atonement; when he seemsto have supposed all his sins entirely forgiven; heused every day of the whole year to offer a sacrificefor his sins of ignorance, or such as he supposed hehad been guilty of, but did not distinctly remember.See somewhat like it of Agrippa the Great, XrX. 7.and Job i. 4,


4R2







OCR Output








AN. 34.] 543 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


given her Coelesyria, instead of what she de­sired: by which means he had at once pa­cified her, and got clear of the entreatieswhich she had made him, to have Judeabestowed upon her.
When these letters were brought, the wo­men laid aside their intention of fleeing tothe Romans which they had thought of whileHerod was supposed to be dead. Yet wasnot that purpose of theirs a secret. Butwhen the king had conducted Antony on hisway against the Parthians, and returningto Judea; both his sister Salome, and hismother, informed him of Alexandra's inten­tions. Salome also added somewhat fartheragainst Joseph, though it were no more thana calumny: that he had often had a criminalconversation with Mariamne. The reasonof her saying so was, that she had for a longtime borne her ill will: for when they haddifferences with one another, Mariamne tookgreat freedoms, and reproached the restwith the meanness of their birth. Herodwhose affection to Mariamne was alwaysvery warm, was presently disturbed at this;and could not bear the torments of jealousy;but was still restrained from doing any rashthing, by the love he had for her. Yet didhis vehement affection and jealousy togethermake him ask Mariamne by herself, aboutthis matter of Joseph. But she denied itupon her oath, and said all that an innocentwoman could possibly say in her own de­fence: so that by little and little the kingwas prevailed upon to drop the suspicion;and left off his anger at her: and being over­come with his passion for his wife, he madean apology to her for having seemed to be­lieve what he had heard about her; and re­turned her a great many acknowledgmentsof her modest behaviour: and professed theextraordinary affection and kindness he hadfor her. Till at last, as is usual betweenlovers, they both burst into tears, and em­braced each other with a most tender affec­tion. But as the king gave more and moreassurances of his belief of her fidelity, andendeavoured to draw her to a like confi­dence in him, Mariamne said, "Yet was notthat command thou gavest, that if any harm
* This slaughter of Arsinoe by Mark Antony, when shehad fled for refuge to this asylum, the temple of Diana,is confirmed by Appian V. page 676. Only he says, that


came to thee from Antony, I, who had beenno occasion of it, should perish with thee, asign of thy love to me."
When these words were fallen from her,the king was shocked at them; and presentlylet her go out of his arms, and cried out, andtore his hair with his own hands, and said,that he had now an evident demonstrationthat Joseph had had criminal conversationwith his wife: for that he would never haveuttered what he had told him by himself,unless there had been a great familiarity,and such firm confidence, between them.And while he was in this passion, he hadlike to have killed his wife: but being stillovercome by his love to her, he restrainedhis passion: though not without a lastinggrief, and disquietness of mind. However,he gave order to slay Joseph, without per­mitting him to come into his sight. And asfor Alexandra, he bound her, and kept herin custody, as the cause of all this mischief.
CHAP. IV.
of cleopatra's avarice and cruelties; her arrivalin judea, and the attentions she received from
HEROD.
AT this time the affairs of Syria were inconfusion by Cleopatra's constant per­suasions to Antony to make an attempt onevery body's dominions. For she persuadedhim to take those dominions from their se­veral princes, and bestow them upon her.And she had a great influence upon him; byreason of his being enslaved to her by hisaffections. She was also by nature verycovetous, and hesitated not to commit anywickedness. She had already poisoned herbrother; because she knew that he was tobe king of Egypt: and this when he was butfifteen years old. And she caused her sisterArsinoe to be *slain by the means of An­tony; when she was a supplicant at Diana'stemple at Ephesus. For if there were butany hopes of getting money, she would vio­late both temples and sepulchres. Nor wasthere any holy place that was esteemed themost inviolable, from which she would notfetch the ornaments it had in it: nor any
it was at her temple at Miletus; and Josephus here at hertemple at Ephesus. Which was the truth cannot. I sup­pose, be now determined.







OCR Output








AN. 187.] 435 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


father: he assured him withal, that he wouldgive him but ten talents; and that for the pre­sent to the king also. The son was irritatedat this; and threw Arion into prison. Butwhen Arion's wife had informed Cleopatra ofthis; with her entreaty, that she would re­buke the child for what he had done, (forArion was in great esteem with her;) Cleo­patra informed the king of it. And Ptolemysent for Hyrcanus, and told him, that hewondered, when he was sent to him by hisfather, that he had not yet come into his pre­sence, but had laid the steward in prison;and he gave order therefore that he shouldcome to him, and give an account of thereason of what he had done. And they re­port, that the answer he made to the king'smessenger was this: that "There was a lawof his that forbade a child that was born, totaste of the sacrifice, before he had been atthe temple, and sacrificed to God. Accord­ing to which way of reasoning he did nothimself come to him; in expectation of the
Eresent he was to make to him, as to one whoad been his father's benefactor; and that hehad punished the slave for disobeying hiscommands:" "For," said he, " it matters notwhether a master be little or great, so thatunless we punish such as these, thou thyselfmayest expect to be despised by thy sub­jects." Upon hearing this answer, the kingburst into laughter, and wondered at thegreat soul of the child.
When Arion was apprised that this was theking's disposition, and that he had no way tohelp himself; he gave the child a thousandtalents; and was liberated from prison. Soafter three days were over, Hyrcanus cameand saluted the king and queen. They sawhim with pleasure, and feasted him in anobliging manner; out of the respect they bareto his father. So he came to the merchants
Erivately, and bought a hundred boys thatad learning, and were in the flower of theirage, each at a talent a piece; as also hebought a hundred maidens, each at the sameprice as the other. And when he was invitedto feast with the king among the principalmen of the country, he sat down the lowestof them all; because he was little regarded,as a child in age still; and this by those that
S laced every one according to their dignity.fow when all those that sat with him had
VOl.. I.—NOS. 37 & 38.


lain the bones of the several parts on a heapbefore Hyrcanus; (for they had themselvestaken away the flesh belonging to them) tillthe table where he sat was filled full withthem, Trypho, who was the king's jester, andwas appointed for jokes and laughter at fes­tivals, was now asked by the guests that satat the table to expose him to laughter. Sohe stood by the king, and said, Dost thou notsee, my lord, the bones that lie by Hyrcanus?By this similitude thou mayest conjecture thathis father made all Syria as bare as he hathmade these bones." And the king laughingat what Trypho said,- and asking of Hyr­canus, " How he came to have so many bonesbefore him?" He replied, "Very rightfully,my lord. For they are dogs that eat theflesh, and the bones together; as these thyguests have done; (looking in the mean timeat those guests;) for there is nothing beforethem; but they are men that eat the flesh,and cast away the bones; as I, who am alsoa man, have now done." The king admiredthis answer, which was so wisely made; andbade them all make an acclamation, as amark of their approbation of his jest; whichwas truly a facetious one.
On the next day Hyrcanus went to everyone of the king's friends, and of the menpowerful at court, and saluted them; but stillinquired of the servants what present theywould make the king on his son's birth-day?and when some said, that they would givetwelve talents, and that others of greaterdignity wotdd every one give according tothe quantity of their riches; he pretended tobe grieved, that he was not able to bring solarge a present; for that he had no more thanfive talents. And when the servants heardwhat he said, they told their masters; andthey rejoiced in this prospect that Josephwould be disapproved, and would make theking angry, by the smallness of his present.When the day came, the others, even thosethat brought the most, offered the king notabove twenty talents; but Hyrcanus gave toevery one of the hundred boys, and hundredmaidens that he had bought, a talent a piece,for them to carry; and introduced them, theboys to the king, and the maidens to Cleo­patra; every body wondering at the unex­pected richness of the presents, even theking and queen themselves. He also pre-4B







OCR Output








Air. 1116.] 191 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


Nafaash, contemning the multitude of theGileadites, and the answer they gave, allowedthem a respite, and gave them leave to sendto whomsoever they pleased for assistance.So they immediately sent to the Israelites, cityby city; and informed them what Nahash hadthreatened to do, and what great distress theywere in. Now the people tell into tears andgrief, at the hearing of what the ambassadorsfrom Jabesh said; and the terror they werein permitted them to do nothing more. Butwhen the messengers were come to the cityof king Saul, and declared the danger inwhich the inhabitants of Jabesh were, thepeople were in the same affliction as those inthe other cities; for they lamented the ca­lamity of those related to them. And whenSaul was returned from his husbandry, intothe city, he found his fellow citizens weeping;and when, upon inquiry, he had learned thecause of the confusion and sadness they werein, he was seized with a divine fury, and sentaway the ambassadors from the inhabitants ofJabesh, promising to come to their assistanceon the third day, and to beat their enemiesbefore sun-rising; that the sun, upon its rising,might see that they had already conquered,and were freed from the fears they wereunder. But he bade some of them remain toconduct him the right way to Jabesh.
So being desirous to excite the people tothis war against the Ammonites, by fear ofthe losses they should otherwise undergo; andthat they might the more suddenly be ga­thered together, he cut the sinews of his oxen,and threatened to do the same to all such asdid not come with their armour to Jordan thenext day, and follow him and Samuel theprophet, whithersoever they should leadthem. So they came together, out of fear ofthe losses they were threatened with, at theappointed time. And the multitude werenumbered at the city Bezek. And he foundthe number of those that were gathered to­gether, besides that of the tribe of Judah, to beseven hundred thousand; while those of thattribe were seventy thousand. So he passedover Jordan, and proceeded in marching allthat night, thirty furlongs; and came to Jabeshbefore sun-rising. So he divided the armyinto three companies, and fell upon their


* 1 Sam. xi. 18.t 1 Sam. xi. 14.


enemies suddenly and unexpectedly on everyside; and joining battle with them, theyslew a great many of the Ammonites, togetherwith their king Nahash. This glorious ac­tion was performed by Saul, and was re­lated with great commendation of him to allthe Hebrews: and he thence gained a won­derful reputation for his valour. For al­though there were some that contemned himbefore, they now changed their minds, andhonoured and esteemed him as the best ofmen. For he did not content himself withhaving merely saved the inhabitants of Ja­besh; but he made an expedition into thecountry of the Ammonites, and laid it allwaste, and took a large prey, and thenreturned to his own country triumphantly.So the people were greatly pleased at theseexcellent performances of Saul, and re­joiced that they had constituted him theirking. They also made a clamour againstthose who pretended he would be of noadvantage to their affairs: and they said,"Where now are these men? let them bebrought to punishment :"* with all the likethings that multitudes usually say, whenelevated with prosperity, against those thatlately had despised the authors of it. ButSaul, although he took the good will and theaffection of these men very kindly, yet didhe swear that he would not see any of hiscountrymen slain that day: since it was ab­surd to mix this victory which God had giventhem, with the slaughter of those thatwere of the same lineage with themselves:and that it was more agreeable to be thenof a friendly disposition, and to betake them­selves to feasting.
When Samuel had told them that theyought to confirm the kingdom to Saul by asecond ordination of him, they all cametogether to the city Gilgal; for thither didhe command them to come.t So the prophetanointed Saul with the holy oil, in sightof the multitude, and declared him to beking the second time. And so the govern­ment of the Hebrews was changed into aregal government. For in the days of Moses,and his disciple Joshua, who was their ge­neral, they continued under an aristocracy.But after the death of Joshua, for eighteen!
X From an. 1467 to 1449. B. C,







OCR Output








36 [book I. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


God to Jacob,' and" that without the consentof Isaac, bade him kill kids of the goats, andprepare a supper. Jacob obeyed his mother,according to all her instructions, and whenthe supper was ready, he took a goat's Bkin,and put it about his arm, that by reason ofits hairy roughness, his father might believehim to be Esau; for they being twins, andin all things else alike, differed only in thisthing. This was done out of his fear, thatbefore Isaac had made his supplications, heshould be caught in his evil practice, andthereby provoke his father to curse him. Sohe brought in the supper to his father. Isaacperceiving, by the peculiarity of his voice,who he was, called his son to him; who gavehim his hand, which was covered with thegoat's skin. When Isaac felt that, he said,"Thy voice is like the voice of Jacob; yetbecause of the thickness of thy hair, thouseemest to be Esau." So suspecting no deceit,he ate the supper, and offered up his prayersand intercession to God, and said, "O Lordof all ages, and creator of all substance, itwas thou that didst propose to my fathergreat plenty of good things, and hast vouch­safed to bestow on me what I have; and hastpromised to my posterity to be their kindsupporter, and to bestow on them still greaterblessings. Do thou therefore confirm thesethy promises, and do not overlook me becauseof my present weak condition, on account ofwhich I more earnestly pray to thee. Begracious to this my son, preserve him, andkeep him from every thing that is evil. Givehim a happy life, and the possession of asmany good things as thy power is able to be­stow. Make him terrible to his enemies, andhonourable and beloved among his friends."Thus did Isaac pray to God, thinking hisprayers had been made for Esau. He hadbut just finished them, however, when Esau


came in from hunting; and when Isaac per­ceived his mistake, he was silent. Esauearnestly requested that he might be madepartaker of the blessing which his brotherhad received, but his father refused, becauseall his prayers had been spent upon Jacob.So Esau lamented the mistake; however, hisfather being grieved at his weeping, said,that " He should excel in hunting, in arms,in strength of body; and should obtain gloryfor ever on those accounts, he and his pos­terity after him; but still should serve hisbrother."
Now the mother delivered Jacob, when hewas afraid that his brother would inflict somepunishment upon him because of the mistakeabout the prayers of Isaac: for she persuadedher husband to take a wife for Jacob out ofMesopotamia,* of her own kindred. Esauhaving already married Basemmath, thedaughter of Ishmael, without his father's con­sent: for Isaac, not liking the Canaanites, dis­approved of Esau's former marriage, whichmade him take Basemmath to wife, in orderto please him; and indeed he had a greataffection for her.
CHAP. XIX.
OF JACOB'S FLIGHT INTO MESOPOTAMIA.
NOW Jacob was sent by his mother intoMesopotamia, in order to marry herbrother Laban's daughter, (which marriagewas permitted by Isaac, on account of hisobsequiousness to the desires of his wife,)and he accordingly journeyed through theland of Canaan; and because he hated thepeople of that country, he would not lodgewith any of them, but took up his lodging inthe open air, and laid his head on a heap ofstones that he had gathered together.t Hav­


of his younger son, Jacob; as Josephus supposes, II. 7.I certainly cannot say. If so, this might tempt Rebeka,to contrive, and Jacob to practise, this imposition uponhim. However, Josephus says here, that it was Isaac,and not Rebeka, who inquired of God at first, and re­ceived the forementioned oracle ; which, if it be the truereading, renders Isaac's procedure the more inexcusable.Nor was it probable that any thing else, so much encou­raged Esau formerly to marry two Canaanitish wives,without his parents' consent, as Isaac's unhappy fondnessfor him.
N. B. Upon this occasion it may be necessary to cau­tion the reader against a common prejudice of the moderns;
as if the bare relation of what we should esteem thefaults and blemishes of the patriarchs, and other verygood men in the scripture, implied a justification of them.The scripture affords us faithful accounts of the greatmen with whom it is concerned; and relates their vicesand follies as impartially as their good and wise actions;yet it does not always characterize those actions, but fre­quently leaves them to the readers own judgment andcensure; to their imitation of the good, and avoidance ofthe bad.
* Gen. xxvii. 46.
t Gen. xxviii. 11.







OCR Output








52 [book n. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


fore carefully dispose of the plentiful cropswhich will come m the former years, thouwilt procure that the future calamity will notbe felt by the Egyptians."
Hereupon the king wondered at the dis­cretion and wisdom of Joseph; and askedhim by what means he might so dispense theplentiful crops in the happy years, as to makethe miserable crops more tolerable: Josephthen added this advice; to spare the goodcrops, and not permit the Egyptians to spendthem luxuriously; but to reserve what theywould have spent in luxury beyond theirnecessity against the time of want. He alsoexhorted him to take the corn of the husband­men, and give them only so much as mightsuffice for their food. Accordingly Pharaoh,being surprised at Joseph, not only for hisinterpretation of the dream, but for the coun­sel he had given, entrusted him with dis­pensing the corn; with the power to do whathe thought would be for the benefit of the
Eeople of Egypt, and for the benefit of thejng: as believing that he who first discedvered this method of acting would prove thebest overseer of it. Joseph having this powergiven him by the king,* with leave to makeuse of his seal, and to wear purple,t drove inhis chariot through all the land of Egypt ;$and took the corn|| of the husbandmen, allot-


ting as much to every one as would be suffi­cient for seed and for food; but without d#-covering to any one the reason why he did so.
CHAP. VI.


OF THE ARRIVAL OP JOSEPH S BRETHREN IN EGYPT, ANDHIS CONDUCT TOWARDS THEM.
JOSEPH was now grown up to thirty yearsof age, and enjoyed great honours fromthe king; who called him Psothom Phanech,out of regard to his prodigious degree of wis­dom; for that name denotes a revealer ofsecrets. He also married a wife of very highquality: she was the daughter of Petephres,§one of the priests of Heliopolis, and her namewas Asenath. By her he had children beforethe scarcity came on, Manasseh, the elder,which signifies forgetful; because his presenthappiness made him forget his former misfor­tunes. And Ephraim, the younger, whichsignifies restored; because he was restoredto the freedom of his forefathers.
Now after Egypt had happily passed overseven years, according to Joseph's interpre­tation of the dreams, the famine came uponthem on the eighth year: and because thismisfortune fell upon them when they had nosense** of it before-hand, they were all sorelyafflicted by it, and came running to the king's


* Joseph had his name changed on this occasion. Itwas an ancient custom among eastern princes, upon theirpromotion of any favourite, to give him a new name. Nebu­chadnezzar, we read, "Dan. i. 7. imposed new names uponDanieJ, and his companions in Babylon; and to this veryday Mo<rul never advances a man, but he gives him a newname, and that significative of something belonging to him;but here the question is, what is the meaning of the namewhich Pharaoh gave Joseph? In the Hebrew text it isZaphnah paaneah, but in the Egyptian and Greek Penta­teuch it is Pson-thonphanech. The oriental versions,however, are pretty unanimous in rendering it, a revealerof secrets; but there are some reasons why this shouldnot be its true interpretation. For the time that Pharaohgave the patriarch this name, was when he advanced himfrom the condition of an imprisoned slave to that of a rulerthroughout all the land of Egypt! and therefore, it isreasonable to suppose that he gave it in commemorationof such promotion, rather than of his expounding dreams:because to have called him an interpreter of dreams only,had been degrading him to the level of magicians. Nowif Pharaoh gave him this name in memory of his promo­tion, it was very likely that this name was strictly andproperly Egyptian, (otherwise the common people couldnot have understood it,) though Moses, in his recording it,might endeayour to accommodate to the Hebrew idiom;and if it was Egyptian, the word in that language signifies
what we call a prime minister: or strictly the first, orprince of the lords. Biblintheca Bibl. occas.annot. 41. B.
t To be arrayed in a rich dress, and to ride in greatpomp and ceremony, were the ancient modes of investingwith the highest degree of subordinate power in Egypt;and with a small variation still remain so. The history ofthe revolt of Ali Bey, (p. 43.) informs us, that on theelection of a new sheik bellet, the pasha who approves ofhim invests him with a valuable fur, treats him with sher­bet, and when the sheik bellet departs, the pasha presentshim with a horse richly caparisoned.
Harmer, vol. iii. p. 308. B.
t Gen. xlv. 42—3.
I! That is, bought it for Pharaoh at a very low price.
§ This Potiphar, or as in Josephus, Petephres, whowas now a priest of On or Heliopolis, is the same name inJosephus, and perhaps in Moses also, with him who is be­fore called the Head Cook or Captain of the Guard; andto whom Joseph was sold. See Gen. xxxvii. 36. xxxix.1. with xli. 50. They are also affirmed to be one and thesame person in the Testament of Joseph, for he is theresaid to have married the daughter of his master and mis­tress. Nor is this a notion peculiar to that Testament;but as Dr. Bernard confesses, common to Josephus, to theSeptuagint interpreters; and toother learned Jews of oldtime.
** This intire ignorance of the Egyptians of these years







OCR Output








456 [book XIII. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


presently fled into that wilderness, which wasnearest to the city. And when they werecome to the lake called Asphar, they abodethere. But when Bacchides was sensiblethat they were in a low state, and were inthat place, he hastened to fall upon themwith all his forces: and pitching his campbeyond Jordan he recruited his army. Butwhen Jonathan knew that Bacchides wascoming upon him, he sent his brother John,who was also called Gaddis, to the NabateanArabs, that he might deposit his baggagewith them, until the battle with Bacchidesshould be over. For they were the Jews'friends. But the sons of Ambri laid an am­bush for John from the city Medaba, andseized upon him, and upon those that werewith him, and plundered all that they hadwith them. They also slew John and all hiscompanions. However they were sufficientlypunished for what they now did by John'sbrethren, as we shall relate presently.
When Bacchides knew that Jonathan hadpitched his camp among the lakes of Jordan,he observed when their sabbath day came,and then assaulted him: as supposing thathe would not fight, because of the law forresting on that day. But he exhorted hiscompanions to fight; and told them, thattheir lives were at stake, since they wereencompassed by the river, and by their ene­mies, and had no way to escape: for thattheir enemies pressed upon them before, andthe river was behind them. So after he hadprayed to God to give them the victory, hejoined battle with the enemy, and overthrewmany: and as he saw Bacchides coming upboldly to him, he stretched out his right handto smite him: but the other foreseeing andavoiding his stroke, Jonathan, with his com­panions, leaped into the river and swam overit; and by that means escaped beyond Jor­dan: while the enemy did not pass over thatriver: but Bacchides returned presently tothe citadel at Jerusalem; having lost abouttwo *thousand of his army. He also fortifiedmany cities of Judea, whose walls had beendemolished, Jericho, Emmaus, Bethoron,Bethel, Timna, Pharatho, Tecoa, and Gaza-ra; and built towers in every one of thesecities, and encompassed them with strong


walls, that were very large also: and putgarrisons into them, that they might issue outof them, and do mischief to the Jews. Healso fortified the citadel of Jerusalem morethan all the rest. Moreover he took the sonsof the principal Jews as pledges; and shutthem up in the citadel, and in that mannerguarded it.
About the same time one came to Jonathan,and to his brother Simon, and told them, thatthe sons of Ambri were celebrating a mar­riage, and bringing the bride, who was thedaughter of one of the illustrious men amongthe Arabians, from the city Gabatha; andthat the damsel was to be conducted withpomp, and splendour, and much riches. SoJonathan and Simon thinking this appearedto be the fittest time for them to avenge thedeath of their brother; and that they hadforces sufficient for receiving satisfaction fromthem for his death, they made haste to Me­daba; and lay in wait among the mountainsfor the coming of their enemies. And assoon as they saw them conducting the virgin,and her bridegroom, and such a great com­pany of their friends with them, as was to beexpected at this wedding, they sallied out oftheir ambush, and slew them all; and tooktheir ornaments, and all the prey that thenfollowed them; and so returned, and receivedthis satisfaction for their brother John fromthe sons of Ambri. For as well those sonsthemselves, as their friends, and wives, andchildren that followed them, perished; beingin number about four hundred.
Simon and Jonathan then returned to thelakes of the river, and abode there. ButBacchides, when he had secured all Judeawith his garrisons, returned to the king. Andthen it was that the affairs of Judea werequiet for two year9.t But when the desert­ers, and the wicked saw that Jonathan andthose that were with him lived in the countryvery quietly, by reason of the peace, theysent to king Demetrius; and excited him tosend Bacchides to seize upon Jonathan:which they said, was to be done without anytrouble, and in one night's time: and that ifthey fell upon them before they were aware,they might slay them all. So the king sentBacchides: who when he was come into Ju­


* One thousand, 1 Mace. ix. 43.
t An. 159, and 158, B. C.
X







OCR Output








aN. 486.] 397 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


years, six months, and ten days. But beforethose kings such rulers governed them aswere called judges and monarchs. Underthis form of government they continued formore than five hundred years, after thedeath of Moses and of Joshua their com­mander. And this is the account I had togive of the Jews who had been carried intocaptivity, but were delivered from it in thetimes of Cyrus and Darius.
*But the Samaritans being enviously dis­posed toward the Jews wrought them manymischiefs; by reliance on their riches, andby their pretence that they were allied to thePersians. And whatsoever it was that theywere enjoined to pay to the Jews, by theking's order, out of their tribute, for the sa­crifices, they would not pay it. They hadalso the governors favourable to them, andassisting them for that purpose. Nor did theyspare to hurt them, either by themselves, orby others, as far as they were able. So theJews determined to send an ambassage toking Darius, in favour of the people of Jeru­salem; and in order to accuse the Samaritans.The ambassadors were Zorobabel, and fourothers of the rulers. And as soon as the kingknew from the ambassadors the accusationsand complaints they brought against the Sa­maritans, he gave them an epistle to be car­ried to the governors and council of Samaria.The contents of the epistle were these:—
"King Darius to Tanganas, and Sambabas


governors of the Samaritans; to Sadraces andBobelo, and the rest of their fellow servantsthat are in Samaria: Zorobabel, Ananias,and Mordecai, the ambassadors of the Jews,complain of you, that you obstruct them inthe building of the temple, and do not supplythem with the expenses that I commandedyou to do, for the offering their sacrifices.My will is, therefore, that upon reading ofthis epistle, you supply them with whatsoeverthey want for their sacrifices; and that out ofthe royal treasury of the tributes of Samaria,as the priest shall desire; that they may notleave off offering their daily sacrifice, norpraying to God for me, and the Persians."
CHAP. V.
OF THE AFFAIRS OF THE JEWS UNDER XF.RXK.S, THE SON OVDARIUS; ALSO CONCERNING ESDRAS AND NEHEMIAH.
UPON the death of Darius,f the govern­ment devolved upon his son Xerxes,!who, as he inherited his father's kingdom,so did he inherit his piety toward God, andhonour of him. For he did all things agreea­bly to his father's will relating to divine wor­ship; and was exceeding friendly to the Jews.Now about this time|| a son of Jeshua, whosename was Joacim, was the high-priest. More­over there was now in Babylon a righteousman, and one that enjoyed a great reputationamong the multitude. He was the principalpriest of the people; and his name was Es­


* N. B. This part of the history is entirely wanting insill our other copies, both of Ezra and Esdras.
t The character which oar celebrated connector of theOld and New Testament has given us of this Darius is,—That he was a prince of great wisdom, clemency, andjustice, and has the honour to be recorded in holy writ,for a favourer of God's people, and a restorer of histemple at Jerusalem, and a promoter of his worshiptherein. For all this God was pleased to make him hisinstrument; and, with respect to this, I doubt not, it was,that he blessed him with a numerous issue, a long reign,and great prosperity. For, though he was not so veryfortunate in his wars against the Scythians and Grecians,yet every where else he had full success in all his under­takings, and not only restored and fully settled the empireof Cyrus, after it had been much shaken by Cambyses,and the Magian, but also added many large and rich pro­vinces to it, especially those of India, Thrace, Macedon,and the Isles of the Ionian sea. Pridcaitx't Connection,anno 486. B.
I % Darius had three sons by his first wife, the daugh­ter of Gobrias, all born before his advancement to thethrone, and four others by Atossa, the daughter of Cyrus,
who were all born after it. Of the former Artabasaneswas the eldest; of the latter Xerxes; and, as Darius ad­vanced in years, between these two was the competitionfor the succession. Artabasanes urged, that, as he wasthe eldest son, according to the custom and usage of allnations, he ought to be preferred before any that wasyounger. But Xerxes replied to this, That he was theson of Darius by Atossa, the daughter of Cyrus, who wasthe first founder of the Persian empire; for which reasonhe held it just and reasonable, that the crown of Cyrusshould rather come to a descendant of Cyrus, than to onethat was not; and to this he added, that though Artaba­sanes was the eldest son of Darius, yet he was not theeldest son of a king; that he was born when he was onlya private person, and could therefore claim no more thanto be heir of his private fortunes; but that as to himself,he was the first-born after his father was king, and hadtherefore the best right to succeed1 him m the kingdom.Whereupon he was nominated to the succession, but notso much for the strength of his plea, as for the influencewhich his mother Atossa had over the inclinations of herhusband. PridetLttx's Connection, anno 486. B.II An. 479.


3U2







OCR Output








AN.1532.J 99 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


so unexpectedly befel them; but Moses in-treated their brethren and their father not tobe troubled for them; to prefer their honourof God before their grief about them; forAaron had already put on his sacred garments.Moses refused all that honour which he sawthe multitude ready to bestow upon him, andattended to nothing but the service of God.He went no more up to mount Sinai; but hewent into the tabernacle, and brought backanswers from God to what he prayed for.His habit was also that of a private man; andin all other circumstances he behaved him­self like one of the common people, and wasdesirous to appear without distinguishinghimself from the multitude, but would haveit known that he did nothing but to take careof them. He also set down in writing theform of their government, and those laws, by


* These answers by the oracle of Urimand Thummim,which words signify light and perfection, or, astheLXXII.renders them, Aiikugis xai AXrjdsia, revelation and truth;and denote nothing faither, that I see, but the shiningstones themselves, which were used in this method of illu­mination, in revealing the will of God, after a perfect andtrue manner, to his people Israel: I say, these answerswere not made by the shining of the precious stones, afteran awkward manner, in the high-priest's breast-plate, asthe modern Rabbins vainly suppose, and as the learnedinterpret Philo and Josephus, but without any sufficientfoundation, so far as I see; for certainly the shining of thestones might precede or accompany the oracle, withoutitself delivering that oracle; see Antiq. VI. 6; but ratherby an audible voice from the mercy-seat, between thecherubim. See Prid. Connect, at the year 534, at large.This oracle had been silent, as Josephus here informs us,'200 years before he wrote his Antiquities, or ever sincethe days of John Hyrcanus, the last good high-priest of thefamily of the Maccabees. Now it is worth our observa­tion, that the oracle before us, was that by which God ap­peared to be present with, and gave directions to hispeople Israel, as their king, all the while they submittedto him in that capacity, and did not set over them such in­dependent kings as governed according to their own willsand political maxims, instead of divine directions; accord­ingly we met with this oracle, besides angelic, and pro­phetic admonitions all along, from the days of Moses andJoshua to the anointing of Saul, the first of the successionof kings. Numb, xxvii. 21, Judg. i. 1, xviii. 5, 6, xx. 18,23, 26, 27, 1 Sam. i. 14, iii. per tot. iv. per tot. Nay, tillSaul's rejection of the divine commands in the war withAmalek, when he took upon him to act as he thought fithimself, 1 Sam. xiv. 18, 19, 36, 37. Then this oracleleft Saul entirely, (which indeed he had seldom consultedbefore; see 1 Sam. xvi. 35, 1. Chron. xiii. 3, Joseph.Antiq. VII. 4,) and accompanied David, who was anointedto succeed him, and who consulted God by it frequently,and complied with its directions constantly. See 1 Sam.xxii. 13, 15, xxiii. 9, 10, xxx. 7, 8, 2 Sam. ii. l,v. 19,23,xxi. 1, 1 Chron, xiv. 10, 14, Joseph. Antiq. VI. 12, VII.
▼oi>- ',—no. 9.


obedience to which they would lead theirlives so as to please God, and so as to haveno quarrels one among another. However,the laws he ordained were such as God sug­gested to him; so I shall now discourse con­cerning that form of government and thoselaws.
I will now treat of what I before omitted,the garment of the high-priest: for Mosesleft no room for the evil practices of falseprophets; but, if some of that sort should at­tempt to abuse the Divine authority, he leftit to God to be present at his sacrifices whenhe pleased, and when he pleased to be ab­sent. And he was willing this should be knownnot to the Hebrews only, but to those foreign­ers also who were there. For as to thosesardonyxes* which the high-priest bare on hisshoulders, the one of them shined out when
4. Saul, indeed, long after his rejection by God, andwhen God had given him up to destruction for his disobe­dience, did once afterwards endeavour to consult Godwhen it was too late; but God would not then answer him,neither by dreams, nor by Urim, nor by prophets; 1Sam. xxvii. 6. Nor did any of David's successors, thekings of Judah, that we know of, consult God by this ora­cle till the Babylonish captivity, when those kings wereat an end, they taking upon them, I suppose, too much ofdespotic power and royalty, and too little owning the Godof Israel for the supreme King of Israel, though a few ofthem consulted the prophets sometimes, and were an­swered by them. At the return of the two tribes, with­out the return of the kingly government, the restorationof this oracle was expected: Neh. vii. 65, 1 Esd. v. 40,: 1 Mac. iv. 46, and indeed it may seem to have been re­stored for some time after the Babylonish captivity, atleast in the days of that excellent high-priest, John Hyr­canus, whom Josephus esteemed as a king, a priest, and aprophet, and who, he says, foretold several things thatcame to pass accordingly; but about the time of his death,he here implies, that this oracle quite ceased, and not be­fore, the following high-priests, now putting diadems ontheir heads, and ruling according to their own will, and bytheir own authority, like the other kings of the pagancountries about them, so that while the God of Israel wasallowed to be the supreme King of Israel, and his direc­tions to be their authentic guides, God gave them suchdirections as their supreme king and governor, and theywere properly under a theocracy, this oracle of Urim, butno longer; see Dr. Bernard's notes here; though I con­fess I cannot but esteem the high-priest Jaddus's divinedream, Antiq. XI. 8, and the high-priest Caiaphas's mostremarkable prophecy, John xi. 47—52, as two small re­mains, or specimens, of this ancient oracle, which properlybelonged to the Jewish priests; nor, perhaps, ought weentirely to forget that eminent prophetic dream of ourJosephus himself, (one next to the high-priest, as of thefamily of the Asmoneans or Maccabees, by his mother'sside, and by his father of the first of the twenty-fourclasses of the" priests,) as to the succession of Vespasian
Cc







OCR Output








562 [book xv. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


distress obliged them also out of necessity toeat many things that did not use to be eaten.Nor was the king himself free from any dis­tress any more than other men; as being de­prived of that tribute he used to have fromthe fruits of the grounds; and having alreadyexpended what money he had in his liberalityto those whose cities he had built. Nor hadhe any people that were worthy of his assist­ance since this miserable state of things hadprocured him the hatred of his subjects: forit is a constant rule that misfortunes are stilllaid to the account of those that govern.
In these circumstances he considered withhimself how to procure some seasonable help.But this was a hard thing to be done; whiletheir neighbours had no food to sell them,and their money also was gone; had it beenpossible to purchase a little food at a great
{H'ice. However he resolved not to leave offlis endeavours to assist his people. So hecut off the rich furniture that was in hispalace, both of silver and gold; insomuchthat he did not spare the finest vessels hehad; or those that were made with the mostelaborate skill of the artificers; but sent themoney to *Petronius, who had been madeprefect of Egypt by Caesar. And as not afew had already fled to him under their ne­cessities; and as he was particularly a friendto Herod, and desirous to have his subjectspreserved, he gave leave to them in the firstplace to export corn, and assisted them everyway, both in purchasing, and exporting thesame: so that he was the principal, if not theonly, person who afforded them what helpthey had. And Herod taking care the peopleshould understand, that this help came fromhimself, did hereby not only remove the illopinion of those that formerly hated him;but gave them the greatest possible demon­stration of his good will. For in the firstplace, as for those who were able to providetheir own food, he distributed to them theirportion of corn in the exactest manner: butfor those that were not able either by reasonof their old age, or any other infirmity, to pro-well as then, the relief they had was from Egypt also:then from Joseph, the governor of Egypt under Pharaohking of Egypt, and now from Petronius, the prefect ofEgypt, under Augustus the Roman emperor. See almostthe like case XX. 2 and 5. It also worth our observa­tion here, that these two years were a sabbatic year, anda yeai of Jubilee; for which Providence, during the


vide food for themselves, he made this pro­vision for them; that the bakers should maketheir bread ready for them. He also tookcare that they might not be hurt by the dan­gers of winter, since they were in great wantof clothing, by reason of the utter destructionof their sheep and goats, till they had no woolto make use of, nor any thing else to coverthemselves withal. And when he had pro­cured these things for his own subjects, hewent farther, in order to provide necessariesfor their neighbours; and gave seed to theSyrians; which thing turned greatly to hisown advantage also: this charitable assistancebeing afforded most seasonably to their fruit­ful soil: so that every one had now a plenti­ful provision of food. Upon the whole, whenthe harvest of the land was approaching hesent no fewer than fifty thousand men, whomhe had sustained, into the country. By whichmeans he both repaired the afflicted condi­tion of his own kingdom, with great genero­sity and diligence; and lightened the afflic­tions of his neighbours, who were under thesame calamities. For there was nobody whohad been in want that was left destitute of asuitable assistance by him. Nay farther,there were neither any people, cities, norprivate men, who were to make provision formultitudes, and on that account were in wantof support, and had recourse to him, but re­ceived what they stood in need of. Inso­much, that it appeared upon a computation,that the number of cori of wheat of ten Atticmedimni a piece, that were given to foreign­ers, amounted to ten thousand; and thenumber that were given in his own kingdomwas about eighty thousand. Now it happened,that this care and seasonable benefaction hadsuch influence on the Jews, and was so ex­tolled among other nations, as to wipe off thatold hatred which his violation of some oftheir customs, during his reign, had pro­cured him among all the nation, and that thisliberality of his assistance in this their greatnecessity was a full satisfaction for all that hehad done of that nature, as it also procured


theocracy, used to provide a triple crop beforehand: butbecame now, when the Jews had forfeited that blessing,the greatest years of famine to them ever since the daysof Ahab. 1 Kings xvii. xviii.
* This Petronius, the prefect of Egypt, under AugustusCaesar, is mentioned by Strabo, XVII. page 778, and byDio Cassius, LIV. page 524, as Spanheimhere informs us.







OCR Output








AN. 26.] 559 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


persons that were the most eminent in thesesorts of exercises were gotten together. Forthere were very great rewards for victoryproposed, not only to those that performedtheir exercises naked; but to those that per­formed as musicians also, and were calledThymelici. And he spared no pains to in­duce all persons, the most famous for suchexercises, to come to this contest for victory.He also proposed no small rewards to thosewho ran for the prizes in chariot races; whenthey were drawn by four, three, or two pairof horses. He also imitated every thing,though ever so costly, or magnificent, in othernations; out of an ambition that he mightgive the most public demonstrations of hisgrandeur. Inscriptions also of the great ac­tions of Caesar, and trophies of those nationswhich he had conquered in his wars, and allmade of the purest gold and silver, encom­passed the theatre. Nor was there any thingthat could be subservient to his design, whe­ther it were precious garments, or preciousstones set in order, which was not also ex­posed to sight in these games. He had alsomade a preparation of wild beasts, in greatabundance; and of such other animals aswere either of uncommon strength, or of sucha sort as were rarely seen. These wereprepared either to fight with one another; orthat men who were condemned to death wereto fight with them. And truly foreignerswere greatly surprised and delighted at thevastness of the expenses here exhibited; andat the great dangers that were here seen.But to natural Jews this was no better thana dissolution of those customs for which theyhad so great a veneration.* It appeared alsono better than an instance of barefaced im­piety, to throw men to wild beasts, for thepurpose of affording delight to the spectators.And it appeared an instance of no less im­piety to change their own laws, for suchforeign exercises. But, above all the rest, thetrophies gave most distaste to the Jews: foras they imagined them to be images, includedwithin the armour that hung round about
* These grand plays, and shews, and Thymelici, ormusic meetings; and chariot races, when the chariotswere drawn by four, three, or two pair of horses, &c.instituted by Herod in his theatres, were still, as we seehere, considered by the sober Jews as heathenish sports,and tending to corrupt the manners of the Jewish nation;


them, they were greatly displeased; becauseit was not the custom of their country to payhonour to such images.
Herod was perfectly acquainted with thedisturbance they were under: and as hethought it unseasonable to use violence, hespake to some of them by way of consolation,and in order to free them from that supersti­tious fear they were under. Yet could nothe satisfy them; but they cried out with oneaccord, out of their great uneasiness at theoffences they thought he had been guilty of,that although they should think of bearing allthe rest, yet would they never bear images ofmen in their city; meaning the trophies: be­cause this was disagreeable to the laws oftheir country. Now when Herod saw thatthey would not easily change their resolution,unless they received satisfaction in this point,he called to him the most eminent men amongthem, and brought them upon the theatre,and shewed them the trophies; and askedwhat sort of things they took these trophiesto be? And when they cried out, that theywere the images of men; he gave order thatthey should be stripped of the outward orna­ments which were about them, and shewedthem the naked pieces of wood: whichpieces of wood, now without any ornaments,became matter of great sport and laughterto them; because they had before alwayshad the ornaments of images themselves inderision.
When therefore Herod had thus dissipatedthe vehemency of passion under which themultitude had been; the greatest part of thepeople were disposed to change their con­duct, and not to be displeased at him anylonger. But still some 01 them retained theirdispleasure against him, for his introductionof new customs: and esteemed the violationof the laws of their country as likely to bethe origin of very great mischiefs. So thatthey deemed it an instance of piety rather tohazard themselves, to be put to death, thanto seem as if they took no notice of Herod;who, upon the change he had made in their
and to bring them into love with Paganish idolatry, andPaganish conduct of life; to the dissolution of the lawof Moses; and accordingly were severely condemnedby them; as appears here and every where else in Josephus.







OCR Output








324 [book re ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


the ships were destroyed, by being so greatand unwieldy; and, being thus disappointedof his profit, he was no longer concernedabout shipping. And this is the history ofJehoshaphat, the king of Jerusalem.
CHAP. II.


OF AHAZIAR KING OF ISRAEL; AND OF THE FURTHER ACTSOK THE PROPHET ELIJAH.


N


OW Ahaziah,* the son of Ahab, reignedover Israel, and made his abode in


Samaria. He was a wicked man, and, in allrespects, like to both his parents; and toJeroboam, who first of all transgressed, andbegan to deceive the people. In the secondyear of his reign the king of Moab revoltedfrom his obedience, and left off'paying thosetributes which he had before payed to Ahab.Now it happened that Ahaziah, as he wascoming down from the top of his house,f felldown from it, and in his sickness sent to theFly,J which was the god of Ekron;|| for thatwas this god's name, to inquire about his re­


Ophir and Tarshish; and the place whence it sailed is inthem Eziongeber, which lay on the Red Sea, whence itwas impossible for any ships to sail to Pontus or Thrace.So that Josephus's copy differed here from our othercopies. But so far may we conclude, that Josephusthought one Ophir to be somewhere in the Mediterranean,and not in the South Sea; though perhaps there might beanother Ophir in that South Sea also; and fleets mightthen sail both from Phoenicia and from the Red Sea tofetch the gold of Ophir, I mean all this, unless what ourcopies call Ophir, Josephus's temple copy called Pontus,as the word is here rendered by him. Which is perhapsthe real truth, and clears the whole difficulty.
* An. 899.
t In the eastern countries the roofs of the houses wereflat, and surrounded with a battlement to prevent fallingfrom them, because it was a customary thing for people towalk upon them, in order to take the air. Now, in thisbattlement, we may suppose that there were some woodenlattices for people to look through, of equal height withthe parapet wall, and that Ahaziah negligently leaning onit, as it was rotten and infirm, it broke down, and let himfall into the court or garden belonging to his house. Orthere is another way whereby he might fall. In theseflat roofs, there was generally an opening which servedinstead of a sky-light to the house below; and this openingmight be done over with lattice-work, which the king, ashe was carelessly walking, might chance to step upon,and slip through. Nor is there any absurdity in supposingsuch lattice-work in a king's palace, when the world wasnot arrived at that height of art and curiosity that we findit in now. Fool's Annotations, and Calmet's Dissertationsur les edifices des anciens Hebrew. B.
J The word signifies, The god of flies; but how thisidol came to obtain that name, it is not so easy a matter todiscover. Several are of opinion, that this god was calledBaal-semin, the lord of heaven, but that the Jews by wayof contempt, gave it the name of Baal-zebub, or the lordof a fly, a god that was nothing worth, or, as others say,whose temple was filled with flies; whereas the temple ofJerusalem, notwithstanding all the sacrifices that weredaily offered, never once had a fly in it, as their doctorsrelate. The sacred writings, indeed, when they speak ofthe gods of the Heathens, very frequently call them, ingeneral, idols, vanity, abominations, &c. but they neverchange their proper names into such as are of an oppro­brious import; neither can we think it likely, that theking of Israel would have called the god of Ekron, forwhom he had so high a veneration as to consult him in his•ickness, by any appellation of contempt. Whoever con-
siders what troublesome and destructive creatures, espe­cially in some hot countries, flies are known to be; inwhat vast swarms they sometimes settle, and not only de­vour all the fruits of the earth, but in many places occa­sioned a noisome pestilence; may reasonably suppose,that the Heathens had a proper deity to whom they paidtheir addresses, either for the prevention or removal oftheir sore plagues. And accordingly we are told by Pliny,(lib. xxix. c. 6.) that when there was a plague in Africa,occasioned by vast quantities of flies, after that the peoplehad sacrificed to the god Achore, (he should have said thegod of Ekron, for there is a plain affinity between theirnames,) the flies all died, and the distemper was extin­guished. Now, it was a known maxim of the Heathentheology, that as all plagues were inflicted by some evildaemon or other, so all evil daemons were under the re­straint of some superior one, who is their prince and ruler.As therefore Pluto was known to be the god of hell, andto have all the mischievous band of spirits under his con­trol, to him the Heathens used to pray, and offer sacri­fices, that he might not suffer any of his inferior agents toinflict this heavy judgment upon them. They worshippedhim, I say, not to engage him to do them any good, but toprevail with him to do them no harm; and accordingly wemay observe, that every thing in their service was darkand gloomy. Their offerings were in the night:
Turn Regi Stygio nocturnas inchoat aras.
Virg. JEd. 6.Their victims were black:
Hunc casta Sibylla
Nigrantum multo pecudum te sanguine ducet.
Ibid. jEn. 6.And the blood let out into a deep ditch:
Cultros in guttera velleris atri
Conjicit, et patulas perfundat sanguine fossas.
Ovid, Met. 1. 7.
Such good reason have we to think, that the Baal-zebub,in Scripture called the prince of the devils, was the verysame with the Pluto whom the Heathens made the god ofhell, and worshipped in this manner. Patrick's and heGere's Commentaries, and Jurieu Hist, des dogmes et cvltes,part iv. c. 3. &c. B.
II Ekron was a city and government of the Philistines,which fell by lotto the tribe of Judah, in the first divisionmade by Joshua, Josh. xv. 45. but was afterwards givenup to the tribe of Dan, Josh. xix. 43. though it does notappear from history that the Jews ever had a peaceable







OCR Output








200 [book VI. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


bewail their children; so shalt thou by thydeath cause thy mother to lament thee also.*Accordingly he gave orders to slay him im­mediately at Gilgal; and then went away tothe city Ramah.
CHAP. VIII.
OF THE APPOINTMENT OF DAVID TO THE REGAL AUTHORITY,BY THE DIVINE COMMAND, AND IN CONSEQUENCE OF SAUL'STRANSGRESSION.
SAUL being sensible of the miserable con­dition he had brought himself into, andthat he had made God to be his enemy, wentup to his royal palace at Gibeah, which namedenotes a hill; and after that day he came nomore into the presence of the prophet. Andwhen Samuel mourned for him, God badehim leave off his concern for him, and to takethe holy oil, and go to Bethlehem, to Jesse,the son of Obed, and to anoint such of hissons as he should shew him, for their futureking. But Samuel said, he was afraid lestSaul, when he came to know of it, should killhim, either by some private method, or evenopenly. But upon God's suggesting to him asafe way of going thither, he came to Beth­lehem. And when they all saluted him, andasked, what was the occasion of his coming?he told them, he came to sacrifice to God.When, therefore, he had prepared the sacri­fice, he called Jesse and his sons to partake.And when he saw his eldest son to be a talland handsome man, he guessed by his come­liness, that he was the person who was to betheir future king. But he was mistaken injudging about God's providence; for whenSamuel enquired of God, whether he shouldanoint this youth, whom he so much admired,and esteemed worthy of the kingdom? Godsaid, "Men do not see as God seeth. Thouindeed hast respect to the fine appearance of


this youth, and thence esteemed him worthyof the kingdom; while I propose the kingdomas a reward, not out of the beauty of bodies,but of the virtue of souls; and I enquire afterone that is perfectly comely in that respect;I mean one who is beautiful in piety, right­eousness, fortitude, and obedience; for inthem consists the comeliness of the soul."fWhen God had said this, Samuel desiredJesse to shew him all his sons. So he madefive others of his sons to come to him. Of allwhich, Eliab was the eldest, Aminidab thesecond, Shammah the third, Nathaniel thefourth, the fifth was called Rael, and the sixthAsam. And when the prophet saw that thesewere no way inferior to the eldest in theircountenances, he inquired of God, which ofthem it was whom he chose for their king?and when God said it was none of them, heasked Jesse, whether he had not some othersons besides these? and when he said thathe had one more, named David, but that hewas a shepherd, and took care of the flocks:Samuel bade them call him immediately; forthat till he was come they could not possiblysit down to the feast. Now as soon as hisfather had sent for David, and he was come,he appeared to be of a yellow complexion,of a sharp sight, and a comely person in otherrespecls also. "This is he," said Samuel tohimself, "whom it pleases God to make ourking." So he sat down to the feast; andplaced the youth under him; and Jesse also,with his other sons. After which he took oilin the presence of David, and anointedJ him;and whispered him in the ear, and acquaintedhim, that God chose him to be their king;and exhorted him to be righteous and obe­dient to his commands; for that by this meanshis kingdom would continue for a long time;and that his house should be of great splen­dour, and celebrated in the world; that he


* 1 Sam. xv. 33.
t 1 Sam. xvi. 7.
t Our translation says, that Samuel anointed him in themidst of his brethren, and for this it is pretended, that asthis unction was a solemn act, and the only title whichDavid had to the kingdom, it was necessary to have itdone in the presence of some witnesses, for which pur­pose none were more proper than those of his own family.But it is plain, from his brother Eliab's treating him afterthis, 1 Sam. xvii. 28. that he was not privy to his beinganointed king-elect over God's people; and thereforesince the words will equally bear the sense of from the
midst, as well as in the midst of his brethren, it is morereasonable to suppose, that as this was the ceremony ofhis designation to the kingdom only, few or none (excepthis father perhaps) were admitted to it. And there wasthe less reason for witnesses upon this occasion, becauseDavid never laid claim to the crown till after Saul's de­cease, and was then, at two several times, 1st, when hewas made king over the tribe of Judah, and 2d, whenmade king over all the tribes of Israel, anointed publicly.Calmet's and Patrick's Comment, and Howell's History, in(he notes. B.







OCR Output








330 [BOOK 15 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


^■i


w*m


on the strength of its walls. But Benhadadsupposed he should take the city, if not byhis engines of war, yet that he should over­come the Samaritans by famine and the wantof necessaries; and brought his army uponthem, and besieged the city. And the plentyof necessaries was brought so low with Jo-ram, that, from the extremity of want, anass's head was sold in Samaria for eightypieces of silver; and the Hebrews bought asextary of dove's dung, instead of salt, forfive pieces of silver. Now Joram was infear lest some persons should betray thecity to the enemy, by reason of the famine,and went every day round the walls and theguards, to see whether any such were con­cealed among them; and by being thus seen,and by taking such care he deprived themof the opportunity of contriving any suchthings. One day upon a certain woman'scrying out, "Have pity on me, my lord;"he thought that she was about to ask forsomewhat to eat; and imprecated God'scurse upon her, saying, he had neitherthreshing-floor, nor wine-press; whence hemight give her any thing at her petition.Upon which she said, she did not desire hisaid in any such thing; nor troubled himabout food: but desired that he would doher justice as to another woman. Andwhen he bade her let him know what shedesired, she said, she had made an agree­ment with another woman, who was herneighbour and her friend; that because thefamine was intolerable, they should kill theirchildren, each of them having a son of herown, and live upon them two days, the oneday upon one son, and the other day uponthe other: "And," said she, "I have killed*my son, the first day, and we lived upon himyesterday; but this other woman will not dothe same thing, but hath broken her agree­ment, and hath concealed her son." Thisstory affected the king so deeply that herent his garment and cried out with a loudvoice; and conceiving great wrath against


Elisha the prophet, he resolved to have himslain; because he did not pray to God toprovide them some way of escape out of themiseries with which they were surrounded.Accordingly a messenger was immediatelydespatched to kill the prophet: but Elishawas not unacquainted with the wrath of theking against him. For as he sat in his houseby himself, with none but his disciples abouthim, he told them, that Joram,f who was theson of a murderer, had sent one to take awayhis head. "But," said he, "when he that iscommanded to do this, comes, take care thatyou do not let him come in; but press thedoor against him, and hold him fast there: forthe king himself will follow him, and come tome, having altered his mind." Accordinglythey did as they were bidden, when he thatwas sent by the king to kill Elisha came.But Joram repented of his wrath against theprophet; and for fear he that was commandedto kill him should have done it before hecame, he made haste to hinder his slaughter.And when he came, he accused him that hedid not pray to God for his deliverance fromthe miseries the people now lay under, butsaw them so sadly destroyed by them. Here­upon Elisha promised, that the very nextday, at the very same hour in which the kingcame to him, they should have a great plentyof food; and that two Jseahs of barley shouldbe sold in the market for a shekel; and aseah|| of fine flour should be bought for ashekel. This prediction made Joram, andthose that were present, very joyful; for theydid not scruple believing what the prophetsaid, on account of the experience they hadof the truth of his former predictions. Andthe expectation of plenty made the wantthey were in that day, with the uneasinessthat accompanied it, appear a light thing tothem. But the captain of the third band,who was a friend of the king's, and on whosehand the king leaned, said, "Thou talkestof incredible things, O prophet! for as it isimpossible for God to pour down torrents of


* This was threatened as a punishment for disobedience,in Levit. xxvi. 29. and Deut. xxvii. 53, 57.
t This son of a murderer was Joram, the son of Ahab,which Ahab slew, or permitted his wife Jezebel to slaythe Lord's prophets, and Naboth, 1 Kings xviii. 4. xxi.19. and he is here called by this name, 1 suppose, be­cause he had now also himself sent an officer to murder
him. Yet is Josephus's account of Joram's coming tohimself at List, as repenting of his intended cruelty,much more probable than that in our copies, 2 Kings vi.33. which rather implies the contrary. See the placewhich seems to be imperfect in those copies.
J About a peck.
D Half a peck.







OCR Output








AN. 140.] 475 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


count of Trypho; Cleopatra sent to him, andinvited him to marry her, and to take thekingdom. The reasons why she made thisinvitation, were, that her friends persuadedher to it; and that she was afraid for herself,in case some of the people of Seleucia shoulddeliver up the city to Trypho.
As Antiochus was now come to Seleucia,and his forces increased every day, hemarched to fight Trypho; and having de­feated him, he ejected him out of the UpperSyria into Phoenicia; and pursued him thi­ther, and besieged him in Dora; which wasa fortress hard to be taken, whither he hadfled. He also sent ambassadors to Simon,the Jewish high-priest, about a league offriendship and mutual assistance. Who rea­dily accepted of the invitation; and sent toAntiochus great suras of money; and pro­visions, for those that besieged Dora; andthereby supplied them very plentifully. Sothat for a little while he was looked upon asone of his most intimate friends. But stillTrypho fled from Dora to *Apamia; wherehe was taken during the siege, and put todeath; when he had reigned fthree years.
However, Antiochus forgot the kind assist­ance that Simon had afforded him in his ne­cessity; by reason of his covetous and wickeddisposition; and committed an army of sol­diers to his friend Cendebeus; and sent himat once to ravage Judea, and to sieze Simon.When Simon heard of Antiochus's breakinghis league with him, although he were nowin years, yet, provoked with the unjust treat­ment he had met with from Antiochus, andtaking a resolution brisker than his age couldwell bear, he went like a young man to actas general of his army. He also sent hissons before, among the most hardy of hissoldiers; and he himself marched on withhis army another way; and laid many of hismen in ambushes, in the narrow valleys, be­tween the mountains. Nor did he fail of suc­cess in any one of his attempts; but was toohard for his enemies in every one of them.


So he led the rest of his life in peace; andalso made a league with the Romans.
Now he was the ruler of the Jews in allJcight years: but his death was at lengthcaused at a banquet by the treachery of hisson-in-law, Ptolemy; who caught also hiswife and two of his sons, and kept them inbonds. He also sent some to kill John, thethird son; whose name was Hyrcanus. Butthe young man, perceiving them coming,||avoided the danger he was in, and hastenedinto the city Jerusalem; as relying on thegood will of the multitude; because of thebenefits they had received from his father,and because of the hatred the same multitudebore to Ptolemy. So that when Ptolemy wasendeavouring to enter the city by anothergate, they drove him away; as having alreadyadmitted Hyrcanus.
CHAP. VIII.
HYRCANUS RECEIVES THE HIGH-PRIESTHOOD, AND EJECTSPTOLEMY OUT OF THE COUNTRY. ANTIOCHUS MAKESWAR AGAINST HYRCANUS, AND AFTERWARD MAKES ALEAGUE WITH HIM.
PTOLEMY§ retired to one of the for­tresses that was above Jericho, whichwas called Dagon. But Hyrcanus took thehigh-priesthood, that had been his father'sbefore, and propitiated God by sacrifices; hethen made an expedition against Ptolemy;and when he made his attacks upon theplace, in other points he was too hard forhim; but was rendered weaker than he bythe commiseration he had for his motherand brethren; and by that only. For Ptolemybrought them upon the wall, and tormentedthem in the sight of all, and threatened thathe would throw them down headlong, unlessHyrcanus would raise the siege. And as hethought that so far as he relaxed as to thesiege and taking of the place, so much favourdid he shew to those that were dearest tohim, by preventing their misery; his zealabout it was cooled. However, his mother


* Orthosia, 1 Mace. xv. 37.
t An. 142, 141, 140, B. C.
J From an. 143 to an. 135 B. C.
II Here Josephus begins to follow, and to abridge thenext sacred Hebrew book, styled in the end of the firstbook of Maccabees, The Chronicles of John Hyrcanus'sHigh-Priesthood; but in some of the Greek copies thefourth book of Maccabees. A Greek version of this chro-
voL. I.—xos. 39 & 40.
nicle was extant in the days of Santes Pagninus, andSixtus Senensis, at Lyons; though it seems to have beenthere burnt, and to be now utterly lost. See Sixtus Se-nensis's account of it, of its many Hebraisms, and its greatagreement with Josephus's abridgment; in the AuthenticRecords, part I. page 206, 207, 208.§ An. 136.
1G







OCR Output








184 [book vr. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS


had approached to it. Those of that villagewept lor these that thus suffered, and madesuch lamentation as was naturally to be ex­pected of so great a misfortune that was sentfrom God; and every one mourned for hisown relation. And since they acknowledgedthemselves unworthy of the ark's abode withthem, they sent to the public senate of theIsraelites, and informed them that the arkwas restored by the Philistines. Which whenthey knew, they brought it away to Kirjath-jearim, a city in the neighbourhood of Beth-shemesh. In this city lived one Abinadab,by birth a Levite, and who was greatly com­mended for his righteous and religious courseof life; so they brought the ark to his house,as to a place fit for God himself to abide in,since therein did inhabit a righteous man.His sons also ministered to the Divine serviceat the ark, and were the principal curatorsof it for* twenty years; for so long it con­tinued in Kirjathjearim; having been butffour months with the Philistines.


CHAP. II.
OF THE EXPEDITION OF THE PHILISTINES AGAINST THE HE­BREWS, AND THE HEBREWS' VICTORY, UNDER THE CON­DUCT OF SAMUEL THE TROPHET, WHO WAS THEIR GENE­RAL.
WHILE the city of Kirjathjearim hadthe ark with them, the whole body ofthe people betook themselves all at that timeto offer prayers and sacrifices to God, and ap­peared greatly concerned and zealous abouthis worship. So Samuel the prophet thoughtit a proper time to speak to them, while they


were in this good disposition, about the re­covery of their liberty, and of the blessingsthat accompanied the same. Accordingly heused such words to them, as he thought weremost likely to excite that inclination, and topersuade them to attempt it:J "O ye Israel­ites," said he, "to whom the Philistines arestill grievous enemies, but to whom God be­gins to be gracious: it behoves you not onlyto be desirous of liberty, but to take theproper methods to obtain it. Nor are you tobe contented with an inclination to get clearof your lords and masters, while you still dowhat will procure your continuance underthem. Be righteous then, and cast wicked­ness out of your souls, and by your worshipsupplicate the Divine Majesty with all yourhearts, and persevere in the honour you payto him. For if you act thus, you will enjoyprosperity, you will be freed from yourslavery, and will get the victory over yourenemies; which blessing cannot possibly beattained either by weapons of war, by thestrength of your bodies, or by the multitudeof your assistance; for God has not promisedto grant these blessings by those means; butby being good and righteous men. And ifyou will be such, I will be security to you forthe performance of God's promises." WhenSamuel had thus said, the multitude ap­plauded his discourse, and gave their consentto resign themselves up to do what waspleasing to God. So Samuel gathered themtogether, to a certain city called Mizpeh;||which signifies, in the Hebrew tongue, awatch tower. There they drew water, andpoured it out to God,§ and fasted all day,and betook themselves to their prayers.


* From an. 1148 to 1128.
Seven months, in the Hebrew and Septuagint.
An. 1128.
The Mizpeh here mentioned, as appears from thecircumstance of the story, must be different from thatwhich is remarked in the history of Jephtha: There isindeed another Mizpeh mentioned among the cities ofJudah, Josh. xv. 38. and a third, among those of Ben­jamin, Josh, xviii. 26. Some are of opinion, that thesetwo cities are one and the same, and are only supposed tobe two, because they lie in the confines of each tribe ; butif they are not the same, it seems most probable, that theMizpeh in the tribe of Benjamin was the city which is herespoken of. And we may observe farther, that as Mizpehis said to be situated not far from Eben-ezer, and probablyon the east or north side: so Shen (if it be the name of aplace, and not rather on some sharp rock thereabouts)was situated not far from it on the opposite, i. e. on the
west or south-west side, to which Bethcar must needs becontiguous. WelWsGeog. of the Old Test. vol. iii. c. 1. B.§ The words in our translation run thus :—And theygathered to Mizpeh, and drew water, and poured it outbefore the Lord, 1 Sam. vii. 6. but what we are to under­stand by this water, the conjectures of commentators havebeen various. Some take these words in a metaphoricalsense, to denote those tears of contrition, which weredrawn, as it were, from the bottom of their hearts, and fellfrom their eyes before the Lord. Others think, that withthis water they washed their bodies, as they are supposedto have done upon another occasion, Exod. xix. 20. tosignify the purification of their souls from the pollution ofsin. Others that they made use of it to cleanse the groundwhere Samuel was to erect an altar, that it might not standupon an impure place. Some suppose that it was em­ployed as an emblem of humiliation, of prayer, of expia­tion, of execration, and I know not what besides. But the







OCR Output








310 [book VIII. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


brought it to him every day. But when thatriver was dried up, for want of rain, he cameto Zarepbath, a city between Sidon andTyre; and this at the command of God. ForGod told him that he should there find awoman who was a widow, that should givehim sustenance. So when he was not far offthe city, he saw a woman gathering of sticks.So God informed him that this was the personwho was to give him sustenance; so he cameand saluted her, and desired her to bring himsome water to drink. But as she was goingso to do, he called to her, and asked her tobring him a loaf of bread also. She affirmedupon oath, that she had at home nothing morethan one handful of meal, and a little oil;and that she was going to gather some sticksthat she might knead it, and make bread forherself and her son; after which she said,they must perish by the famine, for they hadnothing for themselves any longer. Here­upon, ne said, "Go on with good courage,and hope for better things: but first of allmake me a little cake and bring it to me;for I foretell to thee, that this vessel of meal,and this cruse of oil, shall not fail, until Godsend rain." When the prophet had said this,she came to him, and made the cakes; ofwhich she had part for herself, and gave therest to her son, and to the prophet also. Nordid any thing of this fail, until the droughtceased.* Now Menander mentions thisdrought, in his account of the acts of Eth-baal, king of the Tyrians: where he says,"Under him there was a want of rain fromthe month Hype rbe re toe us, till the monthHyperberetoeue of the year following. But


when he made supplications, there camegreat thunders. This Ethbaal built the cilyBotrys in Phoenicia, and the city Auza inLybia." By these words he designed thiswant of rain that was in the days of Ahab;for at that time it was that Ethbaal alsoreigned over the Tyrians, as Menanderwrote.
Now the son of this woman, who sustainedthe prophet, fell into a distemper, till hegave up the ghost, and appeared to be dead.fThe mother, therefore came to the prophet,weeping and beating her breast, and utteringsuch expressions as her passions dictated toher, and complained to him, that he hadcome to reproach her for her sins, and thaton this account it was that her son was dead.But he bade her be of good cheer, and de­liver her son to him; for that he would re­store him again to her alive. So when shehad delivered her son up to him, he carriedhim into an upper room, where he himselflodged, and laid him down upon the bed;and cried unto God, and said that God hadnot done so well in rewarding the womanwho had sustained him, by taking away herson; and he prayed that he would send againthe soul of the child into him, and bring himto life again. Accordingly God took pity onthe mother, and was willing to gratify theprophet; that he might not seem to havecome to her to do her a mischief; and thechild, beyond all expectation, came to lifeagain. So the mother returned the prophetthanks, and said, she was then clearly satis­fied that God did converse with him.J
IJAfter a little§ while Elijah came to king


* The woman had sufficient reason to believe thatElijah was a prophet, or person sent from God, when shesaw the miraculous increase of the meal and oil; but uponhis not curing her son when he lay sick, but rather suf­fering him to die, her faith began to droop; whereas, uponseeing him revive, her faith revived with him; andthrough the joy of having him restored to her again, sheaccounted this latter miracle much greater than the former.Le Gere's Commentary. B.
t Some of the Hebrew doctors (and herein they arefollowed by some Christians) are of opinion, that thiswidow's son was the prophet Jonas; that after his resto­ration, his mother gave him to Elijah; that after he at­tended on the prophet, as long as he lived; and on a cer­tain occasion was despatched by him to Nineveh, as everyone knows. Bat besides that these traditions are desti­tute of any real proof, Jonah was a Hebrew, as he him­self de.;hres, chap. i. 9. and a native of Gath-hepher, aswe read, 2 Kings xiv. 25. whereat the widow's son was a
native of Zarephtha, a town belonging to the kingdom ofSidon, and by birth a stranger to the race of Israel. Cal­mef s Commentary. B.
t See 1 Kings xvii. 17—24.
II Josephus, in his present copies, says, that a littlewhile after the recovery of the widow's son at Sarepta,God sent rain upon the earth; whereas, in our othercopies, it is after many days, 1 Kings xviii. 1. Severalyears are also intimated there, as belonging to this droughtand famine. Nay we have the express mention of the thirdyear; which I suppose was reckoned from the recoveryof the widow's son, and the ceasing of this drought inPhoenicia, which, as Menander informs us here, laste ' onewhole year. And both our Saviour and St. James affirm,that this drought lasted in all three years and six months,as their copies of the Old Testament then informed them.Luke iv. 25. James v. 17. I suspect, therefore, that Jo-sephus's original reading was, No small time afterward.
§ About an. 907.







OCR Output








366 [book X. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


excepting Judea. But when Nebuchadnez­zar had already reigned four years, whichwas the eighth of Jehoiakim's governmentover the Hebrews, the king of Babylon madean expedition with mighty forces against theJews, and required tribute of Jehoiakim;threatening upon his refusal to make waragainst him. He was affrighted at his threat­ening, and bought his peace with money;and brought the tribute he was ordered tobring for three years.
But on the third year, upon hearing thatthe king of Babylon made an expeditionagainst the Egyptians, he did not pay histribute; yet was he disappointed of his hope,for the Egyptians durst not fight at this time.And indeed the prophet Jeremiah foretoldevery day how vainly they relied on theirhopes from Egypt; and how the city wouldfoe overthrown by the king of Babylon,* andJehoiakim the king would be subdued byhim. But what he thus spoke, proved to beof no advantage to them, because there werenone that should escape. For both the mul­titude, and the rulers when they heard him,had no concern about what they heard: butbeing displeased at what was said, as if theprophet were a diviner against the kings,they accused Jeremiah; and bringing himbefore the court, they required that a sen­tence of punishment might be given againsthim. Now all the rest gave their votesfor his condemnation; but the elders pru­dently sent away the prophet from the courtof the prison, and persuaded the rest to dohim no harm. For they said he was not theonly person who foretold what would cometo the city, but that Micah signified the samebefore him, as well as many others; none ofwhom suffered any thing of the kings thatthen reigned, but were honoured as the pro­phets of God. So they appeased the multi­tude with these words, and delivered Jere-


miah from the punishment to which he wascondemned.f Now when this prophet hadwritten all his prophecies, and the peoplewere fasting, and assembled at the temple, onthe ninth month of the fifth year of Jehoiakim,he read the book he composed, containinghis predictions of what was to befall the city,the temple, and the multitude. And whenthe rulers heard of it, they took the bookfrom him, and bade him and Barucb thescribe to go their ways, lest they should bediscovered by one or the other. They thencarried the book to the king, who gave orderin the presence of his friends, that his scribeshould read it: but when he heard what itcontained, he was angry, and tore it, and castit into the fire, where it was consumed. Healso commanded they should seek for Jere­miah, and Baruch the scribe, and bring themto him that they might be punished. How­ever, they escaped his anger.
A little time afterward, the king of Baby­lon made an expedition against Jehoiakim;who received him into the city; and this outof fear of the foregoing predictions of Jere­miah, as supposing he should suffer nothingthat was terrible; because he neither shutthe gates, nor fought against him. Yet whenhe was come into the city, he did not observethe covenants he had made; but he slewsuch as were in the flower of their age, andsuch as were of the greatest dignity; togetherwith their king Jehoiakim, whom he com­manded to be thrown before the walls, with­out any burial, and made his son Jehoiachirjking of the country, and of the city; he alsotook the principal persons in dignity for cap­tives, three thousand in number, and ledthem away to Babylon. Among whom wasthe prophet Ezekiel, who was then but young.And this was the end of king Jehoiakim,when he had lived thirty-six years, and
reigned eleven.J But he was succeeded in
—.—. . —- . -—


* The prophet's words upon this occasion, are these:Because ye have obeyed the commandments of Jona-dab, your father, and kept all his precepts, and done ac­cording to all that he hath commanded you; thus saiththe Lord of hosts, the God of Israel, Jonadab, the sonof Rechab, shall not want a man to stand before me forever, Jer. xxxv. 18, 19. To stand before a prince, or to■ee his face, in Scripture-phrase, denotes the honourwhich accrues from being in his service, but the Recha-bites were neither priests nor Levites. Hitherto theyhad lived in the fields, separate from towns and villages,
and were averse indeed to any employment either inchurch or state; but from the time of their captivity,(for they were carried along with the two tribes,) we-hnd them employed as singers and porters in the serviceof the temple. To serve in this capacity, there was nonecessity for their being of the tribe of Levi; the decla­ration of the divine will by the mouth of the prophetJeremiah, was in this case a sufficient vocation. Colmei'sCommentary on Jer. xxv. 19. B.
t Jeremiah xxvi. 8—24.
j From an. 610 to an. 599.







OCR Output








AN. 1800.] 3? ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


 


ing fallen asleep, he dreamed that he saw aladder which reached from the earth untoheaven, and persons descending down theladder that seemed more excellent thanhuman; and at last God himself stood aboveit, and calling him by his name, said, " OJacob, it is not fit for thee, who art the son ofa good father, and grandson to one who hadobtained a great reputation for his eminentvirtue, to be dejected at thy present circum­stances, but to hope for better times. Forthou shalt have great abundance of all goodthings, by my assistance. For I brought Abra­ham hither, out of Mesopotamia, when hewas driven away by his kinsmen; and I madethy father a happy man. Nor will I bestowan inferior degree of happiness on thyself.Be of good courage, therefore; and undermy conduct, proceed on thy journey; for the


marriage thou goest so zealously about shallbe consummated. And thou shalt have chil­dren of good characters; whose multitude shallbe innumerable. And they shall leave whatthey have to a still more numerous posterity;to whom, and to whose posterity, I give thedominion of all the land, and their posterityshall fill the earth, so far as the sun beholdsthem. But do not thou fear any danger, norbe afraid of the many labours thou mustundergo, for by my providence I will directthee what thou art to do in the time present,and still more in the time to come."
Such were the predictions which God madeto Jacob. Whereupon he became very joy­ful at what he had seen and heard; and hepoured oil upon the stones,* because on themthe prediction of such great benefits wasmade. He also vowed a vow that he would


* One of the idols in the Pagoda of Jaggernaut is de­scribed, by Captain Hamilton, as a huge black stone, of apy ramidical form, and the Saj/imona Codom of the Siameseis of the same complexion. The Ayeen Akbery mentions anoctagonal pillar of black stone fifty cubits high. Tavernierobserved an idol of black stone in the Pagoda of Benares,and that the statue of Chreeshna, in his celebrated tem­ple of Mathura, is of black marble. It is very remarkable,that one of the principal ceremonies incumbent upon thepriests of these stone deities, according to Tavernier, is toanoint them daily with odoriferous oils: a circumstancewhich immediately brings to our remembrance the similarpractice of Jacob, who, after the famous vision of the ce­lestial ladder, took the stone which he had put for his pillow,and set it up for a pillar, and poured oil upon the top of it.It is added, that he called the name of that place, Bethel;that is, the house of God. This passage evinces of howgreat antiquity is the custom of considering stones in asacred light, as well as the anointing them with consecratedoil. From this conduct of Jacob, and this Hebrew appel­lative, the learned Bochart, with great ingenuity andreason, insists that the name and veneration of the sacredstones, called Baetyti, so celebrated in all pagan antiquity,were derived. These Baetyti were stones of a roundform; they were supposed to be animated by means ofmagical incantations, with a portion of the Deity; theywere consulted on occasions of great and pressing emer­gency, as a kind of divine oracles, and were suspended,either round the neck, or some other part of the body.Thus the setting up of a stone by this holy person, ingrateful memory of the celestial vision, probably becamethe occasion of the idolatry in succeeding ages, to theseshapeless masses of unhewn stone, of which so manyastonishing remains are scattered up and down the Asiaticand the European world. Maurice's Indian Antiquities,vol. ii. p. 355.
Jacob calls the pillar which he had set up, God's house.It appears strange to as to hear a stone pillar called God'shouse, being accustomed to give names of this kind to suchbuildings only as are capable of containing their worship­pers within them. But this is not the case in every part
of the world, as we learn from Major Symes's narrative ofhis Embassy to the kingdom of Ava. The temples of thatpeople, vast as many of them are, are built without cavityof any sort, and he only mentions some of the most ancientof those at Pagahm as constructed otherwise. The fol­lowing extract will sufficiently illustrate this matter:
"The object in Pegu that moat attracts, and mostmerits notice, is the noble edifice of Slwemadoo, or thegolden supreme. This is a pyramidical building, composedof brick and mortar, without excavation or aperture ofany sort: octagonal at the base, and spiral at the top.Each side of the base measures one hundred and sixty-two feet. The extreme height of the edifice, from thelevel of the country, is three hundred and sixty-one feet,and above the interior terrace three hundred and thirty-one feet. Along the whole extent of the northern face ofthe upper terrace there is a wooden shed for the con­venience of devotees, who come from a distant part of thecountry. There are several low benches near the foot ofthe temple, on which the person, who comes to pray,places his offering, commonly consisting of boiled rice, aplate of sweetmeats, or cocoa-nuts fried in oil; when it isgiven, the devotee cares not what becomes of it; thecrows and wild dogs often devour it in the presence of thedonor, who never attempts to disturb the animals. I sawseveral plates of victuals disposed of in this manner, andunderstood it was the case with all that was brought.
"The temple of Shoedagan, about two miles and a halfnorth of Rangoon, is a very grand building, although not sohigh, by twenty-five or thirty feet, as that of Shoemadoo,at Pegu. The terrace on which it stands is raised on arocky eminence, considerably higher than the circumjacentcountry, and is ascended by above a hundred stone steps,The name of this temple, which signifies Golden Dagon,naturally recalls to mind the passage in the scriptures,where the house of Dagon is mentioned, and the image ofidolatry bows down before the Holy Ark."
"Many of the most ancient temples at Pagahm are notsolid at the bottom: a well arched dome supports a pon­derous superstructure; and, within, an image of Gaudona■its enshrined." B.


 







OCR Output








i







OCR Output








AW.-31.J 547 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS


had happened. So he made a consolatoryspeech to the multitude, in the followingmanner.
"You are not ignorant, my fellow-soldiers,that we have recently sustained many acci­dents, that we have put a stop to what we areabout; and it is probable, that even thosethat are most distinguished for their courage,can hardly keep up their spirits in such cir­cumstances. But since we cannot avoidfighting; and nothing that hath happened isof such a nature, but it may by yourselves berecovered into a good state, and this by onebrave action well performed; I have pro­posed to myself, both to give you some en­couragement, and, at the same time, someinformation. Both which parts of my de­sign will tend to this point, that you may stillcontinue in your own proper fortitude. I willthen in the first place demonstrate to you,that this war is a just one on our side; andthat on this account it is a war of necessity,and occasioned by the injustice of our adver­saries. For if you be once satisfied of this,it will be a real cause of alacrity to you.After which I will farther demonstrate, thatthe misfortunes we are under are of no greatconsequence; and that we have the greatestreason to hope for victory. I shall begin withthe first, and appeal to yourselves as witnessesof what I shall say. You are not ignorant ofthe wickedness of the Arabians; which is tothat degree as to appear incredible to allother men; and to include somewhat thatshews the grossest barbarity and ignoranceof God. The chief things wherein they haveaffronted us, have arisen from covetousness,and envy: and they have attacked us in aninsidious manner, and on the sudden. Andwhat occasion is there for me to mention manyinstances of such their procedure? Whenthey were in danger of losing their own go­vernment, and of being slaves to Cleopatra,what others were they that freed them fromthat fear? For it was the friendship I hadwith Antony, and the kind disposition he wasin towards us, that hath been the occasion,that even these Arabians have not beenutterly undone; Antony being unwilling toundertake any thing which might be sus-


peeled by us of unkindness. But when hehad a mind to bestow some parts of each ofour dominions on Cleopatra, I also managedthat matter so, that by giving him presents ofmy own, I might obtain a security to bothnations: while I undertook myself to answerfor the money; giving him two hundredtalents, and becoming surety for those twohundred more which were imposed upon theland that was subject to this tribute. Andthis they have defrauded us of; although itwas not reasonable that Jews should pay tri­bute to any man living; or allow part of theirland to be taxable. But although that wasto be, yet ought we not to pay tribute forthese Arabians, whom we have ourselvespreserved. Nor is it fit that they, who haveacknowledged, with great integrity and senseof our kindness, that it is by our means theykeep their principality, should injure us, anddeprive us of what is our due; and this whilewe have remained their friends. And whereasthe observance of covenants takes placeamong the bitterest enemies, but amongfriends is absolutely necessary, this is notobserved among these men; who think gainto be the best of all things, let it be by anymeans whatsoever; and that injustice is noharm, if they may but get money by it. It is,therefore, a question with you, whether theunjust are to be punished or not? when Godhimself hath declared his mind that so itought to be; and hath commanded that weshould abhor injuries and injustice. This isnot only just but necessary, in wars betweenseveral nations. For these Arabians havedone what both the Greeks and Barbariansown to be an instance of the grossest wick­edness, with regard to our ambassadors;whom they have beheaded. While theGreeks declare that such ambassadors are*sacred and inviolable. And for ourselves,we have learned from God the most excellentof our doctrines, and the most holy part ofour law, by angels, or ambassadors. Forthis name brings God to the knowledge ofmankind; and is sufficient to reconcile ene­mies one to another. What wickedness thencan be greater than the slaughter of ambas­sadors, who come to treat about doing what


* Herod says here, that as ambassadors were sacred,when they carried messages to others; so did the laws ofthe Jews derive a sacred authority by being delivered
voL. I.—NOS. 45 & 46.
from God by angels, or divine ambassadors, which is St.Paul's expression, about the same laws. Gal. iii. 19.Heb. ii. 2.
4 Q







OCR Output








an. 906.] 311 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


Ahab, according to God's will, to inform himthat rain was coming. Now the famine hadseized upon the whole country; and therewas a great want of what was necessary forsustenance; insomuch that it was not onlymen that wanted it, but the earth itself also;which did not produce enough for the horses,and the other beasts, of what was useful forthem to feed on, by reason of the drought.So the king called for Obadiah,* who wassteward over his cattle, and said to him, thathe would have him go to the fountains ofwater, and to the brooks; that if any her­bage could be found for them he might mowit down, and reserve it for the beasts. Andwhen he had sent persons all over the thabi-table earth to discover the prophet Elijah,and they could not find him, he bade Oba­diah accompany him. So it was resolvedthey should make a progress, and dividethe ways between them; and Obadiah andthe king went the one way, and the otheranother. Now it had happened, that at thesame time when Queen Jezebel slew theprophets, that this Obadiah had concealed ahundred prophets, and had fed them withbread and water.J But when Obadiah wasalone, and absent from the king, the prophetElijah met him, and asked him who he was?And when he had learned it from him, heworshipped him. Elijah then bade him goto the king, and tell him, that he was readyto wait on him. But Obadiah replied, "Whatevil have I done to thee, that thou sendestme to one who seeketh to kill thee; and hathsought over all the earth for thee? Or artthou so ignorant as not to know, that theking hath left no place untouched, into whichhe hath not sent persons to bring thee back,in order if they could take thee, to have putthee to death?" He also acknowledged hewas afraid lest God should appear to himagain, and he should go away into another


place; and that when the king should sendhim for Elijah, and he should not be able tofind him, he should be put to death. He de­sired him, therefore, to take care of his pre­servation, and told him how diligently hehad provided for those of his own profession,and had saved a hundred prophets, whenJezebel slew the rest of them, and had keptthem concealed; and that they had beensustained by him. But Elijah bade him fearnothing, but go to the king, assuring him uponoath, that he would certainly shew himselfto Ahab that very day.
So when Obadiah had informed the kingthat Elijah was there, Ahab met him, andasked him in anger, "Tf he were the man thatafflicted the people of the Hebrews, and wasthe occasion of the drought that they layunder?" but Elijah, without any flattery,said, that Ahab was himself the man, and hishouse, which brought such sad afflictionsupon them; and that by introducing strangegods into their country, and worshippingthem; and by leaving their own, who was theonly true God; and naving no manner of re­gard to him. However, he bade him go hisway, and gather together all the people toMount Carmel, with his own prophets andthose of his wife; telling him how many therewere of them; as also the prophets of thegroves, about four hundred in number. Andas all the men whom Ahab sent for ran awayto the aforenamed mountain, the prophetElijah stood in the midst of them, and said:"How long will ye live thus in uncertainty ofmind and opinion?" he also exhorted them,that in case they esteemed their own God tobe the true and the only Deity, they wouldfollow him and his commandments; but incase they esteemed him to be nothing, buthad an opinion of the strange gods, and thatthey ought to worship them, his counsel wasthat they should follow them. And when


* There are some Jewish doctors who think that thisObadiah was the same with him whose writings we haveamong the twelve minor prophets. They pretend that hewas married to that woman of Shunem, where Elisha usedto lodge; that he was a disciple of the prophet Elijah, andthe last of the three captains whom king Ahnziah sent toapprehend him; and that for this reason he had compas­sion on hira, though he had destroyed the others that camebefore him, with fire from heaven, 2 Kings i. 9. &c. butall these things are pure apocrypha. Obadiah himself, inhis discourse with Elijah, sufficiently tells us who he was,viz. a person truly religious, who worshipped God alone,
had a singular affection for his servants; enough, onewould think, to have made Ahab discard, if not persecutehim, had he not found him so highly useful in the manage­ment of his domestic affairs, as to connive at his not wor­shipping Baal, or the calves; especially as we read nothingof his going up to Jerusalem, which was a defect that Godmight perhaps think proper to dispense with. Calmet'sand Patrick's Commentaries. B.
t Josephus here seems to mean, that this droughtaffected all the habitable earth.
1 t Kings xviii. 4.







OCR Output








aw. 899.] 325 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


covery. But the God of the Hebrews ap­peared to Elijah the prophet, and commandedhim to go and meet the messengers that weresent; and to ask them, whether the people ofIsrael had not a God of their own, that theking sent to a foreign god to inquire about hisrecovery? and to bid them return and tellthe king that he would not escape this disease.And when Elijah had performed what Godhad commanded, and the messengers hadheard what he said, they returned to the kingimmediately. And when the king wonderedhow they could return so soon, and askedthem the reason of it, they said, " A certainman met us,* and forbade us to go on anyfarther, but to return and tell thee, from thecommand of the God of Israel, that this dis­ease will have a bad termination."t Andwhen the king desired them to describe theman who said this to them, they replied, " Hewas a hairy man; and was girt about with agirdle of leather." So the king understoodthat the man described by the messengerswas Elijah. Hereupon he sent a captain tohim; with fifty soldiers, and commanded themto bring Elijah to him. And when the cap­tain that was sent found Elijah sitting uponthe top of a hill, he commanded him to comedown, and to come to the king; for so had heenjoined: but that in case he refused theywould carry him by force. Elijah replied,


"That you may have a trial whether I be atrue prophet, I will pray that fireJ may fallfrom heaven, and destroy both the soldiersand thyself." So he prayed, and a whirlwindof fire fell from heaven, and destroyed thecaptain and those that were with him. Andwhen the king was informed of the destructionof these men, he was very angry, and sentanother captain with the like number ofarmed men that were sent before. And whenthis captain also threatened the prophet,that, unless he came down of his own accord,he would take and carry him away; upon hisprayer against him the fire from heaven slewthis captain as well as the other. And when,upon inquiry, the king was informed of whathappened to him, he sent out a third captain.But when this captain, who was a wise man,and of a mild disposition, came to the placewhere Elijah happened to be, he spake civillyto him; and said, he knew that it was withouthis own consent, and only in submission tothe king's command, that he came to him; andthat those that came before, did not comewillingly, but on the same account. Hetherefore desired him to have pity on thosearmed men that were with him, and to comedown and follow him to the king. So Elijahaccepted of his discreet words and courteousbehaviour, and came down and followed him.And when he came to the king he told him,


possession of it. It was situated near the MediterraneanSea, between Ashdod and Jamnia, in a moist and hot soil,and was therefore very much infested with flies. CalmtfsDictionary, and Patrick's Commentary. B.
* The description which the messengers give of Elijahis,—That he was a hairy man, and girt with a girdle ofleather about his loins, 2 Kings i. 8. where his being ahairy man, may either denote his wearing long hair on hishead, and his beard, as the ancient Greek philosopherswere wont to do, and as Lucan describes Cato,
Intensos rigidam in frontem descendere canosPassus erat, moestamque genis,increscere barbam.
Or it may denote his habit, which was made of skins,rough, and with their hair on, as the ancient heroes wereclothed in the skins of lions, tigers, and bears: as theEvangelists represent the Baptist in a raiment of camel'shair, Matt. iii. 4. as the apostle describes the prophets,wandering about in sheep skins and goat skins, Heb. xi.37. and as Statius dresses up old Tiresius,
longaevi vatis.opacos
Tiresiae vultus, vocemaue et vellera notaInduitur. .
Theb. lib. 2. B.\ 2 Kings i. 6.
| It is commonly esteemed a cruel action of Elijah,when he called for fire from heaven, and consumed twocaptains and a hundred soldiers; and this for no othercrime than obeying the orders of their king, in attempting-to seize him. And our Saviour notices it as an instance ofgreater severity than the spirit of the New Testamentallows, Luke ix. 54. But we must consider, that it is notunlikely that these captains and soldiers believed theywere sent to fetch the prophet, that he might be put todeath, for foretelling the death of the king; and this, whilethey knew him to be the prophet of the true God, thesupreme king of Israel, (for they were still under thetheocracy,) which was no less than impiety, rebellion, andtreason, in the highest degree. Nor would the commandof a subaltern, or inferior captain, contradicting the com­mands of the general, when the captain and the soldiersboth knew it to be so, as I suppose, justify or excuse suchgross rebellion and disobedience in soldiers at this day.Accordingly when Saul commanded his guards to slayAhimelech, and the priests at Nob, they knew it to be anunlawful command, and would not obey it, 1 Sam. xxii. 17.From which cases both officers and soldiers may learn,that the commands of their leaders or kings cannot justifyor excuse them in doing what is wicked ia'the sight ofGod, or in fighting in an unjust cause, when they know itso to be. See the Notes on VII. 13. and Vill. 14.


3L2







OCR Output








AN. 521 43^ ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


count his adversaries could not so much asobtain a hearing. This favour Herod hadgained by money: but still, when Antony wascome to Ephesus, Hyrcanus, the high-priest,and our nation, sent an ambassage to him:which carried a crown of gold with them;and desired that he would write to the gov­ernors of the provinces, to set those Jewsfree, who had been carried captive by Cas­sius; and this without their having foughtagainst him: and to restore them that coun­try, which in the days of Cassius had beentaken from them. Antony thought the Jews'desires were just: and wrote immediately toHyrcanus, and to the Jews. He also sent, atthe same time, a decree to the Tyrians; thecontents of which were to the same purpose."Marcus Antonius, imperator, to Hyrcanus,the high-priest and ethnarch of the Jews,sendeth greeting. If you be in health, it iswell: I am also in health, with the army.Lysimachus, the son of Pausanius, and Jose-phus, the son of Menneus, and Alexander, theson of Theodorus, your ambassadors, met meat Ephesus; and have renewed that ambas­sage which they had formerly been upon atRome; and have diligently acquitted them­selves of the present ambassage, which thouand thy nation have entrusted to them; andhave fully declared the good will thou hastfor us. I am therefore satisfied, both by youractions, and your words, that "you are welldisposed to us: and I understand that yourconduct of life is constant, and religious. SoI reckon upon you as our own. But whenthose that were adversaries to you, and to theRoman people, and abstained neither fromcities, nor temples; and did not observe theagreement they had confirmed by oath; itwas not only on account of our own contestwith them, but on account of all mankind incommon, that we have taken vengeance onthose who have been the authors of great in­justice towards men, and of great wickednesstowards the gods. For the sake of whichwe suppose it was that the *sun turnedaway his light from us; as unwilling to view


the horrid crime they were guilty of in thecase of Caesar. We have also overcome theirconspiracies, which threatened the gods them­selves, which Macedonia received: as it is aclimate peculiarly proper for impious and in­solent attempts: and we have overcome thatconfused rabble, half mad with spite againstus, which they got together at Philippi, inMacedonia; when they seized on the placesthat were proper for their purpose, and. as itwere, walled them round with mountains tothe very sea; and where the passage wasopen only through a single gate. This vic­tory we gained, because the gods had con­demned these men for their wicked enter­prises. Now Brutus, when he had fled as faras Philippi, was shut up by us: and became apartaker of the same perdition with Cassius.And now these have received their punish­ment, we suppose that we may enjoy peacefor the time to come: and that Asia may beat rest from war. We therefore make thatpeace which God hath given us common toour confederates also: insomuch that thebody of Asia is now recovered out of thatdistemper it was under, by the means of ourvictory. I therefore, bearing in mind boththee and your nation, shall take care of whatmay be for your advantage. I have also sentepistles in writing to the several cities: thatif any persons, whether freemen or bondmen,have been sold funder the spear by CaiusCassius, or his subordinate officers, they maybe set free. And I will that you kindly makeuse of the favours which I and Dolabellahave granted you. I also forbid the Tyriansto use any violence with you; and for whatplaces of the Jews they now possess, 1 orderthem to restore them. I have withal accept­ed of the crown which thou sentest me."
"Marcus Antonius, imperator, to the ma­gistrates, senate, and people of Tyre, sendethgreeting. The ambassadors of Hyrcanus,high-priest and ethnarch of the Jews, appear­ed1 before me at Ephesus, and told me, thatyou are in possession of part of their country;which you entered upon under the govern­


sephus himself in the history Of the War, I. 12. directsus to read, IraXiav, Italy. For thither went OctaviusCaesar, after he and Antony had beaten Brutus and Cassiusat Philippi. Whence Antony went into Asia, as Josephusagrees with them.* This clause plainly alludes to that well known, but
unusual and very long darkness of the sun, which hap­pened upon the murder of Julius Caesar, by Brutus andCassius: which is taken great notice of by Virgil, Pliny,and other Roman authors. See Virgil's Georgics 1. justbefore the end; and Pliny's Natural History, II. 30.t Publicly.







OCR Output








248 [book VII. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


and communicated to them all that he hadheard of his son's madness: he then com­mitted himself to God, to judge betweenthem, about all their actions, and left the careof his royal palace to his ten concubines, andwent away from Jerusalem; being willinglyaccompanied by the rest of the multitude whowent hastily away with him; and particularlyby those six hundred armed men, who hadbeen with him from his first flight, in the daysof Saul. But he persuaded Abiathar andZadok the high-priests, who had determinedto go away with him; as also all the Levites,who were with the ark, to stay behind; ashoping God would deliver hhn without itsremoval; but he charged them to let himknow privately how all things went on. Andhe had their sons, Ahimaaz, the son of Zadok,and Jonathan, the son of Abiathar, for faithfulministers in all things. But Ittai the Gittitewent out with him, whether David would lethim or not; for he would have persuaded himto stay, and on that account he appeared themore friendly to him. But as he was as­cending the Mount of Olives barefoot, andall his company were in tears, it was told himthat Ahithophel was with Absalom. Thishearing augmented his grief, and he besoughtGod earnestly to alienate the mind of Absalomfrom Ahithophel; for he was afraid that heshould persuade him to follow his perniciouscounsel; for he was a prudent man, andvery sharp in seeing what was advantageous.When David had ascended to the top of themountain, he took a view of the city, andprayed to God with abundance of tears, ashaving already lost his kingdom. And hereit was that a faithful friend of his, whose namewas Hushai,* met him. When David sawhim with his clothes rent, and having ashes


all over his head, and in lamentation for thegreat change of affairs; he comforted him,and exhorted him to leave off grieving. Nayat length he besought him to go back to Ab­salom, and appear as one of his party, and toendeavour to learn the most secret thoughtsof his mind, and to contradict the counsels ofAhithophel;f for that he could not do him somuch good by being with him, as he might bybeing with Absalom. So he was prevailed onby David, and left him, and came to Jeru­salem; whither Absalom himself came also alittle while afterward.J
When David was gone a little farther, theremet him Ziba, the servant of Mephibosheth,(whom he had sent to take care of the pos­sessions which had been given him, as theson of Jonathan, the son of Saul;) with acouple of asses, laden with provisions; anddesired him to take as much of them as heand his followers stood in need of. Andwhen the king asked him, where he had leftMephibosheth, he said, he had left him inJerusalem, expecting to be chosen king inthe present confusions, in remembrance ofthe benefits Saul had conferred upon them.At this the king had great indignation, andgave to Ziba all that he had formerly be­stowed on Mephibosheth; for he determinedthat it was much fitter that he should havethem, than the other. At which Ziba greatlyrejoiced.
When David was at a place called Ba-hurim, there came out a kinsman of Saul's,whose name was Shimei,|| and threw stonesat him, and gave him reproachful words; andas his friends stood about the king, and pro­tected him, he persevered still more in hisreproaches, and called him, " A bloody man,and the author of all sorts of mischief/' He


* This man might be of the ancient race of the Arch-ites, descendants from Canaan, of whom Moses speaks,Gen. x. 17. but since the name of these ancient people isdifferently written, I should rather think, that this addi­tional name was given him from the place of his nativity,viz. Archi, a town situated on the frontiers of Benjaminand Ephraim, to the West of Bethel. Josh. xvi. 2. B.
t The Jews are of opinion, that Ahithophel was in­censed against David, and therefore ready to go over tothe adverse party, because he had abused Bathsheba,whom they take to have been his grand-daughter, becauseshe was the daughter of Eliam, 2 Sam. xi. 3. and Ahitho­phel had a son of that name, 2 Sam. xxiii. 34. for thisreason they imagine, that he advised Absalom to lie withhis father's concubines, that he might be repaid in kind:
though the Scripture assigns another, viz. that he and hisfather might thereby become irreconcileable enemies.Pool's Annotations. B.
J 2 Sam. xv. 37.
II Whether this man had been a personal sufferer in thefall of Saul's family, or what else had exasperated himagainst David, it no where appears; but it seems as if hehad conceived some very heinous offence against him,when neither the presence of a king, nor the terror of hiaguards, could restrain him from throwing stones and bitterspeeches at him. And it looks as if the king were falleninto the utmost contempt, when one private man couldthink of venting his malice at him in so gross a mannerwith impunity. Howell's Hist, in the notes. B.







OCR Output








viii AUTHOR'S PREFACE.


I formed it into a distinct treatise, with a beginning of its own, and its own conclusion. Butin process of time, as usually happens to such as undertake great things, I grew weary andwent on slowly; it being a large subject, and a difficult thing to translate our history into aforeign, and to us, unaccustomed language. However, there were some persons who desiredto know our history, and exhorted me to go on with it, and above all the rest Epaphroditus,*a man who is a lover of all kinds of learning, but is principally delighted with the knowledgeof history, and this on account of his having been himself concerned in great affairs, andmany turns of fortune, and having shewn a wonderful vigour of an excellent nature, and animmoveably virtuous resolution in them all. I yielded to this man's persuasions, who alwaysexcites such as have abilities in what is useful and acceptable, to join their endeavours withhis. I was also ashamed to permit any indolence of disposition to have a greater influenceupon me than the delight of taking pains in such studies as were very useful. I thereforestirred up myself, and went on with my work more cheerfully. Besides the foregoingmotives, I had others, which I greatly reflected on; and these were, that our forefatherswere willing to communicate such things to others; and that some of the Greeks took con­siderable pains to learn the affairs of our nation.
I found, therefore, that the second of the Ptolemies was a king who was extraordinarilydiligent in what concerned learning and the collection of books; that he was also peculiarlyambitious to procure a translation of our law, and of the constitution of our governmenttherein contained, into the Greek tongue. Now Eleazar the high-priest, one not inferior toany other of that dignity among us, did not envy the king the participation of that ad­vantage, which otherwise he would certainly have denied him; but that he knew the customof our nation was, to hinder nothing of what we esteemed ourselves from being communi­cated to others. Accordingly, I thought it became me, both to imitate the generosity ofour high-priest, and to suppose there might even now be many lovers of learning like theking. For he did not obtain all our writings at that time; but those who were sent toAlexandria as interpreters, gave him only the books of the law. While there were a vastnumber of other matters in our sacred books. They indeed containt the history of fivethousand years. In which time happened many strange accidents, many chances of war,and great actions of the commanders, and mutations of the form of our government. Uponthe whole, a man that will peruse this history may principally learn from it, that all eventssucceed well, even to an incredible degree, and the reward of felicity is proposed by God;but then it is to those that follow his will, and do not venture to break his excellent laws;and that so far as men any way apostatize from the accurate observation of them,J whatwas practicable before, becomes impracticable; and whatsoever they set about as a goodthing, is converted into an incurable calamity. And now I exhort all those that peruse


* Tins Epaphroditus was certainly alive in the third year of Trajan, A. D. 100. Who he was we do not know.Tor as to Epaphroditus, the freed man of Nero, Tacit. Annal. XV. 55, Nero's and afterwards Domitian's secretary,who was put to death by Domitian in the fourteenth or fifteenth year of his reign, he could not be alive in the thirdof Trajan.
t That Josephus's chronology agreed neither with the Masorete Hebrew, nor with the present Septuagint but almostalways with that of the Samaritan Pentateuch, and contained not less than 5000 years. See Essays on the Old Testa­ment, page 195, 203, which is here recommended by Fabricius to the consideration of the reader, ap. Havercamp,page 59.
J Josephus here plainly alludes to the famous Greek proverb, ©sS wf«fov1@' zsav cw-opov vsi^ov. If God be withus, every thing that is impossible, becomes possible.







OCR Output








64 [book h. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


save their male children alive, they and theirfamilies should be destroyed. This was asevere affliction, indeed, to those that sufferedit, not only as they were deprived of theirsons, and while they were the parents them­selves they were obliged to be subservient tothe destruction of their own children, but asit was to be supposed to tend to the extirpa­tion of their nation; while upon the destruc­tion of their children, and their own gradualdissolution, the calamity would become veryhard and inconsolable. Such was the illstate they were in; but no one can overthrowthe purposes of God, though he contrive tenthousand subtile devices for that end; for thischild, whom the sacred scribe foretold, wasbrought up, and concealed from the obser­vers appointed by the king; and he that fore­told him did not mistake in the consequencesof his preservation, which were brought topass under a singular manner:—
A man, whose name was Amram, one ofthe nobler sort of the Hebrews, was afraid ofhis whole nation lest it should fail, by thewant of young men to be brought up here-


aftef, and was very uneasy at ity his wifebeing then with child, and he knew not whatto do; hereupon he betook himself to prayerto God, and intreated him to have compassionon those men who had no ways transgressedthe laws of his worship, and to afford themdeliverance' from the miseries they at thattime endured, and to render abortive theirenemies' hope of the destruction of their na­tion. Accordingly God had mercy on him,and was moved bv his supplication; he stoodby him in his sleep, and exhorted him not todespair of his future favours. He said farther,that he did not forget their piety towardshim, and would always reward them for it;as he had formerly granted his favour to theirforefathers, and made them increase from afew to so great a multitude. He remindedhim, that when Abraham was come alone outof Mesopotamia into Canaan, he had beenmade happy, not only in other respects, butJthat when his wife was at first barren, sh#:was afterward by him enabled to conceive'seed, and bare him sons; thatheleft tolshmael,1'and to his posterity, the country of Arabia:


occasion told a lie; but there is no reason for such a sup­position, though possibly they might conceal some part ofthe truth, which is not unlawful, but highly commendable,when it is to preserve the innocent; for many of the He­brew women might be such as are here described, thoughnot every one of them. The answer of the midwivestherefore is so far from being a sneaking lie to save theirlives, that it is a bold confession of their faith and piety,to the hazard of them, viz. that they saw so plain an evi­dence of the wonderful hand of God, in that extraordinaryvigour in the travail of the women, that do what Pharaohwould, they durst not, would not, strive against it, be­cause they would not strive against God. Lightfoot's Ser­mons on 2 Sam. xix. 29. The making the midwives houses,is, by most interpreters ascribed to God, and the thing issupposed to have been done in a metaphorical sense, i.. e.God gave them a numerous offspring or family, and a verylasting succession or posterity. For there are five things,say they, which go to complete the greatness or eminenceof a family, as such; its largeness, its wealth, its honours,its power, and its duration. And therefore since the mid-wives hazarded their own lives to save those of the He­brew children, and to preserve the Israelites a numerousprogeny and posterity, the God of Israel, in return, notonly made their own lives long and prosperous, but gavethem very numerous families, and an enduring posterity, inwhom they Taught be said to live after death, even fromgeneration to generation. But all this is a very forcedconstruction, and what the original words will by no meansbear. We should therefore rather think, these houseswere built, not for; the midwives, but for the Israelites,and that it was hot God, but Pharaoh, who built them. Thecase seems to be this :—Pharaoh had charged the- mid-
wives to kill the male children that were born of the He­brew women; the midwives feared God, omitted to do •what the king had commanded them, pretending in excuse'for their omission, that the Hebrew women were gen'-'erally delivered before' they could get to them. Pharaoh'hereupon resolving to prevent their increase, gave chargeto his people to have all the male children of the He­brews thrown into the river; biit his command could notbe strictly executed, whilst the Israelites lived up anddown the fields in tents, which was their ancient and cus­tomary way of living; for they would shift here and there,and lodge the women in childbed out of the way, to savetheir children. Pharaoh therefore built them houses, andobliged them to a more settled habitation, that the peoplewhom he had set over them, might know where to findevery family, andto take an account of all the children thatshould be b6rn. So that this was a very cunning contri­vance of Pharaoh, in order to have his charge more strictlyand effectually executed than it could otherwise have, beendone; and was a particular too remarkable not to be in­serted in Moses's account of this affair. The only seem­ing difficulty is, to reconcile the words to the text in whathas been here advanced; but this will be none at nil, if thewords be rightly translated, and the verses rightly distin­guished in this manner. Exod. i. 20. And God dwelt with'^the midwives, and the people multiplied, and waxed very^,mighty, and this happened, (or Was so, or came to pass,) fbecause the midwives feared God, ver. 21, 22. And'PKa-:rdoh built them (i. e. Israelites) houses, and charged allhtii''people, saying, every son that is born, ye shall cast itUo therivers, and every daughter ye shall save alive. Skuckford'sConnection, vol.ii.'l. 7. B.







OCR Output








7« [book n. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS


'Now while the Hebrews made no stay, butwent on earnestly, as led by God's presence,the Egyptians supposed, at first, that theywere distracted, and were going rashly uponmanifest destruction; but when they saw thatthey were gone a great way without anyharm, and that no obstacle or difficulty fellin their journey, they made haste to pursuethem; and, hoping that the sea would becalm for them also, they put their cavalryforemost, and went down into the sea. Nowthe Hebrews, while these were putting ontheir armour, were before-hand with them,and got first over to the land on the other side,without any hurt, whence the others were en­couraged, and more courageously pursuedthem, as hoping no harm would come to themneither: but the Egyptians were not awarethat they went into a road made for the He­brews, and not for others; that this road wasmade for the deliverance of those in danger,but not for those that were earnest to makeuse of it for the other's destruction. As soon,therefore, as the whole Egyptian army waswithin it, the sea flowed to its own place, and


came down with a torrent raised by stormsof wind,* and encompassed the EgyptiansShowers of rain also came down from thesky, and dreadful thunder and lightning, withflashes of fire. Thunderbolts also were dartedupon them: nor was there any thing whichGod sends upon men as indications of hisWrath, which did not happen at this time;for a dark and dismal night oppressed them,and thus did all these men perish, so thatthere was not one man left to be a messengerof this calamity to the rest of the Egyptians.tThe Hebrews were not able to containthemselves for joy at their wonderful deliver­ance, and destruction of their enemies: nowindeed, supposing themselves firmly deliv­ered, when those that would have forced theminto slavery were destroyed, and when theyfound they had God so evidently for theirprotector: and how having escaped the dan­ger they were in, after this manner, and see­ing their enemies punished in such a way asis never recorded of any other men, theywere all the night employed in singing ofhymns, and in mirth. MosesJ also composed


Chaisem, i. e. the sea of Clysona, from a town situate onits western coast, much about that place where the Israel­ites passed over from the Egyptian to the Arabian shore.But as the word Clysona may denote a drowning or over­flowing with water, it is not improbable that the town builtin this place, as well as this part of the sea, might havesuch a name given it, in memory of the fate of the Egyp­tians, who were drowned herein. Well's Geography of theOld Testament, vol. ii. B.
J Exod. xiv. 29. "The waters were a wall unto themon their right hand and on their left." Diodorus Siculusrelates that the Ichthyophagi, who lived near the Red Sea,had a tradition handed down to them through a long lineof ancestors, that the whole bay was once laid bare to thevery bottom, the waters retiring to the opposite shore, andthat they afterwards returned to their accustomed chan­nel with a most tremendous revulsion. (Bib. Hist. lib. iii.p. 174.) Even to this day the inhabitants of the neigh­bourhood of Corondel preserve the remembrance of amighty army having been once drowned in the bay, whichPtolomy calls Clysma. (Shaw's Travels, p. 349.) Thevery country where the event is said to have happened,in some degree bears testimony to the accuracy of theMosaical narrative. The scriptural Etham is still calledEtti; the wilderness of Shur, the Mountain of Sinai, andthe country of Paran, are still known by the same names.(Niebuhr's Travels, vol. i. p. 189, 191.) Marah's Elath,and Midian, are still familiar to the ears of the Arabs.The grove of Elim yet remains, and its twelve fountainshave neither increased nor diminished in number sincethe days of Moses. B.
II Exod. xiv. 21.
* These storms of wind, thunder, and lightning, at thisdrowning of Pharaoh's army, are almost wanting in our
copies of Exodus, but fully extant in that of David, Ps.lxxvii. 16, 17, 18.
T Exod. xiv. 28.
J What some have here objected against this passage ofthe Israelites over the Red Sea, in this .one night, fromthe common maps, viz. that this sea being here aboutthirty miles broad, so great an army could not pass over itin so short a time, is a great mistake. Mons. Thevenot,an eye witness, informs us, that this sea, for about fivedays' journey, is no where more than eight or nine milesacross; and in one place but four or five miles, accordingto De Lisle's map, which is made from the best autho­rities.
What has been farther objected against this passage ofthe Israelites, and drowning of the Egyptians, being mira­culous also, viz. That Moses might carry the Israelitesover at a low tide, without any miracle; while yet theEgyptians, not knowing the tide so well as he, might bedrowned upon the return of the tide, is truly absurd. Yetdoes Artapanus, an ancient heathen historian, inform us,that this was what the more ignorant Memphites, wholived at a great distance, pretended, though he confesses,that the more learned Heliopolitans, who lived muchnearer, owned the destruction of the Egyptians, and thedeliverance of the Israelites to have been miraculous.And De Castro, a mathematician, who surveyed this seawith great exactness, informs us, that there is no greatflux or reflux in this part of the Red Sea, to give a colourto the hypothesis; nay, that the elevation of the tide thereis little above half the height of a man. So vain andgroundless are these and the like evasions and subterfugesof our modern sceptics and unbelievers! and so certainly dothorough enquiries, and authentic evidence, disprove andconfute such evasions and subterfuges upon all occasions'.







OCR Output








ah. 1487.] 153 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


whenever we wanted that assistance, accord­ing to his command; it is but just, now allour difficulties are over, that you should bepermitted to enjoy rest, and that we shouldtrespass on your alacrity to help us no longer;that so, if we should again stand in need ofit, we may readily have it on any futureemergency, and not tire you out so muchnow, as may make you slower in assisting usanother lime. We therefore return you thanksfor the dangers you have undergone with us;and we do it not at this time only, but weshall always be disposed to remember ourfriends, and to preserve in mind what advan­tages we have had from them, and how youhave put off the enjoyment of your own hap­piness for our sakes, and have laboured forwhat we have now, by the good will of God,obtained; and resolved not to enjoy your ownprosperity till you had afforded us that as­sistance. However, you have, by joining yourlabours with ours, gotten great plenty ofriches, and will carry home with you muchprey, with gold and silver, and, what is morethan all these, our good will towards you, anda mind willingly disposed to make a requitalof your kindness, in what case soever youshall desire it; for you have not omitted anything which Moses previously required ofyou, nor have you despised him, because hewas dead and gone from you, so that thereis nothing to diminish that gratitude whichwe owe you. We therefore dismiss you joy­ful to your own inheritances, and intreat youto suppose that there is no limit to be set tothe intimate relation that is between us; andthat you will not imagine, that because thisriver is interposed between us, that you areof a different race from us, and not Hebrews;for we are all the posterity of Abraham, bothwe that inhabit here, and you that inhabitthere; and it is the same God who broughtour forefathers, and yours, into the world;whose worship and form of government weare to take care of, which he has ordained,and are most carefully to observe; because,while you continue in those laws, God willalso shew himself merciful and assisting toyou; but if you imitate the other nations, andforsake those laws, he will reject your na­tion."* When Joshua had spoken thus, and
* Josh. xxii. 1—6.


had saluted them all, both those in authority,one by one, and the whole multitude in com­mon, he himself stayed where he was; butthe people conducted these tribes on theirjourney, and that not without tears in theireyes; and, indeed, they hardly knew how topart one from the other.
Now when the tribe of Reubel, and that ofGad, and as many of the Manassites as fol­lowed them, were passed over the river, theybuilt an altart on the banks of Jordan, as amonument to posterity, and as a sign of theirrelation to those that should inhabit on theother side. But when those on the other sideheard that those who had been dismissed hadbuilt an altar, but did not hear with what in­tention they built it, but supposed it to be byway of innovation, and for the introduction ofstrange gods, they did not incline to disbe­lieve it, but thinking this defamatory report,as if it were built for divine worship, wascredible, they appeared in arms, as thoughthey would avenge themselves upon thosethat built the altar, and they were about topass over the river, and to punish them fortheir subversion of the laws of their country:for they did not think it fit to regard them onaccount of their kindred, or the dignity ofthose that had given the occasion, but to re­gard the will of God, and the manner whereinhe desired to be worshipped; so these menput themselves in array for war; but Joshua,and Eleazar the high-priest, and the senaterestrained them, and persuaded them first tomake trial by words of their intention; andafterwards, if they found that their intentionwas evil, then only to proceed to make warupon them. Accordingly, they sent as am­bassadors to them Phineas. the son of Eleazar,and ten more persons that were in esteemamong the Hebrews, to learn what was intheir mind, when, upon passing over the river,they had built an altar upon its banks. But, assoon as these ambassadors were passed over,and were come to them, and a congregationwas assembled, Phineas stood up, and said,"The offence you have been guilty of is oftoo heinous a nature to be punished by wordsalone, or by them only to be amended forthe future. Yet we do not so look at theheinousness of your transgression, as to have
t Josh. xxii. 10.


s







OCR Output








194 [boo* vt. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


mash; the report being gone abroad thatthey were coming down upon him to Gilgal.Samuel replied, " iNay, certainly, if thou hadstbeen a* righteous man, and hadst not diso­beyed me, nor slighted the commands whichGod suggested to me concerning the presentstate of affairs, and hadst not acted morehastily than the present circumstances re­quired, thou wouldst have been permitted toreign a long time, and thy posterity afterthee."t So Samuel being grieved at whathad happened, returned home. But Saulcame to the city Gibeah, with his son Jona­than; having only six hundred men with him;and of these the greater part had no weapons;because of the scarcity of iron in that country,as well as of those that could make suchweapons; for as we shewed a little before,the Philistines had not suffered them to havesuch iron, or such workmen.J Now thePhilistines divided their army into three corn-office, and offer sacrifice without the priest, we are insome degree able to answer that question, which I haveever thought a very difficult one: viz. Whether if therewere a city or country of lay christians, without any cler­gymen, it were lawful for the laity alone to baptize, ad­minister the sacrament, &c. or indeed whether they alonecould ordain themselves either bishops, priests, or dea­cons, for the due performance of such sacerdotal ministra­tions; or whether they ought not rather, till they pro­cure clergymen to come among them, to confine them­selves within those bounds of piety and Christianity whichbelong alone to the laity; such particularly as are recom­mended in the 1st Book of the Apostolical Constitutions,which peculiarly concern the laity, and are intimated inClement's undoubted Epistle, § 40. To which latteropinion I incline.


serve the command that was given him. Butwhen he saw that the prophet tarried longerthan he expected, and that he was desertedby the soldiers, he took the sacrifices, andoffered them. At this juncture he heard thatSamuel was come, and went out to meet him.But the prophet said he had not done well indisobeying the injunctions he had sent him;and had not stayed till his coming; whichbeing appointed according to the will of God,he had prevented him in offering those prayersand sacrifices that he should have made forthe multitude; and that he therefore had per­formed divine offices rashly, and in an illmanner. Hereupon Saul made an apologyfor himself, and said, that he had waited asmany days as Samuel had appointed; thathe had been so quick in offering his sacrifice,upon account of the necessity he was in, andbecause his soldiers were departing from him,out of their fear of the enemies' camp at Mich-appointed him; but not till the end of that day, as he oughtto have done; and Samuel appears, by delaying to cometill the full time of the evening sacrifice on that day, tohave tried him (who seems to have been already for sometime declining from his strict subordination to God, and hisprophet; to have taken life-guards for himself and his son,which was an entirely new thing in Israel, and savouredof a distrust of God's providence; and to have affectedmore than he ought that independent authority which thePagan kings took to themselves:) Samuel, I say, seemshere to have tried Saul, whether he would stay till thepriest came; who alone could lawfully offer the sacrifices,or would boldly and profanely usurp the priest's office;which he ventured upon, was justly rejected for his pro-faneness. See Constitut. Apost. II. 27. And indeed sinceSaul had accepted kingly power, which naturally becomesungovernable and tyrannical, as God foretold, and the ex­perience of all ages has shewn; the divine settlement byMoses had soon been laid aside under the kings, had notGod, by keeping strictly to his laws, and severely execu­ting the threatenings therein contained, restrained Sauland other kings in some degree of obedience to himself.Nor was even this severity sufficient to restrain most ofthe future kings of Israel and Judah, from the grossestidolatry and impiety. Of the advantage of which strictness,in the observing divine laws, and inflicting their threat­ened penalties, see Antiq. VI. 12. where Josephus speaksof that matter. Though it seems at least in three in­stances, that good men did not always immediately approveof such divine severity. There seems to be one instance,
1 Sam. vi. 19, 20. Another, 1 Sara. xv. 11. And a third,
2 Sam. vi. 8, 9. Joseph. Antiq. VI. 7. though they all atlast acquiesced in the divine conduct, as knowing that Godis wiser than men.
* By this answer of Samuel, and that from a divinecommission, which is fuller in 1 Sam. xiii. 14. and by thatparallel note in the Apostolical Constitutions, just quoted,concerning the great wickedness of Saul in venturing, evenunder a seeming necessity of affairs, to usurp the priest's
t 1 Sam. xiii. 13.
J The precaution which the Philistines took to hinderthe Israelites from providing themselves with weapons, isno more than what other conquerors have done to thenations they have vanquished. Porsenna, when he madepeace with the Romans, restrained them from the use ofall iron but what was necessary in the tillage oT theirground. Cyrus, when he subdued the Lydians, for fearof a revolt, took from them the use of arms, and insteadof a laborious life spent in war, suffered them to sink intosoftness and luxury, so that they soon lost their ancientvalour: and (to instance in one prince more) Nebuchad­nezzar, when ne had made himself master of Judea, tookalong with him into Babylon all the craftsmen and smiths,that the poorest of the people, which he left behind, mightbe in no condition to rebel, 2 Kings xxiv. 14. The onlywonder is, why the Israelites, after they had regainedtheir liberty under the government of Samuel, and giventhe Philistines so total an overthrow atEbcn-ezer, did notrestore those artificers, and so provide themselves withproper arms against the next occasion? But, besides theextreme sloth and negligence which appears in the Israel­ites' whole conduct during this period, it was not so easy







OCR Output








THE


FLAVIUS JOSEPHU
THE
'mt®tUm t
CONTAINING
TWENTY BOOKS OF THE JEWISH ANTIQUITIES,
SEVEN BOOKS OF tfgE JEWISH WAM3
AND f"'-,;'
THE LIFE OF JOSEPHUS,
WRITTEN BY HIMSELF.
TRANSLATED FROM THE ORIGINAL GREEK, ACCORDING TO HAVERCAMFS ACCURATE EDITION.
TOGETHER WITH
explanatory Botes ano ^bserbations;
PARALLEL TEXTS OF SCRIPTURE! THE TRUE CHRONOLOGY OF THE SEVERAL HISTORIES; AN ACCOUNT OF THE JEWISH COINS,
WEIGHTS, AND MEASURES; AND A COMPLETE INDEX.


BY THE LATE
WILLIAM WfllSTON, M. A.
PROFESSOR OF MATHEMATICS IN THE UNIVERSITY OF CAMBRIDGE, 4c. ic.
REVISED, AND ILLUSTRATED WITH NOTES,
BY THE REV. SAMUEL MIJIDER. A. M.
Of Clare Hall, Cambridge; Lecturer of the United Parishes of Christ Church, Newgate Street, and St. Leonard, Foster Lane, London; Chaplain to his Royal Highness
the Duke of Kent; and Author of Oriental Customs, &c. tc.


IN TWO VOLLMKS.
BOSTON: *
PRINTED AND PUBLISHED BY S. WALKER, NEWBURY-STREET.
1821.







OCR Output








374 [book X. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


because it was not probable that one who,under such a want of all things, had failed ofnothing that was necessary Tor him, shouldbe found so wicked and ungrateful towardshis benefactor, that when it would be an in­stance of wickedness in him not to savehim, had he been treacherously assaultedby others, to endeavour to kill him with hisown hand. That, however, if he ought tosuppose this information to be true, it wasbetter for himself to be slain by the other,than to destroy a man who fled to him forrefuge, and intrusted his own safety to him,and committed himself to his disposal.
So Johanan and the rulers that were withhim, not being able to persuade Gedaliah,went away. But after an interval of thirtydays, Ishmael came again to Gedaliah, to thecity Mispah, and ten men with him; and,when he had feasted Ishmael, and those thatwere with him in a splendid manner at histable, and had given them presents, he be­came disordered in drink, while he endea­voured to be merry with them. And whenIshmael saw him in that case, and that he wasdrowned in his cups to a degree of insensi­bility, and fallen asleep, he rose up on asudden, with his ten friends, and slew Geda­liah, and those that were with him at thefeast. And when he had slain them, he wentout by night, and slew all the Jews that werein the city, and those soldiers also that wereleft therein by the Babylonians. But thenext day eighty men came out of the countrywith presents to Gedaliah, none of themknowing what had befallen him. WhenIshmael saw them he invited them in toGedaliah; and, when they were come in, heshut up the court, and slew them, and casttheir dead bodies into a certain deep pit,that they might not be seen. But of theseeighty men Ishmael spared those that in-treated him not to kill them, till they haddelivered up to him what riches they hadconcealed in the fields; consisting of theirfurniture, garments, and corn. But he tookcaptive the people that were in Mispah, withtheir wives and children; among whom werethe daughters of king Zedekiah, whomNebu-zaradan the general of the army of Babylonhad left with Gedaliah. And when he haddone this, he came to the king of the Ammo­nites.


But when Johanan, and the rulers withhim heard of what was done at Mispah, byIshmael, and of the death of Gedaliah, theyhad indignation at it, and every one of themtook his own armed men, and came suddenlyto fight with Ishmael; and overtook him atthe fountain of Hebron. And when thosethat were carried away captives by Ishmaelsaw Johanan and the rulers, they were veryglad, and looked upon them as coming totheir assistance. So they left him that hadcarried them captives, and came over to Jo­hanan. Then Ishmael, with eight men, fledto the king of the Ammonites. But Johanantook those whom he had rescued out of thehands of Ishmael, and the eunuchs, and theirwives, and children, and came to a certainplace called Mandra, and there they abodethat day; for they had determined to removefrom thence, and to go into Egypt; for fearlest the Babylonians should slay them, incase they continued in the country, and thatout of danger at the slaughter of Gedaliah,who had been set over it for governor.
While they were under this deliberation,Johanan the son of Kareah, and the rulersthat were with him, came to Jeremiah the
grophet, and desired that he would pray tood, that because they were at an utter lossabout what they ought to do, he would dis­cover it to them; and they sware that theywould do whatever Jeremiah should say tothem. And the prophet said he would betheir intercessor with God: it came to pass,that after ten days, God appeared to him, andsaid, he should inform Johanan, and theother rulers, and all the people, that hewould be with them while they continued inthat country, and take care of them, and keepthem from being hurt by the Babylonians, ofwhom they were afraid; but that he woulddesert them if they went into Egypt; andout of his wrath against them, would inflictthe same punishments upon them which theyknew their brethren had already endured.So when the prophet had informed Johanan,and the people, that God foretold thesethings, he was not believed, when he saidthat God commanded them to continue inthat country; but they imagined that he saidso to gratify Baruch, his own disciple, andbelied God; that he persuaded them to staythere, that they might be destroyed by the







OCR Output








AN. 20.] 569 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


well know them yourselves. But as to thatundertaking which I have a mind to set aboutat present, and which will be a work of thegreatest piety and excellence that can possi­bly be undertaken by us; I will now declareto you. Our fathers indeed, when they re­turned from Babylon, built this temple to GodAlmighty. Yet does it want sixty cubits ofits largeness in altitude; for so much did thatfirst temple which Solomon built exceed thistemple. Nor let any one condemn our fa­thers for their negligence or want of pietyherein. For it was not their fault, that thetemple was no higher. For they were Cyrus,and Darius, the son of Hystaspes, who de­termined the measures for its rebuilding.And it hath been by reason of the subjectionof those fathers of ours to them and to theirposterity, and after them to the Macedonians,that they had not the opportunity to followthe original model of this sacred edifice; norcould raise it to its ancient altitude. Butsince I am now, by God's will, your governor;and I have had peace a long time, and havegained great riches, and large revenues; and,what is the principal thing of all, I am inamity with, and well regarded by, the Ro­mans; who, if I may so say, are the rulers ofthe whole world; I will do my endeavour tocorrect that imperfection, which hath arisenfrom the necessity of our affairs, and theslavery we have been under formerly; andto make a thankful return, after the mostpious manner, to God, for what blessings Ihave received from him, by giving me thiskingdom, and that by rendering his templeas complete as 1 am able."
This speech, however, affrighted many ofthe people, as being unexpected; and be­cause it seemed incredible, it put a dampupon them; for they were afraid that hewould pull down the whole edifice, and notbe able to bring his intentions to perfectionfor its rebuilding. And this danger appeared


to them to be very great; and the vastnessof the undertaking to be such as could hardlybe accomplished. But while they were inthis disposition, the king told them, he wouldnot pull down their temple till all things wereprepared for the building it up again. Andas he promised them this beforehand, so hedid not break his word; but got ready athousand wagons, that were to bring stonesfor the building; and chose out ten thousandof the most skilful workmen, and brought athousand sacerdotal garments, for as manyof the priests; and had some of them taughtthe art of stone-cutters, and others of car­penters, and then began to build: but not tillevery thing was well prepared for the work.So Herod took away the old foundations,and laid others, and erected the temple uponthem: being in length a hundred cubits, andin height twenty additional cubits; whichtwenty, upon the *sinking of their founda­tions, fell down. And this part it was thatwe resolved to raise again in the days ofNero. Now the temple was built of stonesthat were white and strong: their length wastwenty-five cubits, their height was eight,and their breadth about twelve. And thewhole structure, as was also the structure ofthe royal cloister, was on each side lower;but the middle was much higher; till theywere visible to those that dwell in the coun­try for a great many furlongs; but chiefly tosuch as lived over against them, and thosethat approached to them. The temple haddoors also at the entrance, and lintels overthem, of the same height with the templeitself. They were adorned with their em­broidered veils, with their flowers of purple,and pillars interwoven. And over these, butunder the crown-work, was spread out agolden vine, with its branches, hanging downfrom a considerable height; the largenessand fine workmanship of which was a sur­prising sight to the spectators; to see what


* Some of our modern students in architecture havemade a strange blunder here; when they imagine, thatJosephus affirms the entire foundations of the temple, orholy house, sunk down into the rocky mountain, on whichit stood, no less than 20 cubits. See Lamy de Templo,page 1083. Whereas it is clear, that they were thefoundations of the additional 20 cubits only, above thehundred; (made perhaps weak on purpose, and only forshew and grandeur,) that sunk or fell down; as Dr.Hudson rightly understands him. Nor is the thing itself
possible in the other sense. Agrippa's preparation forbuilding the inner parts of the temple 20 cubits higher,history Of the War, V. 1. must, in all probability, referto this matter: since Josephus says here, that this whichhad fallen down was designed to be raised up again underNero; under whom Agrippa made that preparation. Butwhat Josephus says presently, that Solomon was the firstking of the Jews; appears by the parallel place, XX. 9.and other places, to be meant only, the first of David'sposterity, and the first builder of the temple.







OCR Output








514 [book XIV. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


thers, and to persist therein. It will be there­fore good for you, if you have made any de­cree against these our friends and confede­rates, to abrogate the same; by reason oftheir virtue and kind disposition towards us."
Now after Caius was slain, when MarcusAntonius and Publius Dolabella were con­suls, they both assembled the senate, and in­troduced Hyrcanus's ambassadors into it, anddiscoursed of what they desired, and made aleague of friendship with them. The senatealso agreed to grant them all they desired.I add the decree itself: that those who readthe present work, may have ready by them ademonstration of the truth of what we say.
"The decree of the senate, copied out ofthe treasury, from the public tables belongingto the quaestors; when Quintus Rutilius, andCaius Cornelius, were quaestors; and takenout of the second table, of the first class. Onthe third day before the ides of April, in thetemple of Concord. There were present atthe writing of this decree, Lucius CulpurniusPiso, of the Menenian tribe; Servius Papi-nius Potitus, of the Lemonian tribe; CaiusCaninius Rebilius, of the Tarentine tribe;Publius Tidetius; Lucius Apulinus, the sonof Lucius, of the Sergian tribe; Flavius, theson of Lucius, of the Lemonian tribe; Pub­lius Platius, the son of Publius, of the Papy-rian tribe; Marcus Acilius, the son of Mar­cus, of the Mecian tribe; Lucius Erucius, theson of Lucius, of the Stellatine tribe; MarcusQuintius Plancillus, the son of Marcus, of thePollian tribe; and Publius Serius. PubliusDolabella, and Marcus Antonius, the consuls,made this reference to the senate; that as tothose things which, by the decree of the se­nate, Caius Caesar had adjudged about theJews, and yet had not hitherto that decreebrought into the treasury; it is our will,as it is also the desire of Publius Dolabella,and Marcus Antonius, our consuls, to havethese decrees put into the public tables, andbrought to the city quaestors, that they maytake care to have them put upon the doubletables. This was done before the fifth of theides of February, in the temple of Concord.Now the ambassadors from Hyrcanus thehigh-priest were Lysimachus, the son of Pau-sanias; Alexander, the son of Theodorus;Patroclus, the son of Chereas; and Jonathan,the son of Onias."


Hyrcanus sent also one of these ambassa­dors to Dolabella, who was then the prefectof Asia, and desired him to dismiss the Jewsfrom military services; and to preserve tothem the customs of their forefathers; and topermit them to live according to them. Andwhen Dolabella had received Hyrcanus's let­ter, without any farther deliberation, he sentan epistle to all the Asiatics; and particularlyto the city of the Ephesians, the metropolisof Asia, about the Jews. A copy of whichepistle here follows:—
"When Artemon was prytanis, on the firstday of the month Leneon, Dolabella, impera-tor, to the senate, and magistrates, and peopleof the Ephesians, sendeth greeting. Alexan­der, the son of Theodorus, the ambassador ofHyrcanus, the son of Alexander, the high-priest and ethnarch of the Jews, appearedbefore me, to shew that his countrymen couldnot go into their armies, because they are notallowed to bear arms, or to travel on the sab­bath days; nor there to procure themselvesthose sorts of food which they have been usedto eat, from the times of their forefathers. Itherefore grant them a freedom from goinginto the army, as the former prefects havedone; and permit them to use the customs oftheir forefathers, in assembling together forsacred and religious purposes, as their lawrequires; and for collecting oblations neces­sary for sacrifices; and my will is, that youwrite this to the several cities under yourjurisdiction."
Those were the concessions that Dolabellamade to our nation, when Hyrcanus sent anambassage to him. But Lucius the consul'sdecree ran thus: "I have at my tribunal setthose Jews, who are citizens of Rome, andfollow the Jewish religious rites, and yet liveat Ephesus, free from going into the army, onaccount of the superstition they are under.This was done before the twelfth of the ca­lends of October, when Lucius Lentulus andCaius Marcellus were consuls. In the pre­sence of Titus Appius Balgus, the son of Ti­tus, and lieutenant, of the Horatian tribe; ofTitus Tongius, the son of Titus, of the Crus-tamine tribe; of Quintus Resius, the son ofQuintus: of Titus Pompeius Longinus, theson of Titus; of Caius Servilius, the son ofCaius, of the Tarentine tribe; of Brncchus,the military tribune: of PuWiup Lucius Gal







OCR Output








AN. 31.] 551 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


treat, and that Herod had given no occasionto suspect that he was displeased at him,but put this question to Hyrcanus, Whetherhe had received any letters from Malchus?and when he answered, that he had receivedletters, but those of salutation only; andwhen he asked farther, whether he had notreceived any presents from him? and whenhe replied, that he had received no morethan four horses to ride on, which Malchushad sent him, Herod charged these uponhim as the crimes of bribery and treason;and gave order that he should be led awayand slain. And in order to demonstrate thathe had been guilty of no offence, when hewas thus brought to his end, they allege, howmild his temper had been; and, that even inhis youth, he had never given any demon­stration of boldness or rashness; and that thecase was the same when he came to be king:but that he even then committed the manage­ment of the greatest part of public affairs toAntipater. And that he was now aboveeighty years old; and knew that Herod'sgovernment was in a secure state. He alsocame over Euphrates, and left those whogreatly honoured him beyond that river;though he were to be entirely under Herod'sgovernment; and that it was a most incredi­ble thing that he should undertake any thingby way of innovation, and not at all agree­able to his temper: but that this was a plotof Herod's own contrivance.*
And this was the fate of Hyrcanus, afterhe had endured various turns of fortune inhis life-time. For he was made high-priestof the Jewish nation in the beginning of hismother Alexandra's reign; who held the go­vernment nine years. And when after hismother's death, he took the kingdom him­self, and held it three months, he lost it, bythe means of his brother Aristobulus. Hewas then restored by Pompey, and receivedall sorts of honour from him, and enjoyedthem forty years. But when he was againdeprived by Antigonus, and was maimed inhis body, he was made a captive by the Par-


thians; and thence returned home againafter some time, on account of the hopesthat Herod had given him. None of these,however, came to pass according to his ex­pectation; but he still conflicted with manymisfortunes through the whole course of hislife: and, what was the heaviest calamity ofall, as we have related already, he came toan end which was undeserved by him. Hischaracter appeared to be that of a man of amild and moderate disposition; and sufferedthe administration of affairs to be generallydone by others under him. He was averseto the management of public affairs, nor hadshrewdness enough to govern a kingdom.And both Antipater and Herod came to theirgreatness by reason of his mildness; andat last he met with such an end from them,as was not agreeable either to justice orpiety.
Now Herod, as soon as he had put Hyr­canus out of the way, hastened to Caesar:and because he could not have any hopes ofkindness from him on account of the friend­ship he had for Antony, he had a suspicionof Alexandra, lest she should take this op­portunity to bring the multitude to a revolt;and introduce a sedition into the affairs ofthe kingdom. So he committed the care ofevery thing to his brother Pheroras; andplaced his mother Cypros, and his sister Sa­lome, and the whole family at Massada: andgave him a charge, that if he should hearany sad news about him, he should take careof the government. But as to Mariamne hiswife, because of the misunderstanding be­tween her and her sister, and his sister'smother, which made it impossible for themto live together, he placed her at Alexan-drium, with Alexandra her mother: and lefthis treasurer Joseph, and Sohemus of Ituria,to take care of that fortress. These twohad been very faithful to him from the be­ginning; and were now left as a guard to thewomen. They also had it in charge, that ifthey should hear any mischief had befallenhim, they should kill them both: and, as far


* As Hyrcanus was the only remaining person of themale line of the Asmoneans, and had himself reignedin Judea under the protection of the Romans, till deposedby the Parthians; Herod suspected, that if any thingwent hard with him, it would turn in favour of Hyrcanus,for restoring him again to the kingdom: and therefore, to
prevent this, contrived a plot against that prince: as ifhe had held a correspondence with Malchus, king ofArabia, for the accomplishing of treasonable designsagainst him. Under this pretence, he caused him to beput to death, after he had passed the eightieth year of hisage. Prideaux,s Connection, part 2. book 8. B.







OCR Output








 







OCR Output








 


jyfa-rMicr hinx


IS/iaoLtcfc . Phil'..







OCR Output








276 [book vih. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


to the place where the king abode at thattime.
Now the sagacity and wisdom which Godhad bestowed on Solomon was so great, thathe exceeded the ancients: insomuch that hewas no way inferior to the Egyptians, who aresaid to have been beyond all men in under­standing; nay indeed it is evident that theirsagacity was very much inferior to that ofthe king's. He also distinguished himself inwisdom above those who were most eminentamong the Hebrews at that time for shrewd­ness. Those I mean were Ethan, Heman,Chalcol, and Darda, the sons of Mahol. Healso composed books of Odes, and Songs, innumber a thousand and five; and of Parablesand Similitudes three thousand. For he spakea parable upon every sort of tree, from thehyssop to the cedar: and in like manner alsoabout beasts, about all sorts of living crea­tures,* whether upon the earth, or in the seas,or in the air. For he was not unacquaintedwith any of their natures; nor omitted in­quiries about them; but described them alllike a philosopher, and demonstrated his ex­quisite knowledge of their several properties.God also enabled him to learn that skill whichexpels demons,f which is a useful science tomen. He composed such incantations alsoby which distempers are alleviated; and leftbehind him the manner of using exorcisms,by which they drive away demons; so thatthey never return, and this method of cureis of great force until this day. For I have


seen a certain man of my own country,whose name was Eleazar, releasing thepeople that were demoniacal in the pre­sence of Vespasian, and his sons, and hiscaptains, and the multitude of his soldiers:and the manner of the cure was this; heput a ring that had a root of one of thosesorts mentioned by Solomon to the nostrilsof the demoniac, after which he drew outthe demon through his nostrils: and whenthe man fell down, he adjured him to returninto him no more; making still mention ofSolomon, and reciting the incantations whichhe composed. And when Eleazar would de­monstrate to the spectators, that he had sucha power, he set a little way offa cup or basonfull of water, and commanded the demon, ashe went out of the man, to overturn it: andthereby let the spectators know that he hadleft the man. And when this was done, theskill and wisdom of Solomon was shewn verymanifestly. For which reason it is that allmen may know the vastness of Solomon'sabilities, and how he was beloved of God,and that the extraordinary virtues of everykind with which this king was endowed maynot be unknown to any people under thesun; for this reason, I say, it is that we haveproceeded to speak so largely of these mat­ters.
Now Hiram, king of Tyre, when he heardthat Solomon succeeded to his father's king­dom, was very glad, for he was a friend ofDavid's. So he sent ambassadors to him,


* The several books which treated of the nature andvirtue of animals, as well as plants, are supposed to havebeen lost in the Babylonish captivity; but Eusebius, ashe is quoted by Anastatius, informs us, that king He-zekiah, seeing the abuse which his subjects made ofSolomon's works, by placing too much confidence inremedies which he prescribed, and the natural secretswhich he discovered, thought proper to suppress themall. Notwithstanding this, since his time, many books,concerning the secrets of magic, medicine, and enchant­ments, have appeared under the name of this prince; andseveral pieces have been quoted, such as The Instructionsof Solomon to his son Rehoboam; The Testament of Solo­mon; The Books of the Throne of Solomon; The Booksof Magic, composed by the demons, under the name ofSolomon; The Clavicula, or Key of Solomon; The Ringof Solomon; the Contradiction of Solomon, &c. whichwere most of them very wicked and pernicious tracts, towhich the authors prefixed this great name to give themcredit and sanction. It is somewhat strange, however,that Josephus should inform us, that Solomon composedbooks of enchantments, and several manners of exorcisms,or of driving away devils, so that they could return no
more; and that he should farther assure us, that himselfhad seen experiments of it by one Eleazar, a Jew, who,in the presence of Vespasian, his sons, and the officers ofhis army, cured several that were possessed. JewishAntiq. lib. 8. c. 2. Calmef s Dictionary, under the wordSolomon. B.
t Some pretended fragments of these books of conjura­tions of Solomon are still extant in Fabricius's Cod. Pseu-depigr. Vet. Test, page 1054. Though I entirely differfrom Josephus, in this opinion, that such books and artsof Solomon were parts of that wisdom which was impartedto him by God in his younger days. They must ratherhave belonged to such profane but curious arts as we find,mentioned, Acts xix. 13, 20. and had been derived fromthe idolatry and superstition of heathen wives and concu­bines, in his old age; when he had forsaken God, andGod had forsaken him, and given him up to demoniacaldelusions. Nor does Josephus's strange account of theroot Baara, Of the war, VII. 6, seem to be other thanthat of its magical use in such conjurations. As for thefollowing history it confirms what Christ says, Malt. xii.27. If I by Beelzebub cast out demons, by whom do your;sons cast them out?







OCR Output








an. 1493.] 125 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


own predictions; there being *no one thatcould be a witness against him, and accusehim for so doing, he stiil gave his attestationto Balaam, and did him the honour to makemention of him on this account.
CHAP. VII.
OF THE PUNISHMENT INFLICTED ON THE MIDIANITES BTTHE HEBREWS: THE APPOINTMENT OF MOSES'S SUCCES­SOR; GRANT OF AMORITE LANDS, &C.
MOSES, for the causes aforementioned,sent against the land of Midian anarmy of twelve thousand* men; taking anequal number out of every tribe; and ap­pointing for their commander Phineas, whohad guarded the laws of the Hebrews, andhad inflicted punishment upon Zimri, whenhe had transgressed them.
Now the Midianites perceived beforehand,how the Hebrews were coming, and wouldsuddenly be upon them. So they assembledtheir army, and fortified the entrances intotheir country; and there awaited the enemy'sapproach. When they were come, and hadjoined battle with them, an innumerable mul­titude of the Midianites fell; among whomwere their five kings; Evi, Zur, Reba, Hur,and Rekem; the latter of whom was of thesame name with the capital city of all Ara­bia, which is till now so called by the wholeArabian nation, Arecem, from the name ofthe king that built it; but is by the Greekscalled Petra. Now when the enemies werediscomfited, the Hebrews spoiled their coun­try, and took a great prey, and destroyed themen that were its inhabitants, together withthe women: only they preserved the virgins


* Numb. xxxi. 5.
t The slaughter of all the Midianite women, that hadprostituted themselves to the lewd Israelites; and thepreservation of those that had not been guilty therein;which latter were no fewer than 32,000, both here, andNumb. xxxi. 15, 16, 17, 35, and both by the particularcommand of God, are highly remarkable; and shew thateven in nations doomed to destruction for their wicked­ness, the innocent were sometimes particularly and pro­videntially taken care of, and delivered from that destruc­tion. Which directly implies, that it was the wickednessof the nations of Canaan, and nothing else, that occasionedtheir excision. See Gen. xv. 16. 1 Sam. xv. 18, 33. Inthe first of which places, the reason of the delay of thepunishment of the Araorites is given; because their ini­quity was not yet full. In the second, Saul is ordered togo and destroy the sinners, the Amalekites; plainly im-


as Moses had commanded Phineas; who in­deed came back, bringing with its victoriousarmy fifty-two thousand beeves, seventy-fivethousand six hundred sheep, and sixty thou­sand asses, with an immense quantity of goldand silver furniture, which the Midianitesmade use of in their houses; for they wereso wealthy, that they were very luxurious.There were also led captive aboutf thirty-two thousand virgins. So Moses divided theprey into parts, and gave one fiftieth part toEleazar, and to the priests; and anotherfiftieth part to the Levites; and distributedthe rest of the prey among the people. Afterwhich they lived happily, as having obtainedan abundance of good things by their valour;and there being no misfortune that attendedthem or hindered their enjoyment of thathappiness.
Moses being now grown old, appointedJoshua for his successor}: both to receive di­rections from God, as a prophet, and for acommander of the army, if they should at anytime stand in need of such a one. And thiswas done by the command of God: that tohim the care of the public should be com­mitted. Now Joshua had been instructed inall those kinds of learning which concernedthe laws, and God himself; and Moses hadbeen his instructor.
At this time the two tribes of Gad, andReubel, and the half tribe of Manassehi.abounded in a multitude of cattle, as well asin all other kinds of prosperity; whence theyhad a meeting, and besought Moses to givethem, as their peculiar portion, that land ofthe Amorites which they had taken by rightof war; because it was fruitful, and for feed-plying, that they were therefore to be destroyed becausethey were sinners, and not otherwise. In the third, thereason is given, why king Agag was not to be spared; viz.because of his former cruelty. As thy sword hath madethe Hebrew women childless; so shall thy mother be madechildless among women, by the Hebrews. The Apostlesalso, or their amanuensis Clement, gives this reason of thenecessity of the coming of Christ, that men had formerlyperverted both the positive law, and that of nature: andhad cast out of their minds the memory of the flood, theburning of Sodom, the plagues of the Egyptians, and theslaughter of the inhabitants of Palestine, as signs of themost amazing impenitence and insensibility under thepunishment of horrid wickedness. Constitut. Apoit. viii12, page 402.
J Numb, xxvii. 22. Deut. xxxiv. 9.
.y


11 2







OCR Output








an. 1056.] 269 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


to such as were under any calamities; hewas also righteous and humane; which aregood qualities peculiarly fit for kings; norwas he guilty of any offence in the exerciseof so great an authority, but in the businessof the wife of Uriah. He also left behind himgreater wealth than any other king either ofthe Hebrews, or of other nations ever did.
He was buried by his son Solomon, in Je­rusalem, with great magnificence,* and withall the other funeral pomp which kings usedto be buried with; moreover he had immensewealth buried with him;f the vastness ofwhich may be easily conjectured by what Ishall now say; Jfor a thousand and three


hundred years afterwards, Hyrcanus the high-priest, when he was besieged by Antiochus,that was called the Pious, the son of Deme­trius, and was desirous of giving him money,to get him to raise the siege, and draw offhisarmy, and having no other method of raisingthe money, opened one room of David's se­pulchre, and took out three thousand talents;and gave part of that sum to Antiochus; andby this means caused the siege to be raised.Nay, many years afterward, Herod the kingopened another room and took away a greatdeal of money; and yet neither of them cameat the coffins of the kings themselves; fortheir bodies were buried under the earth so


* 1 Kings ii. 10. 1 Chron. xxix. 26—30.
t Among several nations indeed it was customary tobury, along with the princes and other great men, variousthings of value, that they took delight in while they lived.The Egyptians were used to this; and about their mum­mies are frequently found very precious ornaments.When Alexander the Great had Cyrus's tomb opened,there was found therein a bed of gold, a very rich table,drinking cups, and many fine vestments: but, notwith­standing all this, several learned men look upon thiswhole account of Josephus as a mere fable. For to whatpurpose, say they, did Solomon bury all this treasureunder ground, when he had so much occasion for it, whenhe was forced to borrow money of the king of Tyre, andburthen his people with so many heavy taxes to supplyhis excessive expenses? How came it, that the otherkings of Judah, who were frequently put to the necessityof stripping the temple of its precious furniture to satisfytheir greedy enemies, never once adventured to lay holdon this treasure? How came it to escape the hands ofthe Chaldeans, and other nations, that so often had theplundering of Jerusalem? Or why should Hyrcanus vio­late this depositum, which his predecessors esteemed moresacred than the holy vessels of the Lord? These arequestions that cannot easily be resolved; and, what is afarther confutation of this story, in that very book, fromwhence Josephus is supposed to have taken it, it is neveronce said, that Hyrcanus broke open David's tomb. Thewords of that spurious author are that " Hyrcanus, whilehe was besieged by Antiochus, opened a treasure-chamberwhich belonged to some of David's descendants, and that,after he had taken a large sum of money out of it, he stillleft a great deal in it, and sealed it up again:" but thisis quite a different thing, and has no manner of relation tothe sepulchre of David. As to the real sepulchre ofDavid, it is certain, that it was always held in great vene­ration among the Jews. It was in being in St. Peter'stime,' for so he tells the people, Acts ii. 29. Dio (inAdriani vita) informs us, that part of it was fallen downin the emperor Adrian's reign. St. Jerom relates, thathe himself used frequently to go and pray at it; andmodern travellers, as we took notice before, describesome magnificent monuments hewed in a rock, not farfrom Jerusalem, which are doubtless very ancient; but
they themselves do not agree, that they were the sepul­chres of the kings of Judah. It was somewhat unaccount­able, however, that the place of this prince's sepulchre,which both the Chaldeans and the Romans, when theytook Jerusalem, thought proper to spare, should now beso entirely lost that we cannot find the least remains of it.But though Providence has so ordered it, that the placeof David's sepulchre should not at present be known, yetthere does not want an eternal monument of his most ex­cellent genius. The Book of Psalms, which for themost part was composed by him, does publish the glory ofits author more than the most pompous eulogies; and theauthor of Ecclesiasticus, chap, xlvii. 2. &c. has conse­crated an epitaph to his memory, which is more durablethan either marble or brass:—As the fat is taken awayfrom the peace-offering, so was David chosen out of thepeople of Israel. He played with lions as with kids, andwith bears as with lambs; he slew a giant when he wasyoung, and took away reproach from the people; for hecalled upon the most high Lord, and he gave strength tohis right hand to slay this mighty warrior, and to set upthe horn of his people. So the people honoured himwith ten thousands, and praised him in blessings of theLord; for he destroyed the enemies on every side, andbrought to nought the Philistines his adversaries :—In allhis works he praised the Holy One most high, and blessedthe Lord with words of glory :—He set singers also beforethe altar, that by their voices they might make sweetmelody, and daily sing praises in their songs. He beau­tified their feasts, and set their solemn times in perfectorder:—The Lord took away his sons, and exalted hishorn for ever; he gave him a covenant of kings, and athrone of glory in Israel. Calmefs Commentary, and hisDictionary, under the word David. B.
J Instead of 1300 years, we are here, by Josephus'sown chronology, to read 980, or, at most, in a round andlarge number, 1000 years. But as to some supposals asif the burial of such riches in or near to David's sepulchrewere a thing incredible, I cannot but wonder at great men,when they oppose some vain conjectures against the mostauthentic evidence we have for these histories; andthat from the best contemporary authors. See XIII. 8.XVI. 7. Of the War, 1, 2. and Authentic Records, partI. page 207.


3D2







OCR Output








524 [book XIV. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


suspecting no harm, complied with his pro­posal: while Herod did not give his consentto what was done, because of the perfidious-ness of these Barbarians: but desired Pha-saelus rather to fight those that were comeinto the city.
So both Hyrcanus and Phasaelus went onthe ambassage. But Pacorus left with Herodtwo hundred horsemen, and ten men, whowere called the free men; and conductedthe others on their journey. And when theywere in Galilee, the governors of the citiesthere met them in their arms. Barzapharnesalso received them at first with cheerfulness,and made them presents: though he after­ward conspired against them. And Phasa­elus, with hie horsemen, were conducted tothe sea side. But when they heard that An-tigonus had promised to give the Parthians athousand talents, and five hundred women,to assist him against them, they soon had asuspicion of the Barbarians. Moreover therewas one who informed them that snares werelaid for them by night, while a guard cameabout them secretly; and they had then beenseized upon, had they not waited for theseizure of Herod by the Parthians, that wereabout Jerusalem, lest, upon the slaughter ofHyrcanus and Phasaelus, he should have anintimation of it, and escape out of theirhands. And these were the circumstancesthey were now in: and they saw who theywere that guarded them. Some persons, in­deed, would have persuaded Phasaelus toflee away immediately on horseback, and notstay any longer. And there was one Ophel-lius who, above all the reBt, was earnest forhim to do so. For he had heard of thistreachery from Saramalla, the richest of allthe Syrians at that time: who also promisedto provide him ships to carry him off: for thesea was just by them. But he had no mindto desert Hyrcanus, nor to bring his brotherinto danger. But he went to Barzapharne6,and told him, he did not act justly, when hemade such a contrivance: for that if hewanted money, he would give him more thanAntigonus. And besides, that it was a hor­rible thing to slay those that came to himupon the security of their oaths; and thatwhen they had done them no injury. Butthe Barbarians swore to him. that there wasno truth in any of his suspicions: but that he


Mas troubled with nothing but false suppo-sals; and then went away to Pacorus.
But as soon as he was gone away, somemen came and bound Hyrcanus and Phasa­elus: while Phasaelus greatly reproached theParthians for their perjury. However, thatbutler, who was sent against Herod, had it incommand to get him without the walls of thecity, and seize upon him. But messengershad been sent by Phasaelus to inform Herodof the perfidiousness of the Parthians. Andwhen he knew that the enemy had seizedupon them, he went to Pacorus, and to themost potent of the Parthians, as to the lordsof the rest. But, although they knew thewhole matter, they dissembled with him in adeceitful way; and said, that he ought to goout with them before the walls, and meetthose who were bringing him his letters: forthat they were not taken by his adversaries,but were coming to give him an account ofthe good success Phasaelus had had. Heroddid not give credit to what they said, for hehad heard that his brother was seized uponby others also. And *the daughter of Hyr­canus, whom he had espoused, also advisedhim not to credit them; which made him stillmore suspicious of the Parthians: for al­though other people did not give heed toher, yet did he believe her, as a woman ofvery great wisdom.
Now while the Parthians were in consulta­tion what was fit to be done, (for they didnot think it proper to make an open attemptupon a person of his character,) and whilethey put off the determination to the nextday, Herod was under great disturbance ofmind: and rather inclining to believe the re­ports he had heard about his brother andthe Parthians, than to give heed to what wassaid on the other side, he determined, that,when the evening came on, he would makeuse of it for his flight, and not make anylonger delay, as if the dangers from the enemywere not yet certain. He therefore removedwith the armed men whom he had with him;and set his wives upon the beasts: as also hismother, and sister, and her whom he wasabout to marry, Mariamne, the daughter ofAlexander, the son of Aristobulus; with hermother, the daughter of Hyrcanus, and his
* Alexandra.







OCR Output








AN. 1531.] Ill ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


afraid lest the enemies should grow insolentupon this victory, and should attack them inorder to gain still greater glory, he resolvedthat it was proper to withdraw the army intothe wilderness, to a farther distance from theCanaanites. So the multitude gave them­selves up again to his conduct; for they weresensible that, without his care, their affairscould not be in a good condition: and hecaused the host to remove, and he went far­ther into the wilderness; as intending thereto let them rest, and not to permit them tofight the Canaanites before God should affordthem a more favourable opportunity.
CHAP. II.
OF THE SEDITION OF CORAH AND OF THE MULTITUDE AGAINSTMOSES AND AARON, CONCERNING THE PRIESTHOOD.
THAT which is usually the case withgreat armies, and especially upon illsuccess, to be hard to be pleased, and go­verned with difficulty, did now befal theJews:* for, being in number six hundredthousand, and by reason of their great multi­tude not readily subject to their governors,even in prosperity, they at this time weremore than usually angry, both against eachother, and against their leader, because ofthe distress they were in, and the calamitiesthey then endured: on which account such asedition overtook them as we have not thelike example either among the Greeks or theBarbarians; by means of this they were indanger of being all destroyed, but were not­withstanding saved by Moses, who would notremember that he had been almost stoned todeath by them. Nor did God neglect to pre­vent their ruin; but notwithstanding the in­dignities they offered their legislator, and thelaws, and their disobedience to the command­ments which he had sent them by Moses, hedelivered them from those terrible calamities-which, without his providential care, hadbeen brought upon them by this sedition: soI will first explain the cause whence this se­dition arose, and then will give an account ofthe sedition itself, as also of what settlementsMoses made for their government after it wasover.
* About an. 1512.
t Evil example is peculiarly influential, because itstrikes in with the corrupt propensities of human nature.VOL. *-—No. 10.


Corah,f a Hebrew of principal account,both by his family and by his wealth, one thatwas also able to speak well, and that couldeasily persuade the people by his speeches,saw that Moses was in an exceeding greatdignity, and was uneasy at it, and envied himon that account: he was of the same tribewith Moses, and of kin to him. He was par­ticularly grieved because he thought he bet­ter deserved that honourable post, as beingmore opulent, and not inferior to him in hisbirth: so he raised a clamour against himamong the Levites, who were of the sametribe, and especially among his kindred, say­ing, that it was a very sad thing that theyshould overlook Moses, while he hunted after,and paved the way to glory for himself, andby ill arts should obtain it under pretence ofGod's command; while, contrary to the laws,he had given the priesthood to Aaron, not bythe common suffrage of the multitude, but byhis own vote, as bestowing dignities in a ty­rannical way upon whom he pleased. Headded, that that concealed way of imposingon them was harder to be borne, than if it hadbeen done by an open force upon them, be­cause he did not only take away their powerwithout their consent, but even while theywere unapprized of his contrivances againstthem; for whosoever is conscious to himselfthat he deserves any dignity, aims to' get itby persuasion, and not by an arrogant methodof violence. But those that believe it impos­sible to obtain those honours justly, make ashew of goodness, and do not introduce force;but by cunning tricks grow wickedly power­ful. That it was proper for the multitude topunish such men, even while they think them­selves concealed in their designs, and notsuffer them to gain strength, till they havethem for their open enemies. "What ac­count," said he, "is Moses able to give whyhe has bestowed the priesthood on Aaron andhis sons? For if God determined to bestowthat honour on one of the tribe of Levi, I ammore worthy of it than he is; as being equalto Moses, by my family, and superior to himboth in riches and in age. But if God haddetermined to bestow it on the eldest tribe,that of Reubel might have it more justly; and
When it is set in opposition to good pursuits, it is generallymost prevalent. This easily accounts for the success.ofthe conspiracy of Corah. B.Ff







OCR Output








572 [book XV. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


and in the next place, for the alacrity the kinghad shewed. They feasted and celebratedthis rebuilding of the temple. And the kingsacrificed three hundred oxen to God; as didthe rest, every one according to his ability.The number of which sacrifices it is not pos­sible to set down; for it cannot be that weshould truly relate it. For at the same timewith this celebration for the work about thetemple, fell also the day of the king's inaugu­ration; which he kept of an old custom as afestival; and it now coincided with the other.Which coincidence of them both made thefestival most illustrious.
There was also an occult passage built for
* This tradition, which Josephus here mentions, as de­livered down from their fathers to their children, of thisparticular remarkable circumstance relating to the build­ing-of Herod's temple, is a demonstration that such itsbuilding was a known thing in Judea in his time. He was


the king; which led from Antonia to the in­ner temple, at its eastern gate. Over this healso erected for himself a tower; that hemight have an opportunity of a subterraneousascent to the temple, in order to guard ugainttany sedition which might be made by thepeople against their kings. It is also Re­ported, that during the time the temple wasbuilding, it did not rain in the day time; butthat the showers fell only in the night; sothat the work was not hindered. And this ourfathers have delivered to us. Nor is it incredi­ble; if any one have regard to the other mani­festations of God. And thus was performedthe work of the rebuilding of the temple.
born but 46 years after it is related to have been finished,and might himself have seen, and spoken with some ofthe builders themselves; and with a great number of thosethat had seen it building.


END OF THE FIRST voLUME.







OCR Output








mr. 1016.] 295 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


became weaker by the length of time, it wasnot sufficient to recall to his mind the institu­tions of his own country; so he still more andmore contemned his own God, and continuedto regard the gods that his marriages had in­troduced. Nay, before this happened, hesinned, and fell into an error about the ob­servance of the laws, when he made* theimages of brazen oxen, that supported thebrazen sea, and the images of lions about hisown throne; for these he made, although itwas not agreeable to piety so to do. Andthis he did notwithstanding that he had hisfather as a most excellent and domestic pat­tern of virtue; and knew what a gloriouscharacter he had left behind him, because ofhis piety towards God. Nor did he imitateDavid, although God had twice appeared tohim in his sleep, and exhorted him so to do.There came therefore a prophet to him, whowas sent by 'God, and told him, that hiswicked actions were not concealed fromGod; and threatened him that he should notlong rejoice at what he had done; that in­deed the kingdom should not be taken fromhim, while he was alive; because God hadpromised to his father David that he wouldmake him his successor; but that he wouldtake care that this should befall his son whenhe was dead. Not that he would withdrawall the people from him, but that he wouldgive ten tribes to a servant of his, and leaveonly two tribes to David's grandson for hissake, because he loved God; and for thesake of the city Jerusalem, wherein he wouldhave a temple.
When Solomon heard this, he was grieved,and greatly confounded, upon this change of


almost all that happiness which had madehim to be admired, into so bad a state. Norhad there much time passed after the prophethad foretold what was coming, before Godraised up an enemy against him, whose namewas Hadad ;f who took the following occa­sion of his enmity to him. He was a child ofthe stock of the Edomites, and of the bloodroyal. And when Joab, the captain of David'shost laid waste the land of Edom, and de­stroyed all that were men grown, and able tobear arms, for six months time, this Hadadfled away, and came to Pharaoh, king ofEgypt; who received him kindly, and as­signed him a house to dwell in, and a countryto supply him with food. And when he wasgrown up he loved him exceedingly; inso­much that he gave him his wife's sister,whose name was Tahpenes to wife, by whomhe had a son, who was brought up with theking's children. When Hadad heard inEgypt that both David and Joab were dead,he came to Pharaoh, and desired that hewould permit him to go to his own country.The king asked what it was that he wanted,and what hardships he had met with, that hewas so desirous to leave him? and when hewas often troublesome to him, and intreatedhim to dismiss him, he did not then do it.But at the time when Solomon's affairs beganto grow worse,* on account of his aforemen­tioned transgressions, and God's anger againsthim for the same; Hadad, by Pharaoh's per­mission, came to Edom, and when he was notable to make the people to forsake Solomon,(for it was kept under by many garrisons,and an innovation was not to be made withsafety,) he removed thence and came into


* Josephus is here certainly too severe upon Solomon;who in making the cherubims, and these twelve brazenoxen, seems to have done no more than imitate the pat­terns left him by David, which were all given David bydivine inspiration. See my Description of the Temples,chap. x. And although God gave no direction for thelions that adorned his throne, yet does not Solomon seemtherein to have broken any law of Moses. For althoughthe Pharisees and later Rabbins, have extended thesecond commandment, to forbid the very making of anyimage, though without any intention to have it worshipped;yet do not I suppose that Solomon so understood it, northat it ought to be so understood. The making any otheraltar for worship, but that at the tabernacle, was equallyforbidden by Moses: Antiq. IV. 3. yet did not the twotribes and a half offend when they made an altar for amemorial only, Josh. xxii. Antiq. V. 1.
t Hadad was a young prince of the royal family of
idumea, who fled into Egypt when David conquered thatcountry. For David, having obtained a signal victoryunder the conduct of Abishai, who, at that time, com­manded in chief, sent Joab afterwards with an order to killall the males that should be found in the land. But Hadadhad escaped into Egypt, where, finding favour in the eyesof the king, he married his wife's sister, and there settled.But, after the death of David, he returned into Idumea,and gave Solomon no small molestation. Calmet's Com­mentary. B.
J Since the beginning of Solomon's evil life and adver­sity was the time when Hadad, (who was born at leasttwenty or thirtv years before Solomon came to the crown,in the days of David,) began to give him disturbance, thisimplies that Solomon's evil life began early, and continuedvery long; which the multitude of his wives and concu­bines does also imply, I suppose he was not fifty yearsof age. j-







OCR Output








172 [book v. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


to fight their enemies, they came hastilyagainst their own kindred. And he threat­ened them, that, with God's assistance, hewould inflict a punishment upon them, unless.they would grow wiser. But when he couldnot persuade them, he fought with them withthose forces which he sent for out of Gilead;and he made a great slaughter among them;and when they were beaten, he pursued them,and seized on the passages of Jordan with apart of his army, which he had sent be­fore; and slew about forty-two thousand ofthem.*
So when Jephtha had ruledt six years, hedied, and was buried in his own country,Sebee, which is a place in the land ofGilead.
Ibzan then took the government; being ofthe tribe of Judah, and of the city Bethlehem.He had sixty children, thirty of them sons,and the rest daughters; all of which he leftbehind him; giving the daughters in marriageto husbands, and taking wives for his sons.He did nothing in thej seven years of hisadministration that was worth recording, ordeserving a memorial. So he died an old man,and was buried in his own country.
When Ibzan was dead after this manner,neither did Elon, who succeeded him in thegovernment, and kept it ten|| years, do anything remarkable: he was of the tribe ofZebulon.
Abdon§ also, the son of Hillel, of the tribeof Ephraim, and born at the city Pyrathon,was ordained their supreme governor afterElon. He is only recorded to have beenhappy in his children; for the public affairswere then so peaceable, and in such security,that neither did he perform any glorious ac­tion. He had forty sons, and by them leftthirty grand-children; and he marched instate with these seventy, who were all skilfulin riding horses, and he left them all aliveafter him. He died an old man, and obtaineda magnificent burial in Pyrathon.**


CHAP. VIII.


OF THE BIRTH OF SAMPSON, AND THE CALAMITIES HEBROUGHT UPON THE PHILISTINES.
AFTER Abdon was dead, the Philistinesovercame the Israelites; and receivedtribute of them fortt forty years. From whichdistress they were delivered after the follow­ing manner:
There was one Manoah, a person of suchgreat virtue that he had few men his equalsand without dispute the principal person ofhis country. He had a wife celebrated forher beauty, and excelling her contemporaries.But he had no children; and being uneasy athis want of posterity, he intreated God togive them seed of their own bodies to succeedthem, and with that intent he came constantlyinto theJJ suburbs, together with his wife;which suburbs were in the great plain. Nowhe was fond of his wife to a degree of mad­ness, and on that account was unmeasurablyjealous of her. Now when his wife was oncealone, an apparition was seen by her; it wasan angel of God, and resembled a young man,beautiful and tall; who brought her the goodnews that she should have a son, born byGod's providence, that should be a goodlychild, of great strength; by whom, when hewas grown up to man's estate, the Philistinesshould be afflicted. He exhorted her alsonot to poll his hair, and that he should avoidall kinds of drink, except water; for so hadGod commanded. So the angel, when he haddelivered that message, went his way; hiscoming being by the will of God.
Now the woman informed her husband,when he came home, of what the angel hadsaid: who shewed so great an admiration ofthe beauty and stature of the young man thathad appeared to her, that her husband wasastonished, and out of himself for jealousy,and such suspicions as are excited by thatpassion. But she was desirous to have herhusband's unreasonable sorrow taken away.


* .111115. x"- 6.
t From an. 1201 to 1195 B. C.
% From an. 1195 to 1188.
|| From an. 1188 to 1178.
§ The number of the years of Abdon's government:which in the other copies are 8, are wanting in all ourpresent copies of Josephus, in the same manner as wasTola's entire government; which I just now observed.
Nor is there any room to doubt but this is a bare omissionof the scribes.
** Judg. xii. 15.
tt From an. 1178 to 1128.
\\ I can discover no reason why Manoah and his wifecame so constantly into these suburbs, to pray for chil­dren, but because there was a synagogue or place of devo­tion in those suburbs.







OCR Output








AN. 187.] 437 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


These were the contents of the epistle,which was sent from the king of the Lace­daemonians. But upon the death of Joseph,the people grew seditious, on account of hissons. For whereas the elders made waragainst Hyrcanus, who was the youngest ofJoseph's sons, the multitude was divided:but the greater part joined with the eldersin this war: as did Simon the high-priest, byreason he was of *kin to them. However,Hyrcanus determined not to return to Jeru­salem any more; but seated himself beyondJordan; and was at perpetual war with theArabians, and slew many of them, and tookmany captives. He also erected a strongcastle, and built it entirely of white stone, tothe very roof; and had animals of a prodi­gious magnitude engraven upon it; and alsoencompassed it with a great and deep canalof water. He also made caves of many fur­longs in length; by hollowing a rock thatwas over against him; and then made largerooms in it; some for feasting, and some forsleeping, and living in. He introduced alsoa vast quantity of waters which ran along it,and which were very delightful, and orna­mental in the court. But still he made theentrances at the mouths of the caves so verynarrow, that no more than one person couldenter by them at once. And the reason whyhe built them after that manner was for hisown preservation: lest he should be besiegedby his brethren, and run the hazard of beingcaught by them. Moreover, he built courtsof greater magnitude than ordinary; whichhe adorned with vastly large gardens. Andwhen he had brought the place to this state,he named it Tyre. This place is betweenArabia and Judea, beyond Jordan, not farfrom the country of Heshbon. And he ruledover those parts for seven years: even allthat time that Seleucus was king of Syria.


But when he was dead, his brother Antio­chus, surnamed Epiphanes, took the king­dom. Ptolemy, king of Egypt, also died;who was besides called Epiphanes. He lefttwo sons, and both young in age; the elderof whom was called Philometor, and theyounger Physcon. As for Hyrcanus, whenhe saw that Antiochus had a great army,and feared lest he should be caught by him,and brought to punishment for what he haddone to the Arabians, he slew himself withhis own hand: and Antiochus seized uponall his substance.
CHAP. V.
OF THE ftUARRELS WHICH AROSE RESPECTING THE HIGH-PRIESTHOOD; THE EXPEDITION OF ANTIOCHUS AGAINSTJERUSALEM; THE CRUELTIES EXECUTED ON THE JEWS;ND THE CONDUCT OF THE SAMARITANS.
UPON the death of Onias, the high-priest,they gave the high-priesthood to Jesus,his brother; for that son which Onias left,(Onias IV.) was yet but an infant. And inits proper place we will inform the reader ofall the circumstances that befell this child.But this Jesus, who was the brother of Onias,was deprived of the high-priesthood by theking, who was angry with him, and gave it tohis younger brother; whose name also wasOnias. For Simon had these three sons; toeach of whom the high-priesthood came; aswe have falready informed the reader. ThisJesus changed his name to Jason; but Oniaswas called Menelaus. Now as the formerhigh-priest, Jesus, raised a sedition againstMenelaus, who was ordained after him, themultitude were divided between them both.And the sons of Tobias took the part of Me­nelaus, but the greater part of the peopleassisted Jason; and by that means Menelausand the sons of Tobias were distressed, and


* Chap. iv.
* We have hitherto had but few of those citationswhere Josephus says, that he had elsewhere formerlytreated of many things, of which yet his present bookshave not a syllable. Our commentators have hithertobeen able to give no tolerable account of these citations;which are far too numerous, and that usually in all hiscopies, both Greek and Latin, to be supposed later inter­polations: which is almost all that has been hitherto saidupon this occasion. What I have to observe farther isthis; that we have but very few of these references be­fore, and very many in and after the history of AntiochusEpiphanes and that Josephus's first work, the Hebrew
or Chaldee, as well as the Greek history of the Jewishwar, long since lost, began with that very history. Sothat the references are most probably made to the editionof the seven books of the war. See the several other ex­amples: I mean besides those in the chapter before us:in Antiq. XIII. 2. and chap. 4, 6, 8, and 13. and BookXVIII. chap. 2. As for his latter Greek books of thatwar, now extant, they are frequetiy cited hereafter also:and those citations are still extant therein. See Antiq.XIII. 3, and chap. 5 and 10. See also some other placesthat may give some light to this matter. Antiq. XIV. 6,and chap. 7, and XX. chap. 7. Of the War, I. 8. IV. 8\ 6


4B2







OCR Output








ah. 976.] 297 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


was buried in Jerusalem: having been supe­rior to all other kings in happiness, riches,and wisdom; excepting that when he wasgrown in years, he was deluded by women,and transgressed the law, concerning whichtransgressions, and the miseries which befellthe Hebrews thereby, I think proper to dis­course at another opportunity.*
CHAP. VIII.
of rehoboam's conduct after his father's death; AND
THE REVOLT OF TEN TRIBES UNDER JEROBOAM.
NOWf when Solomon was dead, and hisson Rehoboam (who was born of anAmmonite wife, whose name was Naamah)had succeeded him in the kingdom, therulers of the multitude sent immediately intoEgypt, and recalled Jeroboam. And whenhe was come to the city Shechem, Rehoboamcame thither also; for he had resolved todeclare himself king of the Israelites, whilethey were there gathered together. So therulers of the people, as well as Jeroboam,came to him and said, that he ought to relax,and to be gentler than his father in the servi­tude he had imposed on them; because theyhad borne a heavyJ yoke,|| and that thenthey should be better affected to him, andbe well contented to serve him under hismoderate government, and should do it moreout of love than fear. But Rehoboam toldthem, they should come to him again in threedays' time, when he would give an answer totheir request. This delay gave occasion to


a present suspicion; since he had not giventhem a favourable answer immediately, flow-ever they thought that his consultation aboutit afforded some hope of success.
Rehoboam now called his father's friends,and advised with them, what sort of answerhe ought to give to the multitude. Uponwhich they gave him the advice which be­came friends, and those that knew the tem­per of such a multitude; they advised himto speak in a way more popular than suitedthe grandeur of a king; because he wouldthereby oblige them to submit to him withgood will: it being most agreeable to sub­jects, that their kings should be almost upona level with them. But Rehoboam rejectedthis good and profitable advice: (it was suchat least at that time, when he was to be madeking:) God himself, I suppose, causing whatwas most advantageous to be contemned byhim. So he called for the young men whowere brought up with him,§ and told themwhat advice the elders had given him, andbade them speak what they thought he oughtto do. So they advised him to give the lol-lowing answer to the people, (for neithertheir youth, nor God himself, suffered themto discern what was best,) That his littlefinger should be thicker than his father'sloins; and, if they had met with hard usagefrom his father, they should experience muchrougher treatment from him: and if his fatherhad chastised them with whips, they mustexpect that he would do it with scorpions.**The king was pleased with this advice; and


* This discourse is now wanting.t An. 976.
I Probably in maintaining his court, and, in particular,his numerous wives and concubines.
II What the particular grievances were that thesepeople desired to have redressed, we may gather from 1Kings iv. 7, &c. viz. the tribute Solomon exacted for hisbuildings, the expenses of his family, and the maintenanceof his chariots and horses, which being for the honour.if the nation, ought to have been borne more contentedlyby a people enjoying such a large share of peace andplenty, and from a prince who had brought in such vastriches to his subjects, as made silver to be of no valueat all in his days, chap. x. 21. but people are more sen­sible of their pressures than of their enjoyments, andfeel the least burdens when they are most at ease. It isobservable, however, that among all their complaints,they take no notice of Solomon's-idolatry, or the strangeworship which he had introduced, though this, one wouldthink, should have been reckoned among the greatest oftheir grievances. Patrick'* Commentary. B.
§ It was a common custom among the kings of the east,to have their sons educated among other young lords thatwere of the same age, which, as it created a generousspirit of emulation, and both endeared the prince to thenobles and the nobles to the prince, could not but tendgreatly to the benefit of the public. Sesostris, the mostfamous prince that ever Egypt produced, is said to havebeen educated this way. And by the gallant youths thatwere his cotemporaries and fellow pupils, it was, that heafterwards did so many surprising actions. The samecustom was in use among the Persians, as we may learnfrom the life of Cyrus; and of Alexander the Great weare told, that his father Philip had trained him up in hisyouth, among those young noblemen who became hisgreat captains in the conquest of all Asia. So that Solo­mon's method and design, in the education of his son,was wise and well concerted, though it failed of success.Calmet's Commentary. B.
** That by scorpions is not here meant the small ani­mals so called, which were never used in corrections;but either a shrub with sharp prickles, like the stings







OCR Output








AN.no.] 481 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


her generals Chelcias and Ananias, the sonsof that Onias who built the temple in theprefecture of Heliopolis, like to that at Je­rusalem; as we have *elsewhere related.Cleopatra entrusted these men with her ar­my; and did nothing without their advice; asfStrabo of Cappadocia attests, when he saiththus, "Now the greater part, both those thatcame to Cyprus with us, and those that weresent afterward thither, revolted to Ptolemyimmediately. Only those that were calledOnias's party, being Jews, continued faithful:because their countrymen Chelcias and Ana­nias were in chief favour with the queen."
This prosperous state of affairs howevermoved the Jews to envy Hyrcanus; but theythat were the worst disposed to him were theJPharisees, who are one of the sects of theJews, as we have ||observed already. Thesehave so great a power over the multitude,that when they say any thing against theking, or against the high-priest, they are pre­sently believed. Now Hyrcanus was a dis­ciple of theirs; and greatly beloved by them.And when he once invited them to a feast,and entertained them very kindly; when hesaw them in a good humour, he began tosay to them, that they knew he was desirous


to be a righteous man, and to do all thingswhereby he might please God: which was the
£rofession of the Pharisees also. However,e desired that if they observed him offendingin any point, and going out of the right way,they would recall him back, and correct him.On this occasion they attested to his beingentirely virtuous; with which commendationhe was well pleased. But still there was oneof his guests there, whose name was §Elea-zar, a man of an ill temper, and delighting inseditious practices. This man said: "Sincethou desirest to know the truth, if thou wiltbe righteous in earnest, lay down thy high-priesthood, and content thyself with the civilgovernment of the people." And when he de­sired to know for what cause he ought to laydown the high-priesthood: the other replied,"We have heard it from old men, that thymother had been a captive under the reign ofAntiochus Epiphanes." This story was false:and both Hyrcanus and all the Pharisees hada very great indignation against him.
Now there was one Jonathan, a great friendof Hyrcanus's, but of the sect of the Saddu­cees;** whose notions are quite contrary tothose of the Pharisees. He told Hyrcanus,that "Eleazar had cast such a reproach upon


* Book XII. chap. 9.
t We may observe here, that this and nine more ofJosephus's citations out of Strabo, are not now extant:nay, that no more than one of his ten citations out of himare now extant: which is that taken out of his geography.The occasion is evident; that though Strabo's geographybe extant, yet are all his historical writings lost. SeeFabricius on Strabo, Biblioth. Graec. IV. 1, 7.
I The origin of the Sadducees, as a considerable party,among the Jews, being contained in this and the two fol­lowing sections, take Dean Prideaux's note upon thistheir first public appearance: which I suppose to be true."Hyrcanus," says he, "went over to the party of theSadducees; that is, by embracing their doctrine againstthe traditions of the elders, added to the written law, andmade of equal authority with it: but not their doctrineagainst the resurrection, and a future state. For this can­not be supposed of so good and righteous a man as JohnHyrcanus is said to be. It is most probable, that at thistime the Sadducees had gone no farther in the doctrinesof that sect, than to deny all their unwritten traditions,which the Pharisees were so fond of. For Josephusmentions no other difference at this time between them:neither doth he say that Hyrcanus went over to the Sad­ducees in any other particular than in the abolishing ofall the traditionary constitutions of the Pharisees: whichour Saviour condemned as well as they."
II Chap. 5.
§ This slander, that arose from a Pharisee, has beenpreserved by their successors, the Rabbins, to these latter
ages. For Dr. Hudson assures us, that David Ganz, inhis Chronology, S. Pr. page 77, in Vorstius's version, re­lates that Hyrcanus's mother was taken captive in mountModiith. Sec chap. 13, and Reland in Palaestin. page 901.** In what sense the Sadducees denied the existence ofangels, it is difficult to determine, since they certainlyacknowledge the authority of the Pentateuch. Somepretend, that they accounted the invention of angels buta novel thing, and that their very name was never heardof, until the return from the captivity, and therefore theyrejected them; whilst others suppose, that they lookedupon them as the inseparable powers of God, which,like the rays of the sun, without being parted from thatplanet, shine and shed their influence here below. Butnow considering that the Sadducees received the fivebooks of Moses, they could hardly entertain any suchnotions as these. As therein they read of frequent appa­ritions of angels, they could not fancy them a new inven­tion of Rabbins that had returned from the captivity.As they saw in these books, that they properly camedown from heaven upon earth, they could not imaginethat they were beings inseparable from the Deity; andtherefore we may suppose, that they rather looked uponthem only as so many phantasms; and that, as the bodies,which these angels put on, had perhaps only the appear­ance of human bodies, the same notion they might haveof the spirits which animated them; because every thingexcept God, in their opinion, was material. Basnage'sHistory of the Jews, lib. 1. c. 6. Mr. Basnage, though heallows the question to be difficult, seems to be of a contrary







OCR Output








aN. M»a] 123 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEVT&


taking you for brave and: worthy men, weagreed to your request, that we might treatyou with such honours as hospitality required.And now seeing yao say that you nave agreat affection for us, and are troubled whenyou think we are departing, we are not averseto your entreaties, and if we may receive sa­tisfactory assurance of your good will, we willbe glad to lead our lives with you, as yourwives; but we are afraid that you will in timebe weary of our company, and will then abuseus, and send us back to our parents, after anignominious manner. You must, therefore,excuse us in guarding against that danger."
The young men professed they would givethem any assistance they should desire; nordid they at all contradict what they requested;so great was the passion they had for them.
"If then," rejoined they, "this be yourresolution; since you make use of such cus­toms* and conduct of life as are entirely dif­ferent from all other men; insomuch that yourkinds of food are peculiar to yourselves, andyour kinds of drink not common to others; itwill be absolutely necessary, if you wouldhave us for your wives, that you do withalworship our gods. Nor can there be anyother demonstration of the kindness whichyou say you already have, and promise tohave hereafter to us, than this, that you wor­ship the same gods as we do. For has anyone reason to complain, that now you arecome into this country, you should worshipthe proper gods of the same country? espe­cially while our gods are common to all men,and yours such as belong to nobody but your­selves." So they said they must either comeinto such methods of divine worship as allothers came into, or else they most look outfor another world, wherein they might live bythemselves according to their own laws.
Now the young men were induced, by thefondness they had for these women, tb thinkthey spake very welK So they gave them­selves up to what they suggested, and trans­gressed their own laws; and supposing there
* What Jbsephus here puts into the mouths of theseMidianite women who came to entice the Israelites tolewdness and idolatry; viz. that their worship of the Godof Israel, m opposition to their idol gods-, implied theirliving according to the holy laws, which the true God hadgiven them by I\fosesr in opposition to those impure laws,which were observed under ifteif false gods', well'deserves
VOL. I. NOS. 11 & 12.


were many gods, and resolving that theywould sacrifice to them according to the lawof that country which ordained them: theyboth were delighted with their strange food,and went on to do every thing that the womenwould have them do, though in contradictionto their own laws. So far, indeed, that thistransgression was already gone through thewhole army of the young men: and they fellinto a sedition that was much worse than theformer, and into the danger of the entire abo­lition of their own institutions. For whenonce the youth had tasted of these strangecustoms, they went with insatiable inclinationsinto them; and some of the principal men,who were illustrious on account of the virtuesof their fathers, were also corrupted togetherwith the rest. Even Zimri, the head of thetribe of Simeon, accompanied with Cozbi, aMidianitish woman, who was the daughter ofSur, a man of authority in that country: andbeing desired by his wife to disregard theraws of Moses, and to follow those she wasused to, he complied with her: and this bothby sacrificing after a manner different fromhis own, and by taking a stranger to wife.
When things were in this state, Moses wasafraid that matters would grow worse, andcalled the people to a congregation: he thenaccused nobody by name; as unwilling todrive those to despair, who, by lying con­cealed, might come to repentance; but hosaid, that they did not do what was eitherworthy of themselves, or of their fathers; bypreferring pleasure to God, and to the livingaccording to his will: that it was fit to changetheir courses, while affairs were in a goodstate; and think that to be true fortitude,which, instead of offering violence to theirlaws, enabled them to resist their lusts. Andbesides that, he said, it was not a reasonablething, when they had lived soberly in thewilderness, to act madly now they were inprosperity: and that they ought not to lose inabandance, what they had gained when theyhad Kttre. And thus did he endeavour to cor-
'our consideration; and gives us a substantial reason forthe great concern that was ever showed under the lawsof Moses, to preserve the Israelites from idolatry, and inthe worship of the true-God'; rt being of no less conse­quence than, whether God's people should be governedby. the holy laws-of the true G»d, or by the impure laws,derived from demons,, under the pagan idolatry.
Il







OCR Output








AN. 519.] 395 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


them leave to assist in building the temple."For," said they, "we worship your God, andespecially pray to him, and are desirous ofthe same religious settlement; and this eversince Shalnianezer, king of Assyria, trans­planted us out of Cuthah and Media to thisplace."* When they said thus, Zorobabel,and Jeshua, the high-priest, and the heads ofthe families of the Israelites replied, that itwas impossible to permit them to be theirpartners, whilst they only had been appoint­ed to build that temple at first by Cyrus, andnow by Darius :f although it was indeed law­ful for them to come and worship there, if theypleased; and that they could allow them no­thing but that in common with them.
When the CutheansJ heard this, they hadindignation at it, and persuaded the nationsof Syria to desire of the governors, in thesame manner as they had done formerly in thedays of Cyrus, and in the time of Cambysesafterwards, to put a stop to the building of thetemple; and to endeavour to delay and pro­tract the Jews in their zeal about it. Now atthis time Sisinnes, the governor of Syria, andPhoenicia, and Sathrabuzanes, with certainOthers, came up to Jerusalem, and asked therulers of the Jews, by whose grant it was thatthey built the temple in this manner? sinceit was more like a citadel than a temple.And for what reason it was that they builtcloisters and walls, and those strong ones too,about the city? Zorobabel, and Jeshua the^high-priest, replied, that "they were the ser­vants of God Almighty: that this temple wasbuilt for him by a king of theirs, that lived ingreat prosperity, and one that exceeded allmen in virtue; and that it continued a longtime; but that, because of the impiety oftheir forefathers, Nebuchadnezzar, king ofthe Babylonians and of the Chaldeans, tooktheir city by force, and destroyed it, and pil­laged the temple, and burnt it down, andtransplanted the people whom he had madecaptives, and removed them to Babylon: thatCyrus, who, after him, was king of Babyloniaand Persia, wrote to them to build the tem­ple; and committed the gifts and vessels, andwhatever Nebuchadnezzar had carried oat ofit, to Zorobabel, and Mithridates, the treasu-


* Ezra iv. 1, 2.t Ezra iv. 3.
voL. I.—NOS. 33 & 34.


rer; and gave order to have them carried toJerusalem, and to have them restored to theirown temple, when it was built. For he hadsent to them to have that done speedily; andcommanded Senabassar to go up to take careof the building of the temple. Who uponreceiving that epistle from Cyrus, came, andimmediately laid its foundations. "And al­though it hath been in building from that timeto this," said they, "it hath not yet beenfinished, by reason of the malignity of ourenemies. If therefore you think proper, writethis account to Darius; that when he hathconsulted the records of the kings, he mayfind that we have told you nothing that is falseabout this matter."
When Zorobabel and the high-priest hadmade this answer, Sisinnes, and those thatwere with him, did not resolve to hinder thebuilding, until they had informed king Dariusof all this. So they immediately wrote tohim about these affairs; while the Jews wereunder terror, and afraid lest the king shouldchange his resolution, as to the building ofJerusalem, and of the temple. There were,however, two prophets at that time amongthem, Haggai and Zachariah,who encouragedthem, and bade them be of good cheer, andto suspect no discouragement from the Per­sians: for that God foretold this to them. Soin dependence on those prophets, they appli­ed themselves earnestly to building, and didnot intermit one day.
Now the Samaritans, in their epistle to Da­rius, had accused the Jews of fortifying thecity, and building the temple more like acitadel than a temple; and said that theirdoings were not expedient for the king's af­fairs, and besides, they shewed the epistle ofCambyses, wherein he forbade them to buildthe temple. Darius therefore, when he un­derstood that the restoration of Jerusalem wasnot expedient for his affairs, and when he hadread the epistle that was brought him fromSisinnes, and those that were with him, gaveorder that what concerned these mattersshould be sought for among the royal records.Accordingly a book was found at Ecbatana,in the tower that was in Media, wherein waswritten as follows: "Cyrus the king, in the


 


I Samaritans.


3U







OCR Output








116 [book it. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


.them; and, lest he should embitter the multi-,tude, he only desired the heads of the tribesto bring their rods,* with the names of theirtribes inscribed upon them; and he shouldreceive the priesthood in whose rod Godshould give a sign. This was agreed to; sothe rest brought their rods, as did Aaron also;who had written the tribe of Levi on his rod.These rods Moses laid up in the tabernacle ofGod. On the next day he brought out therods, which were known from one another bythose who brought them; they having dis­tinctly noted them, as had the multitude also;and as to the rest, in the same form Moseshad received them, in that they saw themstill: but they also saw buds and branchesgrown out of Aaron's rod, with ripe almondsupon them; the rod having been cut out ofthat tree. The people were so amazed atthis strange sight, that though Moses andAaron were before under some degree ofhatred, they now laid that hatred aside, andbegan to admire the judgment of God con­cerning them. So that hereafter they ap­plauded what God had decreed, and per­mitted Aaron to enjoy the priesthood peace­ably. And thus God ordained him priestthree several times, and he retained that ho­nour without farther disturbance. And herebythis sedition of the Hebrews, which had lasteda great while, was at length composed.
And now Moses, because the tribe of Leviwas made free from war and warlike expedi­tions, and was set'apart for the Divine wor­ship; lest they should want, and seek afterthe necessaries of life, and so neglect thetemple, commanded the Hebrews, accordingto the will of God, that when they shouldgain the possession of the land of Canaan,they should assign forty-eight good cities tothe Levites, and permit them to enjoy theirsuburbs, as far as the limit of two thousandcubits would extend from the walls of the city.And besides this, he appointed that the peopleshould pay the tithe of their annual fruits ofthe earth, both to the Levites, and to thepriests. And this is what that tribe receivesof the multitude. But I think it necessary toset down what is paid by all, peculiarly to thepriests.
* Concerning these twelve rods of the twelve tribes ofIsrael, see St. Clement's account, much larger than thatin our Bible. 1 Epist. § 43.


Accordingly he commanded the Levites toyield up to the priests thirteen of their forty-eight cities; and to set apart for them thetenth part of the tithe which they every yearreceive of the people; as also that it was butjust to offer to God the first fruits of the entireproduct of the ground; and that they shouldoffer the first-born of those four-footed beaststhat are appointed for sacrifices, if it be amale, to the priests, to be slain, that they andtheir entire families may eat them in the holycity; but that the owners of those first-born,which are not appointed for sacrifices, in thelaws of our country, should bring a shekeland a half in their stead; but for the first-bornof a man, five shekels: that they should alsohave the first-fruits out of the shearing of thesheep; and that when any baked bread-corn,and made loaves of it, they should give some­what of what they baked to them. More­over, when any have made a sacred vow; Imean those that are called Nazarites,f thatsuffer their hair to grow long, and use nowine: when they consecrate their hair, andoffer it for a sacrifice, they are to allot thathair to the priests, to be thrown into the fire.Such, also, as dedicate themselves to God, asa corban, which denotes what the Greeks calla gift, when they are desirous of being freedfrom that ministration, are to lay down moneyfor the priests; thirty shekels if it be a woman,and fifty if it be a man; but if any be too poorto pay the appointed sum, it shall be lawfulfor the priest to determine the sum, as theythink fit. And if any slay a beast at home,for a private festival, but not for a religiousone, they are obliged to bring the maw, andthe cheek, or breast, and the right shoulderof the sacrifice, to the priests. With theseMoses contrived" that the priests should beplentifully maintained; besides what they hadout of these offerings for sins, which the peoplegave them, as I have set it down in the fore­going book. He also ordered, that out ofevery thing allotted for the priests, their ser­vants, their sons, their daughters, and theirwives, should partake as well as themselves:excepting what came to them out of the sa­crifices that were offered for sins. For ofthose none of the family of the priests might
t Grotius observes, that the Greeks, as well as theJews, sometimes consecrated the hair of their heads to th -*gods. On Numb vi. 18.







OCR Output








AN. 24.] 563 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


him great fame among foreigners. And itlooked, as if these calamities, that afflicted hisland to a degree plainly incredible, came inorder to raise his glory, and to be to his greatadvantage. For the greatness of his liberalityin these distresses, which he now demonstra­ted beyond all expectation, did so change thedisposition of the multitude towards him, thatthey were ready to suppose he had been fromthe beginning not such a one as they hadfound him to be by experience; but such aone as the care he had taken of them in sup­plying their necessities proved him now to be.About this time he sent five hundred chosenmen out of his body guards, as auxiliaries toCaesar: whom *Elius Gallus led to the RedSea: and who were of great service to himthere. When therefore his affairs were thusimproved, and again were in a flourishingcondition, he built himself a palace in theupper city; raising the rooms to a very greatheight, and adorning them with the mostcostly furniture of gold, and marble seats, andbeds; and these were so large, that theycould contain many companies of men. Theseapartments were also of different sizes, andhad particular names given them. For oneapartment was called Caesar's, another Agrip-pa's, &c. He also fell in love again, and mar­ried another wife: not suffering his reason tohinder him from living as he pleased. Theoccasion of this marriage was as follows.There was one Simon, a citizen of Jerusalem,the son of Boethus, a citizen of Alexandria,and a priest of great note there. This manhad a daughter, who was esteemed the mostbeautiful woman of that time. And when the
Eeople of Jerusalem began to speak much iner commendation, it happened that Herodwas much affected with what was said of her;and when he saw the damsel he was smittenwith her beauty. Yet did he entirely rejectthe thoughts of using his authority to abuseher; as believing that by so doing he shouldbe stigmatized for violence and tyranny. Sohe thought it best to take the damsel to wife.And while Simon was of a dignity too inferiorto be allied to him; but still too considerableto be despised; he governed his inclinationsafter the most prudent manner, by augmenting


* This Elius Gallus seems to be no other than thatElius Largus, whom Dio speaks of, as conducting an ex­pedition that was about this time made into Arabia Felix,
voL. I. NOS. 47 & 48.


the dignity of the family, and making themmore honourable. Accordingly he deprivedJesus, the son of Phabet, of the high-priest­hood; and conferred that dignity on Simon:and so joined in affinity with him by marryinghis daughter.
When this wedding was over, Herod builtanother citadel, in that place where he hadconquered the Jews, when he was driven outof his government, and Antigonus enjoyed it.This citadel is distant from Jerusalem aboutsixty furlongs. It was strong by nature, andfit for such a building. It is a sort of a mo­derate hill, raised to a farther height by thehand of man; till it was of the shape of a wo­man's breast. It is encompassed with circu­lar towers; and has a straight ascent to it;which is composed of two hundred steps ofpolished stones. Within it are royal and veryrich apartments, of a structure that providedboth for security and for beauty. About thebottom there are habitations of such a struc­ture as are well worth seeing; both on otheraccounts, and also on account of the waterwhich is brought thither from a great wayoff. and at vast expense. For the place itselfis destitute of water. The plain that is aboutthis citadel- is full of edifices, not inferior toany city in largeness: and having the hillabove it in the nature of a castle.
And now, when all Herod's designs hadsucceeded according to his hopes, he had notthe least suspicion that any troubles couldarise in his kingdom: because he kept hispeople obedient, as well by the fear theystood in of him, (for he was implacable in theinfliction of his punishments,) as by the provi­dent care he had shewn towards them afterthe most magnanimous manner, when theywere under their distresses. But still he tookcare to have external security for his govern­ment, as a fortress against his subjects. Forthe orations he made to the cities were veryfine, and full of kindness: and he cultivated agood understanding with their governors, andbestowed presents on every one of them; in­ducing them thereby to be more friendly tohim, and using his magnificent disposition soas his kingdom might be the better securedto him: and this till all his affairs were every
LIII. according to Petavius: who is here cited by Span-heiro. See a full account of this expedition in Prideaux,at the years 24 and 23.
4S







OCR Output








542 [book XV. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


mons; for he had no possible way to avoid it.So he left his *uncle Joseph procurator forhis government, and for the public affairs;and gave him a private charge, that ifAntony should kill him, he also should killMariamne immediately. For that he had atender affection for her, and was afraid ofthe injury that should be offered him, if,after his death, she for her beauty, should beengaged to some other man. But his inti­mation was nothing but this, at the bottom;that Antony had fallen in love with her,when he had formerly heard somewhat ofher beauty. So when Herod had given Jo­seph this charge, and had no sure hopesof escaping with his life; he went away toAntony.
But as Joseph was administering the pub­lic affairs of the kingdom, and for that reasonwas very frequently with Mariamne; bothbecause his business required it, and becauseof the respects he ought to pay to the queen;he frequently entered into conversation aboutHerod's kindness, and great affection towardsher: and when the women, especially Alexan­dra, used to turn his discourses into raillery,Joseph was so over desirous to demonstratethe king's inclinations, that he proceeded sofar as to mention the charge he had received:and thence drew his demonstration, thpf He­rod was not able to live without her; and thatif he should come to any ill end^Jre could notendure a separation from heiyeven after hewas dead. The women, however, as wasnatural, did not take this to be an instanceof Herod's strong affection, but of his severeusage of them; that they could not escapedestruction, nor a tyrannical death, evenwhen he was dead himself. And this sayingof Joseph's was a foundation for the women'ssevere suspicions about him afterwards.
At this time a report went about the cityJerusalem, among Herod's enemies, that An­tony had tortured Herod, and put him todeath. This report, as is natural, disturbedthose that were about the palace; but chieflythe women. Upon which Alexandra endea­voured to persuade Joseph to go out of thepalace, and flee away with them to the en­signs of the Roman legion; which then layencamped about the city, as a guard to the
* Of the four Josephs in these histories, see the note


kingdom, under the command of Julius. Forthat, by this means, if any disturbance shouldhappen about the palace, they should be ingreater security; as having the Romans fa­vourable to them. And that besides, theyhoped to obtain the highest authority, if An­tony did but once see Mariamne: by whosemeans they should recover the kingdom,and want nothing which was reasonable forthem to hope for, because of their royal ex­traction.
But as they were in the midst of these de­liberations, letters were brought from Herod,about all his affairs; and proved contrary tothe report, and of what they before expected.For when he was come to Antony, he soonrecovered his interest with him, by the pre­sents which he had carried with him fromJerusalem: and he soon induced him, upondiscoursing with him, to leave off his indig­nation at him. So that Cleopatra's persua­sions had less force, than the arguments andpresents he brought, to regain his friendship.For Antony said, that it was not good to re­quire an account of a king, as to the affairsof his,jg^»«TmiTe«t. Far at this rate hecoiikMSe no king at all: but thai ihosewno had given him that authority ought topermit him to make use of it. He also toldCleopatra, that it would be best for her notto meddle with the acts of the king's govern­ment. Herod wrote an account of thesethings; and enlarged upon the other honourswhich he had received from Antony. Howhe sat by him at his hearing causes, andtook his diet with him every day; and thathe enjoyed those favours from him, notwith­standing the reproaches that Cleopatra soseverely laid against him, who, having agreat desire of his country, and earnestlyentreating Antony that the kingdom mightbe given to her, laboured with her utmostdiligence to remove him out of the way.But that he still found Antony just to him;and had no longer any apprehensions of hardtreatment from him. And that he was soonto set out upon his return, with a firmer addi­tional assurance of his favour to him, in hisreigning and managing public affairs; andthat there was no longer any hope for Cleo­patra's covetous temper; since Antony had
On the War, Book I. chap. 28.


 







OCR Output








41$ [book XI. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


But the elders of Jerusalem being very un­easy that the brother of Jaddua the high-priest, though married to a foreigner, shouldbe a partner with him in the high-priesthood,quarrelled with him. For they esteemed thisman's marriage a step to such as should bedesirous of transgressing about the marriageof strange wives; and that this would bethe beginning of a mutual intercourse withforeigners; although the offence of someabout marriages, and their having marriedwives that were not of their own country, hadbeen an occasion of their former captivity,and of the miseries they then underwent. Sothey commanded Mauasseh to divorce hiswife, or not to approach the altar: the high-priest himself joining with the people in theirindignation against his brother, and drivinghim away from the altar. Whereupon Ma­uasseh came to his father-in-law, Sanhallat,and told him, that although he loved hisdaughter Nicaso, yet he was not willing to bedeprived of his sacerdotal dignity on her ac­count; which was the principal dignity intheir nation, and always continued in thesame family. But Sanballat promised notonly to preserve to him the honour of hispriesthood, but to procure for him the powerand dignity of a high-priest, and to make himgovernor of all the places he himself nowruled, if he would keep his daughter for hiswife. He also told him farther, that he wouldbuild him a temple like to that at Jerusalem,upon mount Gerizzim; which is the highestof all the mountains that are in Samaria: andhe promised that he would do this with theapprobation of Darius the king. Manassehwas elevated with these promises; and staidwith Sanballat; upon a supposal that heshould gain a high-priesthood, as bestowedon him by Darius. For it happened thatSanballat was then in years. But there wasnow a great disturbance among the people ofJerusalem, because many of those priests andLevites were entangled in such matches.For they all revolted to Manasseh: and San­ballat afforded them money; and dividedamong them land for tillage, and habitationsalso; and all this in order to gratify his son-in-law.
About this* time Darius heard how Alex-
* An. 334.


ander had passed over the Hellespont; andhad beaten his lieutenants, in the battle atGranicum; and was proceeding farther.Whereupon he assembled an army of horseand foot, and determined that he would meetthe Macedonians, before they should assaultand conquer all Asia. So he passed over theriver Euphrates; and came over Taurus, theCelician mountain; and at Issus of Cilicia hewaited for the enemy, as ready there to givehim battle. Now Sanballat was glad thatDarius was come down; and told Manassehthat he would perform his promises to him assoon as Darius should come back, after hehad beaten his enemies. For not he only,but all those that were in Asia also, were per­suaded that the Macedonians would not somuch as come to a battle with the Persians;on account of their multitude. But the eventproved otherwise than they expected. Forthe king joined battle with the Macedonians,and was beaten, and lost a great part of hisarmy. His mother also, with his wife, andchildren, were taken captives; and he fledinto Persia. So Alexander came into Syria,and took Damascus: and when he had ob­tained Sidon, he besieged Tyre. He thensent an epistle to the Jewish high-priest, re­quiring him to send him some auxiliaries; andto supply his army with provisions: and thatwhat presents he formerly sent to Darius hewould now send to him; and choose thefriendship of the Macedonians: and that heshould never repent of so doing. But thehigh-priest answered the messengers, that hehad given his oath to Darius, not to bear armsagainst him: and he said he would not trans­gress it, while Darius was in the land of theliving. Upon hearing this answer, Alexanderwas very angry; and though he determinednot to leave Tyre, which was just ready tobe taken; yet as soc> o as he had taken it, hethreatened that he would make an expeditionagainst the Jewish high-priest, and throughhim teach all men to whom they must keeptheir oaths. So when he had, with a gooddeal of pains, during the 6iege, taken Tyre,and had settled its affairs, he came to thecity of Gaza, and besieged both the city, andhim that was governor of the garrison, whosename was Babemeses.
But Sanballat thought he had now a properopportunity of making his attempt. So he







OCR Output








134 [book IV. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


or if, when he is dead, her first husband wouldmarry her again, it shall not be lawful for herto return to him. If a woman's husband die,and leave her without children, let his brothermarry her, and let him call the son that isborn to him, by his brother's name, and edu­cate him as the heir of his inheritance; forthis procedure will be for the benefit of thepublic; because thereby families will not fail,and the estate will continue among the kin­dred; and this will be for the solace of wivesunder their affliction, that they are to be mar­ried to the next relations of their former hus­bands. But if the brother will not marry her,let the woman come before the senate, andprotest openly that his brother will not admither for his wife, but will injure the memoryof his deceased brother, while she is willingto continue in the family, and to bear himchildren. And when the senate have enquiredof him, for what reason it is that he is averseto this marriage, whether he gives a bad orgood reason, the matter must come to thisissue; that the woman shall loose the sandalsof the brother, and shall spit in his face, andsay, " He deserves this reproachful treatmentas having injured the memory of the de­ceased." And then let him go away out ofthe senate, and bear this reproach upon himall his life long; and let her marry to whomshe pleases, of such as seek her in marriage.*But if any man take captive either a virgin,or one that hath beenf married, and has amind to marry her, let him not be allowed tobring her to his bed, or to live with her as hiswife, before she hath her head shaven, andhath put on her mourning habit, and lamentedher relations and friends that were slain inthe battle; that by this means she may give


vent to her sorrow for them, and after thatmay betake herself to feasting, and matri­mony; for it is good for him who takes a wo­man in order to have children by her, to becomplaisant to her inclinations, and not merelyto pursue his own pleasure, while he hath noregard to what is agreeable to her. But whenthirty days are past, as the time of mourning,(for so many are sufficient for prudent per­sons for lamenting the dearest friends,) thenlet them proceed to the marriage. But incase when he hath gratified his desires, he betoo proud to retain her for his wife, let himnot have it in his power to make her a slave,but let her go away whither she pleases, andhave that privilege of a free woman.J
As to those young men that despise theirparents, and do not pay them honour, butoffer them affronts; either because they areashamed of them, or think themselves wiserthan they. In the first place, let their parentsadmonish them in words; (for they are bynature of authority sufficient for becomingtheir judges,) and let them say thus to them:"That they cohabited together, not for thesake of pleasure, nor for the augmentation oftheir riches, by joining both their stocks to­gether; but that they might have children, totake care of them in their old age; and mightby them have what they then should want;"and say farther to him, " When thou wast bornwe took thee up with gladness; and gave Godthe greatest thanks for thee; and brought theeup with great care, and spared for nothingthat appeared useful for thy preservation, andfor thy instruction in what was most excellent.And now, since it is reasonable to forgive thesins of those that are young, let it suffice theeto have given so many indications of thy con-many other customs of that ancient people, in common withthe inhabitants of Syria, and with the Arabians in general."'


* Deut. xxv. 5. From this ancient custom the Athe-uians appear to have that remarkable law, that no heiressmust marry out of her kindred, but shall resign up her­self and fortune to her nearest relations: and by the samelaw the nearest relation was obliged to marry her. Pot­ter's Gr. Ant. vol. i. p. 159.
Among the modern eastern nations we still meet withthe law, or custom, of marrying the brother's widow.Thus Olearius (Ambassador's Travels into Persia, p. 417,Eng. edit.) informs us concerning the Circassians: "Whena man dies without issue, his brother is obliged to marrythe widow, to raise up seed to him." Volney, (Voyageen Syrie, tom. ii. p. 74,) observes, that "the Druzes re­tain, to a certain degree, the custom of the Hebrews,which directed a man to marry his brother's widow: butthis is not peculiar to them, for they have this as well as
Amongst the Arabians, if a father left one or morewidows, the sons often marry them, provided they werenot their own mothers. This usage was suppressed byMohammed; and before this time it was marked with adegree of detestation. Lord Haile's (Annals of Scotland,p. 39,) informs us, that this custom prevailed in Scotlandso late as the eleventh century: and he supposes that itmight have originated from avarice, in order to relievethe heir from the payment of a jointure. B.
t Here it was supposed that this captive's husband, ifshe were before a married woman, was dead before, orrather was slain in this battle. Otherwise it would havebeen adultery in him that married her
t Deut. xxi. 14







OCR Output








104 [book XI. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


messengers through the country, and gaveorder that they should have a remission oftheir labours, and should keep a festival manydays, on account of his kingdom. In likemanner did Vashti,* the queen, gather herguests together, and made them a feast in thepalace. Now the king was desirous to shewher, who exceeded all other women in beauty,to those that feasted with him; and sent someto command her to come to his feast. Butshe, out of regard to the laws of the Persians,which forbid the wives to be seen by stran­gers, did not go to the king. And though herepeatedly sent the eunuchs to her, she didnevertheless refuse to come: till the kingwas so much irritated, that he broke up theentertainment, and rose up, and called forthose seven, who had the interpretation ofthe laws committed to them, and accused hiswife, and said, that he had been affronted byher; because when she was frequently calledby him to his feast, she did not obey him.He therefore gave order, that they should in­form him what could be done by the lawagainst her. So one of them, whose namewas Memucan, said, that this affront was of­fered not to him alone, but to all the Persians;who were in danger of leading their lives veryill with their wives, if they must be despisedby them. For that none of their wives wouldhave any reverence for their husbands, ifthey had such an example of arrogance inthe queen towards him who ruled over all.Accordingly he exhorted him to punish herwho had been guilty of so great an affrontto him, after a severe manner; and when hehad so done, to publish to the nations whathad been decreed about the queen. So the


resolution was to put Vashti away, and togive her dignity to another woman.f
But the king having been fond of her, didnot well bear a separation: and yet by thelaw he could not admit of a reconciliation.So he was under trouble as not having it inhis power to do what he desired. But whenhis friends saw him so uneasy, they advisedhim to cast the memory of his wife, and hislove for her out of his mind; and to sendabroad over all the habitable earth, and tosearch out for comely virgins, and to take herwhom he should best like, for his wife, be­cause his passion for his former wife wouldbe quenched by the introduction of another;and the kindness he had for Vashti would bewithdrawn from her, and be placed on herthat was with him. Accordingly he was per­suaded to follow this advice; and gave orderto certain persons to choose out of the vir­gins that were in his kingdom, those thatwere esteemed to be most comely. So whena great number of these virgins were gather­ed together, there was found a damsel inBabylon, whose parents were dead, and shewas brought with her uncle Mordecai; whowas of the tribe of Benjamin, and one of theprincipal persons among the Jews. Now itproved that this damsel, whose name wasEsther, was the most beautiful of all the rest;and that the grace of her countenance drewthe eyes of the spectators principally uponher. So she was committed to one of theeunuchs, to take the care of her, and shewas provided with odours, and with costlyointments, such as her body required to beanointed withal.J And this was used for six.months by the virgins; who were in number


* It has been a great inquiry among the learned, whothis Vashti was. Those who make the Ahasuerus in Scrip­ture to be Darius the son of Hystaspes, suppose that shewas Atossa the daughter of Cyrus, who was first marriedto Cambyses, her own brother, then to the Magian, whowould have passed for Smerdis, and last of all to Darius.Others suppose, that she was Ahasnerus's own sister, be-ca'i*e the Persians, in those days, made no scruple in thesekind of marriages; though there is much more reason tothink, that before her marriage, there had been such acollection of virgins made for the use of. the king, as wasbefore Esther's, (this is implied in chap. ii. 19.) and thathaving the good fortune then of obtaining the preferencein the king's esteem, she was created queen, but beingperhaps a woman of no high descent, her family extrac­tion, for that reason, might be concealei'. CalmeCs Die-tionary, under the name. B.
t Esther ii. 3, 4.
j The reason is assigned in the following verse, fortheir being kept so long in this course, viz. that for sixmonths they might be anointed with the oil of myrrh,which, besides the fragrancy of its smell, was good tomake the skin soft and smooth, and clear it from all man­ner of scurf; and for six more with sweet odours, whichin these hot countries, were necessary to take away all illscents, and, as some think, to make the body more vigor­ous. But besides this, there might be something of statein making those vassals, (for such they were accounted,)wait, before they were admitted to the honour of theking's bed; and something of precaution too, in keepingthem recluse for so long a time, that the king might besatisfied, that he was not imposed upon by a child begot­ten by any other man. Patrick's Commentary, and PooVtAnnotations on Esther ii. 12. B.







OCR Output








664 [book XV. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


way more and more augmented. But thenthis magnificent temper of his, and that sub­missive behaviour and liberality which he ex­ercised towards Caesar, and the most power­ful men of Rome, obliged him to transgressthe customs of his nation, and to set asidemany of their laws: and by building citiesafter an extravagant manner, and erectingtemples: *not in Judea indeed, for thatwould not have been permitted; it beingforbidden us to pay any honour to images, orrepresentations of animals, after the mannerof the Greeks; but still he did thus in thecountry properly, out of our bounds, and inthe cities thereof. The apology which hemade to the Jews for these things was, thatall was done, not out of his own inclinations,but by the commands and injunctions ofothers, in order to please Caesar, and theRomans; as though he had not the Jewishcustoms so much in his eye, as he had thehonour of those Romans; while yet he hadhimself entirely in view all the while: andindeed was very ambitious to leave greatmonuments of his government to posterity.Whence it was that he was so zealous inbuilding such fine cities, and expended suchvast sums of money upon them.
Now fupon his noticing a place near thesea, which was very proper for containing acity, and was before called Strato's tower,he set about getting a plan for a magnificentcity there; and erected many edifices ofwhite stone, with great diligence all over it.He also adorned it with most sumptuouspalaces, and large edifices for containingthe people; and what was the greatest andmost laborious work of all, he adorned itwith a haven, that was always free from thewaves of the sea. Its largeness was notless than the Pyraeum, at Athens; and hadtowards the city a double station for theships. It was of excellent workmanship;and this was the more remarkable for itsbeing built in a place that of itself was notsuitable to such noble structures, but was tobe brought to perfection by materials fromother places, and at very great expenses.
* One may here take notice, that how tyrannical andextravagant soever Herod were in himself, and in hisGrecian cities, as to those plays, shews, and temples foridolatry, mentioned above, chap. 8, and here also, yetdurst even he introduce very few of them into the cities


This city is situate in Phoenicia, in the pas­sage by sea to Egypt, between Joppa andDora; which are lesser maritime cities, andnot fit for havens, on account of the impetu­ous south winds that beat upon them; whichrolling the sands that come from the seaagainst the shores, do not admit of shipslying in their station: but the merchantsare generally there forced to ride at theiranchors in the sea itself. So Herod endea­voured to rectify this inconvenience; andlaid out such a compass towards the land, asmight be sufficient for a haven, wherein thegreat ships might lie in safety. And this heeffected by letting down vast stones of abovefifty feet in length; not less than eighteenin breadth, and nine in depth, into twentyfathoms deep: and as some were lesser, sowere others bigger, than those dimensions.This mole which he built by the seasidewas two hundred feet wide; the half ofwhich was opposed to the current of thewaves, so as to keep off those waves whichwere to break upon them: and so was calledProcymatia or the first breaker of the waves:but the other half had upon it a wall, withseveral towers: the largest of which was awork of very great excellence, and wascalled Drusus, from the son-in-law of Caesar,who died young. There were a great num­ber of arches where the mariners dwelt:and there was also before them a key, orlanding place, which ran round the entirehaven, and was a most agreeable walk. Butthe entrance or mouth of the port was madeon the north quarter; on which side wasthe stillest of the winds of all in this place.And the basis of the whole circuit on theleft hand, at the entrance of the port, sup­ported a round turret; which was made verystrong, in order to resist the greatest waves;while on the right hand, stood two vaststones, and those each of them larger thanthe turret which was over against them.These stood upright, and were joined to­gether. Now there were edifices all alongthe circular haven made of the finest stone;with a certain elevation, whereon was erected
of the Jews: who, as Josephus here notes, would noteven then have permitted it; so zealous were the} stillfor many of the laws of Moses, even under so tyrannicala government as this of Herod the Great.t An. 22.







OCR Output








376 [book X. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


Chaldeans; and they exercised themselves inthat wisdom which he had ordered theyshould apply themselves to. Now amongthese were four of the family of Zedekiah, ofmost excellent dispositions; the one of whomwas called Daniel; another was called Ana­nias; another Misael, and the fourth Azarias.*And the king of Babylon changed theirnames, and commanded that they shouldmake use of other names. Daniel he calledBaltasar; Ananias, Shadrach; Misael, Me-shach; and Azarias, Abednego.f These theking had in esteem, and continued to love;on account of their excellent temper, theirapplication to learning, and the progressthey had made in wisdom.
Now Daniel and his kinsmen had resolvedto use a severe diet, and to abstain from thosekinds of food which came from the king'stable; and entirely to forbear to eat of allliving creatures. So he came to Ashpenaz,who was that eunuch to whom the care ofthem was committed,J and desired him totake and spend what was brought for themfrom the king, but to give them pulse anddates for their food, and any thing else, be­sides the flesh of living creatures, that hepleased; for that their inclinations were tothat sort of food, and that they disliked theother. He replied, that he was ready toserve them in what they desired; but hesuspected that they would be discovered bythe king, from their meagre bodies, and thealteration of their countenances; because it


could not be avoided but their bodies andcomplexions must be changed with their diet;especially while they would be clearly dis­covered by the finer appearance of the otherchildren, who would tare better; and thusthey should bring him into danger, and occa­sion him to be punished. However, theypersuaded Arioch to give them what theydesired for ten days, by way of trial; and, incase their habits of bodies were not altered,to go on in the same way; as expecting thatthey should not be hurt thereby afterwards;but that if he saw them look worse than therest, he should reduce them to their formerdiet. Now it appeared that they were sofar from becoming worse, by the use of thisfood, that they grew plumper, and fuller inbody than the rest; insomuch that he thoughtthose who fed upon what came from the king'stable seemed less plump and full; whilethose that were with Daniel looked as if theyhad lived in plenty, and in all sorts of luxury.||Arioch, therefore, from that time, securelytook himself what the king sent every dayfrom his supper, according to custom, to thechildren; but gave them the aforementioneddiet; while they had their souls in somemeasure more pure, and less burdened, ands"o fitter for learning; and had their bodiesbetter adapted for labour. For they neitherhad the former oppressed and heavy withvariety of meats; nor were the other effemi­nate on the same account. So they readilyunderstood all the learning that was among


* It was a usual thing for conquerors to change thenames of the persons they vanquished in war, in testi­mony of their absolute power over them. Thus we findthe king of Babylon changing the name of Mattaniah intoZedekiah, when he constituted him king of Judah,2 Kings xxiv. 17. But our learned Usher has farther re­marked that the king of Egypt gave Eliakim the name ofJehoiakim, thereby to testify, that he ascribed his victoryover the Babylonians to Jehovah, the God of Israel, bywhose excitation, as he pretended, 2Chron. xxxv. 21, 22.he undertook the expedition. Patrick's and CahnersCommentary. B.
t It is very remarkable, that, as all their former namesrelated to the true God, so all the names which on thisoccasion were imposed upon these four Jewish youthshad some reference or other to Babylonish idols. Danielin Hebrew, signifies God is my judge; Belteshazzar, inChaldee, is the treasure of Baal; Hananiah, in Hebrew,is well pleasing to God; Shadrach, in Chaldee, the in­spiration of the sun; Mishael, in Hebrew, proceedingfro;n God; Meshach, in Chaldee, belonging to the god­dess Sheshach; Azariah, in Hebrew, God is my help;
and Abednego, in Chaldee, the servant of Nego, i. e. thesun or the morning-star, both deities among the Babylo­nians, and so called because of their brightness. Colmef'sCommentary on Dan. i. 7. B.
\ What we render master of the eunuchs, may verylikely signify the chief minister of Nebuchadnezzar'scourt. Such officers, in the palaces of eastern princes,were usually called eunuchs; because they who had thecontrol of the king's household, as we say, were ordi­narily such, though many times it might be otherwiseThe Jews have a notion, that Daniel and his three com­panions were, by the order of Nebuchadnezzar, madeeunuchs, that the prophecy of Isaiah might be fulfilled:—Thy sons, that shall issue from thee, shall they takeaway, and they shall be eunuchs in the palace of the kingof Babylon, chap, xxxix. 7. Buf that is no conclusivereason; because, in that prophecy, as well as in the pas­sage we are now upon, the name of eunuch might meanno more than any person who had an employment at court.Calmefs Commentary. B.
II Daniel i. 15.







OCR Output








an. 1492.] 133 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


give the first fruits to the priests. But whenany one hath done this, and hath brought thetithe of all that he hath, together with thosefirst fruits that are for the Levites, and for thefestivals; and when he is about to go home,let him stand before the holy house, and re­turn thanks to God, that he hath deliveredthem from the injurious treatment they hadin Egypt; and hath given them a good land,and permits them to enjoy the fruits thereof;and when he has openly testified that he hathfully paid the tithes, and other dues, accord­ing to the law of Moses, let him intreat Godthat he will be ever merciful and gracious tohim; and continue to be so to all the Hebrews,both by preserving the good things he hathalready given them, and by adding what isstill in his power to bestow.
Let the Hebrews marry, at a proper age,virgins that are free, and born of good parents.And he that does not marry a virgin, let himnot corrupt another man's wife, and marryher; nor grieve her former husband. Norlet free-men marry slaves; although their af­fections should strongly bias any of them so todo: for it is decent, and for the dignity of thepersons themselves, to govern such affections.And farther, no one ought to marry a harlot,whose matrimonial oblations, arising fromprostitution, God will not receive. For bythese means the dispositions of the childrenwill be liberal and virtuous. I mean whenthey are not born of base parents, and of theconjunction of such as marry women that arenot free. If any one has been espoused to awoman as to a virgin, and does not afterwardfind her so to be, let him bring his action, andaccuse her; and let him make use of such in­dications to prove his accusation as he is fur­nished withal. And let the father or the bro­ther of the damsel, or some one that is afterthe nearest kin to her, defend her. And ifthe damsel obtain a sentence in her favour,that she had not been guilty, let her live withher husband that accused her. And let himnot have any farther power at all to put heraway, unless she give him very great occa­sion of suspicion, and such as can no way becontradicted. But for him that brings an ac­cusation and calumny against his wife, in an
* These words of Josephus are very like those of thePharisees to our Saviour upon this very subject: Matthew


impudent and rash manner, let him be pu­nished by receiving forty stripes save one,and let him pay fifty shekels to her father;but if the damsel be convicted, as havingbeen corrupted, and is one of the commonpeople, let her be stoned; because she didnot preserve her chastity till she were law­fully married; but if she were the daughter ofa priest, let her be burnt alive. If any onehath two wives, and if he greatly respect andbe kind to one of them; either of his affectionto her, or for her beauty, or for some otherreason; while the other is of less esteem withhim; and if the son of her that is beloved bethe younger by birth than another born of theother wife, but endeavours to obtain the rightof primogeniture from his father's kindness tohis mother, and would thereby obtain a doubleportion of his father's substance, (for thatdouble portion is what I have allotted him inthe laws,) let not this be permitted. For itis unjust that he, who is the elder by birth,should be deprived of what is due to him, onthe father's disposition of his estate, becausehis mother was not equally regarded by him.He that hath corrupted a damsel, espousedto another man, in case he had her consent,let both him and her be put to death, for theyare both equally guilty; the man, because hopersuaded the woman willingly to submit toan impure action, and to prefer it to lawfulwedlock; the woman, because she was per­suaded to yield herself to be corrupted, eitherfor pleasure, or for gain. However, if a manmeet with a woman when she is alone, andforce her, where nobody is present to conicto her assistance, let him only be put todeath. Let him that hath corrupted a virgin,not yet espoused, marry her: but if the fatherof the damsel be not willing she should behis wife, let him pay fifty shekels as the priceof her prostitution. He that desires to bedivorced from his wife, for* any cause what­soever; and many such causes happen amongmen, let him in writing give assurance that hewill never use her as nis wife any more; forby this means she may be at liberty to marryanother husband; although before this bill ofdivorce be given, she is not to be permittedso to do. But if she be misused by him also,
xix. 3. Is it lawful for a man to put away his wife forevery cause?


Kk2







OCR Output








Air. 1116.] 187 ANTIQUITIES OP THE JEWS.


however, in no long time they would sorelyrepent of what they did, which repentanceyet could not undo what was thus done forfuturity; that they would be sufficiently re­buked for their contempt, and the ungratefulconduct they had used towards Him, andtowards the prophetic office: "So I commandthee," said the Deity, "to ordain them sucha one as I shall name beforehand to be theirking, when thou hast first described whatmischiefs regal government will bring uponthem, and openly testified before them untowhat a great change of affairs they arehasting."*
When Samuel had heard this, he calledthe Jews early in the morning, and confessedto them that he was to ordain them a king;but he said, that he was first to describe tothem what would follow, what treatment theywould receive from their kings, and with howmany mischiefs they must struggle. "Forknow ye," said he, "that in the first place,they will take your sons away from you; andthey will command some of them to be dri­vers of their chariots, and some to be theirhorsemen, and the guards of their body; andothers of them to be runners before them, andcaptains of thousands, and captains of hun­dreds; they will also make them their arti­ficers, makers of armour, and of chariots, andof instruments; they will make them theirhusbandmen also, and the guardians df theirown fields, and the diggers of their own vine­yards. Nor will there be any thing whichthey will not do at their commands, as if theywere slaves bought with money. They willalso appoint your daughters to be confec­tioners, and cooks, and bakers; and thesewill be obliged to do all sorts of work whichwomen slaves that are in fear of stripes andtorments submit to. They will, besides this,take away your possessions, and bestow themupon their eunuchs, and the guards of theirbodies, and will give the herds of your cattleto their own servants; and, in brief, you andall that is yours will be servants to your king,and will become no way superior to his slaves.Now when you suffer thus, you will be re­minded of what I now say; and when you re­pent of what you have done, you will beseechGod to have mercy upon you, and to grant you


a quick deliverance from your kings; but hewill not accept your prayers, but will neglectyou, and permit you to suffer the punishmentyour evil conduct has deserved."
But the multitude was still deaf to thesepredictions of what would befall them; andtoo peevish to suffer a determination whichthey had injudiciously made, to be taken outof their mind; for they could not be turnedfrom their purpose, nor did they regard thewords of Samuel, but peremptorily insistedon their resolution, and desired him to ordairtthem a king immediately, and not to troublehimself with fears of what would come here­after; for that it was necessary that theyshould have with them one to fight their bat­tles, and to avenge them of their enemies;and that it was no way absurd, when theirneighbours were under regal government,that they should have the same form of go­vernment also. So when Samuel saw thatwhat he had said had not diverted themfrom their purpose, but that they continuedresolute, he said, "Go you every one homefor the present, and I will send for you assoon as I shall have learned from God who itis that he will give you for your king."t
CHAP. IV.
OF THE APPOINTMENT OF A KING OVER THE ISRAELITES,BY THE COMMAND OF GOD.
THERE was one of the tribe of Benjamin,a man of a good family, and of a vir­tuous disposition; his name was Kish. Hehad a son, a young man of a comely counte­nance, and of a tall stature, but his under­standing and his mind were preferable towhat was visible in him; they called him Saul.Now this Kish had some fine she asses thathad wandered out of the pasture whereinthey fed, so he sent out his son, and one ser­vant with him, to search for the beasts. Butwhen he had gone over his own tribe in searchafter the asses, he went to other tribes, andwhen he found them not there neither, he de­termined to return home, lest he should oc­casion any concern to his father about him­self. But his servant told him, as they were >near the city of Ramah, that there was a trueprophet in that city, and advised him to go to


* Sam. viii. 9.voL. I.—NOS. 15 & 16.
t 1 Sam. viii. 22.
Rr







OCR Output








314 [book vni. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


driving twelve yoke of oxen, he came tohim, and cast his own garment upon him.Upon which Elisha began to prophesy; andleaving his oxen, he followed Elijah. Andwhen he desired leave to salute his parents,Elijah gave him leave so to do: and whenhe had bidden them adieu, he followed him,and became the disciple and the servant ofElijah all the days of his life. And thus haveI related the affairs in which this prophetwas concerned.
Now* there was one Naboth,f of the cityIzar, who had a field adjoining to that of theking's. The king would have persuadedhim to sell him that field, which lay so nearto his own lands, at what price he pleased:that he might join them together, and makethem one farm; and if he would not acceptof money for it, he gave him leave to chooseany of his other fields in its stead. But Na-both said he would not do so; but wouldkeep the possession of that land of his own,which he had by inheritance from his father.JUpon this the king was grieved, as if he hadreceived an injury, when he could not getanother man's possession; and would neitherwash himself, nor take any food. And whenJezebel asked him, what it was that troubledhim? and why he would neither wash him-


self, nor eat? he related to her the perverse-ness of Naboth; and how when he had madeuse of gentle words to him, and such as werebeneath the royal authority, he had beenaffronted, and had not obtained what he de­sired. However, she persuaded him not tobe cast down at this accident; but to leaveoff his grief, and return to the usual care ofhis body: for that she would take care tohave Naboth punished. And she immedi­ately sent letters to the rulers of the Jez-reelites in Ahab's name; and commandedthem to fast,|| and to assemble a congrega­tion, and to set Naboth at the head of them,because he was of an illustrious family; andto have three bold men ready to bear wit­ness that he had blasphemed God and theking;§ and then to stone him, and slay himin that manner. Accordingly when Nabothhad been thus accused, he was stoned by themultitude and slain. When Jezebel heardthat, she went to the king, and desired himto take possession of Naboth's vineyard onfqee cost. So Ahab was glad of what hadbeen done; and rose up immediately fromthe bed whereon he lay, to go to see Na­both's vineyard: but God had great indig­nation at it, and sent Elijah the prophet tothe field of Naboth, to speak to Ahab, and


* About an. 899.
t The account of Ahab's coveting Naboth's vineyard,as Abarbinel observes, is immediately set after his treat­ment of Benhadad, to shew his extreme great wickednessin sparing him, as Saul did Agag king of the Amalekites,and killing Naboth, that he might get possession of hisvineyard. For this was a high aggravation of his crime,that he basely murdered a just Israelite, and let an im­pious enemy escape. Patrick's Commentary. B.
J As it is natural to all men to love and value the an­cient possessions that have been in their family; so thelaw of Moses prohibited the alienation of lands from onetribe or family to another, unless a man was reduced topoverty, in which case he might sell it to the jubilee;but then it was to revert to him again, Lev. xxv. 15, 25,28. Now as Naboth was in no need to sell his vineyard,so he considered with himself, that, if merely to do theking a pleasure, he should part with it out of his hands,especially to be made a garden, and so annexed to thepalace, neither he nor his posterity, should ever be ableto recover it again; so that, in this act, he should bothoffend God, and injure his posterity, which he, being apious and religious man, durst not adventure to do. Pool'sAnnotations. B.
|| It was always a customary thing, upon the approachof any great calamity, or the apprehension of any na­tional judgment, to proclaim a fast; and Jezebel orderedsuch a fast to be observed in Jezreel, the better to con­ceal her design against Naboth. For, by this means, she
intimated to the Jezreelites, that they had some accursedthing among them, which was ready to draw down thevengeance of God upon their city; and that therefore itwas their business to inquire into all those sins whichprovoked God to anger against them, and to purge themout effectually. As therefore these days of fasting wereemployed in punishing offenders, doing justice, and im­ploring God's pardon, they gave the elders of the city anoccasion to convene an assembly, and the false witnessesa fair opportunity to accuse Naboth before them. LeClerc's and Patrick's Commentaries. B.
§ By the law of Moses it was death to blaspheme God,Lev. xxiv. 16 and by custom it was death to revile theking, Exod. xxii. 28. Now, in order to make safe work,the evidences, as they were instructed, accused Nabothof both these crimes, that the people might be the bettersatisfied to see him stoned. There is this difference,however, to be observed between these two crimes, that,if a man had only blasphemed God, he was to be triedby the great court of Jerusalem, as the Hebrew doctorstell us, and his goods came to his heirs; whereas, whena man was executed for treason against the king, hisestate went to the exchequer, and was forfeited to himagainst whom the offence was committed; and for thisreason it was, that they accused Naboth of this crimelikewise, that his estate might be confiscated; and Abab,by that means, got possession of his vineyard. Patrick'sCommentary. B.







OCR Output








118 [BOOK TV. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


good things it produces. Moses, therefore,sent messengers to Sihon, the king of thiscountry, desiring that he would grant his armya passage, upon what security he shouldplease to require: he promised that he shouldbe no ways injured; neither as to that countrywhich Sihon governed, nor as to its inhabi­tants: and that he would buy his provisionsat such a price as should be to their advan­tage; even though he should desire to sellthem their very water. But Sihon refused hisoffer, and put his army in array, preparingevery thing in order to hinder their passageover Arnon.*
When Moses saw that the Amorite king wasdisposed to commence hostilities, he thoughthe ought not to bear that insult; and deter­mining to wean the Hebrews from their indo­lent temper, and prevent the disorders whicharose thence, which had been the occasion oftheir former sedition; nor indeed were theynow thoroughly easy in their minds: he en­quired of God, whether he would give himleave to fight? which when he had done, andGod had promised him the victory, he wasvery courageous, and ready to proceed tofighting. Accordingly he encouraged thesoldiers, and desired of them that they wouldtake the pleasure of fighting, now God gavethem leave so to do. Upon this commission,which they so much longed for, they put ontheir armour, and set about the work withoutdelay. But the Amorite king was not nowlike to himself, when the Hebrews were readyto attack him; both himself was affrighted atthe Hebrews, and his army, which before hadshewn themselves to be of good courage,were then found to be timorous. So theycould not sustain the first onset, nor bear upagainst the Hebrews: but fled away, think­ing this would afford them a more likely wayfor their escape than fighting. For they de­pended upon their cities, which were strong;from which they reaped no advantage, whenthey were forced to fly from them. For assoon as the Hebrews saw them giving ground,they immediately pursued; and when theyhad broken their ranks, they greatly terrifiedthem. And some of them broke off from therest, and ran away to the cities. Now the


Hebrews pursued them briskly; and obsti­nately persevered in the labours they hadalready undergone; and being very skilful inslinging, and very dexterous in throwingdarts, or any thing else of that kind; andalso having on nothing but light armour,which made them quick in pursuit, they over­took their enemies. And for those that weremost remote, and could not be overtaken,they reached them by their slings and theirbows, so that many were slain, and those thatescaped the slaughter were sorely wounded;and these were more distressed with thirst,than with any of those that fought againstthem, for it was the summer season: and whenthe greatest number of them were broughtdown to the river, out of a desire to drink;as also when others fled away by troops, theHebrews came round them, and shot atthem; so that what with darts, and what witharrows, they made a slaughter of them all:Sihon also, their king, was slain. So the He­brews spoiled their dead bodies, and tooktheir prey.f The land also, which they took,was full of fruits, and the army went all overit without fear, and fed their cattle upon it,and took the enemies prisoners. For theycould no way put a stop to them, since all thefighting men were destroyed. Such was thedestruction which overtook the Amorites,who were neither sagacious in counsel, norcourageous in action. Hereupon the He­brews took possession of their land, which issituate between three rivers, and naturallyresembling an island, the river Arnon beingits northern limit, and the river Jabbok de­termining its southern side; which, runninginto Jordan, loses its own name, and takesthe other. While Jordan itself runs along byit, on its western coast.J
When matters were come to this state, Og,the king of Gilead and Gaulanitis, fell uponthe Israelites. He brought an army with him,and came in haste to the assistance of hisfriend Sihon. But though he found himalready slain, he resolved to fight the He­brews, supposing he should be too hardfor them, and being desirous to try their va­lour. But failing of his hope, he was bothslain in the battle, and all his army was de­


* Nnmb. xxi. 23.
t This victory is celebrated in Numb. xxi. SOi. Deut. i.
4. iii. 2. iv. 46. xxix. 7, 8. Josh. xiii. 10. Judges xi. 21.Ps. exam. 10, 11. cxxxvi. 18, 19. and by Philo, p. 642.J Numb. xxi. 24.







OCR Output








230 [book VII. ANTIQUITIES OP THE JEWS.


had, till now, continued with Saul's son, whenthe rest of the tribe of Judah had ordainedDavid for their king. There came also seventhousand and one hundred out of the tribe ofSimeon; out of the tribe of Levi came fourthousand and seven hundred, having Jehoiadafor their leader. After these came Zadok,the high-priest, with twenty-two captains ofhis kindred. Out of the tribe of Benjaminthe armed men were four thousand; but therest of the tribe continued still expecting thatsome one of the house of Saul should reignover them. Those of the tribe o( Ephraimwere twenty thousand and eight hundred; andthese mighty men of valour, and eminent fortheir strength. Out of the half tribe of Ma-nasseh came eighteen thousand of the mostpotent men. Out of the tribe of Issacharcame two hundred,* who foreknew what wasto come hereafter: but of armed men twentythousand. Of the tribe of Zebulun fifty thou­sand chosen men. This was the only tribewhich came universally in to David: and allthese had the same weapons with the tribe ofGad. Out of the tribe of Naphtali the emi­nent men and rulers were one thousand,whose weapons were shields and spears, andthe tribe itself followed after; being, in amanner,t innumerable. Out of the tribe ofDan there were of chosen men, twenty-seventhousand and six hundred. Out of the tribeof Asher were forty thousand. Out of thetwo tribes that were beyond Jordan, and the


rest of the tribe of Manasseh, such as usedshields, and speais, and head-pieces, andswords, were a hundred and twenty thousand.The rest of the tribe also made use of swords.This multitude < ame together to Hebron, toDavid; with a great quantity of corn, wine,and all other sorts of food: and establishedDavid in his kingdom with one consent. Andwhen the people had feasted and rejoicedthree days in Hebron, David and all the peo­ple removed, and came to Jerusalem.
CHAP. III.
OF THE SIEGE AND REDUCTION OF JERUSALEM, BY KIN;DAVID; WHO EXPELLED THE CANAANITF.S AND BROUGHTIN THE JEWS.
NOW the Jebusites, who were the inha­bitants of Jerusalem, and were by ex­traction Canaanites, shut their gates; andplaced their blind, lame, and maimed personsupon the wall, in way of derision of theking;J and said, that the very lame them­selves would hinder his entrance into it. Thisthey did out of contempt of his power, andas depending on the strength of their walls.David was hereby enraged, and began thesiege of Jerusalem, and employed his utmostdiligence and alacrity therein; as intendingby the taking of this place to demonstrate hispower, and to intimidate all others that mightbe of the like evil disposition towards him.So he took the lower city by force, but lhe|j


* These words of Josephus concerning the tribe of Is­sachar, who foreknew what was to come hereafter, arebest paraphrased by the parallel text, 1 Chron. xii. 32.Who had understanding of the times to know what Israelought to do, i. e. Who had so much knowledge of astro­nomy as to make calendars for the Israelites; that theymight keep their festivals, and plough, and sow, and gatherin their harvests and vintage in due season.
t Thirty-seven thousand, 1 Chron. xii. 34.
J The blind and the lame, says Luther, upon this place,were the idols of the Jebusites, which, to irritate David,they set upon their walls, as their patrons and protectors;and these they call blind and lame sarcastically, and withrespect to David's opinion: as if they had said, ' Thesegods of ours, whom ye Israelites reproach, as blind andlame, and so unable to direct or defend us, will secure usagainst you, and to your cost, make you find that theyare neither blind nor lame, but have eyes to watch for us,and hands to fight against you, so that you must conquerand subdue them, before you take this place.' But thisinterpretation seems to be a little too metaphorical andlorced, for which reason we have rather chosen the con­struction which Josephus (lib. vii. cap. 2.) puts upon thispassage, viz. that they imagined their fortress to be 00
impregnable, that by way of contempt, they told David,that their very blind and lame would be able to defendit against him and all his forces; and this is a sense soextremely plain and obvious, that the renowned liochartwonders, why any man of learning should seek for anyother. The only exception to it is, that these blind andlame, (which were rather objects of compassion,) are saidto have been extremely hated by David. But we mayobserve, that David here retorts the sarcasm upon them;The lame and blind, i. e. those who are said to defendthe place, and who, as they pretended, were to be onlythe lame and the blind. And these were hateful to David,because they had wickedly and insolently defied the ar­mies of the living God. Pool's Annotations, Patrick'sand Le (Here's Comment. B.
II What our other copies say of Mount Sion as aloneproperly called the city of David, 2 Sam. v. 6—9. and ofthis its siege and conquest now by David, Josephus applies to the whole city Jerusalem: though including thecitadel also. By what authority we do not now know;perhaps after David had united them together, or joinedthe citadel to the lower city, Josephus esteemed them asone city. However this notion seems to be confirmed bywhat the tame Josephus says concerning David's and roanx







OCR Output








16 [book I. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


by the flood, the pillar of stone might remain,and exhibit those discoveries to mankind;and also inform them that there was anotherpillar of brick erected by them. Now thisremains in the land of Siriad, to this day.
CHAP. III.
or the deluge: noah's'preservation is an ark, and
HIS SUBSEQUENT DEBARKATION AND DEATH.
THE posterity of Seth continued to esteemGod as the Lord of the universe, and tohave an entire regard to virtue for seven ge­nerations; but in process of time they wereperverted, and forsook the practices of theirforefathers, and did neither pay those honoursto God which were appointed them, nor hadthey any concern to justice towards men. Butfor what degree of zeal they had formerlyevinced for virtue, they now shewed by theiractions a double degree of wickedness;whereby they made God to be their enemy.For many angels* of Godf accompanied withwomen, and begat sons that proved unjust,and despisers oi all that was good, on accountof the confidence they had in their ownstrength; for the tradition is, that these mendid what resembled the acts of those whomthe Grecians call giants. But Noah was veryuneasy at what they did; and being dis­pleased at their conduct, persuaded them tochange their dispositions and their actionsfor the better. But seeing they did not yieldto him, but were slaves to their wicked plea­sures, he was afraid they would kill him, to­gether with his wife and children, and those


they had married, so he departed out of thatland.
Now God loved this man for his righteous­ness, yet he not only condemned those othermen ibr their wickedness, but determined todestroy the whole race of mankind, and tomake another race that should be pure fromwickedness, and cutting short their lives, andmaking their years not so many as they for­merly enjoyed, but one hundred and twentyJonly, he turned the dry land into sea. Andthus were all these men destroyed. But Noahalone was saved, for God suggested to himthe following contrivance and way of escape:—That he should make an ark of four storieshigh, three hundred cubits|| long, fifty cubitsbroad, and thirty cubits high.S Accordinglyhe entered into that ark, with his wife, andhis sons and their wives, and put into it; notonly provisions to support their wants there,but also sent in with the rest, all sorts ofliving creatures, the male and his female, forthe preservation of their kinds: and others ofthem by sevens.** Now this ark had firmwalls, and a roof; and was braced with crossbeams, so that it could not be any waydrowned, or overturned by the violence ofthe water: thus was Noah, with his family,preserved. Now he was the tenth from Adam,as being the son of Lamech, whose fatherwas Methusela: he was the son of Enoch, theson of Jared; and Jared was the son of Ma-laleel; who, with many of his sisters, werethe children of Cain, the son of Enos: nowEnos was the son of Seth, the son of Adam.


* This notion that the fallen angels were in some sensethe fathers of the old giants, was the constant opinion ofantiquity.
t Gen. vi. 4.
J Josephus here supposes, that the life of these giants,for of them only do I understand him, was now reducedto one hundred and twenty years; for as to the rest ofmankind, Josephus himself confesses their lives weremuch longer than one hundred and twenty years, for manygenerations after the flood, as we shall see presently: andEe says they were gradually shortened till the days of Mo­ses, and then fixed for some time at one hundred and twenty.Nor indeed need we suppose, that either Enoch or Jose­phus meant to interpret these one hundred and twentyyears for the life of men before the flood to be differentfrom the one hundred and twenty years of God's patience,(perhaps while the Ark was preparing) till the deluge;which I take to be the meaning of God when he threatenedthis wicked world, that if they so long continued impenitent,their days should be no more than one hundred and twentyyears.
|| A cubit is about twenty-one English inches.
§ The timber of which the Ark was framed, Moses callsGopher wood; but what tree this Gopher was, is not a littlecontroverted. Some will have it to be the cedar, othersthe pine, others the box, and others (particularly the Ma­hometans) the Indian plane tree. But our learned Fuller,in his miscellanies, has observed, that it was nothing elsebut that which the Greeks call Kwapitftfog, or the cypresstree; for, taking away the termination, cupar andgopher dif­fer very little in the sound. This observation the greatBochart has confirmed, and shown very plainly, that nocountry abounds so much with this wood, as that part ofAssyria which lies about Babylon. To this we may add theobservation of Theophrastus, who speaking of trees thatare least subject to decay, makes the cypress the most dura­ble; for which Bitruvius gives this reason, that the sap,which is in every part of the wood, has a peculiarly bittertaste, and is so very offensive, that no worm or other corro­ding animal will touch it, so that such things as are made ofthis wood, will in a manner last for ever. Universal Hist. B.
** Gen. vii. 2







OCR Output








• V







OCR Output








aN. 277.] 429 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


sian and Titus: who although they had beenat a great deal of pains in the war againstthe Jews, and were exasperated against thembecause they did not deliver up their wea­pons, but continued the war to the very last;yet did they not take away any of the privi­leges belonging to them as citizens; butrestrained their anger, and overcame theprayers of the Alexandrians and Antiochians,who were a very powerful people: insomuchthat they did not yield to them, neither outof their favour to these people, nor out oftheir old grudge at those whose" wicked op­position they had subdued in the war. Norwould they alter any of the ancient favours
granted to the Jews: but said, that those whoad borne arms against them, and foughtthem, had suffered punishment already; andthat it was not just to deprive those that hadnot offended of the privileges they enjoyed.
We also know, that Marcus Agrippa wasof the like disposition towards the Jews. Forthe people of Ionia were very angry at them,and besought Agrippa, that they, and theyonly, might have those privileges of citizens,which Antiochus, the grandson of Seleucus,who by the Greeks was called* "the God,"had bestowed on them; and desired that ifthe Jews were to be joint partakers withthem, they might be obliged to worship thegods they themselves worshipped; but whenthese matters were brought to the trial, theJews prevailed, and obtained leave to makeuse of their own customs, and this under thepatronage of Nicolaus of Damascus. ForAgrippa gave sentence, that "he could notinnovate. And if any one hath a mind toknow this matter accurately, let him perusethe hundred and twenty-third, and hundredand twenty-fourth books of the history of thisNicolaus. Now as to this determination ofAgrippa, it is not to be admired; for thattime our nation had not made war againstthe Romans. But one may well be astonishedat the generosity of Vespasian and Titus;


that after so great wars and contests whichthey had with us, they should use such mode-"ration. But I will now return to that part ofmy history, whence I made the present di­gression.
It happened in the reign off Antiochusthe Great, who ruled over all Asia, that theJews, as well as the inhabitants of Coelesyriajsuffered greatly; and their land was sorelyharassed. For while he was at war withPtolemyJ Eupator, and with his son, who wascalled Epiphanes, it fell out, that these na­tions were equally sufferers, both when hewas beaten and when he defeated the others.So that they were like a ship in a storm,which is tossed by the Waves on both sides:and just thus as they were in their situationin the middle between Antiochus's prosperity,and its change to adversity. But at lengthwhen Antiochus had beaten Ptolemy, he seiz­ed upon Judea. And when Philopator wasdead, his son sent a great army under Scopas,the general of his forces, against the inhabi­tants of Coelesyria: who took many of theircities, and in particular our nation; whichwhen he fell upon them, went over to him.Yet was it not long afterward when Antiochusovercame Scopas, in a battle fought at thefountains of Jordan; and destroyed a greatpart of his army. But afterward, when An-tiochus subdued those cities of Coelesyriawhich Scopas had gotten into his possession,and Samaria with them; the Jews, of theirown accord, went over to him, and receivedhim into Jerusalem: and gave plentiful pro­vision to all his army, and to his elephants:and readily assisted him when he besiegedthe garrison which was in the citadel of Je­rusalem. Wherefore Antiochus thought itbut just to requite the Jews' diligence andzeal in his service. So he wrote 'to the gene­rals of his armies, and to his friends; andgave testimony to the good behaviour of theJews towards him; and informed them whatrewards he had resolved to bestow on them


to the Jews and other conquered nations, afford us a verygood reason why Almighty God, upon the rejection ofthe Jews for their wickedness, chose them for his people;and first established Christianity in that empire. Ofwhich matter, see Constitut. Apost. V. 90. and Euseb. ap.Prim. Christ. Revived, III. page 456, 457, and JosephusXIV.10.XVI.il.
* That this Antiochus was Called Avtiox^ ©fos, orAntiochus the god, by the Milesians, see Appian Syriac.
p. 210, quoted in the notes on this place.
t Of this Antiochus the Great, and his wars with Pto­lemy Philopator, and Ptolemy Epiphanes, Spanheim andHudson bid us here consult Polybius V. 85, and the Ex-cerpta out of Polybius, published by Valesius, page 70,-77, 79, and Hieronymus in Daniel xi. But note, thatthose parts of Polybius's XVIth book that are quotedpresently by Josephus, are lost.
J Or rather Philopator.
4. A 1»







OCR Output








A*. 899.] 315 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


say to him, that he had slain the true ownerof that field unjustly.
And as soon as he came to him, and theking had said, that he might do with him whathe pleased, (for he thought it a reproach tohim to be thus caught in his sin,) Elijah said,that in the very place in which the dead bodyof Naboth was eaten up by the dogs, bothhis own blood, and that of his wife, shouldbe shed; and that all his family should perish,because he had been so insolently wicked,and had slain a citizen unjustly, and contraryto the laws of his country. Hereupon Ahabbegan to be sorry for the things he had done,and to repent of them; and he put on sack­cloth, and went barefoot,* and would nottouch any food: he also confessed his sins,and endeavoured thus to appease God. ButGod said to the prophet, while Ahab wasliving he would put off the punishment of hisfamily, because he repented of those insolentcrimes he had been guilty of; but that stillhe would fulfil his threatening under his son:fand this message the prophet delivered tothe king.
CHAP. XIV
OF THE EXPEDITION OF HADAD, KING OF DAMASCUS ANDSTRIA, AGAINST AHAB.
WHEN the affairs of Ahab were in thissituation, the son of Benhadad, whowas king of the Syrians and Damascus, gottogether an army out of all his country, andprocured thirty-two kings beyond Euphratesto be his auxiliaries. So he made an expe­dition against Ahab. But because Ahab'sarmy was not like that of Benhadad's, he didnot set it in array to fight him; but havingshut up every thing that was in the countryin the strongest cities he had, he abode inSamaria himself: for the walls about it werevery strong, and it appeared not easily to betaken in other respects also. So the king ofSyria took his army with him, and came toSamaria, and placed his army round aboutthe city, and besieged it. He also sent aherald to Ahab, and desired he would admit


the ambassadors he would send him; bywhom he would let him know his pleasure.So upon the king of Israel's permission forhim to send, those ambassadors came, andby their king's command spake thus: thatAhab's riches, and his children, and hiswives, were Benhadad's: and if he wouldmake an agreement, and give him leave totake as much of what he had as he pleased,he would withdraw his army, and leave offthe siege. Upon this Ahab made the am­bassadors to go back, and tell their king,that both he himself, and all that he had,were his possessions. And when these am­bassadors had told this to Benhadad, hesent to him again, and desired, since he con­fessed that all he had was his, that he wouldadmit those servants of his which he wouldsend the next day: and he commanded himto deliver to those whom he should send,whatever upon their searching his palace,and the houses of his friends, and kindred,they should find to be excellent in its kind:but that what did not please them theyshould leave him. At this second ambas-sage, Ahab was surprised, and gathered to­gether the multitude to a congregation, andsaid: "For myself, I am ready, for yoursafety and peace, to give up my own wivesand children to the enemy, and to yield tohim all my own possessions: for that waswhat the Syrian king required at his firstambassage. But now he desires to send hisservants to search all your houses; and inthem to leave nothing that is excellent inits kind; seeking an occasion of fightingagainst me; as knowing that I would notspare what is mine own for your sakes; buttaking a handle from the disagreeable termshe offers concerning you, to bring a warupon us. However, 1 will do what youshall resolve is fit to be done." Hereuponthe multitude advised him to hearken tonone of Benhadad's proposals, but to despisehim, and to be in readiness to fight. Ac­cordingly he dismissed the ambassadors withthis answer, that he still continued in themind to comply with what terms their masterat first desired, for the safety of the citizens;


* "The Jews weep to this day," says Jerom, hererecited by Reland, "and roll themselves upon sackcloth,in ashes barefoot, upon such occasions." To which Span-heim adds, "that after the same manner Berenice, when
voL. I.—NOS. 27 & 28.
life was in danger, stood at the tribunal of Floras barefoot."Of the War, II. 15. See the like of David, 2 Sam. xv50. Antiq. VII.t 1 Kings xxi. 29.
3K







OCR Output








ait. 453.] 413 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


you take notice that every city and everynation that shall disobey any thing containedin this epistle, shall be destroyed by fireand sword. However, let this epistle bepublished through all the country that isunder our obedience; and let all the Jews,by all means, be ready against the day be-forementioned: that they may avenge them­selves upon their enemies."
Accordingly the horsemen who carried theepistle proceeded on the ways which theywere to go, with speed. But as for Morde-cai, as soon as he had assumed the royal gar­ment, and the crown of gold, and had put thechain about his neck, he went forth in a pub­lic procession. And when the Jews who werein Shushan, saw him in so great honour withthe king, they thought his good fortune wascommon to themselves also: and joy, and abeam of salvation, encompassed the Jews:both those that were in the cities, and thosethat were in the countries, upon the publica­tion of the king's letters: insomuch, that manyeven of other nations circumcised themselvesfor fear of the Jews: that they might procuresafety to themselves thereby.* For on thethirteenth day of the twelfth month, whichaccording to the Hebrews is called Adar, butaccording to the Macedonians Dystrus; thosethat carried the king's epistle gave them no­tice, that the same day wherein their dangerwas to have been, on that very day should


they destroy their enemies. But now therulers of the provinces, and the tyrants, andthe kings, and the scribes, had the Jews inesteem. For the fear they were in of Morde-cai forced them to act with discretion. Nowwhen the royal decree was come to all thecountry that was subject to the king, theJews at Shushan slew five hundred of theirenemies. And when the king had told Estherthe number of those that were slain in thatcity; but did not well know what had beendone in the provinces; he asked her whethershe would have any thing farther doneagainst them? for that it should be doneaccordingly. Upon which she desired thatthe Jews might be permitted to treat theirremaining enemies in the same manner thenext day: as also that they might hang theten sons of Haman upon the gallows.f Sothe king permitted the Jews to do so, as de­sirous not to contradict Esther.
So they gathered themselves together againon the fourteenth day of the month Dystrus,and slew about three hundred of their ene­mies; but Jtouched nothing of what richesthey had. Now there were slain by the Jewsthat were in the country, and in the othercities, seventy-five thousand of their enemies:and these were slain on the thirteenth day ofthe month; and the next day they kept as afestival.|| In like manner the Jews that werein Shushan gathered themselves together, and


* It might be presumed that some, out of hatred to theJews, might be inclinable to obey Human's decree: forthough he himself was gone, yet it cannot be imagined,that all the friends and creatures that he had made perishedwith him. He might have a great party every where,and some of them so furiously enraged at his fall, as(even at the hazard of their own lives) would not fail toshew their indignation at those who were the occasion ofit: and therefore this second decree, procured by Morde-cai, gave them authority, if any attempt was made uponthem, either in great bodies, or small parties, not only todefend themselves and repel them, but to make as greata slaughter of them as they were able, and even to takepossession of their goods, as Haman had procured themlicense (chap. iii. 13.) to seize the goods of the Jews.Patrick's Commentary. B.
t It is not unlikely, that many might be enraged athis death, and his sons, in particular, might set them­selves at the head of those who were bold enough toattempt the destruction of the Jews in Shushan, beingresolved to reveDge their father's death, though in sodoing they were sure to meet their own. And this seemsto suggest one reason why Esther was so solicitous tohave their dead bodies (for they were slain already) hungupon the gallows, chap. ix. 13. even because they had
shewn more malice and indignation against the Jews, andon the day when the cruel edict came to take place, hadmade more desperate attacks upon them than any; thoughthe reason of the state, in this severity, might be to ex­pose the family to the greater infamy, and to deter othercounsellors from abusing the king at any time with falserepresentations. For though the Jews suffered none tohang on the tree (as they call the gallows) longer than tillthe evening of the day whereon they were executed; yetother nations let them hang until they were consumed,(as appears from the story of the Gibeonites, 2 Sam. xxi.9, 10.) or devoured by crows, vultures, or other ravenouscreatures; from whence that vulgar saying among theRomans, pascere in cruce corvos, had its rise. Patrick'sCommentary, and Pool's Annotations. B.
t See 1 Sam. xv. 9, 14, 15, 19, 21.
II Pur, in the Persian language, signifies a lot, and thefeast of Purim, or lots, (which had its name from Ha­inan's casting lots in order to divine which would bemost lucky to prefix for the murder of all the Jews in thewhole Persian dominions) is, to this very day, celebratedby the Jews, with some peculiar ceremonies, but most ofthem reducible to these three things, reading, resting,and feasting. Before the reading, which is performed inthe synagogue, and begins in the evening, as soon as the


3Y2







OCR Output








552 [book XV. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


as they were able, to preserve the kingdomfor his sons, and for his brother Pheroras.
When he had given them this charge, hewent to Rhodes, to meet Caesar. And whenhe had sailed to that city, he took off his dia­dem; but remitted nothing else of his usualdignity. And when, upon his meeting him,he desired that he would let him speak tohim, he therein exhibited a much more no­ble specimen of a great soul. For he didnot betake himself to supplications, as menusually do upon such occasions; nor offeredhim any petition, as if he were an offender:but after an undaunted manner gave an ac­count of what he had done. For he saidthat he had the greatest friendship for An­tony; and did every thing he could that hemight attain the government. That he wasnot indeed in the army with him; becausethe Arabians had diverted him: but that hehad sent him both money and corn; whichwas but too little in comparison of what heought to have done for him. "For," saidhe, "if a man own himself to be another'sfriend, and know him to be a benefactor, heis obliged to hazard every thing, to useevery faculty of his soul, every member ofhis body, and all the wealth he hath, forhim; in which I confess 1 have been too de­ficient. However, I am conscious to myself,that so far I have done right, that I havenot deserted him upon his defeat at Actium:nor upon the evident change of his fortune,have I transferred my hopes from him toanother; but have preserved myself, thoughnot as a valuable fellow-soldier, yet certainlyas a faithful counsellor to Antony; when Idemonstrated to him, that the only way hehad to save himself, and not to lose all hisauthority, was to slay Cleopatra, for whenshe was once dead, there would be room forhim to retain his authority; and rather tobring thee to make a composition with him,than to continue at enmity any longer. He,however, would not attend to my advice;but preferred his own rash resolutions,which have happened unprofitably for him,but profitably for thee. Now therefore, incase thou determinest about me, and myalacrity in serving Antony, according to thyanger at him; I own there is no room forme to deny what I have done, nor will 1 beashamed to own, and that publicly too, that


I had a great kindness for him. But if thouwilt put him out of thy case, and only exa­mine how I behave myself to my benefactorsin general; and what a sort of friend I am,thou wilt find by experience that I shalldo and be the same to thyself. For it isbut changing the names, and the firmness offriendship that I shall bear to thee will notbe disapproved by thee."
By this speech, and by his behaviour,which shewed Caesar the frankness of hismind, he greatly gained upon him; whowas himself of a generous and magnificenttemper: insomuch that those very actions,which were the foundation of the accusa­tions against him, procured him Caesar'sgood will. Accordingly he restored himhis diadem; and encouraged him to exhibithimself as great a friend to himself as hehad been to Antony; and then had him ingreat esteem. He also added, that QuintusDidius had written to him, that Herod hadvery readily assisted him in the *affair ofthe gladiators. So when he had obtainedsuch a kind reception, and had, beyond allhis hopes, procured his crown to be moreentirely and firmly settled upon him thanever, by Caesar's donation, as well as by thatdecree of the Romans, which was procuredfor his greater security; he conducted Cae­sar on his way to Egypt, and made presentseven beyond his ability, to both him and hisfriends; and in general behaved himself withgreat magnanimity. He also desired thatCaesar would not put to death one Alexan­der, who had been a companion of Antony's:but Caesar had sworn to put him to death:and so he could not obtain that petition.And now he returned to Judea again, withgreater honour and assurance than ever;and affrighted those that had expectationsto the contrary: as still acquiring from hisvery dangers greater splendour than before,by the favour of God to him. So he pre­pared for the reception of Caesar, as he wasgoing out of Syria to invade Egypt: andwhen he came, he entertained him at Ptole-mais with all royal magnificence. He alsobestowed presents on the army, and broughtthem provisions in abundance. He likewiseproved to be one of Caesar's most cordial
* See Of the War, Book I. chap. 20.







OCR Output








an. 894.] 333 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


051


themselves upon their antiquity. Nor dothey know that these kings are much laterthan they imagine; and that they are notyet eleven hundred years old. Now whenJoram the king of Israel, heard that Ben-hadad was dead, he recovered out of theterror he had been in on his account, andwas very grateful for the restoration ofpeace.
CHAP. V.
OF THE WICKEDNESS OF JEHOKAM, KING OF JERUSALEM:HIS DEFEAT AND DEATH.
JEHORAM, the king of Jerusalem, hadno sooner taken the government uponhim, than he betook himself to the slaughterof his brethren, and his father's friends, whowere governors under him; and thus beganto demonstrate his wickedness.* Nor was heat all better than those kings of Israel whoat first transgressed against the laws of theircountry, and against God's worship. And itwas Athaliah, the daughter of Ahab, whomhe had married, who taught him to be a badman in other respects, and also to worshipforeign gods. Now God would not quiteroot out this family, because of the promisehe had made to David. However Jehoramdid not leave off the introduction of new sortsof customs to the propagation of impiety, andto the customs of his own country. Andwhen the Edomites about that time had re­volted from him, and slain their former king,who was in subjection to his father, and hadset up one of their own choosing, Jehoramfell upon the land of Edom, with the horse­men that were about him, and the chariots,by night; and destroyed those that lay nearto his own kingdom; but proceeded no far­ther. However, this expedition did him noservice, for they all revolted from him, withthose that dwelt in the country of Libnah.He was indeed so mad as to compel thepeople to go up to the high places of themountains, and worship foreign gods.
As he was doing thus, and had entirely


cast the laws of the Hebrews out of his mind,there was brought him an fepistle from theprophet Elijah; which declared that Godwould execute great judgments upon him,because he had not imitated his own fathers;but had followed the wicked courses of thekings of Israel, and had compelled the tribeof Judah, and the citizens of Jerusalem toleave the holy worship of their own God, andto worship idols, as Ahab had compelled theIsraelites to do: and because he had slain hisbrethren, and those men that were righteous.The prophet also gave him notice in thisepistle, what punishment he should undergofor these crimes; namely, the destruction ofhis people, with the corruption of his ownwives and children, and that he should him­self die of a distemper in his bowels, withlong torments; his bowels falling out by theviolence of the inward decay of the parts;insomuch that though he saw his own misery,he should not be able to help himself; butshould die in that manner.
It was not long after this, that an army ofthe Philistines, and of those Arabians wholived near to Ethiopia, fell upon the kingdomof Jehoram, and spoded the country and theking's house. They also slew his wives, andhis sons, one only escaping, whose name wasAhaziah. After this calamity he himself fellinto that disease which was foretold by theprophet, and lasted Ja great while: (for Godinflicted this punishment upon him out of hiswrath against him:) and so he died misera­bly; and saw his own bowels fall out. Thepeople also abused his dead body. I supposeit was because they thought that such hisdeath came upon him by the wrath of God;and that therefore he was not worthy to par­take of such a funeral as became kings.Accordingly they neither buried him in thesepulchres of his fathers; nor vouchsafed himany honours, but buried him like a privateman; and this when he had lived forty years,and reigned eight.H And the people of Je­rusalem delivered the government to his sonAhaziah.


* An. 894 B. C.
t This epistle, in some copies of Josephus, is said tocome to Joram from Elijah, with this addition, "for hewas yet upon earth;" which could not be true of Elijah;who, as all agree, was gone from the earth about fouryears before, and could only be true of Elisha. Nor |
perhaps is there any more mystery here, than that thename of Elijah has very anciently crept into the text,instead of Elisha, by the copiers; there being nothing inany copy of that epistle peculiar to Elijah.
J Two years: 2 Chron. xxi. 19.
II From'895 to 887.


3M2







OCR Output








aN. 521.] 393 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


which they could possess themselves of with­out tribute. At the same time he enjoinedthe Idumeans and Samaritans, and the inha­bitants of Coelesyria, to restore those villageswhich they had taken from the Jews; andthat, besides all this, fifty talents should begiven them towards the building of the tem­ple. He also permitted them to offer theirappointed sacrifices, and promised whatso­ever the high-priest and the priests wanted,and those sacred garments wherein they usedto worship God, should be made at his ownexpense: and that the musical instrumentswhich the Levites used in singing hymns toGod should be given them. Moreover hecharged them, that portions of land shouldbe given to those that guarded the city andthe temple, as also a determinate sum ofmoney every year, for their maintenance:and withal he sent the vessels. And all thatCyrus intended to do before him, relating tothe restoration of Jerusalem, Darius ordainedshould be done accordingly.
When Zorobabel had obtained thesegrants from the king, he went out of thepalace; and, looking up to heaven, he beganto return thanks to God for the wisdom hehad given him, and the victory he had gainedthereby; even in the presence of Darius him­self. "For," said he, "I had not been thoughtworthy of these advantages, O Lord, unlessthou hadst been favourable to me." Whentherefore he had returned thanks to God forthe present circumstances he was in, and hadprayed to him, to afford him the like favourfor time to come, he came to Babylon; andbrought the good news to his countrymen ofwhat grants he had procured for them fromthe king. When they heard this, they alsogave thanks to God that he had restoredthe land of their forefathers to them again.So they betook themselves to drinking andeating; and for seven days they kept a fes­tival, for the rebuilding and restoration of


their city. After this they chose themselvesrulers, who should go up to Jerusalem, outof the tribes of their forefathers, with theirwives, and children, and cattle, who travel­led to Jerusalem with great pleasure, underthe conduct of those whom Darius sent alongwith them: and they made a cheerful noisewith songs, and pipes, and cymbals, the restof the Jewish multitude accompanying themwith rejoicing.
And thus did these men go a certain anddeterminate number out ot every family:though i do not think it proper to recite particularly the names of those families;* thatI may not take off the mind of my readersfrom the connection of the historical facts,and make it hard for them to follow the co­herence of my narrations. But the sum ofthose that went up, above the age of twelveyears, of the tribes of Judah and Benjamin,was four fhundred and sixty-two myriads, andeight thousand. The Levites were seventyfour; the number of women and childrenmixed together, was forty thousand sevenhundred and forty-two. And besides these,there were singers of the Levites one hun­dred and twenty-eight; porters one hundredand ten; and of the sacred ministers threehundred and ninety-two. There were alsoothers, who said they were of the Israelites,but were not able to shew their genealogies,six hundred and sixty-two. Some there werealso who were expelled out of the numberand honour of the priests, as having marriedwives whose genealogies they could not pro­duce; nor were they found in the genealogiesof the Levites and priests; they were aboutfive hundred and twenty-five. The multitudealso of servants, followed those that went upto Jerusalem, seven thousand three hundredand thirty-seven. The singing men andsinging women were two hundred and forty-five. The camels were four hundred andthirty-five; the beasts used to the yoke were


j * See Ezra ii. 1—70. Nehemiah viii. 6—70.
t This number of 4,620,000 in Josephus's presentcopies, is one of the grossest errors that is in them; andought to be corrected from Ezra ii. 64. 1 Esdras v. 40. andNeh. vii. 66. who all agree the general sum was but about42,360. It is also very plain, that Josephus thought,when Esdras .afterward brought up another company outof Babylon and Persia, in the days of Xerxes, they werealso, as well as these, out of the two tribes, and out ofthem only; and were in all no more than a seed, and a
remnant; while an immense number of the ten tribesnever returned; but as he believed, continued them be­yond Euphrates: chap. v. Of which multitude of Jewsbeyond Euphrates he speaks frequently elsewhere.-Though, by the way, he never takes them to be idolaters;but looks on them still as observers of the laws of Moses.The certain part of the people that now came up fromBabylon, at the end of this chapter, imply the samesmaller number of Jews that now came up, and will noway agree with the 4,620,000.







OCR Output








an. 896.] 319 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


chief. But John was chief of two hundredthousand.* The same man was chief of thetribe of Benjamin; and had two hundredthousand archers under him. There wasanother chief, whose name was Jehozabad,who had a hundred and eighty thousandarmed men. This multitude was distributedto be ready for the king's service; besidesthose whom he sent to the best fortifiedcities.
Jehoshaphat took for his son Jehoram towife, Athaliah, the daughter of Ahab, king ofthe ten tribes. And when, after some time,he went to Samaria, Ahab received him cour­teously, and treated the army that followedhim in a splendid manner; with great plentyof corn and wine, and of slain beasts; anddesired that he would join with him in the waragainst the king of Syria; that he might re­cover from him the city of Ramoth, in Gilead.For though it had belonged to his father, yethad the king of Syria's father taken it awayfrom him. And upon Jehoshaphat's promiseto afford him his assistance; (for indeed hisarmy was not inferior to the other's,) and hissending for his army from Jerusalem to Sa­maria, the two kings went out of the city;and each of them sat on his own throne, andeach gave their orders to the respectivearmies. Now Jehoshaphat bade them callthe prophets, if there were any there; andinquire of them concerning this expeditionagainst the king of Syria, whether they wouldgive them counsel to make the expedition atthis time. For there was peace at that timebetween Ahab and the king of Syria, whichhad lasted three years, from the time he hadtaken him captive till that day.
So Ahab called his own prophets, being innumber about four hundred,f and bade theminquire of God whether he would grant himthe victory, if he made an expedition againstBenhadad, and enable him to overthrow thatcity, for whose sake it was that he was going


to war. Now these prophets gave theircounsel for making this expedition; and said,that he would defeat the king of Syria, and,as formerly, would reduce him under hispower. But Jehoshaphat, understanding bytheir words that they were false prophets,asked Ahab, whether there were not someother prophet belonging to the true God?that they might have surer information con­cerning futurities. Ahab said, there was in­deed such a one, but that he hated him, ashaving prophesied evil to him; and havingforetold that he should be overcome, andslain by the king of Syria; and that for thiscause he had him now in prison; and that hisname was Micaiah, the son of Imlah. Butupon Jehoshaphat's desire that he might beproduced, Ahab sent an eunuch, who broughtMicaiah to him. Now the eunuch had in­formed him by the way, that all the otherprophets had foretold that the king shouldgain the victory. But he said, it was notlawful for him to lie against God; but thathe must speak what he should say to himabout the king, whatsoever it were. Whenhe came to Ahab, and he adjured him uponoath, to speak the truth to him, he said thatGod had shewn to him the Israelites runningaway, and pursued by the Syrians, and dis­persed upon the mountains by them, as arc £flocks of sheep dispersed when their shep­herd is slain. He said farther, that God sig­nified to him,J that those Israelites shouldreturn in peace to their own home, and thathe only should fall in the battle. WhenMicaiah had thus spoken, Ahab said to Je­hoshaphat, " I told thee a little while ago thedisposition of the man with regard to me, andthat he uses to prophesy evil to me." Uponwhich Micaiah replied, that he ought to hearall, whatsoever it be that God foretells; andthat in particular, they were false prophetswho encouraged him to make this war, inhope of victory; whereas he must fight and


* Two hundred and eighty thousand, 2 Chron. xvii. 15.
t 1 Kings xxii. 6.
J Micaiah's answer to Ahab, inquiring of him the suc­cess of his intended expedition, is, Go, and prosper; forthe Lord shall deliver the city into the hands of the king,1 Kings xxii. 15. which does not at all contradict theother prophets, had it been spoken in earnest; but wehave good reason to believe, that the words were spokenironically, and in mockery to the promises which theother prophets made Ahab. Accordingly, we may oh-
serve by Ahab's reply, that he suspected Micaiah's sin­cerity, and, either by his gesture or manner of speaking,gathered, that his meaning was to traduce these false pro­phets for their answers, so that Micaiah's answer is ineffect, as if he had said,—" Since thou dost not seek toknow the truth, but only to please thyself, go to thebattle, as all thy prophets advise thee; expect the successwhich they promise thee, and try the truth of their pre­dictions by thy dear bought experience." Pool's Jhmotations. B.







OCR Output








a*. 479] 399 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


same year. Now Esdras presented the sacredmoney to the treasurers, who were of the fa­mily of the priests, of silver six hundred andfifty talents; vessels of silver one hundred ta­lents; vessels of gold twenty talents; and ves­sels of brass, that was *more precious thangold, twelve talents by weight. For thesepresents had been made by the king, and hiscounsellors, and by all the Israelites thatstayed at Babylon. So when Esdras haddelivered these things to the priests, he gaveto God as the appointed sacrifices of wholeburnt-offerings; twelve bulls, on account ofthe common preservation of the people,ninety rams, seventy-two lambs, and twelvekids of the goats, for the remission of sins.He also delivered the king's epistle to theking's officers, and to the governors of Coole-syria and Phoenicia. And as they were undera necessity of doing what was enjoined byhim, they honoured our nation, and were as­sistant to them in all their necessities.
Now these things were truly done underthe conduct of Esdras; and he succeeded inthem; because God esteemed him worthy ofthe success of his conduct, on account ofhis righteousness. But some time afterwardthere came some persons to him, and broughtan accusation against certain of the multitude,and of the priests and Levites, who had trans­gressed their settlement, and dissolved thelaws of their country, by marrying strangewives; and had brought the family of thepriests into confusion. These persons desir­ed him to support the laws; lest God shouldtake up a general anger against them all, andreduce them to a calamitous condition again.Hereupon he rent his garment immediately,out of his grief, and pulled the hair of his headand beard; and cast himself upon the ground:because this crime had reached the principalmen among the people, and considering thatif he should enjoin them to cast out theirwives, and the children they had by them, heshould not be hearkened to, he continued ly­ing upon the ground. However all the bettersort came running to him; who also them­selves wept, and partook of the grief he wasunder for what had been done. So Esdras


rose up from the ground, and stretched out hishand towards heaven, and said, that he wa#ashamed to look towards it, because of thesins which the people had committed: whilethey had cast out of their memories what theirfathers had undergone on account of theirwickedness. And he besought God, whohad saved a seed and a remnant out of thecalamity and captivity they had been in, andhad restored them again to Jerusalem, andto their own land, and had obliged the kingsof Persia to have compassion on them, thathe would also forgive them the sins they hadnow committed: which, though they deserveddeath, yet was it agreeable to the mercy ofGod to remit the punishments due to them.
After Esdras had said this, he left off' pray­ing; and when all those who came to himwith their wives and children were under la­mentation, one whose name was Jechonias,a principal man in Jerusalem, came to himand said, that they had sinned in marryingstrange wives; and he persuaded him to ad­jure them all, to cast those wives out, and thechildren born of them, and that those shouldbe punished who would not obey the law. SoEsdras hearkened to this advice, and madethe heads of the priests, and of the Levites,and of the Israelites, swear that they wouldput away those wives and children accordingto the advice of Jechonias. And when hehad received their oaths, he went in hasteout of the temple, into the chamber of Joha-nan, the son of Eliasib: and as he had hithertostated nothing at all, for grief; so he abodethere that day. And when proclamation wasmade, that all those of the captivity shouldgather themselves together to Jerusalem, andthat those that did not meet there in twoor three days,,should be banished from themultitude, and that their substance should beappropriated to the uses of the temple ac­cording to the sentence of the elders, thosethat were of the tribes of Judah and Benja­min came together in three days; viz. on thetwentieth day of the ninth month: which, ac­cording to the Hebrews, is called fTebeth,and according to the Macedonians, Apelleus.Now as they were sitting in the upper room


tieth of Artaxerxes, as commonly supposed, but from thetwenty-fifth of Xerxes, is there proved at large, page78—91.
* Dr. Hudson observes here, that this kind of brass or
copper, or rather mixture of gold and brass or copper, wascalled Aurichalcum; and that this was of old esteemed themost precious of all metals.t Casleu.







OCR Output








448 [book XII. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


did not leave off fighting with the Idumeans:but pressed upon them on all sides, and tookfrom them the city of Hebron, and demolishedall its fortifications, and set its towers on fire,and burnt the country of the foreigners, andthe city Marissa. They came also to Ashdod,and took it, and laid it waste, and took awaya great deal of the spoils and prey that werein it, and returned to Judea.
CHAP. IX.
CONCERNING THE DEATH OF ANTIOCHUS EFIPHANES J ANDTHE CONDUCT OF ANTIOCHDS EUPATOR TOWARDS JUDASMACCABEUS. ALSO OF ALCIMUS AND ONIAS.
ABOUT this time king Antiochus, as hewas going over the upper countries,heard that there was a very rich city in Per­sia, called Elymais; and therein a very richtemple of Diana; and that it was full of allsorts of donations dedicated to it, as also ofweapons and breast-plates: which, upon in­quiry, he found had been left there by Alex­ander, the son of Philip, king of Macedon.And being incited by these motives, he wentin haste to Elymais, and assaulted and be­sieged it. But as those that were in it werenot terrified at his assault, nor at his siege,but opposed him courageously, he was beatenoff his hopes. For they drove him away fromthe city, and went out, and pursued after him:insomuch that he fled away as far as Baby­lon; and lost a great many of his army. Andwhen he was grieving for this disappoint­ment, some persons told him of the defeat ofhis commanders whom he had left to fightagainst Judea; and what strength the Jewshad already gotten. When this concernabout these affairs was added to the former,he was confounded: and, by the anxiety hewas in, fell into a distemper; which, as itlasted a great while, and as his pains in-


creased upon him, so he at length perceivedhe should die in a little time. So he calledhis friends to him; and told them, that hisdistemper was severe upon him: and con­fessed withal that this calamity was sent uponhim for the miseries he had brought upon theJewish nation;* while he plundered theirtemple, and contemned their God. Andwhen he had said this, he gave up the ghost.Whence one may wonder at Polybius ofMegalopolis; who, though otherwise a goodman, yet saith, that "Antiochus died be­cause he had a purpose to plunder the tem­ple of fDiana in Persia." For the {purposingto do a thing, but not actually doing it, is notworthy of punishment. But if Polybius couldthink, that Antiochus thus lost his life onthat account, it is much more probable thatthis king died on account of his sacrilegiousplundering of the temple at Jerusalem. Butwe will not contend about this matter, withthose who may think that the cause assignedby this Polybius of Megalopolis, is nearer thetruth than that assigned by us.
However, Antiochus, before he died, calledfor Philip, who was one of his companions;and made him the guardian of his kingdom.And gave him his diadem, and his garment,and his ring: and charged him to deliverthem to his son Antiochus; and ||desired himto take care of his education, and to preservethe kingdom for him. This Antiochus diedin the hundred and forty-ninth year. But itwas Lysias that declared his death to themultitude, and appointed his son Antiochusto be king, of whom at present he had thecare; and called himEupator.
At this time it was that the garrison in thecitadel at Jerusalem, with the Jewish run­agates, did a great deal of harm to the Jews.For the soldiers that were in that garrisonrushed out upon the sudden, and destroyed


* 1 Mace, vi. 12.
f Dr. Hudson observes here, that Jerom upon Danielxi. says, "Polybius and Diodoras both relate how thisAntiochus attempted to seize upon the spoils of the templeof Elymais, which was full of riches." Hudson also notesthat "Strabo places this temple of Diana at Elymais."XVI. page 744. See Authentic Records, part I. page226, and Prideaux at the year 164.
J Since St. Paul, a Pharisee, confesses that he had notknown concupiscence, or desires to be sinful, had not thetenth commandment said, "Thou shalt not covet," Rom.vii. 7. the case seems to have been much the same with
our Josephus, who was of the same sect, that he had nota deep sense of the greatness of any sins that proceededno farther than the intention. However, since Josephusspeaks here properly of the punishment of death, whichis not inflicted by any law either of God or man for thebare intention, his words need not be strained to meanthat sins intended, but not executed, were no sins at all.
II No wonder that Josephus here describes AntiochusEupator as young, and wanting tuition, when he cameto the crown: since Appian informs us, (Dr. Hudsonnotes here,) Syriac. page 177. that he was then butnine years old.







OCR Output








AH. 1612.] fi.r> ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


as also to his sons by Ketura, Troglodytis;and to Isaac, Canaan. "By my assistance,"said he, " he did great exploits in war, which,unless you be yourselves impious, you muststill remember. As for Jacob, he becamewell known to strangers also, by the great­ness of that prosperity in which he lived andleft to his sons, who came into Egypt with nomore than seventy souls, while you are nowbecome above six hundred thousand. Knowtherefore, that I shall provide for you all incommon what is for your good, and particu­larly for thyself what shall make thee famous;for that child, out of dread of whose nativitythe Egyptians have doomed the Israelite chil­dren to destruction, shall be this child ofthine,, and shall be concealed from those whowatch to destroy him, and when he is broughtup, in a surprising way he shall deliver theHebrew nation from the distress they areunder from the Egyptians. His memory shallbe famous while the world lasts; and this notonly among the Hebrews, but foreigners also;all which shall be the effect of my favour tothee, and to thy posterity. He shall also havesuch a brother, that he shall himself obtainmy priesthood, and his posterity shall have itafter him to the end of the world."
When the Vision had informed him of thesethings, Amram awaked, and told it to Joche-bed, his wife: and now the fear increasedupon them, on account of the prediction inAmram's dream, for they were under' con­cern, not only for the child, but on account ofthe great happiness that was to come to himalso. However,* the mother's labour wassuch as afforded a confirmation to what wasforetold by God; for it was not known to thosewho watched her by the easiness of her pains,and because the throes of her delivery didnot fall upon her with violence; and nowthey nourished the child at home privatelyfor three months. But after that time, Am­ram fearing he should be discovered, and byfalling under the king's displeasure,- both heand his child should perish, and so he shouldmake the promise of God of none effect, hedetermined rather to trust the safety and cafe4of the child to God, than to depend on hisown concealment of him, which he lookedupon as a thing uncertain, and whereby boththe :ohild, so privately to be nourished, ftnJF


-TTTTTT


 


T~r


■A£"iW.


-i—i-


himself, should be in imminent danger; buthe believed that God would some way forcertain procure the safety of the child, inorder to secure the truth of his own predic­tions. When they had thus determined, theymade an ark of bulrushes, after the mannerof a cradle, and of a bigness sufficient for aninfant to be laid in, without being too muchstraightened. They then daubed it over withslime, which would naturally keep out thewater from entering between the bulrushes,and put the infant into it, and setting it afloatupon the river, they left its preservation toGod; so the river received the child, andcarried him along; but Miriam, the child'ssister, passed along upon the bank overagainst him, as her mother had bid her, tosee whither the ark would be carried: whereGod demonstrated that human wisdom wasnothing, but that the Supreme Being is ableto do whatsoever he pleases; that those, who,in order to their own security, condemn othersto destruction, and use great endeavoursabout it, fail of their purpose; but that othersare, in a surprising manner, preserved, andobtain a prosperous condition, almost fromthe very midst of their calamities: those 1mean whose dangers arise by the appoint­ment of God; and indeed such a Providenceiwas exercised in the case of this child asshewed the power of God.
Thermuthis, the king's daughter was nowdiverting herself by the banks of the river;and seeing a cradle borne along by the cur­rent, she sent some that could swim, and bidthem to bring the cradle to her. When thosethat were sent on this errand came to herwith the cradle, and she saw the little child,she was greatly in love with it, on account ofits largeness and beauty, for God had takensuch great care in the formation of Moses,that he caused him to be thought worthy ofbringing up and providing for by all thosethat had taken the most fatal resolutions, onaccount of their dread of his nativity, for thedestruction of the rest of the Hebrew nation.Thermuthis bid them bring her a Woman thatmight suckle the child, yet would not thechild admit of her breast, but turned awayfripm it, and did the like to many other women.Now. Miriam;Was by when this happened; notto appear to be there on purpose, but onlyas staying to see the child, and she'said, " It







OCR Output








92 [book III. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


on the sides and behind, within one cubit ofthe ground. There were other curtains ofthe same breadth with these, but one more innumber, and longer; for they were thirty cu­bits long: these were woven of hair, andwere extended loosely down to the ground,appearing like a triangular front and elevationat the gates; the eleventh curtain being usedfor this very purpose. There were also othercurtains made of skins above these, whichafforded covering and protection to thosethat were woven, both in hot weather andwhen it rained. And great was the surpriseof those who viewed these curtains at a dis­tance; for they seemed not at all to differfrom the colour of the sky. But those thatwere made of hair, and of skins, reacheddown in the same manner as did the veil atthe gates, and kept off the rain, and heat ofthe sun: and after this manner was the taber­nacle reared.
There was also an ark* made, sacred toGod, of wood that was naturally strong, andcould not be corrupted. This was calledEron, in our own language. Its constructionwas thus; its length was five spans,f but itsbreadth and height was each of them threespans. It was covered with gold, both withinand without: so that the wooden part wasnot seen. It had also a cover united to it, bygolden hinges, after a wonderful manner:


which cover was every way evenly fitted toit, and had no eminences to hinder its exactconjunction. There were also two goldenrings, belonging to each of the longer boards,and passing through the entire wood; andthrough them gilded bars passed along eachboard; that it might thereby be moved, andcarried about as occasion should require; forit was not drawn in a cart by yokes of kine,but borne on the shoulders of the priests.Upon this cover were two images, calledcherubim. They are flying creatures, buttheir form is not like to that of any of thecreatures which men have seen; though Mo­ses said he had seen such beings near thethrone of God. In this ark he put the twotables whereon the Ten Commandments werewritten; five upon each table; and two and ahalf upon each side of them: and this ark heplaced in the most holy place.
In the holy place he placed a table likethose at Delphi. Its length was two cubits,its breadth one cubit, and its height threespans. It had feet also, the lower half ofwhich were complete feet, resembling thosewhich the Dorians put to their bedsteads;but the upper parts towards the table werewrought into a square form. The table hada hollow towards every side, having a ledgeof four fingers depth, that went round about,like a spiral; both on the upper and lower


-.
* We meet with imitations of this divinely institutedemblem among several heathen nations, both in ancient andmodern times. Thus Tacitus (de Mor. German, cap. 40.)informs us, that " the inhabitants of the north of Germany,our Saxon ancestors, in general worshipped Herthum,that is, the mother earth, and believed her to interpose inthe affairs of men, and to visit nations; that to her, withina sacred grove, in a certain island of the ocean, a vehicle,covered with a vestment, was consecrated, and allowed tobe touched by the priest alone, who perceived when thegoddess entered into this her sacred place, and with pro­found veneration attended her vehicle, which was drawnby cows. While the goddess was on her progress, days ofrejoicing were kept at every place which she vouchsafedto visit. They engaged in no war, they meddled not witharms, they locked up their weapons: peace and quiet­ness only were then known, these only relished, till thegame priest reconducted the goddess, satiated with the con­versation of mortals, to her temple."
Among the Mexicans, Vitziputzli, their supreme god,was represented in a human shape, sitting on a throne,supported by an azure globe, which they called heaven.Four poles or sticks came out from two sides of thisglobe, at the ends of which serpents' heads were carved,the whole making a litter, which the priests carried ontheir shoulders whenever the idol was shewn in public.Picart's Ceremonies, vol. iii. p. 146.
In Lieutenant Cook's voyage round the world, published by Dr. Hawksworth, vol. ii. p. 252, we find thatthe inhabitants of Huaheine, one of the islands lately dis­covered in the South Sea, had " a kind of chest or ark, thelid of which was nicely sewed on, and thatched very neatlywith palm-nut leaves. It was fixed upon two poles, andsupported upon little arches of wood, very neatly carved:the use of the poles seemed to be to remove it from placeto place in the manner of our sedan chair: in one end ofit was a square hole, in the middle of which was a ringtouching the sides, and leaving the angles open, so as toform a round hole within, a square one without. Thefirst time Mr. Banks saw this coffer, the aperture at theend was stopped with a piece of cloth, which, lest heshould give offence, he left untouched. Probably therewas then something within: but now the cloth was takenaway; and upon lookipg into it, it was found empty. Thegeneral resemblance between this repository, and the arkof the Lord among the Jews, is remarkable: but it isstill more remarkable, that upon enquiring of the boywhat it was called, he said Ewharra no Eautau, the houseof God; he could, however, giye no. account of its sig­nification or use." Parkhurst's Heb. Lex. p. 690, 4thedit. 8.
t A cubit was about twenty-one inches; and a spanhalf a cubit. ;,







OCR Output








an. 855.] 335 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


him, wherefore this young man came to him?and added withal, that he was mad: he re­plied, " you guess rightly; for the words hespake were the words of a madman." Andwhen they were eager about the matter, anddesired he would tell them, he answered,that God had said, he had chosen him to beking over the multitude. When he had saidthis, every one of them *put off his garment,and spread it under him, and blew withtrumpets, and proclaimed Jehu king. Sowhen he had assembled the army, he pre­pared to set out immediately against Joram,at the city Jezreel; in which city, as wesaid before, he was healing of the woundwhich he had received in the siege of Ra-moth. It happened also that Ahaziah, kingof Jerusalem, was now come to Joram; (forhe was his sister's son, as we have saidalready,) to see how he did after his wound,and this upon account of their kindred. Butas Jehu was desirous to make a suddenattack upon Joram and his companions, hedesired that none of the soldiers might runaway, and tell Joram what had happened;for that this would be an evident demon­stration of their kindness to him, and wouldshew that their real inclinations were tomake him king.
So they were pleased with what he did,and guarded the roads,f lest somebody shouldprivately carry intelligence to those that wereat Jezreel. Now Jehu took his choice horse­men, and sat upon his chariot, and went onfor Jezreel. And when he was come near,the watchman,J whom Joram had set thereto observe such as came to the city, saw Jehumarching on, and told Joram that he saw a
of Ezekiel, chap, xxiii. 30, 31. and of Jeremiah, xxix.26.) as fools and madmen; and some great names in theHeathen world, looking upon all pretenders to inspirationin no better light; according to that noted passage inCicero: Quid habet auctorilatis furor iste, quern divinumvocatis, ut quae sapiens non videt, ea videat insanus, et is,qui humanos sensus atniserit, divinos assecutus sit? DeDivinat. lib. 2. B.
* Spanheim here observes, that this putting off men'sgarments, and spreading it under a king, was an easterncustom, which he has elsewhere explained.
t An. 855.
J In time of peace, as well as war, it was customary tohave watchmen set on high and eminent places whereverthe king was, to prevent his being surprised. Thus David,at Jerusalem, was informed by the watchman, that his sonswere escaped from the slaughter of Absalom, when he


troop of horsemen. He accordingly gaveorders, that one of his horsemen should besent out to meet them, and to know who itwas that was coming. So when the mes­senger came up to Jehu, he asked him, inwhat condition the army was? for that theking wanted to know it. But Jehu told himnot to meddle with such matters; but tofollow him. When the watchman saw this,he told Joram, that the horseman had mingledhimself among the company, and came alongwith them. And when the king had sent asecond messenger, Jehu commanded him todo as the former did. And as soon as thewatchman told this also to Joram, he at lastgot upon his chariot himself, together withAhaziah, the king of Jerusalem; for, as wesaid before, he was there, to see how Joramdid, after he had been wounded; as being hisrelation. So he went out to meet Jehu, whomarched slowly,|| and in good order. Andwjaen Joram met him in the field of Naboth,he asked him, if all things were well in thecamp? but Jehu reproached him bitterly,and called his mother a witch and a harlot.Upon this the king, fearing what he intended,turned his chariot about as soon as he could,and said to Ahaziah, " We are fought againstby deceit and treachery." But Jehu drewhis bow and smote him; the arrow goingthrough his heart. So Joram fell down im­mediately, and gave up the ghost. Jehu alsogave orders to Bidkar, the captain of thethird part of his army, to cast the dead bodyinto the field of Naboth; reminding him ofthe prophecy which Elijah delivered to Ahabhis father, when he had slain Naboth; thatboth he and his family should perish in that


thought them all lost, 2 Sam. xiii. 34. and thereforeJoram, who had an army lying before Ramoth Gilead, hadgood reason to keep a watchful eye upon every motionthat came, especially from that quarter. Patrick's andCalmefs Commentaries. B.
I I Our copies say, that this driving of the chariots waslike the driving of Jehu the son of Nimshi, for he drovefuriously, 2 Kings ix. 20. whereas Josephus's copy, ashe understood it, was that, on the contrary, Jehu marchedslowly, and in good order. Nor cap it be denied, thatsince there was interval enough for king Joram to sendout two horsemen, one after another, to Jehu, and atlength to go out with king Ahaziah to meet him; and allthis after he was come within sight of the watchman, andbefore he was come to Jezreel, the probability is greatlyon the side of Josephus's copy, or interpretation


f







OCR Output








an. 599.] 367 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


the kingdom by Jehoiachin, whose motherwas Nehusta; a citizen of Jerusalem. Hereigned three months and ten days.
CHAP. VII.
OF THE DEPOSITION OF JEHOIACHIN BY THE BABYLONIANS;THE SUCCESSION OF ZEDEKIAH J AND IMPRISONMENT OFTHE PROPHET JEREMIAH.
AFTER the king of Babylon had giventhe kingdom to Jehoiachin, he re­pented of what he had done; fearing lest hemight excite a revolt, to revenge the deathof his father.* He therefore sent an army,and besieged Jehoiachin in Jerusalem.f Butbecause he was of a gentle and just disposi­tion,J ne did not desire to see the city en­dangered on his account; but he took hismother, and kindred, and delivered them tothe commanders sent by the king of Babylon,and accepted of their oaths, that neithershould they nor the city suffer any harm.This agreement, however, was not observedfor a single year; for the king of Babylongave orders to his generals to take all thatwere in the city captives; both the youth,and the handicraft men, and bring thembound to him: their number was ten thou­sand, eight hundred, and thirty-two; as alsoJehoiachin, and his mother and friends. Andwhen these were brought to him, he keptthem in custody, and appointed Jehoiachin's


uncle, Zedekiah, to be king; and made himtake an oath, that he would certainly keepthe kingdom for him, and make no innovation,nor have any league of friendship with theEgyptians.
Now Zedekiah was twenty-one years oldwhen he took the government; and had thesame mother with his brother Jehoiakim;but he was a despiser of justice, and of hisduty. And those of the same age with himwere wicked about him; and the whole mul­titude did what unjust and insolent thingsthey pleased. For this reason the prophetJeremiah came often to him, and insisted,that he must leave off his impieties and trans­gressions; and take care of what was right;and neither give ear to the rulers-, amongwhom were wicked men; nor give credit totheir false prophets, who deluded them, as ifthe king of Babylon would make no morewar against them; and as if the Egyptianswould make war against him, and conquerhim; since what they said was not true, andthe events would not prove such as they ex­pected. Now as to Zedekiah himself, whilehe heard the prophet speak, he believedhim, and agreed to every thing as true; andsupposed it was for his advantage. But thenhis friends perverted him, and dissuaded himfrom what the prophet advised, and obligedhim to do what they pleased.|| Ezekiel alsoforetold in Babylon what calamities were


* It is very probable that Nebuchadnezzar heard thathe had entered into a confederacy with the king of Egypt,as his successor did; and therefore sent an army againsthim, in the very beginning of his reign, to lay siege toJerusalem, against which he intended to come himself:but the Jews have a conceit, that Nebuchadnezzar'scounsellors represented to him, how unadvisedly he actedin making him king whose father had been in rebellionagainst him, and that upon their representation, he re­solved to depose him. From an ill dog there never comesa good whelp, was the proverb, they say, which thecounsellors made use of on this occasion; and to makethis more feasible to the father and son, they generallyapply that passage in Ezekiel, " She took another of herwhelps, and made him a young lion, and he went up anddown among the lions. He became a young lion, andlearned to catch the prey, and devour men.—Then thenations set against him on every side, from the provinces,they spread their net over him, and he was taken in theirpit," chap. xix. 6. &c. Calmet's and Patrick's Com­mentaries. B.
t 2 Kings xxiv. 10.
J Josephus's character of this Jehoiachin here, seemscontrary to that in 2 Kings xxiv. 19. 2 Chron. xxxvi. 9.and Jer. xxii. 28. And yet Josephus's account is con-
firmed by himself elsewhere, Of the War, IV. 9. bothwhich places agree, that he was so mild, and so disposedto spare his people, that he gave up the city Jerusaleminto the hands of the Babylonians, upon their oath to dothe people no harm without opposition: which good willto his people he greatly celebrates in the place last quoted.Perhaps Josephus chose to omit his idolatrous conduct inso short a reign; and to celebrate this humane dispositiononly, without any contradiction of his copy to ours. Corn-pure his character of Zedekiah at first, with that a littleafter.
II The words in the text according to our translation,are—The word which Jeremiah the prophet commandedSeraiah the son of Neriah, &c. when he went with Zede­kiah, the king of Judah, into Babylon, in the fourth yearof his reign. And this Seraiah was a quiet prince, Jer. li.59. and from hence some Hebrew interpreters infer, thatZedekiah went to Babylon in the fourth year of his reignto make his court, and cultivate the good graces of hispatron and paramount Nebuchadnezzar. But this opinion,though followed by several, has no foundation in anyother part of Scripture; and the passage now before us,may, according to the original, be very properly renderedin this wise.—The word which Jeremiah commandedSeraiah, when he went to Babylon upon an embassy from







OCR Output








444 [book XII. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


And this was the speech which Judas madeto encourage them. But when the enemysent Gorgias, with five thousand foot, and onethousand horse, that he might fall upon Judasby night; and had for that purpose, certainof the runagate Jews as guides; the son ofMattathias perceived it, and resolved to fallupon those enemies that were in their camp,now their forces were divided. When theyhad therefore supped in good time, and hadleft many fires in their camp, he marched allnight to those enemies that were at Emmaus.So that when Gorgias found no enemy intheir camp, but suspected they were retired,and had hidden themselves among the moun­tains, he resolved to go and seek them, where­soever they were. But about break of dayJudas appeared to those enemies that wereat Emmaus, with only three thousand men,and those ill armed, by reason of their pov­erty. And when he saw the enemy skilfullyfortified in their camp, he encouraged theJews, and told them, that they ought to fight,though it were with their naked bodies; forthat God had sometimes of old given suchmen strength, and against such as were morein number, and were armed also; out of re­gard to their great courage. So he command­ed the trumpeters to sound for the battle.And by thus falling upon the enemies whenthey did not expect it, and thereby astonish­ing and disturbing their minds, he slew manyof those that resisted him; and went on pur­suing the rest as far as Gadara, and the plainsof Idumea, and Ashdod, and Jamnia. Andof these there fell about three thousand. Yetdid Judas exhort his soldiers not to be toodesirous of the spoils: for that still they musthave a battle with Gorgias, and the forcesthat were with him: but that when they hadonce overcome them, then they might secure­ly plunder the camp; because these were theonly enemies remaining, and they expectedno others. And just as he was speaking tohis soldiers, Gorgias's men looked down intothat army, which they left in their camp, andsaw that it was overthrown, and the campburnt: for the smoke that arose from it shew­ed them, even when they were a great way


off, what had happened. When thereforethose that were with Gorgias understood thatthings were in this posture, and perceivedthat those that were with Judas were readyto fight them, they also were affrighted, andput to flight. But then Judas, as though hehad already beaten Gorgias's soldiers with­out fighting, returned and seized on thespoils. He took a great quantity of gold,and silver, and purple, and blue; and thenreturned home with joy, and singing hymnsto God for their good success. For this vic­tory greatly contributed to the recovery oftheir liberty.*
Lysias was confounded at the defeat of thearmy, which he had sent; and the next yearhe assembled sixty thousand chosen men.He also took five thousand horsemen, andfell upon Judea: and he went up to the hillcountry, at Bethsur,f a village of Judea, andpitched his camp there: where Judas methim, with ten thousand men. And when hesaw the great number of his enemies, heprayed to God, that he would assist him; andjoined battle with the first of the enemy thatappeared, and slew about five thousand ofthem; and became thereby terrible to therest. Nay indeed Lysias observing the greatspirit of the Jews, how they were preparedto die, rather than lose their liberty; and be­ing afraid of their desperate way of fighting,as if it were real strength; he took the restof the army back with him, and returned toAntioch: where he enlisted foreigners intothe service, and prepared to fall upon Judeawith a greater army.
When therefore the generals of Antiochus'sarmies had been defeated so often, Judas as­sembled the people, and told them, that afterthese many victories which God had giventhem, they ought to go up to Jerusalem, andpurify the temple, and offer the appointedsacrifices.J But as soon as he, with the wholemultitude, was come to Jerusalem, and foundthe temple deserted, and its gates burntdown, and plants growing in the temple oftheir own accord, on account of its desertion;he and those that were with him began tolament, and were quite confounded at the


* 1 Mace. iv. 24.
t It had been fortified by kingRehoboam, 2 Chron. xi. 7.and was, at this time, a very important fortress, as being
one of the keys of Judea on the south side of IdumeaUniversal History, lib. 2, c. 11. B.I See 1 Mace. iv. 36—65.







OCR Output








396 [book XI. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


first year of his reign commanded that thetemple should be built in Jerusalem, and thealtar, in height sixty cubits, and its breadthof the same, with three edifices of polishedstone, and one edifice of stone of their owncountry: and he ordained that the expensesof it should be paid out of the king's revenue.He also commanded that the vessels whichNebuchadnezzar had pillaged out of the tem­ple, and had carried to Babylon, should berestored to the people of Jerusalem, and thatthe care of these things should belong to Se-nabassar, the governor, and president of Syriaand Phoenicia, and to his associates; that theymay not meddle with that place: but maypermit the servants of God, the Jews, andtheir rulers, to build the temple. He alsoordained that they shoyld assist them in thework, and that they should pay to the Jews,out of the tribute of the country where theywere governors, on account of the sacrifices,bulls, rams, lambs, and kids of the goats: andfine flour, together with oil, and wine, and allother things that the priests should suggest tothem, and that they should pray for the pre­servation of the king and of the Persians;and that for such as transgressed any of theseorders thus sent to them, he commanded thatthey should be hung on a cross, and theirsubstance confiscated to the king's use. Healso prayed to God against them, that if anyone attempted to hinder the building of thetemple, God would strike him dead, andthereby restrain his wickedness."
When Darius had found this book amongthe records of Cyrus, he wrote the followinganswer to Sisinnes, and his associates:—
"King Darius, to Sisinnes the governor,and to Sathrabuzanes, sendeth greeting. Hav­ing found a copy of this epistle among therecords of Cyrus, I have sent it you: and Iwill that all things be done as is therein writ­ten. Fare ye well."
So when Sisinnes,Pand those that were withhim, understood the intention of the king,they resolved to follow his directions for thetime to come. So they forwarded the sacredwork, and assisted the elders of the Jews,and the princes of the Sanhedrim: and thestructure of the temple was, with great dili-
* Ezra vi. 14.• t From an. 619 to an. 612. B. C.


gence brought to a conclusion; by the pro­phecies of Haggai and Zachariah, accordingto God's commands, and by the injunctions ofCyrus and Darius* the kings. Now the tem­ple was built in fseven years time. And inthe ninth year of the reign of Darius, on thetwenty-third day of the twelfth month, whichis by us called Adar, but by the Macedonians,Dystrus; the priests and Levites, and themultitude of the Israelites offered sacrifices;as the renovation of their former prosperity,after their captivity; and because they hadthe temple rebuilt: a hundred bulls, two hun­dred rams, four hundred lambs, and twelvekids of the goats, according to the number oftheir tribe :f (for so many are the tribes ofthe Israelites) and this last for the sins ofevery tribe. The priest also, and the Le­vites, set the porters at every gate, accordingto the laws of Moses. The Jews also builtthe cloisters of the inner temple, that wereround about the temple itself. «
And as the feast of unleavened bread wasat hand, in the first month, which accordingto the Macedonians is called Xanthicus, butaccording to us Nisan: all the people ran to­gether out of the villages to the city, andcelebrated the festival; having purified them­selves with their wives and children, accord­ing to the law of their country: and they of­fered the sacrifice called the passover, on thefourteenth day of the same month, and feastedseven days, and spared no expense, but offer­ed whole burnt-offerings to God, and per-,formed sacrifices of thanksgiving, becauseGod had led them again to the land of theirfathers, and to the laws thereto belonging;and had rendered the mind of the king ofPersia favourable to them. So these men of­fered the largest sacrifices on these accounts,and used great magnificence in the worshipof God; and dwelt in Jerusalem; and madeuse of a form of government that was aristo­cratic, but mixed with an oligarchy. Forthe high-priests were at the head of the af­fairs, until the posterity of the Asmoneansset up regal government. For before theircaptivity and the dissolution of their polity,they at first had kingly government from Sauland David, for five hundred and thirty-two
J; Ezra vi. 17.







OCR Output








326 (boo* tt. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


"God hath said, since thou hast despised himas not being God, and so unable to foretellthe truth about thy distemper, but hast sentto the god of Ekron to inquire of him; knowthis that thou shalt die."
Accordingly the king died in a very littletime,* as Elijah had "foretold; and Joramhis brother succeeded him in the kingdom,for he died without children. This Joramtwas like his father Ahab in wickedness, andreigned twelve years, indulging himself in allsorts of wickedness and impiety towards God;for leaving off his worship, he worshippedforeign gods. But in other respects he wasan active man. Now at this time Elijah dis­appeared from among men; and no oneknows of his death to this very day; but heleft behind him his disciple Elisha, as wehave formerly declared. And indeed, as toElijah, and as to Enoch, who lived before thedeluge, it was written in the sacred booksthat they disappeared; but so, that nobodyknew they died.
chap. m.
OP AN EXPEDITION MADE BT JORAM AWn JF.MOSHAPHATAGAINST THE MOABITES; THE WORKS OF ELISHA, ANDTHE DEATH OF JEHOSHAPHAT.
WHEN Joram had taken upon him J thekingdom, he determined to make anexpedition against the king of Moab, whosename was Mesha. For as we have said be­fore, he was departed from his obedience tohis brother Ahaziah; while he payed to hisfather Ahab, ||two hundred thousand sheepwith their fleeces of wool. When thereforehe had gathered his own army together, hesent to Jehoshaphat, and intreated him, thatsince he had from the beginning been afriend to his father, he would assist him inthe war that he was entering into against theMoabites, who had departed from their obe­dience. Jehoshaphat readily promised thathe would assist him, and would oblige theking of Edom, who was under his authority,
* An. 898.
t Josephus's character of Joram seems much worsethan that in our Hebrew and Greek copies; which say,2 Kings iii. 2, 3. that although he followed the calves ofJeroboam, yet did he not act like his father Ahab, (andhis mother Jezebel, because he put away the image ofBaal that his father had made.) Where we may note thatnot only the Alexandrian MS. omits the last branch in­


to make the same expedition also. WhenJoram had received these assurances, hetook his army with him, and came to Jeru­salem; and when he had been sumptuouslyentertained by the king of Jerusalem, it wasresolved upon by them to make their marchagainst their enemies through the wildernessof Edom. And when they had taken a com­pass of seven days' journey, they were in dis­tress for want of water for the cattle, and forthe army; from the mistake of their roadsby the guides that conducted them; inso­much that they were all in an agony, espe­cially Joram; and cried to God, by reason oftheir sorrow, and desired to know whatwickedness had been committed by them,that induced him to deliver three kings to­gether, without fighting, into the hands of theking of Moab? But Jehoshaphat, who was arighteous man, encouraged him, and badehim send to the camp, and know whetherany prophet of God was come along withthem; that they might by him learn from Godwhat they should do. And when one of theservants of Joram said, he had seen thereElisha, the son of Shaphat, the disciple ofElijah, the three kings went to him, at theintreaty of Jehoshaphat. And when theywere come to the prophet's tent, without thecamp; they asked him, what would becomeof the army? and Joram was particularlypressing with him about it. And when hereplied to him, that he should not troublehim; but go to his father's and mother's pro­phets; for they, to be sure, were true pro­phets; he still desired him to prophesy, andto save them. So he sware by God, that hewould not answer him, unless it were on ac­count of Jehoshaphat, who was a holy andrighteous man; and when, at his desire, theybrought him a man that could play on thepsaltery, the Divine Spirit came upon him,as the music played; and he commandedthem to dig many trenches in the valley:"For," said he," though there appear neithercloud, nor wind, nor storm of rain, ye shall


closed in parentheses; but that the following characters,and circumstances, and divine punishment of this Joramin all our copies, favour the worse character in JosephusSee 2 Kings iii. 13, 14. vi. 31, 32. ix. 7, 8, 9, 10, 22—26
t An. 895.
II One hundred lambs, and one hundred thousand rams,Hebrew and Septuagint


-.


1







OCR Output








192 [book vr. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


years in all. the multitude had no settledform of government, but were in an anarchy.After which they returned to their formergovernment; they then permitting them­selves to be judged by him who appearedto be the best warrior and most courageous;whence it was that they called this intervalof their government the Judges.
Then did Samuel call another assemblyalso, and said to them, " I solemnly adjureyou by God Almighty, who brought thoseexcellent brethren, I mean Moses andAaron, into the world; and delivered ourfathers from the Egyptians, and from theslavery they endured under them; that youwill not speak what you say to gratify me,nor suppress any thing out of fear of me, norbe overborne by any other passion; but saywhat have I ever done that was cruel orunjust? or what have I done out of lucre,or covetousness, or to gratify others? Bearwitness against me if I have taken an ox,or a sheep, or any such thing: which yet,when they are taken to support men, it isesteemed blameless. Or have I taken anass for mine own use, of any one, to hisgrief? Lay some one such crime to mycharge, now we are in your king's presence.But they unanimously exclaimed, that nosuch thing had been done by him; but thathe had presided over the nation, after aholy and righteous manner.
When this testimony had been given himby them all, Samuel said, "Since you allgrant that you are not able to lay any illthing to my charge hitherto, come on now,and hearken while I speak with great free­dom to you. You have been guilty of greatimpiety against God, in asking you a king.It behoves you to remember, that our grand­father Jacob came down into Egypt byreason of a famine, with seventy souls onlyof our family, and that their posterity mul­tiplied there to many ten thousands, whom


the Egyptians brought into slavery, andhard oppression; that God himself, uponthe prayers of our fathers, sent Mosesand Aaron, who were brethren, and gavethem power to deliver the multitude outof their distress, and this without a king.These brought us into this very land whichyou now possess. And when you enjoyedthese advantages from God, you betrayedhis worship, and religion: nay, when youwere brought under the hands of yourenemies, he delivered you, first by render­ing you superior to the Assyrians, andtheir forces; he then made you to overcomethe Ammonites, and Moabites, and last ofall the Philistines. And these things havebeen achieved under the conduct of Jeph-tha and Gideon. What madness thereforepossessed you to fly from God, and to desireto be under a king? yet have I ordainedhim for king whom he chose for you. How­ever, that I may make it plain to you thatGod is angry and displeased at your choiceof regal government, I will so dispose him,that he shall declare this very plainly toyou, by strange signals; for what none ofyou ever saw here before, I mean a* winterstorm in the midst of harvest, I will intreat ofGod, and will make it visible to you."f Nowas soon as he had said this, God gave suchstrange signals by thunder and lightning,and the descent of hail, as attested the truthof all the prophet had said ;$ insomuch thatthey were amazed and terrified, and con­fessed they had sinned, and had fallen intothat sin through ignorance; and besought theprophet, as one that was a tender and gentlefather, to render God so merciful as to for­give this sin, which they had added to thoseother offences whereby they had affrontedhim, and transgressed against him. So hepromised that he would beseech God, andpersuade him to forgive them their sins.However, he advised them to be righteous,


* Mr. Reland observes here, and proves elsewhere, inhis note on III. 1. that although thunder and lightning withus happen usually in summer, yet in Palestine and Syriathey are chiefly confined to winter. Josephus takes noticeof the same thing again, of the War IV. 4. See alsoAntiq. II. 14.
t It is an observation of St. Jerome, that this harvest inJudea began about the end of June, or the beginning ofJuly, in which season thunder and rain was never known,but only in the spring and autumn, the one called the
former, and the other the latter rain: and therefore Samuel,by this preamble, hit not wheat harvest to-day? chap. xii.17. meant to signify the greatness of the miracle God wasgoing to work; that he could, in an instant, and in a time,when they least of all expected it, deprive them of all thecomforts of life, as they justly deserved, for their rejectinghim and his prophet, who was so powerful with bim, as, byhis prayers, to produce such wonders. Patrick's, CalmePs,and Le Clerr's Commentaries. BJ 1 Sam. xii. 18







OCR Output








 


S^sa.







OCR Output








hs. 947.1 307 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


wealth from God, they returned to Jerusalem.Now as they were corning, a prophet whosename was Azariah, met them on the road, andbade them stop their journey a little; and be­gan to say to them, that the reason why theyhad obtained this victory from God was thatthey had shewn themselves righteous andreligious men, and had done every thing ac­cording to the will of God; that therefore,if they persevered therein, God would grantthat they should always overcome their ene­mies, and live happily; but if they left off hisworship, all things would fall out on the con­trary; and the #time should come, wherein notrue prophet should be left in their wholemultitude; nor a priest who should deliver atrue answer from the oracle: but their citiesshould be overthrown, and their nation scat­tered over the whole earth, and live the lifeof strangers and wanderers. So he advisedthem, while they had time, to be good, andnot to deprive themselves of the favour ofGod. When the king and the people heardthis, they rejoiced; and all in common, andevery one in particular, took great care tobehave themselves righteousry.f The kingalso sent some to take care, that those inthe country should observe the laws.
I now return to Baasha, king of the mul­titude of the Israelites, who slew Nadab,the son of Jeroboam, and retained the go­vernment. He dwelt J in the city Tirzah;having made that his habitation; and reignedtwenty-four years. He became more wickedand impious than Jeroboam or his son: for hedid a great deal of mischief to the multitude;and was injurious to God. The prophet Jehuwas therefore sent to tell him beforehand,that his whole family should be destroyed,and that God would bring the same miserieson his house, which had brought that of Je­roboam to ruin: because when he had beenmade king by him, he had not requited hiskindness, by governing the multitude righ­teously and religiously; which things in thefirst place tended to their own happiness,and in the next place were pleasing to God;that he had imitated this very wicked kingJeroboam; and although that man's soul had


perished, yet did he express to the life hiswickedness; and he said, that he shouldtherefore justly experience the like calamitywith him; since he had been guilty of thelike wickedness. But Baasha, though heheard beforehand what miseries would be­fall him and his whole family for their inso­lent behaviour, yet did not he leave off hiswicked practices for the time to come; nordid he care to appear to be other than worseand worse till he died; nor did he even thenrepent of his past actions, nor endeavour toobtain pardon of God for them; but did asthose do, who have rewards proposed tothem, when they have once in earnest setabout their work, they do not leave off theirlabours. For thus did Baasha grow worsewhen the prophet foretold to him what wouldcome to pass: as if the threatened perditionof his family, and the destruction of his housewere good things; and as if he were a com­batant for wickedness, he every day tookmore and more pains for it. And at last hetook his army, and assaulted a certain con­siderable city called Ramah, which was fortyfurlongs distant from Jerusalem; and whenhe had taken it, he fortified it; having pre­viously determined to leave a garrison in it,that they might thence make excursions, anddo mischief to the kingdom of Asa.
Hereupon Asa was afraid of the attemptsthe enemy might make upon him; and, con­sidering with himself how many mischiefs thisarmy that was left in Ramah might do to thecountry over which he reigned, he sent am­bassadors || to the king of the Damascens,with gold and silver, desiring his assistance,and putting him in mind that they had afriendship together,§ from the times of theirforefathers. So he gladly received that sumof money; and made a league with him, andbrake the friendship he had with Baasha,and sent the commanders of his own forcesunto the cities that were under Baasha's do­minion; and ordered them to do them mis­chief. So they went and burnt some of them,and spoiled others: Ijon, Dan, and Abel-maim,** and many others.
Now when the king of Israel heard this,


* Here is a very great error in our Hebrew copy inthis place, 2 Chron. xvi. 3—6. as applying what followsto times past, and not in times future.
t 2 Chron. xv. 8.
voL. I.—NOS. 25 & 26.
I An. 954.
II About an. 937.
§ See 1 Kings xix. 15—xx. 34.
** This Abelmaim, or in Josephus's copy, Abellane,3 1







OCR Output








an. 670.] 361 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


treachery, and ordered him to be broughtto him, and had him under his power to inflictwhat punishment he pleased upon him. ButManasseh perceiving what a miserable con­dition he was in, and esteeming himself thecause of all, besought God to render hisenemy humane and merciful to him. Accord­ingly God heard his prayer, and Manassehwas released by the king of Babylon, andescaped the danger he was in.* And whenhe was come to Jerusalem, he endeavoured,if it were possible, to cast out of his memoryhis former sins against God; of which he nowrepented; and to apply himself to a very re­ligious life. He sanctified the temple, andpurified the city; and for the remainder ofhis days he was intent on nothing but to re­turn thanks to God for his deliverance; andto preserve him propitious to him all his lifelong. He also instructed the multitude to dothe same; as having nearly experienced whata calamity he was fallen into by a contraryconduct. He also rebuilt the altar, andoffered the legal sacrifices, as Moses com­manded; and when he had re-establishedwhat concerned the divine worship, as itought to be, he took care of the security ofJerusalem. He did not only repair the oldwalls, with great diligence, but added anotherwall to the former, f He also built very loftytowers; and strengthened the garrisonedplaces before the city; supplying them with
{)rovisions of all sorts. And indeed, whenie had changed his former course, he so ledhis life for the time to come, that from thetime of his return to piety towards God, hewas deemed a happy man, and a pattern forimitation. When therefore he had livedsixty-seven years, he departed this life;having reigned Jfifty-five years, and wasburied in his own gardens; and the kingdom


came to his son HAmon, whose mother's namewas Meshulemeth, of the city Jotbath.
CHAP. IV.
OF THE REIGNS OF AMON AND JOSIAII, AND OF THE PRE­DICTIONS OF HULDAH THE PROPHETESS.
AMON imitated those works of his fatherwhich he insolently did when he wasyoung. So a conspiracy was formed againsthim by his servants, and he was slain in hisown house, when he had lived twenty-fouryears, and reigned two. But the multitudepunished those that slew Amon, and buriedhim with his father, and gave the kingdom tohis son Josiah, who was eight years old.§His mother was of the city Boscath; and hername was Jedidah. He was of a most excel­lent disposition, and naturally virtuous, andfollowed the actions of king David, as a pat­tern, and a rule to him in the whole conductof his life. When he was only twelve yearsold, he gave demonstrations of his religiousand righteous behaviour; for he brought thepeople to a sober way of living, and exhortedthem to leave off the opinion they had oftheir idols; because they were not gods; butto worship their own God. And by reflectingon the actions of his progenitors, he prudentlycorrected what they did wrong, like a veryelderly man, and like one abundantly ableto understand what was fit to be done; andwhat he found they had well done, he ob­served all the country over, and imitated thesame. And thus he acted in following thewisdom and sagacity of his own nature, andin compliance with the advice and instruc­tion of the elders.** For by following thelaws it was that he succeeded so well in theorder of his government; and in piety withregard to the divine worship. And this hap­


* The Jewish doctors have a tradition, that while Ma­nasseh was at Babylon, by the direction of his conqueror,he was put in a large brazen vessel full of holes, and setnear to a great fire; that in this extremity, he had re­course to all his false deities, to whom he had offered somany sacrifices, but received no relief from them; thatremembering what he had heard hit good father Hezekiah•ay, viz. When thou art in tribulation, if thou turn to theLord thy God he will not forsake thee, neither destroythee, Deut. iv. 30, 31. he was thereupon immediately de­livered, and in a moment translated to his kingdom. Butthis is no less a fiction, than that miraculous flame whichthe author of the imperfect comment upon St. Matthewspeaks of, that encompassed him on a sudden, as he was
praying to God, and having melted his chains asunder,set him at liberty. Vide Tradit. Hebr. in paralip Targumin 2 Chron. xxxiii. 11. In all probability, it was SaosDuchin, the successor of Esarhaddon, who some yearsafter bis captivity, released Manasseh out of prison. B.
t 2 Chron. xxxiii. 14.
% From an. 699 to an. 644.
II The name of this king, in some copies of the Septua-gint, in Josephus here, and in one copy of the ApostolicalConstitutions, II. 23, 24. is not Amon, or Ammon, as inour Hebrew, or other copies, but Amos.
§ 2 Chron. xxxiv. 1.
** Perhaps the Sanhedrim.







OCR Output








AN. 1116.} 189 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


kissed him, and said, " Be thou a king, by theordination of God, against the Philistines,and for avenging the Hebrews for what theyhave suffered by them. Of this thou shalthave a sign which I would have thee notice:As soon as thou art departed hence, thou wiltfind three men upon the road, going to wor­ship God at Bethel: the first thou wilt seecarrying three loaves of bread; the secondcarrying a kid of the goats; and the third willfollow them, carrying a bottle of wine. Thesemen will salute thee, and speak kindly tothee, and will give thee two of their loaves,which thou shalt accept; and thence thoushalt come to a place called Rachel's Monu­ment, where thou shalt meet with those thatwill tell thee thy asses are found; after this,when thou comest to Gabatha, thou shaltovertake a company of prophets, and thoushalt be seized with the Divine Spirit,* andprophesy along with them, till every one thatsees thee shall be astonished, and wonder,and say, Whence is it that the son of Kishhas arrived at this degree of happiness? Andwhen these signs have happened to thee,know that God is with thee, then do thou sa­lute thy father, and thy kindred. Thou shaltalso come when I send for thee to Gilgal, thatwe may offer thank-offerings to God for theseblessings." When Samuel had said this, hesent the young man away; and all things fellout to Saul according to the prophecy ofSamuel.
But as soon as Saul came into the house ofhis kinsman Abner, he was asked by him con­cerning his journey, and what accidents hadhappened to him therein; and he concealednone of the other things from him, no, not hiscoming to Samuel the prophet, nor how hetold him the asses were found; but he saidnothing about the kingdom, andf what be­longed thereto; which ne thought would pro­cure him envy, and when such things areheard they are not easily believed. Nor didhe think it prudent to tell those things to him,although he appeared very friendly, and onewhom he loved above the rest of his relations,considering, I suppose, what human naturereally is; that no one is a firm friend, neither


among our intimates, nor of our kindred; nordo they preserve that kind disposition whenGod advances nfen to great prosperity, butthey are still ill-natured and envious at thosethat are in eminent stations.
Then Samuel called the people together tothe city Mispeh; and spake to them by thecommand of God in the words following:—"When God had granted you a state of liberty,and brought your enemies into subjection, youbecame unmindful of his benefits, and re­jected him, that he should not be your king;not considering that it would be most foryour advantage to be presided over by thebest of Beings; for God is the best of beings;but you choose to have a man for your king;though kings will use their subjects as beasts,according to the violence of their own willsand inclinations, as wholly carried away withthe lust of power; but will not endeavour soto preserve the race of mankind, as their ownworkmanship and creation; which, for thatvery reason, God would take care of. Since,however, you have come to a fixed resolution,and this injurious treatment of God has quiteprevailed over you, dispose yourselves byyour tribes, and cast lots."
When the Hebrews had so done, the lotfell upon the tribe of Benjamin, and when thelot was cast for the families of this tribe, thatwhich was called Matri was taken; and whenthe lot was cast for the single persons of thatfamily; Saul the son of Kish was taken fortheir king. When the young man knew this,he prevented their sending for him, and im­mediately went away and hid himself. I sup­pose it was because he would not have itthought that he willingly took the govern­ment upon him. Nay* he shewed such a degree of command over himself, and of mo­desty, that while the greatest part are notable to contain their joy, even in the gainingof small advantages, but presently shewthemselves publicly to all men; this man didnot only evince nothing of that nature, whenhe was appointed to be lord over so manyand so great tribes, but crept away, and con­cealed himself from those he was to reignover, and made them seek him with a good


from him, it is more reasonable to think, though someJewish doctors will have it otherwise, that what he madeun* of, upon this occasion, was no more than common oil.Patrick's Comment. B.
* An instance of this divine fury we have after this inSaul, 1 Sam. xi. 6. See the like Judg. iii. 10. vi. 34. xi.
29. xiii. 25. xiv. 6.t 1 Sam. x. 16.


Rr2







OCR Output








494 [book XIII. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


with the news that he had secured the firstplace, the second, and all the places, (for asboon as one had begun, they all submitted tohis disposal:) but the queen and the nationwere in the greatest disorder. For they wereaware, that it would not be long ere Aristo-bulus would be able to set himself firmly inthe government: what they were principallyafraid of was this, that he would inflict punish­ment upon them, from the mad treatment hishouse had had from them. So they resolvedto take his wife and children into custody, andkeep them in the *fortress that was over thetemple. Now there was a great conflux ofpeople that came to Aristobulus from allparts: insomuch that he had a kind of royalattendance about him. For in little morethan fifteen days he got twenty-two strongplaces; which gave him the opportunity ofraising an army from Libanus, and Tra-chonitis, and the fmonarchs. For men areeasily led by the greater number, and easilysubmit to them. And besides this they sup­posed, that by affording him their assistance,when he could not expect it, as well as heshould have the advantages that would comeby his being king: because they had beenthe occasion of his gaining the kingdom.Now the elders of the Jews, and Hyrcanuswith them, went unto the queen; and de­sired that she would give them her senti­ments about the present posture of affairs.For that Aristobulus was in effect lord ofalmost all the kingdom; by possessing somany strong holds; and that it was absurdfor them to take any counsel of themselves,how ill soever she were, while she was alive;and that the danger would be upon them inno long time. But she bade them do whatthey thought proper to be done: that they
* This fortress, castle, citadel, or tower, whitherthe wife and children of Aristobulus were now sent,and which overlooked the temple, could be no otherthan what Hyrcanus I. built, XVIII. 4, and Herod


had many circumstances in their favour stillremaining: a nation in good heart; an army;and money in their several treasuries: forthat she had small concern about publicaffairs now, when the strength of her bodyalready failed her.
Now a little while after she had said thisto them, she died; when she had reignedJnine years, and had lived seventy-three.A woman she was who shewed no signs ofweakness in her sex; for she was sagaciousto the greatest degree in her ambition ofgoverning; and demonstrated by her doingsat once that her mind was fit for action, andthat sometimes men themselves shew the lit­tle understanding they have by the frequentmistakes they make in point of government.For she always preferred the present to fu­turity, and preferred the power of an impe­rious dominion above all things: and in com­parison of that had no regard to what wasgood, or what was right. However shebrought the affairs of her house to such anunfortunate condition, that she was the occa­sion of the taking away that authority fromit, and that in no long time afterward, whichshe had obtained by a vast number of haz­ards and misfortunes; and this out of a de­sire of what does not belong to a woman; andall by a compliance in her sentiments withthose that bore ill will to their family; andby leaving the administration destitute of aproper support of great men. And indeedher management, during her administration,while she was alive, was such, as filled thepalace after her death with calamities anddisturbance. However, although this hadbeen her way of governing, she preservedthe nation in peace. And this is the conclu­sion of the affairs of Alexandra.
the Great rebuilt, and called the tower of Antonio,XV. 11.
t See Of the War, Book I. chap. 20.
t From an. 78 to an. 70 B. C.







OCR Output








378 [book X. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


to discover his dream, he was undertaking toinform him of it. For this was not by hisown skill, or on account of his having bettercultivated his undertaking than the rest:"But," said he, "God hath had pity upon us,when we were in danger of death; and whenI prayed for the life of myself, and of those ofmy own nation, he hath manifested to meboth the dream and the interpretation thereof.For I was not less concerned for thy glory,than for the sorrow that we were by theecondemned to die; while thou didst so un­justly command men both good and excellentin themselves to be put to death, when thouenjoined them to do what was entirely abovethe reach of wisdom; and required of themwhat was only the work of God. Whereforeas thou in thy sleep was solicitous concerningthose that should succeed thee in the govern­ment of the whole world, God was desirousto shew thee all those that should reign afterthee; and to that end exhibited to thee thefollowing dream:—Thou seemedst. to see agreat image standing before thee; the headof which was of gold, the shoulders and armsof silver, the belly and the thighs of brass;but the legs and the feet of iron.* Thouthen sawest a stone broken off from a moun­tain, which fell upon the image, and threw itdown and brake it to pieces, and did notpermit any part of it to remain whole; but


the gold, the silver, the iron, and the brass,became smaller than meal; which, upon theblast of a violent wind, was forcibly carriedaway, and scattered abroad; but the stoneincreased to such a degree, that the wholeearth beneath it seemed to be filled there­with. This is the dream which thou sawest,and its interpretation is as follows:—Thehead of gold denotes thee, and the kings ofBabylon that have been before thee. Butthe two hands and arms signify that thy go­vernment shall be dissolved by two kings.But another king that shall come from thewest, armed with brass, shall destroy thatgovernment. And another government thatshall be like unto iron, shall put an end to thepower of the former, and shall have dominionover all the earth; on account of the natureof iron, which is stronger than that of gold,of silver, and brass." Daniel also declaredthe meaning of fthe stone to the king; but Ido not think it proper to relate it; since Ihave only undertaken to describe things past,or things present; but not the things that arefuture. Yet if any one be so desirous ofknowing truth, as not to wave such points ofcuriosity, and cannot curb his inclination forunderstanding the uncertainties of futurity,and whether they will happen or not, let himdiligently read the book of Daniel, which hewill find among the sacred writings.


* By these different emblems of metals and stone, Godintended to signify to Nebuchadnezzar the several em­pires that were to be in the world. The Assyrian orChaldean is represented by gold, because it was the firstand the most magnificent, if not the most extensive, andNebuchadnezzar, being then upon the throne, is said to behead of it. That of silver is the Persian, founded byCyrus, upon the ruins of the Chaldean, but inferior to theChaldean in its duration at least, if not in its extent. Thatof brass is the Grecian, founded by Alexander, upon theruins of the Persian, and its character is, that it shouldbear rule over all the earth, Daniel ii. 39. which wasverified in its great founder; for, upon his return fromIndia to Babylon, the ambassadors of almost all the knownparts of the world resorted thither, to pay their homageand acknowledgment of his dominion. That of iron is theRoman empire, which is extinguished by its breaking inpieces, and subduing all things, verse 40. For whilst itwas in its full strength and vigour, under its consuls andfirst emperors, it brought under its dominion all the king­doms and states that were then subsisting in Europe, Africa,and a great part of Asia; but, from that time, it became amixture of iron and clay. Its emperors proved most ofthem vicious and corrupt, either by their tyranny makingthemselves hateful to their subjects, or, by their folliesand vices, contemptible. Lastly, that of the stone out of
the mountain, is the fifth monarchy, or the kingdom ofthe Messiah's; which against all the power and policy ofthe Roman empire, prevailed, not by an external force,but by the powerful preaching of the gospel, to the sup­pression and defeat of wickedness and impiety, idolatry,and superstition, and it shall stand for ever, and never bedestroyed, Daniel ii. 44. which can be said of no otherkingdom but that of Jesus Christ, which, for these seven­teen hundred years and upwards, has withstood the vio­lence of persecutions, and all other contrivances formedagainst it, and has the sure promises of its AlmightyFounder on its side, that the gates of hell should not pre­vail against it, Matt. xvi. 18. Calmefs Commentary. B.t This is a most remarkable passage in Josephus, con­cerning the stone cut out of the mountain, and destroyingthe image, which he intimated to be a prophecy of futurity;and probably not safe for him to exclaim, as belonging tothe destruction of the Roman empire, by Jesus Christ,the true Messiah of the Jews. Take here also the wordsof Havercamp. "The place referred to by Josephus,"says he, is " chap. 10. Nor is this to be wondered at,that he would not meddle with things future. For hehad no mind to provoke the Romans, by speaking of thedestruction of the city, which they called the eternal city."Note v. on X. 11.







OCR Output








an. 1493.] 121 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


slew the sacrifices, and offered them as burntofferings, that he might observe some signalof the Sight of the Hebrews. Then said he,44 Happy is this people, on whom God be­stows the possession of innumerable goodthings; and grants them his own providenceto be their assistant and their guide: so thatthere is not any nation among mankind, butyou will be esteemed superior to them invirtue, and in the earnest prosecution of thebest rules of life, and of such as are pure fromwickedness; and will leave those rules toyour excellent children: and this out of theregard that God bears to you, and the pro­vision of such things for you as may renderyou happier than any other people under thesun. You shall retain that land to which hehath sent you, and it shall be ever under thecommand of your children; and both all theearth, as well as the sea, shall be filled withtheir glory. And you shall be sufficientlynumerous to supply the world in general, andevery region of it in particular, with inhabi­tants out of your stock. However, O blessedarmy! wonder that you are become so manyfrom one father! and truly the land of Canaancan now hold you, as being yet comparativelyfew. but know ye, that the whole world isproposed to be your place of habitation forever. Your posterity shall also live in theislands, as well as on the continent, and shallbe more numerous than the stars of heaven.And when you are become so many, God willnot relinquish his care of you, but will affordyou an abundance of all good things in timesof peace, with victory and dominion in timesof war. May the children of your enemieshave an inclination to fight against you, andmay they be so hardy as to come to arms,and to assault you in battle, for they will notreturn with victory, nor will their return beagreeable to their wives and children. To sogreat a degree of valour will you be raised bythe providence of God, who is able to dimi­nish the affluence of some, and to supply thewants of others."
sacrifices to be prepared. The ancients were very super­stitious about certain numbers, supposing that God de­lighted in odd numbers.
Terna tibi haec primum triplici diversa coloreLicia circumdo; terque haec altaria circumEffigiem duco; numero Deus impare gaudet.
Virg. Eclog. viii. 73,


Thus did Balaam speak by inspiration; asnot being in his own power, but moved tosay what he did by the Divine spirit. ButBalak was greatly displeased, and said, hehad broken the contract whereby he was tocome, as he and his confederates had invitedhim, by the promise of great presents. Forwhereas he came to curse their enemies, hehad pronounced an encomium on them; andhad declared they were the happiest of men.To which Balaam replied; "O Balak, if thourightly considerest this whole matter, canstthou suppose that it is in our power to besilent, or to say any thing, when the Spirit olGod seizes upon us? for he puts such wordsas he pleases in our mouths, and such dis­courses as we are not ourselves conscious of.I well remember by what entreaties both youand the Midianites brought me hither; and onthat account I took this journey. It was myprayer that I might not put any affront uponyou, as to what you desired of me. But Godis more powerful than the purposes I hadmade to serve you. For those that take uponthem to foretel the affairs of mankind, as fromtheir own abilities, are entirely unable to doit; or to forbear to utter what God suggeststo them, or to offer violence to his will. Forwhen he prevents us, and enters into us, no­thing that we say is our own. I then did notintend to praise this army, nor to notice theseveral good things which God intended todo to their race. But since he was so favour­able to them, and so ready to bestow uponthem a happy life, and eternal glory, he sug­gested the declaration of those things to me.But now, because it is my desire to obligethee thyself, as well as the Midianites, whoseentreaties it is not decent for me to reject;let us again rear other altars, and offer thelike sacrifices that we did before; and I maysee whether I can persuade God to permitme to bind these men with curses." Balakreadily agreed to this proposal; but Godwould not even upon* second sacrifices con­sent to his cursing the Israelites. Then fell
Around his waxen image first I windThree woollen fillets, of three colours join'd;Thrice bind about his thrice devoted head,Which round the sacred altar thrice is led.Unequal numbers please the gods. Drvden. B.
* Whether Josephus had in his copy but two attemptsof Balaam in all to curse Israel; or whether by his twice







OCR Output








AK. 1050.] 281 Antiquities of the jews.


figure was that of a hemisphere; this brazenvessel was called a sea tor its largeness; forthe laver was ten cubits in diameter, and castof the thickness of a palm. Its middle partrested on a short pillar, that had ten spiralsround it; and that pillar was a cubit in dia­meter. There stood round about it twelveoxen, that looked to the four winds of heaven;three to each wind; having their hinder partsdepressed, that so the vessel might rest uponthem; which itself was also depressed roundabout inwardly. Now this sea containedthree thousand baths.
He also made ten brazen bases, for somany quadrangular lavers; the length ofevery one of these bases was five cubits, thebreadth four cubits, and the height sixcubits.* This vessel was partly turned, andwas thus contrived. There were four smallquadrangular pillars, that stood one at eachcorner; these had the sides of the base fittedto them on each quarter; and they wereparted into three parts; every interval hada border fitted to support the laver; uponwhich was engraven, in one place a lion, andin another place a bull, and an eagle. Thesmall pillars had the same animals engraven,that were on the sides. The whole workwas elevated, and stood upon four castwheels; which had also naves and felloes,and were a foot and half in diameter. Anyone that saw the spokes of the wheels, howexactly they were turned, and united to the


sides of the bases, and with what harmonythey agreed to the felloes, would wonder atthem. However, their structure was this.Certain shoulders of hands stretched outheld the corners above; upon which resteda short spiral pillar, that lay under the hol­low part of the laver, resting upon the fore­feet of the eagle, and the lion; which wereadapted to them: insomuch that those whoviewed them would think that they were ofone piece. Between these were engravingsof palm trees. This was the construction ofthe ten bases. He also made ten large roundvessels, which were the lavers themselves;each of which contained fforty baths:J forit had its height four cubits, and its edgeswere as much distant from each other. Healso placed these lavers upon the ten basesthat were called Mechonoth; and he set fiveof the lavers on the ||left side of the temple,which was that side towards the north wind;and as many on the right side, towards thesouth, but looking towards the east. Thesame eastern way he also set the sea. Nowhe appointed the sea for washing the handsand the feet of the priests, when they enteredinto the temple, and were to ascend the al­tar; but the lavers to cleanse the feet andentrails of the beasts that were to be burnt-offerings.
He also made a brazen altar, whose lengthwas twenty cubits, its breadth the same, andits height ten, for the burnt-oflerings. He


in number and richness, to that of the edifice; and yetJosephiu seems to have carried his account beyond allcredibility, when he tells us, that there were 10,000tables besides those of the shew-bread; 10,000 candle­sticks besides those in the holy place; 80,000 cups fordrink-offerings; 100,000 basons of gold, and double thatnumber of silver: when he tells us that Solomon causedto be made 1000 ornaments for the sole use of the high-priest, 10,000 linen robes and girdles for that of thecommon priests, and 200,000 more for the Levites andmusicians, when he tells of 200,000 trumpets made ac­cording to Solomon's direction, with 200,000 more, madein the fashion that Moses had appointed, and 400,000musical instruments of a mixed metal, between gold andsilver, called by the ancients electrum. Concerning all-which we can only say, that the text is either silent, orcontradicts this prodigious account. Universal History,lib. i. c. 7. B.
* Four cubits, Heb. and Septuagint. 1 Kings vii. 27.
t The round or cylindrical lavers of 4 cubits in dia­meter, and 4 in height, both in our copies: 1 Kings vii.38, 39. and here in Josephus, must have contained a greatdeal more than the 40 baths, which are always assignedt hem. Where the error lies is hard to say. If for ^oou,
congii, or baths, we take homers, which were but a tenthpart of the bath: or if, in Josephus, we take their dia­meters only one third of their height, by reading insteadof tjctois, to rpirov too"stwv, the measures would pretty wellagree. But both these conjectures are uncertain, andunsupported. Perhaps Josephus honestly followed hiscopies here; though they had been corrupted, and he wasnot able to restore the true reading. In the mean timethese 40 baths are probably the quantity contained ineach laver: since they went upon wheels, and were tobe drawn by the Levites about the court of the priests,for the washings they were designed for, and had theyheld much more they would have been too heavy to havebeen so drawn.
I Cori, or Congii.
II Here Josephus gives us a key to his own language,of right and left hand in the tabernacle and temple: thatby the right hand he means what is against our left, whenwe suppose ourselves going up from the east gate of thecourts, towards the tabernacle or temple themselves: andso vice versa. Whence it follows that the pillar Jachin,on the right hand of the temple was on the south, againstour left hand, and Booz on the north against our righthand.







OCR Output








An. 22.] 565 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


a temple, that was seen a great way off,by those that were sailing for that haven,and had in it two statues, the one of Rome,the other of Caesar. As the city itself wascalled Caesarea: which was also built of finematerials, and was of a fine structure. Nay,the very subterranean vaults and cellars hadno less of architecture bestowed on them,than had the building above ground. Someof these vaults carried things at even dis­tances, to the haven, and to the sea; butone of them ran obliquely, and bound allthe rest together; that both the rain and thefilth of the streets were together carried offwith ease, and the sea itself, upon the fluxof the tide from without, came into the city,and washed it all clean. Herod also builttherein a theatre of stone: and on the southquarter, behind the port, he erected an am­phitheatre, capable of holding a vast num­ber of men, and conveniently situated for aprospect of the sea. So this city was thusfinished in *twelve years; during whichtime the king did not fail both to go onwith the work, and to pay the charges thatwere necessary.
CHAP. X.
OF ZENODORUS AND THE TRACHONITES; AND THE ACCUSA­TION BROUGHT AGAINST HEROD BY THE GADARENES.
ALSO OF THE PHARISEES, THE ESSENES, AND MANAHEM.
WHEN Herod had rebuilt Sebaste, orSamaria, he resolved to send hissons Alexander and Aristobulus to Rome, toenjoy the company of Caesar. Accordinglywhen they came thither, they were enter­tained at the house of tPollio, who was veryfond of Herod's friendship; and they hadleave to lodge in Caesar's own palace; for hereceived these sons of Herod with all hu­manity, and gave Herod permission to givehis kingdom to which of his sons he pleased:and, besides all this, he bestowed on him
* Caesarea being here said to be rebuilt, and adornedin twelve years; and soon afterwards in ten years, XVI.5. there must be a mistake in one of the places, as to thetrue number: but in which of them it is hard positively todetermine. I prefer the latter reading: because in the13th and 14th years of Herod's reign was the terriblefamine in Judea: which would prevent any fulness ofhis treasury for some years: because then it will begin inhis 18th year, when we know he had recovered himselfenough to set about rebuilding the temple.


Trachon, and Batanea, and Auranitis, on thefollowing occasion. One JZenodorus hadhired what was called the house of Lysanias.But he was not satisfied with its revenues,he became a partner with the robbers whoinhabited the Trachones; and so procuredhimself a larger income. For the inhabi­tants of those places lived in a mad way,and pillaged the country of the Damascenes;while Zenodorus did not restrain them, butpartook of the prey they acquired. Now asthe neighbouring people were hereby greatsufferers, they complained to Varro, whowas then president of Syria, and entreatedhim to write to Caesar about this injustice ofZenodorus. When these matters were laidbefore Caesar, he wrote back to Varro todestroy those nests of robbers, and to givethe land to Herod; that by his care theneighbouring countries might be no longerdisturbed with these doings of the Tracho-nites. For it was not an easy thing to re­strain them: since this way of robbery hadbeen their usual practice, and they had noother way to get their living; because theyhad neither any city of their own, nor landsin their possession; but only some recepta­cles and dens in the earth; and there theyand their cattle lived in common together.However, they had made contrivances toget pools of water, and laid up corn in gra­naries for themselves; and were able tomake great resistance, by issuing out sud­denly against any that attacked them. Forthe entrances of their caves were narrow;in which but one could come at a time: andthe places within incredibly large, and madevery wide. But the ground over their habi­tations was not very high, but rather on aplain: while the rocks are altogether hard,and difficult to be entered upon; unless anyone gets into the plain road, by the guidanceof another. For these roads are not straight,but have several revolutions. But when


t This Pollio, with whom Herod's sons lived at Rome,was not Pollio, the Pharisee, already mentioned by Jose-phus, chap. 1, and again presently after this, chap. 10,but Asinius Pollio, the Roman.
| The character of this Zenodorus is so like that of afamous robber, of the same name in Strabo, and that aboutthis very country, about this time also, that I think Dr.Hudson hardly needed to have put a perhaps to his de­termination that they were the same. See Strabo, XVI.page 756.


if


4S2







OCR Output








162 [SOOK V ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


an admonition from God not to overlook theIsraelites in such a distress as they were nowin; but to endeavour boldly to regain theirliberty. So when he had procured some toassist him in this dangerous undertaking;(and few they were who, either out of shameat their present circumstances, or out of adesire of changing them, could be prevailedon to assist him:) he first of all destroyedthat garrison which Chushan had set overthem. And when it was perceived that hehad not failed in his first attempt, more of thepeople came to his assistance; so they joinedbattle with the Assyrians, and drove thementirely before them, and compelled them topass over the Euphrates. Hereupon Othniel,who had given such proof of bis valour, re­ceived from the multitude authority to judgethe people. And when he had ruled overthem* forty years, he died.


CHAP. IV.
OF THE SUBJUGATION OF THE HEBREWS BY THE MOABITES;AND OF THEIR DELIVERANCE FROM SLAVERY BY EHUD;WHO RETAINED THE DOMINION EIGHTY YEARS.
WHEN Othniel was dead, the affairs ofthe Israelites fell again into disorder;and while they never payed to God the honourdue to him, nor were obedient to the laws,their afflictions increased; till Eglon,f kingof the Moabites, taking advantage of the dis­orders of their political government, madewar upon them, and overcame them in severalbattles, and made the most courageous tosubmit; and entirely subdued their army, andordered them to pay him tribute. And whenhe had built him a royal palace atj: Jericho,he omitted no method whereby he might dis­tress them; and, indeed, he reduced them toEoverty for|| eighteen years. But when Godad once taken pity on the Israelites, on ac­count of their afflictions, and was moved tocompassion by their supplications, he freedthem from the hard usage they had met with


under the Moabitea. And this liberty he pro­cured for them in the following manner:
There was a young man of the tribe ofBenjamin, whose name was Ehud, the son ofGera; a man of very great courage in boldundertakings; and of a very strong body, fitfor hard labour, but best skilled in using hisleft hand,§ in which was his whole strength;and he also dwelt at Jericho. Now this manbecame familiar with Eglon, and that bymeans of presents, with which he obtained hisfavour, and insinuated himself into his goodopinion, whereby he was also beloved of thosethat were about the king. Now when on atime, he was bringing presents to the king,and had two servants with him, he put a dag­ger on his right thigh secretly, and went into him. It was then summer time, and themiddle of the day, when the guards were notstrictly on their watch; both because of theheat, and because they were gone to dinner.So the young man, when he had offered hispresents to the king, who then resided in asmall parlour, that stood conveniently to avoidthe heat, fell into discourse with him; forthey were now alone, the king having bid hisattendants leave him, because he had a mindto talk with Ehud. He was now sitting onhis throne; and fear seized upon Ehud, lesthe should miss his stroke, and not give him adeadly wound. So he raised himself up, andsaid he had a dream to impart to him, by thecommand of God. Upon this, the king leapedout of his throne for joy of the dream; soEhud smote him to the heart; and leaving hisdagger in his body, he went out, and shut thedoor after him. Now the king's servantswere very still, as supposing that the king hadcomposed himself to sleep.
Hereupon Ehud informed the people ofJericho privately what he had done; and ex­horted them to recover their liberty. Theyheard him gladly, and went to their arms,and sent messengers all over the country, thatshould sound trumpets** of rams' horns; for itwas the custom to call the people together by


* From An. 1441 to 1401.
t Judg. iii. 12.
j It appears by the sacred history Judg. i. 16. iii. 13.tint Eglon's pavilion or palace, was at the city of Palm-trees, as the place where Jericho had stood is called afterits destruction by Joshua; that is, at, or near the demo­lished city. Accordingly Josephus says it was at Jericho;or rather in that fine country of palm-trees, upon or near
the same spot of ground on which Jericho had formerly-stood, and on which it was afterwards rebuilt by Hiel, 1Kings xvi. 34. Our other copies, that avoid its propername Jericho, and call it the city of palm-trees only, speakhere more accuratelv than Josephus.
II From An. 1401 to 1383.
§ Jndg. iii. 15.
** Judg. iii. 27







OCR Output








164 [book V ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


not be the general, unless she would go alsoas a general with him, she had indignation atwhat he said, and replied: "Thou, O Barak,deliverest up meanly that authority whichGod hath given thee, into the hand of a wo­man, and I do not reject it." So they col­lected ten thousand men, and pitched theircamp at mount Tabor; where, at the king'scommand, Sisera met them, and pitched hiscamp not far from the enemy. Whereuponthe Israelites, and Barak himself, were soaffrighted at the multitude of those enemies,that they were resolved to march off, had notDeborah retained them, and commandedthem to fight the enemy that very day; forthat they should conquer them, and Godwould be their assistance.
So the battle began; and when they werecome to a close fight, there came down fromheaven a great storm, with a vast quantity ofrain and hail; and the wind blew the rain inthe face of the Canaanites, and so darkenedtheir eyes, that their arrows and slings wereof no advantage to them. Nor would thecoldness of the air permit the soldiers to makeuse of their swords. This storm, however,did not so much incommode the Israelites,because it came on their, back; They alsotook such courage upon the apprehensionthat God was assisting them, that they fellupon the very midst of their enemies, and


slew a great number of them. So that someof them fell by the Israelites; some fell bytheir own horses, which were put into dis­order; and not a few were killed by theirown chariots. At last Sisera, as soon as hesaw himself beaten, fled away, and came to awoman, whose name was Jael,* a Kenite;who received him, when he desired to beconcealed, and when he asked for somewhatto drink, she gave him sour milk;t of whichhe drank so freely, that he fell asleep. Butwhen he was asleep, Jael took an iron nail,and drove it through his temples with ahammer, into the floor. And when Barakcame a little afterwards, she shewed Siseranailed to the ground.J And thus was thevictory gained by a woman, as Deborah hadforetold. Barak also fought with Jabin, atHazor; and when he met with him, he slewhim. And when the general was fallen,Barak overthrew the city to the foundation,and was the commander of the Israelites forforty years
CHAP. VI.
OF THE OPPRESSION OF THE HEBREWS BY THE MIDIANITESAND OTHER NATIONS; AND OF THEIR DELIVERANCE BVGIDEON, WHO RULED OVER THE MULTITUDE FOR SEVEN


YEARS.


N


OW when Barak and Deborah weredead, whose deaths, happened about


endearing herself to the people, and made her, by thismeans, the fitter instrument to rescue them from oppres­sion. Pool's Annot. B.
* She was of the posterity of Hobab, the son of Jethro,father-in-law of Moses; and is here called a Kenite, be­cause originally she descended from those people whodwelt westward of the Dead Sea, and extended themselvespretty far into Arabia Petraea. The word Ken, from whichthey took their name, signifies a nest, a hole, or a cave;and to this the prophet Balaam might allude, when he ad­dressed himself to them in these words :—" Strong is thydwelling-place, and thou puttest thy nest on a rock ; never­theless the Kenites shall be wasted, until Ashur shall carrythee away captive." Numb. xxiv. 21. These Kenitesindeed were some of the people whose lands God hadpromised to the descendants of Abraham; nevertheless, inconsideration of Jethro, all that submitted to the Israelites,were permitted to live in their own country. In Numb.x. 29. we find that Hobab was invited by Moses to accom­pany him into the land of Canaan; and, in all probability,he accepted the invitation. At their first coming, theysettled themselves in the territories of Jericho; but havingcontracted a particular friendship with the tribe of Jndah,they removed with them into the country that fell to theirlot, Judg. i. 16. Every family of them, however, did notso; for this Heber, we find, for some reasons that are notmentioned, had settled his habitation in the tribe of Naph-
thali, Jiidg. i. 11. The Kenites, indeed, though theywere proselytes, and worshipped the true God, accordingto the Mosaic law, yet being strangers by birth, and so notpretending to any right or title to the land of Canaan, heldit best policy, in these troublesome times, to observe aneutrality, and maintain peace, as well as they could, bothwith the Israelites and Canaanites; and upon this footing itwas, that there was a peace between king Jabin and thehouse of Heber, and that Sisera, in his distress, fled toHeber's tent for protection, and put confidence in thefeigned civilities of his wife. Howell's Hist, of the Bible. B.
t Jael certainly shewed her regard for Israel by de­stroying Sisera; but it is as certain that she did not do it inthe most honourable manner: there was treachery in it;perhaps, in the estimation of those people, the greatesttreachery. Among the later Arabs, giving a person drinkhas been thought to be the strongest assurance of their re­ceiving him under their protection. When Guy de Lusig-nan, king of Jerusalem, was taken prisoner, and was con­ducted before Saladin, he demanded drink, and they gavehim fresh water, which he drank in Saladin's presence;but when one of his lords would have done the same, Sa­ladin would not suffer it, because he did not intend tospare his life: on the contrary, advancing to him, afteisome expostulations, he cut off his head. D'Herbelot, p371; /farmer, vol. ii. p. 469.
J Judg. iv. 22.







OCR Output








ak. 958.] 30ft ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


to his servant, Jeroboam; and are now herewith him to fight against those who, by God'sown determination, are to reign, and to de-
Erive them of that dominion which theyave still retained; for as to the greaterpart of it, Jeroboam is unjustly in possessionof it. However, I do not suppose he willenjoy it any longer; but when he hath suf­fered that punishment which God thinks dueto him for what is past, he will leave off thetransgressions he hath been guilty of, andthe injuries he hath offered to him, andwhich he hath still continued to offer; andhath persuaded you to do the same. Yet,when you were not any further unjustlytreated by my father, than that he did notspeak to you so as to please you; and thisonly in compliance with the advice of wickedmen, you in anger forsook him, as you pre­tended; but in reality you withdrew your­selves from God, and from his laws. Althoughit had been right for you to have given soyoung a man not only some disagreeablewords; but if his youth and his unskilfulnessin affairs had led him into some unfortunateactions; and that for the sake of his fatherSolomon, and the benefits you received fromhim. For men ought to excuse the sins ofposterity, on account of the benefactions ofparents. But you considered nothing of allthis then, neither do you consider it now;but come with so great an army against us.And what is it that you depend upon forvictory? Is it upon the golden heifers, andthe altars you have erected on high places,which are demonstrations of your impiety,and not of religious worship? Or is it theexceeding multitude of your army whichgives you such good hopes? yet certainlythere is no strength in an army of many thou­sands when the war is unjust. For we oughtto place our surest hope of success againstour enemies in righteousness alone, and inpiety towards God. Which hope we justly


have, since we have kept the laws from thebeginning, and have worshipped our ownGod, who was not made by hands out ofcorruptible matter; nor was he formed by awicked king, in order to deceive the multi­tude; but who is *his own workmanship,and the beginning and end of all things. Itherefore give you counsel even now to re­pent, and to take better advice, and to leaveoff the prosecution of the war; to call tomind the laws of your country, and to reflectwhat it hath been that hath advanced you toso happy a state as you are now in."
This was the speech which Abijah madeto the multitude. But while he was stillspeaking, Jeroboam sent some of his soldiersprivately to surround him on certain parts ofthe camp that were not taken notice of. Andwhen he was thus within the compass of theenemy, his army was affrighted, and theircourage failed them. But Abijah encouragedthem, and exhorted them to place their hopeson God: for that he was not encompassed bythe enemy. So they all at once implored thedivine assistance; while the priests soundedwith the trumpets, and they made a shout,and fell upon their enemies; and God brakethe courage and cast down the force of theirenemies, and made Abijah's army superiorto them. For God vouchsafed them a won­derful and very famous victory; and such afslaughter was now made of Jeroboam's army,as is never recorded to have happened in anyother war; whether it were of the Greeks orof the Barbarians; for they overthrew andslew five hundred thousand of their enemies;Jand they took their strongest cities by force,and spoiled them, and besides those theydid the same to Bethel and her towns; andJeshanah and her towns. And after thisdefeat Jeroboam never recovered himselfduring the life of Abijah; who yet did notlong survive: for he reigned but three years,|jand was buried in Jerusalem, in the sepul­


* This is a strange expression in Josephus, that Godis his own workmanship, or that he made himself; con­trary to common sense, and to Christianity. Constitut.Apost. VI. 11. Perhaps he only means that he was madeby none, but was unoriginated. See Cotelerius's note onthe forecited place of the Constitutions.
t By this terrible and unparalleled slaughter of 500,000men of the newly idolatrous and rebellious ten tribes,God's high displeasure and indignation against idolatryand rebellion fully appeared; the remainder were thereby
seriously cautioned not to persist in them; and a kind ofbalance or equilibrium was made between the ten and thetwo tribes, for the time to come. While otherwise theperpetually idolatrous and rebellious ten tribes would natu­rally have been too powerful for the two tribes, which werepretty frequently free both from such idolatry and rebellion.Nor is there, by consequence, any reason to doubt the truthof this prodigious number slain, upon so singular an occasion.
X 2 Chron. xiii. 17.
II From an. 959 to 957: two years and seven months







OCR Output








AN. 591.] 369 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


punished; and this was the condition he wasin for some time, while he suffered unjustlywhat I have already described.
In the ninth year of the reign of Zedekiah,on the tenth day of the tenth month, the kingof Babylon made a second expedition againstJerusalem, and lay before it eighteen months,and besieged it with the utmost application.*There came upon them also two of thegreatest calamities, at the same time thatJerusalem was besieged; a famine and pes­tilential distemper, and made great havockamong them. And though the prophet Jere­miah was in prison, he did not rest, but pro­claimed aloud, and exhorted the multitudeto open their gates, and admit the king ofBabylon: for that if they did so, they shouldbe preserved, and their whole families; but ifthey did not do so they should be destroyed.And he foretold that if any one staid in thecity, he should certainly perish by the fa­mine, or by the enemies' sword: but that ifhe would flee to the enemy he would escapedeath. Yet did not these rulers that heardhim believe him, even when they were inthe midst of their sore calamities; but theycame to the king, and, in their anger, in­formed him of what Jeremiah said, and ac­cused him, and complained of the prophet,as of a madman, and one that disheartenedtheir minds; and by the denunciation ofmiseries, weakened the alacrity of the mul­titude, who were otherwise ready to exposethemselves to danger for him, and for theircountry; while he, in a way of threatening,warned them to flee to the enemy: and toldthem that the city should certainly be taken,and utterly destroyed.
- But for the king himself, he was not at allirritated against Jeremiah: such was hisgentle and righteous disposition. Yet thathe might not be engaged in a quarrel withthose rulers, at such a time, by opposingwhat they intended, he let them do with theprophet whatsoever they would. Where­upon, when the king had granted them sucha permission, they presently came into theprison, and took him, and let him down witha cord into a pit full of mire, that he mightbe suffocated, and die of himself. So hestood up to the neck in the mire, which was


all about him, and so continued. But therewas one of the king's servants, who was inesteem with him, an Ethiopian by descent;who told the king what a state the prophetwas in, and said that his friends and hisrulers had done evil in putting the prophetinto the mire, and by that means contrivingagainst him, that he should suffer a deathmore bitter than by his bonds only. Whenthe king heard this, he repented of hishaving delivered up the prophet to therulers, and bade the Ethiopian take thirtymen of the king's guards, and cords withthem, and whatsoever else they understoodto be necessary for the prophet's preserva­tion; and to draw him up immediately. Sothe Ethiopian took the men he was orderedto take, and drew up the prophet out of themire, and left him in the prison.f
But when the king had sent to call himprivately, and inquired what he could sayto him from God, which might be suitable tohis present circumstances, and desired himto inform him of it; Jeremiah replied, hehad somewhat to say; but that he shouldnot be believed, nor if he admonished him,should he be hearkened to. "For," said he,"thy friends have determined to destroy me,as though I had been guilty of some wicked­ness. And where are now those men thatdeceived us, and said that the king of Baby­lon would not come and fight against us anymore? But I am afraid now to speak thetruth; lest thou shouldst condemn me todie." And when the king had assured himupon oath that he would neither himself puthim to death, nor deliver him up to therulers, he became bold upon that assurance,and gave him this advice: that he shoulddeliver the city up to the Babylonians: andhe said, that it was God that prophesied thisby him, that he must do so, if he would bepreserved, and escape out of the danger hewas in; and that then neither should the cityfall to the ground, nor should the temple beburned; but if he disobeyed, he would bethe cause of these miseries coming upon thecitizens, and of the calamity that would be­fall his whole house. When the king heardthis, he said, he would willingly do what hepersuaded him to, and what he declared


* 2 Kings xxv. J.
t Jeremiah xxviii. 13.







OCR Output








102 [book III. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


same oblations that private men do; exceptthey so far differ, that they are to bring forsacrifices a bull, or a kid of the goats, bothmales.
Now the law requires, both in private andpublic sacrifices, that the finest flour be alsobrought; for a lamb, the measure of one tenthdeal; for a ram, two; and for a bull, three.This they consecrate upon the altar, when itis mingled with oil: for oil is also brought bythose that sacrifice; for a bull, the half of ahin; for a ram, a third part of the same man­ner; and one quarter of it for a lamb. Theybring the same quantity of oil which they doof wine, and they pour the wine about thealtar; but if any one does not offer a com­plete sacrifice of animals, but brings fine flouronly for a vow, he throws a handful upon thealtar, as its first fruits; while the priests takethe rest for their food; either boiled, or min­gled with oil, but made into cakes of bread:but whatsoever it be, that a priest himselfoffers, it must of necessity be all burnt. Nowthe law forbids us to sacrifice any animal atthe same time with its dam; and in othercases, not till the eighth day after its birth.
Other sacrifices are also appointed for es­caping distempers, or for other occasions; inwhich meat-offerings are consumed, togetherwith the animals that are sacrificed; of whichit is not lawful to leave any part till the nextday, only the priests are to take their ownshare.
CHAP. X.
CONCERNING THE FESTIVALS, AND HOW EACH DAY OF SUCHFESTIVAL IS TO BE OBSERVED.
THE .law requires, that out of the publicexpenses a lamb of the first year bekilled every day, at the beginning and endingof the day;* but on the seventh day, whichis called the Sabbath, they kill two, and sa­crifice them in the same manner. On the newmoon they both perform the daily sacrifices,and slay two bulls, with seven lambs of thefirst year, and a kid of the goats also, for theexpiation of sins, that is, if they have sinnedthrough ignorance.
On the seventh month, which the Macedo-


nians call Hyperberetaeus, they make an ad­dition to those already mentioned, and sacri­fice a bull, a ram, seven lambs,f and a kid ofthe goats for sins.
The tenthJ day of the same lunar monththey fast till the evening; and this day theysacrifice a bull, two rams, seven lambs, and akid of the goats for sins; and besides these,they bring two kids of the goats, one of whichis sent alive out of the limits of the camp intothe wilderness, for the scape-goat, and to bean expiation of the sins of the whole multi­tude; but the other is brought into a place ofgreat cleanness, within the limits of the camp,and is there burnt, with its skin, without anysort of cleansing. With this goat is burnt abull not brought by the people, but by thehigh-priest, at his own charge, which, whenit is slain, he brings of the blood into the holyplace, together with the blood of the kid ofthe goats, and sprinkles the ceiling with hisfinger seven times, as also its pavement, andas often towards the most holy place, andabout the golden altar. He also at last bringsit into the open court, and sprinkles it aboutthe great altar. Besides this, they set the ex­tremities, and the kidneys, and the fat, withthe lobe of the liver upon the altar, and thehigh-priest presents a ram to God as a burnt-offering, j
On the fifteenth|| day of the same month,when the season of the year is changing forwinter, the law enjoins us to pitch tabernaclesin every one of our houses, but so that wepreserve ourselves from the cold of that timeof the year; as also that when we should ar­rive at our own country, we should come tothat city which we should have then for ourmetropolis, because of the temple therein tobe built: and keep a festival for eight days,and offer burnt-offerings, and sacrifice thank-offerings; that we should then carry in ourhands a branch of myrtle, and,willow, and abough of the palm-tree, with the addition ofthe pomecitron; that the burnt-offering on thefirst of those days was to be a sacrifice ofthirteen bulls, fourteen lambs, and fifteenrams, with the addition of a kid of the goats,as an expiation for sins; that on the followingdays the same number of lambs, and of rams,


* Exod. xxix. 38.t Numb. xxix. 2.
Numb, xxviii. 3.
t Levit. xxiii. 27.II Numb. xxix. 12.







OCR Output








an. 1052.] 273 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


years afterwards,* when he heard that twoof hie servants were run away from him, andwere in Gath, he went for his servants inhaste: and when he was come back withthem, the king perceived it, and was muchdispleased that he had contemned his com­mands, and what was more, had no regard tothe oaths he had sworn to God. So he calledhim, and said, "Didst not thou swear neverto leave, nor to go out of this city to another?Thou shalt not therefore escape punishmentfor thy perjury, but I will punish thee, thouwicked wretch! both for this crime, and forthose wherewith thou didst abuse my father,when he was in his flight; that thou mayestknow that wicked men gain nothing at last;although they be not punished immediatelyupon their unjust practices; but that in all thetime wherein they think themselves secure,because they have yet suffered nothing, theirpunishment increases, and is heavier uponthem; and that to a greater degree than ifthey had been punished immediately uponthe commission of their crimes" So Benaiah,on the king's command, slew Shimei.
CHAP. II.
op Solomon's marriage; his wisdom and riches; andthe assistance he obtained from hiram towardsthe building of the temple.
SOLOMON having settled himself firmlyin his kingdom, and having brought hisenemies to punishment; married the daughterof Pharaoh, king of Egypt! He also built thewalls of JerusalemJ much larger and strongerthan those which had been before: andthenceforward he managed public affairs verypeaceably. Nor was his youth any hindrance


in the exercise of justice, the observance ofthe law, or the remembrance of what chargeshis father had given him at his death: but hedischarged every duty with greater accuracythan might have been expected from such as.are aged, and of the greatest prudence. Henow resolved to go to Hebron,|| and sacrificeto God upon the brazen altar that was builtby Moses. Accordingly he offered there athousand burnt offerings. And when he haddone this, he thought he had payed greathonour to God. For as he was asleep thatvery night, God appeared to him, and com­manded him to ask of him some gifts whichhe was ready to bestow on him, as a rewardfor his piety. So Solomon asked of Godwhat was most excellent, and of the greatestworth in itself: what God would bestow withthe greatest joy; and what it was most pro­fitable for man to receive. For he did notdesire either gold, silver, or any other riches,as a young man might naturally have done;for these are the things that generally are es­teemed by most men, as alone of the greatestworth, and of the best gifts of God. "But,"said he, "Give me, O Lord, a sound mind,and a good understanding; whereby I mayspeak and judge the people according totruth and righteousness." With these peti­tions God was well pleased, and promisedto give him all those things that he had notmentioned in his option, riches, glory, victoryover his enemies; and in the first place, un­derstanding and wisdom; and this in such adegree, as no other mortal man, neither kingsnor ordinary persons ever had. He also pro­mised to preserve the kingdom to his posterityfor a very long time; if he continued righteousand obedient to him, and imitated his father


might think proper to confine him to the city of Jerusalem,that, being removed from the place where his family andinterest lay, to one where he was but a stranger, and suf­ficiently odious for his former ill treatment of the lateking, he might be incapable of raising any tumults orseditions; and that, being in this public theatre, all hiswords and actions might be narrowly observed, which,considering his busy and wicked temper, might give So­lomon a fair advantage against him, and, as the manner ofsome is, the very prohibition itself might probably inflamehis desire to transgress it. Pool's Annotations. B.
* About an. 1052.
t 1 Kings iii. 1.
J This building the walls of Jerusalem, soon afterDavid's death, illustrates the conclusion of the fifty-firstPsalm, where David prays: Build thou the walls of Jeru-
salem; they being, it seems, unfinished or imperfect atthat time. See VIII. 6, and 1 Kings ix. 15.
II Although both the Hebrew and the Septuagint say1 Kings iii. 4, 5. and 2 Chron. i. 3. that the place whitherSolomon now went, to the tabernacle or great brazenaltar, was Gibeon, and not Hebron, as Josephus's copyhad it, yet is Josephus's copy confirmed by the vow ofAbsalom, which was according to our common copies, tobe performed not at Gibeon, but at Hebron, 2 Sam. xv.7, 12. And since Gibeah or Gibeon denotes a hill or anelevation, as Josephus elsewhere truly observes, VI. 3.the original text perhaps meant an elevated place at He­bron. See the very same difference between Gibeon inour copies, Jeremiah xli. 12. and Hebron in Josephus's,x. 9. which probably requires the very same reconcilia­tion also.







OCR Output








a^. 1460.] 159 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


tribe, and gave it in charge to those that car­ried them, to inform the tribes of those thatwere the cause of his wife's death, and of theviolence they had offered her.
Upon this the people were greatly dis­turbed at what they saw and heard; as neverhaving had the experience of such a thingbefore. So they gathered themselves to Shi-loli, out of a just anger; and, assembling in agreat congregation before the tabernacle,they immediately resolved to take arms, andto treat the inhabitants of Gibeah as enemies.But the senate restrained them from doing so,and persuaded them that they ought not sohastily to make war upon people of the samenation with them, before they discoursed withthem, by words, concerning the accusationlaid against them. It being* part of their law,that they should not bring an army againstforeigners themselves, when they appear tohave been injurious, without sending an am-bassage first, and trying thereby whether theywill repent or not; and accordingly they ex­horted them to do what they ought, in obedi­ence to their laws; that is, to send to the in­habitants of Gibeah, to know whether theywould deliver up the offenders to them; andif they should deliver them up, to rest satis­fied with the punishment of those offenders;but if they despised the message that was sentthem, to punish them, by taking up armsagainst them. Accordingly they sent to theinhabitants of Gibeah, and accused the youngmen of the crimes committed in the affair ofthe Levite's wife; and required of them, thosethat had done what was contrary to the law,that they might be punished; as having justlyfdeserved to die for what they had done. Butthe inhabitants of Gibeah would not deliverup the young men, and thought it too re­proachful for them, out of fear of war, to sub­mit to other men's demands upon them;vaunting themselves to be no way inferior toany in war, neither in their number, nor incourage. The rest of their tribe also madegreat preparation for war: for they were so


insolently mad also, as to resolve to repelforce by force.
When it was related to the Israelites, whatthe inhabitants of Gibeah had resolved upon,they took an oath that no one of them wouldgive his daughter in marriage to a Benjamite;but that they would make war with greaterfury against them, than their forefathers hadmade war against the Canaanites. Accord­ingly they sent out an army of four hundredthousand against them; while the Benjamites'army wasJ twenty-five thousand and six hun­dred; five hundred of whom were excellentat slinging stones with their left hands. Whenthe battle was joined at Gibeah, the Benja­mites beat the Israelites, and of them therefell twenty-two thousand men; and probablymore had been destroyed had not the nightcome on, and broken off the fight. So theBenjamites returned to the city with joy, andthe Israelites returned to their camp in greataffliction at what had happened. On the nextday, when they fought again, the Benjamitesbeat them, and eighteen thousand of theIsraelites were slain, and the rest desertedtheir camp out of fear of a great slaughter.So they came toll Bethel, a city that was nearthe camp, and§ fasted on the next day, andbesought God, by Phineas, the high-priest,that his wrath against them might cease; andthat he would be satisfied with these two de­feats, and give them the victory over theirenemies. Accordingly God promised themso to do, by the prophesying of Phineas.
When therefore they had divided the armyinto two parts, they laid the one half of themin ambush about the city Gibeah by night,while the other half attacked the Benjamites;these retiring upon the assault, the Benja­mites pursued them; while the Hebrews re­tired by slow degrees, as desirous to drawthem entirely from the city, and the otherfollowed them as they retired, till both theold and young men that were left in the cityas too weak to fight, came running out toge­ther as willing to bring their enemies under.


-'* See IV. 8. and Deut. xx. 10.
t Deut. xxii. 25.
j Jiidg. xx. 46, 47.
II Josephus seems here to have made a small mistake,when he took the Hebrew word Beth-El, which denotesthe house of God, or the tabernacle, Judg. xx. 18, for theproper name of a place, Bethel. It no way appearing that
the tabernacle was ever at Bethel. Only so far it is true,that Shiloh, the place of the tabernacle in the days of theJudges, was not far from Bethel.
§ See this account in Josephus, remarked as one of themo«t necessary and important emendations his temple copyaffords us, different from all our other copies. LiterAccompl. of Proph. Supplement, pag. 76, 76, 77.







OCR Output








84 [book lit ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


mours about them ran abroad, which excitedgreat fear in the inhabitants of those coun­tries: accordingly they sent ambassadors toone another, and exhorted each other to de­fend themselves, and to endeavour to destroythese men. Those that induced the rest todo so, were such as inhabited Gobilitis andPetra; they were called Amalekites,* andwere the most warlike of the nations thatlived thereabout, and whose kings exhortedone another, and their neighbours, to engagein this war against the Hebrews, telling themthat an army of strangers, who had ran aM'ayfrom slavery under the Egyptians, lay in waitto ruin them; which army they were not incommon prudence, and regard to their ownsafety, to overlook, but to crush them beforethey should gather strength, and come to bein prosperity: and perhaps attack them firstin an hostile manner, as presuming upon theirindolence in not attacking them before; andthat they ought to avenge themselves for whathad been done in the wilderness; but thatthis could not be so well done when the He­brews had once laid their hands on theircities and goods; that those who endeavouredto crush a power in its first rise, were wiserthan those that attempted to stop its progress,when it became formidable; as these lastseem to be angry only at the flourishing ofothers, but the former do not leave any roomfor their enemies to become troublesome tothem. After they had sent such ambassagesto the neighbouring nations, and among eachother, they resolved to attack the Hebrewsin battle.
These proceedings of the people of thosecountries occasioned perplexity and troubleto Moses, who expected no such warlike pre­parations: and when these nations were readyto fight, the multitude of the Hebrews wereobliged to try the fortune of war; they were


in great disorder, and in want of all neces­saries, and yet were to make war with menwho were well prepared for it. Then it was,therefore, that Moses began to encouragethem, and to exhort them to have a goodheart, and rely on God's assistance by whichthey had been advanced into a state of free­dom, and to hope for victory over those whowere ready to fight with them in order to de­prive them of that blessing. He said theywere to suppose their own army to be nume­rous, wanting nothing, neither weapons, normoney, nor provisions, nor such other con­veniences as when men are in possession of,they fight undauntedly, and that they were tojudge themselves to have all these advantagesin the Divine assistance. They were also tosuppose the enemies' army to be small, un­armed, and weak, and such as want thoseconveniences which they know must bewanted when it is God's will that they shouldbe beaten. He reminded them that they hadexperienced the value of God's assistance inabundance of trials, and those such as weremore terrible than war; for that is only againstmen, but these were against famine and thirst,things that were in their own nature insu­perable; as also against mountains, and thatsea which affording them no way for esca­ping; yet had all these difficulties been con­quered by God's gracious kindness: so heexhorted them to be courageous at this time,and to consider their entire prosperity to de­pend on the present conquest of their ene­mies.
Moses having thus encouraged the multi­tude, called together the princes of theirtribes, and their chief men, both separatelyand jointly. The young men he charged toobey their elders, and the elders to hearkento their leader; so the people were elevatedin their minds, and ready to try their fortune


 


* The Amalekites were a people descended from Ama-lek, the son of Eliphaz, the son of Esau, by a concubine,Gen. xxxvi. 12. And the ground of their enmity againstthe Israelites is generally supposed to have been an innatehatred, from the remembrance of Jacob's depriving theirprogenitor, both of his birth-right and blessing. Theirfalling upon them, however, and that without any provo­cation, when they saw them reduced to so low a conditionby the fitigue of their march, and the excessive droughtthey laboured under, was an inhuman action, and justlydeserved the defeat which Joshua gave them. Bu* thenthe reason why God thought fit to denounce a perpetualwar against them, is to be resolved into this :•—That know-
ing the Israelites were pre-ordained by God to be put inpossession of the land of Canaan, they came against themwith an armed force, in hopes of frustrating the designs ofProvidence concerning them. And this is the reason whichMoses himself assigns for this declaration of war; becausehis (i. e. Amalek's j hand is agaiiist the throne of God, (i. e. Jagainst God himself) therefore the Lord will wage war Eagainst him from one generation to another. Exod. xviyg16. The injury done the Israelites was not so much as tlgppaffront offered to the divine Majesty; and therefore Gjsfodthreatens utterly to extirpate the' designers of it. r/nnH§ff.sal History, 1. I.c. 7. and Patrick's Commentary. B. =§
f"







OCR Output








386 [boor X. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


fleeing away from him; that he was disturbed,and fell on his face, and on his two hands,and that a certain person touched him, andat the same time bid him to rise, and seewhat would befall his countrymen after manygenerations. He also related, that when hestood up, he was shewn a great ram withmany horns growing out of his head; and thatthe last was nigher than the rest; that afterthis he looked to the west, and saw a he-goatcarried through the air from that quarter;that he rushed upon the ram with violence,and smote him twice with his horns, andoverthrew him to the ground, and trampledupon him; that afterward he saw a very
treat horn growing out of the forehead of thee-goat; and that when it was broken offjfour horns grew up that were exposed toeach of the four winds; and he wrote thatout of them arose another lesser horn, which,as he said, waxed great; and that God shewedto him, that it should fight against his nation,and take their city by force, and bring thetemple worship to confusion, and forbid thesacrifices to be offered, for one thousand twohundred and ninety-six days.* Daniel wrotethat he saw these visions in the plain of Susa,and he hath informed us that God interpretedthe appearance of this vision after the fol­lowing manner:—He said, that the ram sig­nified the kingdom of the Medes and Persians,and the horns those kings that were to reignin them; and that the last horn signified thelast king; and that he should exceed all thekings in riches and glory; that the he-goatsignified that one should come and reignfrom the Greeks, who should twice fight withthe Persians, and overcome him in battle,and should receive his entire dominion; thatby the great horn, which sprang out of theforehead of the he-goat was meant the firstking; and that the springing up of four hornsupon its falling off} and the conversion ofevery one of them to the four quarters of theearth, signified the succours that should ariseafter the death of the first king; and the par­tition of the kingdom among them; and that
* See Daniel viii. 1—14.


they should be neither his children, nor ofhis kindred that should reign over the habit­able earth for many years; and that fromamong them there should arise a certain kingthat should overcome our nation and laws,and should take away the political govern­ment, and should spoil the temple, and forbidthe sacrifices to be offered, for three years.Accordingly it happened that our nationsuffered these things under Antiochus Epi-phanes, according to Daniel's vision; andwhat he wrote many years before they cameto pass. In the same manner Daniel wroteconcerning the Roman government, and thatour country should be made desolate by them.All these things did this man leave in writing,as God had shewed them to him. Insomuchthat such as read his prophecies, and seehow they have been fulfilled, may justlywonder at the honour wherewith God ho­noured Daniel; and may thence discoverhow the Epicureans are in an error, who castProvidence out of human life; and do notbelieve that God takes care of the affairs ofthe world; nor that the universe is governedand continued in being by that blessed andimmortal nature; but say that the world iscarried along of its own accord, without aruler and a curator, which, were it destituteof a guide to conduct it, as they imagine, itwould be like ships without pilots, which wesee destroyed by the winds; or like chariotswithout drivers, which are overturned: sowould the world be dashed to pieces by beingcarried without a Providence, and so perishand come to nought. So that by the afore­mentioned predictions of Daniel those menseem to err from the truth, who determinethat God exercises no Providence over humanaffairs. For if that were the case, that theworld went on by mechanical necessity, weshould not see that all things would come topass according to his prophecy. Now as tomyself I have so described these matters as Ihave found them and read them: but if anyone be inclined to another opinion aboutthem, let him enjoy his sentiments withoutany blame from me.







OCR Output








88 [book III. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


saw it; and thunder, with its thunderbolts,were sent down, and declared God to bethere present in a gracious way to such asMoses desired he should be gracious. Nowas to these matters, every one of my readersmay think as he pleases: but I am under thenecessity of relating this history as it is de­scribed in the sacred books. This sight, andthe amazing sound that came to their ears,disturbed the Hebrews to a prodigious de­gree; for they were not such as they wereaccustomed to. And then the rumour thatwas spread abroad how God frequented thatmountain, greatly astonished their minds; sothey sorrowfully remained within their tents,as both supposing Moses to be destroyed bythe Divine wrath, and expecting the like de­struction for themselves.
While they were under these apprehen­sions, Moses appeared joyful and greatly ex­alted. When they saw him they were freedfrom their fear, and admitted more comfort­able hopes as to what was to come. The airalso was become clear and pure of its formerdisorders, upon the appearance of Moses;whereupon he called the people together, inorder to their hearing what God would sayto them. And when they were assembled, hestood on an eminence, whence they might allhear him, and said, "God has received megraciously, O Hebrews, as he has formerlydone; and has suggested a happy method ofliving for you, and an order of political go­vernment, and is now present in the camp. Itherefore charge you for his sake, and thesake of his works, and what we have done byhis means, that you do not put a low valueon what I am going to say, because the com­mands have been given by me; nor becauseit is the tongue of a man that delivers themto you. But if you have a due regard to thegreat importance of the things themselves,you will understand the greatness of Himwhose institutions they are; and who has notdisdained to communicate them to me for our
Hvixa |8Xs ' jj£ ftopprjs a«p EuiEpov tfupAajurofASvov tfxip7ij<5ov oXx xa7a [3iv9ea KoifjjtKXudi tfupos <pwvi]v


common advantage. For it is not to be sup­posed that the author of these institutions isbarely Moses, the son of Amram and Joche-bed, but he who obliged the Nile to runbloody for your sakes, and tamed the haugh­tiness of the Egyptians, by various sorts ofjudgments; he who provided a way throughthe sea for us; he who contrived a method ofsending us food from heaven, when we weredistressed for want of it; he who made thewater to issue out of a rock, when we hadvery little of it before; he, by whose meansAdam was made to partake of the fruits ofthe land, and of the sea; he, by whose meansNoah escaped the deluge; he, by whosemeans our forefather Abraham, of a wander­ing pilgrim was made the heir of the land ofCanaan; he, by whose means Jacob wasadorned with twelve virtuous sons; he, bywhose means Joseph became a potent lordover the Egyptians; he it is who conveys theseinstructions to you by me as his interpreter.And let them be to you venerable, and con­tended for more earnestly by you than yourown wives and children; for if you will followthem you will lead a happy life, you will en­joy the land fruitful, the sea calm, and thefruit of the womb complete, as nature re­quires; you will also be terrible to your ene­mies; for I have been admitted into the pre­sence of God, and been made a hearer of hisincorruptible voice; so great is his concernfor the welfare of your nation."
When he had said this, he brought thepeople, with their wives and children, so nearthe mountain, that they might hear God him­self speaking to them about the preceptswhich they were to practise; that the energyof what should be spoken might not be hurtby its utterance, by that tongue of a manwhich could but imperfectly deliver it to theirunderstanding. And they all heard a voicethat came from above; insomuch that noneof those words escaped them, which Moseswrote in two tables; and though it is not*


^s
say the Chaldaic oracles; and as for earthquakes, orshaking of mountains, this is no more than what all nationssuppose have ever come to pass upon God's manifestinghimself at any time: for it is not only the Psalmist whotells us, that the earth shook, and the heaven dropped, atthe presence of God; but in the description which Virgil
gives us of the approach of Phoebus, he does in a mannertranslate the words of Moses:
Tremere omnia visa repente,
Luminaque, laurusque Dei: totusque moveriMons circum, et mugire adytis cortina reelusis
Vide Nicholl's Conference, part 2. B.
* Of this and another superstitious notion of the Phari­sees, which Josephus complied with, see note on II. 12.







OCR Output








114 [book it. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


know them well enough, unjustly pretend tosuspect, he thou my witness. When I liveda private quiet life, I left those good things,which by my own diligence, and by thy coun­sel, I enjoyed with Raguel, my father-in-law;and I gave myself up to this people, and un­derwent many miseries on their account. Ialso bore great labours; at first, in order toobtain liberty for them, and now in order totheir preservation; and have always shewedmyself ready to assist them in every distress.Now, therefore, since I am suspected by thosevery men, whose being is owing to my la­bours; come thou, as it is reasonable to hopethou wilt: thou, I say, who shewedst me thatfire at mount Sinai, and madest me to hear itsvoice, and to see the several wonders whichthat place afforded; thou, who commandedstme to go to Egypt, and declare thy will tothis people; thou, who disturbedst the happyestate of the Egyptians, and gavedst us theopportunity of flying from our slavery underthem, and madest the dominion of Pharaohinferior to my dominion; thou, who didstmake the sea dry land for us, when we knewnot whither to go, and didst overwhelm theEgyptians with those destructive waves whichhad been divided for us; thou, who didst be­stow upon us the security of weapons whenwe were naked; thou, who didst make thecorrupted fountains to flow so as to be fit fordrinking; and didst furnish us with water thatcame out of the rocks, when we were in thegreatest want of it; thou, who didst preserveour lives with quails, which was food fromthe sea, when the fruits of the ground failedus; thou, who didst send us such food fromheaven, as had never been seen before; thou,who didst suggest to us the knowledge of thylaws, and appoint us a form of government:Come thou, O Lord of the whole world, andthat as such a judge and a witness to me ascannot be bribed; and show how I havenever admitted of any gift against justice fromany of the Hebrews; and have never con­demned a poor man, that ought to have beenacquitted on occount of one that was rich;and have never attempted to hurt this com­monwealth: I am now here present, and amsuspected of a thing the remotest from my in­tentions: as if I had given the priesthood toAaron, not at thy command; but out of my


own favour to him. Do thou at this time de­monstrate, that all things are administered bythy providence, and that nothing happens bychance, but is governed by thy will, andthereby attains its end; as also demonstratethat thou takest care of those that have donegood to the Hebrews. Demonstrate this, Isay, by the punishment of Abiram and Da-than, who condemn thee as an insensible be­ing, and one overcome by my contrivances.This wilt thou do by inflicting such an openpunishment on those men, who so madly flyin the face of thy glory, as will take them outof the world, not in an ordinary manner, butso that it may appear that they do not die asother men go out of the world: let that groundon which they tread open about them, withtheir families and goods. This will be a de­monstration of thy power to all men; and thismethod of their sufferings will be an instruc­tion of wisdom for those that entertain pro­found sentiments of thee. By this means Ishall be found a good servant, in the preceptsthou hast given by me. But if the calumniesthey have raised against me be true, mayestthou preserve these men from every evil ac­cident, and bring all that destruction on me,which I have imprecated upon them. Andwhen thou hast inflicted punishment on thosethat have endeavoured to deal unjustly withthis people, bestow upon them concord andpeace. Save this multitude that follow thycommandments, and preserve them free fromharm: and let them not partake of the punish­ment of those that have sinned. For thouknowest thyself, it is not just that for thewickedness of those men, the whole body ofthe Israelites should suffer punishment."
When Moses had said this with tears in hiseyes, the ground was moved on a sudden;and the agitation that set it in motion waslike that which the wind produces in wavesof the sea. The people were all affrighted,and the ground that was about their tentssunk down at that terrible sound, and carriedwhatsoever was dear to the seditious into it­self; who so entirely perished, that there wasnot the least appearance that any men hadever been seen there: the earth that hadopened itself about them closing again, andbecoming entire as it was before: insomuch,that such as saw it afterward did not perceive


-\







OCR Output








AN. 1158.] 177 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


the)r sent for Sampson, and he was brought totheir feast, that they might insult him in theircups. Hereupon he, thinking it one of thegreatest misfortunes if he should not be ableto revenge himself, when he was thus insult­ed, persuaded the boy that led him by thehand, that he was weary and wanted to resthimself; and desired he would bring himnear the pillars. And as soon as he came tothem, he rushed with force against them; andoverthrew the house, by overturning its pil­lars, with three thousand men in it,* whowere all slain, and himself with them. Andsuch was the end of Sampson, when he hadruled over the Israelitesf twenty years. Andindeed this man deserves to be admired forhis courage, and strength, and his magna­nimity at his death; and that his wrath againsthis enemies went so far as to die himself withthem. But as for his being ensnared by awoman, that is to be ascribed to humannature, which is too weak to resist the temp­tations to that sin. But we ought to bearhim witness, that in all other respects he wasone of extraordinary virtue. His kindredtook away his body, and buried it in Sarasai,his own country, with the rest of his family.
CHAP. IX.
OF THE MARRIAGE OF BOOZ AND RUTH; FROM WHOM CAMEOBED, THE GRANDFATHER OF DAVID.
NOW after the death of Sampson, Eli, thehigh-priest, was governor of the Israel­ites. Under him.f when the country was af­flicted with a famine, Elimelech, of Bethle­hem, which is a city of the tribe of Judah,being not able to support his family under sosore a distress, took with him Naomi his wife,and the children that were born to him by


her, Chilion and Mahlon; and removed hishabitation into the land of Moab; and uponthe happy prosperity of his affairs there, hetook for his sons wives of the Moabites,Orpah for Chilion, and Ruth for Mahlon.But in the compass of ten years both Eli­melech, and a little while after him the sons,died; and Naomi being very uneasy at theseaccidents, and not able to bear her lonesomecondition, now those that were dearest to herwere dead, on whose account it was that shehad gone away from her own country, shereturned to it again; for she had been informedthat it was now in a flourishing condition.However, her daughters-in-law were not ableto think of parting with her; and when theyhad a mind to go out of the country with her,she could not dissuade them from it. Butwhen they insisted upon it, she wished thema more happy wedlock than they had withher sons, and that they might have prosperityin other respects also; and, seeing her ownaffairs were so low, she exhorted them tostay where they were, and not to think ofleaving their own country, and partakingwith her of that uncertainty, under whichshe must return. Accordingly Orpah stayedbehind; but she took Ruth along with her, asshe could not be persuaded to stay behind,but would share her fortune, whatsoever itshould prove.||
When Ruth was come with her mother-in-law to Bethlehem, Booz, who was nearof kin to Elimelech, entertained her. Andwhen Naomi was so called by her fellow-citizens, according to her true name, shesaid, "You might more truly call me Mara."Now Naomi signifies, in the Hebrew tongue,Happiness; and Mara, Sorrow. It was nowreaping time; and Ruth, by the leave ol


altogether with some plain or cloistered buildings. Sev­eral palaces and dau-wanas, as they called the courts ofjustice in these countries, are built in this fashion; whereupon their festivals or rejoicings a great quantity of sandis strewed upon the area for the wrestlers to fall upon,whilst the roof of the cloisters round about is crowdedwith spectators of their strength and agility. I haveoften seen several hundreds of people diverted in thisimnner upon the roof of the dey's palace at Algiers,which, like many more of the same quality and denomi­nation, hath an advanced cloister over against the gate ofthe palace, Esther v. 1. made in the fashion of a largepent-house, supported only by one or two contiguous pil­lars in the front, or else in the centre. In such openstructures as these, in the midst of their guards and
counsellors, are the bashas, kadeeSj and other great offi­cers, assembled to distribute justice, and transact thepublic affairs of their provinces. Here, likewise, theyhave their public entertainments, as the lords and othersof the Philistines had in the house of Dagon. Upon a sup­position, therefore, that in the house of Dagon, there wasa cloistered structure of this kind, the pulling down of thefront or centre pillars only, which supported it, would beattended with the like catastrophe that happened to thePhilistines." Shaw't Travels, p. 283. B.
* Judg, xvi. 27, 30.
T From about 1158 to 1138 B. C.
t According to the date, (1350) it must have been longbefore the government of Eli.
II Ruthi. 19







OCR Output








178 [book xm. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


whatsoever his army wanted in great plenty,and marched along with him when he madean expedition against the Parthians. Ofwhich Nicolaus of Damascus is a witness forus: who in his history writes thus, "WhenAntiochus had erected a trophy at the riverLycus, upon his conquest of Indates, the ge­neral of the Parthians, he stayed there twodays. It was at the desire of Hyrcanus, theJew: because it was such a festival derivedto them from their forefathers, whereon thelaw of the Jews did not allow them to travel."And he did not speak falsely in saying so:for that festival, which we call Pentecost,did then fall out to be the next day to thesabbath. Nor is it *lawful for us to journeyeither on a sabbath day, or on a festival.But when Antiochus joined battle with Ar-saces, king of Parthia, he lost a great part ofhis army; and was himself slain. And hisbrother Demetrius succeeded in the kingdomof Syria, by the permission of Arsaces; whofreed him from his captivity, at the sametime that Antiochus attacked Parthia.
CHAP. IX.
OF THE EXPEDITION OF HYRCANUS AGAINST SVRIA; AND
HIS CONCLUSION OF A LEAOUE WITH THE ROMANS.
ALSO OF THE DEATH OF KING DEMETRIUS AND ALEX­ANDER.
HEN Hyrcanus fheard of the death ofAntiochus, he presently made an ex


w


pedition against Jthe cities of Syria; hopingto find them destitute of fighting men, andof such as were able to defend them. How­ever, it was not till the sixth month that hetook Medaba, and that not without the greatdistress of his army. After this he took Sa-mega, and the neighbouring places. Andbesides these, Shechem, and Gerizzim, andthe nation of the Cutheans, who dwelt at thetemple which resembled that temple whichwas at Jerusalem; and which Alexander per­mitted Sanballat, the general of his army, tobuild, for the sake of Manasseh, who was son-in-law to Jaddua, the high-priest; as we have||formerly related. Which temple was nowdeserted, §two hundred years after it wasbuilt. Hyrcanus also took Dora, and Ma-rissa, cities of Idumea; and subdued all theIdumeans; and permitted them to stay inthat country, if they would adopt the rite ofcircumcision, and make use of the laws of theJews. And they were so desirous of living inthe country of their forefathers, that they**submitted. At which time therefore this be­fell them, that they were hereafter no otherthan Jews.
But Hyrcanus, the high-priest, was de­sirous to renew that league of friendshipthey had with the Romans. Accordingly hesentff an ambassage to them. And when thesenate had received their epistle, they madea league of friendship with them, after themanner following:—


* The Jews were not to march or journey on the sab­bath, or on such a great festival as was equivalent tothe sabbath, any farther than a sabbath day's journey, or2000 cubits. See the Note on XX. 8.
t An. 130.
J Those within the limits of Judea.
II See Book XI. chap. 8.
§ It was exactly 202 years, viz. from an. 332 to an.130 B. C.
** This account of the Idumeans admitting circumci­sion, and the entire Jewish law, from this time, or fromthe days of Hyrcanus, is confirmed by their subsequenthistory. See XIV. 8. XV. 7. XVII. 12. Of the War,II. 3. IV. 4. This, in the opinion of Josephus, madethem proselytes of juslice, or entire Jews; as here andelsewhere, XIV. 8. So Dio, XXXVII. page 41. How­ever, Anti^onus the enemy of Herod, though Herod werederived from surh a proselyte of justice for several gene­rations, will allow him to be no more than a half Jew.XIV. 15. But still take out of Dean Prideaux, at theyear 129, the words of Ammonius, which fully confirmthis account of the Idumeans in Josephus. "The Jews,"says he, "are such by nature, and from the beginning:ivhile the Idumeans were not Jews from the beginning,
but Phoenicians and Syrians; but being afterward sub­dued by the Jews, and compelled to be circumcised, andto unite into one nation, and to be subject to the samelaws, they were called Jews." Dio also says, as the Deanthere quotes him, from Book XXXVI. page 37, "Thatcountry is called Judea, and the people Jews. And thisname is given also to as many others as embrace theirreligion, though of other nations." But then upon whatfoundation so good a governor as Hyrcanus took uponhim to compel these Idumeans either to become Jews orto leave their country, deserves great consideration. Isuppose it was because they had long ago been drivenout of the land of Edom, and had seized on and pos­sessed the tribe of Simeon, and all the southern parts ot"the tribe of Judah; which was the peculiar inheritance ot"the worshippers of the true God, without idolatry: as thereader may learn from Reland, Palestin. part I. page I54,305, and from Prideaux at the years 740 and 165. Nor doI remember that ever the like violence was used by him orhis predecessors, with any country, which was not a partof that promised land: though the other kings after himintended it to all their conquests in or out of that promisedland. See Prideaux at the year 10G, and Antiq. XIII. 15.tt An. 128.







OCR Output








360 [book X. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


words Hezekiah was troubled, and said, hewas himself unwilling that his nation shouldfall into such calamities; yet since it was notpossible to alter what God had determined,he prayed that there might be peace whilehe* lived.f Berosus also makes mention ofthis Baladan, king of Babylon. Now as tothis prophet, Isaiah, he was by the confessionof all, a divine and wonderful man in speak­ing truth; and out of the assurance that hehad never written what was false, he wrotedown all the prophecies, and left them be­hind him in books; that their accomplish­ment might be judged of from the events byposterity. Nor did this prophet do so alone;but the others, which wereJ twelve in num­ber, did the same. And whatever is doneamong us, whether it be good, or whether itbe bad, comes to pass according to the pro­phecies.
CHAP. HI.
OF THE IMPIETY OF MANASSEH, HEZEKIAH'S SUCCESSOR;HIS PENITENCE IN CAPTIVITY, AND HIS RESTORATION TOHIS KINGDOM.
WHEN the king Hezekiah had sur­vived the interval of time alreadymentioned, and had dwelt all that time inpeace, he died: having completed fifty-fouryears of his life, and reigned ||twenty-nine.But when his son Manasseh, whose mother's


name was Hephzibah of Jerusalem, hadtaken the kingdom, he departed from theconduct of his father; and fell into a courseof life quite contrary thereto; and shewedhimself in his manners most wicked in all re­spects, omitting no sort of impiety; but imi­tating those transgressions of the Israelites,by the commission of which against God theyhad been destroyed. For he was so hardyas to defile the temple of God, and the city,and the whole country. For by setting outfrom a contempt of God, he barbarously slewall the righteous men that were among theHebrews. Nor would he spare the pro-phets:§ for he every day slew some of them:till Jerusalem was deluged with blood.** SoGod was angry at these proceedings, andsent prophets to the king, and to the multi­tude; by whom he threatened the very samecalamities to them, which their brethren theIsraelites, upon the like affronts offered toGod, were now under. But these men wouldnot believe their words; by which belief theymight have reaped the advantage of escapingall those miseries: yet did they in earnestlearn, that what the prophets had told themwas true.
Now while they persevered in the samecourse of life, God raised up war againstthem, from the king of Babylon and Chaldea;who sent an army against Judea, and laidwaste the country; and caught Manasseh by


* 2 Kings xx. 19.
t The words in the text are,—Then said Hezekiahunto Isaiah, Good is the word of the Lord, which thouhast spoken. And he said, Is it not good, if peace andtruth be in my days? 2 Kings xx. 19. The prophet hadtold him, that the very people whom he had been sohighly complimenting would carry his posterity into cap­tivity; and to return him such an answer as this, shewsnot all the concern which a good prince ought to havefor his people and posterity. It shews, indeed, as if hecared not what became of them, so long as he was per­mitted to live easy and happy. The words in the originalare to this effect. "That which thou hast told me fromGod, is good; I will submit to it: But shall peace andtruth, i. e. solid and lasting peace, continue for my time?May I flatter myself with so much happiness? And willGod be so gracious as not to revoke the grant which hehath made me of a longer continuance here? He is just,no doubt, in every thing he sends upon us; but, do thesethreats relate to me, or my posterity only? Well wereit for me, if'he would suspend the execution of his wrathfor the little time that I have to live." This is the naturalsense of Hezekiah's answer; and accordingly Josephusmakes him say, " That though I am much afflicted at thethoughts of the misery that will befall my family, yet,
since it is God's pleasure that it should be so, I haveno more to beg of Heaven, than that I may enjoy thesmall remainder of my miserable life in peace." JewishAntiq. lib. 10. c. 3. and Calmefs Commentary. B.
I See Essay on the Old Testament, Supplement, page27, 28.
H From an. 728 to an. 699. B. C.
§ The prophets who are supposed to have been livingin this king's reign, were Hoshea, Joel, Nahum, Habak-kuk, some say Obadiah; and who was the greatest pro­phet of them all, Isaiah. In the late reign he was ingreat esteem at court, and being himself of the bloodroyal, and as some say, the king's father-in-law, hethought it more incumbent upon him to endeavour to re­claim him from his degenerate wicked courses. But thisso exasperated him against Isaiah, that instead of hearken­ing to his remonstrances, he caused him to be appre­hended, and to make his torture both more lingering;,and more exquisite, had him sawn asunder, with awooden saw, to which the author of the epistle to theHebrews, chap. xi. 27. may be thought to allude.Calmefs Commentary, and Ilozeel's History in thenotes. B.
** 2 Kings xxi. 16.







OCR Output








506 [book XV. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


these men are hindered from their depreda­tions upon their neighbours, their custom isto prey one upon another; insomuch that nosort of injustice comes amiss to them. Butwhen Herod had received this grant fromCaesar, and was come into this country, heprocured skilful guides, and put a stop totheir wicked robberies, and procured peaceand quietness to the neighbouring people.
Hereupon Zenodorus was grieved, in thefirst place, because his principality was takenaway from him; and still more so, because heenvied Herod, who had gotten it. So hewent up to Rome to accuse him; but returnedback without success. Now Agrippa was,about this time, sent to succeed Caesar in thegovernment of the countries beyond the Ioniansea; and Herod met with him when he waswintering about *Mitylene; (for he had beenhis particular friend and companion;) andthen returned into Judea again. Some of theGadarenes now came to Agrippa, and accusedHerod; but they were sent back bound to theking, without a hearing. The Arabians, how­ever, who of old bare ill will to Herod's go­vernment, were incensed, and at that timeattempted to raise a sedition in his dominions;and, as they thought, upon a more justifiableoccasion. For Zenodorus, despairing alreadyof success as to his own affairs, prevented hisenemies by selling to those Arabians a part ofhis principality, called Auranitis, for the valueof fifty talents. But as this was included inthe donation of Caesar, they contested thepoint with Herod, as unjustly deprived ofwhat they had bought. Sometimes they didthis by making incursions upon his territories,sometimes by attempting force against him,and sometimes by going to law with him.They also persuaded the poorer soldiers tohelp them, and were troublesome to him; outof a constant hope that they should inducethe people to raise a sedition. In which de­signs those that are in the most miserable cir­cumstances of life are still the most earnest.And although Herod had been a great whileapprised of these attempts; yet did not he in­dulge any severity against them; but by ra­tional methods aimed to mitigate things, asnot willing to give any handle for tumults.
Now4- when Herod had reigned for seven-


* These cities, Mitylene and Gadara, have both coinsstill extant; as Spanheim here informs us.


teen years, Caesar came into Syria: at whichtime the greatest part of the inhabitants ofGadara clamoured against Herod, as one thatwas heavy in his injunctions, and tyrannical.These reproaches they chiefly ventured uponby the encouragement of Zenodorus; whotook his oath that he would never leave Herodtill he had procured that they should be sepa­rated from Herod's kingdom, and joined toCaesar's province. The Gadarenes were in­duced hereby, and made no small cry againsthim: and that the more boldly, because thosethat had been delivered up by Agrippa, werenot punished by Herod; who let them go,and did them no harm. For indeed he wasthe principal man in the world who appearedalmost inexorable in punishing crime in hisown family; but very generous in remittingthe offences that were committed elsewhere.And while they accused Herod of injuries,and plunderings, and subversions of temples,he stood unconcerned, and was ready to makehis defence. However, Caesar gave him hisright hand; and remitted nothing of his kind­ness to him, upon this disturbance by themultitude. And indeed these things werealleged the first day: but the hearing pro­ceeded no farther. For as the Gadarenessaw the inclination of Caesar and of his asses­sors; and expected, as they had reason to do,that they should be delivered up to the king;some of them, out of a dread of the tormentsthey might undergo, cut their own throats inthe night, and some of them threw themselvesdown precipices; and others cast themselvesinto the river, and destroyed themselves oftheir own accord. Which accidents seemeda sufficient condemnation of the rashness andcrimes they had been guilty of. HereuponCaesar made no longer delay, but clearedHerod from the crimes he was accused of.Another happy accident there was, which wasa farther great advantage to Herod at thistime. For Zenodorus's belly burst, and agreat quantity of blood issued from him in hissickness, and he thereby departed this life atAntioch in Syria. So Caesar bestowed hiscountry upon Herod. It lay between Trachonand Galilee; and contained Ulatha, and Pa-neas, and the country round about. He alsomade him one of the procurators of Syria;
t An. 21.







OCR Output








Date Loaned


Ivyoft


Ai»


i •»#<**?


Iff


jyv^


cr/6fin / ^^


pJW^


JUL^4


1075 TO SEP


^97*


Libn'y Bu'eau Cat. No. 113S







OCR Output








352 [book k. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


sacrifices upon the altar. The king also sentto the country that was under him; and calledthe people to Jerusalem, to celebrate thefeast of unleavened bread;* for it had beenintermitted a long time, on account of thewickedness of the aforementioned kings. Healso sent to the Israelites, and exhorted themto leave off their present way of living, andto return to their ancient practices, and toworship God; for that he gave them leave tocome to Jerusalem, and to celebrate, all inone body, the feast of unleavened bread: andthis he said was by way of invitation only,and to be done of their own good will, andfor their own advantage, and not out of obe­dience to him; because it would make themhappy.
But the Israelites, upon the arrival of theambassadors, and upon their laying beforethem what they had in charge from theirown king, were so far from complying there­with, that they laughed the ambassadors toscorn, and mocked them as fools; they alsoaffronted the prophets, who gave them thesame exhortations; and foretold what theywould suffer if they did not return to theworship of God; insomuch that they caughtthem, and slew them. Nor did this degree oftransgressing suffice them; but they had morewicked contrivances than what have beendescribed. Nor did they leave off, beforeGod, as a punishment for their impiety,brought them under their enemies. But ofthat more hereafter. There were, however,many of the tribe of Manasseh, and of Zab-ulon, and of Issachar.t who were obedient towhat the prophets exhorted them to do; andall these came running to Jerusalem, to Heze-kiah, that they might worship God there.
When these men were come, king Heze-kiah went up into the temple, with the rulersand all the people, and offered for himselfseven bulls, and as many rams; with sevenlambs, and seven kids of the goats. Theking also and the rulers laid their hands on


the heads of the sacrifices, and permitted thepriests to complete the sacred offices aboutthem. So they both slew the sacrifices, andburnt the burnt-offerings; while the Levitesstood round about them, with their musicalinstruments,^; and sang hymns to God, andplayed on their psalteries; as they were in­structed to do; and this while the rest of thepriests returned the music, and sounded thetrumpets which they had in their hands. Andwhen this was done, the king and the multi­tude prostrated themselves and worshippedGod. Seventy bulls, one hundred rams, andtwo hundred lambs, were sacrificed by theking, who also granted the multitude sacri­fices to feast upon, six hundred oxen, andthree thousand other cattle; and the priestsperformed all things according to the law.Now the king was so pleased herewith, thathe feasted with the people, and returnedthanks to God. But as the least of unleavenedbread was now come, when they had offeredthat sacrifice which is called the passover,they afterwards offered other sacrifices forseven days. When the king had bestowedon the multitude, beside what they sacrificedof themselves, two thousand bulls, and seventhousand other cattle; the same thing wasdone by the rulers. For they gave them athousand bulls, and a thousand and fortyother cattle. Nor had this festival been ob­served from the days of king Solomon, withsuch great splendour and magnificence; andwhen the festival was ended, they went outinto the country, and purged it, and cleansedthe city of all the pollution of the idols. Theking also gave order that the daily sacrificesshould be offered, at his own expense, andaccording to the law; and appointed that thetithes and the first fruits should be given bythe multitude to the priests and the Levites;that they might constantly attend upon divineservice, and never be taken off from theworship of God. Accordingly the multitudebrought together all sorts of their fruits to


* 2 Chron. xxx. 1.
t Asher, Hebrew and Septuagint.
j Moses, in the service of the tabernacle, did not ap­point the use of many musical instruments; only he causedsome trumpets to be made, which upon solemn occasions,were to be sounded, at the time when the burnt-offeringand peace-offering were upon the altar, Numb. x. 10.But David, by the advice of the prophets Gad and Na­than, introduced several kinds of music into the service of
the temple, as a thing highly conducive to inspire peoplewith respect, with joy, and with affection for the solem­nities and assemblies of religion, 1 Chron. xxiii. 5. andxxv. 1. and it is farther observable, that the institution ofmusic, in religious assemblies, is not a matter of humaninvention, but was ordained by God, and has the sanctionand authority of his prophets to confirm it—for so wasthe commandment of the Lord by his prophets, 2 Chron.xxix. 25. B.







OCR Output








AH. 38.] 533 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


Pappus, who was encamped at a village call­ed lsanas. And there ran in to him many outof Jericho and Judea, near to which placeshe was: and the enemy fell upon his men, sostout were they at this time, and joined battlewith them. But he defeated them in the fight;and in order to be revenged on them for theslaughter of his brother, he pursued themsharply, and killed them as they ran away.And *as the houses were full of armed men,and many of them ran as far as the tops of thehouses, he got them under his power, andpulled down the roofs of the houses; and sawthe lower rooms full of soldiers that werecaught, and lay all on a heap. So they threwstones down upon them, as they lay piled oneupon another; and thereby killed them. Norwas there a more frightful spectacle in all thewar than this: where beyond the walls animmense multitude of dead men lay heapedone upon another. This action it was whichchiefly damped the spirits of the enemy; whoexpected now what would come. For thereappeared a mighty number of people, thatcame from places far distant, that were nowabout the village, but then ran away. Andhad it not been for the depth of winter, whichthen restrained them, the king's army had pre­sently gone to Jerusalem: as being very cou­rageous at this good success: and the wholework had been done immediately. For Anti-gonus was already considering how he mightflee away, and leave the city.
At this time the king gave order that thesoldiers should go to supper, (for it was late atnight:) while he went into a chamber to usethe bath; for he was very weary. And hereit was that he was in the greatest danger:which yet, by God's providence, he escaped.For he was naked, and had but one servantthat followed him, to be with him while hewas bathing in an inner room; certain of theenemy, who were in their armour, and hadfled thither out of fear, were then in the place.And as he was bathing, the first of them cameout with his sword drawn, and went out atthe doors; and after him a second, and athird armed in like manner; and were un-


der such a consternation, that they did nohurt to the king; and thought themselves tohave come off very well in suffering no harmthemselves, in their getting out of the house.However, on the next day, he cut off thehead of Pappus; (for he was already slain,)and sent it to Pheroras; as a punishmentof what their brother had suffered by hismeans: for he was the man that slew himwith his own hand.
Whenf the rigour of winter was over, He­rod removed his army, and came near to Je­rusalem, and pitched his camp hard by thecity. Now this was the third year since hehad been made king at Rome. And as heremoi ed his camp, and came near that partof the wall where he could be most easilyassaulted, he pitched that camp before thetemple: intending to make his attacks in thesame manner as did Pompey. So he encom­passed the place with three bulwarks, anderected towers, and employed a great manyhands about the work; and cut down thetrees that were round about the city: andwhen he had appointed proper persons tooversee the works, even while the army laybefore the city, he himself went to Samaria,to complete his marriage; and to take towife the daughter of Alexander, the son ofAristobulus. For he had betrothed her al­ready; as I have Jbefore related.
CHAP. XVI.
HEROD, AFTER HIS MARRIAGE WITH MARIANNE, TAKESJERUSALEM BV FORCE, WITH THE ASSISTANCE OF SO-SIUS; AND PUTS AN END TO THE GOVERNMENT OF THEASMONEANS.
AFTER the wedding was over, Sosiuscame through Phoenicia; having senthis army over the midland parts. He also,who was their commander, came himself,with a great number of horsemen and foot­men. The king also came from Samaria,and brought with him a numerous army; be­sides that which was there before: for theywere about thirty thousand. And they allmet together at the walls of Jerusalem, and


* It may be worthy our observation here that thesesoldiers of Herod's coold not have gotten upon the tops ofthese houses which were full of enemies, in order to pulltip the upper floors, and destroy them beneath, but byladders from the outside: which illustrates some texts in
the New Testament, by which it appears that men usedto ascend thither by ladders on the outside. See Matt,xxiv. 17. Mark xiii. 15. Luke v. 19. xvii. 31.
t An. 37.
J See chap. 12.


402







OCR Output








348 [book IX. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


 


l*>.


ss


and to go away, and so put an end to thewar. This sum the multitude collected forMenahem, by exacting *fifty fdrachmae, as
Soil-money for every head. After which heied, and was buried in Samaria, and lefthis son Pekahiah his successor in the king­dom. This prince followed the barbarity ofhis father, and so ruled but two years only:after which he was slain with his friends ata feast, by the treachery of one Pekah, thegeneral of his horse, and the son of Rema-liah, who laid snares for him. Now this Pe­kah held the government twenty years,J andproved a wicked man, and a transgressor.But the king of Assyria, whose name wasTiglath-Pileser, when he had made an expe­dition against the Israelites, and had over-runall the land of Gilead, and the region beyondJordan, and the adjoining country, which iscalled Galilee, and Kadesh, and Hazor; hemade the inhabitants prisoners, and trans­planted them into his own kingdom.
Now Jotham, the son of Uzziah, reignedover the tribe of Judah in Jerusalem: beinga citizen thereof by his mother, whose namewas Jerusha. This king was not defective inany virtue;|| but was religious towards God,and righteous towards men, and careful ofthe good of the city, for what parts soeverwanted to be repaired or adorned, he mag­nificently repaired and adorned them. Healso took care of the foundations of thecloisters in the temple, and repaired thewalls that were fallen down, and built very


great towers, and such as were almost im­pregnable: and if any thing else in his king­dom had been neglected, he took great careof it. He also made an expedition againstthe Ammonites, and overcame them in battle,and ordered them to pay an annual tributeof a hundred talents, and ten thousand coriof wheat, and as many of barley: and soaugmented his kingdom, that his enemiescould not despise it, and his own peoplelived happily.
There was at this time a prophet,§ calledNahum; who spake after this manner con­cerning the overthrow of the Assyrians, andof Nineveh:** "Nineveh shall be a pool ofwater in motion; so shall all her people betroubled and tossed, and go away by flight:while they say one to another, stand, standstill; seize their gold and silver, for thereshall be none to wish them well. For theywill rather save their lives than their money:For a terrible contention shall possess themone with another, and lamentation, and loos­ing of the members; and their countenancesshall be perfectly black with fear. Andwhere will be the den of the lions, and themother of the young lions? God says to thee,Nineveh, that they shall deface thee, andthe lions shall no longer go out from thee,to give laws to the world." And indeedthis prophet prophesied many other thingsbesides these concerning Nineveh; which Ido not think necessary to repeat: and I hereomit them, that I may not appear trouble-drawn into idolatry; that Rehoboam forsook the law ofthe Lord, and Abijah walked in his steps; that Asa sentthe treasures of the temple to the king of Syria, and putthe prophet in the stocks; that Jehoshaphat entered intosociety with the idolatrous; and so he .goes on with allthe rest. But in Jotham, says he, there is no fault found,which, in an age of general corruption, is pretty wonder­ful, unless we may suppose, that the people's sacrificingand burning incense still on high places, 2 Kings xv. 35.(which he by his authority might have removed,) be im­putable to him as a fault. Patrick's Commentary. B.


* Dr. Wall, in his critical notes on 2 Kings xv. 20.observes, that "When this Menahem is said to haveexacted the money of Israel, of all the mighty men ofwealth, of each man fifty shekels of silver, to give Pul,king of Assyria, 1000 talents; this is the first publicmoney raised by any Israelitish king, by a tax on the peo­ple: that they used before to raise it out of the treasuresof the house of the Lord, or out of their own house; thatit was the poll-money on the rich men, and them only,lo raise 353,000/. or, as others count a talent, 400,000Z.at the rate of 61. or 11. per head:—and that God com­manded by Ezekiel, chap. xlv. 8. and xlvi. 18. that nosuch things should be done at the Jews' restoration; butjthe king should have land of his own." See also thesame notes on 2 Kings xxiii. 35. and on 2 Chron. xxxvi.3, 4.
t Shekels, Hebrew and Septuagint.
t From an. 760 to 740.
if Solomon Jarchi here observes that all the kings ofJudah had some crime or other laid to their charge, ex­cept this Jotham. That David himself sinned grievouslyin the matter of Uriah; that Solomon by his wives was
§ About an. 726.
** This passage is taken out of the prophet Nahum, ii.8—13. and is the principal, or rather the only one thatis given us verbatim, but a little abridged, in Josephus'swritings. By which quotation we learn what he himselfalways asserts, viz. that he made use of the Hebrew ori­ginal, and not of the Greek version: as also we learn, thathis Hebrew copy considerably differed from ours. Seeall three texts particularly set down and compared toge­ther in the Essay on the Old Testament, page 187, 188,189.







OCR Output








554 [book XV. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


ill, and yet was so unable to bear it, on ac­count of the fondness he had for her, that hecould not continue long in any one mind;but sometimes was angry at her, and some­times reconciled to ner: but by alwayschanging one passion for another, he wasstill in great uncertainty. And thus was heentangled between hatred and love; andwas frequently disposed to inflict punish­ment on her, for her insolence towards him:but being deeply in love with her, he wasnot able to get quit of this woman. Inshort, as he would gladly have her punished,so was he afraid lest, ere he were aware,he should, by putting her to death, bring aheavier punishment upon himself at thesame time.
When Herod's sister and mother per­ceived that he was in this temper, with re­gard to Mariamne, they thought they hadnow an excellent opportunity of exercisingtheir hatred against her: and provokedHerod, by telling him such long stories andcalumnies about her, as might at once excitehis hatred and his jealousy. Now thoughhe willingly listened to their words, yet hadnot he courage enough to do any thing toher, as if he believed them. But still hebecame worse disposed to her: and theseill passions were more and more inflamedon both sides: while she did not hide herdisposition towards him; and he turned hislove to her, into wrath against her. Butwhen he was just going to put this matterpast all remedy, he heard the news, thatCaesar was the victor in the war; and thatAntony and Cleopatra were both dead; andthat he had conquered Egypt. Hereuponhe made haste to go to meet Caesar; andleft the affairs of his family in their presentstate. However Mariamne recommendedSohemus to him, as he was setting out onhis journey; and professed that she owedhim thanks for the care he had taken ofher; and asked of the king for him a placein the government: upon which an honour­able employment was bestowed upon himaccordingly.
Now when Herod was come into Egypt,he was introduced to Caesar with great free­dom; as already a friend of his; and re­ceived very great favours from him. Forhe made him a present of those four hun­


dred *Galatians, who had been Cleopatra'sguards: and restored that country to himagain, which, by her means, had been takenaway from him. He also added to his king­dom, Gadara, and Hippos, and Samaria: and.besides those, the maritime cities, Gaza, andAthedon, and Joppa, and Strato's tower.
Upon these new acquisitions, he grew moremagnificent; and conducted Caesar as far asAntioch. But upon his return, as much ashis prosperity was augmented by the foreignadditions that had been made him, so muchthe greater were the distresses that cameupon him in his own family; and chiefly inthe affair of his wife: wherein he formerlyappeared to have been most of all fortunate.For the affection he had for Mariamne wasno way inferior to the affections of such asare on that account celebrated in history;and this very justly. As for her, she was inother respects a chaste woman, and faithfulto him: yet was she somewhat rough by na­ture, and treated her husband imperiously;because she saw he was so fond of her, asto be enslaved by her. She did not alsoconsider seasonably with herself, that shelived under a monarchy, and that she wasat another's disposal: and accordingly wouldoften behave herself after a saucy mannerto him. Which yet he usually put off in ajesting way; and bore with moderation, andgood temper. She would also expose hismother and sister openly, on account of themeanness of their birth: and would speakunkindly of them. Insomuch that there wasbefore this a disagreement and unpardonablehatred among the women; and it was nowcome to greater reproaches of one anotherthan formerly. Which suspicions increased,and lasted a whole year after Herod returnedfrom Caesar. However, these misfortunes,which had been kept under some decencyfor a great while, burst out at once uponsuch an occasion as was now offered. Foras the king was one day, about noon, Jaindown on his bed to rest him; he called forMariamne, out of the great affection he hadalways for her. She came in accordingly;but would not lie down by him. And whenhe was very desirous of her company, sheshewed her contempt of him: and added,
* Gauls.







OCR Output








246 [book VII. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


difference between them, and that in theprogress of that difference they came to anopen quarrel; and that one was smitten bythe other and was dead, and she desired himto interpose in this case, and to save this herson from her kindred, who were very zealousto have him that had slain his brother put todeath; that so she might not be farther de­prived of the hopes she had of being takencare of in her old age by him; and that if hewould hinder this slaughter of her son, bythose that wished for it, he would do her agreat favour, because the kindred would notbe restrained from their purpose by any thingelse than by the fear of him.
And when the king had given his consentto what the woman had begged of him, shemade this reply, "I owe thee thanks for thybenignity to me in pitying my old age, andpreventing the loss of my only remainingchild. But in order to assure me of this thykindness, be first reconciled to thine own son,and cease to be angry with him. For howshall I persuade myself that thou hast reallybestowed this favour upon me, while thouthyself continuest after the like manner in thywrath to thine own son? For it is a foolishthing to add wilfully another to thy dead son;while the death of the other was broughtabout without thy consent." The king nowperceived that this pretended story was afabrication devised by Joab; and when uponinquiry of the old woman, he understood itto be so in reality, he called for Joab, andtold him, he had obtained what he requested,according to his own mind; and he bade himbring Absalom back,* for he was not nowdispleased, but had already ceased to beangry with him. So Joab bowed himself


down to the king, and went immediately toGeshur, and brought Absalom with him toJerusalem.
However the king sent a message to hisson beforehand, as he was coming, and com­manded him to retire to his own house; forhe was not yet in such a disposition as tothink fit to see him. Accordingly, upon thefather's command, he avoided coming intohis presence; and contented himself with therespects paid him by his own family only.Now his beauty was not impaired, either bythe grief he had been under, or by the wantof such care as was proper to be taken of aking's son; for he still surpassed all men inthe tallness of his stature, and was moreeminent in a fine appearance, than those thatdieted the most luxuriously. And indeedsuch was the thickness of the hair of his head,that it was with difficulty he was polled everyeighth day, and his hairf weighed two hun­dred shekels, which are five pounds. How­ever, he dwelt in Jerusalem two years, andbecame the father of three sons and onebeautiful daughter; which daughter}: Reho-boam, the son of Solomon, took to wife after­wards, and had by her a son named Abijah.But Absalom sent to Joab, and desired himto pacify his father towards him; and to be­seech him to give him leave to come to seehim, and speak with him. But when Joabneglected so to do, he sent some of his ownservants, and set fire to the field that adjoinedto him; which thing when Joab understood,he came to Absalom, and accused him ofwhat he had done, and asked him the reasonwhy he did so? Absalom replied, " I havefound out this stratagem, that might bringthee to me, while thou hast taken no care to


was taken off by a premeditated murder: he was slain inthe field, where there were no witnesses, whether thefact was wilfully done or no; whereas all the king's sonssaw Amnon barbarously murdered by his brother. And,lastly, he was her only son, by whom alone she couldhope to have her husband's name perpetuated; whereasDavid's family was in no danger of being extinct, evenalthough he had given up Absalom to justice. But therewas a great deal of policy in not making the similitude tooclose_and visible, lest the king should perceive the driftpf the woman's petition, before she had obtained a grantof pardon for her son, and came to make the applicationto the king. And though, upon her making the applica­tion, the king might have argued the disparity of the twooases, yet he thought proper to wave this, and admit herreasoning to be good, because he was as desirous to have
Absalom recalled as were any of his subjects. Patrick'sCommentary. B.
* 2 Sam. xiv. 21.
t Of this weight of Absalom's hair, how in twenty orthirty years it might well amount to two hundred shekels,or to somewhat above six pounds avoirdupois, see theLiteral Accomplishment of Prophecies, p. 77, 78. Buta late very judicious author thinks that the Septuagintmeant not its weight, but its value was two hundred she­kels, Dr. Wall's critical notes on the Old Testamentupon 2 Sam. xiv. 26. It does not appear what was Jose-phus's opinion. He sets the text down honestly, as hefound it in his copies. Only he thought, that at the endof days when Absalom polled and weighed his hair, wasonce a week.
} 2 Chron. xi. 20.







OCR Output








aN. 1099-1 213 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


a certain place called the New Place,* be­longing to Ziph. Where Jonathan the sonof Saul came to him, and saluted him, andexhorted him to be of good courage, and tohope well as to his future condition, and notto despond at his present circumstances; forthat he should be king, and have all the forcesof the Hebrews under him; but told him,that such happiness uses to come with greatlabour and pains. They also took oaths, thatthey would all their lives long continue ingood will and fidelity one to another: andDavid called God to witness, as to what exe­cration he had made upon himself, if heshould transgress his covenant, and shouldchange to a contrary behaviour. So Jona­than left him there, having rendered his caresand fear somewhat lighter, and returnedhome. Now the men of Ziph, to gratify Saul,informed him that David abode with them;and assured him that if he would come tothem, they would deliver him up; for that ifthe king would seize on the straits of Ziph,David could not escape to any other people.So the king commended them, and confessedthat he had reason to thank them, becausethey had given him information of his enemy:and he promised that it should not be longere he would requite their kindness. Healso sent men to seek for David, and to searchthe wilderness wherein he was, resolving tofollow them in person. Accordingly theywent before the king, to search for David;and used endeavours not only to shew their
food will to Saul, by informing him whereis enemy was, but to evince the same moreplainly , by delivering him up into his power.But a failure attended the unjust and wickeddesires of these men, who, while they under­went no hazard by not discovering such anambition of revealing this to Saul, yet didthey falsely accuse, and promise to deliverup a man beloved of God, and one that wasunjustly sought for to be put to death, andwho might otherwise have lain concealed;and this out of flattery and expectation of


gain from the king. For when David wasapprised of the malignant intentions of themen of Ziph, and of the approach of Saul,he left the straits of that country, and fled tothe great rock that was in the wilderness ofMaon.
Hereupon Saul hastened to pursue himthither. For as he was marching, he learnedthat David was gone away from the straitsof Ziph; and Saul removed to the otherside of the rock. But the report that thePhilistines had again made an incursion intothe country of the Hebrews, called Saul ano­ther way, from the pursuit of David, whenhe was ready to be caught; for he returnedback again to oppose those Philistines, whowere naturally their enemies; as judging itmore necessary to avenge himself of them,than to continue the pursuit of a single enemy,and to overlook the ravage that was made inthe land.
By this means David unexpectedly escapedout of the danger he was in, and came to thestraits of Engedi. And when Saul had driventhe Philistines out of the land, there camesome messengers who told him, that Davidabode within the bounds of Engedi. So hetook three thousand chosen men, that werearmed, and hastened towards him. And whenhe was not far from those places, he saw adeep and hollow cave by the way side. Itwas open to a great length and breadth; andthere it was that David, with his four hundredmen, were concealed. Saul, having occasionto enter here alone, was seen by one of Da­vid's companions, and he that saw him said,that David had now, by God's providence, anopportunity of avenging himself of his adver­sary, and advised him to cut off his head, andso deliver himself out of that tedious wander­ing condition, and the distress he was in.David accordingly arose up, and cut off theskirt of Saul's garment; but he soon repentedof what he had done; and said it was not rightto kill him that was his master, and one whomGod had thought worthy of the kingdom.f


* The name of this place, Kaivij, or the New Place, asit is both in the Septuagint and Josephus, 1 Sam. xxii. 15.is justly supposed by Dr. Hudson to have risen from adifferent reading of the Hebrew word: Bahadesa, in thenew place, instead of that in our present Hebrew, Baho-resa, in the wood. Which was the original reading canhardly now be determined. Only two of the best copiesmay well be preferred to one copy, which is not so good.
t If it be asked, how David could do this without Saul'sperceiving it? the answer might be, that this possiblymight be some upper loose garments, which Saul mightput off, and lay aside at some distance from him, upon thisoccasion; and that as there were several rooms, or par­ticular cells in these large caverns, which might have se­cret passages from one to another, Saul, at the mouth ofone of these cells, might lay down his upper garment,


U u 2







OCR Output








AN. 285 1048.] ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


appearance of God's having descended intothis temple, and of his having pitched histabernacle therein. So these men were in­tent upon this thought. But Solomon roseup, (for he was sitting before) and used suchwords to God as he thought agreeable to thedivine nature to receive, and fit for him togive; for he said, "Thou hast an eternalhouse, O Lord! and such a one as thou hastcreated for thyself out of thine own works;we know it to be the heaven, the air, theearth, and the sea, which thou pervadest;nor art thou contained within their limits. Ihave indeed built this temple to thee and thyname; that from thence when we sacrifice,and perform sacred operations, we may sendour prayers up into the air, and may con­stantly believe that thou art present, and artnot remote from what is thine own. Forneither when thou seest and hearest allthings, nor now, when it pleases thee todwell here, dost thou leave off the care ofall men; but rather thou art very near tothem all; and especially thou art present tothose that address themselves to thee, whe­ther by night or by day." When he hadthus solemnly addressed himself to God, heturned his discourse to the multitude, andstrongly represented the power and provi­dence of God to them. How he had shewnall things that were to come to pass to Davidhis father; as many of those things hadalready come to pass; and the rest wouldcertainly come to pass hereafter. And howhe had given him his name, and told to Davidwhat he should be called before he wasborn; and foretold that when he should beking, after his father's death, he should buildhim a temple; which since they saw accom­plished according to his prediction, he re­quired them to bless God; and by believinghim, from what they had seen accomplished,never to despair of any thing that he had pro­mised for the future, in order to their happi­ness, or suspect that it would not come to pass.When the king had spoken thus, he lookedagain towards the temple, and lifting up hisright hand to the multitude, he said, "It isnot possible by what men can do to returnsufficient thanks to God for his benefits be­stowed upon them; for the Deity stands inneed of nothing; and is above any such re­quital. But so far as we have been superior,


O Lord! to other animals by thee, it becomesus to bless thy majesty; and it is necessaryfor us to return thee thanks for what thouhast bestowed on our house, and on the He­brew people. For with what other instru­ments can we better appease thee, when thouart angry at us, or more properly preservethy favour, than with our voice? which as wehave it from the air, so do we know that bythat air it ascends upwards towards thee. Itherefore ought myself to return thee thanksthereby, in the first place concerning myfather, whom thou hast rained from obscurityunto so great glory; and in the next placeconcerning myself; since thou hast performedall that thou promisedst unto this very day.And I beseech thee for the time to cometo afford us whatsoever thou, O God! hastpower to bestow on such as thou didstesteem; and to augment our house for allages, as thou hast promised to David myfather to do, both in his life-time, and at hisdeath; that our kingdom should continue,and that his posterity should successivelyreceive it to ten thousand generations. Donot therefore fail to give us these blessings,and to bestow on my children that virtue inwhich thou delightest. And besides all this,I humbly beseech thee that thou wilt let someportion of thy Spirit come down and inhabitin this temple; that thou mayest appear tobe with us upon earth. As to thyself, theentire heavens, and the immensity of thethings that are therein, are but a small habi­tation for thee; much more is this poortemple. But I intreat thee to keep it, asthine own house, from being destroyed byour enemies for ever; and to take care of itas thine own possession. If this people befound to have sinned, and be thereuponafflicted by thee with any plague, because oftheir sin; as with'dearth, pestilence, or anyother affliction which thou usest to inflict onthose that transgress any of thy holy laws;and if they fly all of them to this temple, be­seeching thee to deliver them; then do thouhear their prayer, as being within this house,and have mercy upon them, and deliver themfrom their afflictions. Nay, moreover, thishelp is what I implore of thee, not for theHebrews only, when they are in distress; butwhen any shall come hither from any ends ofthe world, and shall return from their sins,


3F2







OCR Output








AW. 255 1064.] ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


When the ambassadors came to David, hewent to Jerusalem: and the tribe of Judahwas the first that came to meet him at theriver Jordan,* and Shimei, the son of Gera,came with a thousand men, which he broughtwith him out of the tribe of Benjamin; andZiba, the freed man of Saul, with his sons,fifteen in number; and with his twenty ser­vants. All these, as well as the tribe of Ju­dah, laid a bridge of boats over the river,that the king and those that were with him,might with ease pass over it. Now as soon ashe was come to Jordan, the tribe of Judahsaluted him. Shimei also came upon thebridge, and took hold of his feet, and prayedhim to forgive him what he had offended, andnot to be too bitter against him; nor to thinkfit to make him the first example of severityunder his new authority; but to considerthat he had repented of his failure of duty,and had taken care to come first of all to him.While he was thus intreating the king, andmoving him to compassion, Abishai, Joab'sbrother, said, "Shall not this man die forthat he hath cursed the king whom Godhath appointed to reign over us?" ButDavid turned himself, and said, "Will yenever leave off^ ye sons of Zeruiah? Donot, 1 pray, raise new troubles and sedi­tions among us, now the former are over;for I would not have you ignorant, that I thisday begin my reign; and therefore swear toremit to all offenders their punishments, andnot to animadvert on any one that has sin­ned. Be thou, therefore, O Shimei, of goodcourage; and do not at all fear being put todeath."f So he worshipped him, and wenton before him.
Mephibosheth also, Saul's grandson, metDavid, clothed in a mean garment,}: andhaving his hair thick and neglected; for after


David was fled away, he was in such grief,that he had not polled his head, nor had hewashed his clothes; as dooming himself toundergo such hardships upon occasion of thechange of the king's affairs. Now he hadbeen unjustly calumniated to the king byZiba, his steward. When he had salutedthe king, and worshipped him, the kingbegan to ask him, why he did not go out ofJerusalem with him, and accompany himduring his flight? He replied, that thispiece of injustice was owing to Ziba, be­cause when he was ordered to get thingsready for his going out with him, he took nocare of it: but regarded him no more than ifhe had been a slave. "And indeed," saidhe, "had I had my feet sound and strong, Ihad not deserted thee; for I could then havemade use of them in my flight. But this isnot all the injury that Ziba has done me, asto my duty to thee, my lord and master; buthe hath calumniated me besides, and toldlies about me of his own invention. ButI know thy mind will not admit of suchcalumnies, but is righteously disposed, anda lover of truth; which it is also the will ofGod should prevail. For when thou wast inthe greatest danger of suffering by my grand­father; and when, on that account, our wholefamily might justly have been destroyed, thouwast moderate and merciful, and didst thenespecially forget all those injuries; when, ifthou hadst remembered them, thou hadst thepower of punishing us for them. But thouhast judged me to be thy friend; and hastset me every day at thine own table; norhave I wanted any thing which one of thineown kinsmen, of greatest esteem with thee,could have expected." When he had saidthis, David resolved neither Jjto punish Me­phibosheth, nor to condemn Ziba, as having


* 2 Sam. xix. 15.
t 2 Sam. xix. 23.
J The words in the text are, that He had neither dressedhis feet, nor trimmed his beard, nor washed his clothes,from the day that the king departed, 2 Sam. xix. 24.These were some of the instances wherein the Jews werewont to express their mourning; and they are here men­tioned by the historian, as evidence of the falsehood ofZiba's information against his master, since no one, whonesdected himself to this degree, could be supposed am­bitious of a crown. Not dressing his feet, may signify,either not cutting his toe-nails, or his not washing hisfeet, which the Jews were accustomed very frequently todo, because of the bad smell which was natural to them,
as well as the Arabians, and some other nations; andtherefore his omission of this could not but make himoffensive to himself. Not trimming his beard was lettingits hair grow negligently, and without any order. Forthe manner of the Jews was, to cut the hair from the lipupwards, and what grew likewise on the cheek; but whatwas on the chin, and so backwards to the ear, that theysuffered to grow; and not washing his clothes must denotehis putting on no clean linen, but wearing the same shirtall the while. Calmef s and Patrick's Commentaries. B.
II By David's disposal of half Mephibosheth's estate toZiba, one would imagine that he was still dissatisfied anddoubtful whether Mephibosheth's story were entirelytrue. Nor does David now invite him to diet with him,







OCR Output








250 [BOQIVfl. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


pleased at this advice, and called for Hushai,David's friend; (for so did he style him,) andinforming him ot the opinion of Ahithophel,he asked farther what was his opinion con­cerning that matter? now he was sensible,that if Ahithophel's counsel was followed,David would be in danger of being seizedand slain. So he attempted to introduce acontrary opinion, and said, "Thou art notacquainted, O king! with the valour of thyfather, and of those that are now with him:that he had made many wars, and hath alwayscome off victorious. Though probably henow abides in the camp, for he is very skilfulin stratagems, and in foreseeing the deceitfultricks of his enemies; yet will he leave Lisown soldiers in the evening; and will eitherhide himself in some valley, or will place anambush at some rock; so that when our armyjoins battle with him, his soldiers will retirefor a little while; but will come upon usagain as encouraged by the king's being nearthem; and in the mean time, your father will6hew himself suddenly in the time of thebattle, and will infuse courage into his ownpeople, when they are in danger; but bringconsternation to thine. Consider thereforemy advice, and reason upon it; and if tboucanst but acknowledge it to be the best,reject the opinion of Ahithophel. Send tothe entire country of the Hebrews, and orderthem to come to fight with thy father. Anddo thou thyself take the army, and be thineown general in this war, and do not trust itsmanagement to another. Then expect toconquer him with ease, when thou overtakesthim openly with his few partisans; but hastthyself many ten thousands; who will be de­sirous to demonstrate their diligence andalacrity. And if thy father shall shut himselfup in some city, and bear a siege, we willoverthrow that city by machines of war, andby undermining it." When Hushai had said


this, he obtained his point against Ahitho­phel; for his opinion was preferred by Ab­salom before the others. However, it wasno other than *God who made the counsel ofHushai appear best to the mind of Absalom.So Hushai hastened to the high-priests,Zadok and Abiathar, and told them theopinion of Ahithophel, and his own, and thatthe resolution was taken to follow this latteradvice. He therefore bade them send toDavid, and tell him of it; and to inform himof the counsels that had been taken; and todesire him to pass quickly over Jordan, lesthis son should change his mind, and makehaste to pursue him, and to prevent him,and seize upon him, before he should be iusafety. Now the high-priests had their sonsconcealed in a proper place out of the city;that they might carry news to David of whatwas transacted. Accordingly they sent amaid servant, whom they could trust, to them,to carry the news of Absalom's counsels, andordered them to signify the same to David,with all speed. So they made no delay; buttaking along with them their father's injunc­tions, became pious and faithful ministers,and judging that quickness and alacrity wasthe best mark of faithful service, they madehaste to meet with David. But certainhorsemen saw them, when they were twofurlongs from the city, and informed Absalomof them, who immediately sent home to takethem. But when the sons of the high-priestperceived this, they turned out of the road,to a village called Bahurim. There theydesired a certain woman to hide them, andafford them security. Accordingly she letthe young men down by a rope into a well,and laid fleeces of wool over them, and whenthose that pursued them came to her, andasked her whether she saw them? she didnot deny that she had seen them; for thatthey stayed with her some time; but she


* This reflection of Josephus's, that God brought tonought the dangerous counsel of Ahithophel, and directlyinfatuated wicked Absalom to reject it; (which infatuationis what the Scripture styles the judicial hardening thehearts and blinding the eyes of men, who, by their formervoluntary wickedness have justly deserved to be de­stroyed, and are thereby brought to destruction,) is a veryjust one. Nor does Josephus ever puzzle himself, orperplex his readers with subtle hypotheses as to themanner of such judicial infatuations hy God; while thejustice of them is generally so obvious. That peculiar
manner of the divine operations, or permissions; or themeans God makes use of in such cases, is often impene­trable by -us. Secret things belong to the Lord our God;but those things that are revealed belong to us, and to ourchildren for ever, that we may do all the words of his law,Deut. xxix. 29. Nor have all the subtiltietn of the moderns,so far as I see, given any considerable light in this andmany other similar points of difficulty relating either todivine or human operations. See also the Notes on V. 1.and IX. 4.







OCR Output








aN. 1375.] Ifi? ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


them. Now the attendants of Eglon wereignorant of what misfortune had befallen himfor a great while. But towards evening, fear­ing some uncommon accident had happened,they entered into his parlour, and when theyfound him dead, they were in great disorder,and knew not what to do. And before theguards could be got together, the multitudeof the Israelites came upon them. So thatsome of them were slain immediately, andsome were put to flight, and ran away towardthe country of Moab, in order to save them­selves. Their number was above ten thou­sand. The Israelites seized upon the ford ofJordan, and pursued them, and slew them;and many they killed at the ford; nor did oneof them escape out of their hands. And bythis means it was that the Hebrews freedthemselves from slavery under the Moabites.Ehud also was on this account dignified withthe government over all the multitude, anddied after he had held the government* eightyyears. He was a man worthy of commenda­tion, even besides what he deserved for theaforementioned act of his. After him Sham-gar,f the son of Anath, was elected for theirgovernor; but died in the first year of hisgovernment.
: CHAP. V.


OF THE OPPRESSION OF THE HEBREWS BY THE CANAANITESDURING TWENTY YEARS; AND THEIR EMANCIPATION BYBARAK AND DEBORAH, WHO RULED OVER THEM FORTYYEARS.
ND now it wasJ that the Israelites, takingno warning by their former misfortunes


* These 80 years for the government of Ehud, are ne­cessary to Josephus's usual large numbers, between theExodus and the building of the temple, of 592 or 612years; but not to the smaller number of 480 years,1 Kings vi. 1. which lesser number Josephus seems some­times to have followed. And since in the beginning of thenext chapter it is said by Josephus, that here was hardlya breathing for the Israelites before Jabin came and en­slaved them; it is highly probable that some of the copiesin his time had here only eight years, instead of 80; as hadthat of Theophilus of Antioch, Ad Autoyle, L. III. andthis most probably from his copy of Josephus-
T Judg. iii. 31.
t An. 1375.
I! Judg. iv. 2.
§ From An. 1374 to 1354.
** The words Prophet and Prophetess are of very am­biguous signification in both Testaments; sometimes theydenote persons extraordinarily inspired by God, and en-
voL. I.—NOS. 13 & 14


to amend their manners, and neither wor­shipping God, nor submitting to the lavcvwere brought under slavery again by Jabin,|jking of the Canaanites; and that before theyhad a short breathing after the slavery underthe Moabites. For this Jabin came out ofHazor, a city that was situate over the lakeSemechonitis; and had in pay three hundredthousand armed footmen, and ten thousandhorsemen; with no fewer than three thousandchariots. Sisera was the commander of allthis army, and was the principal person inthe king's favour. He so sorely beat theIsraelites when they fought with him, that hecompelled them to pay tribute.
So they continued to undergo that hard­ship for§ twenty years, as not good enoughof themselves to grow wise by their misfor­tunes. God was willing also hereby the more'to subdue their obstinacy and ingratitudetowards himself. So when, at length, thejwere become penitent, and were so wise asto learn that their calamities arose from theircontempt of the laws, they besought Deborah,a certain prophetess,** whose name, in th<-Hebrew tongue, signifies a Bee, to pray toGod to take pity on them, and not to overlookthem now they were ruined by the Canaan­ites. So God granted them deliverance, andchose for their general one Barak, who wasof the tribe of Naphthali; and whose name inthe Hebrew tongue signifies Lightning.
So Deborah sent for Barak, and bid himchoose out ten thousand young men to goagainst the enemy; because God had said,that that number was sufficient, and promisedthem victory. But when Barak said, he would
dued with the power of working miracles and foretellingthings to come; and sometimes they are used for personsendued with special, though not miraculous gifts or graces,for the better understanding and explaining the word ofGod; and, of this sort, were the sons of the prophets, orsuch as were brought up in the schools of the prophet*.As, therefore, we read nothing of any miraculous actionthat Deborah did, she perhaps was only a woman of emi­nent holiness and prudence, and knowledge of the HolyScriptures, by which she was singularly qualified to judgethe people, i. e. to determine causes and controversiesamong them, according to the word of God. For thoughJabin oppressed th?m sorely, yet it was rather by rigoroustaxations, than infringing their laws, which he still sufferedto be administered by their own officers. And of this hemight take the less notice, because the supreme judicaturewas exercised by a woman, from whose power anc' authority, he thought there was no reason to apprehend anydanger; though this certainh gave her an opportunity cd"
Oo







OCR Output








530 [book ht. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS,


selves; and had great plenty of provisions.He also went thence, and resolved to destroythose robbers that dwelt in the caves, anddid much mischief in the country. So hesent a troop of horsemen, and three compa­nies of armed footmen, against them. Theywere very near a village called Arbela. Andon the fortieth day after he came himself,with his whole army. And as the enemysallied out boldly upon him, the left wing ofhis army gave way. But appearing with abody of men, put those to flight who werealready conquerors, and recalled his menthat ran away. He also pressed upon hisenemies, and pursued them as far as the riverJordan, though they ran away by differentroads. So he brought over to him all Gali­lee, excepting those that dwelt in the caves;and distributed money to every one of hissoldiers, giving them a hundred and fiftydrachmae apiece, and much more to theircaptains; and sent them into winter quarters.At which time Silo came to him, and his com­manders with him, because Antigonus wouldnot give them provisions any longer; for hesupplied them for no more than one month.Nay he had sent to all the country about, andordered them to carry off the provisions thatwere there, and retire to the mountains, thatthe Romans might have no provisions to liveupon, and so might perish by famine. ButHerod committed the care of that matter toPheroras, his youngest brother, and orderedhim to repair Alexandrium. Accordingly hequickly made the soldiers abound with greatplenty of provisions, and rebuilt Alexandrium,which had been before desolate.
About this time it was that Antony con­tinued some time at Athens; and Ventidius,who was now in Syria, sent for Silo, and com­manded him to assist Herod in the first placeto finish the present war, and then to send fortheir confederates, for the war they them­selves were engaged in. But as for Herod,he went in haste against the robbers thatwere in the caves, and sent Silo away to Ven­tidius while he marched against them. Thesecaves were in mountains that were exceedingabrupt; and in their middle were no otherthan precipices, with certain entrances intothe caves; and those caves were encom­passed with sharp rocks. And in these didthe robbers lie concealed, with all their fa­


milies about them. But the king caused cer­tain chests to be made, in order to destroythem, and to be hung down, bound aboutwith iron chains, by an engine, from the topof the mountains. It being not possible toget up to them by reason of the sharp ascentof the mountains; nor to creep down to themfrom above. Now these chests were filledwith armed men, who had long hooks in theirhands, by which they might pull out such asresisted them, and then tumble them down,and kill them by so doing. But the lettingthe chests down proved to be a matter ofgreat danger, because of the vast depth theywere to be letdown; although they had theirprovisions in the chests themselves. Butwhen the chests were let down, and not oneof those in the mouths of the caves durstcome near them, but lay still out of fear, someof the armed men girt on their armour, andby both of their hands took hold of the chainby which the chests were let down, and wentinto the mouths of the caves, because theyfretted that such delay was made, by the rob­bers not daring to come out of the caves.And when they were at any of these mouths,they first killed many of those that were inthe mouths with their darts; and afterwardpulled those to them that resisted them, withtheir hooks, and tumbled them down the pre­cipices, and afterwards went into the caves,and killed many more; and then went intotheir chests again, and lay still there. Butupon this, terror seized the rest, when theyheard the lamentations that were made; andthey despaired of escaping. However, whenthe night came on, that put an end to thewhole work. And as the king proclaimedpardon by a herald to such as deliveredthemselves up to him. many accepted of theoffer. The same method of assault was madeuse of the next day: and they went farther,and got out in baskets to fight them, andfought them at their doors, and sent fireamong them, and set their caves on fire; forthere was a great deal of combustible matterwithin them. Now there was one old manwho was caught within one of these caves,with a wife and seven children; these prayedhim to give them leave to go out, and yieldthemselves up to the enemy: but he stood atthe cave's mouth, and always slew that childof his who went out, until he had destroyed







OCR Output








it*. 584] 421 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


Jews are now slaves in thy kingdom? Dothou then what will be agreeable to thy mag­nanimity, and to thy good nature: free themfrom the miserable condition they are in; be­cause that God who supporteth the kingdom,was the author of their laws: as I have learn­ed by particular inquiry. For both thesepeople, and we also, worship the same God;the framer of all things. We call him, andthat truly by the name of Zriva, or Life,* be­cause he breathes life into all men. Where­fore do thou restore these men to their owncountry; and give them permission to live init; and this do to the honour of God; becausethese men pay a peculiar excellent wor­ship to him. And know this farther, that(hough I be not of kin to them by birth,nor one of the same country with them, yetdo I desire these favours to be done them:since all men are the workmanship of God;and I am sensible that he is well pleased withthose that do good. I therefore put up thispetition to thee, to do good to them."
When Aristeus was saying thus, the kinglooked upon him with a cheerful countenance,and said, "How many thousands dost thousuppose there are of such as want to be madefree?" To which Andreas replied, as hestood by, and said, " A few more than a hun­dred thousand." The king made answer,"And is this a small gift that thou askest,Aristeus?" But Sosibius, and the rest thatstood by, said, he ought to offer such a thank-offering as was worthy of his greatness of soul,to that God who had given him his kingdom.With this answer he was much pleased; andgave order that when they paid the soldierstheir wages, they should lay down a "fhundredand twenty drachmae for every one of theslaves. And he promised to publish a mag­nificent decree, about what they requested:which should confirm what Aristeus had pro­posed, and especially what God willed shouldbe done; whereby he said he would not onlyset those free who had been led away captive
* Of Jupiter. *
t Although this number, 120 drachmae of Alexandria,or 60 Jewish shekels, be here three times repeated, andthat in all Josephus's copies Greek and Latin: yet sinceall the copies of Aristeus whence Josephus took his rela­tion have this sum several times, and still has no morethan 20 drachma?, or 10 Jewish shekels; and since thesum of the talents, to be set down presently, which is lit­tle above 460, for somewhat more than 100,000 slaves,


by his father, and his army; but those whowere in his kingdom before; and those also,if any such there were, who had been broughtaway since. And when they said that theirredemption money would amount to abovefour hundred talents, he granted it. A copyof which decree I have determined to pre­serve, that the magnanimity of this king maybe made known. Its contents were as fol*lows:—
"Let all those who were soldiers, underour father; and who, when they over-ran Sy­ria and Phoenicia, and laid waste Judea, tookthe Jews captives, and made them slaves, andbrought them into our cities, and into thiscountry, and then sold them; as also thosethat were in my kingdom before them; andif there be any that have lately been broughtthither, be made free by those who possessthem; and let them accept of a hundred andtwenty drachmae for every slave. And letthe soldiers receive this redemption moneywith their pay; but the rest out of the king'streasury. For I suppose that they were madecaptives without our father's consent, andagainst equity; and that their country washarassed by the insolence of the soldiers;and that, by removing them into Egypt, thesoldiers have made a great profit by themOut of regard therefore to justice, and out ofpity to those who have been tyrannized over,contrary to equity, I enjoin those that havesuch Jews in their service to set them atliberty; upon receipt of the beforemention-ed sum; and that no one use any deceit aboutthem, but obey what is here commanded.And I will that they give in their name withinthree days, after the publication of this edict,to such as are appointed to execute the same;and to produce the slaves before them. ForI think it will be for the advantage of my af­fairs. And let every one that will, informagainst those that do not obey this decree:and I will, that their estates be confiscatedinto the king's treasury."
and is nearly the same in Josephus and Aristeus, doesbetter agree to 20 than 123 drachmae; and since the valueof a slave of old was, at the utmost, but 30 shekels, or 60drachmas, see Ex. xxi. 32. while in the present circum­stances of these Jewish slaves, and those so very nume­rous, Philadelphus would rather redeem them at a cheaperthan a dearer rate; there is great reason to prefer Aris-teus's copies before Josephus's.


3Z2







OCR Output








44 [BOOK. II. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


BOOK II.


Containing an Interval of 220 Years.


FROM THE DEATH OF ISAAC TO THE EXODUS OUT OF EGYPT.


CHAP. I.
OF THE DIVISION OF HABITATION BY ESAU AND JACOB BYWHICH THE FORMER POSSESSED IDUMEA, AND THE LATTERCANAAN.
AFTER the death of Isaac, his sonsdivided their habitations respectively.Nor did they retain what they had before:but Esau departed from the city of Hebron,and left it to his brother, and dwelt in Seir,and ruled over Idumea. He called thecountry by that name from himself; for hewas named Adom, on the following occasion:He once returned from the toil of hunting,very hungry, when he was a child in age,and met with his brother, when he was get­ting ready lentile-pottage for his dinner; itwas of a very red colour, on which accounthe the more earnestly longed for it, and de­sired some of it to eat. But Jacob took ad­vantage of his brother's hunger, and forcedhim to give up his birth-right; and he beingpinched with famine, resigned it up to him,under an oath. Whence it came, that onaccount of the redness of the pottage, he was,in way of jest by his contemporaries, calledAdom; for the Hebrews call what is red,Adom; and this was the name given to thiscountry. But the Greeks gave it a moreagreeable pronunciation, and named it Idu­mea.
He became the father of five sons, of whomJaus, Jolomus, and Coreus were by one wife,whose name was Alibama; but of the restAliphaz was born to him by Ada, and Raguel


by Basemath: and these were the sons ofEsau. Aliphaz had five legitimate sons;Theman, Homer, Sapphus, Gotham, and Ka-naz: for Amalek was not legitimate, but by aconcubine, whose name was Thamna. Thesedwelt in that part of Idumea which wascalled Gebelatis, and that denominated fromAmalek, Amalekites; for Idumea was a largecountry, and preserved the name of thewhole: while in its several parts it kept thenames of its peculiar inhabitants.
CHAP. II.
OF JOSEPH, THE YOUNGEST OF JACOB'S SONS, AND THE ENVYOF HIS BRETHREN.
IT happened that Jacob attained so great'happiness as rarely any other person hasarrived at; he was richer than the rest of theinhabitants of that country, and was at onceenvied and admired for such virtuous sons;for they were deficient in nothing, but wereof great strength, both for labouring with theirhands, and enduring of toil, and shrewd alsoin understanding. And God exercised sucha providence over him, and such a care ofhis happiness, as to bring him the greatestblessings, even out of what appeared to bethe most sorrowful condition: and to makehim the cause of our forefathers' departureout of Egypt; him, I say, and his posterity.The occasion was this: when Jacob had thisson Joseph born to him by Rachel, his fatherloved him above the rest of his sons, bothbecause of the beauty of his body, and thevirtues of his mind; for he excelled the rest







OCR Output








218 [book VI. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


what a mighty misfortune was ready to over­take you, in your very camp, without yourknowing of it." Now when Saul knew David'svoice, and understood that when he had himin his power, while he was asleep, and hisguards took no care of him; yet did he sparehim, when he might justly have cut him off:he said, that "He owed him thanks for hispreservation; and exhorted him to be of goodcourage, and not to be afraid of suffering anymischief from him any more, and to return tohis own home; for he was now persuaded,that he did not love himself so well as he wasbeloved by him; that he had driven awayhim that could guard him, and had givenmany demonstrations of his good will; thathe had forced him to live so long in a state ofbanishment, and in great fears of his life; des­titute of his friends and his kindred. Whilestill he was often saved by him, and fre­quently received his life again when he wasevidently in danger of perishing." So Davidbade them send for the spear, and the cruseof water, and take them back; adding, thatGod would be the judge of both their dispo­sitions, and of the actions that flowed fromthe same: "for he knows," said he, "thatwhen it was this day in my power to havekilled thee, I abstained from it."*
Saul, having thus escaped the hands ofDavid twice, returned to his royal palace, andhis own city. But David was airaid, if hestaid there, he should be caught by Saul. Sohe thought it better to go up into the land ofthe Philistines. Accordingly he came withthe six hundred men that were with him toAchish the king of Gath; which was one oftheir five cities. Now the king received bothhim and his men, and gave them a place toinhabit. He had with him also his two wives,Ahinoam and Abigail; and he dwelt in Gath.But when Saul heard this, he took no farthercare about sending to him, or going after him,because he had been twice, in a manner,caught by him, while he was himself endea­vouring to catch him. However, David hadno mind to continue in the city of Gath, butdesired the king, that, since he had receivedhim with such humanity, he would grant him
* 1 Sam. xxvi. 23.
t This farther account is not, I think, found in Jose-phus's present works.J A year and four months, in the Hebrew and Septua-


another favour, and bestow upon him someplace in that country for his habitation, forhe was ashamed, by living in the city, to begrievous and burdensome to him. So Achishgave him a certain village, called Ziklag,which David and his sons were fond of whenhe was king, and reckoned it to be their pe­culiar inheritance. But about those matterswe shall give the reader farther informationfelsewhere.—Now the time that David dweltin Ziklag, in the land of the Philistines, wasfourJ months and twenty days. And now heprivately attacked these Geshurites andAmalekites, that were neighbours to the Phi­listines, and laid waste their country; andtook much prey of their beasts and camels;and then returned home. But David ab­stained from the men; as fearing they shoulddiscover him to king Achish. Yet did hesend part of the prey to him as a free gift.And when the king inquired whom they hadattacked, when they brought away the prey,he said, those that lay to the south of the Jews,and inhabited in the plain: whereby he per­suaded Achish to approve of what he haddone; for he hoped that David had foughtagainst his own nation, and that now he shouldhave him for his servant all his life-time; andthat he would stay in his country.j)
CHAP. XIV.
of saul's application to a necromantic woman toraise dp the soul of samuel; and of the death ofhimself and his sons, upon the overthrow of thehebrews in battle.
ABOUT the same time, the Philistines re­solved to make war against the Israel­ites, and sent to all their confederates thatthey would go along with them to the war toReggan, near the city Shunem, whence theymight gather themselves together, and suddenly attack the Hebrews. Then did Achish,the king of Gath, desire David to assist themwith his armed men against the Hebrews.This he readily promised; and said, that thetime was now come wherein he might requitehim for his kindness and hospitality. So theking promised to make him the keeper of his
gint. See 1 Sam. xxvii. 7. and xxix. 3. though the wordsare not very plain, even in them.II 1 Sam. xxvii. 12.







OCR Output








an. 1096.] 221 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


them, he is the man who ought to he by allhonoured, with the testimony of a virtuous orcourageous man. For as to those that go outto war with hopes of success, and that theyshall return safe; supposing they should haveperformed some glorious action; I think thosedo not well who call these valiant men, as somany historians and other writers who treatof them are wont to do; although I confessthose do justly deserve some commendationalso. But those only may be styled coura­geous and bold in great undertakings, anddespisers of adversities, who imitate Saul.For as for those that do not know what theevent of war will be as to themselves, andthough they do not faint in it, but deliverthemselves up to uncertain futurity, and aretossed this way and that way, this is not sovery eminent an instance of a generous mind;although they happen to perform many greatexploits. But when men's minds expect nogood event; but they know beforehand theymust die; and that they must undergo thatdeath in the battle also; after this, neither tobe affrighted, nor to be astonished at the ter­rible fate that is coming; but to go directlyupon it, when they know it beforehand: thisit is that I esteem the character of a man trulycourageous. Accordingly this Saul did; andthereby demonstrated that all men who de­sire fame after they are dead, are so to act,as they may obtain the same. This especiallyconcerns kings; who ought not to think itenough in their high station that they are notwicked in the government of their subjects,but to be more than moderately good to them.1 could say more than this about Saul, andhis courage; the subject offering matter suf­ficient; but that I may not appear to run outimproperly in his commendation, I returnagain to that history from which I made thisdigression.
Now when the Philistines had pitched theircamp, and had taken account of their forcesaccording to their nations, kingdoms, andgovernments, king Achish came last of all,with his own army. After whom came David,with his six hundred armed men. And whenthe commanders of the Philistines saw himthey asked the king, whence those Hebrewscame? and at whose invitation? He an­swered, that it was David, who was fledaway from his master Saul; and he had en­


tertained him when he came to him; andthat now he was willing to make him this re­quital for his favours, and to avenge himselfupon Saul; and so was become his confede­rate. The commanders, however, complainedthat he had taken him for a confederate whowas an enemy; and gave him counsel to keephim away, lest he should unawares do hisfriends a great deal of mischief by enter­taining him. For that he afforded him anopportunity of being reconciled to his masterby doing mischief to the army. They there­upon desired him, out of a prudent foresightof this to send him away, with his four hun­dred armed men, to the place he had givenhim for his habitation. For this was thatDavid whom the virgins celebrated in theirhymns, as having destroyed many ten thou­sands of the Philistines. When the king ofGath heard this, he thought they spake well;so he called David, and said to him, " As formyself, I can bear witness that thou hastshewn great diligence and kindness aboutme; and on that account it was that I tookthee for my confederate. However, what Ihave done does not please the commandersof the Philistines. Go therefore within a day'stime to the place I have given thee withoutsuspecting any harm, and there keep mycountry, lest any of our enemies should makean incursion upon it; which will be one partof that assistance I expect from thee." SoDavid returned to Ziklag, as the king of Gathbid him. But it happened that while he wasgone to the assistance of the Philistines, thenations of the Amalekites had made an in­cursion, and taken Ziklag before, and hadburnt it; and when they had taken a greatdeal of other prey out of that place, and outof the other parts of the Philistines' countrythey departed.
Now when David found that Ziklag waslaid waste, and that it was all spoiled, andthat his own wives, and the wives of his com­panions, with their children, were made cap­tives; he presently rent his clothes; weepingand lamenting, together with his friends. Andindeed he was so cast down with these mis­fortunes, that at length tears themselves failedhim. He was also in danger of being stonedto death by his companions; who were greatlyafflicted at the captivity of their wives andchildren; for they laid the blame upon him


Xx2







OCR Output








AN. 128.] 479 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


"Fanius, the son of Marcus, the praetor,gathered the senate together, on the eighthday before the ides of February, in the senatehouse: when Lucius Manlius, the son of Lu­cius, of the Mentine tribe, and Caius Sempro-nius, the son of Caius, of the Falernian tribe,were present. The occasion was that theambassadors sent by the *people of the Jews,Simon the son of Dositheus, Apollonius theson of Alexander, and Diodorus the son ofJason, who were good and virtuous men, hadsomewhat to propose about that league offriendship and mutual assistance which sub­sisted between them and the Romans; andabout other public affairs: who desired thatJoppa, and the havens, and Gazara, and thesprings of Jordan, and the several other citiesa nd countries of theirs, which Antiochus hadtaken from them in the war, contrary to thedecree of the senate, might be restored tothem: and that it might be lawful for theking's troops to pass through their country,and the countries of those that are subject tothem. And that what attempts Antiochushad made during that war, without the de­cree of the senate, might be made void;and that they would send ambassadors, whoshould take care that restitution be madethem of what Antiochus had taken fromthem; and that they should make an esti­mate of the country that had been laid wastein the war; and that they would grant themletters of protection to the kings, and freepeople; in order to their quiet return home.It was therefore decreed, as to these points, torenew their league of friendship and mutualassistance with these good men, who weresent by a good and a friendly people."
But as to the letters desired, their answerwas, that the senate would consult aboutthat matter, when their own affairs wouldgive them leave: and that they would en­deavour for the time to come, that no likeinjury should be done them: and that theirpraetor Fanius, should give them money outof the public treasury, to bear their ex­penses home. And thus did Fanius dismiss


the Jewish ambassadors, and gave themmoney out of the public treasury; and gavethe decree of the senate to those that wereto conduct them, and to take care that theyshould return home in safety. j
And thus stood the affairs of Hyrcanus,the high-priest. But as for king Demetrius,who was inclined to make war against Hyr­canus, there was no opportunity for it; whileboth the Syrians, and the soldiers, bare illwill to him, because he was an ill man. Butwhen they had sent ambassadors to PtolemyPhyscon, that he would send them one of thefamily of Seleucus, in order to take the king­dom; and he had sent them Alexander, whowas called Zebina, with an army, and therehad been a battle between them, Demetriuswas defeated, and fled to Cleopatra, his wife,to Ptolemais; but his wife would not receivehim. He went thence to Tyre, and wasthere caught; and fwhen he had sufferedmuch from his enemies, he was slain bythem. So Alexander took the kingdom, andmade a league with Hyrcanus. Yet whenAlexander afterward fought with Antiochus,the son of Demetrius, who was called Gry-pus, he was also defeated and slain.!
CHAP. X.
UPON THE QUARREL BETWEEN ANTIOCHUS GRYPUS ANDANTIOCHUS CYZICENUS RESPECTING THE KINGDOM, HYR­CANUS TAKES AND DEMOLISHES SAMARIA; AND AFTER­WARD JOINS HIMSELF TO THE SECT OF THE SADDUCEES.
WHEN Antiochus had taken the king­dom, he was afraid to make waragainst Judea; because he heard that hisbrother by the same mother, who was alsocalled Antiochus, was raising an army againsthim out of Cyzicum. So he stayed in hisown land; and resolved to prepare himselffor the attack he expected from his brother,who was called Cyzicenus; because he hadbeen brought up in that city. He was theson of Antiochus, called Soter, who died inParthia. He was the brother of Demetrius,the father of Grypus. For it had so hap­


* In this decree of the Roman senate, it seems, thatthese ambassadors were sent from the people of theJews, as well as from their prince or high-priest, JohnHyrcanus.
"f This clause, that Demetrius suffered much from hisenemies before his death, is noted here by Dr. Hudson to<b"sagree with the accounts of Trogus Pompeius in Justin;
and with Porphyry. Whether Josephus or those authorswere here imposed upon cannot now be determined. Butif this were a part of the Chronicles of John Hyrcanus, amost authentic and contemporary record, as it seems tobe, there is no doubt but Josephus's account ought to bepreferred.J An. 122.







OCR Output








182 [book VI. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


BOOK VI.


Containing an Interval of Thirty-Two Year*.


FROM THE DEATH OF ELI TO THE DEATH OF SAUL.


CHAP. I.
OF THE DESTRUCTION THAT CAME UPON THE PHILISTINES,BY THE WRATH OF GOD, ON ACCOUNT OF THEIR HAVINGCARRIED AWAY THE ARK; AND OF THE MANNER IN WHICHTHEY SENT IT BACK TO THE HEBREWS.
WHEN the Philistines had taken the arkof the Hebrews, they carried it to thecity Ashdod, and put it by their own god, whowas called* Dagon, as one of their spoils.But when they went into the temple the nextmorning, to worship their idol, they found him
f>aying the same worship to the ark, for heay prostrate, as having fallen down from thebasis whereon he had stood. So they took himup, and set him on his basis again, and weremuch troubled at what had happened. Andas they frequently came to Dagon, and foundhim still lying along in a posture of adorationto the ark, they were in very great distressand confusion. At length God sent a verydestructive disease upon the city and countryof Ashdod; for they died of the dysentery, asore distemper, that brought death upon themvery suddenly; for before they could, as usualin easy deaths, be well loosed from the body,they brought up their entrails, and vomitedup what they had eaten, and what was en­tirely corrupted by the disease. And as tothe fruits of their country, a great multitudeof mice arose out of the earth and hurt them;and spared neither the plants, nor the fruits.Now while the people of Ashdod were underthese misfortunes, and were not able to sup­port themselves under their calamities, they
* Dagon, a famous god or idol, is generally supposed to


perceived that they suffered thus because ofthe ark; and that the victory they had gotten,and their having taken the ark captive, hadnot happened for their good. They there­fore sent to the people of Ascalon, and de­sired that they would receive the ark amongthem. This desire was not disagreeable tothose of Ascalon; so they readily granted it;but when they had gotten the ark, they werein the same miserable condition; for the arkcarried along with it the disasters that thepeople of Ashdod had suffered, to those whoreceived it from them. Those of Ascalonalso sent it away to others; %vho, being pur­sued by the same disasters, again sent it tothe neighbouring cities. So that the ark wentround, after this manner, to the five cities ofthe Philistines; as though it exacted thesedisasters as a tribute for its coming amongthem.
When those that had experienced thesemiseries were tired out with them, and whenthose that heard of them were taught therebynot to admit the ark among them, since theypaid so dear a tribute for it; at length theysought for some contrivance how they mightget free from it. So the governors of the fivecities, Gath, Ekron, Ascalon, Gaza, andAshdod, met together, and considered whatwas fit to be done. And at the first theythought proper to send the ark back to itsown people; as allowing that God hadavenged its cause, that the miseries they hadundergone came along with it, and that thosewere sent on their cities upon its account,
have been like a man about the navel, and like a fish beneath it.







OCR Output








270 [book VII. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


artfully, that they did not appear to eventhose that entered into their monuments.*
* I suppose those large and magnificent sepulchres inthe north west, now without, but perhaps of old withinthe walls of Jerusalem, and still called the sepulchres ofthe kings, are those very sepulchres, in which David,and so many more kings of Judah were buried; and incertain of whose rooms, which are not a few, these im­mense riches might now be deposited; and out of whichvast sums were afterwards taken; certainly by Hyrcanus,and very probably by Herod the Great also. See Antiq.XIII. 8. XVI. 7. Sandys, page 175. Thevenot, part I.lib. II. chap. 40. Prideaux, at the year 699. Maundrell,page 75, 76, 77. and note on Antiq. VII. 3. and on XVII.


But so much shall suffice concerning thesematters.
11. with Authent. Rec. part I. page 207. Dr. Prideaux'sobjections are built chiefly on the supposal, that this vasttreasure, put now into David's sepulchre, must have beenknown all along afterwards; whereas it is more probableit was not known, till Hyrcanus, in great distress, disco­vered it, and took out 3000 talents. Nor perhaps was itafterwards known, that Hyrcanus had left any behind him;till Herod, prying about every where for money, at lengthmet with that remainder also, and took it all away. Sepul­chres were of old looked upon as places so sacred andinviolable, that treasures might be more safely trusted inthem, than in almost any other places.







OCR Output








AN. 143.] 473 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


were ensnaring and treacherous; and yetthat it was more eligible to send the money,and Jonathan's sons; than to be liable to theimputation of not complying with Trypho'soffers, and thereby refusing to save his bro­ther. Accordingly Simon sent the sons ofJonathan, and the money. But when Tryphohad received them, he did not keep his pro­mise, nor set Jonathan free; but took hisarmy, and went about all the country, andresolved to go up afterward to Jerusalem bythe way of Idumea; while Simon went overagainst him with his army; and invariablypitched his own camp over against him.
When those that were in the citadel hadsent to Trypho, and besought him to makehaste, and come to them, and to send them
Erovisions, he prepared his cavalry, as thoughe would be at Jerusalem that very night.But so great a quantity of snow fell in thenight that it covered the roads, and madethem so deep, that there was no passing,especially for the cavalry; and this preventedhim from coming to Jerusalem. Trypho there­fore removed thence, and came into Coele-syria; and falling vehemently upon the landof Gilead, he slew Jonathan there, and whenhe had given order for his burial, he returnedto Antioch.* However Simon sent some tothe city Basca, to bring away his brother'sbones; and buried them in their own city,Modin. And all the people made great la­mentation over him. Simon also erected avery large monument for his father, and hisbrethren, of white and polished stone; andraised it a great height, and so as to be seenat a considerable distance; and made clois­ters about it, and set up pillars, which wereof one stone apiece. Moreover he built sevenpyramids for his parents, and his brethren,


* An. 143 B.C.
t There is some error in the copies here; when nomore than four years are ascribed to the high-priesthoodof Jonathan. We know by Josephus's last Jewish chro­nology, XX. 10. that there was an interval of seven yearsbetween the death of Alcimus. or Jacimns, the last high-priest, and the real high-priesthood of Jonathan; to whomyet those seven years seem here to be ascribed; as partof them were to Judas before, XII. 10. Now since, be­sides those seven years interregnum in the pontificate,we are told, XX. 10. that Jonathan's real high-priesthoodlasted seven years more; these two seven years will makeup fourteen years; which I suppose was Josephus's ownnumber in this place, instead of the four in our presentcopies.


one for each of them; which were made verysurprising, both for their largeness, andbeauty; and which have been preserved tothis day. And we know that it was Simonwho bestowed so much zeal about the burialof Jonathan, and the building of these monu­ments for his relations. Now Jonathan diedwhen he had been high-priest ffour years;and had been also the governor of his nation.And these were the circumstances that con­cerned his death.
But Simon, who was made high-priest bythe multitude, on the very first year of hishigh-priesthood set his people free from theirslavery under the Macedonians; and permit­ted them to pay tribute to them no longer.Which liberty and freedom from tribute theyobtained after a Jhundred and seventy yearsof the kingdom of the Assyrians; which wasafter Seleucus, who was called Nicator, gotthe dominion over Syria. Now the affectionof the multitude toward Simon was so great,that in their contracts one with another, andin their public records, they wrote, "In thefirst year of Simon, the benefactor and eth-narch of the Jews." For under him theywere very happy, and overcame the enemiesthat were round about them. For Simonoverthrew the cities Gazara, Joppa, andJamnia. He also took the citadel of Jerusa­lem by siege, and cast it down to the ground;that it might not be any more a place of re­fuge to their enemies, when they took it, todo them a mischief; as it had been till now.And when he had done this, he thought itadvisable, and most for their advantage, tolevel the very mountain itself, upon whichthat citadel happened to stand; that so thetemple might be higher than it. And whenhe had called the multitude to an assembly,
J These 170 years of the Assyrians, mean no more, asJosephus explains himself here, than from the era of Se­leucus; which as it is known to have begun on the 312thyear before the Christian era; from its spring in the firstbook of Maccabees, and from its autumn in the second bookof Maccabees; so did it not begin at Babylon till the nextspring, on the 311th year. See Prideaux, at the year 312.And it is truly observed by Dr. Hudson on this place, thatthe Syrians and Assyrians are sometimes confounded inancient authors: according to the words of Justin theEpitomizer of Trogus Pompeius; who says, that "TheAssyrians were afterwards called Syrians," I. 11. SeeOf the War, V. 9. where the Philistines themselves, atthe very south limit of Syria, in its utmost extent, arecalled Assyrians by Josephus, as Spanheim observes.







OCR Output








492 [book XIII. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


in their power to abuse my dead body, theywill do it no injury at all, and thou wilt rulein safety." *So when he had given his wifethis advice, he died: after he had reignedftwenty-seven years, and lived forty-nine.
CHAP. XVI.


OF ALEXANDRA S CONDUCT TOWARD THE PHARISEES; HERGOVERNMENT AND DEATH.
ALEXANDRA, having taken the fortress,acted as her husband had suggested;and spake to the Pharisees, and put all thingsinto their power; both as to the dead body,and as to the affairs of the kingdom: andthereby pacified their anger against Alex­ander, and made them bear good will andfriendship to him. Accordingly they cameamong the multitude, and laid before themthe actions of Alexander; and told them thatthey had lost a righteous king: and by thecommendations they gave him, they broughtthem to grieve, and to be in heaviness forhim: so that he had a funeral more splendidthan had any of his predecessors. Alexan­der left behind him two sons, Hyrcanus andAristobulus; but committed the kingdom toAlexandra. Now as to these two sons, Hyr­canus was indeed unable to manage publicaffairs, and delighted rather in quiet life.But the younger, Aristobulus, was an activeand a bold man. And Alexandra was be­loved by the multitude, because she seemeddispleased at the offences her husband hadbeen guilty of.
So she made Hyrcanus high-priest, becausehe was the elder, but more particularly be­cause he cared not to meddle with politics;and she permitted the Pharisees to do everything, requiring the multitude to be obedient
< * It seems by this dying advice of Alexander Janneusto his wife, that he had himself pursued the measures ofhis father Hyrcanus, and taken part with the Sadducees;who closely adhered to the written law; against the Pha­risees, who had introduced their own traditions: seechap. 16. and that he now saw a political necessity ofsubmitting to the Pharisees, and their traditions hereafter,if his widow and family wished to retain their monarchi­cal government, or tyranny over the Jewish nation.Which sect yet, thus supported, were at last in a greatmeasure the ruin of the religion, government, and nationof the Jews: and brought them into so wicked a state, thatthe vengeance of God came upon them, to their utterexcision. Just thus did Caiaphas politically advise the


to them. She also restored those practiceswhich the Pharisees had introduced, accord­ing to the traditions of their forefathers; andwhich her father-in-law, Hyrcanus, had abro­gated: so she had the name of the regent,but the Pharisees had the authority. For itwas they who restored such as had beenbanished, and set such as were prisoners atliberty: and in short they differed nothingfrom lords. The queen, however, took careof the affairs of the kingdom, and got toge­ther a great body of mercenary soldiers, andincreased her own army to such a degree,that she became terrible to the neighbouringtyrants; and took hostages of them. Andthe country was entirely at peace; exceptingthe Pharisees, for they disturbed the queen,and desired that she would kill those whopersuaded Alexander to slay the eight hun­dred men.J After which they cut the throatof one of them, named Diogenes; and afterhim they did the same to several, one afteranother; till the men that were the mostpotent came into the palace, and Aristobuluswith them: for he seemed to be displeased atwhat was done; and it appeared openly, thatif he had an opportunity, ne would not permithis mother to go on so. These reminded thequeen of the great dangers they had gonethrough, and the great things they had done:whereby they had demonstrated the firmnessof their fidelity to their master: insomuchthat they had received the greatest marks offavour from him. And they begged of her,that she would not utterly blast their hopes,as it now happened, that when they had es­caped the hazards that arose from their openenemies, they were to be cut off at home,by their private enemies, like brute beasts,without any assistance. They said also, that iftheir adversaries would be satisfied with those


Jewish Sanhedrim; John xi. 50. "That it was expe­dient for them that one man should die for the people;and that the whole nation perish not." And this in con­sequence of their own political supposal, verse 48, that"If they let Jesus alone, with his miracles, all men wouldbelieve on him; and the Romans would come and takeaway both their place and nation." Which political cru»cifixion of Jesus of Nazareth brought down the vengeanceof God upon them; and occasioned those very Romans,of whom they seemed so much afraid, that to prevent itthey put him to death, actually to come and take awayboth their place and nation, within 38 years afterwards
t From an. 105 to an. 79 B. C.
\ An. 77.







OCR Output








130 [book IV. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


thing they arc taught; which will be the bestthing they can be taught, and will be cause oftheir future felicity.*
Let every one commemorate before God,the benefits which he bestowed upon them attheir deliverance out of the land of Egypt;and this twice every day; both when the daybegins, and when the hour of sleep comes.Gratitude being in its own nature a just thing;and serving not only by way of return for
!)ast, but also by way of invitation of futureavours. They are also to inscribe the prin­cipal blessings they have received from God,upon their doors, and shew the same remem­brance of them on their arms;t as also theyare to bear on their forehead and their armthose wonders which declare the power ofGod, and his good will towards them; thatGod's readiness to bless them may appearevery where conspicuous about them.J
Let there be seven men to judge|| in everycity;§ and these such as have been beforemost zealous in the exercise of virtue andrighteousness. Let every judge have twoofficers allotted bim out of the tribe of Levi.Let those that are chosen to judge in theseveral cities be had in great honour: andlet none be permitted to revile any others,when these are present, nor to carry them­selves in an insolent manner to them. It be­ing natural that reverence towards those inhigh offices among men should procure men'sfear and reverence towards God. Let thosethat judge be permitted to determine accord­ing as they think right; unless any one canshew that they have taken bribes, to the per­version of justice, or can ailedge any otheraccusation against them, whereby it may ap­pear that they have passed an unjust sen-
* Deut. xxxi. 12.
t Whether these phylacteries, and.' other Jewish me­morials of the law here mentioned by Josephus, and byMoses, (besides the fringes on the border of their gar­ments, Numb. xv. 37,) were literally meant by God, Imuch question. That they have been long observed bythe Pharisees, and the Rabbinical Jews, is certain. How­ever the Karaites, who receive not the underwritten tra­ditions of the elders, but keep close to the written lawwith Jerome and Grotius, think they were not literally tobe understood; as Bernard and Reland here take notice.Nor indeed do I remember, that either in the ancienterbooks of the Old Testament, or in the books we call Apo­crypha, there are any signs of such literal observationsappearing among the Jews. Though their real or mys­tical signification, i. e. the constant remembrance and ob-


tence. For it is not fit that causes should beopenly determined out of regard to gain, orto the dignity of the suitors; but that thejudges should esteem what is right before allother things: for otherwise God will be des­pised, and esteemed inferior to those, thedread of whose power has occasioned the un­just sentence. For justice is the power ofGod: he, therefore, that gratifies those ingreat dignity supposes them more potent thanGod himself. But if these judges are unableto give a just sentence, about the causes thatcome before them; (which case is not unfre-quent in human affection,) let them send thecause undetermined to the holy city, andthere let the high-priest, the prophet, and theSanhedrim, determine as shall seem good tothem.
But let not a single** witness be credited:but three, or two at the least, and those suchwhose testimony is confirmed by their goodlives. But let not the testimony offt womenbe admitted, on account of the levity andboldness of their sex. Nor let servants beadmitted to give testimony, on account oftheir ignoble spirit; since it is probable theymay not speak truth, either out of hope ofgain, or fear of punishment. But if any onebe believed to have borne false witness, lethim, when he is convicted, suffer all the samepunishments, which he, against whom he borewitness, was to have suffered.
If a murder be committed in any place, andhe that did it be not found, nor is there anysuspicion upon one, as if he had hated theman, and so had killed him; let there be avery diligent inquiry made after the man,and rewards proposed to any that will disco­ver him. But if no information can be pre­servation of the lawsof God' and Moses, be frequently in­culcated in all the sacred writings.
X Numb. xv. 38, 39.


II Here, as well as Of the War, n. 20, are but sevenjudges appointed for small cities, instead of twenty-thieein the modern Rabbins, which modern Rabbins are alwaysbut of very Htde authority in comparison of Josephus.
§ Deut. xvi. 18.
** I have never observed elsewhere, that in the Jewishgovernment women were not admitted as legal witnessesin courts of Justice. None of our copies of the Penta­teuch say a word of it. It is very probable, however,that this was an exposition of the Scribes and Pharisees,and the practice of the Jews in the days of Josephus.
tt Deut. xvii. 6;


--







OCR Output








am. 727.] 353 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


the priests and the LeviteB. The king alsomade garners and receptacles lor these fruits,and distributed them to every one of thepriests and Levites, and to their wives andchildren. And thus did they return to theirold form of divine worship. Now when theking had settled these matters after themanner already described, he made warupon the Philistines, and defeated them, andpossessed himself of all their cities, fromGaza to Gath. And when the king of Assyriagent to him, threatening to overturn all hisdominions, unless he would pay him the tri­bute which his father paid formerly, Heze­kiah was not alarmed; but depended on hispiety towards God, by whom he inquired,and accurately knew all future events. Andthus much shall suffice for the present con­cerning king Hezekiah.
CHAP. XIV.
OP THE REDUCTION OF SAMARIA BY SHALMANE9ER, ANDTHE REMOVAL OF THE TEN TRIBES INTO MEDIA.
WHEN Shalmaneser, king of Assyria,was informed that Hoshea had sentErivately to So, the king of Egypt, desiringis assistance against him, he was veryangry; and made an expedition against Sa­maria, in the seventh year of the reign ofHoshea. And on being refused admittanceinto the city, he besieged Samaria threeyears,* and took it by mere force, in theninth year of the reign of Hoshea, and in theseventh of Hezekiah king of Jerusalem; andquite demolished the government of the Is­raelites, and transplanted all the people intoMedia and Persia; among whom he tookking Hoshea alive; and when he had removedthese people out of their land, he transplantedother nations out of a place called Cuthah,into Samaria, and into the country of theIsraelites. So the tten tribes of the Israeliteswere removed out of Judea, nine hundredand forty-seven years after their forefathers


came out of the land of Egypt, and possessedthemselves of this country; but eight hundredyears after Joshua had been their leader;and two hundred and forty years, sevenmonths, and seven days, after they had re­volted from Rehoboam, the grandson ofDavid, and had given the kingdom to Jero­boam. And such a conclusion overtook theIsraelites, when they had transgressed thelaws, and would not hearken to the prophets,who foretold that this calamity would comeupon them, if they would not leave off theirtransgressions. What gave birth to thesedoings, was that sedition which they raisedagainst Rehoboam, the grandson of David;when they set up his servant Jeroboam to betheir king; who by sinning against God, andbringing them to imitate his bad example,made God to be their enemy; while himselfunderwent that punishment he justly de­served.
And now the king of Assyria invaded allSyria and Phoenicia in a hostile manner. Thename of this king is also set down in the ar­chives of Tyre; for he made an expeditionagainst Tyre in the reign of Eluleus. AndMenander attests to it; who, when he wrotehis Chronology, and translated the archivesof Tyre into the Greek language, gives us thefollowing history: "One whose name wasEluleus reigned thirty-six years: the king,upon the revolt of the Citteans, sailed tothem and reduced them again to submission.Against these did the king of Assyria send anarmy, and in a hostile manner over-ran allPhoenicia; but soon made peace with them,and returned back. But Sidon and Ace Pa-loetyrus revolted, and many other cities therewere which delivered themselves up to theking of Assyria. Accordingly when the Ty-rians would not submit to him, the king re­turned, and fell upon them again; while thePhoenicians had furnished him with sixtyships, and eight hundred men to row them.And when the Tyrians had come upon them


* This siege of Samaria, though not given a particularaccount of either in our Hebrew or Greek Bibles, or inJosephus, was so very long; no less than three years;that it is no way improbable but that parents, and particu­larly mothers, might therein be reduced to eat their ownchildren, as the law of Moses had threatened upon theirdisobedience, Levit. xxvi. 29. Deut. xxviii. 53—57. andas was accomplished in the other shorter sieves of boththe capital cities, Jerusalem, and Samaria; the former
mentioned, Jer. xix. 9. Lam. ii. 20. iv. 10. Antiq. IX. 4.Of the War, VI. 3, 4. the latter mentioned, 2 Kings vi.26—29. See my Boyle's Lectures, page 209—214.
t That our Chronology is certain, as far backward asthis captivity of the ten tribes; and that to a single year,during the interval of 2456 years, see demonstrated fromthe sabbatical years, in the Supplement to the LiteralAccomplishment of the Prophecies, page 75.







OCR Output








AN. 237 1078.] ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


the son of Jehoiada. His elder sons were nearhis body, and had the care of it also.
He also called to mind the covenants andthe oaths he had made with Jonathan, theson of Saul; and the friendship and affectionJonathan had for him. For besides all therest of his excellent qualities, with which hewas endowed; he was also exceeding mindfulof such as had at other times bestowedbenefits upon him. He therefore gave orderthat inquiry should be made, whether any ofJonathan's lineage were living; to whom hemight make return of that familiar acquaint­ance which Jonathan had had with him; andfor which he was still debtor. And whenone of Saul's freed men was brought to him,who was acquainted with those of his familythat were still living, he asked him, whetherhe could tell him of any one belonging toJonathan that was now alive; and capableof a requital of the benefits he had receivedfrom Jonathan? the man replied that a sonof his was remaining, whose name was Me-phibosheth; but that he was lame of his feet,for that when his nurse heard that the fatherand grandfather of the child were fallen inthe battle, she snatched him up, and fledaway, and let him fall from her shoulders,and his feet were lamed. So when he hadlearned where, and by whom he was broughtup, he sent messengers to Machir, to the cityLodebar; for with him was the son of Jona­than brought up, and sent for him to come tohim. So when Mephibosheth came to theking, he fell on his face, and worshipped him.But David encouraged him, and bid him beof good cheer, and expect better times. Sohe gave him his father's house, and all theestate which his grandfather Saul was in pos­session of, and bade him come and diet withhim, at his own table, and never to be absentone day. And when the youth had wor­shipped him, on account of his words, andgifts given to him; he called for Ziba, and


told him, that he had given the youth hisfather's house, and all Saul's estate. He alsoordered that Ziba should cultivate his land,and take care of it, and bring him the profitsof all to Jerusalem. Accordingly Davidbrought him to his table every day; and be­stowed upon the youth, Ziba, and his sons,who were in number fifteen, and his servants,who were in number twenty. When the kinghad made these appointments, and Ziba hadworshipped him, and promised to do all thathe had bidden him, he went his way. So thatthis son of Jonathan dwelt at Jerusalem, anddieted at the king's table, and had the samecare that a son could claim taken of him.


He also had himself a son.Micha.


* whom he named


CHAP. VI.
OF THE WAR WAGED AGAINST THE AMMONITES, AND ITSHAPPY CONCLUSION.
ABOUT thist time died Nahash, king ofthe Ammonites, who was a friend ofDavid's.J And when his son had succeeded _his father in the kingdom, David sent ambas­sadors to him to comfort him; and exhortedhim to take his father's death patiently, andto expect that he would continue the samekindness to himself, which he had shewed tohis father. But the princes of the Ammonitestook this message in evil part, and not asDavid's kind disposition, gave reason to takeit, and they excited the king to take it; andsaid that David had sent men to spy out thecountry, and what strength it had, under thepretence of humanity and kindness. Theyfurther advised him not to give heed toDavid's words; lest he should be deluded byhim, and so fall into an inconsolable calamity.Accordingly Nahash's son, the king of theAmmonites, thought these princes spake whatwas more probable than the truth wouldadmit; and so abused the ambassadors that


quently must be received into the inmost confidence.For whether the office of a Lord Chancellor was con­sistent with the constitution of the Jewish state, a modernauthor seems to doubt. History of the Life of King David,vol. 2. B.
* 1 Chron. viii. 34.
t About an. 1078 B. C.
I What the particular benefits which David had re­ceived from Nahash were, we are no where told in Scrip­ture; but some of the Jews say, that he fled to him,
when he durst stay no longer with Achish king of thePhilistines, and that he received him very kindly; others,that he entertained his relations, when the king of Moab,to whom he had committed them, slew some of them:but the most likely opinion is, that as he was a bitter enemyto Saul, who had given him a great overthrow, he, forthat very reason, became a friend to David, when he per­ceived how Saul persecuted him, and thereupon mightsend him relief and assistance, and perhaps offer him pro­tection in his kingdom. Patrick's Commentary. B


Zz2







OCR Output








AN. 31 1912.] ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


I might have thee for my son; when thou wastcome into the world, there was nothing thatcould contribute to thy support for which Iwas not greatly solicitous; nor any thingwherein I thought myself happier than to seethee grown up to man's estate; and that Imight leave thee, at my death, the successorto my dominion; but since it was by God'swill that I became thy father, and is now hiswill that I relinquish thee, bear this conse­cration to God with a generous mind; for Iresign thee up to God, who hath thought fitnow to. require this testimony of honour tohimself on account of the favours he hathconferred on me, in being to me a supporterand defender. Accordingly thou, my son,wilt now die, not in any common way of goingout of the world, but sent to God, the fatherof all men, before hand, by thy own father, inthe nature of a sacrifice. I suppose he thinksthee worthy to leave this world, neither bydisease, by war, nor any other severe wayby which death usually comes upon men, butso that he will receive thy soul with prayersand holy offices of religion, and will placethee near to himself, and thou wilt there beto me a succourer and supporter in my oldage, on which account I principally broughtthee up; and thou wilt thereby procure meGod for my comforter instead of thyself."
Now Isaac was of such a generous dispo­sition as became the son of such a father,and was pleased with this discourse, andsaid that he was not worthy to be born atfirst, if he should reject the determination ofGod and of his father, and should not resignhimself up readily to both their pleasures;since it would have been unjust if he had notobeyed, even if his father alone had so re­solved: so he went immediately to the altarto be sacrificed; and the deed had been


* It seems both here, and in God's parallel blessing toJacob, c. 19. that Josephus had yet no notion of the hiddenmeaning of that most important and most eminent promise,In thy seed shall all the families of the earth be blessed;he saith not of seeds, as of many, but as of one; and tothy seed, which is Christ, Gal. iii. 16. Nor is it anywonder, he being,' I think, as yet not a Christian: andhad he been a Christian, yet since he was till the latterpart of his life no more than an Ebonite Christian, whoabove all the apostles rejected and despised St. Paul, itwould be no great wonder if he did not now follow hisinterpretation. In the mean time we have in effect. St.Paul's exposition in the testament of Reuben in Authent.Rec. part I. page 302, who charges his sons " To worship
VOL. L—No. 3.


done if God had not opposed it, for he calledloudly to Abraham by his name, and forbadehim to slay his son, and said it was not out ofa desire of human blood that he was com­manded to slay his son, nor was he willingthat he should be taken away from him whomhe had made his father, but to try the temperof his mind, whether he would be obedientto such a command: since, therefore, he nowwas satisfied as to the surprising readinesshe shewed in his piety, he was delighted inhaving bestowed such blessings upon him,and that he would not be wanting in all sortof concern about him; and that his sonshould live to a very great age, that he shouldlive a happy life, and bequeath a large prin­cipality to his children, who should be goodand legitimate. He foretold also that hisfamily should increase into many nations,*and that those patriarchs should leave behindthem an everlasting name; that they shouldobtain the possession of the land of Canaan,and be envied by all men. When God hadsaid this, he produced to them a ram,f whichdid not appear before, for the sacrifice; soAbraham and Isaac receiving each other un­expectedly, and having obtained the pro­mises of such great blessings, embraced oneanother; and when they had sacrificed, theyreturned to Sarah, and lived happily together,God affording them his assistance in allthings they desired.
CHAP. XIV.
OF THE DEATH AND BURIAL OF SARAH, ABRAHAM'S WIFE.
NOW SarahJ died a little while after­ward, having lived one hundred andtwenty-seven years. They buried her inHebron, the Canaanites publicly allowing
the seed of Judah, who should die for them in visible andinvisible wars, and should be among them an eternal king."Nor is that observation of a learned foreigner of myacquaintance to be despised, who takes notice, that asseeds in the plural must signify posterity, so seed in thesingular may signify either posterity, or a single person;and that in this promise of all nations being happy in theseed of Abraham, or Isaac, or Jacob, &c. it is alwaysused in the singular; to which I shall add, that it is some­times, as it were, paraphrased by the son of Abraham, theson of David, &.c. which is capable of no such ambiguity.See Boyle's Lectures, page 247—272.
t Gen. xxii. 13.
I Gen. xxiii. 1. 2. An. 1900.
I







OCR Output








an. 562.] 383 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


to say, that there was a certain captivewho came from Judea, a Jew by birth; bijtbrought away thence by Nebuchadnezzar,when he destroyed Jerusalem; whose namewas Daniel; a wise man, and one of greatsagacity in finding out what was impossiblefor others to discover, and what was knownto God alone; and who brought to light andanswered such questions to Nebuchadnezzar,as no one else was able to answer, when theywere consulted. She therefore desired thathe would send for him, and inquire concern­ing the writing; and to condemn the unskil-fulness of those that could not find theirmeaning; and this although what God sig­nified thereby should be of a melancholynature.
When Baltasar heard this, he called forDaniel; and when he had expressed what hehad learned concerning him and his wisdom,and how a divine spirit was with him, andthat he alone was fully capable of finding outwhat others would never have thought of; hedesired him to declare to him what this wri­ting meant. That if he did so, he would givehim leave to wear purple, and to put a chainof gold about his neck, and would bestow onhim the third part of his dominion, as an ho­norary reward of his wisdom, that thereby hemight become illustrious to those who sawhim, and who inquired upon what occasionhe obtained such honours. But Daniel de­sired, "that he would keep his gifts to him­self; the effect of wisdom, and of divine reve­lation admitting of no gifts; but bestowing itsadvantages on petitioners freely; but thatstill he would explain the writing to him. Hesaid, it denoted that he should soon die; andthis because he had not learned to honourGod, and not to admit things above humannature, by what punishments his progenitorhad undergone for the injuries he had offeredto God; and because he had quite forgottenhow Nebuchadnezzar was removed to feedamong wild beasts, for his impieties, and didnot recover his former life among men, andhis kingdom, but upon God's mercy to him,


after many supplications and prayers. Whodid thereupon praise God all the days of hislife, as one of almighty power, and who takescare of mankind. He also reminded himthat he had greatly blasphemed against God,and had made use of his vessels amongst hisconcubines; that therefore God was angrywith him, and declared by his writing be­forehand what a sad conclusion of his life heshould come to. And he explained the wri­ting thus: "MANEH: this, if it be expoundedin the Greek language, may signify Apifljioj, anumber; because God hath numbered solong a time for thy life, and for thy govern­ment; and there remains but a small portion.THEKEL: this signifies Era^of, a weight;and means that God hath weighed thy king­dom in a balance, and finds it going downalready. PHARES: this also in the Greektongue, denotes KXoWfMi, a fragment; God willtherefore break thy kingdom in pieces, anddivide it among the Medes and Persians."*
When Daniel had told the king that thewriting upon the wall signified these events,Baltasar was in great sorrow and affliction,as was to be expected when the interpreta­tion was so heavy upon him. However hedid not refuse what he had promised Daniel,although he were become a foreteller of mis­fortunes; but bestowed it all upon him. Asreasoning thus, that what he was to rewardwas peculiar to himself and to fate, and didnot belong to the prophet; but that it wasthe part of a good and a just man to givewhat he had promised, although the eventswere to be of a melancholy nature. Nowafter a little while, both himself, and the citywere taken by Cyrus king of Persia, whofought against him. For it was Baltasar,under whom Babylon was taken; when hehad reigned seventeen years. And this isthe end of the posterity of Nebuchadnezzar,as history informs us. But when Babylonwas taken by Darius, and when he, with hiskinsman Cyrus, had put an end to the do­minion of the Babylonians, he was sixty-twoyears old. He was the son of Astyages; and


mother Nitocris appears to have been the real regentafterwards; Baltasar being a weak and effeminate prince,as I have already noted, and as his history shews. N. B.It is plain that though Xenophon knew the history ofCyrus, yet did he not know his chronology, or how longhe was in his war. He thought those wars, before the
taking of Babylon, to have been over in a very few years;contrary to the strongest evidence elsewhere; though incontradiction to this, he knew Cyrus to be younger thanCyaxares, and a very old man before he died; whichagrees with the other testimonies of antiquity."* Daniel v. 28.







OCR Output








428 [book XII. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


tion of it? Demetrius replied, that no onedurst be so bold as to touch upon the descrip­tion of these laws, because they were divineand venerable; and because some that hadattempted it were afflicted by God. He alsotold him, that Theopompus was desirous ofwriting somewhat about them; but was there­upon disturbed in his mind, for above thirtydays' time. And upon some intermission ofhis distemper, he appeased God by prayer: assuspecting that his madness proceeded fromthat cause. Nay, indeed, he farther saw ina dream, that his distemper befell him, whilehe indulged too great a curiosity about di­vine matters; and was desirous of publishingthem among common men. But when heleft off that attempt, he recovered his under­standing again. Moreover he informed himof Theodectes, the tragic poet; concerningwhom it was reported, that when in a certaindramatic representation, he was desirous tomake mention of things that were containedin these sacred books, he was afflicted witha darkness in his eyes. And that upon hisbeing conscious of the occasion of his dis­temper, and appeasing God by prayer, hewas free from that affliction.
When the king had received these booksfrom Demetrius, as we have said already, headored them: and gave order that great careshould be taken of them, that they might re­main uncorrupted. He also desired that theinterpreters would come often to him out ofJudea, and that both on account of the re­spect that he would pay them, and oh ac­count of the presents he would make them.For he said, it was now but just to sendthem away: although if, of their own ac­cord, they would come to him hereafter,they should obtain all that their own wisdommight justly require, and what his generositywas able to give them. So he then dismissedthem: and gave to every one of them threegarments of the best sort, two talents of gold,a cup of the value of one talent, and the fur­niture of the room wherein they were feasted.And these were the things he presented to
* The use of oil was much greater, and the donativesof it, much more valuable in Judea, and the neighbouringcountries than it is amongst us. It was also, in the daysof Josephus, thought unlawful for Jews to make use ofany oil that was prepared by heathens: perhaps on ac­count of some superstitions intermixed with its prepara-


them. But by them he sent to Eleazar, thehigh-priest, ten beds, with feet of silver, andthe furniture to them belonging; and a cupof the value of thirty talents. And besidesthese, ten garments, and purple, and a verybeautiful crown, and a hundred pieces of thefinest wove linen: as also vials, and dishes,and vessels for pouring, and two golden cis­terns to be dedicated to God. He also de­sired him, by an epistle, that he would givethese interpreters leave, if any of them weredesirous of coming to him; because he highlyvalued a conversation with men of such learn­ing, and would be very willing to lay out hiswealth upon such men. And this was whatcame to the Jews, and was much to their gloryand honour, from Ptolemy Philadelphus.
CHAP. m.
OF THE HONOURS AND PRIVILEGES BESTOWED UPON THENATION OF THE JEWS, BY THE KINGS OF ASIA.
THE Jews also obtained honours fromthe kings of Asia, when they becametheir auxiliaries. For Seleucus Nicatormade them citizens in those cities which hebuilt in Asia, and in the lower Syria, and inthe metropolis, Antioch, and gave them pri­vileges equal to those of the Macedoniansand Greeks, who were the inhabitants; inso­much that these privileges continue to thisvery day. An argument for which you havein this, that whereas the Jews do not makeuse *of oil prepared by foreigners, theyreceive a certain sum of money from theproper officers belonging to their exercises,as the value of that oil; which money, wheathe people of Antioch would have deprivedthem of, in the last war, Mucianus, who wasthen president of Syria, preserved it to them.And when the people of Alexandria and ofAntioch did after that, at the time that Ves­pasian and Titus his son governed the ha­bitable earth, pray that these privileges ofcitizens might be taken away, they did notobtain their request. In which behaviourany one may discern the equity and gene­rosity of the Romans;t especially of Vespa-
tion by those heathens. When therefore the heathenswere to make them a donative of oil, they paid themmoney instead of it. See Of the War, II. 19. and Hud­son's note on the place before us.
t This, and the like great and just characters of thejustice, equity, and generosity, of the old Romans, both







OCR Output








aN. 1048.] 287 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


now built, to be burnt and spoiled by theirenemies, and that city to be utterly over­thrown by the hands of their enemies; andmake their miseries proverbial, and such asshould hardly be credited for their stupen­dous magnitude; till their neighbours, whenthey should hear of them, should wonder attheir calamities, and earnestly inquire for theoccasion, why the Hebrews, who had beenbefore advanced by God to such wealth andglory, should be then so hated by him? andthat the answer that should be made by theremainder of the people should be, by con­fessing their sins, and their transgression ofthe laws of their country *
CHAP. V.
OF THE ROYAL PALACE ERECTED BV KING SOLOMON, AND HISSOLUTION OF THE RIDDLES SENT HIM BV HIRAM.
AFTER the building of the temple,which, we have before said, wasfinished in seven years, the king laid thefoundation of his palace;")" which he did notfinish under thirteen years. For he was notequally zealous in the building of this palace,as he had been about the temple. Foralthough that was a great work, and re­quired wonderful application; yet God, forwhom it was made, so far co-operated there­with, that it was finished in the aforemen­tioned number of years. But the palace,which was a building much inferior in dignityto the temple, both on account that its mate­rials had not been so long beforehand pre­pared, and on account that this was only ahabitation for kings, and not for God, it waslonger in finishing. However, this buildingwas raised so magnificently, as suited thehappy state of the country of the Hebrews,and of the king thereof. But it is necessarythat I describe the entire structure and dis­position of the parts; that so those who pe-


ruse this book may thereby make a conjec­ture, and as it were, have a prospect of itsmagnitude.
This house was a large and curious edifice,which Solomon built for hearing causes, andtaking cognizance of suits. It was sufficientlycapacious to contain a great body of men;who would come together to have theircauses determined. It was a hundred cubitslong, fifty broad, and thirty high; supportedby quadrangular pillars, which were all ofcedar; but its roof was according to the JCo-rinthian order, with folding doors, and theiradjoining pillars of equal magnitude, eachfluted with three cavities; which buildingwas at once firm and very ornamental. Therewas also another house so ordered, that itsentire breadth was placed in the middle. Itwas quadrangular, and its breadth was thirtycubits; having a temple over against it, raisedupon many pillars; in which temple therewas a large and magnificent room, whereinthe king sat in judgment. To this was joinedanother house that was built for his queen.There were other smaller edifices for diet,and for sleep, after public matters were over;and these were all floored with boards ofcedar. Some of these Solomon built withstones of ten cubits; and lined the walls withother stones that were of great value; suchas are dug out the earth for the ornaments oftemples, and to make fine prospects in royalpalaces; and which make the mines whencethey are dug famous. Now the contextureof the curious workmanship of these stoneswas in three rows; but the fourth row wasadorned with sculptures which representedtrees, and all sorts of plants, with the shadesthat arose from their branches, and leavesthat hung down from them. These trees andplants covered the stone that was beneaththem, and their leaves were wrought so pro­digiously thin and subtile that you would


* 1 Kings ht. 1—9.
t 1 Kings vii. 1—12.
J This mention of the Corinthian ornaments of archi­tecture in Solomon's palace by Josephus, seems to behere set down by way of prolepsis. For although it ap­pears to me, that the Grecian and Roman most ancientorders of architecture were taken from Solomon's temple,as from their original patterns; yet it is not so clear thatthe last and most ornamental order, the Corinthian, wasso ancient. Although what the same Josephus says, Ofthe War, V. 5. that one of the gates of Herod's templewas built according to the rules of this Corinthian order,
is no way improbable; that order being, without dispute,much older than the reign of Herod. However, uponsome trial, 1 confess I have not hitherto been able fullyto understand the structure of this palace of Solomon's,either as described in our Bibles, or even with the addi­tional help of this description here by Josephus. So Iadd no more notes about it. Only the reader may easilyobserve with me, that the measures of this first buildingin Josephus, 100 cubits long, and 50 cubits broad, arethe very same with the area of the court of the taber­nacle of Moses; and just half an Egyptian aroura oracre.







OCR Output








An. 1106.] 203 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


replied, "O king, be not cast down, norafraid; for I will depress the insolence ofthis adversary;* and will go down and fightwith him, and will bring him under me, as talland as great as he is; till he shall be suffi­ciently laughed at, and thy army shall getgreat glory, when he shall be slain by onethat is not yet of man's estate, neither fit forfighting, nor capable of being intrusted withthe marshalling an army, or ordering a battle;but by one that looks like a child, and isreally no older in age than a child."
Now Saul wondered at the boldness andalacrity of David; but durst not presume onhis ability, by reason of his age; but said, hemust on that account be too weak to fightwith one that was skilful in the art of war."I undertake this enterprise," said David,"in dependance of God's being with me; forI have experienced already of his assistance.For I once pursued after and caught a lionthat assaulted my flocks, and took away alamb from me; and I snatched the lamb outof the wild beast's mouth; and when heleaped upon me with violence, I took him bythe tail, and dashed him against the ground.In the same manner did I avenge myself of abear also. And let this adversary of ours beesteemed like one of these wild beasts, sincehe has a long while reproached our army,and blasphemed our God, who yet will re­duce him under my power."
Saul prayed that the end might be, byGod's assistance, not disagreeable to thealacrity and boldness of the child, and said,"Go thy way to the fight." So he put abouthim his breast-plate, and girded on his sword,and fitted the helmet to his head, and wentaway. But David was burdened with hisarmour; for he had not been exercised to it,nor had he learned to walk with it. So hesaid, "Let this armour be thine, O king, who


* 1 Sam. xvii. 32.
t It is highly probable that this was a general practicewith idolaters, who, supposing themselves secure of thefavour and protection of their deities, concluded that theirenemies must necessarily be the objects of their displea-•nre and vengeance. Hence, anticipating the certaintyof divine wrath upon them, they cursed and devoted themto destruction. So did the Philistines act towards David.And so the Romans used to do, saying,—Dii deaeque teperdant. B.
{ This mode of speaking and challenging was verycommon with the Orientals. Homer gives the same
voL. I.—NOS. 17 & 18.


art able to bear it; but give me leave to fightas thy servant, and as I myself desire." Ac­cordingly he laid by the armour, and takinghis staff with him, and putting five stones outof the brook into a shepherd's bag, andhaving a sling in his right hand, he wenttowards Goliath. But the adversary seeinghim come in such a manner, disdained him;and jested upon him, as if he had not suchweapons with him as are usual when oneman fights against another; but such as areused in driving away and avoiding of dogs;and said, "Dost thou take me not for a manbut a dog?" to which he replied, "No, notfor a doe; but for a creature worse than adog." This provoked Goliath to anger, whothereupon cursed him by the name of God;tand threatened to give his flesh to the beastsof the earth, and to the fowls of the air, to betorn to pieces by them. To whom Davidanswered, " Thou comest to me with a sword,and with a spear, and with a breast-plate;but I have God for my armour in comingagainst thee, who will destroy thee, and allthy army by my hands; for I will this daycut off thy head, and cast the other parts ofthy body to the dogs;J and all men shalllearn, that. God is the protector of the He­brews; and that our armour and our strengthis in his providence; and that without God'sassistance, all other warlike preparations andpower are useless." So the Philistine beingretarded by the weight of his armour, whenhe attempted to meet David in haste, cameon but slowly, as despising him, and dependedupon it, that he should slay him, who wasboth unarmed, and a child also, without anytrouble at all.
But the youth met his antagonist, beingaccompanied with an invisible assistant, whowas no other than God himself. And takingone of the stones|| that he had out of the
haughty air to his heroes, and it was doubtless a copy ofthe manners and hyperbolical speeches of the times.Thus he makes one say to another:
Bold as thou art, too prodigal of breath,Approach, and enter the dark gates of death.
II. vi. 177. B.
I I The dexterity with which the sling may be used asan offensive weapon is surprising. It evidently appearsin the conflict between David and Goliath, and may beconfirmed by the following citation. "The arms whichthe Achaans chiefly used were slings. They were trained
Tt







OCR Output








an. 1532.] 71 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


the assistance of the God of his fathers hehad escaped from the Egyptians.
When they were near the borders, Aaron,his brother, by the command of God, methim: to whom he declared what had befallenhim at the mountain, and the commands thatGod had given him: but as they were goingforward, the chief men among the Hebrewshaving learned that they were coming, metthem; to whom Moses declared the signs hehad seen, and when they could not believethem, he made them see them; so they tookcourage at these surprising and unexpectedsights, and conceived hopes of their entiredeliverance, as believing now that God tookcare of their preservation.
Since then Moses found that the Hebrewswould be obedient to whatever he shoulddirect, as they promised, and that they werein love with liberty; he came to the king,who had indeed but lately* received thegovernment, and told him how much he haddone for the good of the Egyptians, whenthey were despised by the Ethiopians, andtheir country laid waste by them, and how hehad been the commander of their forces, andhad laboured for them, as if they had beenhis own people; and he informed him in whatdanger he had been during that expedition,without having any proper returns made him,as he had deserved. He also stated, dis­tinctly, what things happened to him at MountSinai, and what God said to him, and thesigns that were done by God in order to as­sure him of the authority of those commandswhich he had given him; he also exhortedhim not to disbelieve what he told him, nor tooppose the will of God.
But when the king derided Moses, he madehim see the signs that were done at MountSinai; yet was the king very angry, andcalled him a wicked man, who had formerlyrun away from his Egyptian slavery, and nowcome back with deceitful tricks, and won­ders, and magical arts, to astonish him. Andwhen he had said this, he commanded thepriests to let him see the same wonderfulsights; as knowing that the Egyptians wereskilful in this kind of learning, and that he


was not the only person who knew them, andpretended them to be divine: he also toldhim, that when he brought such wonderfulsights before him, he would only be believedby the unlearned. Now when the prieststhrew down their rods, they became serpents;but Moses was not daunted at it, and said,"O king, I do not myself despise the wisdomof the Egyptians; but I say, that what I do is somuch superior to what these perform by magicarts and tricks, as divine power exceeds thepower of man; but I will demonstrate thatwhat I do is not done by craft, or so counter­feiting what is not really true, but that theyappear by the providence and power of God."When he had said this, he cast his rod downupon the ground, and commanded it to turnitself into a serpent. It obeyed him, and wentall round and devoured the rods of the Egyp­tians,f which seemed to be dragons, until ithad consumed them all. It then returned toits own form, and Moses took it into his handagain.
However, the king was no more movedwhen this was done than before; but beingvery angry, he said, that he should gain no­thing by this cunning and shrewdness againstthe Egyptians; at the same time commandingthe chief task-master over the Hebrews togive them no relaxation from their labours,but to compel them to submit to greateroppressions than before; and though he al­lowed them chaff before for making theirbricks, he would allow it no longer, but hemade them to work hard at brick-making inthe day time, and to gather chaff in the night.Now when their labour was thus doubled,they laid the blame upon Moses, becausetheir labour and their misery were on hisaccount become more severe. But Mosesdid not let his courage sink for the king'sthreatenings; nor did he abate of his zeal onaccount of the Hebrews' complaints, but hesupported himself, and set his soul resolutelyagainst them both, and used his utmost dili­gence to procure liberty to his countrymen:so he went to the king and persuaded him tolet the Hebrews go to Mount Sinai, and thereto sacrifice to God, because God had en-taken in this entire Egyptian chronology, and sp in theking of Egypt, with whom Moses had to do.


* Josephus seems here mistaken in his Egyptian chro­nology, when he says that this Pharaoh, who was thenking, had but lately began his reign; nor is it any wonder,since I have already observed, how greatly he was mis-
VOL. I.—No. 6.
t Exod. vii. 12.







OCR Output








170 [book v. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


bringing some of them, and by his exampleencouraging the soldiers to do the same.And when the rock was encompassed roundabout with these faggots, they set them on fire,and threw in whatsoever by nature caughtfire the most easily. So a mighty flame wasraised, and nobody could fly away from therock, but every man perished, with theirwives and children; in all about fifteen hun­dred men; and the rest were a great numberalso. And such was the calamity which fellupon the Shechemites; and men's grief ontheir account had been greater than it was,had they not brought so much mischief on aperson who had so well deserved of them;and had they not themselves esteemed this asa punishment for the same.
Now Abimelech, when he had affrightedthe Israelites with the miseries he had broughtupon the Shechemites, seemed openly toaffect greater authority than he now had, andappeared to set no bounds to his violence,unless it were with the destruction of all.Accordingly he marched to Thebez, and tookthe city suddenly, and there being a greattower therein, whereunto the whole multi­tude fled, he made preparation to besiege it.Now as he was rushing with violence nearthe gates, a woman threw a piece of a mill­stone upon his head.* Upon which Abime­lech fell down, and desired his armour-bearerto kill him; lest his death should be thoughtto be the work of a woman. So he under-went this death,f as a punishment for thewickedness he had perpetrated against hisbrethren; and his insolent barbarity to theShechemites. Now the calamity that hap­pened to those Shechemites was according tothe prediction of Jotham. However, the army


that was with Abimelech, upon his fall, wasscattered abroad, and went to their ownhomes.
Now it was thatJ Jair, the Gileadite, of thetribe of Manasseh, took the government. Hewas a man happy in other respects also; butparticularly in his children; who were of agood character. They were thirty in num­ber; and very skilful in riding on horses, andwere intrusted with the government of thecities of Gilead. He kept the governmenttwenty-two|| years, and died an old man; andhe was buried at Camot, a city of Gilead.
And now all the affairs of the Hebrewswere managed uncertainly, and tended todisorder, and to the contempt of God, and ofthe laws. So the Ammonites and Philistineshad them in contempt, and laid waste thecountry with a great army; and when theyhad taken all Perea, they were so insolent asto attempt to gain possession of all the rest.But the Hebrews being now reformed by thecalamities they had undergone, made suppli­cations to God, and brought sacrifices to him;beseeching him not to be too severe; but tobe moved by their prayers to leave off hisanger against them. So God became moremerciful, and was ready to assist them.
When the Ammonites had made an expe­dition into the land of Gilead, the inhabitantsof the country met them at a certain moun­tain; but wanted a commander. Now therewas one whose name was Jephtha, who bothon account of his father's virtue, and on ac­count of that army which he maintained athis own expense, was a potent man. TheIsraelites therefore sent to him, and intreatedhim to come to their assistance; promisinghim the dominion over them all his life-time.


N
* Thus Plutarch relates, that Pyrrhus, at the siege ofArgos, was killed by a woman throwing a tile upon hishead; but there is something more remarkable in Abime-lech's death by a stone, because, as he slew all his bre­thren upon one stone, for him to die by no other instru­ment, carried some stamp of his sin upon it. The mannerof his death, however, puts me in mind of what the sameauthor records of the Spartan general Lysander, who fellingloriously under the wall of Haliartus. "Thus he died,"says he, " but not like Cleombrotus, who was slain while hewas gloriously making head against an impetuous enemy atLeuctra, not like Cyrus, or Epaminondas, who received amortal wound, while 'he was rallying his men, and secu­ring to them the victory. These great men died in theircallings. They died the death of kings and commanders;whereas he, like some common soldier, or one of the for­lorn hope, cast away his life ingloriously; giving this testi-
mony to the ancient Spartans, that they did well toavoid storming of walls; in which the stoutest man maychance to fall by the hand, not only of an abject fellow,but by that of a boy, or a woman, as they say Achilles wasslain, in the'gates of Troy, by the hands of the effeminateParis." Patrick's Commentary, and Plutarch's Comp. ofLysander and Sylla. B.
t An. 1264.
J Our present copies of Josephus all omit Tola amongthe Judges, though the other copies have him next afterAbimelech, and allot 23 years to his administration, Judg.x. 1,2. yet do all Josephus's commentators conclude, thatin Josephus's sum of the years of the Judges, bis 23 yearsare included. Whence we are to confess that somewhathas been here lost out of his copies.
II From an. 1241 to 1219 6. C







OCR Output








LKTTGS C.6


 


niooiimoiotooiDiiaraioiOfFDirarafaiiHioinii


i i-.-i i


J" aicjiui ■ii_jii_i«i_h«i giQigiQi aioinioiiiaicjiniii _


 


3 iras&np&iE.







OCR Output








316 [book tiu. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


but as for his second desires, he could notsubmit to them.
When Benhadad heard this, he had indig­nation, and sent ambassadors a third time;threatening that his army should raise abank higher than those walls, in confidenceof whose strength Ahab despised him, andthat by only each man of his army taking ahandful of earth. Hereby making a shew ofthe great number of his forces, and aimingto affright him. Ahab, however, answered,that he ought not to vaunt himself when hehad only put on his armour, but when heshould have conquered his enemies in thebattle.* So the ambassadors came back,and found Benhadad at supper with histhirty-two kings, and informed him of Ahab'sanswer; in consequence of which he imme­diately gave orders to make lines round thecity, and raise a bulwark; and to prosecutethe siege all manner of ways. Now as thiswas doing, Ahab was in great agony, and allhis people with him. But he took courage,and was freed from his fears, upon a certainprophet's coming to him, and saying, thatGod had promised to subdue so many thou­sands of his enemies under him. And whenhe had inquired by whose means the victorywas to be obtained; he said, "By the sonsof the princes; but under thy conduct, astheir leader; by reason of their unskilfulnessin war." Hereupon he called for the sonsof the princes, and found them to be twohundred and thirty-two persons; and whenhe was informed that the king of Syria hadbetaken himself to feasting and repose, heopened the gates, and sent out the princes'sons. Now when the sentinels told Ben­hadad of it, he sent some to meet them, and


commanded that if these men were comeout for fighting, they should bind them, andbring them to him; and that if they came outpeaceably, they should do the same. NowAhab had another army ready within thewalls. But the sons of the princes fell uponthe out-guard, and slew many of them, andpursued the rest of them to the camp. Andwhen the king of Israel saw that these hadthe upper hand, he sent out all the rest ofhis army; whicb falling suddenly upon theSyrians, beat them: for they did not thinkthey would have come out. On which ac­count it was that they assaulted them whenthey were naked,f and intoxicated; inso­much that they left all their armour behindthem when they fled out of the camp; andthe king himself escaped with difficulty, byfleeing away on horseback. But Ahab wenta great way in pursuit of the Syrians: andwhen he had spoiled their camp, which con­tained a great deal of wealth, and a largequantity of gold and silver, he took Ben-hadad's chariots and horses, and returnedto the city. But as the prophet told him heought to have his army ready, because theSyrian king would make another expeditionagainst him the next year, Ahab was busy inmaking provision for it accordingly.
When Benhadad had saved himself,:): andas much of the army as he could out of thebattle; he consulted with his friends how hemight make another expedition against theIsraelites. Now those friends advised him,not to fight with them on the hills; becausetheir God was potent in such places; andthence it had come to pass that they hadlately been beaten. But they said, that ifthey joined battle with them in the plain,


* 1 Kings xx. 11.
t Mr. Reland notes here very truly, that the wordnaked does not always signify entirely naked; but some­times without men's usual armour, without their usualrobes or upper garments. As when Virgil bids the hus­bandmen plough and sow naked. When Josephus says,IV. 3, that God had given the Jews the security of ar­mour, when they were naked: and when he here saysthat Ahab fell on the Syrians when they were naked andintoxicated. When, XI. 5, he says, that Nehemiahcommanded those Jews that were building the walls ofJerusalem, to take care to have their armour on uponoccasion, that the enemy might not fall upon them naked.I may add, that the case seems to be the same in theScripture, when it says, that Saul lay down naked amongthe prophets, 1 Sam. xix. 24. When it says, that Isaiah
walked naked and barefoot, Isaiah xx. 2, 3. and when itsays, that Peter, before he girt his fisher's coat abouthim, was naked, John xxi. 7. Nor were the naked sol­diers others than those levis armaturx, who were freefrom the heavy armour of the rest. And the like maybe supposed in several other places. What is said toDavid also gives light to this; who was reproached byMichnl for dancing before the ark, and uncovering himselfin the eyes of the handmaids, as one of the vain fellowsshamefully uncovereth himself, 2 Sam. vi. 14, 20. yet isit there expressly said, verse 14, that David was girdedwith a linen ephod: i. e. he had laid aside his robe ofstate, and put on only the sacerdotal, Levitical, or sacredgarments, proper for such a solemnity. See also Antiq.V. 3, VI. 2, and XVII. 10.J About an. 898.







OCR Output








132 [book IV. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


Nor do the laws neglect smaller matters: butprovide that even those be managed after anUnblameahle manner.
Let not those that reap, and gather in thecorn that is reaped, gather in the gleaningsalso; but let them rather leave some handfulsfor those that are in want of the necessariesof life; that it may be a support, and a supplyto them, in order to their subsistence. In likemariner when they gather their grapes, letthem leave some smaller bunches for thepoor; and let them pass over some of the fruitsof the olive trees,* when they gather them;and leave them to be partaken by those thathave none of their own. For the advantagesarising from the exact collection of all willnot be so considerable to the owners, as willarise from the gratitude of the poor. AndGod will provide that thejand shall more wil­lingly produce what shall be for the nourish­ment of its fruits, in case you do not merelytake care of your own advantage, but haveregard to the support of others also. Nor areyou to muzzle the mouths of the oxen, whenthey tread the ears of corn, in the threshingfloor:f for it is not just to restrain our fellowlabouring animals, and those that work inorder to its production, of this fruit of theirlabours. Nor are you to prohibit those thatpass by at the time when your fruits are ripe,to touch them; but to give them leave to fillthemselves full of what you have; and thiswhether they be of your own country, orstrangers; as being glad of the opportunityof giving them some part of your fruits whenthey are ripe. But let it not be esteemedlawful for them to carry any a way 4 Nor letthose that gather the grapes, and carry themto the wine-presses, restrain those whom theymeet from eating of them. For it is unjustout of envy to hinder those that desire it, topartake of the good things that come into theworld according to God's will; and this whilethe season is at the height, and is hasteningaway, as it pleases God. Nay, if some out ofbashfulness are unwilling to touch these fruits,


let them be encouraged to take of them; Imean those that are Israelites, as if they werethemselves the owners and lords, on accountof the kindred there is between them. Nay,let them desire men that come from othercountries, to partake of these tokens of friend­ship, which God has given in their properseason. For that is not to be deemed as idlyspent, which any one out of kindness commu­nicates to another. Since God bestows plentyof good things on men, not only for themselvesto reap the advantage, but also to give toothers in a way of generosity; and he is de­sirous, by this means, to make known to othershis peculiar kindness to the people of Israel,and how freely he communicates happinessto them, while they abundantly communicateout of their great superfluities to even theseforeigners also. But for him that acts con­trary to this law, let him be beaten|| withforty stripes save one, by the public execu­tioner; let him undergo this punishment,which is a most ignominious one for a freeman; and this because he was such a slaveto gain, as to lay a plot upon his own dignityFor it is proper for you who have had the ex­perience of the afflictions of Egypt, and ofthose in the wilderness, to make provision forthose that are in the like circumstance: andwhile you have now obtained plenty your­selves, through the mercy and providence ofGod, to distribute of the same plenty to suchas stand in need of it.
Besides those two tithes, which I havealready said you are to pay every year, oneto the Levites, the other for the festivals; youare to bring every third year a third tithe, tobe distributed to those that want them;§ towomen also that are widows, and to childrenthat are orphans:** but as to the fruits, letthem carry that which is ripe first of all untothe temple: and when they have blessed Godfor that land which bare them, and which hehad given them for a possession: when theyhave also offered those sacrifices which thelaw has commanded them to bring, let them


* Deut. xxiv. 20.t Deut. xxv. 4.
I Deut. xxiii. 24.
II This penalty of forty stripes save one, was five timesinflicted on St. Paul by the Jews. 2 Cor. xi. 34.
§ Tosephus's plain and express interpretation of thislaw of Moses, Deut. xiv. 28, 29, &c. that the Jews were
bound every third year to pay three tithes, that to theLevites; that for sacrifices at Jerusalem; and this for theindigent, the widow, :rnd the orphans, is fully confirmedby the practice of good old Tobit, even when he was acaptive at Assyria, against the opinion of the Uabbin».Tobit i. 6, 7, 8*.** Deut. xxvi. 12.







OCR Output








an. 1052.] 277 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


and congratulated him on the present happystate of affairs. Upon which Solomon senthim an epistle, the contents of which were asfollows:
SOLOMON TO KING HIRAM.
"Know* thou that my father would havebuilt a temple to God; but was hindered bywars and continual expeditions; for he didnot leave off to overthrow his enemies, till hemade them all subject to tribute. But I givethanks to God for the peace I at presentenjoy; and on that account I am at leisure,and design to build a house to God; ForGod foretold to my father that such a build­ing should be erected by me. Wherefore Idesire thee to send some of thy subjects withmine to mount Lebanon, to cut down timber;for the Sidonians are more skilful than ourpeople in cutting of wood. As for wages tothe hewers of wood, I will pay whatever pricethou shalt determine."
When Hiram had read this epistle, he was


pleased with it; and wrote back this answerto Solomon:—
KING HIRAM TO KING SOLOMON.
"It is fit to bless God, that he hath com­mitted thy father's government to thee, whoart a wise man, and endowed with all virtues.As for myself, I rejoice at the condition thouart in; and will be subservient to thee in allthat thou sendest to me about. For when mysubjects have cut down many and large treesof cedar, and cypress wood, I will send themto sea, and will order my subjects to makefloats of them, and to sail to what placesoever of thy country thou shalt desire, andleave them there. After which thy subjectsmay carry them to Jerusalem. But do thoutake care to procure us corn for this timber;which we stand in need of, because we in­habit an island."f
The copies of these epistles remain at thisday, and are preserved not only in our booksbut among the Tyrians also; insomuch that


* These epistles of Solomon and Hiram are those in1 Kings v. 3—9. and as enlarged in 2 Chron. ii. 2—16.but here given us by Josephus in his own words. Theyare also extant in Eusebius's Praeparat. Evangel. IX. 33.but greatly disguised by Eupolemus, from whom Eusebiushad those copies. Which Eupolemus, for a heathen,knew a considerable deal of Jewish affairs; though in avery imperfect manner. Nor are his other accounts ofJewish history to be compared with the more accurateones in Josephus.
t What Josephus here puts into his copy of Hiram'sepistle to Solomon, and repeats afterwards, chap. v. thatTyre was now an island, is not in any of the three othercopies, that in the Kings, that in the Chronicles, or thatin Eusebius, out of Eupolemus. Nor is it any other, Isuppose, than his own conjectural paraphrase. For whenI, many years ago, inquired into this matter, I found theitate of this famous city, and of the island whereupon itstood, to have been different at very different times; in­somuch that the accurate Mr. Reland, who much labouredat it, was not able to clear the difficulties thereto relating.See his Palestina, tom. ii. page 1046—1056. The resultof my inquiries into this matter is in my Essay on the OldTest. Append, page 226, 227, and, with the addition ofsome later improvements, stands thus:—that the besttetimonies hereto relating imply, that Palaetyras, or oldestTyre, was no other than that most ancient smaller fort orcity Tyre, situate on the continent, and mentioned Josh.xix. 29. out of which the Canaanite or Phoenician inha­bitants were driven into a large island, that lay not far offin the sea, by Joshua; that this island was then joined tothe continent at the present remains of Palastyrus, by aneck of land, over against Solomon's cisterns, still socalled; and the city's fresh water probably was carriedalong in pipes by that neck of land, and that this islandwas therefore, in strictness, no other than a peninsula;
having villages in its fields, Ezek. xxvi. 6. and a wall aboutit, Amos i. 10. and the city was not of so great reputationas Sidon for some ages; that it was attacked both by seaand land by Salmanassar, as Josephus informs us out ofMenander, IX. 14. and came to be the metropolis of Phoe­nicia, and was afterwards taken and destroyed by Nebu­chadnezzar, according to the numerous Scripture Prophe­cies thereto relating, Isa. xxiii. Jer. xxv. 22.—xxvii. 3.—xlvii. 4. Ezek. xxvi. xxvii. xxviii. and that there wereremains of that destruction in heathen authors also, extantin the days of Josephus, though now lost, X. 11. thatseventy years after that destruction by Nebuchadnezzar,this city was in some measure revived and rebuilt,Isa. xxiii. 17, 18. but that, as the prophet Ezekiel hadforetold, Isa. xxvi. 3, 4, 5, 14. xxvii. 34. the sea arosehigher than before, till at last it overflowed, not only theneck of land, but the main island or peninsula itself, anddestroyed that old and famous city for ever; that how­ever there still remained an adjoining smaller island, onceconnected to old Tyre itself by Hiram, which was after­ward inhabited; to which Alexander the Great, with in­credible pains, raised a new bank or causeway, and thatit plainly appears from Mr. Maundrell, a most authenticeye witness, that the old large and famous city, on theoriginal large island, is laid now so generally under water,that scarcely more than forty acres of it, or rather of thatadjoining small island, remain at this day, so that perhapsnot above the hundredth part of the first island and city isnow above water. See Reland, page 1049, 1052. MarshChron. page 539, and Maundrell's Travels, page 50.This was foretold in the prophecies of Ezekiel; andaccording to them, as Mr. Maundrell distinctly observes,these poor remains of Old Tyre are now become like thetop of a rock, a place for the spreading of nets in the midstof the sea. Nor does Ovid pretend that the proper islandon which Old Tyre stood is now visible.


3E2







OCR Output








458 [book xm. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


other should treat with him first, and gainassistance from him. And this he did out ofthe fear he had, lest Jonathan should remem­ber how ill Demetrius had formerly treatedhim; and should join with him in this waragainst him. He therefore gave orders thatJonathan should be allowed to raise an army,and should get armour made, and should re­ceive back those hostages of the Jewish na­tion whom Bacchides had shut up in thecitadel of Jerusalem. When this good for­tune had befallen Jonathan, by the concessionof Demetrius, he came to Jerusalem, andread the king's letter, in the audience of thepeople, and of those that kept the citadel:those wicked men and deserters who werein the citadel, were therefore greatly afraid,upon the king's permission to Jonathan toraise an army, and to receive back the hos­tages. So he delivered every one of themto their own parents. And thus did Jonathanmake his abode at Jerusalem: renewing thecity to a better state, and reforming thebuildings as he pleased. For he gave ordersthat the walls of the city should be rebuiltwith square stones; that it might be moresecure from their enemies. And when thosethat kept the garrisons that were in Judeasaw this, they all left them, and fled to An-tioch; excepting those that were in the cityBethsura, and those that were in the citadelof Jerusalem. For the greater part of theseconsisted of the wicked Jews and deserters;and on that account these did not deliver uptheir garrisons.
When Alexander knew what promises De­metrius had made Jonathan, and withal knewhis courage, and what great things he had
* 1 Mace. x. 15.
t Since Jonathan did not put on the pontifical robestill seven or eight years after the death of his brotherJudas, or not till the feast of tabernacles in the 160th ofthe SeleucidsB, 1 Mace. x. 21. Petitus's emendationseems here to deserve consideration: who instead of"After four years, since the death of his brother Judas:"would have us read: "And therefore after eight years,since the death of his brother Judas." This would tole­rably well agree with the date in the Maccabees, and withJosephus's own exact chronology, at the end of the XXthbook of these Antiquities: which the present text cannotbe made to do.
J From the time of the return from the Babylonishcaptivity, the office of high-priest had been in the familyof Josodek, and, in a lineal descent, was transmitteddown to Onias, the third of that name. He was sup-


done when he fought the Macedonians; andbesides what hardships he had undergone bythe means of Demetrius, and of Bacchides,the general of Demetrius's army; he told hisfriends, that he could not at present find anyone that might afford him better assistancethan Jonathan; who was both courageousagainst his enemies, and had a particular ha­tred against Demetrius, as having both suf­fered many hard things from him, and actedmany hard things against him. If thereforethey were of opinion that they should makehim their friend against Demetrius, it wasmore for their advantage to invite him to as­sist them now, than at another time.* Itbeing therefore determined by him and hisfriends to send to Jonathan, he wrote to himthis epistle:—
"King Alexander, to his brother Jonathan,sendeth greeting. We have long ago heardof thy courage and fidelity: and for that rea­son have sent to thee to make with thee aleague of friendship, and of mutual assist­ance. I therefore do ordain thee this daythe high-priest of the Jews; and appoint thatthou shall be called my friend. I have alsosent thee, as presents, a purple robe, and agolden crown: and desire that now thou artby me honoured, thou wilt in like mannerrespect me also."
When Jonathan had received this letter,he fput on the pontifical robe, at the feast oftabernacles; four years after the death of hisbrother Judas. For at that time no high-priest had been made.J So he raised greatforces, and had abundance of armour gotready. This greatly grieved Demetrius,when he heard of it; and made him blame


planted by Jason his brother, as Jason was by his brotherMenelaus, and after the death of Menelaus, Alcimus, whowas of a different family, was put into the office by thecommand of the king of Syria. Whether the Asmoneanswere of the race of Josedek, or not, it is no where said:but it is certain that they were of the course of Joarib,(1 Mace. ii. 1,) which was the first class of the sons ofAaron; and therefore, upon the failure of the formerpontifical family, they had the best right to succeed.With this right it was, that Jonathan took the office; andin his family it became settled, and continued for severaldescents, until the time of Herod, who, from an office ofinheritance, changed it into that of arbitrary will and plea­sure. Whoever had the power after him, put the high-priests in or out, as they thought fit, till at length theoffice was extinguished by the destruction of the templeby the Romans. Prideaux's Connection, an. 253. B.


i







OCR Output








an. 709.] 359 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


give him some sign, that he might believewhat he had said, and be sensible that hecame from God. For things that are beyondexpectation, and greater than our hopes, aremade credible by actions of the like nature.And when Isaiah had asked him, what signhe wished to be exhibited? He desired thathe would make the shadow of the sun whichhad already gone down ten steps in hishouse,* to return again to the same place,and to make it as it was before. And whenthe prophet prayed to God to exhibit thissign to the king, he saw what he desired tosee, and was freed from his distemper, andwent up to the temple, where he worshippedGod, and made vows to him.
At this time the dominion of the Assyrianswasf overthrown by the Medes. But theking of Babylon, whose name was Baladan,sent ambassadors to Hezekiah with presents;and desired he would be his ally, and his


friend.J So he received the ambassadorsgladly, and made them a feast, and shewedthem his treasures, and his armoury, and theother wealth he was possessed of in preciousstones, and in gold, and gave them presentsto be carried to Baladan, and sent themback to him. || Upon which the prophetIsaiah came to him, and inquired whencethose ambassadors came? to which he re­plied, that they came from Babylon, from theking; and that he had shewn them all hehad; that by the sight of his riches andforces they might thereby guess at the plentyhe was in, and be able to inform the king ofit. But the prophet rejoined, and said,"Know thou, that, after a little while, theseriches of thine shall be carried away toBabylon: and thy posterity shall be madeeunuchs there, and be servants to the kingof Babylon: for God hath foretold suchthings shall come to pass." Upon these


* As to this regress of the shadow, either upon a sun­dial, or the steps of the royal palace built by Ahaz, whe­ther it were physically done, by the miraculous revolu­tion of the earth, in its diurnal motion, backward, fromcast to west, for a while; and its return again to itsold natural revolution from west to east; or whether itwere apparent only, and performed by an aerial phos­phorus: (of which sort, though under other shapes, wehave had a great many of late years,) which imitated thesun's motion backward, while a cloud hid the real sun,cannot now be determined. Philosophers and astrono­mers will naturally incline to the latter hypothesis. How-ever, it must be noted, that Josephus seems to have un­derstood it otherwise than we generally do: that theshadow was accelerated as much at first forward, as itwas made to go backward afterward, and so the day wasneither longer nor shorter than usual; which, it must beconfessed, agrees best of all to astronomy, whose eclipseselder than that time were observed at the same times ofthe day as if this miracle had never happened. After all,this wonderful signal was not, it seems, peculiar to Judea;but either seen, or at least heard of at Babylon also; asappears by 2 Chron. xxxii. 31, where we learn, that theBabylonian ambassadors were sent to Hezekiah, amongother things to inquire of the wonder that was done in theland. It is also taken notice of by the father of Sirach,Ecclus. xlviii. 23. See another ancient testimony alsobefore, in the note under Joshua, Antiq. V. 1.
t This expression of Josephus's, that the Medcs, uponthis destruction of the Assyrian army, overthrew the As­syrian empire, seems to be too strong. For although theyimmediately cast off the Assyrian yoke, and set up De-joces, a king of their own; yet was it some time beforethe Medes and Babylonians overthrew Nineveh; andsome generations ere the Medes and Persians, under Cy-axares and Cyras, overthrew the Assyrian or Babylonianempire, and took Babylon.
t The conquests which the Assyrians were everywhere making, could not fail of giving umbrage to the
neighbouring powers to confederate against them; andtherefore, we may well suppose, that, besides the businessof congratulating Hezekiah's recovery, the purpose of thisembassy was to enter into an alliance with him againstSennacherib, whose growing power the Babylonians hadreason to fear, as well as the Jews ; and, (as the author ofthe Chronicles expresses it,) to inquire into the wonderthat was done in the land, 2 Chron. xxxii. 31. i. e. to in­quire into the miracle of the sun's retrogradation, whichcould not fail of being a matter of great curiosity to theChaldeans, who, above all other nations, were at that timegiven to the study of Astronomy. Calmet's Commentary.and Prideaux's Connection, Anno 713. B. ,
|| The things which Hezekiah shewed to the Babylo­nian ambassadors, were the riches of his house, his trea­sures, his armoury, and all his stores and strength for war;and the reason for his doing this, was, doubtless, to makethe Babylonians put the greater value upon his friend­ship: but herein he offended God, that he not only laida bait before these foreigners to encourage them to invadehis country, but seemed to place more confidence in thisnew alliance with them, than in the power of the Al­mighty, whose favour and protection he had so long ex­perienced. The author of the Chronicles tells us, that, inthe business of the ambassadors of the princes of Babylon,who sent unto him to inquire of the wonder that was donein the land, God left him to try him, that he might knowall that was in his heart, 2 Chron. xxxii. 31. And fromhence some have inferred, that Hezekiah's great offencelay, not so much in the ostentation of his military storesand treasures, as in his not giving sufficient glory to Godfor so signal a miracle, and his recovery ensuant there­upon, and in his not representing this matter to theseidolatrous ambassadors, in such powerful and convincingterms as might have drawn them over to the knowledgeof the true God, which was the proper improvement he.should have made this divine vouchsafement to him. LsClerks Commentary. B.







OCR Output








 


• i-ririiZi? piivtf


jwa s.i.s,-«• j*.7T77Cr~"







OCR Output








AN. 44.] 515 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


lus, the son of Publius, of the Veturian tribe;of Caius Sentius, the son of Caius, of theSabhatine tribe; of Titus Atilius Bulbus, theson of Titus, lieutenant and vice praetor; tothe magistrates, senate, and people, of theEphesians, sendeth greeting. Lucius Lentu-lus, the consul, freed the Jews that are inAsia from going into the armies, at my inter­cession for them. And when I had made thesame petition some time afterward to Phanius,the imperator, and to Lucius Antonius, thevice-quaestor, I obtained that privilege ofthem also: and my will is that you take carethat no one give them any disturbance."
The decree of the Delians. "The answerof the praetors, when Beotus was archon; onthe twentieth day of the month Thargeleon.While Marcus Piso, the lieutenant, lived inour city, who was also appointed over thechoice of the soldiers, he called us, andmany others of the citizens, and gave order,that if there be here any Jews, who are Ro­man citizens, no one is to give them any dis­turbance about going into the army: becauseCornelius Lentulus, the consul, freed theJews from going into the army, on account ofthe superstition they are under. You aretherefore obliged to submit to the praetor."And the like decree was also made respect­ing us by the Sardians.
"Caius Phanius, the son of Caius, impera­tor, and consul, to the magistrates of Cos,sendeth greeting. I would have you knowthat the ambassadors of the Jews have beenwith me, and desired they might have thosedecrees, which the senate had made aboutthem: which decrees are here subjoined.My will is, that you have a regard to, andtake care of, these men, according to thesenate's decrees; that they may be safelyconveyed home through your country."
The declaration of Lucius Lentulus, theconsul. "I have dismissed those Jews whoare Roman citizens, and who appear to me tohave their religious rites, and to observe thelaws of the Jews at Ephesus, on account ofthe superstition they are under. This actwas done before the thirteenth of the calendsof October."
"Lucius Antonius, the son of Marcus, vice-quaestor, and vice-praetor; To the magistrates,senate, and people of the Sardians, sendethgreeting. Those Jews that are our fellow-


voL. I. NOS. 43 & 44.


citizens of Rome came to me, and demon­strated, that they had an assembly of theirown, according to the laws of their fore­fathers; and this from the beginning: as alsoa place of their own, wherein they deter­mined their suits and controversies with oneanother. Upon their petition therefore tome, that these might be lawful for them, Igive order that these privileges be preserved,and they be permitted to do accordingly."
The declaration of Marcus Publius, theson of Spurius; and of Marcus, the son ofMarcus, and of Lucius, the son of Publius."We went to the pro-consul, and informedhim of what Dositheus, the son of Cleopatridaof Alexandria desired; that, if he thoughtgood, he would dismiss those Jews who wereRoman citizens, and were wont to observethe rites of the Jewish religion, on account ofthe superstition they were under. According­ly he did dismiss them. This was done beforethe thirteenth of the calends of October."
"In the month *Quintilis, when LuciusLentulus and Caius Marcellus were consuls;and there were present Titus Appius Balbus,the son of Titus, lieutenant, of the Horatiantribe; Titus Tongius, of the Crustuminetribe, Quintus Resius, the son of Quintus;Titus Pompeius, the son of Titus; CorneliusLonginus; Caius Servilius Bracchus, the sonof Caius, a military tribune, of the Tarentinetribe; Publius Clusius Gallus, the son of Pub­lius, of the Veturian tribe; Caius Teutius,the son of Caius, a military tribune, of theEmilian tribe; Sextus Antilius Serranus, theson of Sextus, of the Esquiline tribe; CaiusPompeius, the son of Caius, of the Sabbatinetribe; Titus Appius Menander, the son ofTitus; Publius Servilius Strabo, the son ofPublius; Lucius Paccius Capito, the son ofLucius, of the Colline tribe; Aulus FuriusTertius, the son of Aulus; and Appius Me-nas. In the presence of these persons Len­tulus pronounced this decree: I have beforethe tribunal dismissed those Jews that areRoman citizens, and are accustomed to ob­serve the sacred rites of the Jews at Ephe­sus; on account of the superstition they areunder."
"The magistrates of the Laodiceans, toCaius Rubilius, the son of Caius, the consul,
* July4M







OCR Output








240 [book VII. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


--


.with drink at supper, till he was thereby dis­ordered. Yet did he nevertheless sleep at theking's gates, without any inclination to go tohis wife.* Upon this the king was very angryat him, and wrote to Joab, and commandedhim to punish Uriah; for he told him that hehad offended him, and he suggested to himthe manner in which he would have him
fmnished, that it might not be discovered thatle was himself the author of this punishment.For he charged him to set him over againstthat part of the enemy's army where the at­tack would be most hazardous, and where hemight be deserted, and be in the greatestjeopardy; for he bade him order his fellow-soldiers to retire out of the fight. When hehad written thus, and sealed the letter withhis own seal, he gave it to Uriah, to carry itto Joab. When Joab had received it, andupon reading it understood the king's pur­pose, he set Uriah in that place where heknew the enemy would be most troublesometo them; and gave him for his partners someof the best soldiers in the army, and said, thathe would also come to their assistance withthe whole army; that, if possible, they mightbreak down some part of the wall, and enterthe city. And he desired him to be glad ofthe opportunity of exposing himself to suchgreat pains; and not to be displeased at it,since he was a valiant soldier, and had agreat reputation for his valour, both with theking, and with his countrymen. And whenUriah undertook the work he was set uponwith alacrity, he gave private orders to thosewho were to be his companions, that whenthey saw the enemy make a sally, they should
* It may be thought perhaps, that Uriah suspectedsomething of his wife's adultery, and therefore, resolvingthat it should be discovered, would not be persuaded togo down to his house: but if he did, he certainly actedthe part of a trusty servant, when he would not open theking's letter to know what was in it, though, upon sup­position that he suspected his criminal commerce withhis wife, he had reason to expect no good. This putsone naturally in mind of the story of Bellerophon's car­rying letters from Proetus to his father-in-law Jobates,king of Lycia, with an order to kill him, from whom itcame into a proverb, to carry Bellerophon's letter, or adeath warrant against one's self, according to that passagein Plautus:
Aha! Bellerophontem jam tuus me fecit filius,Egomet tabellas detuli ut vincirer. Bacchid.
For the fable of Uriah and Bellerophon are so very muchalike, that the fable of the latter seems to be founded


leave him. When, therefore, the Hebrewsmade an attack upon the city, the Ammoniteswere afraid that the enemy might preventthem, and get up into the city; and this atthe very place whither Uriah was ordered;so they exposed their best soldiers to be inthe fore-front, and opened their gates sud­denly, and fell upon the enemy with greatvehemence, aftd ran violently upon them.When those that were with Uriah saw this,they all retreated backward, as Joab hadpreviously directed; but Uriah, as ashamedto run away and leave his post, sustained theviolence of the onset, and slew many of theenemy; but, being encompassed round, andcaught in the midst of them, he was slain ;tand some other of his companions were slainwith him.
When this was done, Joab sent messengersto the king, and ordered them to tell him, thathe did what he could to take the city soon:but that, as they made an assault on the wall,they had been forced to retire with great loss.And bade them, if they saw the king wasangry at it, to add, that Uriah was slain also.When the king had heard this of the messen­gers, he said, "That they did wrong whenthey assaulted the wall; whereas they ought,by undermining, and other stratagems of war,to endeavour the taking of the city, especiallywhen they had before their eyes the exampleof JAbimelech, the son of Gideon, who wouldneeds take the tower in Thebez by force, andwas killed by a large stone thrown at him byan old woman; and although he was a manof great prowess, he died ignominiously by thedangerous manner of his assault: that they


upon the story of the former. Bellerophon, who, as somescholiasts think, should be read Boulepheron (a council-carrier) was a stranger at the court of Proetus, as Uriah(being a Hittite) was at the court of David. He declinedthe embraces of Sthenboea, as Uriah did the bed of Bath-sheba; and was for that reason, sent to Jobates, generalof Proetus's army, with letters, which contained a direc­tion to put him to death, as Uriah was sent to Joab,David's general. By Jobates he was sent, with a smallguard, upon an attack, in which it was intended heshould be slain, as Uriah was by Joab to that in which hefell. The main of the history is the same in both; thesimilitude of Jobates and Joab's name is very remarkable;and the variation in the whole only lies in some such or­namental embellishments, as might well be expected in apoetical composition; Calmet's Commentary, and the His­tory of the Life of King David. B.
t 2 Sam. xi. 17.
J Judges ix. 56—65.







OCR Output








430


ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


[book XII.


for that behaviour. I will set down presentlythe epistles themselves, which he wrote tohis generals concerning them: but will first
f>roduce the testimony of Polybius of Mega-opolis: for thus does he speak, in the six­teenth book of his history, "Now Scopas,the general of Ptolemy's army, went in hasteto the superior parts of the country, and inthe winter time overthrew the nation of theJews." He also saith in the same book,"When Scopas was conquered by Antiochus,Antiochus received Batanea, Samaria, Abila,and Gadara: and that, some time afterwards,there came in to him those Jews that inhabit­ed near that temple which was called Jeru­salem: concerning which although I havemore to say, and particularly concerning thepresence of God about that temple, yet do Iput off that history till another opportunity."This it is which Polybius relates. But wewill return to the series of the history: whenwe have first produced the epistles of kingAntiochus.
KING ANTIOCHUS, TO PTOLEMY, SENDETH GREET­ING,i
"Since the Jews, upon our first entranceon their country, demonstrated their friend­ship towards us; and when we came to theircity (Jerusalem) received us in a splendidmanner; and came to meet us with theirsenate; and gave abundance of provisions toour soldiers, and to the elephants; and joinedwith us in ejecting the garrison of the Egyp­tians, that were in the citadel; we havethought fit to reward them, and to retrievethe condition of their city, which hath beengreatly depopulated by such accidents ashave befallen its inhabitants, and to bringthose that have been scattered abroad backto the city. And, in the first place, we havedetermined, on account of their piety towardsGod, to bestow on them, as a pension, for^heir sacrifices of animals, that are fit for sa­crifice; for wine, and oil, and frankincense,the value of twenty thousand pieces of sil­ver: and six sacred artabae of fine flour:with one thousand four hundred and sixtymedimni of wheat; and three hundred andseventy-five medimni of salt. And these pay­ments I would have fully paid them as I havesent orders to you. I would also have thework about the temple finished, and the


cloisters; and if there be any thing else thatought to be rebuilt. And for the materials ofwood, let them be brought out of Judea, andout of the other countries, and out of Liba-nus, tax free: and the same I would have ob­served as to those other materials which willbe necessary in order to render the templemore glorious. And let all of that nation liveaccording to the laws of their own country:and let the senate, and the priests, and thescribes of the temple, and the sacred singers,be discharged from poll-money, and thecrown-tax; and other taxes also. And thatthe city may the sooner recover its inhabit­ants, I grant a discharge from taxes for threeyears to its present inhabitants; and to suchas shall come to it until the month Hyperbe-reteus. We also discharge them for the (u-ture from a third part of their taxes: that thelosses they have sustained may be repaired.And all those citizens that have been carriedaway, and are become slaves, we grant themand their children their freedom; and giveorder that their substance be restored to,them."
Antiochus also published a decree, through-all his kingdom, in honour of the temple:which contained what follows:—
"It shall be lawful for no foreigner to comewithin the limits of the temple round about:which thing is forbidden also to the Jews, un­less to those who, according to their own cus­tom, have purified themselves. Nor let anyflesh of horses, or of mules, or of asses, bebrought into the city, whether they be wildor tame: nor that of leopards or foxes, orhares: and in general, that of any animalwhich is forbidden for the Jews to eat. Nor*let their skins be brought into it: nor let any-such animal be bred up in the city. Letthem only be permitted to use the sacrificesderived from their forefathers: with whichthey have been obliged to make acceptableatonements to God. And he that transgress-eth any of these orders, let him pay to the
Kriests three thousand drachmae of silver."loreover this Antiochus bare testimony toour piety and fidelity, in an epistle of his,when he was informed of a sedition in Phry-gia and Lydia, at which time he was in thesuperior provinces; wherein he commandedZeuxis, the general of his forces, and hismost intimate friend, to send some of our ua­







OCR Output








e*


5


I


 







OCR Output








398 [book xr. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


 


dras. He was very skilful in the laws of Mo­ses, and well acquainted with king * Xerxes.He had determined to go up to Jerusalem,and to take with him some of those Jews thatwere in Babylon. And he desired that theking would give him an epistle to the go­vernors of Syria by which they might knowwho he was. Accordingly the king wrote thefollowing epistle to those governors:—
"Xerxes, king of kings, to Ezra, the priestand the reader of the divine law, greeting. 1tliiuk it agreeable to that love which 1 bearto mankind, to permit those of the Jewish na­tion that are so disposed, as well as those ofthe priests and Levites, that are in our king­dom, to go together to Jerusalem. Accord­ingly I have given command for that purpose.And let every one that hath a mind, go; ac­cording as it hath seemed good to me, andto my seven counsellors; and this in orderto their review of the affairs of Judea, to seewhether they be agreeable to the law of God.Let them also take with them those presentswhich I and my friends have vowed; with allthat silver and gold that is found in the coun­try of the Babylonians, as dedicated to God;and let all this be carried to Jerusalem forsacrifices. Let it also be lawful for thee andthy brethren to make as many vessels of sil­ver and gold as thou pleasest. Thou shaltalso dedicate those holy vessels which havebeen given thee: and as many more as thouhast a mind to make, and shalt take the ex­penses out of the king's treasury. I havemoreover written to the treasurers of Syriaand Phoenicia, that they take care of thoseaffairs that Esdras the priest and reader ofthe laws of God is sent about. And that Godmay not be angry with me, or with my chil­dren, I grant all that is necessary for sacri­fices to God, according to the law: as far asa hundred cori of wheat. And I enjoin younot to lay any treacherous imposition, or anytributes, upon their priests or Levites, sacredsingers, porters, sacred servants, or scribesof the temple. And do thou, O Esdras, ap­point judges according to the wisdom giventhee of God: and those such as understand


the law, that they may judge in all Syria andPhoenicia: and do thou instruct those alsowho are ignorant of it: that if any one ofthy countrymen transgress the law of God,or that of the king, he may be punished; asnot transgressing it out of ignorance, but asone that knows, but boldly despises andcontemns it. And such may be punished bydeath, or by paying fines. Farewell."
When Esdras had received this epistle, hewas very joyful; and began to worship God,and confessed that he had been the cause ofthe king's great favour to him; and for thesame reason he gave all the thanks to God.So he read the epistle at Babylon, to thoseJews that were there; but he kept the epistleitself, and sent a copy of it to all those of hisown nation, that were in Media. And whenthese Jews had understood what piety theking had toward God, and what kindness hehad for Esdras, they were all greatly pleased.Nay, many of them took their effects withthem, and came to Babylon; as very desirousof going down to Jerusalem. But then theentire body of the people of Israel remainedin that country. Wherefore there are buttwo tribes in Asia and Europe, subject tothe Romans; while the ten tribes are beyondEuphrates till now; and are an immense mul­titude, and not to be estimated by numbers.Now there came a great number of priests,Levites, porters, sacred singers, and sacredservants to Esdras. So he gathered those thatwere in captivity together beyond Euphrates,and stayed there three days, and ordained afast for them; that they might make theirprayers to God for their preservation; thatthey might suffer no misfortunes by the way;either from their enemies, or from any otherill accident. For Esdras had said beforehandthat he had told the king how God wouldpreserve them; and so he had not thought fitto request that he would send horsemen toconduct them. So when they had finishedtheir prayers, they removed from Euphrates;on the twelfth day of the first month, of theseventh year of the reign of Xerxes; and theycame to Jerusalem on the fifth month of the


* That the histories of Ezra or Esdras the scribe, when
he came and settled the Jewish commonwealth, after their
return from the Babylonish captivity; and of Nehemiab,
when he built the walls of Jerusalem, do not belong to Ar-
. taxerxes, the son, but to Xerxes the father, as Josephus
here rightly places them, contrary to all our other copiesof Ezra and Nehemiah, is largely proved in my LiteralAccomplishment of Scripture Prophecies, Supplement,page 59—75. As also that Daniel's famous seventyweeks take their date, not from the seventh or twen







OCR Output








an. 1466.] 157 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


to their political government. WhereuponGod was provoked to anger, and put them inmind, first how contrary to his directions theyhad spared the Canaanites; and, after that,how those Canaanites, as opportunity served,used them very barbarously. But the Israel­ites, though they were in heaviness at theseadmonitions from God, yet were they stillvery unwilling to go to war. And since theygot large tributes from the Canaanites, andwere indisposed for taking pains by theirluxury, they suffered their aristocracy to becorrupted also, and did not ordain themselvesa senate, nor any such magistrates as theirlaws had formerly required. But they werevery much given to cultivating their fields,in order to get wealth; which great indolenceof theirs brought a terrible sedition uponthem; and they proceeded so far as to fightone against another, from the following occa­sion.
There* was a Levite,f a man of a vulgarfamily, that belonged to the tribe of Ephraim,and dwelt therein. This man married a wifefrom Bethlehem, which is a place belongingto the tribe of Judah. Now he was very fondof his wife, and overcome with her beauty;but he did not meet with a return of affection,for she was averse to him; which did moreinflame his passion for her. So they quar­relled one with another perpetually; and atlast the woman was so disgusted at thesequarrels, that she left her husband, and wentto her parents, in the fourth month. Thehusband being very uneasy at her departure,went to his father and mother-in-law, madeup their quarrels, and lived with them therefour days, as being kindly treated. On thefifth day he resolved to go home, and wentaw>y in the evening; for his wife's parentswere loth to part with their daughter, anddelayed the time till the day was gone. Nowthey had one servant that followed them, andan ass on which the woman rode; and when


they were near Jerusalem, having gone al-readyJ thirty furlongs, the servant advisedthem to take up their lodgings somewhere,lest some misfortune should befal them, ifthey travelled in the night, especially sincethey were not far off enemies; that seasonoften giving reason for suspicion of dangersfrom even such as are friends. But the hus­band was not pleased with this advice, norwas he willing to take up his lodging amongstrangers; for the city belonged to the Ca­naanites; but desired rather to go twentyfurlongs farther, and so take their lodging insome Israelite city. Accordingly he came toGibeah, a city of the tribe of Benjamin, whenit was just dark; and while no one that livedin the market-place invited him to lodge withhim, there came an old man out of the field;one that was indeed of the tribe of Ephraim,but resided in Gibeah, and asked him, whohe was? for what reason he came thither solate? and why he was looking out for pro­visions for supper when it was dark? to whichhe replied that he was a Levite, and wasbringing his wife from her parents, and wasgoing home; but he told him his habitationwas in the tribe of Ephraim. So the old man,as well because of their kindred, as becausethey lived in the same tribe; and also becausethey had thus accidentally met together, tookhim to lodge with him. Now certain youngmen, of the inhabitants of Gibeah, havingseen the woman in the market-place, and ad­miring her beauty, when they understood thatshe lodged with the old man, came to thedoors, as contemning the weakness and few­ness of the old man's family. And when theold man desired them to go away, and not tooffer any violence or abuse there; they de­sired him to yield them up the strange wo-.uan, and then he should have no harm doneto him. And when the old man alleged,that the Levite was of his kindred; and thatthey would be guilty of horrid wickedness if


* Josephus's early date of this history, before the be­ginning of the Judges, or when there was no king in Israel,Judges xix. 1. is strongly confirmed by the large numberof Benjamites, both in the days of Asa and Jehoshaphat;2 Chron. xtv. 8. and xvi. 17. who yet were here reducedto 6O0 men. Nor can those numbers be at all supposedgenuine, if they were reduced so late as the end of theJudges, where our other copies place this reduction.
t About An. 1460 B. C.
J Reland, in his Palestina, tom. II. p. 810. finds a con-
tradiction in Josephus, as to the distance of Gibeah of Saulin the tribe ofBenjamin, from Jerusalem, 30 furlongs here:but of the War, V. 2. 20 furlongs, and no more. Yet isthere no necessity of making these two places to contra­dict each other. These 20 furlongs only they had now togo to Gibeah indeed; but it was not from Jerusalem, butfrom the place where they now were; which might easilybe eight or ten furlongs from Jerusalem in the way toGibeah. So that here does not appear any real contra­diction at all.


 


Nn2







OCR Output








an. 1028.] 291 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


servants, in such low employments. Nor wasit reasonable, that when God had broughtso many nations under their power, theyshould depress their own people to suchmean offices of lite, rather than those na­tions. While the Israelites were concernedin warlike affairs, and were in armour, andset over the chariots, and the horses; ratherthan leading the life of slaves. He also ap­pointed five hundred and fifty rulers overthose Canaanites who were reduced to suchdomestic slavery; who received the care ofthem from the king, and instructed them inthose labours and operations wherein hewanted their assistance.
The king also built many ships* in theEgyptian bay of the Red Sea, in a certainplace called Eziongeber; but now calledBerenice, and not far from the city Eloth.This country belonged formerly to the Jews,and became useful for shipping, from thedonations of Hiram, king of Tyre. For hesent a sufficient number of men thither forpilots, and such as were skilful in navigation:to whom Solomon gave this command, thatthey should go along with his stewards tothe land that was of old called fOphir, butnow the Aurea Chersonesus, which belongsto India; to fetch him gold. And when theyhad gathered four hundredJ talents together,they returned to the king.
There was then a woman queen of ||Egyptand Ethiopia; she was inquisitive in phi­losophy, and one that on other accounts alsowas to be admired. When this queen heardof the virtue and prudence of Solomon, shehad a great mind to see him; and the re-
Eorts that went every day abroad induceder to come to him; she being desirous to besatisfied by her own experience, and not by


a bare hearing; (for reports thus heard arelikely enough to comply with a false opinion;while they wholly depend on the credit ofthe relators;) so she resolved to come tohim, and that especially in order to have atrial of his wisdom, while she proposedquestions of very great difficulty, and in-treated that he would resolve their hiddenmeaning. Accordingly she came to Jerusa­lem with great splendour and rich furniture:for she brought her camels laden with gold,with several sorts of sweet spices, and withprecious stones. Now upon the king's kindreception of her, he both shewed a great de­sire to please her, and easily comprehendingin his mind the meaning of the curious ques­tions she propounded to him, he resolvedthem sooner than any body could have ex­pected. So she was amazed at the wisdomof Solomon, and discovered that it was moreexcellent upon trial than what she had heardby report beforehand. In particular she wassurprised at the fineness and largeness of hisroyal palace; and not less so at the goodorder of the apartments: for she observedthat the king had therein shewn great wis­dom. But she was beyond measure asto­nished at the house which was called §theforest of Lebanon: as also at the magnificenceof his daily table, and the circumstances ofits preparation and ministration, with the ap­parel of his servants that waited; and theskilful and decent management of their at­tendance. Nor was she less affected withthose daily sacrifices which were offered toGod, and the careful management which thePriests and Levites used about them. Whenshe saw this done every day, she was in thegreatest admiration imaginable; insomuchthat she was not able to contain the surprise


* About an. 1024.
t What Josephus affirms here, that Ophir, or, as hisand the Septuagint copies spell it Sophir, was the samewith the Aurea Chersoaesus, or rather with the adjoiningisland of Taprobane, now called Ceylon, is the very pro­bable opinion of the great Bochart, Canaan. I. 46. Butit is yet not so certain as to be agreed to by all others.See the note on IX. 1.
{Four hundred and twenty, 1 Kings ix. 28.That this queen of Sheba was a queen of Sabaea inSouth Arabia; and not of Egypt and Ethopia, as Jose­phus here asserts, is, I suppose, now generally agreed.And since Sabaea is well known to be a country nearthe sea in the south of Arabia Felix, which lay southfrom Judea also; and since our Saviour calls this queen,
voL. I.—NOS. 25 & 26.
the Queen of the South; and says, she came from theutmost parts of the earth; Matt. xii. 42. Luke xi. 31.which description agrees better to this Arabia, than toEgypt and Ethiopia, there is little occasion for doubtingin this matter. The common mistake, which is mucholder than Josephus; nay, as old as the Septuagintversion, that Cush signified Ethiopia, beyond Egypt,which Bochart has fully proved to denote Arabia.Phaleg. IV. 2, very probably misled Josephus into hishypothesis.
§ Whether Solomon's house of the forest of Lebanonwere at Jerusalem, or whether it were not rather at Bal-bec, between Libanns and Antilibanus, may be doubtedSee for the latter interpretation, Authent. Rec. vol. IIpage 887, 888.
3G







OCR Output








214 fBOOK VI. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


For that, although he were wickedly dis­posed, yet was it not lawful to touch his life.But when Saul had left the cave, David criedaloud, and desired Saul to hear him. Here­upon the king turned his face, and David,according to custom, prostrated himself be­fore the king, and said, "O king! thououghtest not to hearken to wicked men, norto such as forge calumnies, nor gratify themso far as to believe what they say, nor toentertain suspicions of such as are thy bestfriends; but to judge of the disposition of allmen by their actions. For calumny deludesmen; but their own actions are a clear de­monstration of their kindness. Words indeed,in their own nature, may be either true orfalse; but actions expose intentions nakedlyto our view. By these, therefore, it would bewell for thee to believe me, as to my regardto thee and to thy house, and not to believethose who frame such accusations against meas never came into my mind; nor are possibleto be executed; and to this farther by pur­suing after my life, and have no concern eitherday or night, but how to murder me; whichthing I think thou dost unjustly prosecute.For how is it, that thou hast embraced thisfalse opinion, as if I had a desire to kill thee?or how canst thou escape the crime of im­piety towards God, when thou wishest thoucouldst kill, and deemest thine adversary, aman, who had it in his power this day toavenge himself, and to punish thee, but wouldnot do it, nor make use of such an oppor­tunity; which if it had fallen out to thee
which David perceiving, and knowing all the passages ofthe place, might go some secret way, and cut off somesmall part of it. Nor could the noise which David's motionmade be well heard by Saul, because it must have beendrowned by a much greater noise which Saul's army,waiting for him at the month of the cave, may be supposedto make. Poole's Annotations. B.
* Whence this determination of the ancients is derived,I cannot tell.
t 1 Sam. xxiv. 22.
I An. 1098 B. C.
II The Jews are of opinion that Samuel died only fourmonths before Saul; but by the generality of Christianchronologers, he is supposed to have died about two yearsbefore the death of that prince, and in the ninety-eighthyear of his age, twenty of which had been spent in thegovernment of Israel, (though Sir John Marsham will haveit no more than sixteen,) before Saul's inauguration, afterwhich he lived about eighteen. He was at first interredat Ramah; but in the time of the Emperor Arcadius, hisbody was transported from Palestine to Constantinople,


against me, thou hadst not let it slip? Forwhen 1 cut off the skirt of thy garment, Icould have done the same to thy head." Sohe shewed him the piece of his garment, andthereby made him agree to what he said tobe true: and added, "I certainly have ab­stained from taking a just revenge upon thee;yet art not thou ashamed to prosecute mewith unjust hatred. May God do justice,and determine about each of our dispositions."Saul was amazed at the strange deliverancehe had received; and being greatly affectedwith the moderation and disposition of theyoung man, he groaned; and when Davidhad done the same, the king answered, " 1have the justest occasion to groan; for thouhast been the author of good to me; as I havebeen the author of calamity to thee. Andthou hast demonstrated this day, that thoupossessest the righteousness of the ancients,*who determined, that men ought to save theirenemies, though they caught them in a desertplace. I am now persuaded, that God re­serves the kingdom for thee; and that thouwilt obtain the dominion over all the Hebrews.Give me then assurances upon oath, that thouwilt not root out my family; nor, out of re­membrance of what evil I have done thee,destroy my posterity; but save and preservemy house." So David sware as he desired,and sent Saul back to his own kingdom. Buthe, and those that were with him, went up tothe straits of Masteroth.f
About this timeJ Samuel the prophet died.||He was a man whom the Hebrews honoured


and (as St. Jerom informs us) received both by the clergyand laity with a joy unspeakable, and honours almost in­finite. He was indeed, while he lived, an excellentgovernor, and through his whole administration, abovevanity, corruption, or any private views. Those that at­tend to his life may observe, that he was modest withoutmeanness, mild without weakness, firm without obstinacy,and severe without harshness; or as the author of Eccle-siasticus has recorded his actions, and consecrated thiseulogy, to his memory: "Samuel, the prophet of theLord," says he, "beloved of the Lord, established akingdom, and anointed princes over his people. Py thelaw of the Lord he judged the congreti-ntion, and the Lordhad respect unto Jacob. By bis faithfulness he was founda true prophet, and by bis word be was known to befaithful in vision. He called upon the mighty God whenhis enemies pressed upon him on every side, when heoffered the sucking lamb; and the Lord thundered fromheaven, and with a great noise made his voice to be heard.He destroyed the rulers of the Syrians, and all the princesof the Philistines. Before his long sleep, he made pro







OCR Output








AW. 41.] 523 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


them: and wrote letters to that purpose. Healso bound fifteen of their adversaries, andwould have put them to death, but that Herodobtained their pardon.
Yet did not these men continue quiet,when they were come back, but a thousandof the Jews came to Tyre to meet him there,whither the report was that he would come.But Antony was corrupted by the moneywhich Herod and his brother had given him;and so he gave order to the governor of theplace to punish the Jewish ambassadors, whowere for making innovations: and to settlethe government upon Herod. But Herodwent out hastily to them, and Hyrcanus waswith him; (for they stood upon the shore be­fore the city,) and he charged them to gotheir ways; because great mischief wouldbefall them if they went on with their accu­sation. But as they did not acquiesce, theRomans ran upon them with their daggers,and slew some, and wounded more of them:and the rest fled away, and went home, andlay still in great consternation. And whenthe people made a clamour against Herod,Antony was so provoked at it, that he slewthe prisoners.
Now in the *second year, Pacorus, theking of Parthia's son, and Barzapharnes, acommander of the Parthians, possessed them­selves of Syria. Ptolemy, the son of Men-neus, also was now dead: and Lysanias hisson took his government; and made a leagueof friendship with Antigonus, the son of Aris-tobulus; and in order to obtain it made useof that commander, who had great interestin him. Now Antigonus had promised to
five the Parthians a thousand talents, andve hundred women: upon condition theywould take the government from Hyrcanus,and bestow it upon him, and withal killHerod. And although he did not give themwhat he had promised, yet did the Parthiansmake an expedition into Judea on that ac­count, and carried Antigonus with them.Pacorus went along the maritime parts; butthe commander, Barzapharnes, through themidland. Now the Tyrians excluded Paco­rus: but the Sidonians, and those of Ptole-mais, received him. However Pacorus senta troop of horsemen into Judea, to take aview of the state of the country, and to assistAntigonus; and he sent the king's butler, ofvoL. i.—NOS. 43 & 44.


the same name with himself. So when theJews that dwelt about mount Carmel cameto Antigonus, and were ready to march withhim into Judea, Antigonus hoped to get somepart of the country by their assistance. Theplace is called Dry mi: and when some otherscame and met them, the men privately fellupon Jerusalem. And when some more werecome to them, they got together in greatnumbers, and came against the king's palace,and besieged it. But as Phasaelus's andHerod's party came to the other's assistance,and a battle ensued in the market-place, theyoung men beat their enemies, and pursuedthem into the temple; and sent some armedmen into the adjoining houses to keep themin; who yet being destitute of such as shouldsupport them, were burnt, and the houseswith them, by the people who rose up againstthem. But Herod was revenged on theseseditious adversaries a little afterward, whenhe fought with them, and slew a great num­ber of them.
But while there were daily skirmishes, theenemy waited for the coming of the multitudeout of the country to the feast of Pentecost.And when that day was come, many thou­sands of the people were gathered togetherabout the temple; some in armour, and somewithout. Now those that came guarded boththe temple and the city, excepting what be­longed to the palace, which Herod guardedwith a few of his soldiers. And Phasaelushad the charge of the wall: while Herod,with a body of his men, sallied out upon theenemy, who lay in the suburbs, and foughtcourageously, and put many thousands toflight: some fleeing into the city, some intothe temple, and some into the outer fortifica­tions: for some such fortifications there werein that place. Phasaelus came also to hisassistance. Yet was Pacorus, the general ofthe Parthians, at the desire of Antigonus, ad­mitted into the city, with a few of his horse­men: under pretence indeed, as if he wouldappease the sedition; but in reality to assistAntigonus in obtaining the government. Andwhen Phasaelus met him, and received himkindly, Pacorus persuaded him to go himself,as ambassador to Barzapharnes; which wasdone fraudulently. Accordingly Phasaelus


* Probably of Antony's coming into Asia.
4N







OCR Output








AN. 10S 1532.] ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


with the kids of the goats; but abating one ofthe bulls every day, till they amounted toseven only. On the eighth day all work waslaid aside, and then, as we said before, theysacrificed to God a bullock, a ram, sevenlambs, and a kid of the goats for an expiationof sins: and this is the accustomed solemnityof the Hebrews when they pitch their taber­nacles.
But in the month of Xanthicus, which is byus called Nisan,* and is the beginning of ouryear, on the fourteenth day of the lunar month,when the sun is in Aries, (for on this monthit was that we were delivered from bondageunder the Egyptians,) the law ordained thatwe should every year slay that sacrifice,which I before observed we slew when wecame out of Egypt, and which was called thePassover; and so do we celebrate this pass-over in companies, and leave nothing of whatwe sacrifice till the day following. The feastof unleavened bread succeeds that of thepassover, and falls on the fifteenth day of themonth, and continues seven days, whereinthey feed on unleavened bread; on every oneof which days two bulls are killed, and oneram, and seven lambs. Now these lambs areentirely burnt, besides the kid of the goats,which is added to all the rest, for sins; for itis intended as a feast for the priest on everyone of those days. But on the second day ofunleavened bread, which is the sixteenth dayof the month, they first partake of the fruits ofthe earth, for before that day they do nottouch them. And while they suppose it pro­per to honour God, from whom they obtainthis plentiful provision, in the first place theyoffer the first fruits of their barley, and that inthe manner following: They take a handfulof the ears, and dry them; they then beatthem small, and cleanse the barley from thebran; they then bring one tenth deal to thealtar to God, and casting one handful of itupon the fire, they leave the rest for the useof the priests; and after this it is that theymay publicly or privately reap their harvest.They also, at this participation of the firstfruits of the earth, sacrifice a lamb as a burnt-offering to God.
When a week of weeks has passed overafter this sacrifice, which weeks contain forty


* Or Abid. Deut. xvi. 1.
voL. I.—No. 9.


and nine days; on the fiftiethf day, called bythe Hebrews Asartha, which signifies Pente­cost, they bring to God a loaf made of wheatflour, of two tenth deals with leaven; and forsacrifices they bring two lambs; and whenthey have only presented them to God, theyare made ready for supper for the priests:nor is it permitted to leave any thing of themtill the day following. They also slay threebullocks for a burnt-offering, and two rams,and fourteen lambs, with two kids of the goatsfor sins: nor is there any one of the festivalsbut in it they offer burnt-offerings. They alsoallow themselves to rest on every one of them:accordingly the law prescribes in them allwhat kinds they are to sacrifice, and how theyare to rest entirely, and must slay sacrificesin order to feast upon them.
However, out of the common charges bakedbread was set on the table of shew breadwithout leaven, of twenty-four tenth deals offlour, for so much is spent upon this bread;two heaps of these were baked; they weretaken the day before the sabbath, but werebrought into the holy place on the morning ofthe sabbath, and set upon the holy table sixon a heap, one loaf still standing over againstanother, where two golden cups, full of frank­incense, were also set upon them; and therethey remained till another sabbath; and thenother loaves were brought in their stead,while the loaves were given to the priests fortheir food, and the frankincense was burnt inthat sacred fire wherein all their offeringswere burnt also; and so other frankincensewas set upon the loaves instead of what wasthere before. The high-priest also, at hisown expense offered a sacrifice twice everyday. It was made of flour, mingled with oil,and gently baked by the fire. The quantitywas one tenth deal of flour. He brought thehalf of it to the fire in the morning, and theother half at night. The account of thesesacrifices I shall give more accurately here­after, but I think I have premised what for thepresent may be sufficient concerning them.


M


CHAP. XI.


OF THE PURIFICATIONS.


OSES took out the tribe of Levi fromcommunicating with the rest of the


t Levit. xxiii. 16.


Dd







OCR Output








38 [book r. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


offer sacrifice upon them, if he lived and re­turned safe: and if he came again in such acondition, he would give the tithe of what hehad gotten to God. He also judged the placeto be honourable, and gave it the name ofBethel; which, if explained in the Greektongue, is the House of God.
He then proceeded on his journey to Meso­potamia, and at length came to Haran, andmeeting with Shepherds in the suburbs, withboys grown up and maidens sitting round acertain well, he stayed with them, as wantingwater to drink; and beginning to discoursewith them, he asked them whether theyknew such an one as Laban? and whetherhe were still alive? they all said they knewhim, for he was not so inconsiderable a per­son as to be unknown to any of them; andthat his daughter fed her father's flocktogether with them: and that, indeed, theywondered she was not yet come, " for by hermeans," said they, " thou mightest learnmore exactly whatever thou desirest to knowabout that family." While they were speak­ing, the damsel came, and the other shep­herds that came with her. Then they shewedher Jacob, and told her, that he was a stran­ger who came to inquire about her father'saffairs. But she, being pleased, after thecustom of children, with Jacob's coming,asked him who he was? and whence hecame? and what it was he wanted, that hecame thither? She also wished it might bein their power to supply his wants.
Jacob was quite overcome, not so much bytheir kindred, nor by that affection whichmight arise thence, as by his love to thedamsel, and his surprise at her beauty, whichwas such as few of the women of that agecould vie with. He then said, "There is arelation between thee and me, elder thaneither of our births, if thou be the daughterof Laban. For Abraham was the son ofTerah, as well as Haran and Nahor. Of thelast of whom, Nahor, Bethuel thy grandfatherwas the son: Isaac my father was the son ofAbraham and of Sarah, who was the daughterof Haran. But there is a nearer and later


* By this deprivation of the kingdom that was to begiven Esau of God, as the first-born; it appears that Jose-phus thought a kingdom to be derived of God was due tohim whom Isaac should bless as his first-born: which Itake to be that kingdom which was expected under the


cement of mutual kindred which we bear toone another. For my mother Rebeka wassister to Laban, thy father, both by the samefather and mother. I, therefore, and thou,are cousin germans, and I am now come tosalute thee, and to renew that affinity whichis proper between us." At the mention of Re­beka, the damsel wept, and that out of thekindness she had for her father, and em­braced Jacob: she having learned an ac­count of Rebeka from her father, and knewthat her parents loved to hear her named;and when she had saluted him, she said, thathe brought the most desirable and greatestpleasure to her father, with all their family,who was always mentioning his mother, andalways thinking of her, and her alone; "andthis," said she, "will make thee equal in hiseyes to any advantageous circumstance what­soever." Then she bid him follow her, whileshe conducted him to her father, not wishingto deprive Laban of such a pleasure, by stay­ing any longer away from him.
When she had said thus, she brought himto Laban; and being owned by his uncle, hewas secure himself, as being among hisfriends; to whom his unexpected arrival gavegreat pleasure. But a little while afterward,Laban told him that he could not express inwords the joy he had at his coming; but stillhe inquired why he left his aged mother andfather, when they wanted to be taken care ofby him; and that he would afford him all theassistance he wanted. Then Jacob gave himan account of the whole occasion of his jour­ney, and told him that Isaac had twin sons,himself and Esau; and that his brother hav­ing failed of his father's prayers, which byhis mother's wisdom were put up for him,sought to kill him; as deprived of the king­dom* which was to be given him of God;and of the blessings for which their fatherprayed; and that this was the occasion of hiscoming hither, as his mother had commandedhim. "For," said he, "we are all brethrenone to another; but our mother esteems analliance with your family more than she doesone with the families of the country; so I
Messiah; who, therefore, was to be born of his posteritywhom Isaac should so bless. Jacob, therefore, by ob­taining this blessing of the first-born, became the genuineheir of that kingdom, in opposition to Esau.







OCR Output








an. 1048.] 283 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


double row of cloisters; which stood on highupon pillars of native stone: while the roofswere of cedar, and were polished in a mannerproper for such high roofs; but he made allthe doors of this temple of silver.
CHAP. IV.
or Solomon's removal of the ark into the temple; his
SUPPLICATION TO GOD, AND PUBLIC SACRIFICES.
WHEN king Solomon had finished theselarge and beautiful buildings, and hadlaid up his donations in the temple, and allthis in the interval of seven years;* and hadgiven a demonstration of his riches and alac­rity therein; insomuch that any one who sawit would have thought it must have been an


immense time ere it could have been finished,and would have been surprised that so muchshould be finished in so short time: he wroteto the rulers and elders of the Hebrews; andordered all the people to gather themselvestogether to Jerusalem,f both to see the tenvpie which he had built, and to remove theark of God into it. And when this invitationwas every where carried abroad, it was theseventh month before they came together;which month is by our countrymen calledThisri; but by the Macedonians Hyperbere-taeus.J The feast of tabernacles happened atthe same time, which was celebrated by theHebrews as a most holy and eminent feast.So they carried the ark,|| and the taberna-cle§ which Moses had pitched, and all the


inner, or court of the priests; he must mean this in agross estimation only; for he and all others agree, thatthe inner temple, or court of the priests, was a few cubitsmore elevated than the middle court, the court of Israel;and that much more was the court of the priests elevatedseveral cubits above the outermost court; since the courtof Israel was lower than the one, and higher than theother.
* The Septuagint says, that they prepared timber andstones to build the temple for three years: 1 Kings v. 18.And although neither our Hebrew copy, nor Josephus,directly name the number of years; yet do they bothsay the building itself did not begin till Solomon's fourthyear; and both speak of the preparation of materials be­forehand: 1 Kings v. 18. Antiq. VIII. 5. and Josephusthere intimates, that it was for a considerable time before-liand also. There is no reason therefore to alter the Sep-tuagint's number; but we are to suppose three years tohave been the just time of the preparation; as I have donein my computation of the expenses in building that tem­ple. See its description, chap. 13. where the whole timeis ten years and a half,t 1 Kings viii. 1.
J This feast was appointed in commemoration of thechildren of Israel's dwelling in booths, whilst they werein the wilderness, and of the tabernacle, which at thattime was built, where God promised to meet them, todwell among them, and to sanctify the place with hisglory; and might therefore be well reckoned a very pro­per season for the dedication of the temple, which was tosucceed in the tabernacle's place. Bedford's ScriptureChronology, lib. vi. c. 2. B.
II The sacred history tells us, that in this ark there wasnothing, save the two tables of stone, which Moses putthere at Horeb, 1 Kings viii. 9. and yet the author to theHebrews affirms, that in this ark was the golden pot thatbad manna, and Aaron's rod that budded, as well as thetables of the covenant, Heb. ix. 4. Now, to reconciletbis, some imagine, that before the ark had any fixed andsettled place, (which is the time the apostle refers to,)all these tilings were included in it, though it was chieflyintended for nothing but the tallies of the covenant; butthat, when it was placed in the temple, nothing was leftin it but these two tables; all the other things were de-VOL. I.—NOS. 23 & 24.
posited in the treasury of the temple, where the book ofthe law (as we read in 2 Chron. xxxiv. 14) was found inthe days of king Josias. Others however pretend, thatin the time of the Apostle, i. e. towards the end of theJewish commonwealth, Aaron's rod, and the pot of mannawere really kept in the ark, though in the days of Solo­mon, they were not. But this answer would be moresolid and satisfactory, if he knew for certain, that, in thetime of the Apostle, the ark of the covenant was really inthe sanctuary of the temple, which Herod built; whereasJosephus (De Bello Jud. lib. vi. c. 6) tells us expressly,that, when the Romans destroyed the temple, there wasnothing found in the Holy of Holies. Calmet's Com­mentary. B.
§ But the question is, what tabernacle, whether thatwhich Moses made, and was then at Gibeon, 2 Chron. i.3. or that which was made by David, and was then at Je-'rusalem? To end this dispute, some have imagined, thatboth these tabernacles were at this time carried into thetemple, and laid up there, that all danger of superstitionand idolatry might thereby be avoided, and that no wor­ship might be performed any where, but only at thehouse which was dedicated to God's service: but it isobserved by others, that the convenience which Davidmade for the reception of the ark, was never called thetabernacle of the covenant; it was no more than a plaintent, set up in some large room of the royal palace, untila more proper receptacle could be provided for it: butthe tabernacle that was at Gibeon, was the same that so­journed so long in the wilderness. The tent was the same,the curtains the same, and the altar the same, that wasmade by Moses; or at least, if there was any alterationin it, (as things of this nature could hardly subsist so verylong without some repair,) the reparation was alwaysmade according to the original model, and with as littledeviation as possible. It is not to be doubted, then, butthat the Mosaic tabernacle is the tabernacle here intended,which, for the prevention of schism, and to make the tem­ple the centre of devotion, was now taken down, and repo-sked in the treasury, or storehouse, where it continueduntil the time that Jerusalem was taken by the Chaldeans,when Jeremiah, as Josephus informs us, (Jewish Antiq.lib. viii. c. 2) was admonished by God, to take it, andthe ark, and the altar of incense, and hide them in some3F







OCR Output








468 [book XIII. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


was at hand, but what should profit them wasstill at a great distance; and it was uncer­tain whether it would come at all or not;they thought it prudent to leave off anylonger continuance with him, and to cultivatefriendship with the other. So they sent toJonathan, and professed the)' would be hisfriends, and afford him assistance. For suchis the temper of men, that before they havehad the trial of great afflictions, they do notunderstand what is for their advantage: butwhen they find themselves to be under suchafflictions, they then change their minds; andwhat it had been better for them to havedone before they had been at all damaged,they choose to do, but not till after they havesuffered such damages. However, he madea league of friendship with them, and tookfrom them hostages for their performance ofit; and sent these hostages to Jerusalem:while he went himself over all the country,as far as Damascus.
Now the generals of Demetrius's forcescame to the city Cadesh, between the landof the Tyrians and Galilee. For they sup­posed they should hereby draw Jonathan outof Syria, in order to preserve Galilee; andthat he would not overlook the Galileans,who were his own people, when war wasmade upon them. But Jonathan went to meetthem, having left Simon in Judea: who raisedas great an army as he was able out of thecountry, and then sat down before Bethsura,and besieged it; that being the strongestplace in all Judea, and a garrison of Deme­trius's kept it: as we have *already related.But as Simon was raising banks, and bringinghis engines of war against Bethsura, and wasvery earnest about the siege of it, the gar­rison was afraid lest the place should be ta­ken of Simon by force, and they put to thesword. So they sent to Simon, and desiredthe security of his oath, that they shouldcome to no harm from him; and that thenthey would leave the place, and go away toDemetrius. Accordingly he gave them hisoath, and ejected them out of the city: andhe put therein a garrison of his own.
But Jonathan removed out of Galilee, andfrom the waters which are called Gennesar;


* Chap. 2.
t 1 Mace. xi. 73.


(for there he was before encamped:) andcame into the plain that is called Asor: with­out knowing that the enemy was there. Whentherefore Demetrius's men knew a day be­forehand that Jonathan was coming againstthem, they laid an ambush in the mountain,who were to assault him on the sudden; whilethey themselves met him with an army in theplain. Which army when Jonathan sawready to engage him, he also got ready hisown soldiers for the battle as well as he wasable. But those that were laid in ambush byDemetrius's generals being behind them, theJews were afraid lest they should be caughtin the midst between two bodies, and perish.So they ran away in haste: and indeed allthe forces forsook Jonathan, excepting aboutfifty who stayed with him: and with themMattathias the son of Absalom, and Judasthe son of Chapseus, who were commandersof the whole army. These marched boldly,and like men desperate, against the enemy;and so pushed them, that by their couragethey daunted them; and with their weaponsin their hands they put them to flight. Andwhen those soldiers of Jonathan, that hadretired, saw the enemy giving way, they gottogether after their flight, and pursued themwith great violence. And this they did asfar as Cadesh, where the camp of the ene­my lay.f
Jonathan having thus obtained a gloriousvictory, and slain two thousand of the enemy,returned to Jerusalem. So when he saw thatall his affairs prospered, according to hismind by the providence of God, he sent am­bassadors to the Romans; being desirous ofrenewing that friendship which their nationhad with them Jformerly. He enjoined thesame ambassadors, that as they came back,they should go to the Spartans; and put themin mind of their friendship and kindred. Sowhen the ambassadors came to Rome, theywent into the senate, and said what theywere commanded by Jonathan the high-priestto say: how he had sent them to confirmtheir friendship. The senate then confirmedwhat had been formerly decreed concerningtheir friendship with the Jews; and gavethem letters to carry to all the kings of Asia
J See Book XII. chap. 10.







OCR Output








ISO [book v. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


night might hot'come on too soon, and be anobstruction to the zeal of the Hebrews in pur­suing their enemies, insomuch that Joshuatook the kings, who were hidden in a certaincave at Makkedah, and put them to death.Now that the day was lengthened at thistime, and was longer than ordinary, is ex­pressed in the books laid up in the temple.
These kings who made war with, and wereready to fight the Gibeonites, being thusoverthrown; Joshua returned again to themountainous parts of Canaan. And when hemade a great slaughter of the people there,and took their prey, he came to the camp atGilgal.* And now there went a great fameabroad among the neighbouring people ofthe courage of the Hebrews; and those thatheard what a number of men were destroyed,were greatly affrighted at it. So the kingsthat lived about mount Libanus, who wereCanaanites; and those Canaanites that dweltin the plain country, with auxiliaries out ofthe land of the Philistines, pitched their campat Beroth, a city of the Upper Galilee, notfar from Cadesh; which is itself also a placein Galilee. The number of the whole army


was three hundred thousand armed footmen,ten thousand horsemen, and twenty thousandchariots. So that the multitude of the ene­mies alarmed both Joshua himself, and theIsraelites; and they, instead of being full ofhope of success, were superstitiously timo­rous, with the great terror with which theywere stricken. Whereupon God upbraidedthem with the fear they were in; and askedthem, whether they desired a greater helpthan he could afford them? and promisedthem that they should overcome their ene­mies; withal charging them to make theirenemies' horses useless, and to burn theirchariots. So Joshua became full of courageupon these promises of God, and went outsuddenly against the enemies; and after fivedays' march he came upon them, and joinedbattle with them; and there was a terriblefight, and such a number were slain, as couldnot be believed by those that heard it. Healso went on the pursuit a great way; anddestroyed the entire army of the enemies, fewonly escaped; and all the kings fell in thebattle; insomuch that when there wanted mento be killed, Joshua slew their horses, and


space of a civil or artificial day, i. e. for twelve hours.But Maimonides is of opinion, (More Nevoch. part 2.chap. 39.) and in this he is followed by some Christianwriters, (Grotius and Masius, in locum,) that there was nosuch cessation of the sun and moon's motion, but that thewhole purport of the miracle was this:—" That God, atJoshua's request, granted him and his soldiers such a de­gree of spirits, activity, and despatch, as enabled them togain a complete victory, and as much execution in one dayas might otherwise have taken up two:" but this is a con­struction so repugnant to the genuine sense of the wordsas to need no formal confutation.
There is something more, however, to be said to thenotion of other learned men, who with regard to the timewhen Joshua might send up his request, and the miraclebegin, think it more probable that he should pray for alonger day, when he perceived the sun just going to leavehim, than when it was in its height. But Joshua, no doubt,had reasons for what he did. He was an old experiencedgeneral, eager for a complete victory, and able to computewhat time it would take to achieve it; so that his fear oflosing any part of the present advantage, might make himpray that the day might be thus prolonged, until he hadobtained the whole. If the sun, in its declension, hadstopped its course, it might have answered his purpose per­haps; hut then it had given a juster handle to the sug­gestions of those who would deny the whole merit of themiracle. For, if the retardation of the sun had not hap­pened until it was going to set, Spinosa might, with a muchbetter grace, have attributed the extraordinary length ofthis day to the refraction of its rays from the clouds, whichat that time were loaded with hail; (Tract. Theol. Politic.C. 2.) or Peirerius, to some aurora borealis, or parhelium,
which, after the setting of the sun, might appear about theterritories of Gibeon, and so be mistaken for the sun'sstanding still; but now, by fixing it in its meridian point,all the cavils are effectually silenced; (Praedam. lib. 4. c.6.) and God, no doubt, who heard him so readily, (Cal-met's Disser. sur le Commandment, &c.) inspired the He­brew general with that wish or prayer, which otherwiseperhaps would never have come into his head. KeiVsAstronomical Lectures.
Besides this general argument of Mr. Keil's, Mr. Whis-ton has one, which he accounts no less than a demonstra­tion: "If the earth," says he, " have an annual revolutionabout the sun, it must affect the apparent motion of all theother planets and comets; and notwithstanding the regu­larity of their several motions in their own orbits mustrender these regular motions, to us, as living upon themoving earth, sometimes direct, and that swiftly andslowly; sometimes stationary, and sometimes retrograde,and that swiftly or slowly also; and all this, at such cer­tain periods, in such certain places, for such certain dura­tions, and according to such certain circumstances, (asgeometry and arithmetic will certainly determine,) andnot otherwise. Now that this is the real case in fact, andthat every one of these particulars are true in the astro­nomical world, all that are skilful in that science do freelyconfess, even those who do not think fit to declare openlyfor this annual revolution of the earth, which yet is thenatural and certain consequence of that concession."Whiston's Astron. Princ. of Relig. The reader that isdesirous to know more both of the annual and diurnal mo­tion of the earth, may consult Mr. Derham's Prelim. Dissto his Astro-Theol. B.
* Josh. x. 15.







OCR Output








ak. 1099.] 215 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


in an extraordinary degree; for that lament­ation which the people made for him duringa long time, manifested his virtue, and theaffection which they bore him; as also didthe solemnity and concern that appearedabout his funeral, and about the completeobservance of all his funeral rites. Theyburied him in his own city Ramah;* andwept for him a very great number of days;not looking on it as a sorrow for the death ofanother man, but as that in which they wereindividually concerned. He was a righteousman, and gentle in his nature, and on thataccount he was very dear to God. Now hegoverned and presided over the people alone,after the death of Eli the high-priest,t twelveyears; andJ eighteen years together withSaul the king, and thus we have finished thehistory of Samuel.
There was a man that was a Ziphite, of thecity Malum: who was rich, and had a vastnumber of cattle; for he had a dock of threethousand sheep, and another of a thousandgoats. Now David had charged his associatesto preserve these flocks from damage; and todo them no mischief; neither out of covetous-ness, nor because they were in want, nor be­cause they were in the wilderness, and socould not easily be discovered; but to esteemfreedom from injustice above all other mo­tives; and to look upon the touching of whatbelonged to another man as a horrible crime,and contrary to the will of God. Such werethe instructions he gave; thinking that thefavours he granted this man were bestowedon one that deserved to have such care takenof his affairs. This person was Nabal; aharsh man, and of a very wicked life; beinglike a cynic in the course of his behaviour;


but still had obtained for his wife a woman ofgood character, wise, and handsome. To thisNabal, therefore, David sent ten of his at­tendants, at the time when he sheared hissheep; and by them saluted him, and alsowished he might do what he now did, formany years to come; but desired him to makehim a present of what he was able to givehim; since he must have learned from hisshepherds, that he had done them no injury,but had been their guardians a long time,while he continued in the wilderness, and beassured he should never repent of giving anything to David. When the messengers haddeclared their errand to Nabal, he accostedthem after an inhuman and rough manner;for he asked them who David was? And whenhe heard that he was the son of Jesse, " Nowis the time,"' said he, " that fugitives grow in­solent, and make a figure, and leave theirmasters." When they told David this, hewas wroth; and commanded four hundredarmed men to follow him, and left two hun­dred to take care of the stuff, (for he hadalready|[ six hundred,) and went againstNabal: he also swore that he would utterlydestroy the whole house and possessions ofNabal, for that he was grieved, not only thathe had proved ungrateful, without makingany return for the humanity he had shewnhim; but that he had also reproached them,and used ill language, when he had receivedno cause of disgust.
Hereupon, one of those that kept the flocksof Nabal said to his mistress, "that whenDavid sent to her husband, he had receivedno civil answer, but on the contrary, very re­proachful language; while yet David hadtaken extraordinary care to keep his flocks


testations in the sight of the Lord, and his anointed, andafter his death he prophesied and shewed the king hisend." Eccles. xlvi. 13. &c. But besides the things thatare recorded of this prophet in the first book of Samuel,there are some other passages concerning him in the firstbook of Chronicles: as, That he enriched the tabernaclewith several spoils which he took from the enemies ofIsrael during his administration, chap. xxvi. 28. That heassisted in regulating the distribution of the Levites, whichDavid afterwards prescribed for the service of the temple,chap. ix. 22. And, lastly, That he wrote the History ofDavid, in conjunction with the prophets Nathan and Gad:but as he was dead before David came to the throne, thiscan be meant only of the beginning of that history, whichby the other two prophets might be continued and con­cluded. There is great probability indeed, that he com­posed the twenty-four first chapters of the first book of
Samuel, which contain the beginning of David's life, andseveral historical facts wherein he himself had a largeshare; but as for the latter part of it, it was impossible forhim to write it, because, in the beginning of the 2Ethchapter, there is no mention made of his death. B.
* 1 Sam. nr. 1.
t From an. 1128 to 1116.
j From an. 1116 to 1098.
II The number of men that came first to David are dis­tinctly in Josephus, and in our common copies, but 400.When he was at Keilah still but 400, both in Josephus andthe Septuagint; but 600 in our Hebrew copies. 1 Sam.xxiii. 13. See xxx. 9, 10. Now the 600 there mentioned,are here intimated by Josephus to have been so many, onljby an augmentation of 200 afterward; which I suppose jsthe true solution of this seeming disagreement.







OCR Output








380 [book X. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


he had seen this dream, he called the magi­cians together again; and inquired of themabout it, desiring them to tell him what it sig­nified. But when none of them could findout the meaning of the dream, nor discoverit to the king, Daniel was the only personthat explained it. And as he foretold, so itcame to pass. For after he had continuedin the wilderness the aforementioned intervalof time, while no one durst attempt to seizehis kingdom, during those seven years; heprayed to God that he might recover histhrone; and be returned to it. But let noone blame me for writing down every thingof this nature, as I find it in our ancientbooks. For as to that matter, I have plainlyassured those that think me defective in anysuch point, that I intended to do no more thantranslate the Hebrew books into the Greeklanguage, and promised to explain those facts,without adding any thing to them of my own,or taking any thing away from them.
CHAP. XI.
OF NEBUCHADNEZZAR, AND HIS SUCCESSORS; THE DISSO­LUTION OF THEIR GOVERNMENT BY THE PERSIANS, THEAFFAIRS OF DANIEL, AND THE PROPHECIES HE DE­LIVERED IN MEDIA.
OW when king Nebuchadnezzar hadreigned forty-three years,* he ended


N


his life.f He was an active man, and morefortunate than the kings were before him.Berosus makes mention of his actions in thethird book of his Chaldaic history, wherehe says, "When his father Nabuchodonosor[Nabopollassar] heard that the governorwhom he had set over Egypt, and the placesabout Coele Syria and Phoenicia, had re­volted from him, while he was not himselfable any longer to undergo the hardships ofWar; he committed to his son Nebuchad­nezzar, who was still but a youth, some partsof his army; and sent him against them.So when Nebuchadnezzar had given battle,and fought with the rebel, he defeated him,and reduced the country under subjection;and made it a branch of his own kingdom.But about that time it happened that hisfather fell ill, and ended his life in the cityBabylon; when he had reigned twenty-oneyears.J And when he was made sensiblethat his father was dead, he settled the af­fairs of Egypt, and other countries, as alsothose that concerned the captive Jews, Phoe­nicians, Syrians, and those of the Egyptiannations; and having committed the convey­ance of them to Babylon to certain of hisfriends, together with the body of his army,and the rest of their ammunition and pro­visions; he went himself hastily, accompa­


probably must have understood those other parallelphrnses, of a time, times, and a half, VII. 25. and XII.9. of so many prophetic years also. Though he lets usknow, by his hint at the interpretation of the seventyweeks, as belonging to the fourth monarchy, and the de­struction of Jerusalem by the Romans, in the days ofJosephus, chap. 2. that he did not think those years tobe bare years; but rather days for years; by whichreckoning, and by which alone, could seventy weeks, orfour hundred and ninety days, reach to the age of Jose­phus. But as to the truth of those seven years' banish­ment of Nebuchadnezzar from men, and his living so longamong the beasts, the very small remains we have anywhere else of this Nebuchadnezzar, prevent our expecta­tion of any other full account of it. So far we know byPtolemy's Canon, a contemporary record, as well as byJosephus's presently, that he reigned in all forty-threeyears: that is eight years after we meet with any account of his actions. One of the last of which was thethirteen years' siege of Tyre, XI. 11. where yet the oldLatin has three years and ten months. Yet were hisactions before so remarkable, both in sacred and profaneauthors, that such a vacuity of eight years at the least,at the latter end of his reign, must be allowed to agreevery well with Daniel's accounts; that after a brfctal lifeof seven years' duration, he might return to his reason,and to the exercise of his royal authority for one wholeyear at least before his death.
* These forty-three years for the duration of the reignof Nebuchadnezzar are, as I have just observed, the samenumber as that in Ptolemy's Canon. Moses Chorenensiealso confirms this captivity of the Jews under Nebuchad­nezzar; and adds, what is very remarkable, that one ofthose Jews that were carried by him into captivity, gotaway into Armenia; and raised the great family of theBagratidae there. See page 1, 58, 91, 98, 100, 109, 123,124, 136, 180, 184.
t This prince died in the year of the world 3442, andbefore Christ 562; after he had reigned, from the deathof his father, according to the Babylonish account, threeand forty years. He was certainly one of the greatestprinces that had appeared in the east for many ages be­fore him, and according to Megasthenes, (as he is cited byJosephus, Antiq. lib. X. c. 11.) both for his enterprisesand performances, far excelled even Hercules himself.The same historian, (as he is quoted by Eusebius, Prep,lib. IX. c. 41.) informs us, that a little before his death,he foretold his subjects of the coming of the Persians,and their subduing the kingdom of Babylon; but this hemight gather from the prophet Daniel, and especiallyfrom the interpretation of his dreams. Prideavx's Con­nection, anno 562. B.
J These twenty-one years here ascribed to Nabopol­lassar, the father of the great Nebuchadnezzar, are thesame with those given him in Ptolemy's Canon. Andnote here, that what Dr. Prideaux says, Connection, at







OCR Output








4G [book II. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


have slain their own brother; by which actthe father must be treated unjustly in theson's slaughter, and the mother* also be inperplexity while she laments that her son istaken away from her; and this not in a naturalway. He, therefore, intreated them to havea regard to their own consciences, and wiselyto consider what mischief would befal themupon the death of so good a child, and theiryoungest brother; and they would also fearGod, who was already both a spectator, anda witness of the designs they had againsttheir brother; that he would love them if theyabstained from this act, and yielded to re­pentance and amendment. But in case theyproceeded to do the fact, all sorts of punish­ments would overtake them from God; sincethey polluted his providence, which wasevery where present, and which did not over­look what was done either in deserts or incities. For wherever a man is, there oughthe to suppose that God is also. He told themfarther, that their consciences would be theirenemies if they attempted to go through sowicked an enterprise: which they never canavoid, whether it be a good conscience, orwhether it be such a one as they will havewithin them when once they have killed theirbrother. He also added, that it was not arighteous thing to kill a brother, though hehad injured them; that it was a good thing toforget the actions of such near friends, evenin things wherein they might seem to haveoffended; but that they were going to killJoseph, who had been guilty of nothing thatwas ill towards them; in whose case the in­firmity of his tender years should ratherprocure him mercy, and induce them to unitein the care of his preservation. He likewiseobserved, that the cause of killing him madethe act itself much worse, while they deter­mined to take him off out of envy at his futureprosperity, an equal share of which theywould naturally partake while he enjoyed it;since they were to him not strangers, but thenearest relations; for they might reckon uponwhat God bestowed upon Joseph as theirown; and that it was fit for them to believe,


that the anger of God would for this causebe more severe upon them if they slew himwho was judged by God to be worthy of thatprosperity which was to be hoped for; andwhile by murdering him, they made it impos­sible for God to bestow it upon him.
Reuben said these, and many other things,and likewise used intreaties to divert themfrom the murder of their brother; but whenhe saw that his discourse had not mollifiedthem at all, and that they prepared to do thefact, he advised them to alleviate the wicked­ness they were going about in a manner oftaking Joseph off; for, as he had exhortedthem first when they were going to revengethemselves, to be dissuaded from doing it; sosince the sentence for killing their brotherhad prevailed, he said that they would not beso grossly guilty, if they would be persuadedto follow his present advice, which would in­clude what they were so eager about, butwas not so very bad, but, in the distress theywere in, of a lighter nature. He begged ofthem, therefore, not to kill their brother withtheir own hands, but to cast him into the pitthat was hard by, and so to let him die, bywhich they would gain so much, that theywould not defile their own hands with hisblood. To this the young men readily agreed;so Reuben took the lad, and tied him to acord, and let him down gently into the pit,for it had no water in it; and when he haddone this, he went his way to seek for suchpasturage as was proper for feeding theirflocks.
But Judas, being one of Jacob's sons also,seeing some Arabians, of the posterity ofIshmael, carrying spices and Syrian waresout of the land of Gilead to the Egyptiansafter Reuben was gone, advised his brethrento draw Joseph out of the pit, and sell himto the Arabians, for if he should die amongstrangers, a great way off. they should befreed from this barbarous action. This, there­fore, was resolved on; so they drew Josephup out of the pit, and sold him to the mer­chants for twenty pounds.f He was nowseventeen years old; but Reuben coming in


* We may here observe, that in correspondence toJoseph's second dream, which implied that his mother,who was then alive as well as his father, should come andbow down to him, Josephus represents her here as stillalive after she was dead, for the decorum of the dream
that foretold it, as the interpretation of that dream doesalso in all our copies, Gen. xxxvii.
t The LXXII. have 20 pieces of gold; the testamentof God, 30; the Heb. and Samar. 20 of silver; the vulgarLatin 30. What was the true number and true sum, can­not therefore now tv% known







OCR Output








338 [book jx. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


punish the wicked, God foretold by his pro­phet, that his sons should reign over Israelfor *four generations.
CHAP. VII.
OF ATHALIAH's REIGN OVER JERUSALEM FOR SIX YEARS JHER SUBSEQUENT PUNISHMENT BY .IEHOIAOA THE HIGH-PRIEST, AND THE ACCESSION OF JEHOASH, SON OF AHA-Z1AH.
WHEN Athaliah, the daughter of Ahab,heard of the death of her brotherJoram, and of her son Ahaziah, and of theroyal family, she endeavoured that none ofthe house of David might be left alive; butthat the family might be exterminated, thatno king might arise out of it afterward. Andshe supposed her sanguinary wishes werecompletely fulfilled. But one of Ahaziah'ssons escaped death after the followingmanner:—Ahaziah had a sister by the samefather, whose name was Jehosheba, and shewas married to the high-priest Jehoiada.She went into the king's palace, and foundJehoash, for that was the little child's name,who was not above a year old, among thosethat were slain, but concealed, with hisnurse.t So she took him into a secret bed­chamber, and shut him up there; and sheand her husband Jehoiada brought him upprivately in the temple, six years;J duringwhich time Athaliah reigned over Jerusalem,and the two tribes.
Now, on the seventh year, Jehoiada com­municated this important matter to five of thecaptains of hundreds, and persuaded them toassist in the attempts he was making againstAthaliah, and to join with him in securing thekingdom to the child. He also received suchoaths from them as are proper to secure thosethat assist one another from the fear of dis­covery; and he was then of good hope thatthey should depose Athaliah. Now those


men whom Jehoiada the priest had taken tobe his partners, went into all the country,and gathered together the priests, and theLevites, and the heads of the tribes out of it,and brought them to Jerusalem, to the high-priest. So he demanded the security of anoath of them to keep private whatsoever heshould discover to them; which requiredboth their silence and their assistance. Sowhen they had taken an oath, and hadthereby made it safe for him to speak, heproduced the child that he had brought up,of the family of David, and said to them,"This is your king, of that house which yonknow God hath foretold should reign overyou for all time to come. I exhort you,therefore, that one third part of you guardhim in the temple, and that a ||fourth guardkeep watch at all the gates, and that the nextpart of you keep guard at that gate whichopens and leads to the king's palace; and letthe rest of the multitude be unarmed in thetemple; and let no armed person go into thetemple, but the priest only." He also orderedthat a part of the priests and the Levitesshould be about the king himself, and be aguard to him, with their drawn swords, andto kill that man immediately, whoever hemight be, that should be so bold as to enterarmed into the temple; and bade them beafraid of nobody, but persevere in guardingthe king. So these men obeyed what thehigh-priest advised them to; and declaredthe reality of their resolution by their actions.Jehoiada also opened that armoury whichDavid had made in the temple, and distri­buted to the captains of hundreds, as alsoto the priests, and Levites, all the spears,quivers, and other weapons, which it con­tained; and set them armed in a circle roundabout the temple, so as to touch one another'shands; by that means excluding those fromentering that ought not to enter. So they


* This promise was fulfilled, in the persons of Jehoahaz,Jehoash, Jeroboam II. and Zachariah.
t Some interpreters are of opinion, that Joash was notthe real son of Ahaziah, (in whom the race of Solomon, ina direct line, was extinct,) but properly the son of Na­than, and only called Ahaziah's, because he succeededhim in the throne; for had he been Ahaziah's true son,and Athaliah's grandson, why might not she have declaredhim king, and during his minority at least, taken the ad­ministration into her own hands? But therefore she ex­ercised her cruelty, as they say, in destroying the princes
related to Ahaziah, because she was unwilling to have thekingdom go into another branch of David's family. Butnotwithstanding these reasons, and the authority of thosewho produce them, in the second books both of Kingsand Chronicles, we find this Jehoash so frequently calledthe son of Ahaziah, the king's son, &c. without anymanner of restriction, that we cannot be persuaded to lookout for any other father for him. B.
t 2 Kings xi. 3.
B A third part, Hebrew and Septuagint







OCR Output








108 [BOOK III. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


"N


turned home, having spent forty days in thewhole work. They also brought with themof the excellent fruits which the land bare,and gave an account of the great quantity ofthe good things the country afforded, whichwere motives to the multitude to go to war;but then they terrified them again with thegreat difficulty there was in obtaining it, say­ing, that the rivers were so large and deepthat they could not be passed over, the hillswere so high that they could not travel alongfor them, and the cities were strengthenedwith walls and firm fortifications. They toldthem also, that they found at Hebron the pos­terity of the giants. Accordingly these spies,who had seen the land of Canaan, when theyperceived that all these difficulties weregreater there than they had met with sincethey came out of Egypt, were affrighted atthem themselves, and endeavoured to intimi­date the multitude also.
From this account the people supposed thatit was impossible to get the possession of thec( jntry,* and when the congregation wasdissolved, they, their wives, and children,continued their lamentations, as if God wouldnot indeed assist them, but only promisedthem fair; they also again blamed Moses,and made a clamour against him and hisbrother Aaron, the high-priest; accordinglythey passed that night very ill, and with con-tumelous language against them; but in themorning they ran to a congregation, intend­ing to stone Moses and Aaron, and then toreturn into Egypt/f
But of the spies there were Joshua the sonof Nun, of the tribe of Ephraim, and Calebof the tribe of Judah, who were afraid of theconsequence, and came into the midst ofthem, and stilled the multitude: desiring themto be of good courage, and neither to con­demn God, as having deceived them, neitherto hearken to those who had affrighted themby telling what was not true concerning theCanaanites, but believe those that encouragedthem to hope for good success, and that theyshould gain possession of the happiness pro­mised them, because neither the height ofmountains, nor the depth of rivers, could
* This was the effect of their unhelief; a sin withwhich they are repeatedly charged in the Scriptures, andwhich was the more aggravated in them, as they had wit-


hinder men of true courage from attemptingthem, especially while God would take careof them beforehand, and be assistant to them."Let us go then," said they, "against ourenemies, and have no suspicion of ill success,trusting in God to conduct us, and followingthose that are to be our leaders." Thus didthese two exhort them, and endeavour to pa­cify the rage they were in; but Moses andAaron fell on the ground, and besought God,not for their own deliverance, but that hewould now put a stop to what the peoplewere unwarily doing, and would bring theirminds to a quiet temper, which were now dis­ordered by their present passion. The cloudalso now appeared, and stood over the taber­nacle, declaring the presence of God to bethere. J
CHAP. XV.
OF THE PUNISHMENT THREATENED TO THE ISRAELITES ON
ACCOUNT OF. THEIR REBELLION: SKETCH OF THE POWER
AND INFLUENCE OF THE JEWISH LEGISLATOR.
MOSES now came boldly to the multi­tude and informed them, that God wasmoved at their abuse of him, and? would in­flict punishment upon them, not indeed suchas they deserved for their sins, but such asparents inflict on their children, in order totheir correction; for, he said, that when hewas in their tabernacle, and was bewailingwith tears that destruction which was comingupon them, God put him in mind what thingshe had done for them, and what benefits theyhad received from him, and yet how ungrate­ful they had proved: that just now they hadbeen induced by the timorousness of the spiesto think their words truer than his own pro­mise to them, and that on this account, thoughhe would not destroy them all, nor utterly ex­terminate their nation, which he had honouredmore than any other part of mankind; hewould not permit them to take possession ofthe land of Canaan, nor enjoy its happiness,but would make them wander in the wilder­ness, and live without a fixed habitation, andwithout a city, for forty years together, as apunishment for their transgression; but at the
nessed so many signal and repeated exertions of the Divinepower. B.
t Numb. xiv. 4.
} Numb. xiv. 10.







OCR Output








AN. 145.] 467 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


others, as fighting from such an elevation;they drove them out of the adjoining houses,and immediately set them on fire. Where­upon the flame spread itself over the wholecity, and burnt it all down. This happenedby reason of the closeness of the houses; andbecause they were generally built of wood.So the Antiochians, when tliey were not ableto help themselves, nor to stop the fire, wereput to flight. And as the Jews leaped fromthe top of one house, to the top of another,and pursued them after that manner; itthence happened that the pursuit was verysurprising. But when the king saw that theAntiochians were busied in saving their chil­dren and their wives, and so did not fight anylonger, he fell upon them in the narrow pas­sages, and fought them, and slew a greatmany of them; till at last they were forced tothrow down their arms, and to deliver them­selves up to Demetrius: so he forgave theirinsolent behaviour, and put an end to thesedition. And when he had given rewardsto the Jews of the rich spoils he had gotten,and had returned them thanks, as the causeof his victory, he sent them away to Jeru­salem, to Jonathan, with an ample testimonyof the assistance they had afforded him. Yetdid he prove an ill man to Jonathan after­ward, and brake the promises he had made:and he threatened he would make war uponhim. unless he would pay all that tributewhich the Jewish nation owed to the firstkings of Syria. And this he had done, ifTrypho had not hindered him, and divertedhis preparations against Jonathan, to a con­cern for his own preservation. For he nowreturned out of Arabia into Syria, with thechild Antiochus; for he was yet in age but ayouth; and put the diadem on his head. Andas the whole forces that had left Demetrius,because they had no pay, came to his assist­ance, he made war upon Demetrius, and,joining battle with him. overcame him in thefight; and took from him both his elephantsand the city Antioch.
Upon this defeat Demetrius retired intoCilicia; but the child Antiochus sent ambas­sadors, and an epistle, to Jonathan; to makehim his friend, and confederate; and con­firmed to him the high-priesthood, and yielded


up to him the four prefectures which hadbeen added to Judea. Moreover he sent himvessels, and cups of gold, and a purple gar­ment, and gave him leave to use them. Healso presented him with a golden button;and styled him one of his principal friends;and appointed his brother Simon to be thegeneral over the forces from the ladder ofTyre, into Egypt.* So Jonathan was sopleased with these grants made him by An­tiochus, that he sent ambassadors to him, andto Trypho, and professed himself their friendand confederate: and he said he would joinwith them in a war against Demetrius; forthat he had made no proper returns for thekindnesses he had done him, but on the con­trary he, for such good turns, had requitedhim with injuries.
So Antiochus gave Jonathan leave to raisea numerous army out of Syria, and Phoenicia,and to make war against Demetrius's gene­rals. Whereupon he went in haste to theseveral cities; which received him splendidlyindeed, but put no forces into his hands. Andwhen he was come from thence to Ascalon,the inhabitants of Ascalon came, and broughthim presents, and met him in a splendid man­ner. He exhorted them, and every one ofthe cities of Coclesyria, to forsake Demetriusand to join with Antiochus; to endeavour topunish Demetrius, for what offences he hadbeen guilty of against themselves; and toldthem, there were many reasons for that pro­cedure, if they had a mind so to do. Andwhen he had persuaded those cities to pro­mise their assistance to Antiochus, he cameto Gaza, in order to induce them also to befriends to Antiochus. But he found the in­habitants of Gaza much more alienated fromhim than he expected: for they had shuttheir gates against him: and although theyhad deserted Demetrius, they had not re­solved to join themselves to Antiochus. Thisprovoked Jonathan to besiege them, and toharass their country. For as he set a part ofhis army round about Gaza itself, so with therest he overran their land, and spoiled it, andburnt what was in it.f When the inhabitantsof Gaza saw themselves in this state of afflic­tion; and that no assistance came to themfrom Demetrius; that what distressed them


* 1 Mace. xi. 57—59.voL. I.—NOS. 39 & 40.
t 1 Mace. xi. 61.4F







OCR Output








222 [book VI. ANTIQUITIES OP THE JEWS.


of what had happened. But when he hadrecovered from his grief, and had raised uphis mind to God, he desired the high-priestAbiathar to put on his sacerdotal garments,and to inquire of God, and to prophesy tohim, whether God would grant, that if hepursued after the Amalekites, he should over­take them, and save their wives and theirchildren, and avenge himself on the enemies?and when the high-priest bade him pursueafter them, he marched apace, with four hun­dred men, after the enemy. And when hewas come to a certain brook called Besor,and had met with* an Egyptian, who wasalmost dead with want and famine; (for hehad continued wandering about without food,in the wilderness three days;) he first of allgave him refreshments, and then asked towhom he belonged, and whence he came?The man told him, he was an Egyptian bybirth, and was left behind by his master, be­cause he was so sick and weak that he couldnot follow him. He also informed him, thathe was one of those that had burnt and plun­dered not only other parts of Judea, butZiklag also. So David made use of him as aguide, to find out the Amalekites; and whenhe had overtaken them, as they lay scatteredabout on the ground, some at dinner, somedisordered and inebriated with wine; and intheir fruition of the spoils and their prey, hefell upon them on the sudden, and made agreat slaughter. For they were naked, andexpected no such thing; but had betakenthemselves to drinking and feasting; and sothey were all easily destroyed. Now someof them that were overtaken as they lay atthe table, were slain in that posture. Othersof them were slain as they were drinking toone another, in their cups; and some of themwhen their satiety had made them fall asleep.And for so many as had time to put on alltheir armour, they slew them with the swordwith no less ease than they did those thatwere naked. And for the partizans of David,they continued also the slaughter from thefirst hour of the day to the evening, so thatthere was not above four hundred of theAmalekites left, and they only escaped bygetting upon their dromedaries and camels.Accordingly David recovered not only all the
* 1 Sam. xxx. 1


other spoils which the enemy had carriedaway; but his wives also, and the wives of hiscompanions. But when they were come tothe place where they had left the two hun­dred men, who were not able to follow them,but were left to take care of the stuff; thefour hundred men did not think fit to divideamong them any other parts of what theyhad gotten, or of the prey, since they did notaccompany them; but pretended to be feeble,and did not follow them in the pursuit of theenemy; but said, they should be contentedto have safely recovered their wives. Yetdid David pronounce, that this opinion oftheirs was evil and unjust, and that when Godhad granted them such a favour, that theyhad avenged themselves on their enemies,and had recovered all that belonged to them­selves, they should make an equal distribu­tion of what they had gotten to all, becausethe rest had tarried behind to guard theirstuff! And from that time this law obtainedamong them;—that those who guarded thestuff} should receive an equal share with thosethat fought in the battle.f Now when Davidwas come to Ziklag, he sent portions of thespoils to all that had been familiar with him,and to his friends, in the tribe of Judah. Andthus ended the affairs of the plundering ofZiklag, and of the slaughter of the Amalekites.Now upon the Philistines joining battle,there followed a sharp engagement, and thePhilistines became the conquerors, and slewa great number of their enemies. But Saulthe king of Israel, and his sons, fought coura­geously, and with the utmost alacrity; asknowing that their entire glory lay in nothingelse but dying honourably; and exposingthemselves to the utmost danger from theenemy; for they had nothing else to hope for.So they brought upon themselves the wholepower of the enemy till they were encom­passed round and slain, but not before theyhad killed many of the Philistines. Now thesons of Saul were Jonathan, Abinadab, andMalchishua. And when these were slain, themultitude of the Hebrews were put to flight;and all was disorder, confusion, and slaughter,upon the Philistines pressing in upon them.But Saul himself fled, having a strong body"of soldiers about him; and upon the Philis-
t 1 Sam: xxx. 25.







OCR Output








278 [book VIII. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


if any one would know the certainty aboutthem, he may desire of the keepers of thepublic records of Tyre to shew him them,and he will find what is there set down toagree with what we have said. I have saidso much out of a desire that my readers mayknow, that we speak nothing but the truth;and do not compose a history out of someplausible relations, which deceive men andplease them at the same time; nor attempt toavoid examination; nor desire men to be­lieve us immediately. Nor are we at libertyto depart from speaking the truth, which isthe proper commendation of an historian,and yet be blameless. But we insist uponno admission of what we say, unless we beable to maintain its truth by demonstrationand the strongest vouchers.
Now king Solomon, as soon as this epistleof the king of Tyre was brought him, com­mended the readiness and good will he de­clared therein; and repayed him in what hedesired, and sent him annually twenty thou­sand cori of wheat; and as many baths of oil.Now the bath is equal to seventy-two sexta-ries. He also sent him the same measure ofwine. So the friendship between Hiram andSolomon hereby increased more and more;and they swore to continue it for ever. Andthe king appointed a tribute to be laid on allthe people, of thirty thousand labourers;whose work he rendered easy by prudentlydividing it amongst them. For he made tenthousand cut timber in mount Lebanon, forone month, and then come home, and resttwo months, until the time when the othertwenty thousand had finished their task atthe appointed time. And so afterwards itcame to pass, that the first ten thousand re-


turned to their work every fourth month.And it was Adoram* who was over this tri­bute. There were also of the strangers leftby David, who were to carry the stones andother materials, seventy thousand; and ofthose that cut the stones, eighty thousand.Of these, three thousand and three hundredwere rulers over the rest. He also enjoinedthem to cut out large stones for the founda­tions of the temple, and that they should fitand unite them together in the mountain, andso bring them to the city. This was done notonly by our own workmen, but by thosewhom Hiram sent also.
CHAP. III.
OF THE BUILDING OF THE TEMPLE.
SOLOMON began to build the temple inthe fourth year of his reign,f on thesecond month, which the Macedonians callArtemisius, and the Hebrews, Jar, five hun­dred and ninety-two years after the Exodusout of Egypt; but one thousand and twenty-two years from Abraham's coming out ofMesopotamia, into Canaan, and after thedeluge one Jthousand four hundred and fortyyears; and from Adam the first man who wascreated, until Solomon built the temple, therehad passed in all ||three thousand one hun­dred and two years. Now that year on whichthe temple began to be built, was already thetwelfth year of the reign of Hiram; but fromthe building of Tyre, to the building of thetemple, there had passed two hundred andforty years.
Now, therefore, the king laid the founda­tion of the temple§ very deep in the ground,**


* Adoniram, 1 Kings i. 14.
t It may be asked why Solomon did not begin thebuilding of the temple sooner, and even in the first yearof his reign, since his father had left him a plan, and allthings necessary for the undertaking! Abarbinel's an­swer is,—That Solomon would not make use of what hisfather had prepared, but was resolved to build this templeall at his proper cost and charge. He therefore put intothe treasure of the Lord's house all that David had dedi­cated to the work; and, to gather together as much goldand silver as was necessary to defray so vast an expense,four years can be accounted no unreasonable time. Nay,even suppose that he had made use of the treasure whichhis father had amassed, yet, if the materials that his fatherhad provided lav at a considerable distance, and were leftrude and unf i^bioned, it would cost all this time to formthem into the exact symmetry, wherein the Scripture re­
presents them, before they were brought together, espe­cially considering, that the very stones which made thefoundation, were very probably vast blocks of marble, orporphyry, 1 Kings v. 17. and all polished in the most ex­quisite manner. Patrick's Commentary, and Pool's An­notations. B.
X 1989.
II 3545.
§ Of the temple of Solomon, here described by Jose-phus, in tins and the following parts of this chapter, seemy description of the temples belonging to this work,chap. 13. In which yet, after all my pains, some diffi­culties still remain not fully accounted for; especially asto the description and contents of the ten lavers. Ofwhich, somewhat more presently, as also of a few otherdifficulties not there always taken notice of.
** The temple itself was indeed but a small edifice







OCR Output








AN. 84.] 491 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


Adida: yet did he upon certain conditionsretire out of Judea.
But Alexander *marchcd again to thetcity Dios, and took it; and then made anexpedition against Es3a, where was the bestpart of Zeno's treasures: and there he encom­passed the place with three walls. And whenhe had taken the city he marched to Golan,and Seleucia. And when he had reducedthem, he took that valley which is called thevalley of Antiochus; as also the fortress Ga-mala. He also accused Demetrius, who wasgovernor of those places, of many crimes;and turned him out. And after he had spentthree years in this war, he returned to hisown country: when the Jews joyfully re­ceived him, upon this his good success.
At this time the Jews were in possession ofthe following cities that had belonged to theSyrians, Idumeans, and Phoenicians. At thesea side Strato's Tower, A po I Ionia, Joppa,Jamnia, Ashdod, Gaza, Anthedon, Raphia,and Rhinocolura. In the middle of thecountry near to Idumea, Adera, and Ma-rissa; near the country of Samaria, mountCarmel, and mount Tabor, Scythopolis, andGadara. Of the country of Gaulonitis, Se­leucia, and Gabala. In the country of Moab,Heshbon, and Medaba, Lemba, and Oronas,Gelithon, Zara, the valley of the Cilices, andPella. The last of these they utterly de­stroyed; because its inhabitants would notbear to Jchange their religious rites for thosepeculiar to the Jews. The Jews also pos­sessed others of the principal cities of Syria,which had been destroyed.
After this, king Alexander, although he fellinto a distemper by hard drinking, and hada quartan ague, which held him three years,yet would not leave off going out with hisarmy, till he was quite exhausted with thelabours he had undergone, and died in thebounds of ||Ragaba, a fortress beyond Jor­dan. But when his queen saw that he was


and at Damascus; as we learn from Josephus in manyplaces; and from St. Paul, 2 Cor. xi. 32. See the Noteon XVI. 9.
* An. 84 B. C.
t See Book XIV. chap. 1.
j We may here take notice, that whatever countriesor cities the Asmoneans conquered from any of the neigh­bouring nations; or whatsoever countries or cities theygained from them, that had not belonged to them before;they, after the days of Hyrcanus, compelled the inhabi-
VOL. I.—NOS. 41 & 42.


ready to die, and had no longer any hopesof surviving, she came to him weeping, andlamenting; and bewailed herself and hersons, on the desolate condition they shouldbe left in: and said to him,
"To whom dost thou thus leave me, andmy children: who are destitute of all othersupports; and this when thou knowest howmuch ill will thy nation bears thee?"
He replied, that she need but follow whathe would suggest to her, in order to retainthe kingdom securely, with her children.That she should conceal his death from thesoldiers, till she should have taken that place;that after this she should go in triumph, asupon a victory, to Jerusalem; and put someof her authority into the hands of the Phari­sees: for that they would commend her forthe honour she had done them; and wouldreconcile the nation to her. For he told her,that they had great authority among the Jews,both to do hurt to such as they hated, and tobring advantages to those to whom they werefriendly disposed. For that they are thenbelieved best of all by the multitude, whenthey speak any severe thing against others:though it be only out of envy at them. Andhe said, that it was by their means that hehad incurred the displeasure of the nation,whom indeed he had injured. "Do thou,therefore," said he, "when thou art come toJerusalem, send for the leading men amongIhem, and shew them my body: and, withgreat appearance of sincerity, give themleave to use it as they please: whether theywill dishonour me by refusing it burial, ashaving severely suffered by my means; orwhether, in their anger, they will offer anyother injury to that body. Promise themalso, that thou wilt do nothing without them,in the affairs of the kingdom. If thou dostbut act thus, I shall have the honour of amore sumptuous funeral from them than thoucouldest have made for me: and when it is
tants to leave their idolatry, and to receive the law ofMoses, as proselytes of justice; or else banished theminto other lands. That excellent prince, John Hyrcanus,did it to the Idumeans, as I have noted on chap. 9, al­ready, who lived then in the promised land; and this Isuppose justly: but by what right the rest did it, even tocountries or cities that were no part of that land, 1 do notknow. This looks too like unjust persecution for religion'II Or Argob. . - , . . j
41







OCR Output








AN. 1102.] 209 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


But when he saw that he was not there onthe second day of the month, he inquired ofJonathan, why the son of Jesse did not cometo the supper and the feast, neither the daybefore, nor that day? Jonathan replied, thathe was gone, according to the agreement be­tween them, to his own city, where his tribekept a festival, and that by his permission:that he also invited him to come to theirsacrifice; and, said Jonathan, "If thou wiltgive me leave, I will go thither, for thouknowest the good will that I bear him." Andthen it was that Jonathan understood hisfather's hatred to David; and plainly saw hisentire disposition. For Saul could not restrainhis anger, but reproached Jonathan, andcalled him the son of a runagate, and anenemy, and said he was a partner with David,and his assistant, and that by this behaviourhe shewed he had no regard to himself, or tohis mother; and would not be persuaded,that while David remained alive, their king­dom was not secure to them. Yet did he bidhim send for him, that he might be punished.And when Jonathan said, in answer, "Whathath he done that thou wilt punish him?"Saul no longer contented himself to expresshis anger in bare words, but snatched up hisspear, and leaped upon him, and was desirousto kill him. He did not indeed do what heintended, because he was hindered by hisfriends; but it appeared plainly to his son,that he hated David, and greatly desired todespatch him; insomuch, that he had almostslain his son with his own hands on his ac­count .
The king's son rose hastily from supper,and being then unable to admit any thinginto his mouth for grief, he wept all night;both because he had himself been near de­struction, and because the death of Davidwas determined. But as soon as it was day,he went out into the plain that was beforethe city; as going to perform his exercises;but, in reality, to inform his friend what dis­position his father was in towards him, as he


had agreed to do. And when Jonathan haddone what had been thus agreed, he dis­missed his servant that followed him, to re­turn to the city, but he himself went into thedesert, and came into his presence, and com­muned with him. So David appeared, andfell at Jonathan's feet, and bowed down tohim, and called him the preserver of his soul.But he lifted him up from the earth, and theymutually embraced one another, and made along greeting, and that not without tears.They also lamented their age, and that fa­miliarity which envy would deprive them of,and that separation which must now be ex­pected, which seemed to them no better thandeath itself. So recollecting themselves atlength from their lamentation, and exhortingeach other to be mindful of the oaths theyhad mutually sworn, they parted.*
CHAP. XII.
of David's flight; fikst to ahimelech, and after­wards TO THE KINGS OF THE PHILISTINES, AND OF THEMOABITES; AND OF THE DESTRUCTION OF AHIMELECHAND HIS FAMILY.
DAVID now fled from the king, and thatdeath he was in danger of by him; andcame to the city Nob, tof Ahimelech thepriest, who, when he saw him coming alone,and neither a friend nor a servant with him,he wondered at it; and desired to learn thecause why there was nobody with him? Towhich David answered, that the king hadcommanded him to do a certain thing thatwas to be kept secret, to which, if he had amind to know so much, he had no occasionfor any one to accompany him. "However,"said he, " I have ordered my servants to meetme at such and such a place." So he desiredhim to let him have somewhat to eat; andthat in case he would supply him, he wouldact the part of a friend, and be assisting tothe business he was now about. And whenhe had obtained what he desired, he alsoasked him, whether he had any weapons with


* l Sam. xx. 42.
t Whether this Ahimelech of the family of Ithamar, orAbiathar, of the same family were the Jewish high-priest,when David came to Nob, see my dissertation at the end ofmy Essay on the Revelation of St. John at large; pag.884—289. Josephus believed, that Ahimelech was thenthe high-priest, which seems contrary to our Saviour's
affirmation, Mar. ii. 25, 26. I mean this, unless therewere, in effect, two high-priests at the same time; theone of the family of Eleazar; and the other of that ofIthamar; the one Ahimelech, the other Abiathar: andthat our Saviour esteemed Abiathar to be so most pro­perly; which is not impossible to be supposed.







OCR Output








AN. 465 145.] ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


mans. So he called the people of Antiochtogether, and persuaded them to receiveDemetrius; and assured them, that he wouldnot be mindful of what they did to his father,in case he should now be obliged by them;and lie undertook that he would himself be agood monitor and governor to him; and pro­mised that he would not permit him to at­tempt any bad actions. But that for his ownpart he was contented with the kingdom ofEgypt. By which discourse he persuadedthe people of Antioch to receive Demetrius.
In the mean time, Alexander assembled anumerous army, and came out of Cilicia intoSyria, and burnt the country belonging toAntioch, and pillaged it.* Whereupon Pto­lemy, and his son-in-law Demetrius, broughttheir army against him; (for he had alreadygiven him his daughter in marriage;) andbeat Alexander, and put him to flight. Andaccordingly he fled into Arabia. Now it hap­pened in the time of battle that Ptolemy'shorse, upon hearing the noise of an elephant,cast him off his back, and threw him on theground. Upon the sight of this accident hisenemies fell upon him, and gave him manywounds upon his head, and brought him intodanger of death; for when his guards caughthim up, he was so very ill, that for four days'time he was not able either to understand, orto speak. However, Zabdiel, a prince amongthe Arabians, cut off Alexander's head, andsent it to Ptolemy. Who, recovering of hiswounds, and returning to his understandingon the fifth day, heard at once a most agree­able hearing, and saw a most agreeable sight;which were the death, and the head of Alex­ander. Yet a little after this joy for the deathof Alexander, with which he was so greatlysatisfied, he also departed this life. NowAlexander, who was called Balas, reignedover Asia five years.
But when Demetrius, who was styled fNi-cator, had taken the kingdom, he was so


wicked as to treat Ptolemy's soldiers veryhardly; neither remembering the league ofmutual assistance that was between them, northat he was his son-in-law and kinsman, byCleopatra's marriage to him. So the soldiersfled from his wicked treatment, to Alexandria.But Demetrius kept his elephants. In themean time Jonathan, the high-priest, leviedan army out of all Judea, and attacked thecitadel at Jerusalem, and besieged it. It washeld by a garrison of Macedonians, and bysome of those wicked men who had desertedthe customs of their forefathers. These menat first despised the attempts of Jonathan fortaking the place; as depending on its strength.But some of those wicked men went out bynight, and came to Demetrius, and informedhim, that the citadel was besieged. He wasaccordingly irritated with what he heard, andtook his army, and came from Antioch againstJonathan. And when he was at Antioch, hewrote to him, and commanded him to cometo him quickly, to Ptolemais. Jonathan didnot intermit the siege of the citadel; but tookwith him the elders of the people, and thepriests; and carried with him gold, and silver,and garments, and a great number of pre­sents of friendship, and came to Demetrius,and presented him with them, and therebypacified the king's anger. So he was ho­noured hy him, and received from him theconfirmation of his high-priesthood, as hehad possessed it by the grants of the kingshis predecessors. And when the Jewish de­serters accused him, Demetrius was so farfrom giving credit to them, that when he pe­titioned him that he would demand no morethan three hundred talents for the tribute ofall Judea, and the three toparchies of Sa­maria, Perea, and Galilee, he complied withthe proposal, and gave him a letter confirm­ing all those grants; whose contents were asfollow:—
"King DemetriusJ to Jonathan his hro­


* An. 145 B. C.
t This name, Demetrius Nicator, or Demetrius theConqueror, is so written on his coins still extant; asHudson and Spanheim informs us. The latter of whomgives us here the entire inscription, " King Demetrius,the god, Philadelphns, Nicator."
J Dr. Hudson observes, that Josephus gives us thisepistle of king Demetrius to Jonathan in purer Greek,than does the translator of the first book of Maccabees;where also it is preserved, 1 Mace. xi. 30—37. whence
he gathers, how careful Josephus was of elegance in theGreek tongue. Nor is this other than Josephus's usualcustom, in producing his other ancient records; which heloves to give us, as much as possible, in his own language.However, as I take it, the most material reason of thedifferent purity of these two versions of the presentepistle is this, that Josephus wrote the purer Attic, andthe translator of the first book of Maccabees the coarserHellenistic dialect; which would naturally produce thisinequality.







OCR Output








an. 1532.] 93 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


part of the body of the work. Upon everyone of the feet was also inserted a ring, notfar from the cover, through which went barsof gilded wood beneath, to be taken out uponoccasion; there being a cavity where it wasjoined to the rings: for they were not entirerings; but before they came quite round,they ended in acute points; one of which wasinserted into the prominent part of the table,and the other into the foot; and by these itwas carried when they journeyed. Upon thistable, which was placed on the north side ofthe temple, not far from the most holy place,were laid twelve unleavened loaves of bread,six upon each heap, one above another; theywere made of two tenth deals, of the purestflour, which tenth* deal is a measure of theHebrews, containing seven Athenian cotylae.Above those loaves were put two vials full offrankincense. Now after seven days, otherloaves were brought in their stead on theseventh day, which is by us called the sab­bath; but for the occasion of this inventionof placing loaves here, we will speak of it inanother place.
Over against this table, near the southernwall, was set a candlestick of cast gold, hol­low within, and of the weight of one hundredpounds, which the Hebrews call cinchares:which, if it be turned into the Greek language,denotes a talent . It was made with its knobs,lilies, pomegranates, and bowls: which orna­ments amounted to seventy in all. By thismeans the shaft elevated itself from a singlebase, and spread into as many branches asthere are planets, including the sun amongmem. It terminated in seven hands, in onerow, all standing parallel to each other; andthese branches carried seven lamps, one byone, in imitation of the number of the planets:these lamps looked to the east and the south,the candlestick being situate obliquely.
Between this candlestick, and the table,which, as we said, were within the sanctuary,was the altar of incense; made of wood in­deed, but of incorruptible wood, and en­tirely crusted over with a golden plate. Itsbreadth on each side was a cubit, but theheight double. Upon it was a grate of gold,above the altar, which had a golden crownencompassing it round about; whereto be-


* A homer


longed rings and bars, by which the priestscarried it, when they journeyed. Before thistabernacle there was reared a brazen altar,but it was within made of wood, five cubits bymeasure on each side, but its height was butthree; in like manner, adorned with brassplates, as bright as gold. It had also a bra­zen hearth of net work; for the ground un­derneath received the fire from the hearth,because it had no basis to receive it. Nearthis altar, lay the basons, the vials, the cen­sers, and the caldrons, made of gold; but theother vessels, made for the use of the sacri­fices, were all of brass. And such was theconstruction of the tabernacle, and the ves­sels thereto belonging.
CHAP. VII.
OF THE SACERDOTAL GARMENTS.
THERE were peculiar garments ap­pointed for the priests, and for all therest, which garments they call cahanaeae, orpriestly garments, as also for the high-priests,which they call cahanaeae rabbae, and denotethe high-priest's garment. Such was there­fore the habit of the rest: but when the priestapproaches the sacrifices, he purifies himselfwith the purification which the law prescribes.And in the first place he puts on that whichis called machanase, which means somewhatthat is fast tied. It is a girdle composed offine twined linen, into which the feet are in­serted, in the nature of breeches; but abovehalf of it is cut ofF, and it ends at the thighs,where it is tied fast.
Over this he wore a linen vestment, madeof fine flax doubled, and called chethone, forwe call linen by the name of chethone. Thisvestment reaches to the feet, and sits close tothe body; and has sleeves that are tied fastto the arms: it is girded to the breast a littleabove the elbows, by a girdle often goinground, four fingers broad; but so looselywoven, that it resembles the skin of a serpent.It is embroidered with flowers of scarlet, pur­ple, blue, and fine twined linen; but the warpis nothing but fine linen. The beginning ofits circumvolution is at the breast; and whenit has gone often round it is there tied, andhangs loosely down to the ankles. I meanthis, all the time the priest is not about any







OCR Output








an. 1897.] 35 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


received him kindly, because Abraham hadformerly lived with him, and had been hisfriend; but when he saw that God was withIsaac, and took such great care with him, hebecame envious, and drove him away. Per­ceiving this change in Abimelech's temper,Isaac retired to a place called the Valley,not far from Gerar: and as he was digging awell, the shepherds fell upon him, and beganto fight, in order to hinder the work; andbecause he did not desire to contend, theshepherds seemed to get the better of him.So he still retired, and dug another well: andwhen certain other shepherds, in the serviceof Abimelech began to offer him violence, heleft that also, and still retired: thus pur­chasing security to himself by a rational andprudent conduct. At length the king gavehim permission to dig a well, which he namedRehoboth; denoting a large space. But ofthe former wells, one was called Escon,which denotes strife; the other Sitenna, whichname signifies enmity.
Isaac's affairs were now in a flourishingcondition; and his power increased from hisgreat. riches. But Abimelech thinking Isaacthrove in opposition to him, while their livingtogether made them suspicious of each other:and Isaac's retiring shewed a secret enmityalso, the king was afraid that his formerfriendship would not secure him, if Isaacshould endeavour to revenge the injuries hehad formerly received: he therefore renewedhis friendship with him, in the presence ofPhiloc,* one of his generals; and when hehad obtained every thing he desired, by rea­son of Isaac's good nature, who preferred the


* While Josephus' copies, both Greek and Latin, men­tion this Philoc as one of Abimelech's generals, that ac­companied him when he renewed the old league withIsaac, which had been made long before with Abraham,our new edition calls him Phicol by the same name withthe general at the league made with Abraham, (which oldleague is not so distinctly mentioned by Josephus,) butthis conjectural reading is too uncertain to be dependedon.
t Gen. xxyi. 31.
I An. 1817.
II This supper of Savory meat, as we call it, Gen. xxvii.4, to be caught by hunting, was evidently intended for afestival on a sacrifice; and upon the prayers that werefrequent at sacrifices Isaac expected, as was then usual insuch eminent cases, that a divine impulse would comeupon him, in order to the solemn blessing of his son therepresent, and his foretelling his future behaviour and for­tune. Whence it must be, that when Isaac had blessed
voL. I.—No. 3.


earlier friendship Abimelech had shewed tohimself, and his father to alter his wrathagainst him, he returned home. f
Now when Esau, one of the sons of Isaac,whom the father principally loved was cometo the age of forty years he married Adah,Jthe daughter of Helon; and Aholibamah, thedaughter of Esebeon, which Helon and Ese-beon were great lords among the Canaanites;thereby taking upon himself the authority,and pretending to have dominion over hisown marriages, without so much as askingthe advice of his father. For had Isaac beenthe arbitrator, he would not have given himleave to marry thus, for he was not pleasedwith contracting any alliance with the peopleof that country; but not wishing to act harshlyby his son, in commanding him to put awaythese wives, he resolved to be silent.
But when he was old, and could not seeat all, he called Esau to him, and told him,that besides his blindness, and the disorderin his eyes, his very old age hindered himfrom his worship of God, by sacrifice: hebade him, therefore, to go out a hunting, andwhen he had caught as much venison as hecould, to prepare him a supper; || that afterthis he might make supplication to God to beto him a supporter, and an assister, duringthe old time of his life: saying, that it wasuncertain when he should die, and that hewas desirous, by his prayers for him, toprocure, before-hand, God to be merciful tohim.
Accordingly Esau went out a hunting. ButRebeka§ thinking it proper to have the sup­plication made for obtaining the favour of
Jacob, and was afterwards made sensible of his mistake,he did not attempt to alter it; because he knew that thisblessing came not from himself, but from God ; and thatan alteration was out of his power. A second afflatus thencame upon him, and enabled him to foretel Esau's futurebehaviour and fortune also.
§ Whether Jacob or his mother Rebeka were mostblameable in this imposition upon Isaac in his old age, 1cannot determine. However, the blessings being de­livered as a prediction of future events, by a divine im­pulse, and according to what Rebeka knew to be thepurpose of God, when he answered her inquiry, beforethe children were born, Gen. xxv. 23, that one peopleshould be stronger than the other; and that the elder,Esau, should serve the younger, Jacob. Whether Isaacknew, or remembered this oracle, delivered in our copies,only to Rebeka; or whether if he knew or rememberedit, he did not endeavour to alter the divine determination,out of his fondness for his elder son, Esau, to the damage







OCR Output








436 [book XII. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


sented those that attended about the kingwith gilts, to the value of a great number oftalents; that he might escape the danger hewas in from them: for to these it was thatHyrcanus's brethren had written to destroyhim. Now Ptolemy admired at the youngman's magnanimity: and commanded him toask what gift he pleased. But he desirednothing else to be done for him by the king,than to write to his father and brethrenabout him. So when the king had paid himvery great respect, and had given him verylarge gifts, and had written to his father andhis brethren, and all his commanders, andofficers about him, he sent him away. Butwhen his brethren heard that Hyrcanus hadreceived such favours from the king, and wasreturning home with great honour, they wentout to meet him, and to destroy him; and thatwith the privity of their father. For he wasangry at him for the large sum of money thathe bestowed for presents: and so had no con­cern for his preservation. However, Josephconcealed the anger he had at his son, outof fear of the king. And when Hyrcanus'sbrethren came to fight him, he slew manyothers of those that were with them; as alsotwo of his brethren themselves: but the restof them escaped to Jerusalem, to their father.But when Hyrcanus came to the city, wherenobody would receive him, he was afraid forhimself; and retired beyond the river Jordan,and there abode: obliging the Barbarians topay their taxes.


At this time Seleucus, who was calledSoter, reigned over Asia: being the son ofAntiochus the Great. And now Hyrcanus'sfather Joseph died. He was a good man,and of great magnanimity; and brought theJews out of a state of poverty and meanness,to one that was more splendid. He retainedthe farm of the taxes of Syria, and Phoenicia,and Samaria *twenty-two years. His uncle,Onias, also died about this time, and leftthe high-priesthood to his son Simon. Andwhen he was dead, Onias his son succeededhim in that dignity. To fhim it was thatAreus, king of the Lacedaemonians, sent anambassage, with an epistle: the copy where­of here follows:—
AREUS, KING OF THE LACEDEMONIANS, TO ONIAS,SENDETH GREETING.
"We have met with a certain writing,whereby we have discovered, that both theJews and the Lacedaemonians are of onestock; and are derived from the Jkindred ofAbraham. It is but just, therefore, that you,who are our brethren, should send to usabout any of your concerns as you please.We will also do the same: and esteem yourconcerns as our own: and will look uponour concerns as in common with yours. De-moteles, who brings this letter, will bringyour answer back to us. This letter is foursquare: and the seal is an eagle, with adragon in his claws."


* Thirty-six years in one manuscript; which is per­haps the true number. See Prideaux at an. 226.
t Take here Dean Prideaux's account of this letter, atthe year 183, which I suppose to be the truth of this case."It is," says he, "most likely Josephus mistook the Oniasto whom this letter was directed, and ascribed that toOnias III. which was done only in the time of Onias I.For while Onias, the first of that name, the son of Jad-dua, was high-priest of the Jews, there was one Areusking of Lacedaemon; (which it no way appears there wasin the days of Onias the third.) And from him mostlikely it was that this letter was written. AccordinglyJonathan, in his letter to the Lacedaemonians, (1 Mace,xii. 10. Antiq. XIII. 5.) wherein he makes mentionof this letter of Areus's, says, There was a long timepassed since it had been sent to them. Which couldnot hare been said by Jonathan in respect of the timein which Onias III. was high-priest: since from thedeath of that Onias, to the time that Jonathan wasmade prince of the Jews, there had passed no morethan twelve years."
J Whence it comes that these Lacedaemonians declarethemselves here to be of kin to the Jews, as derived
both from the same ancestor Abraham, I cannot tell.Unless, as Grotius supposes, they were derived from theDores, that came of the Pelasgi. These are by Hero­dotus, in effect, called Barbarians: and perhaps werederived from the Syrians and Arabians, the posterity ofAbraham by Keturah, see Antiq. XIV. 10; Of the War,I. 26. and Grotius on 1 Mace. xii. 7. We may fartherobserve from the recognitions of Clement I. 33. thatEliezer of Damascus, the servant of Abraham, Gen. xv. 2.and xxiv. was of old by some taken for his son. So thatif the Lacedaemonians were sprung from him, they mightthink themselves to be of the posterity of Abraham; aswell as the Jews, who were sprung from Isaac. And per­haps this Eliezer of Damascus is that very Damascus,whom Trogus Pompeius, as abridged by Justin, makes thefounder of the Jewish nation itself. Though he afterwardblunders, and makes Azelus, Adores, Abraham, and Is­rael, kings of Judea; and successors to this Damascus:XXXVI. 2. It may not be improper to observe far­ther, that Moses Chorenensis, in his history of the Ar­menians, informs us, that the nation of the Parthian?also was derived from Abraham, by Keturah, and herchildren.







OCR Output








'if


 


The _&ejauine_wor ka_fif.Flavius Josephua


 


Jo3ephus. F


EGEW5


1821111—


 


w$mtii£F!~-'







OCR Output








AN. 44.] 517 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


were friendly to the Jews, even in the daysof Abraham; who was the father of all theHebrews; as we have also found it set downin our public records."
"The decree of those of Halicarnassus.When Memnon, the son of Orestidas, by de­scent, but by adoption of Euonymus, waspriest in the month Aristerion, the decree ofthe people, upon the representation of Mar­cus Alexander, was this. Since we have evera great regard to piety towards God, and toholiness; and since we aim to follow the peo­ple of the Romans, who are the benefactorsof all men, and what they have written to usabout a league of friendship and mutual as­sistance between the Jews and our city, andthat their sacred offices, and accustomed fes­tivals and assemblies, may be observed bythem: we have decreed, that as many menand women of the Jews as are willing so todo, may celebrate their sabbaths, and per­form their holy offices according to the Jew­ish laws, and may* make their proseuchae atthe sea side; according to the custom of theirforefathers. And if any one, whether he bea magistrate, or private person, hinder themfrom so doing, he shall be liable to a fine; tobe applied to the uses of the city."
"The decree of the Sardians. This de­cree was made by the senate and people,upon the representation of the praetors.Whereas those Jews who are our fellow citi­zens, and live with us in this city, have everhad great benefits heaped upon them by thepeople; and have come now into the senate,and desired of the people that, upon the res­titution of their law, and their liberty by thesenate and people of Rome, they may assem­ble together according to their ancient legalcustom; and that we will not bring any suit


against them about it; and that a place maybe given, where they may have their con­gregations, with their wives and children;and may offer, as did their forefathers, theirprayers and sacrifices to God: now the senateand people have decreed to permit them toassemble together on the days formerly ap­pointed; and to act according to their ownlaws: and that such a place shall be setapart for them by the praetors, for the build­ing and inhabiting the same, as they shallesteem fit for that purpose. And that thosewho take care of the provisions for the city,shall take care that such sorts of food, asthey esteem fit for their eating, may be im­ported into the city."
"The decree of the Ephesians. WhenMenophilus was prytanis; on the first day ofthe month Artemisius, this decree was madeby the people; and Nicanor, the son of Eu-phemus, pronounced it, upon the representa­tion of the praetors. Since the Jews thatdwell in this city have petitioned Marcus Ju­lius Pompeius, the son of Brutus, the procon­sul, that they may be allowed to observe theirsabbaths; and to act in all things accordingto the customs of their forefathers, withoutimpediment from any body; the praetor hathgranted their petition. Accordingly it wasdecreed by the senate and people, that, inthis affair that concerned the Romans, noone of them should be hindered from keepingthe sabbath day, nor be fined for so doing:but that they be allowed to do all things ac­cording to their own laws."
Now there are fmany such decrees of thesenate and imperators of the Romans, andthose different from these before us, whichhave been made in favour of Hyrcanus, andof our nation; as also there have been more


and that the public acts of their city then extant confirmedthe same. This evidence is too strong to be evaded byour present ignorance of the particular occasion of suchancient friendship and alliance between those people. Seethe like full evidence of the kindred of the Lacedaemoni­ans and the Jews; and that because they were both theposterity of Abraham: by a public epistle of these peopleto the Jews, preserved in the first book of the Maccabeesxii. 19—23. and thence by Josephus, in his Antiquities,XII. 4. both which authentic records are highly valuable.It is also worthy of observation, what Moses Chorenensis,the principal Armenian historian, informs us of, page 83.that Arsaces, who raised the Parthian empire, was of theseed of Abraham, by Chetura; and that thereby was ac­complished that prediction, which said, "Kings of nations
shall proceed from thee." Gen. xvii. 6.
* See the note on Book XII. chap. 2.
t If we compare Josephus's former promises to produceall the public decrees of the Romans in favour of the Jews,with his excuse here, for omitting many of them; wemay observe, that when he came to transcribe all thosedecrees he had collected, he found them so numerous,that he thought he should too much tire his readers if hehad attempted it: which he thought a sufficient apologyfor his omitting the rest of them. Yet do those by himproduced, afford such a strong confirmation to his history,and give such great light to even the Roman antiquitiesthemselves; that I believe the curious are not a littlesorry for such omissions.


4M2







OCR Output








AS. 59 1747.] ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


tion for the preservation of the life of Ben­jamin.
Joseph being now overcome with his affec­tion, and no longer able to personate an angryman, commanded all that were present todepart, that he might make himself known tohis brethren, when they were alone.* Andwhen the rest were gone out, he discoveredhimself, and said, "I commend you for yourvirtue, and for your kindness to your brother;I find you better men than I could have ex-
fiected from what you contrived about me.ndeed I did all this to try your love to yourbrother. So I believe you were not wickedby nature, in what you did in my case: butthat all has happened according to God's will;who has thereby procured our enjoyment ofwhat good things we have; and if he continuein a favourable disposition, of what we hopefor hereafter. Since, therefore, I know thatour father is safe, and well, beyond expecta­tion; and I see you so well disposed towardsyour brother, I will no longer remember whatguilt you seem to have had about me; butrather return you my thanks, that you haveconcurred with the intentions of God to bringthings to their present state. I would haveyou also forget the same, since that impru­dence of yours is come to such a happy con­clusion, rather than to be uneasy and blush atthose your offences. Do not therefore, letyour evil intentions, when you condemnedme, and that bitter remorse which might fol­low, be a grief to you now: because thoseintentions were frustrated. Go your way, re­joicing in what has happened by the divineprovidence, and inform your father of it, lesthe should be spent with tears for you, and de­prive me of the most agreeable part of myfelicity; I mean lest he should die before hecomes into my sight, and enjoys the goodthings that we now have. Take therefore,with you our father, and your wives and chil­dren, and all your kindred, and remove yourhabitation hither; for it is not proper that thepersons dearest to me should live remote fromme, now my affairs are so prosperous; espe­cially when they must endure five more yearsof famine." When Joseph had said this, heembraced his brethren, who were in tears andsorrow; but the* generous kindness of their
* Gen. xIt. 1.
vor,. i.—no. 5.


brother seemed to leave among them no roomfor fear, lest they should be punished on ac­count of what they had consulted and actedagainst him. And they were then feasting.Now the king, as soon as he heard that Jo­seph's brethren were come to him, was ex­ceeding glad of it, as if it had been part ofhis own good fortune; and gave them wag­gons full of corn, and gold, and silver, to beconveyed to their father. Now when theyhad received more of their brother; part tobe carried to their father, and part as free giftsto every one of themselves, Benjamin havingstill more than the rest, they departed.
CHAP. VII.
OF THE REMOVAL OF JACOB AND ALL HIS FAMILY INTO EGYTT,ON ACCOUNT OF THE FAMINE.
AS soon as Jacob came to know by hissons' returning home, in what state Jo­seph was; that he had not only escaped death,but that he lived in splendour and happiness,and ruled over Egypt, jointly with the king;and had intrusted to his care almost all hisaffairs, he did not think any thing he was toldto be incredible, considering the greatness ofthe works of God, and his kindness to him:although that kindness had, for some timepast, been intermitted. So he immediatelyand zealously set out upon his journey to him.
When he came to the well of the oath,Beersheba, he offered sacrifice to God,f andbeing afraid that the happiness there was inEgypt might tempt his posterity to fall in lovewith it, and settle in it, and no more think ofremoving into the land of Canaan, and pos­sessing it as God had promised them; also,being afraid, lest if this descent into Egyptwere made without the will of God, his familymight be destroyed there, and out of fear lesthe should depart this life before he came tothe sight of Joseph, he fell asleep, revolvingthese doubts in his mind.
But God stood by him, and called to himtwice by his name: and when he asked whohe was? God said, "Is it not just that thouJacob shouldest be acquainted with that Godwho has ever been a protector and a helperto thy forefathers, and after them to thyself.For when thy father would have deprived
t Gen. xlvii. 1.







OCR Output








AN. 389 530.] ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


be given them out of the tributes due fromSamaria. The priests shall also offer thesesacrifices according to the laws of Moses inJerusalem: and when they offer them, theyshall pray to God for the preservation of theking, and of his family; that the kingdom ofPersia may continue. But my will is, thatthose who disobey these injunctions, andmake them void, shall be hung upon a cross,and their substance brought into the king'streasury. And such was the import of thisepistle. Now the number of those that cameout of captivity to Jerusalem, were forty-twothousand four hundred and sixty-two.
CHAP. II
OF THt OPPOSITION WHICH THE JEWS EXPERIENCED FROMTHE CUTHEANS, AND THE NEIGHBOURING GOVERNORS;OF THE COMMAND OF CAMBYSES TO STOP THE BUILDINGOF THE TEMPLE.
WHEN the foundations of the templewere laying, and when the Jews werezealous about building it, the neighbouringnations, and especially the Cutheans, whomShalmaneser, king of Assyria, had broughtout of Persia and Media, and had planted inSamaria, when he carried the people of Is­rael captive; besought the governors, andthose that had the care of such affairs, thatthey would interrupt the Jews, both in therebuilding of their city, and in the buildingtheir temple. Now as these men were cor-


rupted with money, they sold the Cutheanstheir interest for rendering this building aslow and careless work. For Cyrus, whowas busy about other wars, knew nothing ofall this; and it so happened that when hehad led his army against the *Massageta3,he ended his life.f But when Cambyses,the son of Cyrus, had taken the kingdom,the governors in Syria, and Phoenicia, andin the countries of Ammon and Moab, andSamaria, wrote an epistle to Cambyses,whose contents were as follows:
"To our lord Cambyses; we thy servants,Rathumus the historiographer, and Semelliusthe scribe, and the rest that are thy judgesin Syria and Phoenicia, greeting. It is fit, Oking! that thou shouldest know, that thoseJews who were carried to Babylon, are comeinto our country; and are building that re­bellious and wicked city, and its market­places, and setting up its walls, and raisingup the temple. Know therefore, that whenthese things are finished, they will not bewilling to pay tribute, nor will they submitto thy commands; but will resist kings, andwill choose rather to rule over others, thanbe ruled over themselves. We thereforethought it proper to write to thee, O king,while the works about the temple are goingon so fast, and not to overlook this matter;that thou mayest search into the books ofthy fathers; for thou wilt find in them, thatthe Jews have been rebels, and enemies to


'* Josephus here follows Herodotus, and those that re­lated how Cyrus made war with the Scythians and Mas-sagetes, near the Caspian Sea, and perished in it. Ofwhom Strabo speaks, XI. page 307, to whom yet he giveslittle credit. While Xenophon's account, which appearsnever to have been seen by Josephus, that Cyrus died inpeace in his own country of Persia, corroborated by thewriters of the affairs of Alexander the Great; when theyagree, that he found Cyrus's sepulchre or Pasargadanear Persepolis. This account of" Xenophon's is alsostrongly confirmed by the circumstances of Cambyses,upon his succession to Cyrus; who instead of a war toavenge his father's death upon the Scythians and Massa-getes, and to prevent those nations from over-running hisnorthern provinces; which would have been the naturalconsequence of his father's ill success and death there;went immediately to an Egyptian war, long ago beganby Cyrus, according to Xenophon, page 644, and con­quered that kingdom. Nor is there, that I ever heardof, the least mention in the reis^i of this Cambyses of anywar against the Scythians or Massagetes that he was everengaged in. Nor, by the way, is this Cambyses anyother than that Artashashta, which our canonical Ezranames in this place, iv. 5, &c.
t It is generally agreed by historians, that Cyrus wasmuch about seventy years old when he died; but thenthey widely differ among themselves as to the mannerof his death. Some say, that he was taken in an en­gagement, and hanged; others, that he died of a woundwhich he received in his thigh; and others, that he waskilled in a battle with the people of Samos. Herodotus,Justin, and Valerius Maximus relate, that, in his waragainst the Scythians, falling into an ambush whichQueen Tomyris had laid for him, he was taken prisoner,and, with insult enough, had his head cut off by herorder; but Xenophon's account is,—that he died peace­ably in his bed, amidst his friends, and in his own coun­try; as, indeed, there is little reason to think, eitherthat so wise a man as Cyrus should, in his advancedyears, engage in so desperate an undertaking as thisScythian expedition is represented on all hands, or that,had he died in Scythia, his mangled body could haveever been got out of the hands ot these barbarians tobe buried at Pasargada in Persia, as most authors agreeit was, and where his monument was to be seen inthe time of Alexander the Great. Calmefs Dictionary,under the word Cyrus; and Prideaux's Connection, anna530. B.


3-T2







OCR Output








486 [book XIII. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


firesent, but to expect a much greater warrom Egypt. For that Cleopatra would notoverlook an army raised by Ptolemy for him­self, out of the neighbourhood; but wouldcome against them with a great army oftheir own: and this because she was labour­ing to eject her son out of Cyprus also; thatas for Ptolemy, if he failed of his hopes, hecould still retire to Cyprus: but that theywould be left in the greatest danger possible.Now Ptolemy, although he had heard of thechange that was made in the people of Pto-lemais, yet did he still go on with his voyage,and came to the country called Sycamine,and there set his army on shore. This army,including horse and foot, consisted of aboutthirty thousand men, with which he marchednear to Ptolemais, and there pitched hiscamp. But when the people of Ptolemaisneither received his ambassadors, nor wouldhear what they had to say, he was undergreat concern.
But when Zoilus, and the people of Gaza,came to him, and desired his assistance, be­cause their country was laid waste by theJews, and by Alexander; Alexander raisedthe siege, for fear of Ptolemy. And when hehad drawn off his army into his own country,he used a stratagem afterwards, by privatelyinviting Cleopatra to come against Ptolemy;but publicly pretending to desire a league offriendship and mutual assistance with him.And promising to give him four hundredtalents of silver, he desired that, by way ofrequital, he would take off Zoilus the tyrant,and give his country to the Jews. HereuponPtolemy made such a league of friendshipwith Alexander, and subdued Zoilus." Butwhen he afterward heard, that he had privilysent to Cleopatra his mother, he brake theleague with him, which yet he had confirmedwith an oath; and fell upon him, and besieg­ed Ptolemais; because it would not receivehim. However, leaving his generals witheome part of his forces to go on with theeiege, ne went himself immediately with therest to ravage Judea. And when Alexanderunderstood this to be Ptolemy's intention, he


also got together about fifty thousand sol­diers, out 01 his own country; nay, *as somewriters have said, eighty thousand. He thentook his army, and went to meet Ptolemy.But Ptolemy fell upon Asochis, a city ofGalilee, and took it by force on the sabbathday: and there he took about ten thousandslaves, and a great deal of other prey.
He then attempted to take Sepphoris, acity not far from that which was destroyed;but lost many of his men. Yet did he thengo to fight with Alexander; who met him atthe river Jordan, near a certain place calledSaphoth; and pitched his camp near to theenemy. He had however eight thousand inthe first rank, whom he styled fhecatontoma-chi, having shields of brass. But Ptolemy'ssoldiers in other respects were inferior tothose of Alexander; and thereupon were themore fearful of running hazards. But Phi-lostephanus, the camp-master, put greatcourage into them; and ordered them topass the river, which was between theircamps. Nor did Alexander think fit to hin­der their passage over it: for he thought,that if the enemy had once gotten the riveron their back, that he should the easier takethem prisoners, when they could not flee outof the battle. When the engagement began,the acts on both sides were alike: and agreat slaughter was made by both the ar­mies. But Alexander was superior; tillPhilostephanus opportunely brought up theauxiliaries, to help those that were givingway. But as there were no auxiliaries toafford help to that part of the Jews that gaveway, it fell out that they fled; and those nearthem did not assist them: but fled alongwith them. However, Ptolemy's soldiersacted quite otherwise. For they followedthe Jews, and killed them; till at lengththose that slew them pursued after them,when they had made them all run away; andslew them so long, that their weapons ofiron were blunted, and their hands quitetired with the slaughter. For the reportwas, that thirty thousand men were thenslain; Timagenes says they were fifty thou~


* From this and other occasional expressions, droppedby Josephus, we may learn that where the sacred books«f the Jews were deficient, he had several other historiesthen extant, but now most of them lost, which he faith­fully followed in his own history. Nor indeed have we
any other records of those times, relating to Judea, thatcan be compared to these accounts of Josephus: thoughwhen we do meet with authentic fragments of such ori­ginal records, they almost always confirm his history,t Each able of himself to fight a hundred men







OCR Output








616 [book XIV. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


send greeting. Sopater, the ambassador ofHyrcanus the high-priest, hath delivered usan epistle from thee; whereby he lets usknow that certain ambassadors were comefrom Hyrcanus, the high-priest of the Jews,and brought an epistle written concerningtheir nation; wherein they desire that theJews may be allowed to observe their sab­baths, and other sacred rites, according tothe laws of their forefathers; and that theymay not be prevented therefrom; becausethey are our friends and confederates; andthat nobody may injure them in our provinces.Now although the Trallians there presentcontradicted them, and were not pleasedwith these decrees, yet didst thou give orderthat they should be observed; and inform-edst us that thou hadst been desired to writethis to us about them. We therefore, in obe­dience to the injunctions received from thee,have received thy epistle; and have laid itup among our public records. And as to theother things about which thou didst send, wewill take care that no complaint be madeagainst us."
"Publius Servilius, the son of Publius, ofthe Galban tribe, proconsul, to the magis­trates, senate, and people of the Milesians,sendeth greeting. Prytanes, the son of Her­mes, a citizen of yours, came to me when Iwas at Tralles, and held a court there; andinformed me, that you used the Jews in away different from my opinion; and forbadethem to celebrate their sabbaths, and to per­form their sacred rites received from theirforefathers; and to manage the fruits of theland according to their ancient custom; andthat he had himself been the promulger ofyour degree, according as your laws require.I would therefore have you know, that uponhearing the pleadings on both sides, I gavesentence, that the Jews should not be prohi­bited from making use of their own customs."
"The decree of those of Pergamus. WhenCratippus was prytanis, on the first day ofthe month Desius, the decree of the praetorswas this. Since the Romans, following theconduct of their ancestors, undertake dan­gers for the common safety of all mankind;and are ambitious to settle their confederatesand friends in happiness, and in firm peace;
* We haye here a most remarkable and authentic at­testation of the citizens of Pergamus, that Abraham was


and since the nation of the Jews, and theirhigh-priest Hyrcanus, sent as ambassadorsto them, Strabo the son of Theodatus, Apol-lonius, the son of Alexander, Eneas, the sonof Antipater, Aristobulus, the son of Amyn-tas, and Sosipater, the son of Philip, worthyand good men; who gave a particular ac­count of their affairs: the senate thereuponmade a decree about what they had desiredof them; that Antiochus the king, the son ofAntiochus, should do no injury to the Jews,the confederates of the Romans; and thatthe fortresses and the havens, and the coun­try, and whatsoever else he had taken fromthem, should be restored; and that it may belawful for them to export their goods out oftheir own havens; and that no king nor peo­ple may have leave to export any goods, ei­ther out of the country of Judea, or out oftheir havens, without paying customs; butonly Ptolemy, king of Alexandria: becausehe is our confederate, and friend: and thataccording to their desire the garrison that isin Joppa may be ejected. Now Lucius Pet-tius, one of our senators, a worthy and goodman, gave order that we should take carethat these things should be done. accordingto the senate's decree; and that their ambas­sadors might return home in safety. Accor­dingly we admitted Theodorus into our se­nate, and took the epistle out of his hands,as well as the decree of the senate. And ashe discoursed with great zeal about the Jews,and described Hyrcanus's virtue and gene­rosity, and how he was a benefactor to allmen in common, and particularly to everybody that comes to him; we laid up theepistle in our public records; and made adecree ourselves, that since we also are inconfederacy with the Romans, we would doevery thing we could for the Jews, accordingto the senate's decree. Theodorus also, whobrought the epistle, desired of our praetorsthat they would send Hyrcanus a copy ofthat decree; as also ambassadors to signifyto him the affection of our people; and toexhort them to preserve and augment theirfriendship for us, and be ready to bestowother benefits upon us; as justly expectingto receive proper requitals from us; and de­siring them to remember, that our *ancestors
the father of all the Hebrews; that their own ancestorswere, in the eldest times, the friends of those Hebrews ,







OCR Output








274 [book VIII. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


in those things wherein he excelled. WhenSolomon heard this from God, he leaped outof his bed; and when he had worshipped himhe returned to Jerusalem; and after he hadoffered great sacrifices before the tabernacle,he feasted all his own family.*
In those days a cause came before him injudgment, which it was very difficult to findany end of. And I think it necessary to ex­plain the fact about which the contest was,that such as peruse my writings may knowwhat difficult cause Solomon was to deter­mine; and those that are concerned in suchmatters may take this sagacity of the king'sfor a pattern, that they may the more easilygive sentence about such questions. Therewere two womervt who were harlots in thecourse of their lives, that came to him; ofwhom she that seemed to be injured beganto speak first, and said, "O king! I and thisother woman dwell together in one room.Now it came to pass, that we both bore a sonat the same hour of the same day, and on thethird day this woman overlaid her son, andkilled it; and then took my son out of mybosom, and removed him to herself; and as Iwas asleep, she laid her dead son in my arms.Now when, in the morning, I was desirousto give the breast to the child, I did not findmy own; but saw this woman's dead child


* 1 Kings iii. 15.
t These two women are said in the text to be harlots;but the Hebrew word, as we took notice in the case ofRahab, may equally signify a hostess, or one who kept ahouse of public entertainment; and that it is so to be takenhere we have these reasons to presume: that as all publicprostitution was severely forbidden by the law, Deut. xxiii.17. women of this infamous character durst not have pre­sented themselves before so just and so wise a king: thatwomen of this lewd behaviour seldom do become mothersof children, and when they chance to have any, are notso solicitous for their preservation, but rather rejoicewhen they have got rid of them. There is no reason tosuppose then, that these women were common harlots;and yet it is generally thought, that they were both un­married persons, and guilty of fornication, because nomention is made of their husbands, whose office it was, ifthey had any, to contest the matter for their wives. Pool'sAnnotations, and Calmtfs Commentary. B.
I Solomon knew at once that the only sign that woulddiscover the truth, would be her affection, and compas­sion, and tenderness for her child; and therefore in orderto distinguish between the two, his business was to maketrial of this; and if we suppose, that when he commandedthe child to be divided, he spake with a sedate counte­nance, and seeming earnestness, as the true mother's pe­tition to the king makes it apparent that he did, then we


lying by me; for I examined it attentively,and found it so to be. Hence it was that Idemanded my son; and when 1 could notobtain him, I have recourse, my lord, to thyassistance. For since we were alone, andthere was nobody there that could convicther, or affright her, she cares for nothing;but perseveres in an obstinate denial of thefact.
When this woman had spoken, the kingasked the other, what she had to say in con­tradiction to that story? And when she haddenied that she had done what was chargedupon her, and said that it was her child thatwas living, and that it was her antagonist'schild that was dead; and when no one coulddevise what judgment could be given, andthe whole court were blind in their under­standing, and could not tell how to find outthis riddle; the king invented the followingmethod of discovering it. He bade thembring in both the dead and the living child;and commanded one of his guards to fetch asword, and to cut both the children into twopieces, that each of the women might havehalf the living and half the dead child. Here­upon all the people privately laughed at theking, as no more than a youth. But in themean time the real mother of the living childcried out,J that he should not do so, but de-may suppose farther, not only the two women, but allthe people present, with horror and admiration, expectingthe execution of the thing; which, when it ended in sojust a decision, quite contrary to what they looked for,raised joy in every breast, and gave a more advantageouscommendation to the judge: and yet Abarbinel, the Jewishcommentator, thinks, that all this was no great proof ofSolomon's extraordinary wisdom, nor could it beget that ,fear or reverence which the text says, 1 Kings iii. 28. *it procured to his person. His opinion therefore is, thatSolomon made a discovery of the truth antecedent to thisexperiment, that by observing the countenance, the man­ner of speech, and all the motions of the women, he dis­cerned the secret of their heart, and penetrated to thebottom of the business; and that his commanding the childto be divided afterwards, was only to notify to the company,what he before had discovered. However this be, it maynot be improper, upon this occasion, to mention an instanceor two out of profane history, of a singular address, thoughmuch inferior to this, in discovering such secrets as seemedto be past finding out. To this purpose, Suetonius, inhis life of Claudian, chap. 15, tell us, how that emperordiscovered a woman to be the mother of a young man,whom she would not own for her son, by commanding herto be married to him; for the horror of committing incestobliged her to declare the truth; and, in like manner,Diodorus Siculus relates, how Ariopharnes, king of the







OCR Output








170 [book v. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


placed men in ambush about them, that hemight not escape without being perceived:but Sampson, who was acquainted with theircontrivances, arose about midnight, and ranby force upon the gates, with their posts, andbeams, and the rest of their wooden furniture;and carried them on his shoulders, to themountain that is over Hebron;* and therelaid them down.
However, he at lengtht transgressed thelaw of his country; and altered his own re­gular way of living, and imitated the strangecustoms of foreigners; which thing was thebeginning of his miseries. For he fell in lovewith a woman that was a harlot among thePhilistines: her name was Delilah, and helived with her. So those that administeredthe public affairs of the Philistines came toher, and persuaded her to attempt a discoveryof that strength, by which Sampson becameunconquerable to his enemies. Accordinglywhen they were drinking, and had the likeconversation together, she pretended to ad­mire the actions he had done; and contrivedto get out of him by subtilty by what meanshe so much excelled others in strength.Sampson, in order to delude Delilah, (for hehad not yet lost his senses,) replied, that if hewere bound with seven such green withs of avine, as might still be wreathed, he should beweaker than any other man. The womansaid no more then; but told this to the rulersof the Philistines, and hid certain of theirsoldiers in ambush within the house; andwhen he was disordered in drink, and asleep,she bound him, as fast as possible, with thewiths; and then, upon her awakening him,


she told him, some of the people were uponhim; but he brake the withs, and endeavouredto defend himself, as though some of his ene­mies were really upon him. Now this woman,in the constant conversation Sampson hadwith her, pretended, that she took it very illthat he had such little confidence in her affec­tion, that he would not tell her what she de­sired; as if she would not conceal what sheknew it was for his interest to have concealed.However, he deluded her again, and told her,that if they bound him with seven cords, heshould lose his strength. And when, upondoing this, she gained nothing, he told herthe third time, that his hair should be woveninto a web; but the truth was not yet disco­vered. At length, however, Sampson, uponDelilah's intreaty (for he was doomed to fallinto some affliction,) was desirous to pleaseher, and told her, that God took care of him;and that he was born by his providence, andtherefore he suffered his hair to grow; Godhaving charged him never to cut it,J andthence his strength was according to the in­crease and continuance of his hair. Whenshe had learned thus much, and had deprivedhim of his hair, she delivered him up to hisenemies, when he was not strong enough todefend himself. So they put out his eyes, andbound him,|| and had him led about amongthem.
But in process of time Sampson's hair grewagain. And there was a public festival amongthe Philistines, when the rulers, and those ofthe most eminent characters, were feastingtogether.§ Now the room wherein they werehad its roof supported by two pillars. So


* Judg. xvi. 3.
t See this justly observed in the Apostolical Constitu­tions, VIII. 37. that Sampson's prayer was heard, but thatit was before this his transgression.
J Pliny (Nat. Hist. lib. xii. cap. 20.) has preserved thememory of several men remarkable for their greatstrength. The heathens were so well acquainted with thecircumstances of Sampson's history, that from it theyformed the fable of Nisus, the king of Megara, upon whosehair the fortune of his kingdom depended. Patrick, inlocum. B.
II Judg. xvi. 21.
§ Some persons have asserted, that no building suffi­ciently capacious to receive so great a number of peoplecould be constructed so as to rest chiefly upon two pillars.But this is a mistake; for Pliny (Nat. Hist. lib. xxxv. cap.15.) mentions two theatres built by C. Curio, (who waskilled in the civil wars, on Caesar's side,) which weremade of wood, and so extensive as (according to his mode
of writing) to hold all the Roman people. They werecontrived with such art, that each of them depended uponone hinge. This caused Pliny to censure the madness ofthe people, who would venture into a place for theirpleasure, where they sat tarn infida instabiliqve sede, onsuch an uncertain and unstable seat; for if that hinge hadgiven way, there had been a greater slaughter than at thebattle of Cannae. This entirely removes any imaginarydifficulty, of this nature at least, from the history ofSampson. "The Eastern method of building may assistus in accounting for the particular structure of the temple,or house, of Dagon, (Judg. xvi.) and the great number ofpeople that were buried in the ruins of it, by pulling downthe two principal pillars. We read (v. 27.) that aboutthree thousand persons were upon the roof, to beholdwhile Sampson made sport. Sampson must therefore havebeen in a court, or area, below them, and consequentlythe temple will be of the same kind with the ancienttc/aev*] , or sacred inclosures, surrounded only in part or







OCR Output








kit. 710.] 305 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


BOOK X.


Containing an Interval of One Hundred and Eighty-two Years and a half.


PROM THE CAPTIVITY OF THE TEN TRIBES TO THE FIRST OF CYRUS.


CHAP. I.


o» Sennacherib's expedition against hezekiab; THE
THREATENINGs OF RABSHAKEH J THE FAILURE OF THEEXPEDITION, AND THE SUBSEQUENT DEATH OF SENNA­CHERIB.
IT was now the fourteenth year of thegovernment of Hezekiah, king of thetwo tribes, when Sennacherib, king of As­syria, made an expedition against him, witha great army, and took all the cities of thetribes of Judah and Benjamin by force.*And when he was ready to bring his armyagainst Jerusalem, Hezekiah sent ambassa­dors to him, promising to submit, and to paywhat tribute ne should appoint. HereuponSennacherib resolved not to proceed in thewar, but to accept of the proposals that weremade him: and if he might receive threehundred talents of silver, and thirty talentsof gold, he promised that he would depart ina friendly manner; and gave security uponoath to the ambassadors that he would thendo Hezekiah no harm, but go away as hecame. So Hezekiah submitted, and emptiedhis treasures, and sent the money; as sup-


C


posing he should be freed from his enemy,and from any farther distress about his king­dom. Accordingly the Assyrian took it, and
et had no regard to what he had promised;
ut while he himself went to the war againstthe Egyptians and Ethiopians, he left hisgeneral Rabshakeh,t and two other of hisprincipal commanders, with great forces todestroy Jerusalem. The names of the twoother commanders were Tartan and Rab­saris.!
Now as soon as they were come before thewalls, they pitched their camp, and sent mes­sengers to Hezekiah, and desired that theymight speak with him. But he did not him­self come out to them for fear; but sent threeof his most intimate friends: viz. Eliakim,who was over the kingdom; Shebna, andJoah the recorder. So these men came out,and stood over against the commanders ofthe Assyrian army, and when Rabshakehsaw them, he bade them go and speak toHezekiah in the following manner: that"Sennacherib, the ||great king, desires toknow of him, on whom it is that he relies,and depends, in flying from his lord, and re-


* 2 Kings xviii. 13. Isaiah xxxvi. 1.
t Tartan, Rabsaris, and Rabshakeh, are not the propernames of these men, but rather denote their employmentsand offices. Tartan signifies the president of the customs,Rabsaris, the chief eunuch, and Rabshakeh, the principalcup-bearer; and because he spake Hebrew with somefluency, the Rabbins are generally of opinion, that he waseither an apostate Jew, or one of the captivity of Israel.It is certain, that he was a very eloquent man, and hisspeech very excellently well calculated to raise seditionor defection among the besieged; but that a person of hiseducation should be versed in the Phoenician, which is in amanner the same with the Hebrew language, is no wonder
fOI» I.—NOS. 29 & 30.
at all. Moreover, had he been a Jew, (though an apos­tate,) he should have known better, one would think,than to have upbraided Hezekiah with acting accordingto the law under which he lived, in destroying the grovesand altars of idols, and in requiring his subjects to worshipGod in Jerusalem only, 2 Kings xviii. 22. Le Clerc'sCommentary. B.
t 2 Kings xviii. 17.
I This title of Great King, both in oar Bibles, 2 Kingsxviii. 19. Isaiah xxxiv. 4. and here in Josephus, is thesame that Herodotus gives this Sennacherib; as Spanheimtakes notice in this place.
3P







OCR Output








an. 4484.] 13 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


the living creatures had one language £- atthat time, the serpent, which then lived to­gether with Adam and his wife, shewed an en­vious disposition at his supposal of their livinghappily, and in obedience to the commandsof God; and imagining that when they dis­obeyed they would fall into calamities, he per­suaded the woman, out of a malicious inten­tion, to taste of the tree of knowledge, tell­ing them, that in that tree was the knowledgeof good and evil, which knowledge when theyshould obtain they would lead a happy life:nay, a life not inferior to that of a god;£ bywhich means he overcame the woman, and
Sersuaded her to despise the command ofrod. Now, when she had tasted of that tree,and was pleased with its fruit, she persuadedAdam to make use of it also. Upon this theyperceived that they were become nakedJ toone another; and being ashamed thus to ap­pear abroad, they invented somewhat to co­ver them, for the fruit sharpened their under­standing; and they covered themselves withfig-leaves, and tying these before them, outof modesty, they thought they were happierthan they were before, as they hadclis-covered what they were in want of. But whenGod came into the garden,|| Adam, who waswont before to come and converse with him,being conscious of his wicked behaviour,went out of the way. This behaviour sur­prised God: and he asked what was thecause of his procedure; and why he, that be­fore delighted in that conversation, did nowfly from, and avoid it? When he made noreply, as conscious to himself that he hadtransgressed the command of God, God said


"I had before determined about you both,how you might lead a happy life, without anyaffliction, care, or vexation of soul; and thatall things which might contribute to your en­joyment and pleasure should grow up by myprovidence, of their own accord, without yourlabour and pains taking: which state of labourwould soon bring on old age, and death wouldnot be at any remote distance. But now thouhast abused my good-will, and hast disobeyedmy commands; for thy silence is not the signot thy virtue, but of thy evil conscience."However, Adam excused his sin, and intreatedGod not to be angry with him; and laid theblame of what was done upon his wife, andsaid, that he was deceived by her, and thencebecame an offender; while she again accusedthe serpent. But God allotted him punish­ment, because he weakly submitted to thecounsel of his wife; and said, the groundshould not henceforth yield its fruits of its ownaccord, but that when it should be harassedby their labour, it would bring forth some ofits fruits, and refuse to bring forth others. Healso made Eve liable to the inconveniencyof breeding, and the sharp pains of bringingforth children ; and this because she persuad­ed Adam with the same arguments where­with the serpent had persuaded her, and hadthereby brought him into a calamitous condi­tion. He also deprived the serpent of speech,out of indignation at his malicious dispositiontowards Adam. Besides this, he inserted poi­son under his tongue, and made him an enemyto men; and suggested to them that theyshould direct their strokes against his head,that being the place wherein lay his mischiev-


* Hence it appears, that Josephus thought several atleast of the brute animals, particularly the serpent, couldspeak before the fall: and I think few of the more perfectkinds of those animals want the organs of speech at thisday. Many inducements there are also to a notion, thatthe present state they are in is not their original state, andthat their capacities have been once much greater thanwe now see them.
t Gen. iii. 5.
J Those who take the word naked in a literal sense, sup­pose that upon the fall, the air, and other elements, imme­diately became intemperate and disorderly; so that ourfirst parents soon knew, or felt, that they were naked, be­cause the sun scorched them, they became wet with therain and the cold pierced them. Others take the expres­sion in a figurative sense, to denote the commission ofsuch sins as man in his senses may well be ashamed of.To this purpose they have observed, that when Moses re­turned from the Mount, and found that the people had
made and consecrated a golden image, the expressionin scripture is, the people were naked, they were be­come vile and reprobate sinners, (for so the word yufjwossignifies in the New Testament, Rev. xvi. 15,) forAaron had made them naked unto their shame, amongtheir enemies, Exod. xxxii. 25. See Nicholas conference,vol. LB.
II Our first parents were conscious of the approach ofGod to them in the garden by the voice which they heardas usual from the divine presence. The word voice maybe rendered noise; and since God's usual way of noti­fying his presence afterwards was either by a still smallvoice, or noise, 1 Kings xix. 12. or by a noise like that ojgreat waters, Ezek. i. 24, or like the rustling of wind in thetrees, 2 Sam. v. 24. we may reasonably suppose, that itwas either a soft gentle noise, like a breeze of windamong the trees of Paradise, or a louder one like the mur­muring of some large river, which gave Adam notice ofGod's approach. B.







OCR Output








x AUTHOR'S PREFACE.


nature of the universe; while our legislator speaks some things wisely, but enigmatically;and others under a decent allegory: but still explains such things as require a direct ex­plication plainly and expressly. However, those who have a mind to know the reasons ofevery thing, may find here a very curious philosophical theory, which I now indeed shallwave the explication of; but if God afford me time for it,* I will set about writing it after Ihave finished the present work. I shall now betake myself to the history before me, after Ihave first mentioned what Moses says of the creation of the world, which I find describedin the sacred books, after the manner following:—
* As to this intended work of Josephus's concerning the reasons of many of the Jewish laws, and what philoso­phical or allegorical sense they would bear; the loss of which work is by some of the learned not much regretted;I am inclinable, in part, to Fabricius's opinion, ap. Havercamp, page 63, 64, that " We need not doubt but, amongsome vain and frigid conjectures derived from Jewish imaginations, Josephus would have taught us a great numberof excellent and useful things ; which perhaps, nobody, neither among the Jews, nor among the Christians, can nowinform as of."







OCR Output








A!T 229 1089.] ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


it to heart, to be deprived of a man that wasof his kindred, and had indeed given him thekingdom, and Abner's death very much trou­bled him. Nor did he himself survive anylong time; but was treacherously set uponby the sons of Rimmon, Baanah and Rechab;and was slain by them. For these being ofa family of the Benjamites, and of the firstrank among them, thought that if they shouldslay Ishbosheth, they should obtain largepresents from David, and be made com­manders by him, or at least should have someother trust committed to them. So when theyonce found him asleep, at noon, in an upperapartment, when none of his guards werethere; and when the woman that kept thedoor was not watching, but was fallen asleepalso; partly on account of the labour she hadundergone, and partly on account of the heatof the day; these men went into the room inwhich Ishbosheth, Saul's son, lay asleep, andslew him;* they also cut off his head, andtook their journey all that night, and the nextday, as supposing themselves fleeing fromthose that they had injured, to one that wouldaccept of this action as a favour, and wouldafford thein security. So they came to He­bron, and shewed David the head of Ishbo­sheth, and presented themselves to him, ashis well-wishers, and such as had killed onethat was his enemy, and antagonist. YetDavid did not approve of what they haddone, as they expected; but said to them,•'Vile wretches! you shall immediately re­ceive the punishment you deserve. Did notyou know what vengeance I executed on himthat murdered Saul,t and brought me hiscrown of gold; and this while he who perpe­trated that action did it as a favour to him,that he might not be caught by his enemies?or do you imagine that I am altered in mydisposition, and suppose that I am not the


same man I then was? but am pleased withmen that are wicked doers? and esteem yourvile actions, when you are become murderersof your master, as grateful to me, when youhave slain a righteous man upon his bed, whonever did evil to any body; and treated youwith great good will and respect; whereforeyou shall suffer the punishment due on hisaccount, and the vengeance I ought to inflictupon you for killing Ishbosheth, and for sup­posing that I should take his death kindly atyour hands; for you could not lay a greaterblot on my honour than the making such asupposal." When David had said this, hetormented them with all sorts of torments,and then put them to death; and he bestowedall accustomed rites on the burial of thehead of Ishbosheth, and laid it in the graveof Abner. J
When these things were brought to thisconclusion, all the principal men of the He­brews came to David, to Hebron, with theheads of thousands, and other rulers, and de­livered themselves up to him; putting him inmind of the good will they had borne to himin Saul's life-time; and the respect they thenhad not ceased to pay him, when he was cap­tain of a thousand; as also that he waschosen of God by Samuel the prophet,|| heand his sons; declaring besides how God had
fiven him power to save the land of thelebrews, and to overcome the Philistines.Whereupon he received kindly their alacrityon his account; and exhorted them to con­tinue in it, for that they should have no reasonto repent of being thus disposed to him.So when he had feasted them, and treatedthem kindly, he sent them out to bring all thepeople to him. Upon which there came tohim about six thousand and eight hundredarmed men of the tribe of Judah; who bareshields and spears of their weapons; for these


* 2 Sam. iv. 7.
t It may seem a little strange, that these two ruffianswere not discouraged by David's punishing the Amalekitefor killing of Saul, and by the detestation he had publiclyshewn of Joab's baseness in murdering Abner: but theformer of these cases, they might think, was not parallelto theirs; because Saul was anointed king by God's imme­diate direction, whereas Ishbosheth, having never hadsuch sacred unction, was no more than an usurper; andas for the latter, they might think, that David's conduct,in relation to Abner's death, proceeded from art and policy,rather than any serious dislike to the tiling itself; and in
this opinion, they might the rather be confirmed, whenthey saw Joab, instead of being punished, continuing inthe very same post and power that he had before. PooVsAnnotations. B.
t 2 Sam. iv. 12.
I This may be a true observation of Josephus's; thatSamuel, by command from God, entailed the crown onDavid and his posterity; for no farther did that entailever reach. Solomon himself having never had any pro­mise made him that his posterity should always have theright to it.


Yy2







OCR Output








AN. 35.] 541 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


very pleasant with the young man, and drewhim into a lonely place; and at the same timeplayed with him in a juvenile and ludicrousmanner. Now the nature of that place washotter than ordinary: so they went out in abody, and of a sudden, and in a vein of mad­ness; and as they stood by the fish ponds, ofwhich there were large ones about the house,they went to cool themselves by bathing, be­cause it was in the midst of a sultry day. Atfirst they were only spectators of Herod's ser­vants and acquaintance, as they were swim­ming. But after a while, the young man, atthe instigation of Herod, went into the wateramong them: while such of Herod's acquaint­ance, as he had appointed to do it, dippedhim, as he was swimming, and plunged himunder water, in the dark of the evening: asif it had been done in sport only. Nor didthey desist till he was entirely suffocated.And thus was Aristobulus murdered. Hav­ing lived no more than *eighteen years; andkept the high-priesthood one year only.Which high-priesthood Ananelus now reco­vered again.
When this j>ad accident was related, the joyof Mis' women was soon changed to lamenta­tion, at the sight of the dead body that laybefore them; and their sorrow was immode­rate. The city of Jerusalem also, upon thespreading of this news, were in very greatgrief: every family looking on this calamityas if it had not belonged to another, but thatone of themselves was slain. But Alexandrawas more deeply affected; upon her know­ledge that he had been wilfully destroyed.But she was under a necessity of bearing upunder it; out of her prospect of a greatermischief that might otherwise follow. Andshe oftentimes came to an inclination to killherself with her own hands. But still she re­strained herself; in hopes she might live longenough to revenge the unjust murder thusprivately committed. Nay she farther re­solved to endeavour to live longer, and togive no occasion to think she suspected thather son was slain on purpose; and supposedthat she might be in a capacity of revenging


it, at a proper opportunity. However, Herodendeavoured that none abroad should believethat the child's death was caused by any de­sign of his. And for this purpose he exhibit­ed not only the ordinary signs of sorrow, buteven burst into tears, and seemed to evincea real confusion of soul. And perhaps hisaffections were overcome on this occasion,when he saw the child's countenance soyoung, and so beautiful: although his deathwere supposed to tend to his own security.So far at least this grief served, as to makesome apology for him. He also took carethat his funeral should be very magnificent,by making great preparation of a sepulchre tolay his body in; and providing a great quan­tity of spices; and burying many ornamentstogether with him: till the very women, whowere in such deep sorrow, were astonishedat it; and received in this way some conso­lation.
None of these things, however, couldovercome Alexandra's grief; but the remem­brance of this miserable case made her sor­row both deep and obstinate. Accordinglyshe wrote an account of this treacherousscene to Cleopatra; and informed her bywhat means her son had been murdered.Cleopatra, as she had formerly been desi­rous to give her what satisfaction she could,and commiserating Alexandra's fortunes,made the case her own; and excited An­tony to punish the child's murder. For thatit was an unworthy thing that Herod, whohad been by him made king of a country thatno way belonged to him, should be guilty ofsuch horrid crimes against those that were ofthe royal blood. Antony was persuaded bythese arguments. And when he came toLaodicea, the sent and commanded Herodto come and make his defence, as to whathe had done to Aristobulus; for that such atreacherous design was not well done, if hehad any hand in it. Herod was now in fear,both of the accusation, and of Cleopatra's illwill to him: which was such, that she wasever endeavouring to make Antony hate him.He therefore determined to obey his sum-place before us. In the first book Of the War, chap. 22,he is said to be seventeen when he was made high-priest,and soon after murdered.


* The reading of one of Josephus's Greek MSS. and ofZonaras, seems here to be right; that Aristobulus wasnot eighteen years old when he was drowned. For hewas not seventeen when he was made high-priest, chap.2, and he continued in that office but one year, as in the
t An. 34.


4P2







OCR Output








362 [book x. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


pened because the transgressions of theformer kings were seen no more, but quitevanished away. For the king went about thecity, and the whole country, and cut downthe groves, which were devoted to strangegods, and overthrew their altars; and if therewere any gifts dedicated to them by hisforefathers, he made them ignominious, andplucked them down; and by this means hebrought the people back from their opinionabout them to the worship of God. He alsooffered his accustomed sacrifices and burnt-offerings upon the altar. Moreover he or­dained certain judges and overseers, that theymight order the matters to them severally be­longing, and have regard to justice above allthings, and distribute it with the same con­cern they would have about their own souls.He also sent over all the country, and desiredsuch as pleased to bring gold and silver forthe repairs of the temple, according to everyone's inclination and abilities. And whenthe money was brought in, he made Maaseiah,the governor of the city, Shaphan the scribe,Joah the recorder, and Eliakim the high-priest, curators of the temple, and of thecharges contributed thereto. These personsmade no delay, nor put the works off at all,but prepared architects, and whatsoever wasproper for those repairs, and set closelyabout the work. So the temple was repairedby this means; and became a public demon­stration of the king's piety.
In the eighteenth year of his reign,* Josiahsent to Eliakim the high-priest, and gave


* An. 624.
t Whether it was the whole Pentateuch, or the hookof Deuteronomy only, which the high-priest found in thetemple, it is generally agreed, that the part which Shaphanread to the king was taken out of the book of Deutero­nomy, and not without some probability, that the 28th,29th, and 30th chapters, were that portion of Scripturewhich the secretary who (as we are told 2 Kings xxii. 8.)had read the book before he brought it to the king,thought proper upon this occasion to turn to; for thereinis contained a renewal of the covenant which Moses, asmediator, had made between God and the people of Israelat mount Horeb; and therein are those threats and ter­rible comminutions to the transgressors of the law, whe­ther prince or people, which affected Josiah so much;and which Moses had given to the Levites to put on theside, of the covenant, that it might be there for a witnessagainst the transgressors of it, Dent. xxxi. 25, 26. Cal-met's Commentary. 6.
t This is the only mention we have of this prophetess,and certainly it makes much to her renown, that she was


order that out of what money was overplus,he should cast cups and dishes, and vials forministration in the temple; and besides, thatthey should bring all the gold and silver whichwas among the treasures, and should expendthat in like manner, in making cups, andother vessels. But as the high-priest wasbringing out the gold, he found the holy booksof Moses,f that were laid up in the temple;and when he had brought them out, he gavethem to Shaphan the scribe; who when hehad read them, came to the king, and in­formed him, that all was finished which hehad ordered to be done. He also read overthe books to him; who when he had heardthem read, rent his garment; and called forEliakim, the high-priest, and for Shaphan thescribe, and for certain other of his most par­ticular friends; and sent them to Huldah,Jthe prophetess, the wife of Shallum; whichShallum was a man of dignity, and of an emi­nent family; and bade them go to her, andsay, that he desired she would appease God,and endeavour to render him propitious tothem; for that there was cause to fear, lestupon the transgression of the laws of Mosesby their forefathers, they should be in perilof going into captivity, and of being cast outof their own country; lest they should be inwant of all things, and so end their daysmiserably. When the prophetess had heardthis, she bade the messengers go back to theking, and say, that "God had already givensentence against them, to destroy the people,and cast them out of their country, and de-consulted upon this weighty occasion, ,when both Jere­miah and Zephaniah were at that time prophets in Judab.But Zephaniah, perhaps at that time might not have com­menced a prophet; because, though we are told that heprophesied in the days of Josiah, Zeph. i. 1. yet we areno where informed, in what part of his reign he enteredupon the prophetic office. Jeremiah too, might at thattime be absent from Jerusalem, at his house at Anathoth,or some more remote part of the kingdom; so that, con­sidering Josiah's haste and impatience, there might be noother remedy at hand to apply to but this woman: Greatis the wrath of the Lord that is kindled against us, saysthe king to his ministers, 2 Kings xxii. 13. and thereforehis intent, in sending them, might be to inquire, whetherthere were any hopes of appeasing his wrath, and in whatmanner it was to be done. Being therefore well assuredof this woman's fidelity, in delivering the mind and counselof God, the ministers who went to inquire, concludedrightly, that it was much more considerable, what mes­sage God sent, than, by whose hand it was that he con­veyed it. Pool's Annotations. B.







OCR Output








AN. 771.] 347 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


upon the golden altar. But Azariah thehigh-priest, who had eighty priests with him,affirmed that it was not lawful lor him tooffer sacrifice: and that none besides theposterity of Aaron were permitted so to do.And when they cried out, that he must goout of the temple, and not transgress againstGod, he was wroth with them, and threat­ened to kill them, unless they would holdtheir peace. In the mean time a great*earthquake shook the ground, and a rentwas made in the temple, and the bright raysof the sun shone through it; and fell uponthe king's face, insomuch that the leprosyseized upon him immediately. And beforethe city, at a place called Eroge, half themountain broke off from the rest on thewest, and rolled itself four furlongs, andstood still at the east mountain; till theroads, as well as the king's gardens, werespoiled by the obstruction. Now as soon asthe priests saw that the king's face was in­fected with the leprosy, they told him of thecalamity he was under, and commandedthat he should go out of the city as a pol­luted person. Hereupon he was so con­founded, that he did as he was commanded;and underwent this terrible and miserablepunishment for a presumptuous intention,and for that impiety against God which wasimplied therein. So he abode out of thecity for some time, and lived a private life:while his son Jotham took the govern-ment.f He died with grief and anxiety, atwhat had happened to him; when he hadlived sixty-eight years, and reigned fifty-two; J and his body was buried in his owngarden.


* This account of an earthquake at Jerusalem, at thevery same time when Uzziah usurped the priest's office,and went into the sanctuary to burn incense, and of theconsequences of the earthquake, is entirely wanting inour other copies; though it be exceeding like to a pro­phecy of Jeremiah's, now in Zachariah xiv. 4, 5. Inwhich prophecy mention is made of fleeing from thatearthquake, as they fled from this earthquake in the daysof Uzziah king of Judah. So that there seems to havebeen some considerable resemblance between these his­torical and prophetical earthquakes. But whether Jose-pbus interpreted this prophecy as a history; or whethera parallel has been dropped in our other copies, cannotbe determined.
t 2 Kings xv. 5.
| From an. 811 to 759.
II God had promised Jehu, that for executing his will
voI,. I.—NOS. 29 & 30.


CHAP. XI.
OF THE REIGNS OF ZACHARIAH, SHALLUM, MENAHEM, TEKA-HIAH, AND PEKAH J AND OF THE EXPEDITION OF PUL, ANDTICLATH-PILESER AGAINST THE ISRAELITES. ALSO OF1'THE AFFAIRS OF JOTHAM, KING OF JUDAH J AND THEPROPHECY OF NAHUM AGAINST THE ASSYRIANS.
WHEN Zachariah,|| the son of Jero­boam, had reigned six months overIsrael, he was slain by the treachery ofShallum, the son of Jabesh; who took thekingdom afterward, but kept it no longerthan thirty days. For Menahem, the gene­ral of his army, who was at that time in thecity Tirzah, and heard of what had befallenZachariah, removed with all his forces toSamaria; and joining battle with Shallumslew him; and when he had made himselfking, he went thence, and came to the cityTiphsah. The citizens shut their gates, andbarred them against the king; and would notadmit him. But in order to be avenged onthem, he burnt the adjacent country, andtook the city by storm; and being verymuch displeased at what the inhabitants ofTiphsah had done, he slew them all, andspared not so much as the infants: withoutomitting the utmost instances of cruelty andbarbarity. For he used such severity uponhis own countrymen, as would not be par­donable with regard to strangers, who hadbeen conquered by him. And after thismanner it was that this Menahem continuedto reign with cruelty and barbarity for tenyears.§ But when Pul, king of Assyria, hadmade an expedition against him, he did notventure an engagement; but he persuadedhim to accept of a thousand talents of silver,
upon the house of Ahab, he would continue the crownof Israel in his family for four generations; and accord­ingly Jehoahaz, Joash, Jehoram, and Zachariah suc­ceeded him; but because he did it not so much in obe­dience to the divine command, as to satisfy his privateand ambitious views, and in a method of cruelty quite ab­horrent to the divine nature, God cut his family short, assoon as he had fulfilled his promise to him, and therebyaccomplished the prophecy of Hosea; I will avenge theblood of Jezreel upon the house of Jehu, and will causeto cease the kingdom of the house of Israel, chap. i. 4.and perhaps it was in remembrance of this prophecy, aswell as of the promise which confined the kingdom inJehu's family to four generations only, 2 Kings xv. 10. thatShallum was encouraged to attempt the life of Zacha­riah. Patrick's Commentary, and Pool's Annotations. B.§ From an. 772 to 762.
30







OCR Output








THE


ANTIQUITIES


OF


sEnra »B1?B^


BOOK I.


Containing an interval of 3833 Years from the Creation to the Death of Isaac.


CHAP. I.
* OF THE CONSTITUTION OF THE WORLD AND THEDISPOSITION OF THE ELEMENTS.
IN the beginning God created the heavenand the earth.f But when the earth didnot come into sight, but was covered withthick darkness, and a wind moved upon itssurface, God commanded that there shouldbe light, and when that was made, he consi­dered the whole mass, and separated the lightand the darkness; and the name he gave toone was night, and the other he called day;and he named the beginning of light, andthe time of rest, the evening and the morning.And this was indeed the first day. But Mosessaid it was one day,J the cause of which I amable to give even now; but because I havepromised to give such reasons for all thingsin a treatise by itself, I shall put off its expo­sition till that time. After this, on the secondday, he placed the heaven over the wholeworld, and separated it from the other parts:and he determined it should stand by itself.He also placed a crystalline firmament round
* Note, that this and the other titles of chapters arewanting in the best MSS. &
t See Gen. i. 1. et sequel.
\ One is put for the first, not only here in the Hebrewand Numb. xxix. 1. Dan. ix. 1. but elsewhere in Josephus,


voL. I. No. I.


it; and put it together in a manner agreeableto the earth: and fitted it for giving moistureand rain, and for affording the advantage ofdews. On the third day he appointed the dryland to appear, with the sea round about it;and on the same day he made the plants andthe seeds to spring out of the earth. On thefourth day he adorned the heaven with thesun, the moon, and the stars, and appointedthem their motions and courses, that the vicis­situdes of the seasons might be clearly signi­fied. And on the fifth day he produced theliving creatures, both those that swim, andthose that fly: the former in the sea, the lat­ter. in the air. He also sorted them as to so­ciety, and that their kinds might increase andmultiply. On the sixth day he created thefour-rooted beasts, and made them male andfemale. On the same day he also formed man.Accordingly Moses says, that in six days theworld, and all that is therein, was made; andthat the seventh day was a rest, and a releasefrom the labour of such operations, whenceit is that we celebrate a rest from our labourson that day, and call it the Sabbath, whichword denotes rest in the Hebrew tongue.
VIII. 5. XVIII. 4. and in the Greek, Matt, xxvin. 1. Johnxx. 19. 1. 1 Cor. xvi.2. as Ainsworth observes on thistext. It is also in Philo, and among the Egyptians andChaldeans, and even in Diodorus Siculus.
D







OCR Output








272 [book VIII. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


since she desired that he might marry Abi-shag; and that he had potent friends, Joabthe captain of the host, and Abiathar thepriest. So he called for Benaiah, the cap­tain of the guards, and ordered him to slayhis brother Adonijah.* He also called forAbiathar, the priest, and said to him, "I willnot put thee to death, because of those hard­ships which thou hast endured with my father,and because of the ark which thou hast bornealong with him; but I inflict the followingpunishment upon thee, because thou wastamong Adonijah's followers, and wast of hisparty. Do not thou continue here, nor comeany more into my sight; but go to thine owntown, and live on thine own fields, and thereabide all thy life; for thou hast offended sogreatly, that it is not just thou shouldest re­tain thy dignity any longer." For the afore­mentioned cause therefore it was, that thehouse of Ithamar was deprived of the sacer­dotal dignity, as God had foretold to Eli, thegrandfather of Abiathar. So it was trans­ferred to the family of Phineas, to Zadok.Now those that were of the family of Phineas,but lived privately during the time that thehigh priesthood was transferred to the houseof Ithamar, (of which family Eli was the firstthat received it,) were these that follow:Bnkki, the son of Abishua, the high-priest;his son was "fJoatham; Joatham's son wasMeraioth; Meraioth's son was JArophoeus;Arophoeus's son was Ahitub; and Ahitub'sson was Zadok: who was first made high-priest in the reign of David.
Now when Joab, the captain of his host,had heard of the slaughter of Adonijah, hewas greatly afraid, for he was a greater friend


to him than to Solomon; and suspecting, notwithout reason, that he was in danger on ac­count of his favour to Adonijah, he fled to thealtar, and supposed he might procure safetythereby to himself; because of the king's pietytowards God. But when some told the kingwhat Joab's supposal was, he sent Benaiah,and commanded him to raise him up from thealtar, and bring him to the judgment seat, inorder to make his defence. However Joabsaid he would not leave the altar, but woulddie there, rather than in another place. Andwhen Benaiah had reported his answer tothe king, Solomon commanded him to ||cutoff his head there,§ and let him take that asa punishment for those two captains of hishost whom he had wickedly slain, and to buryhis body: that his sins might never leave hisfamily; but that himself and his father, byJoab's death, might be guiltless. And whenBenaiah had done what he was commandedto do he was himself appointed to be captainof the whole army. The king also madeZadok high-priest, in the room of Abiathar,**whom he had removed.
But as to Shimei, Solomon commandedthat he should build him a house, and stay atJerusalem, and attend upon him; and shouldnot have authority to go over the brook Ce-dron; and that if he disobeyed that command,death should be his punishment. He alsothreatened him so terribly, that he compelledhim to take an oath, that he would obey, Ac­cordingly, Shimei said, that he had reason tothank Solomon for giving him such an injunc­tion, and added an oath that he would do ashe bade him: and, leaving his own country,he made his abode in Jerusalem.ff But three


* 1 Kings ii. 25.Zerahiah, 1 Chron. vi. 6.
:; Amariah, 1 Chron. vi. 7.
I This execution upon Joab, as a murderer, by slayinghim, even when he had taken sanctuary at God's altar, isperfectly agreeable to the laws of Moses, which enjoins,that "If a man come presumptuously upon his neighbourto slay him with guile, thou shalt take him from minealtar, that he may die." Exod. xxi. 14.
§ It was formerly very customary among princes, toemploy their officers, or greatest confidants, in such likeexecutions. Among the Romans, the soldiers were alwaysthe persons who carried to prison, to torture, or to ex­ecution, such as were found guilty of any offence; andthis Tertullian makes an argument to dissuade Christiansfrom engaging in their wars, lest thereby they should beobliged to imprison, punish, or execute malefactors. In
Dan. ii. 24. we read, that Nebuchadnezzar sent Arioch,who was chief commander of his troops, to destroy thewise men of Babylon, because they could not interpret hisdream; and therefore we need less wonder, that we findSolomon employing Benaiah, the captain of his guard, onthe like office. But whether he did not first drag Joabfrom the altar before he slew him, for fear of polluting theholy place with blood, or whether Solomon did not ratherthink fit to have him killed even at the altar, and let allmen see, that no place, though never so sacred, shouldsecure any man from the hand of justice, commentatorshave not agreed. Calmefs and Patrick's Comment. B.
** 1 Kings ii. 35.
tt Shimei, as we read, was a very powerful man.When he came to meet king David, and to beg pardonfor his offence, he had a thousand of his own tribe toaccompany him, 2 Sam. xix. 17. and therefore Solomon







OCR Output








 


lllllll


il I(V i iii fj i 'li


 







OCR Output








488 [book XIII. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS


but when Alexander saw that Ptolemy wasretired from Gaza to Cyprus, and his motherCleopatra was returned to Egypt; he grewangry at the people of Gaza, because theyhad invited Ptolemy to assist them; and be­sieged their city, and ravaged their country.But as Apollodorus, the general of the armyof Gaza, fell upon the camp of the Jews bynight, with two thousand foreign, and *tenthousand of his own forces; while the nightlasted, those of Gaza prevailed; because theenemy were made to believe that it was Pto­lemy who attacked them. But when daycame on, and that mistake was corrected, andthe Jews knew the truth of the matter, theycame back again, and fell upon those of Gaza,and slew of them about a thousand. But asthose of Gaza stoutly resisted, and would notyield for either their want of any thing, norfor the great multitude that were slain; (forthey would rather suffer any hardship what­ever, than come under the power of their ene­mies;) Aretas, king of the Arabians, a personthen very illustrious, encouraged them to goon with alacrity; and promised them that hewould come to their assistance. But it hap­pened that before he came Apollodorus wasslain: for his brother Lysimachus envyinghim for the great reputation he had gainedamong the citizens, slew him; and got thearmy together, and delivered upf the city.When Alexander came in, at first he layquiet; but afterward set his army upon theinhabitants of Gaza, and gave them leave topunish them. So some went one way, andsome another, and slew the inhabitants ofGaza. Yet were not they of cowardly hearts;but opposed those that came to slay them,and slew as many of the Jews: and some ofthem, when they saw themselves deserted,burnt their own nouses; that the enemy might


get none of their spoils. Nay, some of themwith their own hands slew their wives andchildren; having no other way of avoidingslavery. But the senators, who were in all fivehundred, fled to Apollo's temple; (for this at­tack happened to be made as they were sit­ting,) whom Alexander slew; and when he hadutterly overthrown their city, he returned toJerusalem; having spent a year in that siege.
About this time JAntiochus Grypus died.His death was caused by Heracleon's trea­chery; when he had lived forty-five years,and had reigned ||twenty-nine. His eon Se-leucus succeeded him in the kingdom; andmade war with Antiochus, his father's bro­ther, who was called Antiochus Cyzicenus,and defeated him, and took him prisoner, andslew him. But after a while §Antiochus, theson of Cyzicenus, who was called Pius, cameto Aradus; and put the diadem on his ownhead; and made war with Seleucus, and drovehim out of all Syria. But when he fled out ofSyria, he came to Mopsuestia again, andlevied money upon them. But when Antio­chus, the son of Cyzicenus, was king of Syria;**Antiochus, the brother of Seleucus, madewar upon him, and was overcome, and de­stroyed, he and his army. After him his bro­ther Philip put on the diadem, and reignedover some part of Syria. But Ptolemy Lathy-rus sent for his fourth brother, Demetrius,who was called Eucerus, from Cnidus; andmade him king of Damascus. Both thesebrothers did Antiochus vehemently oppose;but presently died. For when he was comeas an auxiliary to ffLaodice,JJ queen of theGileadites, when she was making war againstthe Parthians, and he was fighting coura­geously, he fell: while Demetrius and Philipgoverned Syria.
As to Alexander, his own people were sedi­


* Or, one thousand.
t An. 97.
J This account of the death of Antiochus Grypus, isconfirmed by Appian, Syriac. page 132. here cited bySpanheim.
II Porphyry says, that this Antiochus Grypus reignedbut 26 years; as Dr. Hudson observes.
§ The copies of Josephus, both Greek and Latin, havehere so grossly false a reading, Antiochus and Antoniusor Antonius Pius, for Antiochus Pius, that the editors areforced to correct the text from the other historians: whoall agree that this king's name was nothing more thanAntiochus Pius.
** These two brothers, Antiochus and Philippus, are
called twins by Porphyry: the fourth brother was kingof Damascus. Both which are the observations of Spanheim.
tt Or Laodicea of Gilead.
JJ This Laodicea was a city of Gilead, beyond Jordan.However Porphyry says, that this Antiochus Pius did notdie in this battle; but, running away, was drowned in theriver Orontes. Appian says, that he was deprived of thekingdom of Syria by Tigranes. But Porphyry makes thisLaodice queen of the Calamans. All which is noted hySpanheim. In such confusion of the later historians, wehave no reason to prefer any of them before Josephus,who had more original ones before him.







OCR Output








AN. 1106.] 199 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


did not grant that forgiveness which the pro­phet solicited; as not deeming it a fit thing togrant forgiveness of such sins at his entrea­ties; since injuries do not otherwise grow sogreat, as by the easy tempers of those thatare injured. For while they seek after theglory of being thought gentle and good-na­tured, before they are aware, they produceother sins. As soon therefore as God had re­jected the intercession of the prophet, and itplainly appeared he would not change hismind; at break of day Samuel came to Saulto Gilgal. When the king saw him, he ranto him, and embraced him, and said, "I re­turn thanks to God, who hath given me thevictory; for I have performed every thingthat he hath commanded." Samuel replied:"How is it then that I hear the bleating ofthe sheep, and the lowing of the greater cattlein the camp?"* Saul made answer, that thepeople had reserved them for sacrifices; butthat, as to the nation of the Amalekites, itwas entirely destroyed; as he had receivedit in command to see done, and that no oneman was left; but that he had saved alive theking alone, and brought him to him; con­cerning whom he said they would advisetogether what should be done with him.But the prophet said, "God is not delightedwith sacrifices; but with good and righteousmen, who are such as follow his will and hislaws; and never think that any thing is welldone by them, but when they do it as Godcommanded them; that he then looks uponnimself as affronted; not when any one doesnot sacrifice, but when any one appears dis­obedient to him. But that from those thatdo not obey him, nor pay him that dutywhich is the true and acceptable worship, hewill not kindly accept their oblations; bethose they offer never so many and so fat, andbe the presents they make him never so orna­mental; nay, though they were made of goldand silver themselves. But he will rejectthem, and esteem them instances of wicked­ness, and not of piety. And that he is de­lighted with those that still bear in mind thisone thing, how to do that, whatsoever it be,which God pronounces or commands forthem to do; and to choose rather to die, thanto transgress any of those commands. Nor
* 1 Sam. xr. 14.


does he require so much as a sacrifice fromthem; and when these sacrifice, though it bea mean oblation, he better accepts of it, asthe honour of poverty; than such oblationsas come from the richest men that offer themto him. Wherefore take notice, that thou artunder the wrath of God; for thou hast de­spised and neglected what he commandedthee. How dost thou then suppose he willrespect a sacrifice out of such things as hehas doomed to destruction? unless perhapsthou dost imagine that it is almost all one tooffer it in sacrifice to God, as to destroy it.Do thou therefore expect that thy kingdomwill be taken from thee, and that authoritywhich thou hast abused by such insolent be­haviour, as to neglect that God who bertowedit upon thee." Then did Saul confess thathe had acted unjustly, and did not deny thathe had sinned; because he had transgressedthe injunctions of the prophet; but he said,that it was out of dread and fear of thesoldiers, that he did not restrain them, whenthey seized on the prey. "But forgive me,"said he, " and be merciful to me; for 1 will becautious how I offend for the time to come."He also intreated the prophet to go back withhim, that he might offer his thank-offerings toGod. But Samuel went home, because hesaw that God would not be reconciled to him.But Saul was so desirous to retain Samuel,that he took hold of his cloak; and becausethe vehemence of Samuel's departure madethe motion to be violent, the cloak was rent.Upon which the prophet said, that after thesame manner should the kingdom be rentfrom him; and that a good and a just manshould take it; that Cod persevered in whathe had decreed about him; that to be mu­table and changeable in what is determined,is agreeable to human passions only; but itis not agreeable to the divine power. Here­upon Saul said that he had been wicked; butthat what was done could not be undone.He therefore desired him to honour him sofar, that the multitude might see that hewould accompany him in worshipping God.So Samuel granted him that favour; andwent with him and worshipped God. Agagalso, the king of the Amalekites, was broughtto him; and when the king asked, how bitterdeath was? Samuel said, As thou hast mademany of the Hebrew mothers to lament and







OCR Output








AK.457.] 403 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


CHAP. VI.


concerning esther, mordecai, and hahan; and theImminent danger to which the whole nation ofthe jews was exposed in the reign of artaxerxes.
AFTER the death of Xerxes,* the king­dom came to be transferred to his sonCyrus, whom the Greeks call Artaxerxes.fWhen this man had obtained the governmentover the Persians, the whole nation of theJews,J with their wives and children, werein danger of perishing: the occasion whereofwe shall declare in a little time. For it isproper in the first place to explain somewhatrelating to this king, and how he came tomarry a Jewish wife; who was also of theroyal family, and who is related to have savedour nation. For when Artaxerxes had takenthe kingdom, and had set governors over thehundred and twenty-seven provinces, fromIndia even unto Ethiopia, in the third year of


his reign,|| he made a costly feast for hisfriends,§ and for the nations of Persia, andfor their governors: such a one as was properfor a king to make, when he had a mind tomake a public demonstration of his riches;and this for a hundred and eighty days. Af­ter which he made a feast for other nations,and for their ambassadors, at Shushan, forseven days. Now this feast was ordered afterthe following manner. He caused a tent tobe pitched, which was supported by pillars ofgold and silver, with curtains of linen andpurple spread over them; that it might affordroom for many thousands to sit down. Thecups which the waiters ministered were ofgold, and adorned with precious stones. Healso gave order to the servants, that theyshould not force the guests to drink, by bring­ing them wine continually, as is the practiceof the Persians; but to permit every one tofollow his own inclination. Moreover he sent


* About an. 457.
t This prince, to distinguish him from others of thatname, was called Maxpox"'p,orLongimanus, upon the sup­posed length of his hands, with which it is said that hecould have touched his knees, even when he stood up­right; but this notwithstanding, it is reported of him, thathe was both the handsomest person of the age in which helived, and a prince likewise of a very mild and generousdisposition. Prideaux's Connection, anno 465. B.
| Since some sceptical persons are willing to discardthis book of Esther, as no true history: and even ourlearned and judicious Dr. Wall, in his late posthumouscritical notes upon all the other Hebrew books of the OldTestament, gives us none upon the Canticles, or uponEsther; and seems thereby to give up this book, as wellas the Canticles, as indefensible: I shall venture to say,that almost all the objections against this book of Estherare obviated at once, if, as we ought certainly to do, andas Dean Prideaux has justly done, we place this historyunder Artaxerxes Longimanus: as do both the Septuagintinterpreters, and Josephus. I mean in this case we alsotake our true copies from the Septuagint, and from Jose­phus; rather than from our Masorete Hebrew. I shallhere add farther, on its behalf, the words of the learnedDr. Lee in his posthumous Dissertation on the second bookof Esdras, page 25, that "The truth of this history isdemonstrated by the feast of Purim, kept from that timeto this very day. See 2 Maccabees xv. 36. And thissurprising Providential revolution in favour of a captivepeople, thereby constantly commemorated, standeth evenupon a firmer basis than that there ever was such a manas Alexander the Great in the world: of whose reignthere is no such abiding monument at this day to befound any where. Nor will they, I dare say, who quar­rel at this, or any other of the sacred historians, find it avery easy matter to reconcile the different accounts whichare given by historians of the affairs qf this king: or toconfirm any one fact of his whatever with the same evi­dence which is here given for the principal fact in thisvoL. I.—NOS. 33 & 34.
sacTed book: or even so much as to prove the existenceof such a person, of whom so great things are related, butupon granting this book of Esther, or sixth of Esdras:(as it is placed in some of the most ancient copies of theVulgate:) to be a most true and certain history."
N. B. The oldest and most authentic record we nowhave of Alexander the Great, is contained in the firstseven verses of the first book of Maccabees.
I I An. 454.
§ The occasion of this great festival is, very likely, In­timated to us in the phrase, When the king Ahasuerus saton the throne of his kingdom, chap. i. 2. i. e. enjoyingpeace and tranquillity through his large dominions; forthe history of his accession to the throne is this:—Xerxeshis father was privately murdered by Artabanus, captainof his guard. He coming to him, (who was then but thethird son,) made him believe, that Darius, his elder bro­ther, had done it, to make his way to the throne, and hada design likewise to cut him off, to secure himself in it.This Ahasuerus believing, went immediately to his bro­ther's apartment, and by the assistance of the wicked Ar­tabanus and his guards, slew him, thinking all the whilethat he acted but in his own defence. Artabanus's driftwas to seize on the throne himself; but for the present hetook Ahasuerus, and placed him thereon, with a design topull him down as soon as matters were ripe for his ownascent: but when Ahasuerus understood this from Maga-byzus, who had married one of his sisters, he took care tocounterplot Artabanus, and to cut him and his whole partyoff before his treason was come to maturity; and for this,and some other successes against his brother Hystaspes,which settled him in a peaceable possession of the wholePersian empire, very probably it was, that a festival-seasonof above a hundred and fourscore days' continuance wasappointed, which, even to this day, according to some tra­vellers, is no uncommon thing in those parts of the world.Prideaux's Connection, anno 465, and Patrick's Commen­tary on Esther, chap. i. B.
3X







OCR Output








464 [book XIII. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


army, he removed from Ashdod, and cameto Ascalon. And when he had pitched hiscamp without the city, the people of Ascaloncame out and met him; bringing him hos­pitable presents, and honouring him: so heaccepted of their kind intentions, and re­turned thence to Jerusalem, with a great dealof prey; which he brought thence, when heconquered his enemies. But when Alexan­der heard, that Apollonius, the general ofhis army, was beaten, he pretended to beglad of it; because he had fought with Jona­than, his friend and ally, against his direc­tions. Accordingly he sent to Jonathan, andgave testimony to his worth; and gave himhonorary rewards, as a *goIden button; whichit is the custom to give the king's kinsmen,and allowed him Ekron, and its toparchy forhis own inheritance.
About this time king Ptolemy, who wascalled Philometor, led an army, partly by thesea, and partly by land, and came to Syria,to the assistance of his son-in-law, Alexander.And accordingly, all the cities received himwillingly, as Alexander had commandedthem to do; and conducted him as far asAshdod; where they all made loud com­plaints about the temple of Dagon, whichwas burnt; and accused Jonathan of havinglaid it waste, and destroyed the country ad­joining with fire, and slain a great number ofthem. Ptolemy heard these accusations, butsaid nothing. Jonathan also went to meetPtolemy as far as Joppa; and obtained fromhim hospitable presents, and those gloriousin their kinds, with all the marks of honour.And when he had conducted him as far asthe river called Eleutherus, he returned againto Jerusalem.f
But as Ptolemy was at Ptolemais, he wasvery near to a most unexpected destruction.For a treacherous design was laid for his lifeby Alexander, by the means of Ammonius,who was his friend. And as the treacherywas very plain, Ptolemy wrote to Alexander;and required of him that he should bringAmmonius to condign punishment; informing


him what snares had been laid for him byAmmonius, and desiring that he might bepunished accordingly. But when Alexanderdid not comply with his demands, lie per­ceived that it was he himself who laid thedesign, and he was very angry at him.J Al­exander had also formerly been on very illterms with the people of Antioch; for theyhad suffered very much by his means. Yetdid Ammonius at length undergo the punish­ment his insolent crimes had deserved. Forhe was killed in an opprobrious manner, likea woman, while he endeavoured to concealhimself in a feminine habit.
Hereupon Ptolemy blamed himself forhaving given his daughter in marriage toAlexander, and for the league he had madewith him to assist him against Demetrius.So he dissolved his relationship, by takinghis daughter away from him; and immedi­ately sent to Demetrius, and offered to makea league of mutual assistance and friendshipwith him, and agreed with him to give himhis daughter in marriage, and to restore himto the principality of his fathers. Demetriuswas well pleased with this ambassage, andaccepted of his assistance, and of the mar­riage of his daughter. But Ptolemy had stillone more hard task to do; and that was topersuade the people of Antioch to receiveDemetrius; because they were greatly dis­pleased at him, on account of the injuries hisfather Demetrius had done them. Yet didhe bring this about. For as the people ofAntioch hated Alexander, on Ammonius'saccount, as we have shewn already; theywere easily prevailed with to cast him out ofAntioch. He accordingly retired to Cilicia;while Ptolemy came to Antioch, and wasmade king by its inhabitants, and by thearmy. So that he was forced to put on twodiadems, the one of Asia, the other of Egypt.But being naturally a good and a righteousman, and not desirous of what belonged toothers; and besides these dispositions, beingalso a wise man in reasoning about futurities,he determined to avoid the envy of the Ro­


* Dr. Hudson observes here, that the Phoenicians andRomans used to reward such as had deserved well ofthem, by presenting to them a golden button. Thisgolden button or buckle, (which was worn upon theshoulder,) was a very singular mark of distinction bothamong the Greeks and the Persians, (from whom the
Macedonians took it.) and was generally made the re­ward of great and gallant actions in war. Calmet't Com­mentary on 1 Mace. x. 89. B.
t 1 Mace. xi. 7.
% This is related very differently in our copies of thefirst book of Maccabees.







OCR Output








an. 1532.] 95 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


also made with sleeves, and appeared like ashort coat; but in the void place of this gar­ment was inserted a piece of the bigness of aspan, embroidered with gold, and the othercolours of the ephod; it is called essen, orthe breast-plate, which in the Greek languagesignifies the oracle. This piece exactly filledup the void space in the ephod, and wasunited to it by golden rings at every corner;and a blue riband was made use of to tiethem together by those rings; and, that theintermediate space might not appear empty,they contrived to fill it up with stitches ofblue ribands. There were also two sardo-nyxes upon the ephod, at the shoulders, tofasten it in the nature of buttons, having eachend running to the sardonyxes of gold, thatthey might be buttoned by them. On thesewere engraven the names of the sons of Ja­cob, in Hebrew characters, six on each of thestones, on either side; and the elder sons'names were on the right shoulder: twelvestones also were upon the breast-plate, ofextraordinary size and beauty; and theywere ornaments not to be purchased by men,because of their immense value. These stoneshowever stood in three rows, by four in arow, being set in ouches of gold, and insertedin the breast-plate; so that they might notfall out . The first three stones were, a sar­donyx, a topaz, and an emerald; the secondrow contained a carbuncle, a jasper, and asapphire; the first of the third row was aligure, then an amethyst, and the third anagate, being the ninth of the whole number;the first of the fourth row was a chrysolite,the next was an onyx, and then a beryl, whichwas the last of all. Now the names of allthose sons of Jacob were engraven in thesestones, whom we esteem the heads of ourtribes; each stone having the honour of aname, in the order according to which theywere born; and whereas the rings were tooweak for themselves, to bear the weight ofthe stones, they made two other rings of alarger size, at the edge of that part of thebreast-plate, which reached to the neck: andinserted it into the very texture of the breast­plate, to receive chains finely wrought, whichconnected them with golden bands to thetops of the shoulders, whose extremity turnedbackwards and went into the ring, on theprominent back part of the ephod. And thisvoL. i.—No. 8.


was for the security of the breast-plate, thatit might not fall out of its place: there wasalso a girdle sewed to the breast-plate, whichwas of the aforementioned colours, inter­mixed with gold: which, when it had goneonce round, was tied again upon the seam,and hung down: there were likewise goldenloops, that admitted its fringes at each ex­tremity of the girdle, and included them en­tirely.
The high-priest's mitre was the same as wedescribed before, and was wrought like thatof all the other priests: above which therewas another, with swaths of blue embroidered,and round it was a golden crown of threerows, one above another: out of which arosea cup of gold, resembling the herb whichwe call saccharus, but those Greeks that areskilful in botany call it hyoscyamus. Nowlest any one that has seen this herb, but hasnot been taught its name, and is unacquaintedwith its nature; or having known its name,knows not the herb when he sees it, I shallgive a description of it . This herb is oftenin tallness above three spans: its root is likethat of a turnip; but its leaves are like theleaves of mint: its branches send out a calyx,cleaving to the branch: and a coat encom­passes it, which it naturally puts off when itis changing, in order to produce its fruit: thiscalyx is ofthe bigness of the bone of the lit­tle finger, but in the compass of its apertureis like a cup. To render this more plain:suppose a sphere be divided into two parts,round at the bottom, but having another seg­ment, that grows up to a circumference fromthat bottom: suppose it to become narrowerby degrees; and that the cavity of that partgrow decently smaller, and then graduallygrow wider again at the brim; such as we seein the navel of a pomegranate, with its notches.And indeed such a coat grows over this plant,as renders it an hemisphere, and that, as onemay say, turned accurately in a lathe, andhaving its notches extant above it; which, asI said, grow like a pomegranate, only thatthey are sharp, and end in nothing but prick­les. Now the fruit is preserved by this coatof the calyx, which fruit is like the seed of theherb sideritis; it sends out a flower, that mayseem to resemble that of poppy. Of this wasa crown made, as far as from the hinder partofthe head, to each of the. temples: but thisBb


 


 







OCR Output








198 [BOOK VI. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


Saul promised to do what he was com­manded; and supposing that his obedience toGod would be shewn not only in making waragainst the Amalekites, but more fully in thereadiness and quickness of his proceedings;he immediately gathered together all hisforces. And when he had numbered themin Gilgal, he found them to be about fourhundred thousand of the Israelites; besidesthe tribe of Judah; for that tribe containedby itself thirty thousand. Accordingly Saulmade an irruption into the country of theAmalekites; and set many men and severalparties in ambush at the river; that so hemight not only do them a mischief by openfighting; but might fall upon them unexpect­edly in the ways, and might thereby surround,and kill them. And when he had joined battlewith the enemy, he beat them, and pursuingthem as they fled, he destroyed them all.And when that undertaking had succeeded,according as God had foretold; he besiegedthe cities of the Amalekites, and took themby force; partly by warlike machines, partlyby mines dug under ground, and partly bybuilding walls on the outsides. Some theystarved out by famine, and some they gainedby other methods; and after all he betookhimself to slay the women and the children,and thought he did not act therein either bar­barously or inhumanly: first, because theywere enemies whom they thus treated; andin the next place, because it was done by thecommand of God; whom it was dangerous-^ not to obey. He also took Agag, the enemies'-*; king, captive. The beauty and tallness ofwhose body he admired so much, that hethought him worthy of preservation. Yetwas not this done according to the will ofGod; but by giving way to human .passions,and suffering himself to be moved with anunseasonable commiseration, in a point whereit was not safe to indulge it. For God hatedthe nation of the Amalekites, to such a de­gree, that he commanded Saul to have nopity even on those infants which we by naturechiefly compassionate. Saul, however, pre­served the king from the miseries which the


Hebrews brought on the people; as if hepreferred the tine appearance of the enemyto the memory of what God had sent himabout. The multitude were also guilty, to­gether with Saul; for they spared the herdsand the flocks, and took them for a prey;when God had commanded they should notspare them. They also carried off the restof their wealth and riches; but if there wereany thing that Was not worthy of regard, thatthey destroyed.*
When Saul had conquered all these Amale­kites that reached from Pelusium of Egypt,to the Red Sea; he laid waste all the rest ofthe enemies' country; but for the nation ofthef Sichemites, he did not touch them, al­though they dwelt in the very middle of theCountry of Midian. For before the battle,Saul had sent to them, and charged them todepart thence, lest they should be partakersof the miseries of the Amalekites. For hehad a just occasion for saving them, sincethey were of the kindred of Raguel, Moses'sfather-in-law.
Hereupon Saul returned home with joy forthe glorious things he had done, and for theconquest of his enemies; as though he hadnot neglected any thing which the prophethad enjoined him to do when he was going tomake war with the Amalekites; and as thoughhe had exactly observed all that he ought tohave done. But God was grieved that theking of the Amalekites was preserved alive;and that the multitude had seized on thecattle for a prey; because these things weredone without his permission. For he thoughtit an intolerable thing that they should con­quer their enemies by that power which hegave them; and then that he himself shouldbe so grossly despised and disobeyed, that amere man that was a king would not bear it.He therefore told Samuel, he repented thathe had made Saul king; while he did nothingthat he had commanded him, but indulgedhis own inclinations. When Samuel heardthat, he was in confusion, and began to be­seech God all that night to be reconciled toSaul, and not to be angry with him. But he


larly seeking to injure, and utterly to destroy the nationof Israel. See Exod. xvii. 8—16. Numb. xiv. 45. Dent,xxv. 17, 18, 19. Judg. vi. 3, 6. vii. 12. x. 12. 1 Sam. xv.33. xxx. 1, 2. Psal. Ixxxiii. 7. and above all, the most bar­barous of all cruelties, that of Human the Agagite, or, one
of the posterity of Agag, the old king of the Amalekites.Esth. iii. 1—15.
* 1 Sam. xv. 9.
t Kenites, 1 Sam. xv. 6.







OCR Output








AN. 181 1148.] ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


Philistines also were greatly afraid of the arkcoming to the Israelites: however the eventdid not prove agreeable to the expectation ofeither side; but when the battle was joined,that victory which the Hebrews expected,was gained by the Philistines; and what de­feat the Philistines were afraid of, fell to thelot of the Israelites; and thereby they foundthat they had put their trust in the ark invain; for they were presently beaten, as soonas they came to a close fight with their ene­mies, and lost about thirty thousand men;among whom were the sons of the high-priest.The ark also was carried away by their ene­mies.
When the news of this defeat came toShiloh, with that of the capture of the ark,(for a certain young man, a Benjamite, whowas in the action, came as a messenger thi­ther,) the whole city was full of lamentations.And Eli the high-priest, who sat upon a highthrone at one of the gates, heard theirmournful cries; and supposed that somestrange thing had befallen his family. So hesent for the young man, and when he under­stood what had happened in the battle, he wasnot much grieved as to his sons, or what wastold him about the army; as having previouslyknown by divine revelation that those thingswould happen, and having himself declared
* From an. 1188 to 1148 B.C.


them beforehand. For what sad things comeunexpectedly, they distress men the most; butas soon as he heard the ark was carried cap­tive by their enemies, he was very muchgrieved at it, because it fell out quite differ­ently from what he expected; so he fell downfrom his throne, and died; having Kved ninety-eight years, and retained the governmentforty.*
On the same day, the wife of his son Phi-neas died also; as not able to survive themisfortune of her husband. For they told herof her husband's death as she was in labour.However she bare a son at seven months, towhom they gave the namef Icabod; whichname signifies disgrace; and this because thearmy received disgrace at this time.
Now Eli was the first of the family ofIthamar, the other son of Aaron, that had thegovernment; for the family of Eleazar offici­ated as high-priest at first; the son still re­ceiving that honour from the father, Eleazarbequeathed it to his son Phineas, after whomAbiezer his son took the honour, and de­livered it to his son whose name was Bukki;his son next received it; after whom Eli, ofwhom we have been speaking, had the priest­hood; and so had his posterity until the timeof Solomon's reign; but then it was resumedby the posterity of Eleazar.
t 1 Sam. iv. 21.


Qq2







OCR Output








62 [book II. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


having not been inferior to any of his ances­tors in piety towards God; and having sucha recompence for it as it was fit those shouldhave, who were so good as these were. Jo­seph, by the king's permission, carried hisfather's dead body to Hebron, and thereburied it, at a great expense.* But his bre­thren were at first unwilling to return backwith him; because they were afraid, lest nowtheir father was dead, he should punish themfor their secret practices against him; sincehe was now gone, for whose sake he hadbeen so gracious to them. He persuadedthem, however, to fear no harm, and to en­tertain no suspicions of him; so he broughtthem along with him, and gave them greatpossessions, and continually evinced the mostparticular concern for them.t
Joseph also died when he had lived a


hundred and ten years ;J having been a manof admirable virtue; who conducted all hisaffairs by the rules of reason, and used hisauthority with moderation; which was thecause of his great felicity among the Egyp­tians, even when he came from another coun­try, and that in such ill circumstances as wehave already described. At length his bre­thren died, after they had lived happily inEgypt. Now the posterity and sons of thesemen after some time carried their bodies, andburied ||them at Hebron. But as to the bonesof Joseph, they carried them into the land ofCanaan afterwards,§ when the Hebrews wentout of Egypt; for so had Joseph made thempromise him upon oath. **But what becameof every one of these men, and by what toilsthey got the possession of the land of Canaan,shall be shewn hereafter; when I have ex-nothing of them in the linen in which they were wrappedbut the bones, and those half rotten." [Letter vii. p. 281.)Antique coffins of stone, and sycamore wood, are still to beseen in Egypt. It is said that some were formerly made ofa kind of pasteboard, formed by folding and glueing clothtogether a great number of times; these were curiouslyplaistered and painted with hieroglyphics. Thevenot, parti. p. 137. B.


* Though there be something of a natural desire inmost men to be buried in the places where their ancestorslie; yet Jacob's aversion to have his remains deposited inEgypt seems to be more earnest than ordinary, or other­wise he would never have imposed an oath upon his sons,and charged them all, with his dying breath, not to sufferit to be done. For he very well knew, that had his bodybeen buried in Egypt, his posterity, upon that very ac­count, would have been too much wedded to the country,ever to attempt the acquisition of the promised land; andtherefore, to wean them from the thought of continuing inEgypt, and to fix their minds and affections in Canaan, heordered his body to be carried thither beforehand, in tes­timony that he died in full persuasion of the truth of thepromises which were given to him and his ancestors: norwas it inconvenient, that future generations, after their re­turn into Canaan, should have before their eyes the Sepul­chre of their forefathers, for a record of their virtues, andan incitement to the imitation of them. But the strongestmotive of all for Jacob's desiring to be buried in Canaan,(supposing that he foreknew that our Saviour Christ wasto live and die, and with some others, rise again in thatcountry) was, that he might be one of that blessed number;as it was indeed an ancient tradition in the church, thatamong those, who came out of their graves after our Lord'sresurrection, Mat. xxvii. 53, the patriarch Jacob was one.PooVs Annotations, and Bibliotheca Bibl. B.
T Gen. i. 21.
X When Joseph died he was not only embalmed, butput into a coffin. This was an honour appropriated topersons of distinction, coffins not being universally used inEgypt. Maillet, speaking of the Egyptian repositories ofthe dead, having given an account of several niches thatare found there, says, "it must not be imagined, that thebodies deposited in these gloomy apartments were all en­closed in chests, and placed in niches; the greatest partwere simply embalmed and swathed after that manner thatevery one hath some notion of; after which they laidthem one by the side of another without any ceremony:some were even put into these tombs without any em­balming at all, or such a slight one, that there remains
II Of the burying places of Joseph, and of the other pa­triarchs, as they are here rightly stated, see Test. Simeon,§8. and Test. Benjamin, § 12, with the Note, in Authent.Rec. Part 1, page 415, 416.
§ Exodus, xiii. 19. Acts vii. 16.
** There are several reasons which might induce Jo­seph not to have his dead body immediately carried intoCanaan, and buried as his father was. 1st, Because hisbrethren, after his decease, might not have interest enoughat court to provide themselves with such things as werenecessary to set off the pomp and solemnity of a funeralbefitting so great a personage. Silly, Because he mightforesee,- that the Egyptians, in all probability, as long astheir veneration for his memory was warm, would hardlyhave suffered his remains to have been carried into ano­ther country. 3dly, Because the continuance of his re­mains among them might be a means to preserve the re­membrance of the services he had done them, and therebyan inducement to them to treat the relations he had leftbehind him with more kindness. 4thly, And chiefly, be­cause the presence of his body with the Israelites mightbe a pledge to assure them, and a means to strengthen andconfirm their faith, and hope in God's promises to theirprogenitors, that he would infallibly put their posterity inpossession of the land of Canaan: and accordingly, whenMoses delivered them out of Egypt, he carried Joseph'sbody along with him, (Exod. xiii. 19.) and committed it tothe care of the tribe of Ephraim, who buried it near She-chem, (Josh. xxiv. 32.) in the field which Jacob, a littlebefore his death, gave to Joseph, as his peculiar property.Pereius, and Patrick's Commentary; Pool's Annotations,and Calmet's Dictionary under the word. B







OCR Output








94 [book hi. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


laborious service; for in this position it ap­pears in the most agreeable manner to thespectators; but when he is obliged to assistat offering sacrifices, and to do the appointedservice, that he may not be hindered in hisoperations by its motion, he throws it to theleft, and bears it on his shoulder. Moses callsthis belt abaneth; but we have learned, fromthe Babylonians, to call it emia. This vest­ment has no loose or hollow parts any wherein it, but only a narrow aperture about theneck: and it is tied with certain strings hang­ing down from the edge over the breast, andover the back; and is fastened above eachshoulder. It is called massabazanes.
Upon his head he wears a cap, not broughtto a conic form, nor including the entire head;but still including more than the half of it.It is named masnaemphthes, or a mitre, butits make is such that it seems to be a crown.It is made of thick swaths, but the contextureis of linen, and it i3 doubled round manytimes, and sewed together; besides which, apiece of fine linen covers the whole cap,from the upper part, and reaches down tothe forehead, and hides the seams of theswaths, which would otherwise appear in­decently: this adheres closely upon the solidpart of the head, that it may not fall off du­ring the sacred service about the sacrifices.


Such was the habit of the generality of thepriests.
The high-priest is adorned with the samegarments already described; but over thesehe puts on a vestment of a blue colour; thisalso is a long robe, reaching to his feet: inour language it is called meeir, and is tiedround with a girdle, embroidered with thesame colours and flowers as the former, in­terwoven with a mixture of gold: to the bot­tom are hung fringes, in colour like pome­granates, with golden* bells,f by a curiousand beautiful contrivance; so that betweentwo bells hangs a pomegranate, and betweentwo pomegranates a bell. Now this vesturewas not composed of two pieces, nor was itsewed together upon the shoulders and thesides, but it was one long vestment, so wovenas to have an aperture for the neck: not anoblique one, but parted all along the breast,and the back; a border also was sewed to it,lest the aperture should look too indecently;it was also parted where the hands were tocome out.
Besides these, the high-priest put on a thirdgarment, called the epnod, which resemblesthe epomis of the Greeks. It was woven tothe depth of a cubit, of several colours, withgold intermixed, and embroidered: but it leftthe middle of the breast uncovered; it was


X
* The use of these golden bells, at the bottom of thehigh-priest's long garment, seems to have been this; thatby shaking his garment at the time of his offering incensein the temple, on the great day of expiation, or at otherproper periods of his sacred ministrations on the greatfestivals, the people might have notice of it, and mieht fallto their own prayers at the time of incense, or other pro­per periods; and so the whole congregation might at onceoffer those common prayers jointly with the high-priest tothe Almighty. See Luc. i. 10. Nor probably is thefather of Sirach to be otherwise understood, when he saysof Aaron, the first high-priest, Ecclus. xlv. 9, God com­passed Aaron with pomegranates, and with many goldenbells round about; that as he went there might be a sound,and a noise made, that might be heard in the temple, for amemorial to the children of his people.
t The bell seems to have been a sacred utensil of veryancient use in Asia. Golden bells formed a part of theornaments of the pontifical robe of the Jewish high-priest,with which he invested himself upon those grand andpeculiar festivals, when he entered into the sanctuary.That robe was very magnificent; it was ordained to be ofsky-blue, and the border of it, at the bottom, was adornedwith pomegranates and gold bells intermixed equally, andat equal distances. The use and intent of these bells isevident from these words: And it shall be upon Aaron tominister, and his sound shall be heard when he goeth inunto the holy place before the Lord, and when he cometh
out, that he die not. The sound of the numerous bellsthat covered the hem of his garment, gave notice to theassembled people that the most awful ceremony of theirreligion had commenced. When arrayed in this garb, hebore into the sanctuary the vessel of incense; it was thesignal to prostrate themselves before the Deity, and tocommence those fervent ejaculations which were to ascendwith the column of that incense to the throne of heaven."One indispensable ceremony in the Indian Pooja is theringing of a small bell by the officiating Brahmin. Thewomen of the idol, or dancing girls of the pagoda, havelittle golden bells fastened to their feet, the soft harmonioustinkling of which vibrates in unison with the exquisitemelody of their voices." (Maurice's Indian Antiquities,vol. v. p. 137.) "The ancient kings of Persia, who, infact, united to their own persons the regal and sacerdotaloffice, were accustomed to have the fringes of their robesadorned with pomegranates and golden bells. The Ara­bian courtesans, like the Indian women, have little goldenbells fastened round their legs, neck, and elbows, to thesound of which they dance before the king. The Arabianprincesses wear golden rings on their fingers, to whichlittle bells are suspended, as well as in the flowing tressesof their hair, that their superior rank may be known, andthey themselves, in passing, receive the homage dueto their exalted station." CalmeCt Dictionary, articleBell. B.







OCR Output








474 [book XIII. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


he persuaded them to have it so demolished;and this by putting them in mind what mise­ries they had suffered by its garrison, and theJewish deserters; and what miseries theymight hereafter suffer in case any foreignershould obtain the kingdom, and put a gar­rison into that citadel. This speech inducedthe multitude to a compliance; because heexhorted them to nothing but what was fortheir own good. So they all applied them­selves to the work, and levelled the moun­tain; and in that work, spent both day andnight, without any intermission; which costthem three* whole years before it was re­moved, and brought to a level with the plainof the rest of the city. After which the templewas the highest of all the buildings; now thecitadel, as well as the mountain whereon itstood, were demolished. And these actionswere thus performed under Simon.
CHAP. VII.
of simon's alliance with antiochus pius; and hiswars against trypho, and against cendebeus, thegeneral of antiochus's army. also of his assassi­nation by his son-in-law, ptolemy.
NOWf after Demetrius had been carriedinto captivity, Trypho his governor,Jdestroyed Antiochus, the son of Alexander,who was also called j|the God; and this when


he had reigned four years. Though he causedit to be reported that he died under thehands of the surgeons. He then sent hisfriends, and those that were most intimatewith him to the soldiers; and promised thathe would give them a great deal of money ifthey would make him king. He intimatedto them that Demetrius was taken captive bythe Parthians; and that Demetrius's brotherAntiochus, if he came to be king, would dothem a great deal of mischief, in way of re­venge for their revolting from his brother.So the soldiers, in expectation of the wealththey should get by bestowing the kingdom onTrypho, made him their ruler. However,when Trypho had gained the management ofaffairs he demonstrated his disposition to bewicked. For while he was a private personhe cultivated a familiarity with the multitude,and pretended to great moderation; and sodrew them on artfully to whatsoever hepleased. But when he had once taken thekingdom, he laid aside any farther dissimu­lation, and appeared in his true colours.This behaviour made his enemies superiorto him; for the soldiery hated him, and re­volted from him to Cleopatra, the wife ofDemetrius; who was then shut up in Se-leucia, with her children. But as Antiochus,the son of Demetrius, who was called Soter,was not admitted by any of the cities on ac-


* An. 142, 141, 140, B. C.
t It must here be diligently noted that Josephus's copyof the first book of Maccabees, which he had so carefullyfollowed, and faithfully abridged as fir as the 50th verseof the 13th chapter; seems there to have ended. Whatfew things there are afterward common to both, mightprobably be learned by him from some other more im­perfect records. However, we must exactly observehere, what the remaining part of that book of the Macca­bees informs us of; and what Josephus would never haveomitted, had this copy contained so much; that this Simonthe Great, the Maccabee, made a league with AntiochusSoter, the son of Demetrius Soter, and brother to the otherDemetrius, who was now a captive in Parthia; that uponhis coming to the crown, about the 140th year before theChristian era, he granted great privileges to the Jewish'nation, and to Simon their high-priest and ethnarch, whichprivileges Simon seems to have taken of his own accordabout three years before. In particular he gave himleave to coin money for his country, with his own stamp;and as concerning Jerusalem, and the sanctuary, that theyshould be free; or as the vulgar Latin hath it, holy andfree, 1 Mace. xv. 6, 7. which I take to be the truer read­ing; as being the very words of his father's concessionoffered to Jonathan several years before, x. 31. Antiq.XIII. 2. Now what makes this date, and these grants,
greatly remarkable, is the state of the remaining genuineshekels of the Jews with Samaritan characters; whichseem to have been (most of them at least,) coined in thefour first years of this Simon the Asmonean; and havingupon them these words on one side, "Jerusalem theholy;" and on the reverse, " In the year of freedom 1 or2 or 3 4." Which shekels therefore are original monu­ments of these times, and undeniable marks of the trothof the history in these chapters; though it be in a greatmeasure omitted by Josephus. See Essay on the OldTestament, p. 157, 158. The reason why I rather sup­pose that his copy of the Maccabees wanted these chap­ters; than that his own copies are here imperfect, is this,that all their contents are not here omitted; though muchthe greatest part be. See a pattern of these genuine she­kels, with the inscriptions in Samaritan letters, at the bot­tom of my Description of the Temples.
I How Trypho killed this Antiochus, the Epitome ofLivy informs us, chap. 55. viz. that he corrupted his phy­sicians, or surgeons; who falsely pretending to the peoplethat he was perishing with the stone, as they cut him forit, killed him; which exactly agrees with Josephus.
|| That this Antiochus, the son of Alexander Balas, wascalled the God, is evident from his coins: which Spanheimassures us bear this inscription, "King Antiochus, theGod, Epiphanes, the victorious."







OCR Output








,







OCR Output








An. 916.] 309 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


his son Jehoshaphat* succeeded him in thegovernment . He was born of Asa's wifeAzubah. And all men allowed that he fol­lowed the works of David his forefather, andthis both in courage and piety. But we arenot obliged now to speak any more of theaffairs of this king.
CHAP. XIII.
OF THE IMPIETY OF AHAB KING OF ISRAEL; THE ACTIONS OFTHE PROPHET ELIJAH; AND THE MURDER OF NABOTH.
AHAB, the king of Israel, dwelt in Sa­maria, and held the government fortwenty-two years; and made no alteration inthe conduct of the kings that were his pre­decessors, but only in such things as were ofhis own invention for the worse, and in hismost gross wickedness. He imitated them intheir wicked courses, and in their injuriousbehaviour towards God; and most especiallyhe imitated the transgression of Jeroboam.For he worshipped the heifers that he had
Egyptians the usage of burning many spices at their funerals, as we find they did at the funeral of Zedekiah king ofJudah, Jer. xxxiv. 5. but notwithstanding this, some veryable commentators are of opinion, that all these spices andperfumes were burnt along with Asa's body; and theyremark, that among his other offences, the sacred historytakes no notice of this vanity of his, in ordering his bodyto be disposed of according to the manner of the Gentiles,and not of his own people. Though therefore they sup­pose that Asa was the first who introduced this custom;yet, in after ages, it became very frequent, and wasthought the more honourable ceremony of the two,2 Chron. xxi. 19. Ibid. xvi. 14. Amos vi. 10. Patrick'sand CalmeCs Commentaries on 2 Chron. xvi. 14. B.* An. 916.\ About an. 910.
J Thesbe was a town on the other side of Jordan, inthe tribe of Gad, and in the land of Gilead, where thisprophet was born, or at least inhabited for some time.Since the Scripture makes no mention either of the qualityof bis parents, the manner of his education, or his call tothe prophetic office, some Jewish doctors have been ofopinion that he was an angel sent from heaven, in themidst of the general corruption of the world, to preservethe true worship of God. Others pretend, that he was apriest descended from the tribe of Aaron; that his father'sname was Sabaca, and his birth altogether miraculous:whilst others again will needs have it, that he was Phineas,the son of Aaron, who, after having lived a long whileconcealed, appeared again in the world under the name ofElijah. But where the Scripture is silent, all particularsof this kind are of small authority. This, however, maybe said with safety of him, that he was one of the chief,if not the prince of the prophets of his age; a man of greatand elevated soul, of a generous and undaunted spirit, azealous defender of the cause of God, and a just avengerof the violation of his honour. Calmefs Commentary. B.


made; and he contrived other absurd objectsof worship. He also married Jezebel, thedaughter of Ethbaal, king of the Tynans andSidonians; of whom he learnt to worship herown gods. This woman was active and bold;and fell into so great a degree of impurityand madness, that she built a temple to thegod of the Tyrians, which they call Belus,and planted a grove of all sorts of trees; shealso appointed priests and false prophets tothis god. The king also himself had manysuch about him; and so exceeded in madnessand wickedness all the kings that went be­fore him.
Now there was a prophett of God, ofThesbon,J a country in Gilead, that came toAhab, and said to him, that God foretold, hewould not send rain nor dew in those yearsupon the country,|| but when he should ap­pear^ And when he had confirmed this byan oath, he departed into the southern parts,and made his abode by a brook, out of whichhe had water to drink; as for his food, ravens
II St. James's words are these:—Elias was a man sub­ject to the like passions as we are; and he prayed earnestly,that it might not rain, and it rained not on the earth for thespace of three years and six months. Our blessed Saviourmakes mention of the like compass of time, Luke iv. 25.and yet neither of these are contradictory to what thesacred history tells us, viz. That the word of the Lordcame to Elijah in the third year, 1 Kings xviii. 1. Forwe must remember, that as Egypt had usually no rain, butwas watered by the river Nile; so the land of Canaan hadgenerally none, except twice a year, which they calledthe early and latter rain. The former of these was in themonth Nisan, which answers to our March; and the otherin the month Marheshvan, which answers to our October.Now, at the beginning of the drought, Ahab might veryprobably impute the want of rain to natural causes; butwhen, after six months, neither the former nor the latterrain fell in their season, he then began to be enraged atElijah, as the cause of the national judgment, and forcedhim, at God's, command, to save his life by flight; andfrom that time the three years in the historian are to becomputed, though from the first notice which Elijah gaveAhab of this approaching calamity, to the expiration of it,were certainly three years and a half. This calamity issaid to have been procured by Elijah's prayers: but wemust not therefore imagine that his prayers were spitefuland malicious, but necessary rather, and charitable to theoffenders; that by the sharp and long affliction which theyproduced, God's honour, and the truth of his word andthreatonings (which was now universally contemned)might be vindicated; and that the Israelites (whose pre­sent impunity hardened them in their idolatry) mighthereby be awakened to see their wickedness, their de­pendence upon God, and the necessity of their returningto his religion and worship. Bedford's Scripture Chro­nology, lib. vi. c. 2. and Pool's Annotations. B.
§ 1 Kings xvii. 1.


312







OCR Output








504 [book xiy. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


but were defeated in the battle, and put toflight. About five thousand were slain onthis occasion, and the rest being dispersed,tried, as well as they were able, to save them­selves. However, Arislobulus had with himstill above a thousand men; and with themhe fled to Macherus, and fortified the place:and though he had had ill success, he stillhad some hope of his affairs. But when hehad struggled against the siege for two days'time, and had received many wounds, he wasbrought as a captive to Gabinius, with hisson Antigonus; who also fled with him fromRome. And this was the fortune of Aristo-bulus, who was sent back again to Rome;and was there retained in bonds; havingbeen both king and high-priest for threeyears, and six months; and was indeed aneminent person, and one of a great soul.However, the senate let his children go;upon Gabinius's writing to them, that hepromised their mother so much, when shedelivered up the fortresses to him. And ac­cordingly they returned into Judea.
Now when Gabinius was making an expc'dition against the Parthians, and had alreadypassed over Euphrates, he changed his mind,and resolved to return into Egypt; in orderto *restore Ptolemy to his kingdom. Anti-pater supplied his army, which he sent againstArchelaus, with corn, and weapons, andmoney. He also made those Jews, who wereabove Pelusium, his friends and confederates;and had been the guardians of the passesthat led into Egypt. But when he came backout of Egypt, he found Syria in disorder withseditions and troubles; for Alexander, theson of Aristobulus, having seized on the go­vernment a second time by force, made manyJews revolt to him; and so he marched overthe country with a great army, and slew allthe Romans he could meet with; and pro­ceeded to besiege the mountain called Geriz-zim, whither they had retreated.
But when Gabinius found Syria in such astate, he sent Anti pater, who was a prudentman, to those that were seditious; to trywhether he could cure them of their madness,and persuade them to return to a bettermind. And when he came to them, he in-
* This history is best illustrated by Dr. Hudson out ofLivy, Epit. cv. who says, that " A. Gabinius, the procon­sul, restored Ptolemy to his kingdom of Egypt; and


duced many of them to do what they ought.But he could not restrain Alexander: for hehad an army of thirty thousand Jews, andmet Gabinius; and joining battle with himwas beaten, and lost ten thousand of his menabout mount Tabor.
So Gabinius settled the affairs which be­longed to the city Jerusalem, as was agree­able to Antipater's inclination; and" wentagainst the Nabateans, and overcame themin battle. He also sent away in a friendlymanner Mithridates and Orsanes, who wereParthian deserters, and came to him; thoughthe report went abroad, that they had runaway from him. And when Gabinius hadperformed great and glorious actions, in hismanagement of the affairs of war, he returnedto Rome and delivered the government toCrassus. Now Nicolaus of Damascus, andStrabo of Cappadocia, both describe the ex­peditions of rompey and Gabinius against theJews: while neither of them say any thingnew, which is not in the other.
CHAP. VII.
OF THE PILLAGING OF THE TEMPLE BY CRASSUS, PREVIOUSTO HIS EXPEDITION AGAINST THE PARTHIANS; IN WHICHHE PERISHED WITH HIS ARMY; OF THE EXPLOITS OFCASSIUS; AND OF THE DEATH OF ARISTOBULUS AND HISSON ALEXANDER.
NOW fCrassus, as he was going upon hisexpedition against the Parthians, cameupon Judea, and carried off the money thatwas in the temple, which Pompey had left;being two thousand talents; and was dis­posed to spoil it of all the gold belonging toit, which was eight thousand talents. Healso took a beam which was made of solidbeaten gold, of the weight of three hundredminse; each of which weighed two poundsand a half. It was the priest who was guar­dian of the sacred treasures, and whose namewas Eleazar, that gave him this beam; notout of a wicked design, for he was a goodand a righteous man; but being intrustedwith the custody of the veils belonging to thetemple, which were of admirable beauty, andof very costly workmanship, and hung clownfrom this beam, when he saw that Crassus
ejected Archelaus, whom they had set up for king," fee.See Prideaux, at the years 64 and 65.t An. 54 B. C.







OCR Output








an. 38.] 535 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


fliction than a defeat, if any of those thingswhich it was not lawful to see should be seenby them; used entreaties and threatenings,and even sometimes force itself to restrainthem. He also prohibited the ravage thatwas made in the city; and many times askedSosius, whether the Romans would empty thecity both of money and men, and leave himking of a desert? and told him, that he es­teemed the dominion over the whole habitableearth, as by no means an equivalent satisfac­tion for such a murder of his citizens. Andwhen Sosius said that this plunder was justlyto be permitted the soldiers, for the siege theyhad undergone, he replied that he would giveevery one their reward out of his own money.And by this means he redeemed what re­mained of the city from destruction; and heperformed what he had promised. For hegave a noble donation to every soldier, and aproportionable present to their commanders:but a most royal present to Sosius himself:till they all went away laden with money.
This *destruction befell the city of Jerusa­lem when Marcus Agrippa and Caninius Gal-lus were consuls of Rome;t on the hundredand eighty-fifth Olympiad; on the thirdmonth; on the solemnity of the fast. As if aperiodical revolution of calamities had re­turned, since that which befell the Jews underPompey. For the Jews were taken by himon the same day; and this was after twenty-


seven years' time. So when Sosius had dedi­cated a crown of gold to God, he marchedaway from Jerusalem; and carried Antigonuswith him, in bonds to Antony. But Herodwas afraid lest Antigonus should be kept inprison only by Antony; and that when hewas carried to Rome by him, he might get hiscause to be heard by the senate; and mightdemonstrate, as he was himself of the royalblood, and Herod but a private man, thattherefore it belonged to his sons to haye thekingdom, on account of the family they wereof, in case he had himself offended the Ro­mans by what he had done. Out of Herod'sfear of this it was, that he, by giving Antony agreat deal of money, endeavoured to persuadehim to have Antigonus slain: which if it wereonce done, he should be free from that fear.And thus did the government of the Asmo-neans cease; a hundred and twenty-six yearsafter it was set up. This family was a splen­did and illustrious one; both on account ofthe nobility of their stock, and of the dignityof the high-priesthood; as also for the glori­ous actions their ancestors had performed forour nation. But these men lost the govern­ment by their dissensions with each other;and it then came to Herod, the son of Anti-pater; who was of a vulgar family, and of noeminent extraction; but one that was subjectto other kings. And this is what history tellsus was the end of the Asmonean family.


* Note here, that Josephus fully and frequently assuresus, that there passed above three years between Herod'sfirst obtaining the kingdom at Rome, and his secondobtaining it upon the taking of Jerusalem, and death ofAntigonus. The present history of this interval twicementions the army's going into winter quarters: whichperhaps belonged to two several winters, chap. 15. Andthough Josephus says nothing how long they lay in thosequarters; yet does he give such an account of the longand studied delays of Ventidius, Silo, and Macheras, whowere to see Herod settled in his new kingdom, but seemnot to have had sufficient force for that purpose; andwere certainly all corrupted by Antigonus to make thelongest delays possible; and gives us such particular ac­counts of the many great actions of Herod's during thesame interval, as fairly imply that interval, before Herodwent to Samosata, to have been very considerable. How­ever, what is wanting in Josephus is fully supplied byMoses Chorenensis, the Armenian historian, in his historyof the same interval, II. 18, 19, 50. Where he directlyassures us, that Tigranes, when king of Armenia, and themanager of this Parthian war, reigned two years afterHerod was made king at Rome: and yet Antony did nothear of his death, in that very neighbourhood, at Samo­sata, till he was come thither to besiege it. After which
Herod brought him an army; which was 340 miles' march,and through a difficult country full of enemies also: andjoined with him in the siege of Samosata, till that city wastaken. After which Herod and Sosius marched back withtheir larger armies the same number of 340 miles; andwhen, in a little time, they sat down to besiege Jerusalem,they were not able to take it but by a siege of five months.All which put together fully supplies what is wanting inJosephus; and secures the entire chronology of thesetimes, beyond contradiction. But then, if we inquire intothe true occasions of this long delay in the settlement ofHerod in his new kingdom, after he had been declaredking at Rome, we shall easily find by Josephus himself,that the Roman lieutenants, Ventidius, Silo and Mache­ras, who were to see Herod settled in the kingdom, werenot in earnest to do it. Nor was any such design shewnin earnest till after he had been with Antony himself, andassisted him in the taking of Samosata. Upon which anew general, Sosius, was sent, with a sufficient force, andfull commission to see it done effectually: and after whichit appears that the war went on in earnest continuallyagainst Antigonus, till Jerusalem and himself were takenby Sosius and Herod; and Herod was fully settled in thekingdom of Judea.
t On the third year of the 185th Olympiad.







OCR Output








470 [book XIII. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


gathered a greater army together than theyhad before, and came against Jonathan. Butas soon as he was informed of their coming,he went suddenly to meet them, to the coun­try of Hamath: for he resolved to give themno opportunity of coming into Judea. So he
fritched his camp at fifty furlongs' distancerom the enemy; and sent out spies to takea view of their camp, and after what mannerthey were encamped. When his spies hadgiven him full information, and had seizedupon some of them by night, who told himthe enemy would soon attack him; he pro­vided for his security, and placed watchmenbeyond his camp, and kept all his forcesarmed all night. And he gave them a chargeto be of good courage, and to have theirminds prepared to fight in the night time, ifthey should be obliged so to do; lest theirenemies' designs should seem concealed fromthem. But when Demetrius's commanderswere informed that Jonathan knew whatthey intended, their counsels were disorder­ed; and it alarmed them to find that the ene­my had discovered their intentions. Nor didthey expect to overcome them any otherway, now they had failed in the snares theyhad laid for them. For should they hazardan open battle, they did not think they shouldbe a match for Jonathan's army. So theyresolved to flee: and having lighted manyfires, that when the enemy saw them, theymight suppose they were there still, they re­tired. But when Jonathan came to give thembattle in the morning, and found their campdeserted, and understood they were fled, hepursued them. Yet could not he overtakethem, for they had already passed over theriver Eleutherus; and were out of danger.So when Jonathan returned thence, he wentinto Arabia, and fought against the *Naba-teans; and drove away a great deal of theirprey, and took many captives, and came toDamascus: and there sold off that he hadtaken. About the same time it was that Si-


mon, his brother, went over all Judea, andPalestine, as far as Ascalon; and fortified thestrong holds; and when he had made themvery strong both in the edifices erected, andin the garrisons placed in them, he came toJoppa: and when he had taken it, he broughta great garrison into it. For he heard thatthe people of Joppa were disposed to deliverup the city to Demetrius's generals.
When Simon and Jonathan had finishedthese affairs, they returned to Jerusalem.There Jonathan gathered all the people to­gether, and took counsel to restore the wallsof Jerusalem, and to rebuild the wall thatencompassed the temple, which had beenthrown down; and to make the places ad­joining stronger by very high towers: andbesides that to build another wall in themidst of the city, in order to exclude themarket-place from the garrison which was inthe citadel; and by that means to hinderthem from any plenty of provisions: andmoreover to make the fortresses that were inthe country much stronger and more defensi­ble than they were before. And when thesethings were approved of by the multitude,as rightly proposed, Jonathan himself tookcare of the building that belonged to thecity; and sent Simon to make the fortressesin the country more secure than formerly.But Demetrius passed over the Euphrates,and came into Mesopotamia; as desirous tocontain that country still, as well as Babylon:and when he should have obtained the do­minion of the upper provinces, to lay a foun­dation for recovering his entire kingdom.For those Greeks and Macedonians whodwelt there, frequently sent ambassadors tohim, and promised, that if he would come tothem, they would deliver themselves up tohim, and assist him in fighting against fArsa-ces, the king of the Parthians. So he waselevated with these hopes, and came hastilyto them; as having resolved that, if he hadonce overthrown the Parthians, and gotten


* Since the Nabatean Arabians were now in amity withthe Jews ; ch. 1. perhaps the reading in 1 Mace. xii. 31. maybe the truer: where these people are called Zabadeans.Otherwise Grotius's conjecture, set down by Dr. Hudson,must be allowed, that the Nabateans not now followingAntiochus, the son of Alexander Balas; but his and Jona­than's enemy Demetrius Nicator, Jonathan endeavouredby force to oblige them to come into his measures, and toacknowledge his friend Antiochus as king of Syria.
t This king, who was of the famous race of Arsaces, isboth here, and 1 Mace. xiv. 2. called by the family nameArsaces: but Appian says, his proper name was Phraates.He is here also called by Josephus the king of the Par­thians, as the Greeks used to call them; but by the elderauthor of the first book of Maccabees, the king of thePersians and Medes; according to the language of theeastern nations. See Authent. Rec. Pt. II. page 1108.







OCR Output








340 [book a. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


lay his hands on; and this without interrup­tion from Jehu, who made no haste to defendthe country, when it was under this distress.Nay he was become a contemner of religion,and despiser of holiness, and of the laws;and died when he had reigned over the Is­raelites *twenty-seven years. He was bu­ried in Samaria, and left the government tohis son Jehoahaz.
Meanwhile Jehoash, king of Judah, hadan inclination to repair the temple of God.So he called Jehoiada, and bade him sendthe Levites and priests through all thecountry to require half a shekel of silverfrom every head, towards the rebuilding andrepairing of the temple, which was broughtto decay by Jehoram, and Athaliah, and hersons. But the high-priest did not do this;as concluding that no one would willinglypay that money. But in the twenty-thirdyear of Jehoash's reign, when the king sentfor him, and the Levites, and complainedthat they had not obeyed what he enjoinedthem; and still commanded them to takecare of the rebuilding of the temple, he usedthis stratagem for collecting the money. Hemade a wooden chest, and closed it up faston all sides, but opened one hole in it. Hethen set it in the temple, beside the altar,and desired every one to cast into it,through the hole what he pleased, for therepair of the temple. This contrivance wasacceptable to the people; and they stroveone with another, and brought in jointlylarge quantities of silver and gold.f Andwhen the scribes and the priests that wereover the treasuries, had emptied the chest,and counted the money in the king's pre­sence, they then set it in its former place.And thus did they every day. But when themultitude appeared to have cast in as muchas was wanted, the high-priest Jehoiada,and king Joash, sent to hire masons and car­penters: and to buy large pieces of timber,and of the most curious sort. And whenthey had repaired the temple, they madeuse of the remaining gold and silver, forbowls, basons, cups, and other vessels; andthey went on to make the altar every dayrich with sacrifices of great value.


Some time afterwards Jehoiada died whenhe had lived one hundred and thirty years;having been a righteous, and in every re­spect a good man: and he was buried inthe king's sepulchres at Jerusalem; becausehe had recovered the kingdom to the familyof David. After his death Jehoash betrayedhis want of care about God; and the prin­cipal men of the people were corruptedwith him; and offended against their duty,and what their constitution determined tobe most for their good. Hereupon God wasdispleased with the change that was madein the king, and in the rest of the people:and sent prophets to testify to them whattheir actions were, and to bring them toleave off their wickedness. But they had soviolent an inclination to it, that neither couldthe examples of those that had offered af­fronts to the laws, and had been so severelypunished, they and their entire families; norcould the fear of what the prophets nowforetold, bring them to repentance, andturn them back from their course of trans­gression, to their former duty. But the kingcommanded that Zachariah, the son of thehigh-priest Jehoiada, should be stoned toJdeath in the temple; and forgot the kind­nesses he had received from his father. Forwhen God had appointed him to prophesy,he stood in the midst of the multitude, andexhorted both them and the king to actrighteously; and foretold, that if they wouldnot hearken to his admonitions, they shouldsuffer a heavy punishment. But as Zacha­riah was ready to die, he appealed to Godas a witness of what he suffered, for thegood counsel he had given them: and howhe perished after a most severe and violentmanner, for the good deeds his father haddone to Jehoash.
However, it was not long before the kingsuffered punishment for his transgression.For when Hazael, king of Syria, made anirruption into his country, and when he hadoverthrown Gath, and spoiled it, he made anexpedition against Jerusalem. HereuponJehoash was afraid, and emptied all thetreasures of God, and of the kings beforehim, and took down the gifts that had been


* Twenty-eight, Hebrew and Septuagint, from an.885 to 857.
t 2 Kings xii. 9.j About an. 840.







OCR Output








434 [book XII. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


cern about that matter, and told him he mightretain her whom he loved without any danger,and might have her for his wife; and openedthe truth of the matter to him, and assuredhim that he chose rather to have his owndaughter abused, than to overlook him, andsee him come to public disgrace. So Josephcommended him for his brotherly love, andmarried his daughter; by whom he had aeon, whose name was Hyrcanus, as we saidbefore. And when this his youngest sonshewed, at thirteen years old, a mind that wasboth courageous and wise; and was greatlyenvied by his brethren, as being of a geniusmuch above them, and such a one as theymight well envy; Joseph had once a mind toknow which of his sons had the best dispo­sition to virtue; and when he sent themseverally to those that had then the best re­putation for instructing youth, the rest of hischildren, by reason of their sloth, and unwil­lingness to take pains, returned to him foolishand unlearned. After them he sent out theyoungest, Hyrcanus; and gave him threehundred yoke of oxen, and bade him go twodays' journey into the wilderness, and sowthe land there, and yet kept back privatelythe yokes of the oxen that coupled themtogether. When Hyrcanus came to the place,and found he had no yokes with him, he con­temned the drivers of the oxen, who advisedhim to send some to his father to bring themsome yokes; but thinking that he ought notto lose his time, while they should be sent tobring him the yokes, he invented a kind ofstratagem, and what suited an age elder thanhis own. For he slew ten yoke of the oxen;and distributed their flesh among the labour­ers; and cut their hides into several pieces,and made him yokes, and yoked the oxentogether with them. By which means hesowed as much land as his father had ap­pointed him to sow; and returned to him.And when he was come back, his father wasmightily pleased with his sagacity; and com­mended the sharpness of his understanding,and his boldness in what he did. And hestill loved him the more, as if he were hisonly genuine son; while his brethren weremuch troubled at it.
But when* one told him that Ptolemy had


* An. 187.


a son just born: and that all the principalmen of Syria, and the other countries subjectto him were to keep a festival, on account ofthe child's birth-day, and went away in hastewith great retinues to Alexandria; he washimself hindered from going by old age; buthe made trial of his sons, whether any of themwould be willing to go to the king. Andwhen the elder sons excused themselvesfrom going, and said they were not courtiersenough for such conversation; and advisedhim to send their brother Hyrcanus, he gladlyhearkened to that advice, and called Hyr­canus, and asked him whether he would goto the king? And upon his promise that hewould go, and his saying that he should notwant much money for his journey, becausehe would live moderately; and that accord­ingly ten thousand drachma; would be suffi­cient, he was pleased with his son's prudence.After a little while, the son advised his fathernot to send his presents to the king fromthence; but to give him a letter to hissteward at Alexandria, that he might furnishhim with money for purchasing what shouldbe most excellent and most precious. So he,thinking that the expense of ten talentswould be enough for presents to be made theking, and commending his son, as giving himgood advice, wrote to Arion, his steward, thatmanaged all his money matters at Alexan­dria; which money was not less than threethousand talents on his account. For Josephsent the money he received in Syria to Alex­andria. And when the day appointed for thepayment of the taxes to the king came, hewrote to Arion to pay them. So when theson had asked his father for a letter to thissteward, and had received it, he hastened toAlexandria. And when he was gone, hisbrethren wrote to all the king's friends, thatthey should destroy him.
But when he was come to Alexandria, hedelivered his letter to Arion; who asked him,how many talents he would have? hoping hewould ask no more than ten or a little more.He said, he wanted a thousand talents: atwhich the steward was angry, and rebukedhim; as one that intended to live extrava­gantly; and he let him know how his fatherhad gathered together his estate by pains­taking, and resisting his inclinations: andwished him to imitate the example of his







OCR Output








186 [book VI. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


>


CHAP. III.
of Samuel's attention to public affairs, the eviladministration of the government by his sons, andthe subsequent demand of the multitude to begoverned by a king.
THE prophet Samuel, when he had or­dained the affairs of the people, aftera convenient manner, and had appointed acity for every district of them; he commandedthem to come to such cities to have the con­troversies that they had one with another de­termined; he himself going over those citiestwice in a year, and doing them justice. Andby that means he kept them in very goodorder for a long time.
But afterward he found himself oppressedwith old age, and not able to do as he haddone formerly. So he committed the govern­ment, and the care of the multitude, to hissons; the elder of whom was called Joel, andthe name of the younger was Abiah. He alsoenjoined them to reside and judge the people,the one at the city Bethel, and the other atBeer-sheba; and divided the people into dis­tricts, that should be under the jurisdiction ofeach of them. Now these men afforded usan evident example and demonstration, howsome children are not of the like dispositionswith their parents; but sometimes perhapsgood and moderate, though born of wickedparents, and sometimes shewing themselvesto be wicked, though born of good parents.For these men, turning aside from their fa­ther's good courses, perverted justice for thefilthy lucre of gifts and bribes; and madetheir determinations, not according to truth,but according to bribery; and turned aside to
* It may probably be made a question, why God did notpunish Samuel, as he did Eli, for the wickedness of hissons? But to this it may be answered, that Samuel's sonswere not so bad as those of Eli; since taking bribes pri­vately was not like openly profaning the tabernacle, andmaking the worship of God contemptible. And besidesthis, it is possible that Samuel might be ignorant of thecorruption of his sons, since he lived at Ramah, and theyat Beer-sheba. Patrick's Comment. B.
t 1 Sam. viii. 5.
J It is generally supposed, that what made the Israel­ites so urgent at this time for a king, was a present straitthey thought themselves in, for want of an able leader; forNahash, the king of the Amorites, coming up to JabeshGilead, and encamping before it, had put the inhabitantsinto such a fright, that, without more to do, they offeredto surrender upon terms; telling him, that they would be-


luxury, and a voluptuous way of living. Sothat, as in the first place, they practised whatwas contrary to the will of God; so did theywhat was contrary to the will of the prophet,their father, who had taken a great deal ofcare, and made very careful provision that themultitude should be righteous.*
Upon these injuries offered to their formerconstitution and government, by the prophet'ssons, the people were very uneasy at theiractions, and came running to the prophet,who then lived at the city Ramah, and in­formed him of the transgressions of his sons;and said, that as he himself was old already,and too infirm to oversee their affairs in themanner he used to do; so they intreated himto appoint some person to be king over them,fwhoj might rule over the nation, and avengethem of the Philistines, who ought to bepunished for their former oppressions. Thesewords greatly afflicted Samuel, on account ofhis innate love of justice, and his hatred toregal government, for he was very fond of anaristocracy, as what mad^ the men that usedit of a divine and happy disposition. Norcould he either think of eating and sleeping,out of his concern and torment of mind atwhat they had said, but all the night long didhe continue awake, and revolved these no­tions in his mind.
While he was thus disposed, God appearedto him, and comforted him, saying, that heought not to be uneasy at what the multitudedesired, because it was not he, but Himself,whom they so insolently despised, and wouldnot have to be alone their King; that theyhad been contriving these things from thevery day that they came out of Egypt; that,


come subjects to him if he would make a league with them,1 Sam. xi. 1. But the haughty Amorite, in contempt ofIsrael, let them know, that if he made n league with them,the condition thereof should be, that they should come outto him, and let him thrust out all their right eyes, and layit for a reproach upon all Israel. The elders of Jabesh,in this sad circumstance, demanded seven days'respite,that they might send messengers unto all the coasts of Is­rael, and if in that time no succours arrived they wouldsubmit. This, it is thought, was the reason for theirpressing so hard upon Samuel at this time for a king;whereas their duty was to have enquired of the Lord, asthey had done *t other times, who it was that he would bepleased to constitute the general in this exigence, to leadout their forces against their enemies. Howell's History,in the notes. B.







OCR Output








146 {book v. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


priests, to be laid up among their treasures;and thus did Jericho perish.
But there was one Achar,* the son of Char-mi, the son of Zebedias, of the tribe of Judah,who, finding a royal garment woven entirelyof gold ;f and a piece of gold that weighedtwo hundred shekels,:f and thinking it a veryhard case that what spoils he, by runningsome hazard, had found, he must give away,and offer them to God, who stood in no needof them, made a deep ditch in his tent, andlaid them up therein, as supposing he shouldnot only be concealed from his fellow sol­diers, but from God also.
Now the place where Joshua pitched hiscamp was called Gilgal,|| which denotesliberty;^ for since they had now passed overthe river Jordan, they looked upon them­selves as freed from the miseries which theyhad undergone from the Egyptians, and inthe wilderness.
A few days after the calamity that befelJericho, Joshua sent three thousand armedmen to take Ai, a city situate above Jericho,but upon the fight of the people of Ai withthem, they were driven back, and lost thirty-six of their men.** When this was told theIsraelites, it made them very sad, and ex­ceeding disconsolate; not so much becauseof the relation the men that were destroyedbare to them, though those that were de­stroyed were all good men, and deservedtheir esteem, as by the despair it occasioned;


for while they believed that they were al­ready in effect in the possession of the land,and should bring back the army out of thebattle without loss, as God had promisedbeforehand, they now saw unexpectedly theirenemies bold with success; so they put sack­cloth over their garments, and continued intears and lamentation all the day, without theleast enquiry after food, but laid what hadhappened greatly to heart.
When Joshua saw the army so much af­flicted, and possessed with forebodings of evil,as to their whole expedition; he used free­dom with God, and said, "We are not comethus far out of any rashness of our own, asthough we thought ourselves able to subduethis land with our own weapons, but at theinstigation of Moses thy servant, because thouhast promised us by many signs, that thouwouldst give us this land for a possession, andthat thou wouldst make our army always su­perior in war to our enemies, and accordinglysome success has already attended upon us,agreeably to thy promises; but because wehave now unexpectedly been foiled, and havelost some men out of our army, we are grievedat it, as fearing what thou hast promised us,and what Moses foretold us cannot be de­pended on; and our future expectation trou­bles us the more, because we have met withsuch a disaster in this first attempt. But dothou, O Lord, free us from these suspicions,for thou art able to find a cure for these dis-


* That the name of this thief was not Achan, as in thecommon copies, but Achar, as here in Josephus, and inthe Apostolic Constitutions, VII. 2. and elsewhere, is evi­dent by the allusion to that name in the curse of Joshua,"Why hast thou troubled us? The Lord shall troublethee." Where the Hebrew words allude only to thename Achar, but not to Achan; accordingly this valley ofAchar or Achor, was and is a known place, a little northof Gilgal, so called from the days of Joshua to this day.See Josh. vii. 24, 26. Is. lxv. 10. Hos. ii. 15. and Dr. Ber­nard's notes here.
t In the original, this robe is called a garment ofShinar,i. e. of Babylon; and the general opinion is, that the rich­ness and excellency of it consisted not so much in the stuffwhereof it was made, as in the colour whereof it wasdyed, which most suppose to have been scarlet, a colourin high esteem among the ancients, and for which the Ba­bylonians were justly famous. Bochart, however, main­tains, that the colour of this robe was various, and not allof one sort; that the scarlet colour the Babylonians firstreceived from Tyre, but the party-colour, whether sowoven or wrought with the needle, was of their own in­vention, for which he produces many passages out ofHeathen authors. Such as
Non ego praetulerim Babylonica picta superbeTexta, Semiramia quaj variantur acu.
Mart. Ep. lib. 8.
Ha?c mihi Memphitis tellus dat munera, victa estPectine Niliaco jam Babylonis acus. Ibid. lib. 14.
with many more citations out of several other writers.However this be, it is certain, that the robe could not failto be a very rich and splendid one, and therefore capti­vated either Achar's pride, or rather covetousness; sincehis purpose seems to have been, not so much to wear ithimself, as to sell it for a large price. Bochart's Phaleg.lib. I.e. 9. Saurin, lib. 3. dissertation 3. B.
J Here Dr. Bernard justly observes, that a few wordsare dropped out of Josephus's copies, on account of therepetition of the word shekels, and that it ought to be readthus, A piece of gold that weighed 60 shekels, and one ofsilver, that weighed 200 shekels, as in our other copies.Josh. vii. 21.
B Josh. v. 9.
§ I agree with Dr. Bernard, and approve of Josephus'sinterpretation of Gilgal, for liberty.
** Josh. vii. 5.







OCR Output








m [BOOK IV. AHfTlQUITIES OF THE TEWS.


ing cattle. But MG3es supposing that theywere afraid of fighting the Canaanitcs, andinvented this provision for their cattle, as ahandsome excuse for avoiding that war, calledthem arrant cowards; and said, they hadonly contrived a decent excuse for their timi­dity; and that they had a mind to live inluxury and ease, while all the rest were la­bouring with great pains to obtain the landthey were desirous to have; and that theywere not willing to undergo the remaininghard service, whereby they were under theDivine promise to pass over Jordan, and over­come those enemies which God had shewedthem, and so obtain their land. But thesetribes, when they saw that Moses was angrywith them, and when they could not deny buthe had a just cause to be displeased at theirpetition, made an apology for themselves;and baid, that it was not on account of their(bar of danger, nor on account of their indo­lence that they made this request, but thatthey might leave the prey they had gotten inplaces of safety, and thereby might be moreexpeditious, and ready to undergo difficulties,and to fight battles. They added, also, thatwhen they had built cities, wherein theymight preserve their children, and wives, andpossessions, if he would bestow them uponthem, they would go along with the rest ofthe army. Hereupon Moses called for Ele-azar, the high-priest, and Joshua, and thechief of the tribes, and permitted these tribesto possess the land of the Amorites, but uponthis condition, that they should join with theirkinsmen in the war, until all things were set­tled. Upon which condition they took pos­session of the country, and built them strongcities, and put into them their children, andtheir wives, and whatsoever else they had thatmight be an impediment to the labours oftheir future marches.
Moses also now built those ten cities, whichwere to be of the number of forty^eight, forthe Levites. Three of these he allotted tothose that slew any person involuntarily, andfled to them; and he assigned the same timefor their banishment, with that of the life ofthe high-priest, under whom the slaughterand flight happened; after which he permitted


* Numb, xxxvi. 2, et 8**).
) From An. 1532 to 1492 B. C.


the slayer to return home; the relations ofhim ihat were slain having the power to killthe slayer, if they caught him without thebounds of the city to which he fled; thoughthis permission was not granted to any otherperson. Now the cities which were set apartfor this flight were Bezer, at the borders ofArabia; Ramoth, of the land of Gilead; andGolan, in the land of Bashan. There wereto be also, by Moses's command, three othercities allotted for the habitation of these fu­gitives, out of the cities of the Levites; butnot till after they should be in possession oi'the land of Canaan.
At this time the chief men of the tribe ofManasseh came to Moses, and informed him,that there was an eminent man of their tribedead, whose name was Zelophehad, who hadno male children, but left daughters; andasked him whether the daughters might in­herit his land* or not? He made this answer:that if they shall marry into their own tribe,they shall carry their own estate along withthem; but if they shall marry to any of ano­ther tribe, they shall leave their inheritancein their father's tribe. And then it was thatMoses ordained that every one's inheritanceshould continue in his own tribe.
CHAP. VIU.
OF THE POLITY SETTLES BY MOSES, AND HIS DISAPPEARANCEFROM AMONG MANKIND.
WHENt forty years were completed,within thirty days, Moses gatheredthe congregation near Jordan, where the cityAbila now stands, which place is full of palm-trees; and when all the people were cometogether, he spake thus to them:
** O ye Israelites, and fellow-soldiers, whohave been partners with me in this long andtoilsome journey. Since now the will of God,and the course of old age at an hundred and Jtwenty, requires that I depart out of this life;and since God has forbidden me to be a pa­tron or an assistant to you in what remains tobe done beyond Jordan; I thought it reason­able not to leave off my endeavours even nowfor your happiness; but to do my utmost toprocure for you the eternal enjoyment of good
X Deut. xxxi. 2.







OCR Output








T70 [book :iv. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


!Hkk^it>«BlW-j


vast materials were there, and with whatgreat skill the workmanship was executed.He also encompassed the entire temple withvery large cloisters; contriving them to bein a due proportion thereto; and he expendedlarger sums of money upon them than hadbeen done before him; till it seemed that noone else had so greatly adorned the templeas he had done. There was a large wall toboth the cloisters; which wall was itself themost prodigious work that was ever heard ofby man. The hill was a rocky ascent, thatdeclined by degrees towards the east partsof the city, till it came to an elevated level.This hill it was which Solomon, who was *thefirst of our kings, by divine revelation en­compassed with a wall; it was of excellentworkmanship upwards, and round the top ofit. He also built a wall below, beginning atthe bottom; which was encompassed by adeep valley. And at the south side he laidrocks together, and bound them to each otherwith lead; and included some of the innerparts, till it proceeded to a great height; andtill both the largeness of the square edifice,and its altitude were immense: and till thevastness of the stones in the front were plainlyvisible on the outside; yet so, that the in­ward parts were fastened together with iron,and preserved the joints immovable for allfuture times. When this work for the foun­dation was done, in this manner, and joinedtogether as part of the hill itself to the verytop of it; he wrought it all into one outwardsurface, and filled up the hollow places whichwere about the wall, and made it a level onthe external surface, and a smooth level also.This hill was walled all round; and in com­pass four furlongs; the distance of each anglecontaining in length a furlong. But withinthis wall, and on the top of all, there rananother wall of stone also: having on theeast quarter, a double cloister, of the samelength with the wall: in the midst of whichwas the temple itself. This cloister lookedto the gates of the temple: and it had beenadorned by many kings in former times.And round about the entire temple werefixed the spoils taken from barbarous nations.All these had been dedicated to the temple


* See Book XVIII. chap. 4.


by Herod; with the addition of those he hadtaken from the Arabians.
Now on the north side of the temple wasbuilt a citadel, whose walls were square andstrong, and of extraordinary firmness. Thiscitadel was built by the kings of the Asmo-nean race, who were also high-priests, beforeHerod: and they called it the tower: inwhich were deposited the vestments of thehigh-priest, which the high-priest only put onat the time when he was to offer sacrifice.These vestments king Herod kept in thatplace; and after his death they were underthe power of the Romans, until the time ofTiberius Caesar. Under whose reign Vitel-lius, the president of Syria, when he oncecame to Jerusalem, and had been most mag­nificently received by the multitude, he hada mind to make them some requital for thekindness they had shewn him. So, upon theirpetition to have those holy vestments in theirown power, he wrote about them to TiberiusCaesar; who granted his request. And thistheir power over the sacerdotal vestmentscontinued with the Jews until the death ofking Agrippa. But after that, Cassius Lon-ginus, who was president of Syria; and Cus-pius Fadus, who was procurator of Judea,enjoined the Jews to deposit those vestmentsin the tower of Antonia: for that they oughtto have them in their power, as they formerlyhad. However, the Jews sent ambassadorsto Claudius Caesar, to intercede with him forthem. Upon whose coming, king Agrippajunior being then at Rome, asked for and ob­tained the power over them from the empe­ror: who gave the command to Vitellius,then commander in Syria, to give it them ac­cordingly. Before that time they were keptunder the seal of the high-priest, and of thetreasurers of the temple: which treasurers,the day before a festival, went up to the Ro­man captain of the temple guards, and viewedtheir own seal, and received the vestments.And again, when the festival was over, theybrought it to the same place, and shewed thecaptain of the temple guards their seal, whichcorresponded with his own, and depositedthem there. And that these things were so,the afflictions that happened to us afterwardsabout them are sufficient evidence. But forthe^ tower itself, when Herod the king of theJews had fortified it more firmly than before,







OCR Output








244 [book VII. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


tell him what was the cause of it: howeverhe said, that he guessed it arose from thepassion of love. Amnon confessed that hewas in love with a sister of his, who had thesame father with himself. So Jonadab sug­gested to him by what method and contri­vance he might obtain his desires. For hepersuaded him to counterfeit sickness; andbade him, when his father should come tohim, to beg of him that his sister might comeand minister to him; for if that were done heshould be better, and should quickly recoverfrom his distemper. So Amnon lay down onhis bed, and pretended to be sick, as Jona­dab had suggested. And when his fathercame, and inquired how he did, he begged ofhim to send his sister to him. Accordinglyhe presently ordered her to be brought tohim: and when she was come, Amnon badeher make cakes for him, and fry them in apan, and do it all with her own hands; be­cause he should take them better from herthan from any one else. So she kneaded theflour in the sight of her brother, and madehim cakes, and baked them in a pan, andbrought them to him. But at that time hewould not taste them, but gave order to hisservants to send all that were there out of hischamber; because he had a mind to reposehimself, free from tumult and disturbance. Assoon as what he had commanded was done,he desired his sister to bring his supper tohim, into the inner parlour; which, when thedamsel had done, he took hold of her, andendeavoured to persuade her to lie with him.Hereupon the damsel cried out, and said,


"Nay, brother, do not force me, nor be sowicked as to transgress the laws, and bringupon thyself the utmost confusion. Curb thisthy unrighteous and impure lust: from whichour house will get nothing but reproach anddisgrace." She also advised him to speak tohis father about this affair, as he might pro­bably permit him to marry her. This shesaid, as desirous to avoid her brother's vio­lent passion at present. But he would notyield to her; but, inflamed with love, andblinded with the vehemency of his passion,he forced his sister. But as soon as Amnonhad gratified his desires he hated the objectof them: and giving her reproachful words,bade her rise up and be gone.* And whenshe said, that this was a more injurious treat­ment than the former, because now he hadforced her, he would not let her stay withhim till the evening, but bid her go away inthe day time, and while it was light, that shemight meet with people that would be wit­nesses of her shame; he commanded his ser­vant to turn her out of his house. Hereuponshe was sorely grieved at the injury and vio­lence that had been offered her:f and renther loose coat, (for the virgins of old timewore such loose coats, tied at the hands, andlet down to the ankles, that the inner coatsmight not be seen;) and sprinkled ashes onher head; and went up the middle of thecity, crying out, and lamenting for the vio­lence that had been offered her. Now Ab­salom, her brother, happened to meet her,and asked her, what sad thing had befallenher, that she was in that plight? and when


* Interpreters seem to be at a great loss to find out thereason, why Amnon's love to his sister should so soon beconverted into such a hatred, as to make him act sorudely, so brutally towards her; but it is no uncommonthing for men of violent and irregular passions, to passfrom one extreme to another. The shame which accom­panies every base action, the remorse and repentance,and many bad consequences, that immediately pursue it,make a recoil in every man's temper; and therefore it isno wonder, that a libidinous young man, who would not»pare so much as his own sister, should after fruition, andwhen the ardour of his lust was satisfied, be seized with acontrary passion, and hate the object he loved so muchbefore, when he came coolly to compare the pleasure andthe sin together, the shortness of the one, and the hei-nousness of the other. He hated his sister, when heshould have hated himself; and as this outrageous treat­ment made it impossible for his guilt to be concealed, soGod seems to have abandoned him to the tumult of hisintemperate mind, on purpose to make this punishment ofDavid's adultery more flagrant, and the prophet's predic-
tion of raising up evil to him out of his tmti house, 2 Sam.xii. 11. more conspicuous; Calmet's and he Clerc's Com­mentaries, and the History of the Life of King David. B.
t The manner of Tamar's signifying her vexation forthe injury and disgrace which her brother had put uponher, is expressed by her putting ashes upon her head,2 Sam. xiii. 19. And that this was an ancient custom,whereby to denote one's grief and concern for any greatloss, or calamity, is evident from that passage of the prophetconcerning the people of Tyre: "They shall cry bitterly,cast dirt upon their heads, and wallow themselves in theashes," Ezek. xxvi. 30. from Achilles's behaviour uponthe death of Patroclus, as we have it in Homer,
'Aft'I'OT^pTjd'i ae yfprfiv JXwv xoviv cbdaXosatfavXhalo xaxxeaak^s ya-osiv 5' »j<JVvvs tfpoffawrov.
Iliad. 18.and from what Mezentius did upon the death of his Lausus,according to Virgil:
Canitiem immundo deformat pulvere, et ambas
Ad caelum tendit palmaa - .dEneid. 10. H.'







OCR Output








AN. 39.] 529 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


city; and not to bear any old grudge at evenhis most open enemies; but was ready toforget the offences which his greatest adver­saries had done him. But Antigonus, byway of reply to what Herod had caused tobe proclaimed, and this before the Romans,and before Silo also, said, that they wouldnot do justly if they gave the kingdom toHerod; who was no more than a privateman, and an Idumean, i. e. *a half Jew:whereas they ought to bestow it on one ofthe royal family, as their custom was. Forthat in case they at present bare any ill-willto him, and had resolved to deprive him ofthe kingdom, as having received it from theParthians; yet were there many others of hisfamily that might by their flaw take it, andthese such as had no way offended the Ro­mans; and being of sacerdotal family, itwould be an unworthy thing to put them by.Now while they said thus one to another, andfell to reproaching one another on both sides,Antigonus permitted his own men, that wereupon the wall, to defend themselves. Whousing their bows, and shewing great alacrityagainst their enemies, easily drove themaway from the towers.
And now it was that Silo discovered thathe had taken bribes. For he set a goodnumber of his soldiers to complain aloud ofthe want of provisions they were in; and torequire money to buy them food; and that itwas fit to let them go into places proper forwinter quarters; since the places near thecity were a desert, by reason that Antigonus'ssoldiers had carried all away. So he set thearmy upon removing, and endeavoured toinarch away. But Herod pressed Silo not todepart; and exhorted Silo's captains andsoldiers not to desert him, when Caesar, andAntony, and the senate. had sent him thither.For that he would provide them plenty of allthe things they wanted; and easily procurethem a great abundance of what they re­quired. After which entreaty he immediately'went out into the country, and left not theleast pretence to Silo for his departure. For


* This affirmation of Antigonus's, spoken in the daysof Herod, and in a manner to his face, that he was anIdumean, i. e. a half Jew, seems to me of much greaterauthority than that pretence of his favourite and flatterer,Nicolaus of Damascus, that he derived his pedigree fromthe Jews, as far hackward as the Babylonish captivity,chap. 1. Accordingly Josephus always esteems him an


he brought an unexpected quantity of provi­sions; and sent to those friends of his whoinhabited'about Samaria, to bring down corn,and wine, and oil, and cattle, and all otherprovisions, to Jericho; that there might beno want of a supply for the soldiers for thetime to come. Antigonus was sensible ofthis: and sent presently over the countrysuch as might restrain, and lie in ambush for,those that went out for provisions. So thesemen obeyed the orders of Antigonus, and gottogether a great number of armed men aboutJericho; and sat about the mountains, andwatched those that brought the provisions.However, Herod was not idle in the meantime. For he took ten bands of soldiers, ofwhom five were of the Romans, and five ofthe Jews, with some mercenaries amongthem, and with some few horsemen, and cameto Jericho. And as they found the city de­serted, but that five hundred of them hadsettled themselves on the tops of the hills,with their wives and children, those he took,and sent away. But the Romans fell uponthe city, and plundered it; and found thehouses full of all sorts of good things. So theking left a garrison at Jericho, and cameback again; and sent the Roman army totake their winter quarters in the countriesthat were come over to him: Judea, andGalilee, and Samaria. And so much did An­tigonus gain of Silo for the bribes he gavehim, that part of the army should be quar­tered at Lidda; in order to please Antony.So the Romans laid their weapons aside, andlived in plenty of all things.
Herod, however, was not pleased withlying still; but sent out his brother Josephagainst Idumea, with two thousand armedfootmen, and four hundred horsemen; whilehimself came to Samaria, and left his motherand his other relations there; for they werealready gone out of Massada; and went intoGalilee, to take certain places which wereheld by the garrisons of Antigonus. And hepassed on to Sepphoris, as God sent a snowwhile Antigonus's garrisons withdrew them-
Idumean: though he says his father Anti pater was of thesame people with the Jews, chap. 8. and hy birth a Jew,XX. 8. as indeed all such proselytes of justice, as the Idu-means, XIII. 9. were in time esteemed the very samepeople with the Jewst Deut. xvii. 15.







OCR Output








450 [book XII. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


livered themselves up upon the security ofoaths, that they should surfer no hard treat­ment from the king. And when Antiochushad thus taken the city, he did them noother harm than sending them out naked.He also placed a garrison of his own in thecity. But as for the temple of Jerusalem,he lay at its siege a long time; while theywithin bravely defended it. For whatso­ever engines the king set against them, theyset other engines again to oppose them. Butthen their provisions failed; what fruits ofthe ground they had laid up were spent;and the land not being ploughed that year,continued unsowed, because it was theseventh year; on which, by our law, weare obliged to let it lie uncultivated. Andwithal so many of the besieged ran awayfor want of necessaries, that but a few onlywere left in the temple.U These happened to be the circumstancesof such as were besieged in the temple. Butthen, because Lysias, the general of the ar­my, and Antiochus, the king, were informed,that Philip was coming upon them out ofPersia; and was endeavouring to gain themanagement of public affairs to himself;they came into these sentiments, to leavethe siege, and to make haste to go againstPhilip. Yet did they resolve not to let thisbe known to the soldiers or to the officers.But the king commanded Lysias to speakopenly to the soldiers and the officers,without saying a word about the business ofPhilip; and lo intimate to them that thesiege would be very tedious; that the placewas very strong; that they were already inwant of provisions; that many affairs of thekingdom wanted regulation; and that it wasmuch better to make a league with the be­sieged, and to become friends to their whole- nation, by permitting them to observe thelaws of their fathers; while they broke outinto this war only because they were de­prived of them; and so to depart home.When Lysias had discoursed thus, both thearmy and the officers were pleased with thisresolution.
Accordingly the king sent to Judas, and
* 1 Mace. vi. 62.
t If we here understand by Alcimus's or Jacirous's be­ing made high-priest, his being confirmed in that dignity,which he had claimed and usurped before; both in this


to those that were besieged with him; andpromised to give them peace, and to permitthem to make use of, and live according to,the laws of their fathers. And they gladlyreceived his proposals. And when they hadgained security upon oath, for their per­formance, they went out of the temple. Butwhen Antiochus came into it, and saw howstrong the place was, he broke his oaths,and ordered his army that was there, topluck down the walls to the ground;* andwhen he had so done, he returned to An-tioch: he also carried with him Onias, thehigh-priest, who was also called Menelaus.For Lysias advised the king to slay Mene­laus, if he would have the Jews be quiet,and cause him no farther disturbance: forthat this man was the origin of all the mis­chief the Jews had done them; by persuad­ing his father to compel the Jews to leavethe religion of their fathers. So the kingsent Menelaus to Berea, a city of Syria;and there had him put to death, when hehad been high-priest ten years. He hadbeen a wicked and an impious man; and,in order to get the government to himself,had compelled his nation to transgress theirown laws. After the death of Menelaus,fAlcimus, who was also called Jacimus, wasmade high-priest. But when king Antiochusfound that Philip had already possessed him­self of the government, he made war againsthim, and subdued him, and took him, andslew him. Now as to Onias, the son of thehigh-priest, who, as we before informedyou, was left a child when his father died;when he saw that the king had slain hisuncle Menelaus, and given the high-priest­hood to Alcimus, who was not of the high-priests' stock; but as induced by Lysiasto translate that dignity from this familyto another house, he fled to Ptolemy, kingof Egypt. And when he found he was ingreat esteem with him, and with his wifeCleopatra, he desired, and obtained a placein the Nomus of Heliopolis, wherein hebuilt a temple, like to that at Jerusalem;of which therefore, we shall hereafter givean account.
place, and in the parallel place, 1 Mace. vii. 5. whenceJosephus took the history; this will agree with the seriesof the present transactions: otherwise not.







OCR Output








294 [tiO'Ott VFtt. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


things; and was very diligent and studiousto have things done after an elegant manner.So he did not neglect the care of the ways;but he laid a causeway of black stone alongthe roads that led to his royal city of Jeru­salem; both to render them easy for travel­lers, and to manifest the grandeur of hisriches and government. He also parted hischariots, and set them in a regular order;that a certain number of them should be inevery city; still keeping a few about him:and those cities he called the cities of hischariots. And the king made silver so plen­tiful in Jerusalem as stones in the street;and so multiplied cedar-trees in the plainsof Judea, which did not grow there before,that they were like the multitude of commonsycamore-trees.* He also ordained the Egyp­tian merchants that brought him their mer­chandise, to sell him a chariot, with a pairof horses, for fsix hundred drachmae of silver;and he sent them to the kings of Syria, andto those kings that were beyond Euphrates.But although Solomon was become themost glorious of kings, and the best belovedof God, and had exceeded in wisdom andriches those that had been rulers of the He­brews before him; yet did he not perseverein this happy state till he died. But he for­sook the observance of the laws of his fathers,and came to an end no way suitable to our


foregoing history of him. He grew mad inhis love of women, and laid no restraint onhimself in his lusts. Nor was he satisfiedwith the women of his own country alone;but he married many wives out of foreignnations;J Sidonians and Tyrians, Ammonitesand Edomites; and he transgressed the lawsof Moses, which prohibited Jews from mar­rying any but those that were of their ownpeople. He also began to worship thei»gods,|| which he did in order to the gratifica­tion of his wives, and out of bis affection fopthem. This very thing our legislator sus*pected, and so admonished us beforehand,that we should not marry women of othercountries, lest we should be entangled withforeign customs, and apostatize from our ownjlest we should leave off to honour our ownGod, and should worship their idols. ButSolomon was fallen headlong into unreason­able pleasures, and regarded not those ad­monitions. For when he bad married sevenhundred wives,§ the daughters of princes andof eminent persons, and three hundred con­cubines, and these besides the king of Egypt'sdaughter;** he soon was governed by them,till he came to imitate their practices. Hewas forced to give them this demonstrationof his kindness and affection to them, to liveaccording to the laws of their countries^And as he grew into years, and his reason


* 1 Kings x. 27.
t Two thousand four hundred shekels, or 2851b.
J Notwithstanding the vast multitude of wives thatSolomon had, the Scriptures make mention of no morethan three children, this son, and two daughters, that arespoken of, 1 Kings iv. 11, 15. and, what is strange, in thebeginning of his story, it takes no notice, as usually itdoes, of his mother's nation, or family, though in the con­clusion of it, 1 Kings xiv. 21—31. it twice reminds us,that she was an Ammonitess by birth, and that her namewas Naamah. Rehoboam was born in the first year of hisfather's reign, and was therefore much about forty-onewhen he entered upon the government; but he was anunskilful and imprudent man, and therefore made a veryfalse step at his first accession to the throne. The authorof Ecclesiasticus gives us no advantageous character ofhim. when he terms him, A man void of understanding,wJro turned the people away with his counsel, chap, xlvii.23. Nay, his own son makes but a faint apology for him,when he tells the people, that he was young, (young inunderstanding) and tender-hearted, and could not with­stand his enemies, 2 Chron. xiii. 7. and therefore somehave imagined, that his father Solomon had him in histhoughts, when he said, in his Preacher, I hated all mylabour, which I had taken under the sun, because I was toleave it to a man that should come after me: And who
knoweth whether he shall be a wise man or a fool? yetshall he have rule over all my labour, wherein I havfelaboured: This also is vanity, chap. it. 18, 19. Calmet'sand Patrick's Commentaries. B.
II About an. 999 B. C.
§ These 700 wives, or the daughters of great men, andthe SOO concubines, the daughters of ignoble, make 1000in all; and are, I suppose, those very 1000 women intr-mated elsewhere by Solomon himself, when he speaks ofhis not having found one good woman among that very-number, Eccles. vii. 28.
** Pharaoh's daughter is generally supposed to have'been a proselyte to the Jewish religion, and thereforeSolomon, in marrying her, incurred no fault; but, in mar­rying so many women besides, and these of a differentreligion, he committed two sins against the law; one inmultiplying wives, and another, in marrying those ofstrange nations, who still retained their idolatry. Andtherefore, the wise son of Sirach, amidst all the encomiumsthat he heaps upon Solomon, could not forget this heinousiniquity, and terrible flaw in his character.—Thou didstbow thy loins to women, and by thy body, thou wastbrought into subjection. Thou didst stain thine honour,and pollute thy seed, so that thou broushtest wrath uponthy children, and wast grieved for thy folly, Eccles. xlvii.19, 20. Patrick's Commentary. B.







OCR Output








ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. [book III.


also the sacrifices. There were also manyand various kinds of sweet spices that be­longed to the tabernacle, and such as werevery costly, and were brought to the goldenaltar of incense, whose nature I do not nowdescribe, lest it should be troublesome to myreaders. But incense* was to be offeredtwice a day, both before sun-rising, and sun-setting. They were also to keep oil readypurified for the lamps, threet of which wereto give light all day long upon the sacredcandlestick before God, and the rest were tobe lighted at the evening.
When all was finished, Besaleel and Aho-liab appeared to be the most skilful of theworkmen; for they invented finer works thanwhat others had done before them, and wereof great abilities to gain notions of what theywere formerly ignorant of: and of these Besa­leel was judged to be the best. Now thewhole time they were about this work wasseven months, and after this ended the firstyear since their departure out of Egypt. Butat the beginning 01 the second year,f in themonth Xanthicus, as the Macedonians call it,but in the month Nisan, as the Hebrews callit, on the new moon, they consecrated thetabernacle, and all its vessels which I havealready described.
God shewed himself pleased with the workof the Hebrews, and did not permit theirlabours to be in vain; nor did he disdain touse what they had made; but he came andsojourned with them, and pitched his taber­nacle in the holy house. And in the follow­ing manner did he come to it: the sky wasclear, but there was a mist over the taberna­cle only, encompassing it, but not with such avery deep and thick cloud as is seen in thewinter season, nor yet in so thin an one asmen might be able to discern any thingthrough it; but from it there dropped a sweetdew, which shewed the presence of God tothose that desired and believed it.
When Moses had bestowed such honorarypresents on the workmen as it was fit theyshould receive who had wrought so well, heoffered sacrifices in the open court of the
* The incense was here offered, according to Jose-phus'9 opinion, before sun-rising, and at sun-setting; but,in the days of Pompey, according to the same Josephus,the sacrifices were offered in the morning, and at the ninthhour. XIV. 4.


tabernacle, as God commanded him; a bull,a ram, and a kid of the goats, for a sin offer­ing. Now I shall speak of what we do in oursacred offices in my discourse about sacrifi­ces, and therein shall inform men in whatcases Moses bid us offer whole burnt offer­ings, and in what cases the law permits us topartake of them as food. And when Moseshad sprinkled Aaron's vestments, himself, andhis sons, with the blood of the beasts thatwere slain, and had purified them with springwater and ointment, they became God'spriests. After this manner did he consecratethem, and their garments, for seven daystogether. The same he did to the taberna­cle, and the vessels thereto belonging, bothwith oil first incensed, as I said, and with theblood of bulls, and of rams, slain day by dayone, according to its kind. But on the eighthday, he appointed a feast for the people, andcommanded them to offer sacrifice accordingto their ability. Accordingly they contendedone with another, and were ambitious to ex­ceed each other in the sacrifices which theybrought, and so fulfilled Moses's injunctions.But as the sacrifices lay upon the altar, a sud­den fire was kindled from among them of itsown accord; and appeared to the sight likefire from a flash of lightning, and consumedwhatsoever was upon the altar.
Hereupon an affliction befel Aaron, con­sidered as a man and a father; but he sup­ported it with true fortitude, for he had, in­deed, a firmness of soul in such accidents;and he thought this calamity came upon himaccording to God's will; for whereas he hadfour sons, as I said before, the two elder ofthem, Nadab and Abihu, did not bring thosesacrifices which Moses bade them bring, butwhich they used to offer formerly, and wereburnt to death. Now when the fire rushedupon them, and began to burn them, nobodycould quench it, accordingly they died in thismanner: and Moses bid their father and theirbrethren to take up their bodies, to carry themout of the camp, and to bury them magnifi­cently. Now the multitude lamented them,and were deeply affected at this death, which
t Hence we may correct the opinion of the modernRabbins, who say that only one of the seven lamps burnedin the day time, when Josephus, an eye witness, saysthere were three.
J An. 1531







OCR Output








as. 1088.] 231 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


citadel held out still. Whence it was thatthe king knowing that the proposals of dig­nities and rewards would encourage the sol­diers to greater actions, promised that he whoshould first go over the ditches that were be­neath the citadel, and should ascend to thecitadel itself, and take it, should have thecommand of the entire people conferred uponhim. So they all were ambitious to ascend;and thought no pains too great, in order toascend thither, out of their desire of the chiefcommand. However Joab, the son of Ze-ruiah, prevented the rest; and as soon as hewas got up to the citadel, cried out to theking, and claimed the chief command.
When David had cast the Jebusites out ofthe citadel, he rebuilt Jerusalem, and namedit the city of David; and abode there all thetime of his reign. But for the time that hereigned over the tribe of Judah only in He­bron, it was *seven years and six months.Now when he had chosen Jerusalem to be hisroyal city, his affairs did more and more pros­per, by the providence of God; who took carethat they should improve and be augmented.tHiram also, the king of the Tyrians, sentambassadors, and made a league of mutualfriendship and assistance with him. He alsosent him presents,cedar-trees, and mechanics,and men skilful in building and architecture;that they might build him a royal palace atJerusalem. Now David made buildings roundabout the lower city; he also joined the cita­del to it, and made it one body; and when he


had encompassed all with walls, he appointedJoab to take care of them. It was Davidtherefore who first cast the Jebusites out ofJerusalem, and called it by his own name,the city of David. For under our forefatherAbraham it was called Salem or $ Solyma.But after that time some say that Homermentions it, by that name of Solyma. Forhe named the temple Solyma, according tothe Hebrew language; which denotes secu­rity. Now the whole time from the warfareunder Joshua our general, against the Ca-naanites; and from that war in which he over­came them and distributed the land amongthe Hebrews: (nor could the Israelites evercast the Canaanites out of Jerusalem untilthis time, when David took it by siege;) thiswhole time was five hundred and fifteenyears.
I shall now make mention of Araunah, whowas a wealthy man among the Jebusites, butwas not slain by David in the siege of Jeru­salem; because of the good will he bore tothe Hebrews; and a particular benignity andaffection which he had to the king himself;which I shall take a more seasonable oppor­tunity to speak of ||a little afterwards. NowDavid married other wives over and abovethose which he had before: he had also con­cubines. The sons which he had were innumber eleven, whose names were§ Amnon,Emnos, Eban, Nathan, Solomon, Jeban, Elien,Phalna, Ennaphen, Jenae, Eliphale, and adaughter, Tamar. Nine of these were born


other kings of Judah's sepulchres, which, as the authors ofthe Books of Kings and Chronicles say, were in the city ofDavid, so does Josephus still say they were in Jerusalem.Tbe sepulchre of David seems to have been a knownplace in the several days of Hyrcanus, of Herod, and ofSt. Peter. Antiq. XIII. 8. XIV. 7. Acts ii. 29. Nowno such royal sepulchres have been found about MountSion: but are found close by the north wall of Jerusalem.Which I suspect to be therefore these very sepulchres.See the note on chap. 15. In the mean time Josephus'sexplication of the lame and the blind, and the maimed, asset to keep this city or citadel, seems to be the truth:and gives the best light to that history in our Bible. Mr.Ottiua truly observes, ap. Havercamp. p. 305. that Jose­phus never mentions Mount Sion by that name; as takingit for an appellative, as I suppose, and not for a propername. He still either styles it the citadel, or the uppercity. Nor do I see any reason for Mr. Ottius's evil sus­picions about this procedure of Josephus's.* From An. 1095 to 1088, B. C.t 2 Sam. v. 10.J Some copies of Josephus have here Solyma or Sa-
lem; and others Hierosolyma or Jerusalem. The latterbest agrees to what Josephus says elsewhere, of tbe War,VI. 10, that this city was called Solyma or Salem beforethe days of Melchisedec, but was by him called Hieroso­lyma or Jerusalem. I rather suppose it to have been socalled after Abraham had received that oracle JehovahJireh, the Lord will see or provide, Gen. xxii. 14. Thelatter word Jireh, with a little alteration prefixed to theold name Salem, Peace, will be Jerusalem. And sincethe expression, God will see, or rather God will providehimself a lamb for a burnt-offering, verse 8, is there saidto have been proverbial till the days of Moses; this seemsto me the most probable derivation of that name: whichwill then denote that God would provide peace by thatLamb of God which was to take away the sins of theworld. However, that which is put into double brackets-can hardly be supposed the genuine words of Josephus;as Dr. Hudson well judges.
I! Chap. xiii.
§ This number (eleven) and most of these names differgreatly from those in 1 Chron. iii. 1—9.







OCR Output








AN. 239 1076.] ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


sand horsemen. Now when the king of theHebrews understood that the Ammonites hadagain gathered so great an army together, hedetermined to make war with them no longerby his generals, but passed over the riverJordan himself, with all his army; and whenhe met them he joined battle with them, andslew forty thousand of their footmen, andseven thousand of their horsemen. He alsowounded Shobach, the general of Chalaman'sforces, who died of that stroke. But thepeople of Mesopotamia, upon such a conclu­sion of the battle, delivered themselves up toDavid, and sent him presents. Who atwinter-time returned to Jerusalem; but atthe beginning of the spring* he sent Joab,the captain of his host, to fight against theAmmonites; who over-ran all their country,and laid it waste, and shut them up in theirmetropolis, Rabbah, and besieged themtherein.
CHAP. VII.
of david's adultery with bathsheba, and his murderop her husband uriah, for which he was reprovedby nathan.
BUT David fell now into a very grievoussin, though he were otherwise naturallya righteous and a religious man, and one thatfirmly observed the laws of our fathers. Forwhen late in an evening he took a view roundhim from the roof of his royal palace,t wherehe used to walk at that hour; he saw a wo­man washing herself in her own house.J She


was one of extraordinary beauty, and thereinsurpassed all other women. Her name wasBathsheba. So he was overcome by that wo­man's beauty, and was not able to restrain hisdesires, but sent for her,|| and lay with her.Hereupon she conceived, and sent to the king,that he should contrive some way for conceal­ing her sin: for according to the laws of theirfathers, she who had been guilty of adulteryought to be put§ to death. So the king sentfor Joab's armour-bearer, from the siege; whowas the woman's husband, and his name wasUriah.** And when he was come, the kinginquired of him about the army, and aboutthe siege; and when he made answer that alltheir affairs went according to their wishes,the king took some portions of meat from hissupper, and gave them to him, and bade himgo home to his wife, and take his rest withher. Uriah did not do so, but slept near theking, with the rest of his armour-bearers.When the king was informed of this, he askedhim why he did not go home to his house,and to his wife, after so long an absence?which is the natural custom of all men, whenthey come from a long journey. He replied,that it was not right, while his fellow-soldiers,and the general of the army slept upon theground, in the camp, and in an enemy's coun­try, that he should go and take his rest withhis wife. When he had thus replied, the kingordered him to stay there that night; that hemight dismiss him the next day to the general.So the king invited Uriah to supper, and aftera cunning and dexterous manner supplied him


* An. 1076.
t The manner of building, in all eastern countries,was to have their houses flat-roofed with a terrace, andparapet wall, for the convenience of walking in the coolair; and as David's palace was built on one of the highestplaces of Mount Sion, he might easily look down uponthe lower parts of the town, and take a view of all thegardens that were within due distance; he Clerc's Com­mentary. B.
| Thus Jupiter is said to have seen Proserpina washingherself, and exposing her whole body to his view, whichinflamed his lust after her:
Aioftdvms oXov SiSog idipxSTo IlijptfsqjovsiTis.
But whether it was in her garden, or court-yard, over­looked by the palace, or in some apartment in her house,whose windows opened that way, that this woman bathedherself, it is not so certain. Tradition points out theplace of a fountain still called after her name, whichwould make it probable that she bathed in a garden, didnot Josephus expressly declare that it was in her ownhouse, as indeed the natural modesty and decency of her
sex, as well as the circumstance of the time, (for then itwas evening,) make his account more probable; nor canit be doubted, but that the declining rays of the sun, shoot­ing into the inmost recesses of her chamber, and throwinga great lustre around her, might discover her very clearlyto very distant eyes, without the least suspicion on herpart, of any possibility of being seen, and consequentlywith all the reserve of modesty proper to her sex; TheHistory of the Life of King David, vol. iii. B.
II 2 Sam. xi. 2—5.
§ Levit. xx. 10.
** Uriah, though a Hittite by nation, was proselyted tothe Jewish religion, and so marrying with a Jewish wo­man, lived in Jerusalem; or as he was one of the king'slife-guard, which for reasons above mentioned, seem tohave been all natives, and of the tribe of Judah, this addi­tional name might perhaps be given him, for some gallantaction achieved against the Hittites, in the same manneras a Roman, in after ages, came to be called Africanus,Germanicus, Parthicus, &c. upon account of the victoriesobtained over the Africans, Germans, or Parthians; Cal-mefs Commentary. B.







OCR Output








66 [book it. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


is in vain that thou, O queen, callest for thesewomen tor the nourishment of the child, whoare by no way of kin to it, but if thou wiltorder one of the Hebrew women to be brought,perhaps it may admit the breast of one of hisown nation. Now, since she seemed to speakwell, Thermuthis bid her procure such a one;so when she had such authority given her,she came back, and brought the mother, whowas known to nobody there; and now thechild gladly admitted the breast, and seemedto adhere closely to it; and so it was that atthe queen's desire the nursing of the childwas entirely intrusted to the mother.
Hereupon it was that Thermuthis imposedthis name, Mouses, upon him, from what hadhappened when he was put into the river, forthe Egyptians call water by the name of Mo,and such as are saved out of it by the nameof Uses; so, by putting these two wordstogether, they imposed this name upon him;and he was, by the confession of all, accor­ding to God's prediction, as well for his great­ness of mind, as for his contempt of difficul­ties, the best of all the Hebrews. Abrahamwas his' ancestor of the seventh generation,for Moses was the son of Amram, who wasthe son of Caath: whose father Levi, was theson of Jacob, who was the son of Isaac, whowas the son of Abraham. Now Moses's un­derstanding became far superior to his age,and when he was taught, he discoveredgreater quickness of apprehension than wasusual in youth, and his action at that timepromised greater, when he should come tothe age of a man. God also gave him thattallness, when he was but three years* old,as was wonderful, and every one that sawhim was greatly surprised at the beauty ofhis countenance. Nay it happened frequently,that those that met him, as he was carriedalong the road, were obliged to turn againupon seeing the child; that they left whatthey were about, and stood still a great whileto look on him; for the beauty of the childwas so remarkable on many accounts, that itdetained the spectators, and made them staylonger to look upon him.
Thermuthis, therefore, perceiving him tobe so remarkable a child, adopted him forher son, having no child of her own; andwhen one time she had carried Moses to her
* An. 1609.


father, she shewed him to him, and said, " shethought to make him her father's successor,if it should please God she should have nolegitimate child of her own; and said to him,I have brought up a child who is of a divineform and of a generous mind; and as I havereceived him from the bounty of the river, ina wonderful manner, I thought proper toadopt him for my son, and the heir of thykingdom." And when she had said this, sheput the infant into her father's hands; so hetook him, and pressed him to his breast; andon his daughter's account, in a pleasant way,put the diadem upon his head. But Mosesthrew it down to the ground, and in a puerilemood he wreathed it round, and trod upon itwith his feet, which seemed to bring alongwith it an evil presage concerning the king­dom of Egypt. But when the sacred scribesaw this, (he was the same person that fore­told that his nativity would bring the do­minion of that kingdom low,) he made aviolent attempt to kill him; and crying outin a frightful manner, he said, " This, O king!this child is he of whom God foretold, that ifwe kill him we shall be in no danger; hehimself affords an attestation to the predic­tion of the same thing, by his trampling uponthy government, and treading upon thy dia­dem. Take him therefore, out of the way,and deliver the Egyptians from the fear theyare in about him, and deprive the Hebrewsof the hope they have of being encouragedby him." But Thermuthis prevented him,and snatched the child away: and the kingwas not hasty to slay him, God himself, whoseprovidence protected Moses, inclining the.,king to spare him: he was therefore educa­ted with great care; so the Hebrews de­pended on him, and were of good hopes thatgreat things would be done by him. TheEgyptians, indeed, were suspicious of whatwould follow his education; yet because ifMoses had been slain, there was no one,either a kin or adopted, that had any oracleof his side, for pretending to the crown ofEgypt, and likely to be of greater advantageto them, they abstained from killing him.
CHAP. X.
OF THE WAR WHICH MOSES MADE WITH THE ETHIOPIANS,
OSES, therefore, when he was born,and brought up in the foregoing man-


M







OCR Output








m [book IV. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


rect the young men, and to bring them to re­pentance for what they had done.
But Zimri arose up after him, and said,"Yes, indeed, Moses, thou art at liberty tomake use of such laws as thou art so fond of;and hast, by accustoming thyself to them,made them firm. Otherwise, if things hadnot been thus, thou hadst often been punishedbefore now, and hadst known that the He­brews are not easily put upon. But thou shaltnot have me.one of thy followers in thy tyran­nical commands: for thou didst nothing else.hitherto, but, under pretence of laws, and ofGod, wickedly impose upon us slavery, andgain dominion to thyself; while thou deprivestus of the sweetness of life, which consists inacting according to our own wills, and is theright of free men, and of those that have nolord over them. Nay, indeed, thou art harderupon the Hebrews than were the Egyptiansthemselves; as pretending to punish accord­ing to law every one's acting as is most agree­able to himself. But thou thyself better de-servest to suffer punishment, who presumestto abolish what every one acknowledges to begood for him; and aimest to make thy singleopinion of more force than that of the rest,and what I now do, and think to be right, Ishall not hereafter deny to be according tomy own sentiments. I have married, as thousayest rightly, a strange woman, and thouhearest what I do from myself, as from onethat is free: for truly I did not intend to con­ceal myself. I also own that I sacrifice tothose gods to whom you do not think fit tosacrifice; and I think it right to acquire know­ledge by inquiring of many people; and not,like one that lives under tyranny, to suffer thewhole hope of my life to depend upon oneman. Nor shall any one find cause to rejoicewho declares himself to have more authorityover my actions than myself."
When Zimri had said these things, aboutwhat he and some others had wickedly done,the people held their peace: both out of fearof what might come upon them, and becausethey saw that their legislator was not willingto bring his insolence before the public anyfarther, or openly to contend with him. Forhe avoided that, lest many should imitate theimpudence of his language, and thereby dis­turb the multitude. Upon this, the assemblywas dissolved. However, this mischievous


attempt had proceeded farther, if Zimri hadnot been slain on the following occasion:Phineas, a man in other respects better thanthe rest of the young men, and also one thatsurpassed his contemporaries in the dignity ofhis father; (for he was the son of Eleazar thehigh-priest, and the grandson of Aaron, Mo­ses's brother,) was greatly troubled at whatwas done by Zimri. So he resolved to intlictpunishment on him, before his unworthy be­haviour should grow stronger by impunity,and in order to prevent this transgressionfrom proceeding farther: which would hap­pen if the ringleaders were not punished.He was of so great magnanimity, both instrength of mind and body, that when he un­dertook any very dangerous attempt, he didnot relinquish it till he got an entire victory.So he came into Zimri's tent, and slew himwith his javelin; and with it he slew Cozbialso. Upon which, all those young men thathad a regard to virtue, and aimed to do aglorious action, imitated Phineas's boldness,and slew those that were found to be guiltyof the same crime with Zimri. Accordinglymany of those who had transgressed perishedby the magnanimous valour of these youngmen. The rest all perished by a plague,which God himself inflicted upon them. Sothat all those, who, instead of hindering themfrom such wicked actions, as they ought tohave done, had persuaded them to go on,were esteemed by God as partners in thewickedness, and died. Accordingly thereperished out of the army no fewer than twenty-four thousand at this time.
This was the cause why Moses was pro­voked to destroy the Midianites; concerningwhich expedition we will speak presently,when we have first related what has beenomitted. For it is but just not to pass overour legislator's due encomium, on account ofhis conduct here: because, although Balaam,who was sent for by the Midianites to cursethe Hebrews; and when he was hinderedfrom doing it by Divine Providence, did stillsuggest that advice to them, by making use ofwhich our enemies had nearly corrupted themultitude cf the Hebrews with their artifices;'yet did he do him great honour, by settingdown his prophecies in writing. And whileit was in his power to claim this glory tohimself, and make men believe they were his


>







OCR Output








260 [BOOK Y«. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


he also made instruments of music, and taughtthe Levites to sing hymns to God, both onthe Sabbath day, and on the other festivals.Now the construction of the instrumentswas thus: the viol was an instrument often strings, played upon with a bow. Thepsaltery had twelve musical notes; and wasplayed upon by the fingers. The cymbalswere broad and large instruments, and weremade of brass. And so much shall suffice,respecting these instruments, that the readersmay not be wholly unacquainted with theirnature.
Now all the men that were about Davidwere men of courage. Those that were mostillustrious and famous of them for their ac­tions were thirty-eight.* Of five of whom Iwill only relate the performances. For thesewill suffice to make manifest the virtues of theothers also: for these were powerful enoughto subdue countries, and conquer great na­tions. First therefore was Jessai, the son ofAchimaas; who frequently leaped upon thetroops of the enemy, "and did not leave offfighting till he overthrew fnine hundred ofthem. After him was Eleazar, the son ofDodo; who was with the king at Arasam:this man, when once the Israelites were undera consternation at the multitude of the Phi­listines, and were running away, stood aloneand fell upon the enemy, and slew many ofthem, till his sword clung to his hand by theblood he had shed; and till the Israelites,seeing the Philistines retire by his means,came down from the mountains, and pursuedthem: and at that time won a surprisingvictory: while Eleazar slew the men, andthe multitude followed and spoiled the deadbodies. The third was Sheba, the son ofIlus. Now this man, when in the warsagainst the Philistines, they pitched theircamp at a place called JLehi; and when theHebrews were again afraid of their army,
Josephus's authority is beyond exception in these matters.Nor can any hypotheses of the moderns, that do not agreewith Josephus's characters, be justly supposed the truemetre of the ancient Hebrews. Nor is there, I think,any other original authority now extant, to be opposed tothese testimonies before us. That the ancient music ofthe Hebrews was very complete also, and had in it greatvariety of tunes, is evident by the number of their mu­sical instruments, and by the testimony of another mostauthentic witness, Jesus the son of Sirach: Ecclus. i. 18,who says, that at the temple, in bis days, the singers sang


and did not stay; he stood alone as an army,and a body of men. And some of them heoverthrew, and some who were not able toabide his strength and force he pursued.These are the works of the hands and offighting, which these three performed.
Now at the time when the king was onceat Jerusalem, and the army of the Philistinescame upon him to fight him, David went upto the top of the citadel, as we have alreadysaid, to inquire of God, concerning the battle;while the enemy's camp lay in the valley thatextends to the city Bethlehem, which isIjtwenty furlongs distant from Jerusalem.Now David said to his companions, "Wehave excellent water in my own city; espe­cially that which is in the pit near the gate;"wondering if any one would bring him someof it to drink: but he said, that he had ratherhave it than a great deal of money. Whenthese three men heard what he said, they ranaway immediately, and burst through themidst of their enemies' camp, and came toBethlehem; and when they had drawn thewater, they returned again through the ene­mies' camp to the king: insomuch that thePhilistines were so surprised at their boldnessand alacrity, that they were quiet, and did no­thing against them; as if they despised theirsmall number. But when the water wasbrought to the king, he would not drink it;saying, that it was brought by the danger andblood of men; and that it was not proper onthat account to drink it; but he poured itout to God, and gave him thanks for thesalvation of the men. Next to these wasAbishai, Joab's brother; who in one dayslew §six hundred. The fifth was Benaiah,by lineage a priest: for being challenged bytwo eminent men in the country of Moab,he overcame them by his valour: Moreoverthere was an Egyptian, who was of a vastbulk, and challenged him: yet did he, when


praises with their voice, with great variety of sounds wasthere made sweet melody.
* Thirty-seven, Heb. and Septuagint.
t Eight hundred, 2 Sam. xxiii. 8.
J See the note on V. 8.'
II Bethlehem is here said to be but twenty furlongsfrom Jerusalem, whereas it is well known to be aboutforty-eight. This must be an error of the copies, not ofJosephus himself: who must have known that distancetoo well, to err above one half in its measure.
§ Three hundred, Heb. and Septuagint.







OCR Output








 


.*


 







OCR Output








yi EDITOR'S PREFACE


dictions of the evils then Coming upon Jerusalem, and the Jewish people, he adds, " Who­soever shall compare these words of our Saviour with the history of the whole war, publishedby the above-mentioned writer, must admire our Lord's great wisdom, and acknowledgethat his foresight was divine."
In his Chronicle, as we have it from Jerom in Latin, Eusebius says, "In subduing Judea,and overthrowing Jerusalem, Titus slew six hundred thousand people: but Josephus writes,that eleven hundred thousand perished by famine and the sword, and that another hundredthousand were publicly sold and carried captives; and he says that the occasion of therebeing so great a multitude of people at Jerusalem was this, that it was the time of the Pass­over: for which reason the Jews, having come up from all parts to worship at the temple,were shut up in the city, as in a prison. And indeed it was fit they should be slain at the sametime in which they crucified our Saviour."
The following general character of Josephus from the pen of Dr. Lardner$ concludes hisobservations on his works. "Josephus was a man of great eminence and distinction amonghis people: but we do not observe in him a seriousness of spirit becoming a Christian, nor thatsublimity of virtue which is suited to the principles of the Christian religion. Nor do we dis­cern in him such qualities as should induce us to think he was one of those who were welldisposed, and were not far from the kingdom of God, Matt. xii. 34. He was a priest bydescent, and early in the magistracy: then a general, and a courtier: and in all shewing aworldly mind, suited to such stations and employments; insomuch that he appears to beone of those, of whom, and to whom, the best judge of men and things said, how can ye be­lieve who receive honour one of another, and seek not the honour that cometh from God only.John v. 24."
The utility of the works of Josephus as a companion to the Sacred History must now be ob­vious. A careful perusal of them cannot fail to illustrate and corroborate many facts of theinspired volume. On this principle they are strongly recommended to the attention of thereligious public. In the present edition, the translation of Mr. Whiston is retained as the mostvaluable which has yet appeared. The notes also which he originally added to explain hisauthor are here preserved. But as room remained for farther explanation than he has given,a considerable body of information is added, in a selection of notes by the Editor, whichare distinguished from those of the translator by the letter B at the close of each. It ishoped theretore, on the whole, that this edition of the Genuine works of Josephus will bean acceptable and useful work, and contribute to the enlargement of knowledge on subjects,which are connected with the dispensations of religion, and the interest of the visible churchof God upon earth.
SAMUEL BURDER.
London, October 1, 1811


~\







OCR Output








an. 226.] 433 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


When the day came on which the king wasto let the taxes of the cities to farm; and thosethat were the principal men of dignity intheir several countries were to bid for them;the sum of the taxes together, of Coelesyriaand Phoenicia, and Judea, with Samaria, asthey were bidden for, came to eight thousandtalents. Hereupon Joseph accused the bid­ders, as having agreed together to estimatethe value of the taxes at too low a rate; andhe promised that he would himself give twiceas much for them; but for those who did notpay, he would send the king home their wholesubstance: for this privilege was sold togetherwith the taxes themselves. The king waspleased to hear that offer; and because itaugmented his revenues, he said he wouldconfirm the sale of the taxes to him. Butthen he asked whether he had any suretiesthat would be bound for the payment of themoney? He answered very pleasantly, "Iwill give securities, and those of personsgood and responsible; and which you shallhave no reason to distrust." And when hebade him name them, who they were, he re­plied, " I give thee no other persons, O king,for my sureties than thyself, and this thywife; and you shall be security for both par­ties." So Ptolemy laughed at the proposal,and granted him the farming of the taxeswithout any sureties. This procedure was asore grief to those that came from the citiesinto Egypt; who were utterly disappointed,and they returned every one to their owncountry with shame.
But Joseph took with him two thousandfoot soldiers from the king. For he desiredhe might have some assistance, in order toforce such as were refractory in the cities topay. And borrowing of the king's friends atAlexandria five hundred talents, he hastenedinto Syria. When he was at Ascalon, anddemanded the taxes of the people, they re­fused to pay any thing, and affronted him also:but he seized upon about twenty of the prin­cipal men, and slew them, and gathered whatthey had together, and sent it all to the king;and informed him what he had done. Ptolemyadmired at the prudent conduct of the man,and commended him for what he had done;and gave him leave to do as he pleased.When the Syrians heard of this they wereastonished; and having before them a sad


example in the men of Ascalon, that wereslain, they opened their gates, and willinglyadmitted Joseph, and paid their taxes. Andwhen the inhabitants of Scythopolis attemptedto affront him, and would not pay him thosetaxes which they formerly used to pay, with­out disputing about them; he slew also theprincipal men of that city, and sent theireffects to the king. By this means he gatheredgreat wealth together; and made vast gainsby this farming of the taxes; and he madeuse of what estate he had thus gotten, inorder to support his authority; as thinking ita piece of prudence to keep what had beenthe occasion and foundation of his presentgood fortune; and this he did by the assist­ance of what he was already possessed of.For he privately sent many presents to theking, and to Cleopatra, and to their friends,and to all that were powerful about thecourt; and thereby purchased their good willto himself.
This good fortune he enjoyed for twenty-two years; and was become the father otseven sons, by one wife; as he had one otherson, whose name was Hyrcanus, by his bro­ther Solymius's daughter, whom he marriedon the following occasion. He once came toAlexandria with his brother; who had alongwith him a daughter already marriageable;in order to give her in wedlock to some of theJews of chief dignity there. He then suppedwith the king; and falling in love with anactress, that was of great beauty, and cameinto the room where they feasted, he told hisbrother of it, and intreated him, (because aJew is forbidden by their law to come near aforeigner,) to conceal his offence, and to bekind and subservient to him, and to give himthe opportunity of fulfilling his desires. Uponwhich his brother willingly entertained theproposal of serving him; and adorned hisown daughter, and brought her to him bynight, and put her into his bed. And Josephbeing disordered with drink, knew not whoshe was; and so lay with his brother'sdaughter; and this he did many times; andloved her exceedingly; and said to his bro­ther, that he loved this actress so well, thathe should run the hazard of his life if he mustpart with her; and yet probably the kingwould not give him leave to take her withhim. But his brother bade him be in no con







OCR Output








AN. 163.] 449 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


such as were going up to the temple, in orderto offer their sacrifices: for this citadel ad­joined to and overlooked the temple. Whenthese misfortunes had often happened tothem, Judas resolved to destroy that garri­son. Accordingly he got all the people to­gether, and vigorously besieged those thatwere in the citadel. This was in the hun­dred and fiftieth year of the dominion of theSeleucidae. So he made engines of war,and erected bulwarks; and very zealouslypressed on to take the citadel. But therewere not a few of the runagates who were inthe place, that went out by night, into thecountry, and got together some other wickedmen like themselves; and went to Antiochusthe king, and desired of him, that he wouldnot suffer them to be neglected under thegreat hardships that lay upon them, fromthose of their own nation: and this becausetheir sufferings were occasioned on his fa­ther's account; while they left the religiousworship of their fathers, and preferred thatwhich he had commanded them to follow:that there was danger lest the citadel andthose that were appointed to garrison it bythe king, should be taken by Judas, and thosethat were with him; unless he would sendthem succours. When Antiochus, who wasbut *a child, heard this, he was angry, andsent for his captains, and his friends; andgave order that they should get an army ofmercenaries together, with such men also, ofhis own kingdom, as were of an age fit forwar. Accordingly an army was collected ofabout a hundred thousand footmen, twentythousand horsemen, and thirty-two ele­phants.
So the king took this army, and marchedhastily out 01 Antioch, with Lysias, who hadthe command of the whole; and came to Idu-mea, and thence went up to Bethsura, a citythat was strong, and not to be taken without
freat difficulty: he sat about this city, andesieged it. And while the inhabitants ofBethsura courageously opposed him, and sal­lied out upon him, and burnt his engines ofwar; a great deal of time was spent in the


siege. But when Judas heard of the king'scoming, he raised the siege of the citadel, andmet the king, and pitched his camp in certainstraits, at a place called Bethzachariah, atthe distance of seventy furlongs from theenemy. But the king soon drew his forcesfrom Bethsura, and brought them to thosestraits. And as soon as it was day he puthis men in battle array, and made his ele­phants follow one another through the nar­row passes: because they could not be setsideways one by another. Now round aboutevery elephant there were a thousand foot­men, and five hundred horsemen. The ele­phants also had high towers upon theirbacks, and archers in them. And he alsomade the rest of his army to go up the moun­tains, and put his friends before the rest;and gave orders for the army to shout aloud:and so he attacked the enemy. He alsoexposed to sight their golden and brazenshields: so that a glorious splendour wassent from them; and when they shouted themountains echoed again. When Judas sawthis, he was not terrified; but received theenemy with great courage, and slew aboutsix hundred of the first ranks. But when his,brother Eleazar, whom they called Auran,saw the tallest of all the elephants armedwith royal breast-plates, and supposed thatthe king was upon him, he attacked himwith great quickness and bravery. He alsoslew many of those that were about the ele­phant, and scattered the rest; and then wentunder the belly of the elephant, and smotehim, and slew him. So the elephant fellupon Eleazar; and by his weight crushedhim to death.f And thus did this man cometo his end, when he had first courageouslydestroyed many of his enemies.
But Judas, seeing the strength of the ene­my, retired to Jerusalem, and prepared toendure a siege. As for Antiochus, he sentpart of his army to Bethsura, to besiege it;and with the rest of his army he came againstJerusalem. But the inhabitants of Bethsurawere terrified at his strength; and seeingthat their provisions grew scarce, they de-much more authentic history in 1 Mace. vi. 28, &c.agrees with him, we have no reason to suppose himtherein mistaken.


* Dr. Hudson observes here, that Jason of Cyrene,as epitomized in the second book of the Maccabees,chap. xiii. tells this story very differently from Josephus.But then, since, as I have lately remarked, Josephusnever appears to have seen those books; and since that
t- 1 Mace. vi. 46.







OCR Output








an. 839.] 341 ANNUITIES OF THE JEWS.


dedicated in the temple, and sent them tothe king of Syria, and procured so much bythem that he was not besieged, nor his king­dom quite endangered: but Hazael was in­duced by the greatness of the sum of moneynot to bring his army against Jerusalem.*Yet Jehoash fell into a severe distemper,and was set upon by his friends, in order torevenge the death of Zachariah the son ofJehoiada. These laid snares for the king,and slew him. He was buried in Jerusalem,but not in the royal sepulchres of his fore­fathers, because of his impiety. He livedforty-seven years; and Amaziah his son suc­ceeded him in the kingdom.f
In the Jtwenty-first year of the reign ofJehoash, Jehoahaz, the son of Jehu, tookthe government of the Israelites in Samaria,and held it seventeen years. He did notproperly imitate his father; but was guiltyof as wicked practices as those that first hadGod in contempt. But the king of Syriabrought him low, and by an expeditionagainst him did so greatly reduce his forces,that there remained no more of so great anarmy than ten thousand men, and fifty horse­men. He also took away from him many ofhis great cities, and destroyed his army.And these were the things that the people ofIsrael suffered according to the prophecy ofElisha, when he foretold that Hazael shouldkill his master, and reign over the Syriansand Damascens. But when Jehoahaz wasunder such unavoidable miseries, he had re­course to prayer and supplication to God;and besought him to deliver him out of thehands of Hazael, and not overlook him, andgive him up into his hands. AccordinglyGod accepted of his repentance; and, beingdesirous rather to admonish those that might


repent, than to determine that they shouldbe utterly destroyed, he granted him deliver­ance from war and dangers. So the countryhaving obtained peace, returned to its formercondition, and flourished as before.
After the death of Jehoahaz,|| his son Joashtook the kingdom, in the thirty-seventh yearof Jehoash, king of the tribe of Judah; andhe retained the government sixteen years.He was a good man,§ and in his dispositionnot at all like to his father. Now at thistime it was that the king of Israel went tovisit Elisha the prophet, who was alreadyvery old, and was now fallen into a disease,and when the king found him very neardeath, he began to weep in his sight, andlament, calling him his father, and hisweapons; because it was by this means thathe never made use of his weapons againsthis enemies: but overcame them by hisprophecies, without fighting. And that hewas now departing this life, and leaving himto the Syrians, who were already armed;and to other enemies that were under theirpower. So he said it was not safe for himto live any longer; but that it would be wellfor him to hasten to his end, and depart outof this life with him. As the king was thusbemoaning himself, Elisha comforted him, anddesired him to bend a bow that was broughthim; and when the king had fitted the bowfor shooting, Elisha took hold of his hands,and bade him shoot. And when he had shotthree arrows, and then left off, Elisha said,"If thou hadst shot more arrows, thou hadstcut the kingdom of Syria up by the roots;but since thou hast been satisfied withshooting three times only, thou shalt fightand beat the Syrians no more times thanthree; that thou mayest recover that country


* 2 Kings xii. 18.t 2 Kings xii. 21.
I The twenty-third, Hebrew and Septuagint.
II An. 842.
§ This character of Joash, the son of Jehoahaz, thathe was a good man; and in his disposition not at all likehis father, seems a direct contradiction to our ordinarycopies; which says, 2 Kings xiii. 11. that he did evil inthe sight of the Lord, and that he departed not from allthe sins of Jeroboam, the son of Nebat, who made Israelto sin. Which copies are here the truest, it is difficult todetermine. If Josephus's be true, this Joash is the singleinstance of a good king over the ten tribes. If the otherbe true, we have not one such example. The accountthat follows, in all copies, of the prophet Elisha's con-
cern for him, and his concern for Elisha, greatly favourJosephus's copies: and suppose this king to have beenthen a good man, and no idolater; with whom God'sprophets used not to be so familiar. Upon the whole,since it appears, even by Josephus's own account, thatAmaziah the good king of Judah, while he was a goodking, was forbidden to make use of the 10,000 auxiliarieshe had hired of this Joash, king of Israel: as if he andthey were idolaters ; -IX. 9. 2 Chron. xxv. 5—9. it ismost likely, that these different characters of Joash suitedthe different parts of his reign: and that according'to ourcommon copies, he was at first a wicked king; and after­wards was reclaimed, and became a good one, accordingto Josephus.


3N2







OCR Output








an. 1532.] 85 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS,


in battle, and hoped to be thereby at lengthdelivered from all their miseries. Nay, theydesired that Moses would immediately leadthem against their enemies, without the leastdelay, that no backwardness might be an hin­drance to their present resolution; so Mosesclassed all that were fit for war into differenttroops, and set over them Joshua, the son ofNun, of the tribe of Ephraim; one that was of
treat courage, and patient to undergo la-ours; of great abilities to understand, andto speak what was proper, and very seriousin the service of God, and indeed, made likeanother Moses, a teacher of piety towardsGod. He also appointed a small party of thearmed men to be near the wafer, and to takecare of the children and the women, and ofthe entire camp; so that whole night theyprepared themselves for the battle, they tooktheir weapons, if any of them had such aswere well made, and attended to their com­manders, as ready to rush forth to the battleas soon as Moses should give the word ofcommand. Moses also kept awake, teach­ing Joshua after what manner he should orderhis camp; but when the day began, Mosescalled Joshua again, and exhorted him to ap­prove himself in deeds such a one as his repu­tation made men expect from him, and togain glory by the present expedition in theopinion of those under him, for his exploits inthis battle: he also gave a particular exhor­tation to the principal men of the Hebrews,and encouraged the whole army as it stoodbefore him; and when he had thus animatedthem, both by his words and works, and pre­pared every thing, he retired to a mountain,and committed the army to God and toJoshua, v^,
The armies having joined battle, soon cameto a close fight hand to hand, both sides shew­ing great alacrity, and encouraging one ano­ther; and, indeed, while Moses stretched outhis hands* towards heaven, the Hebrewswere too hard for the Amalekites; but Moses


* This eminent circumstance, that while Moses's handswere held up towards heaven, the Israelites prevailed;and while they were let down towards the earth, theAmalekites prevailed; seems the earliest intimation wehave of the proper posture, used of old, in solemn prayer,which was the stretching out the hands and eyes towardsheaven, as other passages of the Old and New Testamentinform us. Nay, hy the way, this posture seems to havecontinued in the Christian church till the clergy, instead


not being able to sustain his hands thusstretched out (for as often as he let down hishands, so often were his own people worsted,)he bade his brother Aaron, and Hur, theirsister Miriam's husband, to stand on each sideof him, and take hold of his hands, and notto permit his weariness to prevent it, but toassist him in the extension of his hands.When this was done, the Hebrews conqueredthe Amalekites by main force; and, indeed,they had all perished, unless the approach ofnight had obliged the Hebrews to desist fromkilling any more. So our forefathers obtaineda most signal and most seasonable victory;for they not only overcame those that foughtagainst them, but also terrified the neigh­bouring nations, and got great and splendidadvantages, which they obtained of their ene­mies by their hard pains in this battle; forwhen they had taken the enemies' camp, theygot great booty for the public, and for theirown private families, whereas till then theyhad not any plenty even of necessary food.The afore-mentioned victory was also theoccasion of their prosperity, not only for thepresent, but for future ages also; for they notonly made slaves of the bodies of their ene­mies, but effectually damped their nlinds: andafter this battle became terrible to all thatdwelt round about them. They also acquireda vast quantity of riches; for a great deal ofsilver and gold was left in the enemies' camp,as also brazen vessels, which they made com­mon use of in their families; many utensilsalso that were embroidered, there were ofboth sorts; that is, of what were woven, andwhat were the ornaments of their armour andother things that served for use to their family,and for the furniture of their rooms; they gotalso the prey of their cattle and of whatso­ever uses to follow camps, when they removefrom one place to another; so the Hebrewsnow valued themselves upon their courage,and claimed great merit for their valour; andthey perpetually inured themselves to take
of learning their prayers by heart, read them out of abook, which is in a great measure inconsistent with suchan elevated posture, and which seems to me to have beenonly a later practice under the corrupt state of the church.Though the constant use of divine forms of prayer, praise,and thanksgiving, appears to have been the practice ofGod's people, Patriarchs, Jews, and Christians, in all thepast ages.
. . .


 


 


 


 







OCR Output








an. 902.] 313 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


sent to Ahab, and desired him to go awayto the city before the storm of rain camedown. So he came to the city Jezreel. Andin a little time the air was all obscured, andcovered with clouds; and a vehement stormof wind came upon the earth, and with it agreat deal of rain. And the prophet wasunder a divine fury, and ran along with theking's chariot unto Jezreel, a city of Izar.*
When Jezebel, the wife of Ahab, under­stood what signs Elijah had wrought, andhow he had slain the prophets, she was angry,and sent messengers to him; and by themthreatened to kill him,f as he had destroyedher prophets. At this Elijah was affrighted,and fled to the city called Beersheba; whichis situate at the utmost limits of the countrybelonging to the tribe of Judah, towards theland of Edom. And there he left his servant,and went away into the desert.J He prayedalso that he might die: for that he was notbetter than his fathers; nor therefore needbe very desirous to live when they weredead: and he lay and slept under a certaintree. And when somebody awakened him,and he was risen up, he found food set byhim, and water. So when he had eaten,and renewed his strength by that food, hecame to the mountain called Sinai ;|| where itis related that Moses received his laws fromGod. And finding there a certain hollow


cave, he entered into it, and continued tomake his abode in it. But when a certainvoice came to him, and asked, "Why hecame thither, and had left the city?" hesaid, that because he had slain the prophetsof the foreign gods; and had persuaded thepeople that he alone, whom they had wor­shipped from the beginning was God, he wassought for by the king's wife to be punishedfor so doing. And when he had heard ano­ther voice, telling him that he should comeout the next day into the open air, andshould thereby know what he was to do, hecame out of the cave the next day accord­ingly. He then both heard an earthquake,and saw the bright splendour of a fire; andafter a silence, a divine voice exhorted himnot to be disturbed with the circumstances hewas in; for that none of his enemies shouldhave power over him. The voice also com­manded him to return home, and to ordainJehu, the son of Nimshi, to be king overtheir own multitude; and Hazael, of Damas­cus, to be over the Syrians; and Elisha, ofthe city Abel, to be a prophet in his stead.And that of the impious multitude, someshould be slain by Hazael, and others byJehu. So Elijah, upon hearing this charge,returned into the land of the Hebrews. Andwhen he found Elisha, the son of Shaphat,ploughing, and certain others with him


* For Izar, we may here read with Hudson and Coc-ceius, Isachar, i. e. of the tribe of Isachar, for to thattribe did Jezreel belong: and presently, chap. xv. wemay read for Izar, with one MS. nearly, and the Scrip­ture, Jezreel; for that was the city meant in the historyof Naboth.
t This certainly was the effect of her blind rage, andnot of any prudence in her; for prudence would haveadvised her to conceal her resentment, until she hadbeen ready to put her design in execution; whereas thissending him word was giving him notice of his danger,and admonishing him to avoid it . But, since he had theconfidence to come where she was, she might think per­haps, that he was as courageous as she was furious; that,upon this notice he would scorn to fly; and she too, inher pride, might scorn to kill him secretly or surrepti­tiously, resolving to make him a public sacrifice. Patrick'tCommentary, and Pool's Annotations. B.
J 1 Kings xix. 3, 4.
II Elijah being now come to the same place, whereGod had delivered the law to his servant Moses, Godwas minded to communicate the like favour to his servantthe prophet, viz. to unveil his Majesty to him, and givehim some signal of his immediate presence: but there issomething very remarkable in the words of the text:—And behold the Lord passed by, and a strong wind rent
the mountains, and brake in pieces the rocks, hut theLord was not in the wind; and, after the wind, an earth­quake, but the Lord was not in the earthquake; andafter the earthquake, a fire, but the Lord was not in thefire; and, after the fire, a still small voice, 1 Kings xix,11, &c. And various are the speculations which this ap­pearance of the divine Majesty hath suggested to inter­preters. The generality of them have looked upon thisas a figure of the gospel-dispensation, which came, not insuch a terrible manner as the law did, with storms, thun­ders, lightnings, and earthquakes, (Exod. xix. 16.) butwith great lenity and sweetness, wherein God speaks tous by his Son, who makes use of no other but gentle ar­guments and soft persuasions. But, if we take this to bea symbolical admonition to Elijah, according to the cir­cumstances he was then in, we may reasonably suppose,that herein God intended to shew him, that though hehad all the elements ready armed at his command todestroy idolaters, if he pleased to make use of them, yethe had rather attain his end by patience, and tenderness,and long-suffering, (signified by that small still voice,wherein the Deity exhibited himself,) and consequently,that the prophet should hereby be incited to imitate him,bridling that passionate zeal to which his natural com­plexion did hut too much incline him. Le Clerc,>, Col*wietf's, and Patrick's Commentaries.. B,







OCR Output








238 [book VII. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


were sent, after a very harsh manner. Forlie shaved the one half of their beards,* andcut off one half of their garments; and senthis answer not in words, but in deeds. Whenthe king of Israel saw this, he had indignationat it; and shewed openly that he would notoverlook this injurious and contumelioustreatment; but would make war with theAmmonites, and would avenge this wickedtreatment of his ambassadors on their king.So that king's intimate friends and com­manders understanding that they had violatedtheir league, and were liable to be punishedfor the same, made preparations for war;they also sent a thousand talents to the Syrianking of Mesopotamia, and endeavoured toprevail with him and fShobach, to assistthem for that pay. Now these kings hadtwenty thousand footmen. They also hiredthe king of the country called Maacah; and afourth king, by name Ishtob, which last hadtwelve thousand armed men.
David was under no consternation at thisconfederacy; nor at the forces of the Ammon­ites. But putting his trust in God, becausehe was going to war in a just cause, on ac­count of the injurious treatment he had metwith, he immediately sent Joab,J the captainof his host, against them, with the flowerof his army. Joab pitched his camp byRabbath, the metropolis of the Ammonites;whereupon the enemy came out, and setthemselves in array; not all of them together,but in two bodies. For the auxiliaries wereset in array in the plain by themselves; butthe army of the Ammonites at the gates, over


against the Hebrews. When Joab saw this,he opposed one stratagem against another,and chose out the most hardy part of his men,and set them in opposition to the king ofSyria, and the kings that were with him; andgave the other part to his brother Abishai,and bade him set them in opposition to theAmmonites; and said to him, in case heshould see that the Syrians distressed him,and were too hard for him, he should orderhis troops to turn about, and assist him: andhe said, that he himself would do the same tohim, if he saw him in the like distress fromthe Ammonites. So he sent his brother be­fore, and encouraged him to do every thingcourageously and with alacrity, which wouldteach them to be afraid of disgrace, and tofight manfully. And so he dismissed him tofight with the Ammonites, while he fell uponthe Syrians. And though they made a strongopposition for a while, Joab slew many ofthem, and compelled the rest to betake them­selves to flight; which when the Ammonitessaw, and were withal afraid of Abishai, andhis army, they staid no longer; but imitatedtheir auxiliaries, and fled to the city. SoJoab, when he had thus overcome the enemy,returned with great glory to Jerusalem, tothe king.
This defeat did not still induce the Ammon­ites to be quiet, nor to own those that weresuperior to them to be so. But they sent to||Chalaman, the king of the Syrians, beyondEuphrates, and hired him for an auxiliary.He had Shobach for the captain of his host,with eighty thousand footmen, and ten thou­


^
* This was one of the greatest indignities that themalice of man could invent, in those countries where allpeople thought their hair so great an ornament, that somewould rather have submitted to die than part with it.What a foul disgrace and heavy punishment this was ac­counted in ancient times, we may learn from NicholausDamascenus, as mentioned by Stobaeus, (tit. 42.) whosays, that among the Indians, the king commanded thegreatest offenders to be shaven, as the heaviest punish­ment that he could inflict upon them; and to the like pur­pose Plutarch, (in Agesil.) tells us, that whenever asoldier, among the Lacedemonians, was convicted of cow­ardice, he was obliged to go with one part of his upperlip shaved, and the other not. Nay, even at this day, nogreater indignity can be offered to a man of Persia, thanto cause his beard to be shaved; and therefore Taver-nier, in his travels, relates the story, that when the Sophicaused an ambassador of Arenge-zebe's to be used in thismanner, telling him, that he was not worthy to wear abeard, the emperor, (even in the manner as David here
did,) most highly resented the affront that was done tohim in the person of his ambassador. And as shavingDavid's ambassadors was deservedly accounted a grievousaffront, so the cutting off half the beard, (which madethem look still more ridiculous,) was a great addition to it,where beards were held in great veneration; and wherelong habits down to the heels were worn, (especially bypersons of distinction,) without any breeches or drawers,the cutting their garments, even to the middle, thereby toexpose their nakedness, was such a brutal and shamelessinsult, as would badly become a man of David's martialspirit, and just sentiments of honour, to have tamelypassed by. Patrick's and Calmet's Commentaries. B.
t Josephus took this Shobach, and Ishtob, mentionedpresently, to be the names of princes or captains, and notof countries, as they stand in the present Hebrew andSeptuagint copies. Which is in the right 1 cannot deter­mine.
J 2 Sam. x. 7.
II About an. 1077.







OCR Output








am. 1076.] 243 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


arose and washed himself, and took a whitegarment, and came into the tabernacle of God.He also commanded them to set supper be­fore him, and thereby greatly surprised hiskindred and servants; while he did nothingof this when the child was sick; but did it allwhen he was dead. Whereupon having firstbegged leave to ask him a question, they be­sought him to tell them the reason ot thisconduct. He then called them unskilful peo­ple, and instructed them how he had hopes ofthe recovery of the child while it was alive;and accordingly did all that was proper forhim to do, as thinking by such means to ren­der God propitious: but that when the childwas dead, there was no longer any occasionfor grief, which was then to no purpose.When he had said this, they commended theking's wisdom and understanding. He thenwent unto Bathsheba his wife, and she con­ceived and bare a son; and, by the commandof Nathan the prophet, called his name Solo­mon.*
But Joab sorely distressed the Ammonitesin the siege, by cutting off their waters; anddepriving them of other means of subsistence:till they were in the greatest want of drinkand meat, for they depended only on onesmall well of water; and this they durst notdrink of too freely, lest the fountain shouldentirely fail. So he wrote to the king andinformed him thereof; and persuaded him tocome himself and take the city, that he mighthave the honour of the victory. Upon thisletter of Joab's, the king accepted of hisgood will and fidelity; and took with him hisarmy, and came to the destruction of Rahab;


and when he had taken it by force, he gave itto his soldiers to plunder it. But he himselftook the king of the Ammonites crown, whoseweight was a talent of gold;f and it had inits middle a precious stone, called a sardonyx:which crown David ever after wore on hisown head. He also found many other ves­sels in the city, and those both splendidand of great price, but as for the men, heJtormented them, and then destroyed them.And when he had taken the other cities ofthe Ammonites by force, he treated themafter the same manner.
CHAP. VIII.
OF THE VIOLATION OF TAMAR BV HER BROTHER AMNON;THE REVENGE OF ABSALOM, AND HIS BANISHMENT ANDRECALL BY KING DAVID.
WHEN the king returned to Jerusalem,a sad misfortune befell his house, onthe following occasion. He had a daughternamed Tamar,|| who was yet a virgin, andvery handsome; insomuch that she surpassedall the most beautiful women. She had thesame mother with Absalom. Now Amnon,David's eldest son, fell in love with her, andbeing not able to obtain his desires, on ac­count of the custody she was under, his griefpreyed upon him so much that he grew lean,and his colour was changed. Now there wasone Jonadab, a kinsman and friend of his,who discovered his passion; for he was an ex­traordinary wise man, and of great sagacityof mind. When therefore he saw that everymorning Amnon was not in body as he oughtto be, he came to him, and desired him to


* 2 Sam. xii. 24.
t A talent of gold was but about seven pounds weight.Nor could Josephus well estimate it higher, since he heresays, that David wore it on his head perpetually.
J Whether Josephus saw the words of our other copies,2 Sam. xii. 31. and 1 Chron. xx. 3. that David put theinhabitants, or at least the garrison of Rabbah, and of theother Ammonite cities, which he besieged and took, un­der, or cut them with saws and under or with harrows ofiron, and under or with axes of iron, and made them passthrough the brick-kiln; is not here directly expressed.If he saw them, as is most probable he did, he certainlyexpounded them of tormenting these Ammonites to death,who yet were none of those seven nations of Canaan,whose wickedness had rendered them incapable of mercy.Otherwise I should be inclined to think that the meaning,at least as the words are in Samuel, might only be this,that they were made the lowest slaves, to work in sawingtimber, or stone; in harrowing the fields; in hewing
VOL. I.—NOS. 21 k 22.
timber; in making and burning bricks; and the like hardservices; but without taking away their lives. We neverelsewhere, that I remember, meet with such methods ofcruelty in putting men to death in all the Bible, or in anyother ancient history. Nor do the words in Samuel seemnaturally to refer to any such thing.
II Virgins of the blood royal were kept secluse in apart­ments, separate from the commerce of men, into whichnot only strangers, but even their own fathers, were notpermitted to enter. Amnon, however, at some time orother, had seen the beautiful Tamar, or otherwise hecould not have conceived so strong a passion for her.Upon some certain ceremonial occasions indeed, it wascustomary for the young women to walk out, and shewthemselves; but, considering their close confinement atother times, it was hardly possible for Amnon to find anopportunity of declaring his passion, much more of grati­fying it; and therefore, out of pure despair, he pinedhimself into a consumption; Calmet's Commentary. B.3 A







OCR Output








402 [book XI. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


to their villages and cities; as every one'sability should require. And when lie hadadded this promise, that he himself, withhis servants, would assist them, he dissolvedthe assembly. So the Jews prepared forthe work.
This is the name they are called by fromthe day that they came up from Babylon;which is taken from the tribe of Judah, whichcame first to these places, and thence boththey and the country gained that appella­tion.
Now when the Ammonites, and Moabites,and Samaritans, and all that inhabited Coele-syria heard that the building went on apace,they took it heinously: and proceeded to laysnares for them, and to hinder their intentions.They also slew many of the Jews; and soughthow they might destroy Nehemiah himself,by hiring some of the foreigners to kill him.They also put the Jews in fear, and disturbedthem, and spread abroad rumours, as if manynations were ready to make an expeditionagainst them: by which means they wereharassed, and had almost left off the building.But none of these things could deter Nehe­miah from being diligent about the work. Heonly set a number of men about him, as aguard to his body: and so unweariedly per­severed therein, and was insensible of anytrouble, out of his desire to perfect this work.•And thus did he attentively and with greatprecaution take care of his own safety: notthat he feared death; but out of this persua­sion, that if he were dead, the walls for hiscitizens would never be raised. He also gave-orders that the builders should keep theirranks, and have their armour on while theywere building. Accordingly the mason hadhis sword on,* as well as Tie that brought thematerials for building. He also appointedthat their shields should lie very near them;and he placed trumpets at every five hundred
* Nehemiah iv. 18.
t It may not be improper to remark here, with whatan unusual accuracy Josephus determines these years ofXerxes, in which the walls of Jerusalem were built; viz.that Nehemiah came with his commission in the 25th ofXerxes; that the walls were two years and four monthsin building; and that they were finished on the 28th ofXerxes. It may also be remarked farther, that Josephushardly ever mentions more than one infallible astrono­mical character, I mean an eclipse of the moon: and thisa little before the death of Herod the Great, XVII. 6.


feet, and charged them, that if their enemiesappeared, they should give notice of it to thepeople, that they might fight in their armour,and their enemies might not fall upon themnaked. He also went about the compass ofthe city by night, being never discouraged,neither about the work itself, nor about hisown diet and sleep: for he made no use ofthose things for his pleasure, but out of ne­cessity. And this trouble he underwent ffortwo years and four months: for in so long atime was the wall built: in the twenty-eighthyear of the reign of Xerxes^ in the ninthmonth. Now when the walls were finished,Nehemiah and the multitude offered sacrificesto God for building of them; and they con­tinued in feasting eight days. However, whenthe nations which dwelt in Syria heard thatthe building of the wall was finished, theyhad indignation at it. But when Nehemiahsaw that the city was thin of people, he ex­horted the priests and the Levites, that theywould leave the country, and remove them­selves to the city, and there continue; andhe built them houses at his own expense: andhe commanded that part of the people whichwere employed in cultivating the land, tobring the tithes of their fruits to Jerusalem;that the priests and Levites having whereofthey might live perpetually, 'might not leavethe divine worship. Accordingly they heark­ened to the constitutions of Nehemiah: bywhich means the city of Jerusalem came tobe fuller of people than it was before. Sowhen Nehemiah had done many other excel­lent things, and things worthy of commenda­tion, in a glorious manner, he came to a greatage, and then died. He was a man of a goodand righteous disposition, and very ambitiousto make his own people happy. And he leftthe walls of Jerusalem as an eternal monu­ment for himself. Now this was done in thedays of Xerxes.
Now on these two chronological characters, in great mea­sure depend some of the most important points belongingto Christianity; viz. The explication of Daniel's seventyweeks, the duration !of our Saviour's ministry, and thetime of his death, in correspondence to those seventyweeks. Though Josephus's own chronology was so dif­ferent from ours, as exhibited in Ptolemy's Canon, that itwas impossible he should have regard to any such cor­respondence.J An. 459.







OCR Output








an. 2992.] ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


This calamity happened in the six hun-dreth year of Noah's government or age, inthe second month,* called by the Macedo­nians, Dius; but by the Hebrews, Marhesvan;for so did they order their year in Egypt.But Moses appointed that Nisan, which is thesame with Xanthicus, should be the firstmonth; so that this month began the year, asto all the solemnities they observed in honourof God: although he preserved the originalorder of the months as to buying and selling,and other ordinary affairs. Now he says,that this flood began on the seventeenth dayof the before-mentioned month; and this wasone thousand five hundred and fifty-six yearsfrom Adam the first man; and the time iswritten down in our sacred books, thosefwho then lived having noted down, with greataccuracy, both the births and deaths of illus­trious men.
For indeed Seth was born when Adam wasin his two hundred and thirtieth year: wholived nine hundred and thirty years. Sethbegat Enoch in his two hundred and fifthyear; who, when he had lived nine hundredand twelve years, delivered the governmentto Cain his son; whom he had at his hundredand ninetieth year. He lived nine hundredand five years. Cain, when he had lived ninehundred and ten years, had his son Malaleel,who was born in his hundred and seventiethyear. This Malaleel having lived eight hun­dred and ninety-five years, died, leaving hisson Jared, whom he begat when he was at hishundred and sixty-fifth year. He lived ninehundred and sixty-two years: and then hisson Enoch succeeded him; who was bornwhen his father was one hundred and sixty-two years old. Now he, when he lived threehundred and sixty-five years, departed andwent to God. Whence it is that they havenot written down his death. Now Mathusela,the son of Enoch, who was born to him whenhe was one hundred and sixty-five years old,had Lamech for his son, when he was one


hundred and eighty-seven years of age; towhom he delivered the government when hehad retained it nine hundred and sixty-nineyears. Now Lamech, when he had governedseven hundred and seventy-seven years, ap­pointed Noah his son to be ruler of the peo­ple; who was born to Lamech when he wasone hundred and eighty-two years old, andretained the government nine hundred andfifty years. These years, collected together,make up the sum before set down. Butlet no one inquire into the deaths of thesemen, for they extended their lives all along,together with their children and grandchil­dren: but let him have regard to their births
When God gave the signal, and it began torain, the water poured down forty intire days,till it became fifteen cubitsJ higher than theearth; which was the reason why there wereno greater number preserved, since they hadno place to fly to. When the rain ceased, thewater did but just begin to abate after onehundred and fifty days, that is, on the seven­teenth day of the seventh month. After thisthe Ark rested on the top of a certain moun­tain in Armenia; which, when Noah under­stood, he opened it, and seeing a small pieceof land about it, he continued quiet, and con­ceived some hopes of deliverance. But a fewdays afterward, when the water was decreasedto a greater degree, he sent out a raven, asdesirous to learn whether any other part ofthe earth was left dry by the water, and whe­ther he might go out of the Ark with safety;but the raven, finding all the land still over­flowed, returned to Noah again. But after^seven days"~Ee~ sent out a dove, to know thestate of the ground, which came back to himcovered with mud, and bringing an olivebranch. Hereby Noah learned that the earthwas become clear of the flood. So after hehad stayed seven more days, he sent the livingcreatures out of the Ark, and both he andhis family went out; when he also sacrificed


* Josephus here truly determines, that the year at theflood began about the Autumnal Equinox. As to what dayof the month the flood began, our Hebrew and Samaritan,and, perhaps, Josephus's own copy, more rightly placed iton the 17th day instead of the 27th, as here; for Josephusagrees with them as to the distance of one hundred andfifty days to the 17th day of the Beventh month, as Gen.vii. ult. with vin. 3.
t Josephus here takes notice, that these ancient gene-
alogies were first set down by those that then lived, andfrom them were transmitted down to posterity: which Isuppose to be the true account of that matter; for there isno reason to imagine that men were not taught to read andwrite soon after they were taught to speak; and perhapsall by the Messiah himself, who, under the father, was thecreator or governor of mankind, and who frequently, inthose early days, appeared to them.X Gen. vii. 20.







OCR Output








»90 (book VI. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


deaj of trouble. So when the people wereat a loss, and solicitous, because Saul disap­peared; the prophet besought God to shewwhere the young man was, and to producehim before them. So when they had learnedthe place where Saul was hidden, they sentmen to bring him; and when he was come,they set him in the midst of the multitude.Now was he taller than all of them, and hisstature was very majestic.
Then said the prophet, "God gives youthis man to be your king. See how he ishigher than all the people, and worthy of thisdominion."* So as soon as the people hadmade acclamation, " God save the king," theprophet wrote down what would come topass, in a book, and read it in the hearing ofthe king, and laid by the book in the taber­nacle of God; to be a witness to future gene­rations of what he had foretold. So whenSamuel had finished this matter, he dismissedthe multitude; and came himself to the cityRamah, in his own country. Saul also wentto Gibeah, where he was born; and manygood men there were who paid him the re­spect that was due to him; but the greaterpart were ill men, who despised him and de­rided the others; who neither brought himpresents, nor attempted in affection, or evenin words, to please him.
CHAP. V.
of saul's expedition against the nation of the am­monites, AND HIS SIGNAL VICTORY OVER THEM.
AFTER one month, the war which Saulhad with Nahash king of the Ammonites,obtained him respect from all the people.For this Nahash had done a great deal of


mischief to the Jew$, that lived beyond Jor­dan; by the expedition he had made againstthem, with a great and warlike army. Healso reduced their cities into slavery, andthat not only by subduing them for the pre­sent, which he did by force and violence; butweakening them by subtilty and cunning, thatthey might not be able afterward to get clearof their slavery, for he put out the rightf eyesof those that either delivered themselves tohim upon terms4 or were taken by him inwar; and this he did that when their left eyeswere covered with their shields, they mightbe wholly useless in war. Now when theking of the Ammonites had served those be­yond Jordan in this manner, he led his armyagainst those that were called Gileadites; andhaving pitched his camp at the metropolis ofhis enemies, which was the city Jabesh, hesent ambassadors to them, commanding themeither to deliver themselves up, on conditionto have their right eyes plucked out; or toundergo a siege, and to have their cities over­thrown. He gave them their choice whetherthey would cut off a small member of theirbody, or universally perish. However, theGileadites were so affrighted at these offers,that they had not courage to say any thing toeither of them; neither that they would de­liver themselves up, nor that they would fighthim. But they desired that he would givethem seven days respite,|| that they mightsend ambassadors to their countrymen, andintreat assistance: and if they came to assistthem they would fight; but if that assistancewere impossible to be obtained, they woulddeliver themselves up to suffer whatever hepleased to inflict on them.§


* 1 Sam. x. 24.
t Take here Theodoret's note, cited by Dr. Hudson:"He that exposes his shield to the enemy with his lefthand thereby hides his left eye, and looks at the enemywith his right eye. He, therefore, that plucks out thatright eye, makes men useless in war."
J The reason why Nahash was for having their righteye put out, was not only to bring a reproach upon Israel,as himself declares, but to disable them likewise fromserving in war; for, as the manner of fighting in thosedays was chiefly with bow and arrow, sword and shield,the loss of the right eye made them incapable of either;because, in combat, the left eye is covered with the shield,and in shooting with the bow, it is usual to wink with it;so that depriving them of their right eye, made them use­less in war: and yet this barbarous king thought it notproper to put out both their eyes; for then he would havemade them utterly incapable of doing him the service, or
acquiring the tribute for him, which he expected fromthem. Calmet's Comment. B.
II It may seem a little strange, that this barbarous princeshould be willing to allow the Jabeshites the respite ofseven days; but Josephus assigns this reason for it, viz.that he had so mean an opinion of the people, that he madeno difficulty to comply with their request. Saul indeedhad been appointed king, but having not as yet taken uponhim the government, he lived, just as he did before, in aprivate condition, 1 Sam. xi. 5. So that had he, upon thisnotice, endeavoured to levy an army, he could not think itpossible to be done in so short a space as seven days; andtherefore he thought he might grant them these conditionswithout any danger, and without driving them to despera­tion as he might have done, had he denied them their re­quest. Patricks Comment. B.
§ 1 Sam. xi. 3.







OCR Output








aN. 1058.] 263 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


Now it happened that Abraham* came andoffered his eon Isaac for a burnt-offering atthat very place; and, when the youth wasready to have his throat cut, a ram appearedon a sudden, standing by the altar, whichAbraham sacrificed in the stead of his son,as we have before related. Now when kingDavid saw that God had heard his prayer,and had graciously accepted of his sacrifice,he resolved to call that place the altar of allthe people; and to build a temple to Godthere. Which words he uttered very appo­sitely to what was to be done afterward; forGod sent the prophet to him, and told him,that there should his son build him an altar.
CHAP. XIV.
OF THE GREAT PREPARATIONS MADE BY DAVID FOR THEHOUSE OF GOD, AND HIS APPOINTMENT OF SOLOMON TOREIGN, UPON ADONIJAH'S ATTEMPT TO OAIN THE KINGDOM.
AFTER the delivery of this prophecyfthe king commanded the strangers tobe numbered; and they were found to be onehundred and eighty thousand. Of these heappointed eighty thousand to be hewers ofstone, and the rest of the multitude to carrystones; and of them he set over the workmenthree thousand and Jfive hundred. He alsoprepared a great quantity of iron and brassfor the work, with many large cedar trees;the Tyrians and Sidonians sending them tohim; for he had sent to them for a supply ofthose trees. And told his friends, that thesethings were now prepared, that he mightleave materials ready for the building of thetemple to his son, who was to reign afterhim; and that he might not have them toseek then, when he was very young, and byreason of his age unskilful in those matters;but might have them lying by him, and somight the more readily complete the work.


So David called his son Solomon, andcharged him, when he had received thekingdom.j| to build a temple to God: andsaid, "I was willing to build God a templemyself; but he prohibited me, because I waspolluted with blood and wars; but he hathforetold that Solomon, my youngest son,should build him a temple, and should becalled by that name. Over whom he hathpromised to take the like care, as a fathertakes over his son; and that he would makethe country of the Hebrews happy under him,and that not only in other respects, but bygiving it peace, and freedom from wars, andfrom internal seditions, which are the greatestof all blessings. Since therefore, thou wastordained king by God himself before thouwast born; endeavour to render thyselfworthy of this his providence; as is in otherinstances so particularly in being religiousand courageous. Keep thou also his com­mands, and his laws, which he hath given usby Moses; and do not permit others to breakthem. Be zealous also to dedicate to God atemple, which he hath chosen to be builtunder thy reign. Nor be thou affrighted bythe vastness of the work; nor set about ittimorously. For I will make all things readybefore I die. And take notice, that thereare already §ten thousand talents of gold,and a hundred talents of silver collectedtogether. I have also laid together brassand iron without number; and an immensequantity of timber, and of stones. Moreoverthou hast many thousand stone-cutters andcarpenters. And if thou shalt want any thingfarther, do thou add somewhat of thine own.Wherefore if thou performest this work, thouwilt be acceptable to God, and have him forthy patron." David also farther exhorted therulers of the people to assist his son in thisbuilding, and to attend to the divine service,


* What Josephus adds here, whether from his copy of2 Sam. xxiv. 25. or of 1 Chron. xxvi. 26—30. or fromother places belonging to David's history, of which alreadyVII. 4. is very remarkable; that this mount Moriah wasnot only the very place where Abraham offered up histon Isaac long ago, but that God had foretold to David by aprophet that here his son should build him a temple, whichis not directly in any of our other copies; though veryagreeable to what was in them; particularly in 1 Chron.xxi. 26, 28. and xxii. 1. to which place I refer the reader.t About an. 1057.
Three hundred, 1 Kings v. 16.
This power of naming a successor was here assumed
by David, and for some time afterwards, (as it appears bythe story of his grandson Rehoboam,) was continued inthe Jewish state. It was a privilege that, in after-ages,was granted to several good princes; but among the Israel­ites it did not prevail long, because the constitution ofother nations, (to which the Israelites affected to conformthemselves,) was different. Pool's Annotations, and Pat­rick's Commentary. B.
§ Of the quantity of gold and silver expended in thebuilding of Solomon's temple, and whence it arose, see thedescription of the temples, chap. 13. And of the distinctparts of that temple, see the other chapters of that descrip­tion thereto belonging.







OCR Output








328 [book xrr ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


water. Insomuch that on this occasion Jo­seph, Herod's brother, was contriving to runaway from it, with two hundred of his de­pendents, to the Arabians. For he had heardthat Malchus repented of the offences he hadbeen guilty of with regard to Herod. ButGod, by sending rain in the night time, pre­vented his going away; for their cisternswere thereby filled, and he was under no ne­cessity of removing on that account. Butthey were now of good courage; and themore so, because the sending that plenty ofwater which they had been sadly in want of,seemed a mark of Divine providence. Sothey made a sally, and fought hand to handwith Antigonus's soldiers, and destroyed agreat number of them. At the same timeVentidius, the general of the Romans, wassent out of Syria, to drive the Parthians outof it; and marched after them into Judea;in pretence indeed to succour Joseph; but inreality the whole affair was no more than astratagem, in order to get money of Antigo-nus. So they pitched their camp very nearto Jerusalem; and obtained a great deal ofmoney from Antigonus, and then he retiredhimself with the greater part of the army.But that the wickedness he had been guiltyof might not be found out, he left a certainpart of his soldiers, under the command ofSilo; with whom also Antigonus cultivatedan acquaintance; that he might cause him nodisturbance; and was still in hopes that theParthians would come again, and defend him.
CHAP. XV.
OF HEROd's RETURN FROM ITALY, AND HIS SUCCESSESAGAINST HIS ENEMIES
BY this time Herod had sailed out of Italyto Ptolemais, and had gotten togethera numerous army, both of strangers and ofhis own countrymen; and marched throughGalilee against Antigonus. Silo also andVentidius came and assisted him; being per­suaded by Dellius, who was sent by Antonyto assist in bringing back Herod. Now Ven­tidius was employed in appeasing the disturb­ances that had been made in the cities, bythe means of the Parthians. And Silo was


in Judea, but corrupted by Antigonus. How­ever, as Herod went along, his army increasedevery day; and all Galilee, with some smallexceptions, joined him. But as he was march­ing to those that were in Massada; for hewas obliged to endeavour to save those thatwere in that fortress, now they were be­sieged, because they were his relations:Joppa was a hindrance to him. For it wasnecessary for him to take that place first; itbeing a city at variance with him; that nostrong hold might be left in his enemies' handsbehind him, when he should goto Jerusalem.And when Silo made this a pretence for ri­sing up from Jerusalem, and was thereuponpursued by the Jews, Herod fell upon themwith a small body of men; and both put theJews to flight and saved Silo, when he wasvery unable to defend himself. But whenHerod had taken Joppa, he made haste toliberate those of his family that were in Mas­sada. Now of the people of the country somejoined him because of the friendship theyhad had with his father; and some becauseof the splendid appearance he made; andothers by way of requital for the benefits theyhad received from both of them: but thegreatest number came to him in hopes ofgetting somewhat from him afterward, if hewere once firmly settled in the kingdom.
Herod had now* a strong army. And ashe marched on, Antigonus laid snares andambushes in the passes and places most pro­per for them. But in truth he thereby didlittle or no damage to the enemy. So Herodreceived those of his family out of Massada,and the fortress Ressa; and then went on forJerusalem. The soldiery also that was withSilo accompanied him all along: as did manyof the citizens; being afraid of his power.And as soon as he had pitched his camp onthe west side of the city, the soldiers thatwere set to guard that part shot their arrows,and threw their darts at him. And whensome sallied out in a crowd, and came tofight hand to hand with the first ranks ofHerod's army, he gave orders, that theyshould in the first place make proclamationabout the wall; that he came for the good ofthe people, and for the preservation of (he


tioned both here, and Of the War, I. 15. is an indicationthat it was now summer time: which agrees to my deter­mination of the time of the year when Herod was made
king at Rome. See Harm, of the Evang. page 150,151.* An. 39.







OCR Output








560 [BOOK *▼, ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


government, introduced such customs asthey had never been used to before: as in­deed in pretence a king, but in reality onethat shewed himself an enemy to their wholenation. On this account ten men, that werecitizens of Jerusalem, conspired togetheragainst Herod, and swore to one anotherto undergo any dangers in the attempt; andtook daggers with them, under their gar­ments, for the purpose of killing him. Nowthere was a certain blind man among theseconspirators, who had thus sworn, on ac­count of the indignation he had against whathe heard to have been done. He was notindeed able to afford the rest any great as­sistance in this undertaking; but was readyto undergo any suffering with them, in theevent of their sustaining any harm; insomuchthat he became a very great encourager ofthe rest of the undertakers.
When they had taken this resolution, theywent up into the theatre; hoping that He­rod himself could not escape them, as theyshould fall upon him so unexpectedly; andsupposing that if they missed of him, theyshould kill a great many of those that wereabout him. And this resolution they took,though they should die for it, in order tosuggest to the king what injuries he haddone to the multitude. These conspiratorsstanding thus previously prepared, wentabout their design with great alacrity. Butthere was one of those spies of Herod's thatwere appointed to inform him of any con­spiracies that should be made against him,who found out the whole affair, and told theking of it, as he was about to go into thetheatre. So when he reflected on the ha­tred which he knew the majority of the peo­ple bore him, and on the disturbances thatarose upon every occasion, he thought thisplot against him not to be improbable. Ac­cordingly he retired into his palace; andcalled those that were accused of this con­spiracy before him by their several names.And as upon the guards falling upon them,they were caught in the very fact, andknew they could not escape, they preparedthemselves for their ends with all the de­cency they could; and so as not to recedefrom their resolute behaviour. For theyshewed no shame for what they were about;nor denied it: but when they were seized,


they shewed their daggers, and professedthat the conspiracy they had sworn to wasa holy and a pious action; that what theyintended to do was not for gain, nor out ofany indulgence to their passions; but prin­cipally for those common customs of theircountry, which all the Jews were obliged toobserve, or to die for them. This was whatthese men said, out of their undaunted cou­rage in this conspiracy. So they were ledaway to execution by the king's guards, thatstood about them; and patiently underwentall the torments inflicted on them till theydied. Nor was it long before that spy, whohad discovered them, was seized on by someof the people, out of the hatred they borehim, and was not only slain by them, butpulled to pieces limb from limb, and givento the dogs. This action was seen by manyof the citizens; yet would not one of themdiscover the perpetrators of it; till uponHerod's making a strict scrutiny after them,by bitter and severe tortures, certain womenthat were tortured confessed what they hadseen done. The authors of the fact werethen so terribly punished by the king, thattheir entire families were destroyed for thisrash attempt. Yet did not the obstinacy ofthe people, and that undaunted constancythey shewed in the defence of their laws,make Herod any easier to them; but he stillstrengthened himself after a more securemanner, and resolved to encompass themultitude every way, lest such innovationsshould terminate in an open rebellion.
Since, therefore, he had now the city for­tified by the palace in which he lived, andby the temple ? which had a strong fortressby it called Antonia, and rebuilt by himself;he contrived to make Samaria a fortress forhimself also against the people; and calledit Sebaste: supposing that this place wouldbe a strong hold against the country, notinferior to the former. So he fortified that
f)lace, which was a day's journey distantrom Jerusalem; and which would therefore,be useful to him in common, to keep boththe country and the city in awe. He alsobuilt another fortress for the whole nation.It was anciently called Strato's tower, butwas by him named Caesarea. He chose outsome select horsemen, and placed them inthe great plain; and built for them a place







OCR Output








3U [book XI. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


five thousand five hundred and twenty-five.And the governors of all the multitude, thusnumbered, were Zorobabel, the son of Sala-thiel, of the posterity of David, and of thetribe of Judah and Jeshua, the son of Josedek,the high-priest. And besides these, therewere Mordecai and Serebeus, who were dis­tinguished from the multitude, and were ru­lers: who also contributed a hundred poundsof gold and five thousand of silver. By thismeans therefore the priests, and the Levites,and a certain part of the people of the Jewsthat were in Babylon came and dwelt in Je­rusalem: but the rest of the multitude re­turned to their own countries.
CHAP. IV.
UT THE REBUILDING OF THE TEMPLE, AND THE FRUITLESSATTEMPT OF THE CUTHEANS TO OBSTRUCT THE WORK.
IN the seventh month, after they were de­parted out of Babylon, both Jeshua thehigh-priest, and Zorobabel, the governor, sentmessengers every way round about, and ga­thered those that were in the country togetherto Jerusalem.* They then built the altar, onthe place where it formerly stood; that theymight offer the appointed sacrifices upon it toGod, according to the laws of Moses. Butwhile they did this, they did not please theneighbouring nations: who regarded themwith envy and ill will. They also celebratedthe feasts of tabernacles at that time, as thelegislator had ordained: and after that theyoffered sacrifices, and what were called thedaily sacrifices, and the oblations proper forthe sabbath, and for all the holy festivals.Those also that had made vows performedthem; and offered their sacrifices, from thefirst day of the seventh month. They alsobegan to build the temple, and gave a greatsum of money to the masons and carpenters;and what was necessary for the maintenanceof the workmen. The Sidonians also werevery willing to bring cedar trees from Liba-nus, to bind them together, and to make aunited float of them, and to bring them to theport of Joppa. For that was what Cyrus hadcommanded at first; and what was now doneat the command of Darius.
* Ezra iii. 1.t An. 519.


In the second yearf of their Coming to Je­rusalem, as the Jews were there, in the secondmonth, the building of the temple went onapace. And when they had laid the founda­tion, on the first day of the second month, ofthat year, they appointed as overseers of thework, such Levites as were full twenty yearsold, and Jeshua, and his sons and brethren,and Cadmiel, the brother of Judas, the sonof Aminadab, with his sons. And by the greatdiligence of those that had the care of it, thetemple was finished sooner than any onewould have expected. The priests, then,adorned with their accustomed garments,stood with their trumpets: while the Levites,and the sons of Asaph, stood, and sang hymnsto God, according as David had first of allappointed. Now the priests, and Levites,and the elder part of the families, recollect­ing how much greater and more sumptuousthe old temple had been; and contrasting itwith the inferiority of the new one, they con­sidered with themselves how much their hap­py state was sunk below what it had been ofold, as well as their temple. Hereupon theywere very disconsolate, and proceeded so faras to lament and shed tears on those accounts.But the people in general were contentedwith their present condition; and becausethey were allowed to build them a temple,they desired no more; and neither regarded,nor indeed at all tormented themselves withthe comparison of that and the former tem­ple; as if this were below their expectations.But the wailing of the old men, and of thepriests on account of the deficiency of thistemple, in their opinion, if compared withthat which had been demolished, overcamethe sounds of trumpets, and the rejoicing ofthe people.J
When the Samaritans, who were still ene­mies to the tribe of Judah and Benjamin,heard the sound of the trumpets, they camerunning together, and desired to know whatwas the occasion of this tumult? and whenthey perceived that it was from the Jews, whohad been carried captive to Babylon, andwere rebuilding their temple; they came toZorobabel, and to Jeshua, and to the headsof the families, and desired they would give
, I Ezra iii. 13.







OCR Output








180 [book t. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


the women remembered the vow which shehad made concerning her son, and deliveredhim to Eh; dedicating him to God, that hemight become a prophet. Accordingly hishair was suffered to grow long, and his drinkwas water. So Samuel was brought up in the*temple. But Elcanah had other sons of Han­nah, and three daughters.
When Samuel was twelve years old,f hebegan to prophesy, and when he was onceasleep, God called to him by name; but hesupposing he had been called by the high-priest, came to him; but when the high-priestsaid he did not call him, God did so thrice.Eli was then so far illuminated, that he saidto him, "Indeed Samuel I was silent now aswell as before. It is God that calls thee.} Dothou therefore signify unto him, and say, I amhere ready." So when he heard God speakagain, he desired him to speak, and to deliverwhat oracles he pleased, for he would not failto perform any ministration he should makeuse of him in. To which God replied, " Sincethou art here ready, learn what miseries arecoming upon the Israelites; such indeed aswords cannot declare, nor faith believe. Forthe sons of Eli shall die in one day; and thepriesthood shall be transferred into the familyof Eleazar; for Eli hath loved his sons morethan my worship, and to such a degree, as isnot for their advantage." This message Eliobliged the prophet by oath to tell him; forotherwise he had no inclination to afflict himby repeating it. And now Eli had a far moresure expectation of the perdition of his sons:but the glory of Samuel increased more and


more; it being found by experience thatwhatsoever he]| prophesied came to pass ac .cordingly.
CHAP. XI
OF THE MISFORTUNES WHICH BEFEL THE SONS OF ELI, THEARK, AND THE PEOPLE; AND OF THE DEATH OF ELI.
ABOUT this time§ the Philistines madewar against the Israelites, and pitchedtheir camp at the city Aphec. Now whenthe Israelites had expected them a littlewhile, the very next day they joined battle;but the Philistines were conquerors, and slewabout four thousand of the Hebrews; andpursued the rest of the multitude to theircamp.
The Hebrews being now afraid of theworst, sent to the senate, and to the high-priest, and desired that they would bring theark of God; that by putting themselves inarray, when it was present with them, theymight be too hard for their enemies; as notreflecting that he who had condemned themto endure these calamities was greater thanthe ark; and for whose sake it was that theark came to be honoured. So the ark came,and the sons of the high-priest with it, havingreceived an assurance from their father, thatif they pretended to survive the taking of theark, they should come no more into his pre­sence. For Phineas officiated already as high-priest; his father having resigned his office tohim, by reason of his great age.** So theHebrews were full of courage, as supposingthey should be too hard for their enemies; the


* Josephus here says, that Samuel was brought up inthe holy place, or the temple; that is in the sacred build­ings about the tabernacle; as is the holy house used byJosephus for the tabernacle itself, VI. 12. and in manyother places.
t About an. 1170.
j 1 Sam. iii. 21. TJie word of the Lord. Without re­curring to the learned explanations which have beengiven of this expression, it may possibly receive an agree­able illustration from the following extracts. "In Abys­sinia there is an officer named Kal Hatze, who standsalways upon steps at the side of the lattice window, wherethere is a hole covered in the inside with a curtain ofgreen taffeta; behind this curtain the king sits." (Brace'sTrav. vol. iv. p. 76.) The king is described in anotherplace as very much concealed from public view. Heeven "covers his face on audiences, or public occasions,and when in judgment. On cases of treason he sits withinhis balcony, and speaks through a hole in the side of it, toan officer called Kal Hatze, the voice or word of the king,by whom he sends his questions, or any thing else that
occurs, to the judges, who are seated at the council table."(Brace's Trav. vol. iii. p. 266.) If such a custom everobtained among the Jews, the propriety of the expression,the word of the Lord, is obvious, as the idea must havebeen very familiar to them. This clearly appears to havebeen the case as to Joseph and his brethren, Gen. xlii. 23.Joseph spake by an interpreter not of languages, but ofdignity and state. Other instances of the same nature mayprobably be traced in 2 Kings v. 10. Job xxxiii. 23. B.
II Although there had been a few occasional prophetsbefore, yet was this Samuel the first of a constant succes­sion of prophets in the Jewish nation; as it is implied inSt. Peter's words, Acts iii. 24. "Yea and all the prophetsfrom Samuel, and those that follow after, as many as havespoken, have likewise foretold of these days." See alsoActs xiii. 20. The others were rather sometimes calledrighteous men. See Matt. x. 41. xiii. 17. Constitut.VIII. 12.
§ An. 1143.
** He was 08 years old. See 1 Sam. iv. 15.







OCR Output








aw. 144.] 471 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


an army of his own, he would make waragainst Trypho, and eject him out of Syria.And the people of that country received himwith great alacrity. So he raised forces,with which he fought against Arsaces; buthe lost all his army, and was himself takenprisoner.
CHAP. VI.
OF THE TREACHEROUS ASSASSINATION OF JONATHAN; THESUCCESSION OF SIMON AS GENERAL AND HIGH-PRIEST OFTHE JEWS ; AND THE COURAGEOUS ACTIONS HE PERFORMEDAGAINST TRVPHO.
WHEN Trypho knew what had befallenDemetrius, he was no longer firm toAntiochus; but contrived by subtilty to killhim, and then take possession of his kingdom.But the fear that he was in of Jonathan wasan obstacle to his design; for Jonathan wasa friend to Antiochus. For which cause heresolved first to take Jonathan out of theway; and then to set about his design rela­ting to Antiochus. But he. judging it best totake him off by deceit and treachery, camefrom Antioch to *Bethshan; which by theGreeks is called Scythopolis: at which placeJonathan met him, with forty thousand chosenmen; for he thought that he came to fighthim. But when he perceived that Jonathanwas ready to fight, he attempted to gain himby presents, and kind treatment; and gaveorder to his captains to obey him; and bythese means was desirous to give him assu­rance of his good will, and to take away allsuspicions out of his mind; that so he mightmake him careless, and inconsiderate; andmight take him when he was unguarded. Healso advised him to dismiss his army, becausethere was no occasion for bringing it withhim; when there was no war, but all was in
}>eace. However he desired him to retain aew about him, and go with him to Ptolemais;for that he would deliver the city up to him;and would bring all the fortresses that werein the country under his dominion; and hetold him that he came with those very de­signs.


* 1 Mace. xii. 39—45.
t 1 Mace. xii. 52.
J The commendation which the author of the first hookef the Maccabees, chap. xiv. 4, &c. bestows npon Simon,is worth our observation; for he therein tells us, that he


Yet did not Jonathan suspect any thing atall by this management; but believed thatTrypho gave him this advice out of kindness,and with a sincere design. Accordingly hedismissed his army, and retained no morethan three thousand of them with him; andleft two thousand in Galilee, and he himselfwith one thousand came with Trypho toPtolemais. But when the people of Ptole­mais had shut their gates, as it had been com­manded them by Trypho to do; he tookJonathan alive, and slew all that were withhim. He also sent soldiers against thosetwo thousand that were left in Galilee, inorder to destroy them. But those men, havingheard the report of what had happened toJonathan, prevented the execution; and be­fore those that were sent by Trypho came,they covered themselves with their armour,and went away out of the country. Nowwhen those that were sent against them sawthat they were ready to fight for their lives,they gave them no disturbance; but returnedback to Trypho.
When the people of Jerusalem heard thatJonathan was taken, and that the soldierswho were with him were destroyed; theydeplored his sad fate:f and there was earnestinquiry made about him by every body; anda great fear fell upon them, and made themsad, lest now they were deprived of thecourage and conduct of Jonathan, the nationsabout them should bear them ill will; and asthey were before quiet on account of Jona­than, they should now rise up against them;and by making war with them should forcethem into the utmost dangers. And indeedwhat they suspected really befell them. Forwhen those nations heard of the death ofJonathan, they began to make war with theJews, as now destitute of a governor. AndTrypho himself assembled an army, and hadan intention to go up to Judea, and make waragainst its inhabitants. But when Simon sawthat the people of Jerusalem were terrifiedat the circumstances they were in, he desiredto make a speech to them;J and thereby torender them more resolute in opposing Try-sought the fjood of the nation in every thing, so that hisauthority always pleased them well; that during his ad­ministration, whilst Syria, and other neighbouring king­doms were almost destroyed by wars, the Jews livedquietly, every man under his own vine and fig-tree, en«







OCR Output








av. 396.] 419 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWa


BOOK XII.


Containing an Interval of One Hundred and Seventy Years.


FROM THE DEATH OP ALEXANDER THE GREAT, TO THE DEATH OF JUDAS MACCABEUS.


CHAP. I.
or THE TREACHEROUS SEIZURE OF JERUSALEM AND JUDEABV PTOLEMY, THE SON OF LAGUS; WHO CARRIED MANYOF THE JEWS THENCE, AND PLANTED THEM IN EGYPT.
"¥T7"HEN Alexander king of Macedon,j j had put an end to the dominion ofthe Persians, and had settled the affairs inJudea after the aforementioned manner, heended his life. And as his government fellamong many, Antigonus obtained Asia; Se-leucus, Babylon; and of the other nationswhich were there, Lysimachus governed theHellespont; Cassander possessed Macedonia;and Ptolemy the son of Lagus seized uponEgypt. And while these princes ambitiouslystrove one against another, every one for hisown principality, it came to pass that therewere continually wars; and the cities weresufferers, and lost a great many of the inha­bitants in these times of distress: insomuchthat all Syria, by the means of Ptolemy theeon of Lagus, underwent the reverse of thatdenomination of Saviour which he then had.He also seized upon Jerusalem: and for thatend made use of deceit and treachery. Foras he came into the city on a sabbath day,as if he would offer sacrifice, he, without any


trouble, gained the city: while the Jews didnot oppose him. For they did not suspecthim to be their enemy; and he gained it thus,because they were free from suspicion of him;and because on that day they were at restand quietness: and when he had gained it, heruled over it in a cruel manner. Nay, Aga-tharchides of Cnidus, who wrote the acts olAlexander's successors, reproaches us withsuperstition: as if we, by it, had lost ourliberty: where he says thus; "There is anation called the nation of the Jews; whoinhabit a city strong and great, named Jeru­salem. These men took no care, but let itcome into the hands of Ptolemy: as not will­ing to take arms: and thereby they submittedto be under a hard master, by reason oftheir unseasonable superstition." But whenPtolemy had taken a great many captives,both from the mountainous parts of Judea,and from the places about Jerusalem andSamaria; and the places near mount Geriz-zim; he led them all into *Egypt and settledthem there. And as he knew that the peopleof Jerusalem were fmost faithful in the ob­servance of oaths and covenants; and thisfrom the Janswer they made Alexander, whenhe sent an ambassage to them, after he had


* The great number of these Jews ami Samaritans thatwere formerly carried into Egypt by Alexander, and nowby Ptolemy the son of Lagus, appeared afterwards in thevast multitude who, as we shall see presently, were soonransomed by Philadelphus, and by him made free, beforehe sent for the seventy-two interpreters; in the manygarrisons and other soldiers of that nation in Egypt in thefamous settlement of the Jews, and the number of thosesynagogues at Alexandria, long afterward, and in the ve­hement contention between the Jews and the Samaritansunder Pliilometor, about the place appointed for publicVOL. I.—NOS. 35 & 36.
worship in the law of Moses; whether at the Jewish tem­ple of Jerusalem, or at the Samaritan temple at Gerizzim:of all which our author treats hereafter. And as to theSamaritans carried into Egypt under the same princes,Scahger supposes that those who have a great synagogue atCairo; as also those whom the Arabic geographer speaks of,as having seized on an island in the Red Sea, are remainsof them at this very day; as the notes here informs us.
t Of the sacredness of oaths among the Jews in the OldTestament, see Scripture Politics, page 54—65.
J See Book XI. chap. 8.
3Z







OCR Output








112 [book IV. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


then Dathan and Abiram, and On, the son ofPeleth would have it. For these are the old­est men of that tribe, and potent on accountof their great wealth also."
Now Corah, when he said this, wished toappear careful of the public welfare; but inreality, he was endeavouring to procure tohave that dignity transferred by the multitudeto himself. And thus did he, out oi' a malig­nant design, but with plausible words, dis­course to those of his own tribe. And whenthese words did gradually spread to more ofthe people, and the hearers still added towhat tended to the scandals that were castupon Aaron, the whole army was full of them.Now of those that conspired with Corah, therewere two hundred and fifty of the principalmen, who were eager to have the priesthoodtaken from Moses's brother, and to bring himto disgrace. Nay, the multitude themselveswere provoked to be seditious, and attemptedto stone Moses: and gathered themselvestogether after an indecent manner, with con­fusion and disorder. And now they all werein a tumultuous manner, raising a clamour be­fore the tabernacle of God, to prosecute thetyrant, and to relieve the multitude from theirslavery under him, who, under colour of theDivine commands, laid violent injunctionsupon them. For that had it been God whochose *one that was to perform the office of apriest, he would have raised a worthy personto that dignity, and would not have producedsuch an one as was inferior to many others,nor have given him that office: and that incase he had judged it fit to bestow it onAaron, he would have permitted the multi­tude to bestow it, and not have left it to bebestowed by his own brother.
Now although Moses had long foreseen thiscalumny of Corah's, and had seen that thepeople were irritated, yet was he not alarmedat it. But being of good courage, because hehad given them good advice about their af­fairs: and knowing that his brother had beenmade partaker of the priesthood at the com­mand of God, and not by his own favour tohim, he came to the assembly: and, as forthe multitude, he said not a word to them,but spake as loud to Corah as he could; and
* Reland here observes, that although our Bibles saylittle or nothing of these riches of Corah, yet both the


being very eloquent, and having this naturaltalent among others, that he could greatlymove the multitude with his discourses; hesaid, "O Corah, both thou, and all those withthee, (pointing to the two hundred and fiftymen,) seem to be worthy of this honour. Nordo I pretend, but that this whole companymay be worthy of the like dignity: althoughthey may not be so rich, or so great, as youare. Nor have I given this office to my bro­ther, because he excelled others in riches;for thou exceedest* us both in the greatnessof thy wealth: nor indeed because he was ofan eminent family; for God, by giving us thesame common ancestor, has made our familiesequal: nay, nor was it out of brotherly affec­tion, which another might yet have justlydone. For certainly, unless I had bestowedthis honour out of regard to God, and to hi&laws, I had not passed by myself, and given itto another; as having a closer intimacy withmyself, than I have with him. For, surely, itwould not be a wise thing for me to exposemyself to the dangers of offending, and to be­stow the happy employment on this accountupon another. But I am above such practi­ces: nor would God have overlooked thismatter, and seen himself thus despised: norwould he have suffered you to be ignorant ofwhat you were to do, in order to please him.But he hath himself chosen one that is to per­form that sacred office to him; and therebyfreed us from that care. So that it was not athing that I pretended to give; but only ac­cording to the determination of God: I there­fore propose it still to be contended for bysuch as please to put in for it; only desiringthat he who has already been preferred, andhas already obtained it, may be allowed nowalso to offer himself a candidate. He pre­fers your peace, and your living without sedi­tion, to this honourable employment; althoughin truth, it was with your approbation that heobtained it. For though God were the donor,yet do we not offend when we think fit to ac­cept of it with your good will. Yet would ithave been an instance of impiety, not to havetaken that honourable employment when heoffered it: nay, it had been exceedingly un­reasonable, when God had thought fit any
Jews and Mahometans, as well as Josephus, are full of it.







OCR Output








AN. 41.] 525 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


youngest brother, and all their servants, andthe rest of the multitude that was with him;and without the enemies' privity pursued hisway to Idumea. Nor could any enemy of his,who then saw him in this case, be so hard­hearted, but would have commiserated hisfortune; while the women drew along theirinfant children, and left their own country,and their friends in prison, with tears in theireyes, and sad lamentations; and in expecta­tion of nothing but what was of a melancholynature.
Herod, however, raised his mind above themiserable state he was in, and was of goodcourage in the midst of his misfortunes; and,as he passed along, bade them every one beof good cheer, and not to give themselves upto sorrow, because that would hinder themin their flight, which was now the only hopeof safety they had. Accordingly they triedto bear with patience the calamity they wereunder, as he exhorted them to do. Yet washe once almost going to kill himself, upon theoverthrow of a waggon, and the danger hismother was then in of being killed: and thison two accounts; because of his great con­cern for her, and because he was afraid lest,by this delay, the enemy should overtake himin the pursuit. But as he was drawing hissword, and going to kill himself therewith,those that were present restrained him, andtold him, that he ought not to desert them,and leave them a prey to their enemies; forthat it was not the part of a brave man to freehimself from the distresses he was in, and tooverlook his friends that were in the samedistresses also: so that he was compelled tolet that horrid attempt alone, partly out ofshame at what they said to him, and partlyout of regard to the great number of thosethat would not permit him to do what he in­tended. So he encouraged his mother, andtook all the care of her the time would allow,and proceeded with the utmost haste to thefortress of Massada. And though he hadmany skirmishes with such of the Parthiansas attacked and pursued him, he was con­queror in them all.
Nor indeed was he free from the Jews allalong, as he was in his flight. For by thattime he was gotten sixty furlongs out of thecity, and was upon the road, they fell uponhim, and fought hand to hand with him: but


he put them to flight, and overcame them:not like one that was in distress, and in ne­cessity, but like one that was excellently pre­pared for war, and had what he wanted ingreat plenty. And on this very place wherehe now overcame the Jews, he, some timeafterward, built a most excellent palace, anda city round about it, and called it Herodium.And when he was come to Idumea, at a placecalled Thressa, his brother Joseph met him:and he then held a council to take adviceabout his affairs, and what was fit to be donein his circumstances, since he had a greatmultitude that followed him, besides his mer­cenary soldiers, and the place Massada, whi­ther he proposed to retreat, was too small tocontain so great a multitude. So he sentaway the greater part of his company, beingabove nine thousand, and bade them go, someone way, and some another, and so savethemselves in Idumea, and gave them whatwould buy them provisions in their journey;but he took with him those that were leastencumbered, and were most intimate withhim, and came to the fortress, and placedthere his wives, and his followers, being abouteight hundred in number; there being in theplace a sufficient quantity of corn, and water,and other necessaries; and went directly forPetra, in Arabia. But when it was day, theParthians plundered all Jerusalem, and thepalace; and abstained from nothing but Hyr-canus's money, which was three hundredtalents. A great deal of Herod's money es­caped; and principally all he had been soprovident as to send to Idumea beforehand.Nor indeed did what was in the city sufficethe Parthians: but they went out into thecountry, and plundered it, and demolishedthe city Marissa.
Thus was Antigonus brought back intoJudea by the king of the Parthians; and re­ceived Hyrcanus and Phasaelus for his pri­soners. But he was greatly cast down be­cause the women had escaped; whom hehad intended to have given the enemy; ashaving promised they should have them, withthe money, for their reward. But being afraidthat Hyrcanus, who was under the guard ofthe Parthians, might have his kingdom re­stored to him by the multitude, he cut offhis^ears; and thereby took care that the high-priesthood should never come to him any.4N2


•v.v,


'^







OCR Output








390 [BOOK XL ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


kings: as hath their city been also: which,for that reason, hath been till now laidwaste. We thought proper also to informthee of this matter, because thou mayestotherwise perhaps be ignorant that if thiscity be once inhabited, and entirely encom­passed with walls, thou wilt be excluded fromthy passage to Coelesyria and Phoenicia."
When Cambyses had read the epistle,being naturally wicked, he was irritated atwhat they told him; and wrote back to themas follows:
"Cambyses the king, to Rathumus thehistoriographer, to Beeltethmus, to Semelliusthe scribe, and the rest that are in commis­sion, and dwelling in Samaria and Phoenicia,after this manner. I have read the epistlethat was sent from you; and I gave orderthat the books of my forefathers should besearched into. And it is there found, thatthis city hath always been an enemy to kings:and its inhabitants have raised seditions andwars. We also are sensible that their kingshave been powerful, and tyrannical, and haveexacted tribute of Coelesyria and Phoenicia.Wherefore I give order, that the Jews shallnot be permitted to build that city; lest suchmischief as they used to bring upon kings, begreatly augmented." When this epistle wasread, Rathumus, and Semellius the scribe,and their associates, got suddenly on horse­back, and made haste to Jerusalem; theyalso brought a great company with them,and forbade the Jews to build the city andthe temple. Accordingly these works werehindered from going on till the second yearof the reign of Darius; for nine more years.For Cambyses reigned seven years;* andwithin that time overthrew Egypt; and whenhe was come back, he died at Damascus.
CHAP. III.
OF THE ELEVATION OF DARIUS TO THE THROVE OF PERSIA;THE SUPERIORITY OF ZOROBABEL IN THE SOLUTION OFFROBLKVS; AND THE PERMISSION WHICH HE ATTAINEDFOR THE REBUILDING OF THE TEMPLE,
FTER the slaughter of the Magi,f who,upon the death of Cambyses, retained


A


* Cambyses reigned, according to the canon of Pto­lemy, including the seven months of the Magi, eightyears. Josephus gives here Cambyses but six years,Rnd the Magi one year; seven in all. I suppose Pto-


the government of the Persians for a year,those families which were called the sevenfamilies of the Persians appointed Darius,the son of Hystaspes, to be their king. Nowhe, while he was a private man, had made avow to God, that if he came to be king, hewould send all the vessels of God that werein Babylon to the temple at Jerusalem. Nowit so fell out, that about this time Zorobabel,who had been made governor of the Jewsthat had been in captivity, came to Darius,from Jerusalem; for there had been an oldfriendship between him and the king. Hewas also, with two others, thought worthy tobe guards of the king's body; and obtainedthat honour which he hoped for.
Now in the first year of the king's reign,Darius feasted those that were about him,and those born in his house, with the rulersof the Medes, and princes of the Persians,and the toparchs of India and Ethiopia, andthe generals of the armies, of his hundredand twenty-seven provinces. But when theyhad eaten and drank abundantly, they everyone departed to their own houses. And Da­rius the king went to bed. But after he hadrested a little part of the night, he awoke,and not being able to sleep any more, he fellinto conversation with the three guards of hisbody; and promised that to him who shouldmake an oration, about points that he shouldinquire of, such as should be most agreeableto truth, and to the dictates of wisdom, hewould grant it as a reward of his victory, toput on a purple garment, to drink in cups ofgold, to sleep upon gold, and to have a cha­riot with bridles of gold, and a head tire offine linen, and a chain of gold about his neck,and to set next to himself, on account of hiswisdom, and to be called his cousin. Nowwhen he had promised to give them thesegifts, he asked the first of them, whetherwine were not the strongest? the second,whether kings were not such? and the third,whether women were not such? or whethertruth were not rather the strongest of all?When he had proposed that they shouldmake their inquiries about these problems,he went to rest. But in the morning he Bent
lemy's canon to be the true number; though the dif­ference between that account and Josephus's, is no morethan a single year.- } An. 622.







OCR Output








AN. 337 855.] ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


the letter, they were afraid; and, consideringtheir utter inability to oppose him who hadalready subdued two great kings, they re­turned for answer, that they owned him fortheir lord, and would do whatsoever he com­manded them. So he wrote back, enjoiningthem to cut off the heads of Ahab's sons, andsend them to him. Accordingly the rulerssent for those that brought up the sons ofAhab, and commanded them to cut off theirheads, and send them to Jehu. This wasaccordingly done, and the heads were put inwicker baskets, and sent to Jezreel. Andwhen Jehu, as he was at supper with hisfriends, was informed that the heads of Ahab'ssons were brought, he ordered them to maketwo heaps of them, one before each of thegates: and in the morning he went out totake a view of them; and when he saw them,he began to say to the people that were pre­sent, that he certainly made an expeditionagainst his master Joram, and slew him; butthat it was not he that slew all these. Andhe desired them to take notice, that as toAhab's family, all things had come to passaccording to God's prophecy; and his housewas perished, according as Elijah had fore­told.* And when he had farther destroyedall the kindred of Ahab that was found inJezreel, he went to Samaria. And as he wasupon the road, he met the relations of Aha-ziah king of Jerusalem, and asked themwhither they were going? They replied,that they came to salute Joram, and theirown king Ahaziah; for they knew not that hehad slain them both. So Jehu gave ordersthat they should be taken and slain, being innumber forty-two persons.
After these, there met him a righteous man,whose name was Jehonadab; and who hadbeen his friend of old. He saluted Jehu,and began to commend him, because he haddone every thing according to the will ofGod, in extirpating the house of Ahab. SoJehu desired him to come up into his chariot,and make his entry with him into Samaria;and told him that he would not spare onewicked man, but would punish the false pro­phets and false priests, and those that de­ceived the multitude, and persuaded them toleave the worship of the Almighty, and to


* 2 Kings x. 10.


worship foreign gods; and that it was a mostexcellent and pleasing sight to a righteousman to see the wicked punished. So Jeho­nadab was persuaded by these arguments,and came into Jehu's chariot, and came toSamaria. And Jehu sought out for all Ahab'skindred, and slew them. And, being de­sirous that none of the false prophets, nor thepriests of Ahab's god might escape punish­ment, he caught them deceitfully by the fol­lowing artifice:—He gathered all the peopletogether, and said, that " he would worshiptwice as many gods as Ahab had worshipped;and desired that his priests and prophets, andservants, might be present; because he wouldoffer costly and great sacrifices to Ahab'sgod; and that if any of his priests werewanting, they should be punished with death.Now Ahab's god was called Baal: and whenhe had appointed a day on which he wouldoffer those sacrifices, he sent messengersthrough all the country of the Israelites, thatthey might bring the priests of Baal to him.So Jehu commanded to give all the priestsvestments; and when they had receivedthem, he went into the house of Baal, withhis friend Jehonadabf and gave orders tomake search whether there were not anyforeigner or stranger among them; for hewould have no one of a different religion tomix among their sacred offices. And whenthey said that there was no stranger there,and they were beginning their sacrifices, heset eighty of his most faithful soldiers withoutthe doors, and bade them slay the false pro­phets, and vindicate the laws of their country,which had been a long time in disesteem.He also threatened that if any escaped, theirown lives should go for them. So they slewthem all with the sword; and destroyed thehouse of Baal,f and by that means purgedSamaria of idolatrous worship. Now thisBaal was the god of the Tyrians; and Ahab,in order to gratify his father-in-law, Ethbaal,who was the king of Tyre and Sidon, built atemple for him in Samaria; and appointedhim prophets, and worshipped him with allsorts of worship. This idol Jehu now de­molished, but he still permitted the Israelitesto worship the golden heifers. However,because he had done thus, and taken care to
T 2 Kings x. 27.







OCR Output








392 [book XI. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


/


willing to forsake what we have, that wemay enjoy her beauty, and procure it toourselves. We also leave father and mo­ther, and the earth that nourishes us, andfrequently forget our dearest friends, for thesake of women. Nay, we are so hardy asto lay down our lives for them. But whatwill chieily make you take notice of thestrength of women is this that follows. Donot we take pains, and endure a great dealof trouble, and that both by land and sea,and when we have procured somewhat asthe fruit of our labours, do not we bringthem to the women, as to our mistresses,and bestow them upon them? Nay, I oncesaw the king, who is lord of so many people,smitten on the face by Apame, the daughterof Rabsaces Themasius, his concubine; andhis diadem taken away from him, and putupon her own head; while he bore it pa­tiently: and when she smiled he smiled, andwhen she was angry he was sad; and ac­cording to the change of her passions, heflattered her, and drew her to reconciliationby the great humiliation of himself, if at anytime he saw her displeased."
And when the princes and rulers lookedone upon another, Zorobabel began to speakabout truth: and he said, "I have already de­monstrated how powerful women are. Butboth these women and the king are weakerthan truth. For although the earth be large,and the heaven high, and the course of thesun swift, yet are all these moved accordingto the will of God, who is true and righteous.For which cause we ought also to esteemtruth to be the strongest of all things, andthat what is unrighteous is of no force againstit. Moreover all things that have any strengthare mortal, and short lived, but truth is a thingthat is immortal, and eternal. It affords us


not indeed such a beauty as will wither awayby time, nor such riches as may be takenaway by fortune; but righteous rules andlaws. It distinguishes them from injustice,and puts what is unrighteous to rebuke."*
So when Zorobabel had left oft' his dis­course about truth, and the multitude hadcried out aloud, that he had spoken the mostwisely, and that it was truth alone that hadimmutable strength, and such as never wouldwax old; the king commanded, that he shouldask for somewhat over and above what hehad promised; for that he would give it him;because of his wisdom, and that prudencewherein he exceeded the rest. "And thouslialt sit with me," said the king, "and shaltbe called my cousin." When he had saidthis, Zorobabel reminded him of the vow hehad made, in case he should ever have thekingdom. Now this vow was, to rebuild Je­rusalem, and to build therein the temple ofGod; as also to restore the vessels whichNebuchadnezzar, had pillaged, and carriedto Babylon. "And this," said he, "is thatrequest which thou now permiltest me tomake, on account that I have been judgedto be wise, and to have understanding."
So the king was pleased with what he said,and arose, and kissed him; and wrote to thetoparchs and governors; and enjoined themto conduct Zorobabel, and those that weregoing with him to build the temple. He alsosent letters to those rulers that were in Syriaand Phoenicia, to cut down and carry cedartrees from Lebanon to Jerusalem; and to as­sist him in building the city. He also wroteto them, that all the captives who should goto Judea should be free: and he prohibitedhis deputies and governors from imposing anyking's taxes upon the Jews. He also per­mitted, that they should have all that land


* The reader is to note, that although the speeches orpapers of these three of the king's guard, are much thesame in our third Book of Esdras, chap. iii. and iv. asthey are in Josephus; yet the introduction of them is en­tirely different. While in our Esdras the whole is relatedas the contrivance of the three of the king's guard them­selves: and even the mighty rewards are spoken of asproposed by themselves, and the speeches arc related tohave been delivered by themselves to the king in writing.While all is contrary in Josephus. I need not say whoseaccount is nost probable. The matters speak for them­selves; and there can be no doubt but Josephus's historyis here to be very much preferred before the other. Norindeed does it seem to me at all unlikely, that the whole
was a contrivance of king Darius's, in order to be de -cently and inoffensively put in mind by Zorobabel, offulfilling his old vow for the rebuilding of Jerusalem, andthe temple, and the restoration of the worship of theOne True God there. Nor does the full meaning of Zo­robabel, when he cries out, 3 Esdras iv. 40. "Blessedbe the God of truth:" and here, "God is true and righ­teous:" or of even all the people, 3 Esdras iv. 41. "Godis truth, and mighty above all things," seem to me muchdifferent from this, there is but One True God, the Godof Israel. To which doctrine, such as Cyrus, Darius,&c. those great patrons of the Jews, seem not to havebeen very averse; though the entire idolatry of theirkingdom made them generally conceal it.







OCR Output








in. 65.] 497 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


And when, after that victory, many went overto Hyrcanus, ass deserters, Aristobulus was leftdesolate, and fled to Jerusalem. Hereuponthe king of Arabia took all his army, andmade an assault on the temple, and besiegedAristobulus therein: the people still support­ing Hyrcanus, and assisting him in the siege;while none but the priests continued withAristobulus. So Aretas united the forces ofthe Arabians, and of the Jews together, andpressed on the siege vigorously. As this hap­pened at the season when the feast of unlea­vened bread was celebrated, which we callthe passover, the principal men among theJews left the country, and fled into Egypt.Now there was one, whose name was Onias;a righteous man, and beloved of God; who,in a certain drought, had prayed to God toput an end to the intense heat; and whoseprayers God had heard, and had sent themrain.* This man had concealed himself, be­cause he saw that this sedition would last agreat while. However they brought him tothe Jewish camp, and desired that as by hisprayers he had once put an end to the drought,so he would in like manner make impreca­tions on Aristobulus, and those of his faction.And when, upon his refusal, and the excusesthat he made, he was still by the multitudecompelled to speak: he stood up in the midstof them, and said, "O God, the king of thewhole world! since those that now stand withme are thy people; and those that are be­sieged are also thy priests; I beseech theethat thou wilt neither hearken to the prayersof those against these; nor bring to effectwhat these pray against those." But as soonas he had made this prayer, the wicked Jewswho stood about him stoned him to death.
But God punished them immediately forthis barbarity, and took vengeance upon themfor the murder of Onias, in the following man­ner. While the priests and Aristobulus werebesieged, it happened that the feast called thepassover was come. At which it is our cus­tom to offer a great number of sacrifices toGod. But those who were with Aristobuluswanted sacrifices, and desired that their coun­trymen without would furnish them with such


sacrifices; and assured them that they shouldhave as much money for them as they shoulddesire; and when they required them to paya thousand drachmae for each head of cattle,Aristobulus and the priests willingly under­took to pay for them accordingly. And thosewithin lowered down the money over thewalls, and gave it them. But when the othershad received it, they did not deliver the sac­rifices; but arrived at that height of wicked­ness, as to break the assurances they hadgiven; and to be guilty of impiety towardsGod, by not furnishing those that wantedthem with sacrifices. And when the priestsfound they had been cheated, and that theagreements they had made were violated,they prayed to God, that he would avengethem on their countrymen. Nor did he de­lay that punishment: but sent a strong andvehement storm of wind that destroyed thefruits of the whole country, till a modius ofwheat was sold for eleven drachmae.
In the mean time Pompey sent Scaurus intoSyria; while he was himself in Armenia, andmaking war with Tigranes. But when Scau­rus was come to Damascus, and found thatLollius and Metellus had newly taken thecity, he came himself hastily into Judea. Andwhen he was come thither, ambassadors cameto him, both from Aristobulus and Hyrcanus;and both desired he would assist them. Andwhen both of them promised to give him mo­ney—Aristobulus "Hour hundred talents, andHyrcanus no less;—he accepted of Aristobu-lus's promise: for he was rich, and had a greatsoul; and desired to obtain nothing but whatwas moderate. Whereas the other was poorand tenacious, and made incredible promisesin hopes of greater advantages. For it wasnot the same thing to take a city that wasexceeding strong and powerful, as it was toeject out of the country some fugitives, witha greater number of Nabateans who were novery warlike people. He therefore made anagreement with Aristobulus, for the reasonsbeforementioned; and took his money, andraised the siege; and ordered Aretas to de­part, or else he should be declared an enemyto the Romans. So Scaurus returned to Da­


* This miraculous grant of rain in the time of dearth,related here by Josephus, on the prayers of this holyirian, Onias, is confirmed in two places by the Jewishyabbins, after their awkward manner: as Reland informs
us in his note on this place. One of which testimoniesis here set down by him at large. To which I refer the,inquisitive reader.
1 Or, three hundred. See Chap. 3.







OCR Output








.50 {book tti ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


mutual confidence amiSrigf inert; putting" ahend to their quarrels, removing passion artelgrief out of the minds of therh that use it,and making them cheerful. "Thou didstsqueeze this wine," said he, "from threeclusters of grapes, with thine hands, and theking received it. Know, therefore, that thisvision is for thy good, and foretels a releasefrom thy present distress within the samenumber of days as the branches whence thougatheredst thy grapes in thy sleep.* f How­ever, remember what prosperity I have fore­told thee, when thou hast found it true; andwhen thou art in authority, do not overlookus in this prison, wherein thou wilt leave Us,when thou art gone to the place we haveforetold: for we are not in prison for anycrime, but for the sake of our virtue andsobriety are we condemned to suffer thepenalty of malefactors, and because we arenot willing to injure him that has thus dis­tressed us, though it were for our own plea­sure." The cup-bearer rejoiced to hear suchan interpretation of his dream, and waitedthe completion of what had been thus shewedhim beforehand.
Another servant of the king's who had beenchief baker, and was now bound in prisonwith the cup-bearer, was in good hope uponJoseph's interpretation of the other's vision,for he had dreamed also; so he desired thatJoseph would tell him what the visions hehad seen the night before might mean? "Ithought," said he, "that I carried three bas­kets upon my head, two were full of loaves,


and the third full of sweet-theats, and othereataBles, such as are prepared for kings*but the fowls came flying, and ate them allup, and had no regard to my attempt to drivethem away." He then expected a predictionlik'e to that of the cup-tfea'rer's: but Joseph,considering the dream, said to him that hewould willingly be an interpreter of goodevents to him, arid riot of such as his dreampronounced; tint he told him that he hadortTy three days to live, as the three basketssignified; but that on the third day he shouldbe crucified, and devoured by fowls, whilehe w£s not able to help himself. Now boththese dreams had the same events that Josephfbretold they should have, and this to bothparties: for on the third day, when the kingsolemnized his birth-day, he crucified thechief baker, but set the butler free from hisbonds, and restored him to his former service,God freed Joseph from his confinementafter he had endured his bonds two years,Jand had received no assistance from the cup­bearer, who did not remember what he hadsaid to him formerly; and God contrived thismethod of deliverance for him. Pharaoh, theking, had seen in his sleep the same eveningtwo visions, and after them had the interpre­tation of them both given him; he haT-^br-gotten the latter, but retained that of #iedreams themselves. Being, therefore, troubl"at what he had seen, for it seemed to him to-be all of a melancholy nature; the next dayhe called together the wisest men among theEgyptians,|| desiring to learn from them the


*.An. 1767.
t The expression which Joseph makes use of concern­ing the king's cup-bearer and baker, Pharaoh shall lift upthy head, seems somewhat too literally translated, since thewords in the original mean no more, than that Pharaohwould have them brought forth and examined. The an­cients, we are to know, in keeping their reckonings, oraccounts, of time, or their list of domestic officers, or ser-Tants, made use of tables with holes bored in them, inwhich they put a sort of pegs, or nails, with broad heads,exhibiting the particulars, either number, or name, orwhatever it was. These nails, or pegs, the Jews callheads, and the sockets of the heads they call bases. Themeaning therefore of Pharaoh's lifting up his head, is, thatPharaoh would take out the peg, which had the cup-bear­er's name on the top of it, to read it; i. e. would sit inJudgment, and make examination into his accounts. Forit seems very probable that both he and the baker had beeneither suspected or accused of having cheated the king;and that, when their accounts were examined and cast up,the one was acquitted, while the other was found guilty.And though Joseph uses the same expression in both cases,
yet we may observe, that speaking to the baker he adds,that Pharaoh shall lift up thy head from off thee, i. e. shallorder thy name to be struck'out of the list of his servants,by taking the peg out of the socket. Bibliotheca Bibl. inlocum. B.
J Gen. xl. 18.
II The Chaldeans of old were the most famous peoplein the world for divinations of all kinds; and therefore itis very probable that the word Hhartaumim, which werender magicians, is not of Hebrew, but Chaldet origin.The roots, however, from whence it springs (if it be acompound word, as probably it is,) are not so visible;and therefore commentators are perplexed to know bywhat method men of this profession proceeded in theirinquiry into secret things; whether they pretended to ex­pound dreams, and descry future events, by natural obser­vations, by the art of astrology, (which came much in re­quest in future ages,) by such rules as are now found inthe books of Oneirocrites or by certain characters, images,pictures, and figures, which were engraved with magicalrites and ceremonies. It is not to be doubted, indeed, butthat the magicians, whom Pharaoh consulted for the inter­


 







OCR Output








410 [book xi. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


honour a man whom thou dost love, give or­der that he may ride on horseback, with thesame garment which thou wearest, and witha gold chain about his neck; and let one ofthy intimate friends go before him, and pro­claim through the whole city, that whosoeverthe king honoureth, obtaineth this mark ofhis honour."* This was the advice whichHaman gave, out of a supposal that such re­ward would come to himself.f Hereuponthe king was pleased with the advice, andsaid, "Go thou, therefore, for thou hast thehorse, the garment, and the chain. Ask forMordecai the Jew, and give him those things;and go before his horse, and proclaim accor­dingly: for thou art my intimate friend, andhast given me good advice. Be thou then*he minister of what thou hast advised: forthis shall be his reward from us, for preserv­ing my life." When he heard this order,which was entirely unexpected, he was con­founded in his mind, and knew not what todo. However he went out, and led the horse4and took the purple garment, and the goldenchain for the neck: and finding Mordecai


* Esther vi. 6—9.
t To form a notion of that height of pride and arro-pnnce, to which Haman, (who thought all the honours hespecifieJ were designed for him) was arrived, we mayobserve, that for any one to put on the royal robe, with­out the privity and consent of the king, was, among thePersians, accounted a capital crime. To which purposePlutarch, in his life of Artaxerxes, has related this story:—" That one day, when in hunting, the king happenedto tear his garment, and Tiribazus was telling him of it,the king asked him, what he should do? Why, put onanother, says Tiribazus, and give that to me. That I will,says the king, but then I enjoin you not to wear it. Tiri­bazus, however, who was a good kind of man enough, buta little weak and silly, adventured to put it on, with all itsfine ornaments; and when some of the nobles began toresent it, as a thing not lawful for any subject to do, Iallow him, says the king, laughing at the figure he made,to wear the fine trinkets as a woman, and the robe as amadman;" Le Clerc's Commentary. There was a custom,not unlike this, among the Hebrews, as appears from thehistory of Solomon, 1 Kings i. 33. for the person that wasdeclared to be successor to the crown, on the day of hisinauguration, to be mounted on the king's horse: and, tothe like custom among the Persians, it is highly probable,that the poet Statius, in his description of a young kingsucceeding to his father's throne, may allude.Sicut Ahaemenius solium gentesque paternasExcepit si forte puer, cui vivere patremTutius, incerta formidine gaudia librat,An fidi proceres, an pugnet vulgus habenis,Cui latus Euphratae, cui Caspia limina mandet,Samere nunc arcus, ipsumque onerare veretur


before the court, clothed in sackcloth, hebade him put that garment off, and put thepurple garment on. But Mordecai, not know­ing the truth of the matter, but thinking thatit was done in mockery, said, "O thouwretch, the vilest of all mankind: dost thouthus laugh at our calamities?" But when hewas satisfied that the king bestowed thishonour upon him, for the deliverance he hadprocured him when he convicted the eunuchs,who had conspired against him, he put onthat purple garment which the king alwayswore; and put the chain about his neck; andgot on horseback, and went round the city:while Haman went before, and proclaimed,"This shall be the reward which the kingwill bestow on every one whom he loves, andesteems worthy of honour." And when theyhad gone round the city, Mordecai went into the king. But Haman went home out ofshame; and informed his wife and friends ofwhat had happened, and this with tears: up­on which they said, he would never be ableto be revenged on Mordecai; for that Godwas with him.||
Patris equum, visusque sibi nee sceptra capaciSustentare manu, nee adhuc implere tiaram.
Thebaid. lib. 8. B.J Commentators arc not agreed whether this crownwas placed upon the king's head, or his horse's. Thosewho refer it to the king, will have it to be what we call aturban, made of fine white and pure linen, which it wasdeath for any one to put on his head, without the king'sexpress order; to which purpose Arrian (Alex, exped.lib. 7.) tells us this story :—" That as Alexander was sail­ing on the Euphrates, and his turban happened to fall offamong some reeds, one of the watermen immediatelyjumped in and swam to it; but as he could not bring itback in his hand without wetting it, he put it upon hishead, and so returned with it. Whereupon most histo­rians that have wrote of Alexander (says he) tells us, thathe gave him a talent of silver for this expression of hiszeal to serve him, but, at the same time, ordered his headto be struck off for presuming to put on the royal diadem."Other commentators are of opinion, that this Keter, whichwe render crown, being a word of a large signification,will equally denote that ornament which the horse thatthe king rode, wore upon his head. As it must be acknow­ledged, that this application of the thing agrees betterwith the signification and order of the Hebrew words;with the following verses, wherein no mention is made olthe Keter, but only of the robe and the horse to whichthis crown belonged; and with the custom of the Persians »who used to put a certain ornament, in Italian calledfiocco, upon the head of that hor?r whereon the king wasmounted. Le Clerc's and Patrick's Commentaries; andPool's Annotations. B.I I Esther vi. 13.


 


 







OCR Output








aN. 1532.] 91 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


and on the back part of it remained the west.It was necessary that its height should beequal to its breadth, ten cubits. There werealso pillars made of wood, twenty on eachside; they were wrought into a quadrangularfigure, in breadth a cubit and a half, but thethickness was four fingers: they had thinplates of gold affixed to them, on both sides,inwardly and outwardly: they had also eachof them, two silver tenons, inserted into theirbases; in each of which was a socket to re­ceive the tenon. But the pillars on the west­ern wall were six. Now all these tenons andsockets accurately fitted one another, inso­much that the joints were invisible; and bothseemed to be one united wall: it was alsocovered with gold, both within and without.The number of pillars was equal on the op­posite sides, and there were on each parttwenty; and every one had the third part ofa span in thickness: so that the number ofthirty cubits were fully made up betweenthem. But as to the wall behind, where thesix pillars made up together only nine cubits,they made two other pillars, and cut them outof one cubit, which they placed in the cor­ners, and made them equally fine with theothers. Now every one of the pillars hadrings of gold affixed to their fronts outward,as if they had taken root in the pillars, andstood one row over against another roundabout; through which were inserted gildedbars, each of them five cubits long, and thesebound together the pillars; the head of onebar running into another, after the nature ofone tenon inserted into another. But for thewall behind, there was but one row of barsthat went through all the pillars: into whichrow ran the ends of the bars on each side ofthe longer walls; and all joined so fast toge­ther, that the tabernacle could not be shaken,either by the winds, or by any other means;but remained firm, quiet, and immoveable.
As for the inside, Moses divided its lengthinto three partitions. At the distance oftencubits from the most sacred end, he placedfour pillars; whose workmanship was thegame with that of the rest, and they stoodupon the like bases with them; each at asmall distance from his fellow. Now the roomwithin those pillars was the most holy place:but the rest of the room was the tabernacle,which was open for the priests. However this
VOL. I.—NO. e.


proportion of the measures of the tabernacleproved to be an imitation of the system of theworld; for that third part which was withinthe four pillars, to which the priests were notadmitted, is, as it were, a heaven, peculiar toGod; but the space of the twenty cubits, is,as it were, sea and land, on which men live:and so this part is peculiar to the priests only.At the front, where the entrance was made,they placed seven pillars of gold, that stoodon bases of brass; and they spread over thetabernacle veils of fine linen, and purple, andblue, and scarlet colours, embroidered. Thefirst veil was ten cubits every way; and thiswas spread over the pillars which parted thetemple, and kept the most holy place con­cealed within: and this veil was that whichmade this part not visible to any. Now thewhole temple was called the Holy Place; butthat part which was within the four pillars,and to which none were admitted, was calledthe Holy of Holies. This veil was very orna­mental, and embroidered with all sorts of fineflowers; and there were interwoven into it avariety of ornaments, excepting only the formsof animals. Another veil, which covered thefive pillars at the entrance, was like the for­mer in its magnitude, texture, and colour;and at the corner of every pillar a ring re­tained it from the top downwards, half thedepth of the pillars; the other half affordingan entrance for the priests, who crept underit. Over this was a veil of linen, of the samesize with the former: it was to be drawn thisway or that way by cords, whose rings fixedto the texture of the veil, and to the cordsalso, were subservient to the drawing and un­drawing of the veil, and to the fastening it atthe corner that it might be no hindrance tothe view of the sanctuary; especially on so­lemn days; but that on other days, and espe­cially when the weather was inclined to snow,it might be expanded, and afford a coveringto the veil of divers colours. Hence thatcustom of ours is derived, of having a finelinen veil after the temple has been built, tobe drawn over the entrances. The ten othercurtains were four cubits in breadth, andtwenty-eight in length, and had golden clasps,which joined the one curtain to the other, soexactly, that they seemed to be one entirecurtain. These were spread over the temple,and covered all the top, and part of the walls,Aa







OCR Output








AK.,1769.] 49 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


husband came home and enquired what wasthe cause of the disorder she was in, she be­gan to accuse Joseph.*
"O husband," said she, "mayest thou notlive a day longer if thou dost not punish thewicked slave who hast desired to defile thybed; who has neither recollected who hewas, when he came to our house, so as to be­have himself with modesty, nor has beenmindful of what favours he had received fromthy bounty; though he must be an ungratefulman indeed, in every respect, not to actagreeable to us. This man I say, laid a privatedesign to abuse thy wife, and this at the timeof a festival, observing when thouwouldst beabsent: so that it now is clear that his mo­desty as it appeared to be formerly, was onlybecause of the restraint he was in out of'' fear of thee, but that he was not really of agood disposition. This has been occasionedby his being advanced to honour beyond whathe deserved, or hoped for; insomuch that heconcluded that he who was deemed fit to betrusted with thy estate, and the governmentof thy family, and was preferred above thyeldest servants, might be allowed to touchthy wife also." When she had spoken thus,she produced Joseph's garment, as if he hadleft it with her when he attempted to forceher. Potiphar not being able to disbelievewhat his wife said, and what he saw himself,and being seduced by his love, did not sethimself about the examination of the truth,"but condemning Joseph as a wicked man, hethrew him into the malefactor's prison; andhad a still higher opinion of his wife, and bareher witness that she was a woman of a be­coming modesty and chastity.
CHAP. V.
of Joseph's situation in prison, and his subsequentliberation.
"^TOW Joseph, commending all his affairsJ3| to God, did not attempt to make anydefence, nor to relate the exact circumstancesof the fact, but silently underwent the bondsand the distress he was in, firmly believing
* There is something not unlike the revengeful artificein Potiphar's wife, in the representation which the poetmakes of Phaedra, when in an affair of the like nature shefinds herself rejected by her son-in-law Hippoly tus.
Regeramus ipsa? crimen, atque ultro impiam.


that God, who knew the cause of his affliction,and the truth of the fact, would be morepowerful than those that inflicted the punish­ment upon him. He accordingly soon re­ceived a proof of God's providence on hisbehalf; for the keeper of the prison takingnotice of his care and fidelity in the affairs hehad set him about, and the dignity of hiscountenance, relaxed his bonds, and therebymade his heavy calamity lighter, and moresupportable to him; he also permitted him tomake use of a diet better than that of the restof the prisoners. Now his fellow prisoners,when their hard labours were over, used todiscourse with each other, being equalsufferers, and to inquire one of another whatwere the occasions of their being condemnedto a prison? Among them Pharaoh's cup­bearer, and one that had been respected byhim, was put in bonds upon the king's angerat him. This man was under the same bondswith Joseph, and soon grew familiar withhim; and upon his observing that Joseph hada better understanding than the rest, he toldhim of a dream he had, and desired he wouldinterpret its meaning, complaining, that be­sides the afflictions he underwent from theking, God also added to him trouble from hisdreams. ,
He therefore said, that in his sleep he sawthree clusters of grapes hanging upon threebranches of a vine, large, and ripe for gather­ing, and that he squeezed them into a cup,which the king held in his hands, and whenhe had strained the wine, he gave it to theking to drink, and that he received it fromhim with a pleasant countenance. This, hesaid, was what he saw; and he desired Jo­seph, that if he had any portion of under­standing in such matters, he would tell himwhat this vision foretold. Joseph bid himbe of good cheer, and expect to be loosedfrom his bonds in three days' time, becausethe king desired his service, and was aboutto restore it to him again; for he let himknow that God bestows the fruit of the vineupon men for good, which wine is poured out
to him, and is the pledge of fidelity and
.—. —■-
Venerem arguamus, &c.
Adeste, Athena, fida tamulorum manus,
Fer opem, &c.
- Ed praeceps abiit


Ensemque trepida liquit attonitus fuga,


Pignus tenemus sceleris, &c


Senec. Hip.







OCR Output








212 [BOOK VI; ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


and manners, and take up boldness, insolence,and a contempt of both divine and humanlaws. And that at a time when they espe­cially stand in need of piety and righteous­ness; because they are then peculiarly ex­posed to envy, and all they think and say arein the view of all men; then it is that theybecome so insolent in their actions, as thoughGod saw them no longer, or were afraid ofthem, because of their power. And whatso­ever it is that they are either afraid of by therumours they hear, or they hate by inclination,or love without reason; these seem to themto be authentic, firm, and true, and pleasingboth to man and to God. But as to whatwould come hereafter, they have not the leastregard to it. They raise those to honour,indeed, who have been at a great deal ofpains for them, and after that honour theyenvy them, and when they have broughtthem unto high dignity, they do not only de­prive them of what they had obtained; but onthat very account of their lives also; andthat on wicked accusations, and such as, onaccount of their extravagant nature, are in­credible. They also punish men, not for suchactions as deserve condemnation, but fromcalumnies and accusations without examina­tion; and this extends not only to such as de­serve to be punished, but to as many as theyare able to kill This reflection is openlyconfirmed from the example of Saul, the sonof Kish; who was the first king who reignedafter our aristocracy, and government underthe judges: and that by his slaughter of threehundred priests and prophets, on occasion ofhis suspicion about Ahimeleoh, and by theadditional wickedness of the overthrow oftheir city; and this as if he were endeavouringin some sort to render the tabernacle desti­tute both of priests and prophets; which en­deavour he shewed by slaying so many ofthem, and not suffering the very city be­longing to them to remain, lest others mightexceed them.
But Abiathar, the son of Ahimelech, whoalone could be saved out of the family ofpriests slain by Saul, fled to David; and in­formed him of the calamity that had befallentheir family; and of the slaughter of his fa­ther. David replied that he was not unap-


prised of what would follow with relation tothem, when he saw Doeg there; for he hadthen a suspicion that the high-priest wouldbe falsely accused by him to the king; andhe blamed himself as having been the causeof this misfortune. But he desired him tostay there, and abide with him,* as in a placewhere he might be better concealed than anywhere else.
chap. xm.
of david's generosity in repeatedly sparing the lifeof saul, when opportunities offered for his de­struction, and of the death of samuel and nabal.
ABOUT this time David heard that thePhilistines had made an inroad into thecountry of Keilah,f and robbed it. So heoffered himself to fight against them, if God,when he should be consulted by the prophet,would grant him the victory. And when theprophet said, that God gave the signal of vic­tory, he made a sudden onset upon the Phi­listines, with his companions; and he shed agreat deal of blood, and carried ofTtheir prey,and staid with the inhabitants of Keilah tillthey had securely gathered in their corn, andtheir fruit. However it was told Saul, thatDavid was with the men of Keilah; for whathad been done, and the great success thathad attended him, were not confined amongthe people where the things were done; butthe fame of it went all abroad, and came tothe hearing of others; and both the fact as itstood, and the author of the fact were carriedto the king's ears. Then was Saul glad whenhe heard that David was in Keilah; and hesaid, " God hath now put him into my hands,since he hath obliged him to come into a citythat hath walls, and gates, and bars." So hecommanded all the people to set upon Keilahsuddenly; and when they had besieged andtaken it, to kill David. But when David per­ceived this, and learned of God that if hestayed there the men of Keilah would deliverhim up to Saul, he took his four hundredmen, and retired into a desert, that was overa city called Engaddi. So when the kingheard he was fled away from the men ofKeilah, he left off his expedition against him.JThen David removed thence, and came to


* 1 Sam. Mii. 23.
t 1 Sam. xxiii. 1. et seq.
l 1 Sam. xxiii. 13. .







OCR Output








100 [BOOK III. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


God was present at their sacrifices: brightrays darting out thence, and being seen evenby those who were most remote; whichsplendour yet was not before natural to thestone. This has appeared a wonderful thingto such as have not so far indulged them­selves in philosophy, as despise divine reve­lation. Yet will I mention what is still morewonderful; for God declared beforehand bythose twelve stones which the high-priestbare on his breast, and which were insertedinto his breast-plate, when they should bevictorious in battle; for so great a splendourshone forth from them before the army beganto march, that all the people were sensibleof God's being present for their assistance.Whence it came to pass, that those Greekswho had a veneration for our laws, becausethey could not possibly contradict this, calledthe breast-plate the Oracle. Now this breast-
Elate and this sardonyx left off shining twoundred years* before I composed this book;God having been displeased at the trans­gression of his laws. Of which things weshall further discourse on a fitter opportunity:but I will now go on with my proposed nar­ration.
The tabernacle being consecrated, and aregular order settled for the priests, the mul­titude judged that God now dwelt amongthem; and betook themselves to sacrifices,fand praises to God, as being now deliveredfrom all expectation of evils; and entertain­ing a hopeful prospect of better times here­after. They offered also gifts to God; some


as common to the whole nation, and othersas peculiar to themselves, and these tribe bytribe. For the heads of the tribes combinedtogether, two by two, and brought a waggon,and a yoke of oxen; these amounted to six,and these carried the tabernacle, when theyjourneyed; besides which, every head of atribe brought a bowl, a charger, and a spoonof ten daricks4 full of incense. Now thecharger and the bowl were of silver, andtogether they weighed two hundred shekels,but the bowl cost no more than seventy she­kels: and these were full of fine flour min­gled with oil, such as they used on the altar,about the sacrifices. They brought also ayoung bullock, and a ram, with a lamb of ayear old, for a whole burnt offering; as alsoa goat, for the forgiveness of sins. Every oneof the heads of the tribes brought also othersacrifices called peace offerings; for everyday two bulls, and five rams, with lambs of ayear old, and kids of the goats. These headsof tribes were twelve days in sacrificing, onesacrificing every day. Now Moses went nolonger up to mount Sinai; but went into thetabernacle, and learned of God what theywere to do, and what laws shonld be made:which laws were preferable to what havebeen devised by human understanding, andproved to be firmly observed, for all time tocome; as being believed to be the gift ofGod: insomuch that the Hebrews did nottransgress any of those laws, either as temptedin times of peace by luxury, or in times ofwar by distress of affairs.


and Titus to the Roman empire, and that in the days ofNero, and before either Galba, Otho, or Vitellus, werethought of to succeed him. Of the War, III. 8, IV. 10,and this confirmed by Suetonius in Vespas. § 5, and Dioin Xiphiline, page 317. This, I think, may be consideredas the very last instance of any thing like the propheticUrim among the Jewish nation, and just preceded the fataldesolation. But how it could possibly come to pass thatsuch great men as Sir John Marsham and Dr. Spencershould imagine that this oracle of Urim and Thummim,with other practices as old, or older than the law of Moses,should have been ordained in imitation of somewhat likethem among the Egyptians, which we never heard of tillthe time of Diodorus Siculus, Elian, and Maimonides, orlittle earlier than the Christian era at the highest, is- almostunaccountable. While the main business of the law ofMoses was evidently to preserve the Israelites from theidolatrous and superstitious practices of the neighbouringpagan nations, and while it is so undeniable that the evi­dence for the great antiquity of Moses's law is incompara­bly beyond that for the like of greater antiquity of such
customs in Egypt or other nations, which, indeed, is gene­rally none at all, it is absurd to derive any of Moses's lawsfrom the imitation of those heathen practices. Such hy­potheses demonstrate to us how far inclination can pre­vail over evidence in even some of the most learned partsof mankind. See Dr. Bernard's very valuable notes uponthis chapter, in opposition to Dr. Spencer, as they standat large in Havercamp's edition.
* About an. 107, two hundred years before A. D. 93,the thirteenth of Domitian, when Josephus published hisAntiquities.
t Of the Jewish sacrifices, the learned reader may consuit the notes in Havercamp's edition, and Dr. Ontram'sexcellent treatise De Sacrificiis. ,
I These old coins called Daricks, are, I think, firstmentioned by Xenophon in his KiJp* XlcuS. page 339, edit.Hutch, a few years after the beginning of Cyaxares II. orDarius the Mede, (of whose Median name Darius thisseems the only original remains in heathen antiquity,) andthose by him mentioned as vastly large, seem to have beena kind of coronation medals of the same king's.







OCR Output








414 [BOOK XI. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


feasted on the fourteenth day, and that whichfollowed it. Whence it is, that even now allthe Jews that are in the habitable earth keepthese days as a festival; and send portionsto one another. Mordecai also wrote to theJews that lived in the kingdom of Artaxerxes,to observe these days, and celebrate them asfestivals: and to deliver them down to pos­terity: that this festival might continue forall time to come; and that it might never beburied in oblivion. For since they were aboutto be destroyed by Haman, they would do aright thing, upon escaping the danger in them,and on their inflicting punishment on theirenemies; to observe those days, and givethanks to God on them. For which causethe Jews still keep the aforementioned days,


and call them days* of Purim. And Mor­decai became a great and illustrious personwith the king, and assisted him in the govern­ment of the people. He also lived with thequeen. So that the affairs of the Jews were,by their means, better than they could everhave hoped for. And this was the state of theJews under the reign of Artaxerxes.f
CHAP. VII.
of John's assassination of his brother jesvs in thetemple, and of the injuries offered to the jewsby bagoses; and what sanballat did.
WHEN Eliashib the high-priest wasdead, his son Judas succeeded inthe high-priesthood. And when he was dead


stars appear, they make use of three forms of prayer:in the first of these, they praise God for counting themworthy to attend this divine service; in the second, theythank him for the miraculous preservation of their an­cestors; and in the third, they bless his holy name, forhaving continued their lives to the celebration of anotherfestival in commemoration of it. Then they read overthe whole history of Haman from the beginning to theend, but not out of any printed book, (for that is notlawful,) but out of a Hebrew manuscript, written onparchment. There are five place* in the text, whereinthe reader raises his voice with all his might: when hecomes to the place that mentions the names of the tensons of Haman, he repeats them very quick, to shew thatthey were all destroyed in a moment; and every timethat the name of Haman is pronounced, the children, withgreat fury, strike against the benches of the synagogues,with the mallets that they bring for that purpose. Afterthat the reading is finished, they return home and have asupper, not of flesh, but of spoon-meat; and early nextmorning they arise, and return to the synagogue: where,after they have read that passage in Exodus, which makesmention of the war of Amalek, they begin again to readthe book of Esther, with the same ceremonies as before;and so conclude the service of the day, with cursesagainst Haman and his wife Zeresh, with blessings uponMordecai and Esther, and with praises to God, for havingpreserved his people. Their resting on this day is ob­served so religiously, that they will not so much as set orsow any thing in their gardens, with full persuasion that itwould not come up if they did; and therefore they ei­ther play at chess, and such like games, or spend thetime in music and dancing, until it be proper to begintheir feasting, wherein they indulge themselves to such animmoderate degree, that their feast of Purim has, withgreat justice, been called the Bacchanals of the Jews.They allow themselves to drink wine to excess, nay,even to such a pitch, as not to be able to distinguish be­tween the blessings of Mordecai and the curse of Haman,as themselves speak; and amidst the other sports anddiversions of the day, they used formerly to erect a gib­bet, and burn upon it a man made of straw, whom theycalled Haman; but herein it was thought, that they mighthave a design to insult Christians, upon the death of our
crucified Saviour; and therefore Theodosius the second(anno Dom. 408) forbade them to use this ceremony,under the penalty of forfeiting all their privileges. Wehave only further to remark concerning this festival, thatit is always kept for two days together, and the reasonhereof is this—The Jews at Shushan had two days al­lowed them to revenge themselves of their enemies,Esther ix. 13. but the rest of the Jews in other nationshad but one. This caused, at first, some difference intheir time of feasting; for the Jews in all other parts ofthe kingdom, having done execution on their enemies onthe thirteenth day, kept their rejoicing feast on the four­teenth; but the Jews at Shushan, being engaged in thiswork both on the thirteenth and fourteenth days, kepttheir festival for their deliverance on the fifteenth. WhenMordecai however had made a record of this great de­liverance, he sent letters to all the Jews throughout thedominions of Ahasuerus, to establish it as a standing ordi­nance among them, that they should keep both the four­teenth and fifteenth of the month Adar every year, as thedays whereon the Jews rested from their enemies: andthis is the reason why the festival continues for two days,though the former of them is only kept with great solemnity.Patrick's Commentary; Hotvcl's History, in the notes; andCalmefs Dictionary, under the word Purim. B.
* Take here part of Reland's Note on this disputedpassage: "In Josephus's copies these Hebrew words,days of Purim, or Lots, as the Greek copies of Estherix. 26, 28, 29, 31, 32. is read days of phurim, or days ofprotection, but ought to be read days of purim, as in theHebrew. Than which emendation nothing is more cer­tain." And had we any assurance that Josephus's copymentioned the casting of lots, as our copies do, Esther iii.7. I should fully agree with Reland; but as it now stands,it seems to me by no means certain.
t As to this whole book of Esther in the present Hebrewcopy, it is so very imperfect, in a case where the providenceof God was so very remarkable, that the Septuagint andJosephus have so much of religion, that it has not so muchas the name of God once in it; and it is hard to say whomade that epitome which the Masorites have given us forthe genuine book itself. No religious Jews could well bethe authors of it: whose education obliged them to havea constant regard to God, and whatsoever related to hit







OCR Output








5U [book XV. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


place so profane, but was to suffer the mostflagitious treatment possible from her covetoushumour. Yet did not all this suffice so ex­travagant a woman, who was a slave to herlusts. But she still imagined that she wantedevery thing she could think of; and did herutmost to gain it. For this reason she hurriedAntony on perpetually to deprive others oftheir dominions, and give them to her. Andas she went over Syria with him, she contrivedto get it into her possession. So he slew *Ly-sanias, the son of Ptolemy, accusing him of hisbringing the Parthians upon those countries.She also petitioned Antony to give her Judeaand Arabia; and in order thereto desired himto take these countries away from their pre­sent governors. As for Antony, he was soentirely overcome by this woman, that onewould not think her conversation only coulddo it, but that he was some way bewitched todo whatsoever she would have him. Yet didthe grossest parts of her injustice make him soashamed, that he would not always hearkento her, to do those flagrant enormities shewould have persuaded him to. That there­fore he might not totally deny her; nor, bydoing every thing that she enjoined him, ap­pear openly to be an ill man; he took someparts of each of those countries away fromtheir former governors, and gave them to her.Thus he gave her the cities that were withinthe river Eleutherus, as far as Egypt; ex­cepting Tyre and Sidon; which he knew tohave been free cities from their ancestors;although she pressed him very often to bestowthese on her also.
When Cleopatra had obtained thus much,and had accompanied Antony in his expedi­tion into Armenia, as far as Euphrates; shereturned back, and came to Apamia, and Da­mascus, and passed on to Judea. ThereHerod met her, and farmed of her some partsof Arabia, and those revenues that came toher from the region about Jericho. Thiscountry bears that balsam, which is the mostprecious drug that is there, and grows therealone. The place also produces many and


excellent palm-trees. When she was there,and was very often with Herod; she endea­voured to have criminal conversation with theking. Nor did she affect secrecy in the in­dulgence of such sort of pleasures. And per­haps she had, in some measure, a passion oflove for him; or rather, what is most proba­ble, she laid a treacherous snare for him, byaiming to obtain such an adulterous conver­sation from him. However, upon the whole,she seemed overcome with love to him. NowHerod had a great while borne no good willto Cleopatra, as knowing that she was awoman irksome to all; and at that time hethought her particularly worthy of his hatred,if this attempt proceeded out of lust: he hadalso thought of preventing her intrigues, byputting her to death, if such were her endea­vours. However, he refused to comply withher proposals; and called a council of hisfriends to consult with them, whether heshould not kill her, now he had her in hispower? For that he should thereby deliverall those from a multitude of evils to whomshe was already become irksome, and wasexpected to be still so for the time to come;and that this very thing would be much forthe advantage of Antony himself: since shewould certainly not be faithful to him, in caseany such necessity should come upon him asthat he should stand in need of her fidelity.But when he thought to follow this advice. hisfriends told him that it was not right to attemptso great a thing, and run himself thereby intothe utmost danger. And they begged of himto undertake nothing rashly: for that Antonywould never bear it, though any one shouldevidently lay before his eyes that it was forhis own advantage. And that the appearanceof depriving him of her conversation by thisviolent and treacherous method, would pro­bably set his affections more on a flame thanbefore. Nor did it appear that he could offerany thing of tolerable weight in his defence;this attempt being against such a woman aswas of the highest dignity of any of her sexat that time in the world. And as to any ad­


* This Lysanias was the son of Ptolemy Menneus, andwas king of Chalcis and Iturea; and probably the sameperson that is mentioned by Strabo, XVI. page 756. Thathe was slain, is confirmed by Dio, XLIX. page 411, asDean Aldrich observes. Who also adds, that the slaughterof Malichus about the same time, which Josephus joins
with this of Lysanias, in his history Of the War, I. 22.is not mentioned either by Dio, or in the Antiquities ofJosephus himself, or any other author. So that it ishighly probable Josephus missed it here voluntarily, ashaving discovered his former mistake about it.







OCR Output








466 [book XIII. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


ther, and to the nation of the Jews, sendethgreeting. We have sent you a copy of thatepistle which we have written to Lasthenes,our kinsman, that you may know its contents.
"King Demetrius to Lasthenes our father,sendeth greeting. I have determined to re­turn thanks, and to shew favour to the nationof the Jews, which hath observed the rulesof justice in our concerns. Accordingly Iremit to them the three prefectures, Aphe-rime, Lydda, and Ramatha, which have beenadded to Judea out of Samaria, with theirappurtenances. As also what the kings mypredecessors received from those that offeredsacrifices in Jerusalem; and what are duefrom the fruits of the earth, and of the trees,and what else belongs to us; with the salt-pits, and the crowns that used to be presentedto us. Nor shall they be compelled to payany of these taxes from this time to all fu­turity. Take care therefore that a copy ofthis epistle be taken, and given to Jonathan;and be set up in an eminent place of theirholy temple."
Now when Demetrius saw that there waspeace every where, and that there was nodanger, nor fear of war, he disbanded thegreatest part of his army, and diminishedtheir pay; and even retained in pay no othersthan such foreigners as came up with himfrom Crete, and from the other islands. How­ever, this procured him ill will and hatredfrom the soldiers; on whom he bestowednothing from this time; while the kings be­fore him used to pay them in times of peace,as they did before; that they might havetheir good will; and that they might be readyto undergo the difficulties of war, if occasionshould require it.
CHAP. V.
OF THE REVOLT OF TRYPHO, WHO, AFTER HE HAD DE­FEATED DEMETRIUS, DELIVERED THE KINGDOM TO ANTI-OCHUS, THE SON OF ALEXANDER, AND GAINED JONATHANFOR HIS ASSISTANT; AND CONCERNING THE ACTIONS ANDEMBASSIES OF JONATHAN.
NOW there was a certain commander ofAlexander's forces, of Apamia by birth:his name was Diodotus, but he was also calledTrypho. This man took notice of the illwill the soldiers bare to Demetrius; and wentto Malchus, the Arabian, who brought up


Antiochus, the son of Alexander; and toldhim what ill will the armies bare Demetrius;and persuaded him to give him Antiochus,because he would make him king, and re­cover to him the kingdom of his father. Mal­chus at first opposed him in this attempt, be­cause he could not believe him: but Tryphoover-persuaded him to comply with his in­tentions and intreaties.
But Jonathan, the high-priest, being de­sirous to get clear of those that were in thecitadel of Jerusalem, and of the Jewish de­serters and wicked men, as well as of thosein all the garrisons in the country, sent pre­sents and ambassadors to Demetrius, andintreated him to take away his soldiers outof the strong holds of Judea. Demetrius madeanswer, that after the war, which he was nowdeeply engaged in, he would not only granthim that, but greater things also. And hedesired he would send him some assistance;and informed him that his army had desertedhim. So Jonathan chose out three thousandof his soldiers, and sent them to Demetrius.
Now the people of Antioch hated Deme­trius; both on account of what mischief hehad himself done them; and because theywere his enemies also on account of his fatherDemetrius, who had greatly abused them.So they watched some opportunity, whichthey might lay hold on, to fall upon him.And when they were informed of the assist­ance that was coming to Demetrius fromJonathan, and considered at the same timethat he would raise a numerous army, unlessthey prevented him, and seized upon him;they took their weapons immediately, andencompassed his palace, in the way of asiege; and seizing upon all the ways of get­ting out, they sought to subdue their king.And when he saw that the people of Antiochwere become his bitter enemies, and thatthey were thus in arms, he took the merce­nary soldiers which he had with him, andthose Jews who were sent by Jonathan, andassaulted the Antiochians. But he was over­powered by their numbers, and was beaten.But when the Jews saw that the Antiochianswere superior, they went up to the top of thepalace, and shot at them from thence. Andbecause they were so remote from them bytheir height, that they suffered nothing ontheir side, but did great execution on the







OCR Output








o48 [book XV. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


is right.-' And when such have been theiractions, how is it possible they can either livesecurely in common life, or be successful inwar? In my opinion this is impossible. Butperhaps some will say, that what is holy, andwhat is righteous, is indeed on our side; butthat the Arabians are either more courageous,or more numerous than we are. Now as tothis in the first place, it is not fit for us to sayso; for with whom is what is righteous, withthem is God himself. Now where God is,there are both multitude and courage. Butto examine our own circumstances a little;we were conquerors in the first battle; andwhen we fought again they were not able tooppose us, but ran away; and could not en­dure our attacks, or our courage. But whenwe had conquered them, then came Athe-nion, and made war against us without de­claring it. And pray is this an instance oftheir manhood? or is it not a second instanceof their wickedness and treachery? Whyare we therefore of less courage, on accountof that which ought to inspire us with strongerhopes? And why are we terrified at those,who, when they fight upon the level, arecontinually beaten; and when they seem tobe conquerors, they gain it by wickedness?And if we suppose that any one should deemthem to be men of real courage, will not hebe excited by that very consideration to dohis utmost against them? For true valour isnot shewn by fighting against weak persons,but in being able to overcome the mosthardy. But then, if the distress we are our­selves under, and the miseries that have comeby the earthquake, have affrighted any one;let him consider, in the first place, that thisvery thing will deceive the Arabians; bytheir supposal that what hath befallen us isgreater than it really is. Moreover, it is notright that the same thing that emboldensthem, should discourage us. For these men,you see, do not derive their alacrity from anyadvantageous virtue of their own; but fromtheir hope, as to us, that we are quite cast


down by our misfortunes. But when weboldly march against them, we shall soon pulldown their insolent conceit of themselves;and shall gain this by attacking them, thatthey will not be so insolent when we come tothe battle. For our distresses are not sogreat, nor is what hath happened an indigna­tion of the anger of God against us; as someimagine. For such things are accidental, andadversities that come in the usual course ofthings. And if we allow that this was doneby the will of God, we must allow that it isnow over by his will also; and that he issatisfied with what hath already happened.For had he been willing to afflict us still morethereby, he had not changed his mind sosoon. And as for the war we are engagedin, he hath himself demonstrated, that he iswilling it should go on; and that he knowsit to be a just war. For while some of thepeople in the country have perished, all youwho were in arms have suffered nothing; butare all preserved alive. Hence God makesit plain to us, that if you had universally,with your wives and children, been in thearmy, it had come to pass that you had notundergone any thing that would have muchhurt you. Consider these things; and, whatis more than all the rest, that you have Godat all times for your protector; and prosecutethese men with a just bravery, who in pointof friendship are unjust; in their battles per­fidious; towards ambassadors impious; andalways inferior to you in valour." i
When the Jews heard this speech, theirminds were animated, and more disposed tofight than before. So Herod, when he had*offered the sacrifices appointed by the law,made haste, and took them, and led themagainst the Arabians: and in order to thatpassed over Jordan; and pitched his campnear to that of the enemy. He also thoughtfit to seize upon a certain castle, that lay inthe midst of them; as hoping it would be forhis advantage, and would the sooner producea battle; and, that if there were occasion for


* This piece of religion, the supplicating God with sa­crifices, by Herod, before he went to this fight with theArabians; taken notice of also in the first book of the war,chap. 19. is worth remarking: because it is the only ex­ample of this nature, so far as I remember, that Josephusever mentions in all his particular accounts of this Herod.And it was when he had been in great distress, and dis­couraged by a defeat of his former army, and by a very
great earthquake in Judea. Such times of affliction ma­king men most religious. Nor was he disappointed of hishopes here; but immediately gained a most signal victoryover the Arabians. While they who just before had beenso great victors, and so much elevated upon the earth­quake in Judea, as to venture to slay the Jewish ambassa­dors; were now under a strange consternation, and hardlyable to fight at all.







OCR Output








520 [book XIV. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


there:) but in reality to the commanders ofthe army, whom he persuaded to go outagainst Malichus with their daggers. So theywent out, and met him near the city, upon thesea shore, and stabbed him. Hyrcanus wasso astonished that his speech failed him: andwhen, after some difficulty, he had recoveredhimself, he asked Herod, what the mattercould be? and who it was that slew Mali­chus? And when he said, that it was doneby the command of Cassius, he commendedthe action: for that Malichus was a verywicked man, and one that conspired againsthis own country. And this was the punish­ment that was inflicted on Malichus, for whathe wickedly did to Antipater.
But when Cassius was marched out of Sy­ria, disturbances arose in Judea: for Felix,who was left at Jerusalem with an army,made a sudden attempt against Phasaelus;and the people themselves rose in arms. ButHerod went to Fabius, the prefect of Damas­cus, and was desirous to run to his brother'sassistance; but was hindered by a distemperthat seized upon him; till Phasaelus by him­self had been too hard for Felix, and hadshut him up in the tower; and there on cer­tain conditions dismissed him. Phasaelusalso complained of Hyrcanus; that althoughhe had received many benefits from them, yetdid he support their enemies. For Malichus'sbrother had caused many places to revolt, andkept garrisons in them: and particularly Mas-sada, the strongest fortress of them all. Inthe mean time Herod recovered of his disease,and came, and took from Felix all the placeshe had gotten; and, upon certain conditions,dismissed him also.
CHAP. XII.
HEROD EJECTS ANTIGONUS, THE SON OF ARISTOBULUS, OUTOF JUDEX; AND GAINS THE FRIENDSHIP OF ANTONY, BYSENDING HIM MUCH MONEY. ANTONY WRITES TO THETYRIANS ON BEHALF OF THE JEWS.
OW *Ptolemy, the son of Menneus,brought back into Judea Antigonus,


N


the son of Aristobulus; who had alreadyraised an army, and had, by money, madeFabius his friend; and this because he wasof kin to him. Marion also gave him assist­ance. He had been left by Cassius to tyran­nize over Tyre; for this Cassius was a manthat seized on Syria, and then kept it under,in the way of a tyrant. Marion also marchedinto Galilee, which lay in his neighbourhood,and took three of its fortresses, and put gar­risons into them, to keep them. But whenHerod came, he took all from him. But theTyrian garrison he dismissed in a very civilmanner; nay, to some of the soldiers he madepresents, out of his good will to that city.When he had despatched these affairs, andwas gone to meet Antigonus, he joined battlewith nim, and defeated him; and drove himout of Judea, when he was just come to itsborders. But when he was come to Jerusa­lem, Hyrcanus and the people put garlandsabout his head. For he had already con­tracted an affinity with the family of Hyrca­nus, by having espoused a descendant of his;and for that reason Herod took the greatercare of him: as being to marry the daughterof Alexander, the son of Aristobulus, and thegrand-daughter of Hyrcanus: by which wifehe became the father of three male, and twofemale children. He had also married beforethis another wife, out of a lower family of hisown nation; whose name was Doris: bywhom he had his eldest son Antipater.
Now Antonius and Cresar had beaten Cas­sius near Philippi; as others have related.But after the victory Caesar went into tGaul;and Antony marched for Asia. When hewas arrived at Bithynia, he had ambassadorsthat met him from all parts. The principalmen also of the Jews came thither, to accusePhasaelus and Herod: and they said, thatHyrcanus had indeed the appearance oireigning, but that these men had all thepower. But Antony paid great respect toHerod, who was come to him to make hisdefence against his accusers. On which ac­


* In this and the following chapters, the reader willeasily remark, how truly Gronovius observes, in his noteson the Roman decrees in favour of the Jews, that theirrights and privileges were commonly purchased of theRomans with money. Many examples of this sort, bothas to the Romans, and others in authority, will occur inour Josephus, both now and hereafter; and need not be
taken particular notice of on the several occasions inthese notes. Accordingly the chief captain confesses toSt. Paul, that "with a great sum he had obtained his free­dom," Acts Kii. 28. As had St. Paul's ancestors, veryprobably, purchased the like freedom, for their family, bymoney; as the same author justly conclude* also.
t For TaXXiaf, or Gaul, the Roman historians, and Jo-







OCR Output








568 [book XV. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


Now there was one of these Essenes, whosename was Manahem; who had this testimony,that he not only conducted his life after anexcellent manner, but had the foreknow­ledge of future events given by God. Thisman once saw Herod, when he was a child,and going to school; and saluted him as kingof the Jews. But he thinking that either hedid not know him, or that he was in jest, re­minded him that he was but a private person.But Manahem smiled to himself, and clappedhim on the back with his hand; and said,"However that be, thou wilt be king, andwilt begin thy reign happily; for God findsthee worthy of it, and do thou remember theblows that Manahem hath given thee; as be­ing a signal of the change of thy fortune.And truly this will be the best reasoning forthee; that thou love justice towards men,and piety towards God, and clemency to­wards thy citizens. Yet do 1 know how thywhole conduct will be; that thou wilt not besuch an one. For thou wilt excel all men inhappiness, and obtain an everlasting reputa­tion; but wilt forget piety and righteousness.And those crimes will not be concealed fromGod, at the conclusion of thy life; when thouwilt find that he will be mindful of them, andpunish thee for them." At that time Heroddid not attend to what Manahem said: ashaving no hopes of such advancement. Buta little afterward, when he was so fortunateas to be advanced to the dignity of king, and-was in the height of his dominion, he sent forManahem, and asked him, how long he should


reign


? But Manahem did not tell him the full


length of his reign. Wherefore, upon thatsilence of his, he asked him farther, whetherhe should reign ten years or not? he replied,"Yes, twenty, nay, thirty years;"but did notassign the just limit of his reign. Herod wassatisfied with these replies: and gave Mana­hem his hand, and dismissed him: and fromthat time he continued to honour all the Es­senes. We have thought it proper to relate
* Of this temple of Herod, see my description of theJewish temples, in the scheme relating to this work,chap. 15. Only we may here farther observe, that thefancy of the modern Jews, in calling this, which wasreally the third of their temples, the second temple, fol­lowed so long by later Christians seems to be without anysolid foundation. The reason why the Christians herefollow the Jews is because of the prophecy of Haggai,ii. 6—9, which they expound of the Messiah's coming to


these facts to our readers, how strange soeverthey be; and to declare what hath happenedamong us; because many of these Esseneshave, by their excellent virtue, been thoughtworthy of this knowledge of divine revelation.
CHAP. XI.
OF THE REBUILDING AND BEAUTIFYING OF THE TEMPLE;AND OF THE TOWER OF ANTONIA.
IN the eighteenth year of his reign, andafter the acts already mentioned, Herodundertook to rebuild of himself the *templeof God, and make it larger in compass, andto raise it to a most magnificent altitude; asesteeming it to be the most glorious of all hisactions as it really was, to bring it to perfec­tion; and that this would be sufficient for aneverlasting memorial of him. But as he knewthe multitude were not ready nor willing toassist in so vast a design; he thought it ad­visable to prepare them first by making aspeech to them; and then to set about thework itself. So he called them together, andspake thus:
"I think I need not remind you my coun­trymen, of such other works as I have done,since I came to the kingdom: although I maysay they have been performed in such a man­ner as to bring more security to you thanglory for myself. For I have neither beennegligent in the most difficult times aboutwhat tended to ease your necessities: norhave the buildings I have made been so pro­per to preserve me, as yourselves, from inju­ries. And I imagine that, with God's assist­ance, I have advanced the nation of the Jewsto a degree of happiness which they neverhad before. And for the particular edificesbelonging to your own country and your owncities; as also to those cities that we havelately acquired, which we have erected, andgreatly adorned, and thereby augmented thedignity of your nation; it seems to me aneedless task to enumerate them; since you


the second or Zorobabel's temple; of which they supposethis of Herod's to be only a continuation, which is meant,I think, of his coming to the fourth and last temple, or tothat future largest and most glorious one described by Eze-kiel. Whence I take the former notion, how generalsoever, to be a great mistake. See the Testament ofBenjamin, § in the Authent. Rec. page 406, and Lit. Ac-compl. of Proph. page 24, 25.


i







OCR Output








an. 1492.J 137 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


prevent any person from rolling down andperishing.
Let him that has received any thing in trustfor another, take care to keep it sacred; andlet no one invent any contrivance, whereby todeprive him that hath intrusted it with himof the same; and this whether it be a man ora woman; no, not although he or she were togain an immense sum of gold; and this wherehe cannot be convicted of it by any body; forit is fit that a man's own conscience, whichknows what he hath, should in all cases obligehim to do well. Let his conscience be hiswitness, and make him always act so as may
Etrocure him commendations from others; andet him chiefly have regard to God, fromwhom no wicked man can lie concealed. Butif he in whom the trust was reposed, withoutany deceit of his own, lose what he was in­trusted withal; let him come before the sevenjudges, and swear by God, that nothing hathbeen lost willingly, or with a wicked inten­tion; and that he hath not made use of anypart thereof. And so let him depart withoutblame.* But if he hath made use of the least
f>art of what was committed to him, and it beost, let him be condemned to repay all thathe had received, after the same manner, asin these trusts, it is to be, if any one defraudthose that undergo bodily labour for him.And let it be always remembered, that we arenot to defraud a poor man of his wages; as be­ing sensible that God has allotted that wagesto him instead of land and other possessions.Nay, this payment is not at all to be delayed,but to be made that very day;f since God isnot willing to deprive the labourer of the im­mediate use of what he hath laboured for.
You are not to punish children for <he faultsof their parents ;J but on account of their ownvirtue rather to vouchsafe them commisera­tion, because they were born of wicked pa­rents; than hatred, because they were bornof bad ones. Nor indeed ought we to imputethe sin of children to their fathers; whileyoung persons indulge themselves in manypractices different from those they have beeninstructed in, and this by their refusal of suchinstruction.


* Exod. xxii. 7, 11.
-f £,evit. xix. 13. Deut. xxiv. 14, 16.
i I>e«t. xxiv. 16.


Let those that have made themselves eu-nuchs|| be had in detestation; and do youavoid any conversation with them who havedeprived themselves of their manhood, andof that which God had given to men, for theincrease of their kind. Let such be drivenaway, as if they had killed their children;since they beforehand have lost what shouldprocure them. For it is evident, that whiletheir soul is become effeminate, they havewithal transfused that effeminacy to theirbody also. In like manner do you treat allthat is of a monstrous nature, when it islooked on. Nor is it lawful to castrate eithermen, or any other animals.§
Let this be the constitution of your politicallaws, in times of peace; and God will be somerciful as to preserve this excellent settle­ment free from disturbance. And may thattime never come, which may innovate anything, and change it for the contrary; butsince it must needs happen that mankind fallinto troubles and dangers, either undesign­edly, or intentionally, let us make a few con­stitutions concerning them; that so being ap­prised beforehand what ought to be done,you may have salutary counsels ready whenyou want them; and may not then be obligedto seek what is to be done, and so be unpro­vided, and fall into dangerous circumstances.May you be a laborious people, and exerciseyour souls in virtuous actions, and therebypossess and inherit the land without wars;while neither any foreigners make war uponit, and SO afflict you, nor any internal seditionseize upon it; whereby you may do thingsthat are contrary to your fathers, and so losethe laws which they have established. Andmay you continue in the observance of thoselaws which God hath approved, and hath de­livered to you. Let all sort of warlike opera­tions, whether they befall you now, in yourown time, or hereafter in the times of yourposterity, be done out of your own borders.But when you are about to go to war, sendambassages and heralds to those who are yourvoluntary enemies; for it is a right thing tomake use of words to them, before you cometo your weapons of war; and assure them
II Deut. xxiii. 1.• § We may hence observe, that the Jews could have nooxen, but only bulls and cows, in Judea.







OCR Output








158 [book v. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS,


they suffered themselves to be overcome bytheir pleasure, and so offend against theirlaws; they despised his righteous admonition,and laughed him to scorn; they also threat­ened to kill him, if he became an obstacle totheir inclinations. Whereupon, when hefound himself in great distress, and yet wasnot willing to overlook his guests, and seethem abused, he produced his own daughterto them; and told them, that it was* a smallerbreach of the law to satisfy their lust uponher, than to abuse his guests; supposing thathe should by this means prevent an injuryfrom being done to those guests. When theyno way abated of their earnestness for thestrange woman, but insisted absolutely ontheir desires to have her, he intreated themnot to perpetrate any such act of injustice:but they proceeded to take her away byforce; and indulging still more the violenceof their inclinations, they took the woman


away to their house, and when they hadabused her the whole night, they let her goabout day-break. So she came to the placewhere she had been entertained, under greataffliction at what had happened, and durstnot look her husband in the face for shame;for she concluded that he would never for­give her, for what she had done. So she felldown, and gave up the ghost; but her hus­band supposed his wife was only fast asleep;and thinking nothing of a more melancholynature had happened, endeavoured to raiseher up, resolving to speak comfortably to her,since she did not voluntarily expose herselfto those men's lust, but was forced away totheir house. But as soon as he perceivedthat she was dead, he acted as prudently asthe greatness of the misfortune would admit;and laid his dead wife upon the beast, andcarried her home. Then cuttingt her limb by
limb into twelve pieces, he sent them to every
. . __


* See Gen. xix. 8.
t Interpreters say but little concerning the real viewsof the Levite in this transaction; they merely intimate,that it was done to excite a general indignation against theauthors of the injury he had sustained. His motives cer­tainly were good and regular. He intended to unite thewhole nation in vengeance against a crime, in which it wasinterested; but as they might be checked in the extent ofthe punishment by the number, the credit, and the power,of the offenders; by the natural commiseration which isfelt for those who are of the same blood; or by an aver­sion to involve a city in destruction; he sought and seizeda method which put them to the indispensable necessity ofespousing his cause. The only part which he had to takew\s, to cut in pieces the body of his wife, which he did, orelse that of an ox, or other like animal, which had beeneither devoted or offered in sacrifice, and to send a part ofit to each tribe. In consequence of this, every tribe en­tered into an indissoluble engagement to see justice donehim for the injury he had received. This is what the in­terpreters of scripture seem not to have known, and whichit is necessary to explain.
The ancients had several ways of uniting themselvestogether by strict ties, which lasted for a stipulated time,amongst these may be noticed the sacrifice of Abraham,the circumstances of which are mentioned, Gen. xvi. 9.kc. Another method was to take a bullock offered or de­voted in sacrifice, cut it into pieces, and distribute it. Allwho had a piece of this devoted bullock were thencefor­ward connected, and were to concur in carrying on theaffair which had given occasion for the sacrifice. But asthis devoting and dividing was variously practised, it alsoproduced different engagements. If he who was at theexpense of the sacrifice were a public person, or in highoffice, he sent of his own accord a piece of the victim toall who were subject to him; and by this act obliged themto enter into his views. If the sacrifice were offered bya private person, those only who voluntarily took a pieceof the sacrifice entered into a strict engagement to espouse
his interest. Connections of this kind derived their force,from the deities, in honour of which the sacrifice wasoffered; from the true God, when made by the Jews;from idols, when made by the Gentiles. The Jews werecontent to invoke and take the Lord to witness, whereasthe Pagans never failed to place upon an altar of greenturf, the deities which presided over their covenant.These deities were called common, because they werethe common deities of all who were thus united, and re­ceived in common the honours which they thought properto pay them.
A direct proof of these facts is recorded in 1 Sam. xi. 7."And Saul took a yoke of oxen, and hewed them in pieces,and sent them throughout all the coasts of Israel by thehands of messengers, saying, Whosoever cometh not forthafter Saul and after Samuel, so shall it be done unto hisoxen. And the fear of the Lord fell on the people, andthey came out with one consent." Another proof is drawnfrom the customs observed by the Scythians and Molos-sians. Lucian thus speaks of what passed between thesepeople upon urgent occasions. "When any one had re­ceived an injury, and had not the means of avenging him­self, he sacrificed an ox, and cut it into pieces, which hecaused to be dressed and publicly exposed; then he spreadout the skin of the victim, and sat upon it, with his handstied behind him. All who chose to take part in the injurywhich had been done, took up a piece of the ox, and sworeto supply and maintain for him, one five horses, anotherten, others still more; some infantry, each according tohis strength and ability. They who had only their person,engaged to march themselves. Now an army composedof such soldiers, far from retreating or disbanding, was in­vincible, as it was engaged by oath."
These circumstances, compared with the account givenof the Levite's conduct, and the subsequent behaviour ofthe tribes, clearly point out, that the method used by theLevite to obtain redress was consistent with the establishedusages of the times, and effected the retribution he desiredto see accomplished. B.







OCR Output








as. 70.] 495 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


BOOK XIV.


Containing an Interval of Thirty-two Years.


FROM THE DEATH OF QUEEN ALEXANDRA, TO THE DEATH OF ANTIGONUS.


CHAP. I.
OF THE WAR BETWEEN ARISTOBULUS AND HYRCANU9; THEIRAGREEMENT RELATIVE TO THE KINGDOM; AND THE SUB­SEQUENT FLIGHT OF HYRCANUS.
WE have related the affairs of queenAlexandra, and her death, in theforegoing book; and will now speak of whatfollowed, and was connected with those his­tories: declaring before we proceed, thatwe have nothing so much at heart, as to*omit no facts either through ignorance orindolence. For we are treating upon thehis.tory and explication of such things, as thegreatest part of our readers are unacquaint­ed with, because of their distance from ourtimes; and we aim to do it with a beauty ofstyle so far as that is derived from properwords harmonically disposed; and from suchornaments of speech as may contribute tothe pleasure of our readers: that they mayentertain the knowledge of what we writewith some degree of satisfaction and plea­sure. But the principal end that authorsought to aim at above all the rest, is tospeak accurately, and to speak truly; forthe satisfaction of those that are otherwiseunacquainted with such transactions, andare obliged to believe what these writersinform them of.


Hyrcanus then began his high-priesthoodon the fthird year of the hundred and seventyseventh Olympiad; when Quintus Horten-sius and Quintus Metellus, who was calledMetellus of Crete, were consuls at Rome:when presently Aristobulus began to makewar against him. And as it came to a battlewith Hyrcanus at Jericho, many of his sol~diers deserted him, and went over to his bro­ther. Upon this Hyrcanus fled into the cita­del: where Aristobulus's wife and childrenwere imprisoned by their mother, as we haveJsaid already; and attacked and overcamethose adversaries that fled thither, and laywithin the walls of the temple. So when hehad sent a message to his brother about com­promising the matters between them, he laidaside his enmity to him on these conditions:that Aristobulus should be king; and that heshould live without intermeddling with publicaffairs, and quietly enjoy the estate he hadacquired. When they agreed upon theseterms in the temple, and had confirmed theagreement with oaths, and the giving oneanother their ||right hands, and embracingone another, in the sight of the whole mul­titude, they departed: Aristobulus, to thepalace; and Hyrcanus, as a private man, tothe former house of Aristobulus.
But there was a certain friend of Hyrca­


* Reland observes here, very justly, how Josephus'sdeclaration, that it was his great concern not only towrite an agreeable, accurate, and a true history, but alsodistinctly not to omit any thing of consequence, eitherthrough ignorance, or indolence; implies, that he couldnot, consistently with that resolution, omit the mention ofno famous a person as Jesus Christ.
t Langius well observes, that this beginning of Hyr-
canus's reign is rightly stated by Josephus: and implies,that he began before the middle of the 69th year be­fore the Christian Era. De Annis Christi II. 18, page336.
J See Book XIII. chap. 16.
II This is, I think, the first mention of confirming agreements by giving each other the right hand, in Josephus;which, however, frequently occurs afterward.







OCR Output








THE


AUTHOR'S PREFACE.


THOSE* who undertake to write histories, do not, I perceive, take that trouble on oneand the same account; but for many and various reasons. For some apply themselvesto this part of learning to shew their great skill in composition; and that they may thereinacquire a reputation. Others write histories in order to gratify those who happen to beconcerned in them; and on that account spare no pains, but rather exceed their own abilities,in the performance. But there are others who of necessity are driven to write history, be­cause they were concerned in the facts, and so cannot excuse themselves from committingthem to writing, for the advantage of posterity. Nay, there are not a few who are inducedto draw their historical facts out of darkness into light, and to produce them for the benefitof the public, on account of the great importance of the facts themselves, with which theyhad been concerned. Now of these several reasons for writing history, I must profess the twolast were my own. For since I was myself interested in that war which we Jews had withthe Romans, and knew myself its particular actions and conclusion, I was forced to give thehistory of it, because I saw that others perverted the truth of those actions in their writings.
Now I have undertaken the present work, as thinking it will appear to all the Greeksfworthy of their study: for it will contain all our antiquities, and the constitution of ourgovernment, as interpreted out of the Hebrew J scriptures. And indeed, I did formerlyintend when I§ wrote of the war, to explain who the Jews originally were; what fortunes theyhad been subject to; and by what legislator they had been instructed in piety and the exer­cise of other virtue; what wars they also had made in remote ages, till they were unwillinglyengaged in this last with the Romans. But because this work would take up a great compass,


* This preface of Josephus's is excellent in its kind, and highly worthy the repeated perusal of the reader, beforehe set about the perusal of the work itself.
t That is all the Gentiles, both Greeks, and Romans.
X Josephus never followed the Septuagint, nor any other Greek version, in these his Antiquities, or other works,but only the Hebrew original; and this so punctually through all his known writings, as to make use of none of thesacred books but those that were written in Hebrew, and belonging to the Jerusalem catalogue.
§ Josephus wrote his seven books of the Jewish War, long before he wrote his Antiquities. Those books of theWar were published about A. D. 75, and these Antiquities A. D. 93, about eighteen years later. See Fabriciui apudHavercamp, page 58, 59.
voL. I.—No. I. C







OCR Output








iw. 968.] 303 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


Ethiopians* learned the rite of circumcisionfrom the Egyptians, with this addition; thatthe Phoenicians and Syrians that live inPalestine confess that they learned it of theEgyptians." Yet is it evident that no otherof the Syrians that live in Palestine besidesus alone are circumcised. But as to suchmatters let every one speak what is agree­able to his own opinion.
When Shishak was gone away, king Re-hoboam made bucklers and shields of brass,tinstead of those of gold;J and delivered thesame number of them to the keepers of theking's palace. So instead of famous warlikeexpeditions, and that glory which resultsfrom those public actions, he reigned ingreat quietness, though not without fear; asbeing always an enemy to Jeroboam. Andhe died when he had lived fifty-seven years,and reigned seventeen.|| He was in his dis­position a proud, and a foolish man: and lostpart of his dominions by not hearkening tohis father's friends. He was buried at Jeru-


salem, in the sepulchres of the kings. Andhis son Abijah§ succeeded him in the king­dom; and this in the eighteenth year of Je­roboam's reign over the ten tribes. It mustbe now our business to relate the affairs ofJeroboam, and how he ended his life. Forhe ceased not, nor rested to be injurious toGod; but every day raised up altars uponhigh mountains, and went on making priestsout of the multitude.
CHAP. XI.
OF THE DEATH OF JEROBOAM'S SON; JEROBOAM'S DEFEATBY ABIJAH; HIS SUBSEQUENT DEATH AND DESTRUCTIONOF HIS HOUSE BY BAASHA.
GOD was in no long time ready to returnJeroboam's wicked actions, and thepunishment they deserved, upon his head,and upon the heads of all his house. Andwhereas a son of the king's lay sick at thattime, who was called Abijah;** he enjoinedhis wife to lay aside her robes, and to take


* Herodotus, as here quoted by Josephus, and as thispassage still stands in his present copies, Book II. chap.104, affirms, that "the Phoenicians and Syrians in Pales­tine, (which last are generally supposed to denote theJews,) owned their receiving circumcision from the Egyp­tians." Whereas it is abundantly evident, that the Jewsreceived their circumcision from the patriarch Abraham,Gen. xvii. 9—14. Josh. vii. 22, 23. as I conclude theEgyptian priests themselves did. It is not thereforerery unlikely that Herodotus, because the Jews hadlived long in Egypt, and came out of it circumcised, didthereupon think they had learned that circumcision inEgypt, and had it not before. Manetho, the famousEgyptian chronologer and historian, who knew the his­tory of his own country much better than Herodotus,complains frequently of his mistakes about their affairs;as does Josephus more than once in this chapter. Norindeed does Herodotus seem at all acquainted with theaffairs of the Jews. For as he never names them; solittle or nothing of what he says about them, their country,or maritime cities, two of which he alone mentions, Ca-dytis and Jenysis, proves true. Nor indeed do thereappear to have ever been any such cities on their coast.See Essay on the Old Testament, Appendix, page 180.Reland's Palestine, tom. II. lib. iii. page 668, 669, 670,and the note on XI. 2.
t This shews, to what low condition the kingdom ofJudnh was reduced. These shields were a matter of stateand grandeur; and therefore it concerned them, if theywere able, to have them of the same value that they werebefore. And, as they were carried before the king to thehouse of the Lord, it seemed likewise to be a matter ofrelisjion, that their value should not be diminished. Now,in making these three hundred shields we are told, thatthree pounds of gold went to one shield, I Kings x. 17.Thus at four pounds per ounce, or forty-eight pounds
sterling to the pound, amounts to no more than 432,0O0Zand therefore it was a miserable case, that they werereduced from so much wealth to so much poverty, thatneither reason of state, nor religion, could raise so small asum on so great an occasion Bedford's Scripture Chro­nology, lib. vi. c. 2. B.
| 1 Kings xiv. 27.
II From an. 976 to 959 B. C
§ An. 959.
** Jeroboam might be for having his wife go to consultthe prophet at Shiloh, because this was a secret not to beentrusted with any body else ; a secret which if it had beendivulged, might have endangered his whole government:because, if once his subjects came to understand, that hehimself had no confidence in the calves which he had setup, but in any matter of importance had recourse to thetrue worshippers of God, it is not to be imagined, what aninducement this would have been for them to forsakethese senseless idols, and to return to the worship of theGod of Israel, whom they imprudently had forsaken.The queen was then the only person he could have con­fidence in. As a mother, he knew, that she would hediligent in her inquiry: and as a wife, faithful in her re­port; but there were sundry reasons why ne might de­sire her to disguise herself. For though Shiloh lay withinthe confines of Ephraim, yet there is sufficient ground tothink, that it was subject to the house of David, and be­longed to the kingdom of Judah. It was certainly nearerJerusalem than Shechem, which Rehoboam had latelyfortified, and made his place of residence: and thereforeJeroboam thought it not safe to venture his queen, in aplace that was under his rival's government, without herputtins; on some disguise. He knew too, tb:tt the prophetAhijah was greatly offended at him, for the gross idolatryhe had introduced: and therefore he thought (as justlyhe might) that, if the prophet perceived it to be his wife,







OCR Output








510 [book XIY ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


only the name of a king which is given thee?But do not thou suffer these things to behidden from thee: nor do not thou think to es­cape danger by being so careless of thyselfand of thy kingdom. For Antipater and hissons are not now stewards of thine affairs: donot thou deceive thyself with such a notion:they are evidently absolute lords. For Herod,Antipater's son, hath slain Hezekias, and thosethat were with him; and hath thereby trans­gressed our law; which hath forbidden toslay any man, even though he were a wickedman, unless he had been first* condemned tosuffer death by the Sanhedrim. Yet hath hebeen so insolent, as to do this, without anyauthority from thee."
Upon Hyrcanus's hearing this, he compliedwith them. The mothers also of those thathad been slain by Herod excited his indigna­tion. For these women continued every dayin the temple, persuading the king and thepeople, that Herod might undergo a trial be­fore the Sanhedrim, for what he had done.Hyrcanus was at length so moved by thesecomplaints, that he summoned Herod to takehis trial, for what was charged upon him. Andaccordingly he came. But his father hadpersuaded him to come, not like a privateman, but with a guard for the security of hisperson; and that when he had settled the af­fairs of Galilee in the best manner he couldfor his own advantage, he should come to histrial; but still with a body of men sufficientfor his security on his journey. Yet so thathe should not come with so great a force, asmight look like terrifying Hyrcanus; but stillsuch a one as might not expose him nakedand unguarded, to his enemies. HoweverSextus Caesar, president of Syria, wrote toHyrcanus; desiring him to clear Herod, anddismiss him at his trial; and threatening himbeforehand if he did not do it. Which epis­tle of his was the occasion of Hyrcanus's de­livering Herod from suffering any harm fromthe Sanhedrim: for he loved him as his ownson. But when Herod stood before the San-


hedrim, with his body of men about him, heaffrighted them all: and no one of his formeraccusers durst after that bring any chargeagainst him. But there was a deep silence;and nobody knew what was to be done.When affairs stood thus, one whose namewas tSameas, (a righteous man, and for thatreason, above all fear,) rose up and said:—
"O ye that are assessors with me, and 0thou that art our king, I neither have evermyself known such a case; nor do I supposethat any one of you can name its parallel; thatone who is called to take his trial by us, everstood in such a manner before us. But everyone, whosoever he be, that comes to be triedby this Sanhedrim, presents himself in a sub­missive manner, and like one that is in fearof himself; and that endeavours to move us tocompassion, with his hair dishevelled, and ina black and mourning garment. But thisadmirable man, Herod, who is accused ofmurder, and called to answer so heavy an ac­cusation, stands here clothed in purple, andwith the hair of his head finely trimmed, andwith his armed men about him; that if weshall condemn him by our law, he may slayus; and by overbearing justice may himselfescape death. Yet do not I make this com­plaint against Herod himself. He is to besure more concerned for himself than for thelaws. But my complaint is against yourselves,and your king, who give him a license so todo. However, take notice, that God is great:and this very man, whom you are going to ab­solve and dismiss, for the sake of Hyrcanus,will one day punish both you, and your kingalso."
Nor did Sameas mistake in any part of thisprediction. For when Herod had receivedthe kingdom,J he slew Hyrcanus and all themembers of this Sanhedrim; excepting Sa­meas. For he had a great honour for him, onaccount of his righteousness: and because,when the city was afterward besieged byHerod and Sosius, he persuaded the peopleto admit Herod into it; and told them, that


* It is here worthy of remark, that none could be putto death in Judea, but by the approbation of the JewishSanhedrim; there being an excellent provision in the lawof Moses, that even in criminal causes, and particularlywhere life was concerned, an appeal should lie from thelesser councils of 7, in the other cities, to the supremecouncil of 71, at Jerusalem. And this is exactly accord­ing to our Saviour's words; when he says, "It could not
be that a prophet should perish out of Jerusalem." Lukexiii. 33.
t This account, as Reland observes, is confirmed bythe Talmudists: who call this Sameas, Simeon the son ofShetach. The like foreboding speech of Sulla concerningJulius Caesar, is in Suetonius JuJ. Caes. I. as Havercamphere takes notice.
t See Book XV. chap. 1.







OCR Output








304 [book VIII ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


the garments belonging to a private person,and to go to Ahijah the prophet; for that heWas a wonderful man in foretelling futureevents; it having been he who told him, thathe should be king. He also enjoined her,when she came to him, to inquire concerningthe child, as if she were a stranger, whetherhe should escape this distemper. So she didas her husband bade her; and changed herhabit, and came to the city Shiloh; for theredid Ahijah live. But as she was going intohis house, his eyes being then dim with age,God appeared to him, and informed himthat the wife of Jeroboam was come to him;and what answer he should make to herinquiry. Accordingly as the woman wascoming into the house, like a private person,and a stranger, he cried out, "Come in, Othou wife of Jeroboam. Why concealestthou thyself? Thou art not concealed fromGod; who hath appeared to me, and in­formed me that thou wast coming, and hathgiven me in command what I shall say tothee." So he said, that she should go awayto her husband and speak to him thus:"Since I made thee a great man, when thouwast little, or rather nothing, and rent thekingdom from the house of David, and gaveit to thee; and thou hast been unmindful ofthese benefits, hast left off my worship, hastmade thee molten gods and honoured them:I will in like manner cast thee down again,and will destroy all thy house, and makethem food for the dogs, and the fowls. Fora certain king is rising up, by my appoint­ment, over all this people, who shall leavenone of the family of Jeroboam remaining.The multitude also shall themselves partakeof the same punishment; and shall be castout of this good land, and shall be scatteredinto the places beyond Euphrates; becausethey have followed the wicked practices oftheir king, and have worshipped the godsthat he made, and forsaken my sacrifices.Do thou, O woman! make haste back to thyhusband, and tell him this message. Butthou shalt then find thy son dead; for asthou enterest the city he shall depart thislife. Yet shall he be buried with the lamen-


tations of all the multitude, and be honouredwith a general mourning: he is the only inno­cent person of Jeroboam's family."*
When the prophet had foretold theseevents, the woman went hastily away with adisordered mind, and greatly grieved at thedeath of the child. So she was in lamenta­tion as she went along the road, and mournedfor the death of her son, that was just at handShe was indeed in a miserable condition atthe unavoidable approach of death, and wentapace; but in circumstances very unfortunatebecause of her son: for the greater haste shemade, she would the sooner see her son dead.Yet was she forced to make such haste onaccount of her husband. Accordingly whenshe was come back, she found that the childhad given up the ghost, as the prophet hadsaid, and she related all the circumstancesto the king.
Jeroboam, however, did not lay any ofthese things to heart; but he brought togethera very numerous army, and made a warlikeexpedition against Abijah, the son of Reho-boam, who had succeeded his father in thekingdom of the two tribes. For he despisedhim, because of his age. But when he heardof the expedition of Jeroboam, he was notaffrighted at it; but proved of a courageoustemper of mind, superior both to his youth,and to the hopes of his enemy. So he chosean army out of the two tribes, and met Je­roboam at a place called mount Zemaraim,and pitched his camp near the others, andprepared every thing necessary for the fight.His army consisted of four hundred thousand:but the army of Jeroboam was double thatnumber. Now as the armies stood in arrayready for action, and were just going tofight, Abijah stood upon an elevated place,and beckoning with his hand, he desired themultitude, and Jeroboam himself, to hearfirst what he had to say. And when silencewas made, he began to speak to this effect:"God consented that David and his posterityshould be your rulers for all time to come;and this you yourselves are not unacquaintedwith. But I cannot but wonder how youshould forsake my father, and join yourselves


he would either tell her nothing, or make things muchworse than they were. The only way, therefore, to comeat the truth, was, (as he thought,) to do what he did: butherein appears his infatuation, that he should not think
the person, whom he held capable of resolving him in thefate of his son, able to see through this guile and disguise.Calmefs Commentary, and Pool's Annotations. B.* 1 Kings xiv. 13.







OCR Output








aN. 453.] 409 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


say thus much, the king was in great agonyand disorder, and encouraged Esther to beof good cheer, and to expect better fortune:since he was ready, if occasion should re­quire it, to grant to her the half of his king­dom. Accordingly Esther desired that heand his friend Haman would come to her toa banquet: for she said she had prepared asupper for him. Accordingly, he consented;and when they were there, as they weredrinking, he bade Esther tell him what shedesired; for that she should not be disap-
{lointed, though she should desire the half oflis kingdom. But she put off the discovery ofher petition till the next day: if he would comeagain, together with Haman, to her banquet.*Now when the king had promised so to do,Haman went away very joyful; because healone had the honour of supping with theking, at Esther's banquet; and because noone else partook of the same honour withkings but himself. Yet when he saw Morde-cai in the court, he was very much displeased;for he paid him no manner of respect whenhe saw him. So he went home, and calledfor his wife Zeresh, and his friends; andwhen they were come, he shewed them whathonour he had enjoyed not only from theking, but from the queen also. For as healone had that day supped with her, togetherwith the king, so was he also invited againfor the next day. "Yet," said he, "I am notpleased to see Mordecai the Jew in thecourt." Hereupon his wife Zeresh advisedhim to give order, that a gallows should bemade, fifty cubits high, and that in the mor­ning he should ask it of the king, that Mor­decai might be hanged thereon. So he com­mended her advice, and gave order to hisservants to prepare the gallows, and to placeit in the court, for the punishment of Morde­cai thereon: which was accordingly pre­pared. But God laughed to scorn the wick­ed expectations of Haman: for that night he


took away the king's sleep; and as the kingwas not willing to lose the time of his lyingawake, but to spend it in something thatmight be of advantage to his kingdom, hecommanded the scribe to bring him thechronicles of the former kings, and the re­cords of his own actions. And when he hadbrought them, and was reading them, onewas found to have received a country on ac­count of his excellent management on a cer­tain occasion; and the name of the countrywas set down. Another was found to havehad a present made him on account of hisfidelity. Then the scribe came to Bigthanand Teresh, the eunuchs, who had formed aconspiracy against the king; which Mordecaihad discovered. And when the scribe saidno more but that; and was going on to an­other history, the king stopped him; and in­quired, if it were not added that Mordecaihad a reward given him? And when he saidthere was no such addition, he bade himleave oflf: and he inquired of those that wereappointed for that purpose, what hour of thenight it was? And when he was informedthat it was already day, he gave order, thatif they found any one of his friends alreadycome, and standing before the court theyshould tell him. Now it happened that Ha­man was found there, for he was come soon­er than ordinary to petition the king to haveMordecai put to death.f And when the ser­vants said, that Haman was before the court,he bade them call him in. And when he wascome in, he said, "Because I know that thouart a sincere friend, I desire thee to give meadvice, how I may honour one that I greatlylove, and that after a manner suitable to mymagnificence." Now Haman reasoned withhimself, that what opinion he should give, itwould be for himself, since it was he alonewho was beloved by the king. So he gavethat advice which he thought of all other thebest. For he said, "If thou would est truly


that was proper and peculiar to the king; and the queen'stouching, or, as some say, kissing it, was a token of hersubjection, and thankfulness for his favour. B.
* Esther v. 8.
t It may seem a little strange, that so proud a manas Haman was, should not be prompted immediately toavenge himself on Mordecai for his contemptuous usageof him, since he had enough about him, no doubt, who,upon the least intimation of his pleasure, would have done
it; and since he, who had interest enough with his princeto procure a decree for the destruction of a whole nation,might easily have obtained a pardon for having killed oneobscure and infamous member of it. But herein did thewise and powerful providence of God appear, that it dis­posed Haman's heart, contrary to his own inclination andinterest, instead of employing his power against his ene­my, to put fetters, as it were, upon his own hands. PnrJ^Annotations. B.







OCR Output













OCR Output








EDITOR'S PREFACE. v


phecy among them to the Twelfth of Nero, he has let us know the state of affairs in Judeaduring the time of the Evangelical history; and he had before done the like in the first twobooks of the Jewish War. What he has therein said of Herod and his sons, of the Romangovernors in Judea, the Jewish sects and their principles, the manners of the Jewish people,and likewise concerning the Samaritans, greatly confirms and illustrates the history of our Evan­gelists."
Dr. W. Wotton says of Josephus, " He is certainly an author very justly to be valued, not­withstanding all his faults. His history of the Jewish war is a noble demonstration of thetruth of the Christian religion: by shewing, in the most lively manner, how the prophecies ofour blessed Lord, concerning the destruction of Jerusalem, were literally fulfilled in theirfullest extent." Preface to Miscellaneous Discourses relating to the Traditions and Usages of theScribes and Pharisees, p. 49
In reference to the account Josephus gives of the destruction of Jerusalem, ArchbishopTillotson says, " We have this matter related, not by a Christian, (who might be suspected ofpartiality and a design to have paralleled the event with our Saviour's prediction,) but by aJew, both by nation and religion, who seems designedly to have avoided, as much as possiblyhe could, the very mention of the Christian name, and all particulars relating to our Saviour,though no historian was ever more punctual in other things." Vol. ii. p. 563. Serm. 186.
Similar to this is the testimony of M. Tillemont. "God has been pleased to chuse for ourinformation in this history, not an apostle, nor any of the chief men of the church, but an ob­stinate Jew, whom neither the view of the virtue and miracles of the Christians, nor theknowledge of the law, nor the ruin of his religion and country, could induce to believe in andlove the Messiah, who was all the expectation of the nation. God has permitted it so to be,that the testimony which this historian gave to an event, of which he did not comprehend themystery, might not be rejected either by Jews or Heathens: and that none might be able tosay, that he had altered the truth of things to favour Jesus Christ and his disciples." Ruinedes Juifs. Art. I. p. 722.
Dr. Doddridge, in his notes on Matt. xxiv. says, « Christian writers have always with greatreason represented Josephus's History of the Jewish War, as the best commentary upon thischapter. And many have justly remarked it, as a wonderful instance of the care of Providencefor the Christian church, that he, an eye-witness, and in these things of so great credit, should(especially in so extraordinary a manner) be preserved to transmit to us a collection of im­portant facts, which so exactly illustrate this noble prophecy in almost every particular cir­cumstance."
Isidore of Pelusium, who flourished about the year 412, in one of his epistles, has theseexpressions; "if you have a mind to know what punishment the wicked Jews underwent, whoill treated the Christ, read the history of their destruction, written by Josephus, a Jew in­deed, but a lover of truth, that you may see the wonderful story, such as no time ever sawbefore since the beginning of the world, nor ever shall see. For that none might refuse togive credit to the history of their incredible and unparalleled sufferings, truth found out, nota stranger, but a native, and a man fond of their institutions, to relate them in a doleful strain."
Eusebius often quotes Josephus, and, in his Ecclesiastical History, has transcribed fromhim several articles at large. Having rehearsed from the gospels divers of our Lord's pre­







OCR Output








An. 36.] 539 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


Antony, he resolved that he would not en­tirely permit the child, or Alexandra, to betreated dishonourably. But his wife Mari-amne urged him vehemently to restore thehigh-priesthood to her brother; and he judgedit was for his advantage so to do; because ifhe once had that dignity, he could not go outof the country. So he called his friends to­gether, and told them, that "Alexandra pri­vately conspired against his royal authority,and endeavoured, by means of Cleopatra, soto bring it about, that he might be deprived ofthe government; and that by Antony's meansthis youth might have the management ofpublic affairs in his stead. And that this pro­cedure of hers was unjust; since she wouldat the same time deprive her daughter of thedignity she now had, and would bring dis­turbances upon the kingdom; for which hehad taken a great deal of pains, and had got­ten it with extraordinary hazards: that yet,while he well remembered her wicked prac­tices, he would not leave off doing what wasright himself; but would even now give theyouth the high-priesthood: and that he for­merly set up Ananelus, because Aristobuluswas then so very young a child." Now whenhe had said this, not at random, but as hethought with the best discretion he had, inorder to deceive the women, and those friendswhom he had taken to consult withal; Alex­andra, out of the great joy she had at this un­expected promise, and out of fear from thesuspicions she lay under, burst into tears, andmade the following apology for herself, andsaid: that "As to the high-priesthood, shewas very much concerned for the disgraceher son was under, and so did her utmost en­deavours to procure it for him: but that asto the kingdom, she had made no attempts;and that if it were offered her for her sonshe would not accept it. And that now shewould be satisfied with her son's dignity,while he himself held the civil government;


* When Josephus says here, in his Greek copies, thatthis Ananelus, the new high-priest, was of the stock of thehigh-priests, we must remember that the Latin version,in all copies, has not a syllable of any such clause. Andsince, in all copies, he had been just telling us, that hewas a priest of an obscure family or character, chap. 2, itis not probable, that he could so soon say that he was ofthe stock of the high-priests. However Josephus heremakes a remarkable observation, that this Ananelus wasthe third that was ever unjustly and wickedly turned outvoL. I.—NOS. 45 & 46.


and she had thereby the security that arosefrom his peculiar ability in governing, to allthe remainder of her family: that she wasnow overcome by his benefits, and thankfullyaccepted of this honour shewn by him to herson; and that she would hereafter be entirelyobedient. And she desired him to excuseher, if the nobility of her family, and thatfreedom of acting which she thought thatallowed her, had made her act too precipi­tately and imprudently in this matter." Sowhen they had spoken thus to one another,they came to an agreement; and all suspi­cions seemed to have vanished away.
CHAP. III.
ARISTOBULUS IS HADE HIGH-PRIEST, BUT AFTERWARDSMURDERED BY THE ORDER OF HEROD, WHO APOLOGIZESTO ANTONY. ALSO CONCERNING JOSEPH AND MAR1AMNE.
HEROD now took the high-priesthoodfrom Ananelus; who, as we said be­fore, was not of this country, but one of thoseJews that had been carried captive beyondEuphrates. For there were many thousandsof this people who had been carried captive,and dwelt about Babylonia; whence Ananeluscame. He was one* of the stock of the high-priests; and had been of old a particularfriend of Herod's. And when he was firstmade king, he conferred that dignity uponhim; and now put him out of it again, in or­der to quiet the troubles in his family; thoughwhat he did was plainly unlawful. For onno preceding occasion was any one that hadonce been in that dignity deprived of it. Itwas Antiochus Epiphanes who first brakethat law, and deprived Jesus, and madehis brother Onias high-priest in his stead.Aristobulus was the second that did so; andtook that dignity from his brother Hyrcanus.And this Herod was the third; who took thathigh office from Ananelus, and gave it to thisyoung man Aristobulus.
of the high-priesthood, by the civil power. No king orgovernor having ventured to do so, that Josephus knewof, but that heathen tyrant and persecutor Antiochus Epi­phanes; that barbarous parricide Aristobulus, the firstthat assumed royal authority among the Maccabees; andthis tyrant, king Herod the Great: although afterwardthat infamous practice became frequent, till the very de­struction of Jerusalem: when the office of high-priesthoodwas at an end.
4 P







OCR Output








540 [book TV. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


■^


Herod now seemed to have healed the di­visions in his family. Yet was he not withoutsuspicion; as is frequently the case of peopleseeming to be reconciled to one another; butas Alexandra had already made attemptstending to innovations, so did he fear that shewould go on therein, if she found a fit oppor­tunity for so doing. So he gave a command,that she should dwell in the palace, and med­dle with no public affairs. Her guards alsowere so careful, that nothing she did in pri­vate life every day was concealed. Thesehardships gradually put her out of patience,and she began to hate Herod. For as shehad the pride of a woman to the utmost de­gree, she had great indignation at this sus­picious guard that was about her, as desirousrather to undergo any thing that could befallher, than to be deprived of her liberty ofspeech; and under the notion of an honoraryguard, to live in a state of slavery and terror.She therefore sent to Cleopatra, and made along complaint of the circumstances she wasin; and entreated her to do her utmost for herassistance. Cleopatra hereupon advised herto take her son with her, and come away im­mediately into Egypt. This advice pleasedher: and she had this contrivance for gettingaway. She got two coffins made, as if theywere to carry away two dead bodies; and putherself into one, and her son into the other;and gave orders to such of her servants, asknew of her intentions, to carry them awayin the night time. Now their road was to bethence to the sea side: and there was a shipready to carry them into Egypt. Now Esop,one of her servants, happened to meet withSabbion, one of her friends; and spake of thiomatter to him: as thinking he had known ofit before. When Sabbion knew this, (whohad formerly been an enemy of Herod's, andbeen esteemed one of those that laid snaresfor, and gave the poison to, his father Antipa-ter;) he expected that this discovery wouldchange Herod's hatred into kindness. So hetold the king of this private stratagem ofAlexandra's. Whereupon he suffered her toproceed to the execution of her project, and


caught her in the very fact. But still hepassed by her offence: and though he had agreat mind to do it, he durst not inflict anything that was severe upon her. For he knewthat Cleopatra would not bear that he shouldhave her accused, on account of her hatredto him; but made a shew as if it were ratherthe generosity of his soul, and his great mode­ration, that made him forgive them. How­ever he fully proposed to himself to put thisyoung man out of the way, by one means orother. But he thought he might probably bebetter concealed, if he did it not immediatelyafter what had lately happened.
Now, upon the approach of the feast oftabernacles, which is a festival very much ob­served among us, he let those days pass over:and both he and the rest of the people werevery merry. Yet did the envy which at thistime arose in him cause him to hasten theexecution of his design. For when this youthAristobulus, who was now in the seventeenthyear of his age, went up to the altar, accord­ing to the law, to offer the sacrifices, and thiswith the ornaments of his high-priesthood:and when he *performed the sacred offices,he seemed to be exceeding comely; andtaller than men usually were at that age; andto exhibit, in his countenance, a great deal ofthat high family he was sprung from; and awarm zeal and affection towards him ap­peared among the people; and the memory ofthe actions of his grandfather Aristobulus wasfresh in their minds. And their affections gotso far the mastery of them, that they couldnot forbear shewing their inclinations to him.They at once rejoiced, and were confounded,and mingled with good wishes their joyfulacclamations which they made to him: tillthe good will of the multitude was made tooevident: and they more rashly proclaimed thehappiness they had received from his family,than was prudent under the existing govern­ment. Hereupon Herod resolved to com­plete what he had intended against the youngman. When therefore the festival was over,and he was feasting at fJericho, with Alex­andra; who entertained them there; he was


* This entirely confutes the Talmudists; who, as Re-land here notes, pretend that no one under twenty yearsof age could officiate as high-priest among the Jews.
t A Hebrew chronicle, cited by Reland, says, thisdrowning was at Jordan, not at Jericho; and this even
when he quotes Josephus. Which reading of Jericho isyet fully confirmed by the last chapter of these Antiqui­ties. I suspect the transcriber of the Hebrew chroniclemistook the name, and wrote Jordan for Jericho.







OCR Output








an. 1062.] 259 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


what it was they would hare? And whenthey desired to have *seven sons of Saul de­livered to them, to be punished, he deliveredthem up; but spared Mephibo9heth, the sonof Jonathan. So when the Gibeonites hadreceived the men, they punished them asthey pleased. Upon which God began tosend rain, and to recover the earth to bringforth its fruits, as usual, and to free it fromthe drought; so that the country of the He­brews flourished again.
A little afterward the king made waragainst the Philistines; and when he hadjoined battle with them, and put them toflight, he was left alone, as he was in pursuitof them: and when he was quite tired down,he was seen by one of the enemy: his namewas fAchmon, the son of Araph, and of thesons of the giants. He had a spear, thehandle of which weighed three hundredshekels, a breast-plate of chain-work, and asword. He turned back and ran violently toslay David, their enemy's king: for he wasquite tired out with labour. But Abishai,Joab's brother, appeared at this juncture,and protected the king with his shield, as helay down, and slew the enemy. Now themultitude was very uneasy at these dangersof the king, and that he was very near to beslain. And the rulers made him swear thathe would no more go out with them tobattle, lest he should come to some greatmisfortune by his courage and boldness;and thereby deprive the people of the bene­fits they now enjoyed by his means, and ofthose that they might hereafter enjoy by hisliving among them.


When the king heard that the Philistineswere assembled atJ the city Gazara, he sentan army against them; when Sibbechai, theHittite, one of David's most courageous men,behaved himself so as to deserve great com­mendation; for he slew many of those thatboasted they were the posterity of the giants,and vaunted themselves highly on that ac­count; and he thereby was the occasion ofvictory to the Hebrews. After this, the Phi­listines made war again; and when Davidhad sent an army against them, Nephan, hiskinsman, fought in a single combat with thestoutest of all the Philistines, and slew him,and put the rest to flight: many of them alsowere slain in the battle. Now a little whileafterward, the Philistines pitched their campat a city, which lay not far off the bounds ofthe country of the Hebrews. They had aman who was six cubits high; and had oneach of his feet and hands one more toe andfinger than men naturally have. Now theperson who was sent against them by David,out of his army, was Jonathan, the son ofShimea, who fought this man in singlecombat, and slew him: and as he was theperson who gave the turn to the battle, hegained the greatest reputation for couragetherein. This man also vaunted himself tobe of the giants. But after this fight thePhilistines made war no more against theIsraelites.
And now David, being freed from wars anddangers, and enjoying a profound peace,||composed songs and hymns to God, of severasorts of metre: some of those which he madewere trimeters, and some were pentameters:


* Those probably, who had been most active in theslaughter of the Gibeonites.
t Ishby the son of Ob, 2 Sam. xxi. 16.
} About an. 1059.This shews, that in the opinion of Josephus, Davidcomposed the Book of Psalms, not at several times be­fore, as their present inscriptions frequently imply; butgenerally at the latter end of his life, or after his warswere over. Nor does Josephus, nor the authors of theknown books of the Old and New Testaments, nor theApostolical Constitutions, seem to have ascribed any ofthem to any other author than to David himself. How­ever he must observe here, that as Josephus says, Antiq.H. 16. that the song at the Red Sea, Exod. xv. 1—21,was composed by Moses, in the hexameter tune, or metre;as also Antiq. IV. 8, that the song of Moses, Deut. xxxii.1—43, was an hexameter poem; so does he say, that thePsalms of David were of various kinds of metre; andVOL. I.—NOS. 21 & 22.
particularly that they contained trimeters and pentame­ters, Antiq. VII. 12, all which implies, that he thoughtthese Hebrew poems might be best described to theGreeks and Romans under those names and characters ofHexameters, Trimeters, and Pentameters. Now it ap­pears, that the instruments of music that were originallyused, by the command of king David and Solomon, andwere carried to Babylon at the captivity of the twotribes, were brought back after that captivity: as alsothat the singers and musicians, who survived that cap­tivity, came back with those instruments: Ezra ii. 41,vii. 24. Nehem. vii. 44. Joseph. Antiq. XI. 3, 4, 5, andthat this music, and these instruments at the temple, couldnot but be well known to Josephus, a priest belonging tothat temple; who accordingly gives us a short descriptionof three of the instruments: Antiq. VII. 12, and givesus a distinct account, that such psalms and hymns weresung in his days at that temple: Antiq. XX. 9. So that
3C







OCR Output








148 [book t ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


near to Jerusalem, when they saw what mise­ries had happened to the inhabitants of Je­richo, and to those of Ai, and suspected thatthe like sore calamity would come as far asthemselves, they did not think fit to ask formercy of Joshua, for they supposed theyshould find little mercy from him who madewar that he might entirely destroy the nationof the Canaanites. But they invited thepeople of Cephirah and Kiriathjearim, whowere their neighbours, to join in the leaguewith them, and told them, that neither couldthey themselves avoid the danger they wereall in, if the Israelites should prevent them,and seize upon them: so when they had per­suaded them, they resolved to endeavour toescape the forces of the Israelites. Accord­ingly upon their agreement to what they pro­posed, they sent ambassadors to Joshua, tomake a league of friendship with him, andchose such of the citizens as were best ap­proved of, and most capable of doing whatwas most advantageous to the multitude. Nowthese ambassadors thought it dangerous toconfess themselves to be Canaanites, butthought they might avoid the danger by say­ing that they bare no relation to the Canaan­ites at all, but dwelt at a very great distancefrom them; and they said farther, that theycame a long way on account of the reputationJoshua had gained for his virtue; and as aproof of the truth of what they said, theyshewed him the habit they were in, for thattheir clothes were new when they came out,but were greatly worn by the length of timethey had been on their journey, for indeedthey took torn garments, on purpose that theymight make him believe so; so they stood inthe midst of the people, and said, that theywere sent by the people of Gibeon, and ofthe circumjacent cities, which were very re­mote from the land where they now were, tomake such a league of friendship with them,and this on such conditions as were customaryamong their forefathers; for, when they un­derstood that, by the favour of God, and hisgift to them, they were to have the possession
Israel should have put them upon some other expedientthan that of lying and deceit. They should have enquired(as far as the obscure dispensation they were under wouldhave permitted them) into the cause of God's severityagainst them. They should have acknowledged, that itwas their grievous sins which drew down this heavyjudgment upon their nation; and after they had repented


of the land of Canaan bestowed upon them,they said they were very glad to hear it, anddesired to be admitted into the number oftheir citizens. Thus did these ambassadorsspeak, and shewing them the marks of theirlong journey, they intreated the Hebrews tomake a league of friendship with them. Ac­cordingly Joshua, believing that they werenot of the nation of the Canaanites, enteredinto friendship with them, and Eleazar thehigh-priest, with the senate, sware to them,that they would esteem them their friendsand associates, and would attempt nothingthat should be unfair against them, the multi­tude also assenting to the oaths that weremade to them; so these men having obtainedwhat they desired by deceiving the Israel­ites, went home; but when Joshua led hisarmy to the country at the bottom of themountains of this part of Canaan, he under­stood that the Gibeonites dwelt not far fromJerusalem, and that they were of the stockof the Canaanites; so he sent for their go­vernors, and reproached them with the cheatthey had put upon him. But they allegedon their own behalf, that they had no otherway to save themselves but that, and weretherefore forced to have recourse to it. Sohe called for Eleazar the high-priest, and forthe senate, who thought it right to makethem public servants, that they might notbreak the oath they had made to them; andthey ordained them to be so; and this wasthe method by which these men found secu­rity under the calamity that was ready toovertake them.*
But the king of Jerusalem took it to heartthat the Gibeonites had gone over to Joshua;so he called upon the kings of the neighbour­ing nations to join together to make waragainst them. Now when the Gibeonites sawthese kings, which were four, besides theking of Jerusalem, and perceived that theyhad pitched their camp at a certain fountainnot far from the city, and were getting readyfor the siege, they called upon Joshua to assistthem; for such was their case, as to expect


thereof in sackcloth and ashes, they should have committedthe rest to Providence, never doubting but that he, whohad changed the very course of nature to punish the guilty,would always find out some means or other to save thepenitent; but this they did not do, and therefore they wereculpable. Scncrin, vol. 3. dissertation 4. B.* Josh. ix. 87.







OCR Output








108 [book XI. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


count; and to let him know that she with hermaidens would do the same: and then shepromised that she would go to the king,though it were against the law; and that ifshe must die, she would not refuse it.*
Accordingly Mordecai did as Esther hadenjoined him, and made the people fast,f andhe besought God, together with them, not tooverlook his nation, particularly at this time,when it was going to be destroyed. But that,as he had often before provided for them, andforgiven them, when they had sinned, so hewould now deliver them from that destructionwhich was denounced against them. For al­though it was not the nation that had at alloffended, yet must they so ingloriously beslain; and that he was himself the occasionof the wrath of Haman: "because," said he,"I did not worship him; nor could I endureto pay that honour to him, which I used topay to thee, O Lord. For upon that his angerhath he contrived this present mischief againstthose that have not transgressed thy laws."The same supplications did the multitudeput up: and entreated that God would pro­vide for their deliverance; and free the Is­raelites that were in all the earth from thiscalamity which was now coming upon them.For they had it before their eyes, and ex­pected its coming. Accordingly Esther madesupplication to God, after the manner of hercountry; by prostrating herself upon theearth, and putting on her mourning garments,and bidding farewell to meat and drink, andall delicacies for three days' time; and sheentreated God to have mercy upon her, andmake her words appear persuasive to theking, and render her countenance more beau­tiful than it was before: that by both herwords and beauty she might succeed, for theaverting of the king's anger, in case he wasirritated against her; and for the consolationof those of her own country, now they werein the utmost danger of perishing: as alsothat he would excite a hatred in the kingagainst the enemies of the Jews, and those


that had contrived their future destruction,if they proved to be contemned by him.
When Esther had offered this supplication,for three days, she put off those garments;and changed her habit, and adorned herselfas became a queen; and took two of herhandmaids with her: one of whom supportedher, as she gently leaned upon her; and theother followed after, and held up her largetrain with the extremities of her fingers. Andthus she came to the king: having a blushingredness in her countenance; with a pleasantagreeableness in her behaviour. Yet did shego in to him with fear. And as soon as shewas come over against him, as he was sittingon his throne, in his royal apparel; whichwas a garment interwoven with gold andprecious stones, which made him seem to hermore terrible; especially when he looked ather somewhat severely, and with a counte­nance on fire with anger, her joints failedher, out of the dread she was in; and shefell down sideways in a swoon. But the kingchanged his mind; which happened, as Isuppose by the will of God; and was con­cerned for his wife, lest her fear should bringsome ill thing upon her: and he leaped fromhis throne, and took her in his arms, and re­covered her, by embracing her, and speakingcomfortably to her, and exhorting her to beof good cheer, and not to suspect any thingthat was sad on account of her coming tohim without being called; because the lawwas made for subjects: but that she, whowas a queen, might be entirely secure. Andas he said this, he put the sceptre into herhand;J and laid his rod upon her neck, onaccount of the law; and so freed her fromher fear. And after she had recovered her­self by these encouragements, she said, "Mylord, it is not easy for me, on the sudden, tosay what hath happened: for as soon as Isaw thee to be great, and comely, and terri­ble, my spirit departed from me; and I hadno soul left in me.*' And while it was withdifficulty, and in a low voice, that she cottid


* Esther iv. 16.
t This is not to be understood, as if the people wereto take no manner of sustenance for three days, becausefew or none could undergo that, but only, either thatthey should abstain from all delicacies, and content them­selves with coarse fare, as Josephus expounds it, or thatthey should make no set meals of dinner or supper in theirfamilies, but eat and drink no more than would suffice to
sustain nature, and support them in prayer to God for ablessing upon her undertaking. Patrick's and Le Cterc*sCommentaries. B.
J A sceptre was the ensign of the highest and mostabsolute authority; and therefore some have observed,that when Mordecai was advanced to the greatest dignitynext the king, having the royal robes, and other ensignsof royal dignity, no mention is made of any sceptre, for







OCR Output








an. 1064.] «1 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


said they then went their ways, and she fore­told, that if they would follow them directlythey would catch them. But when after along pursuit they could not catch them, theycame back again. And when the womansaw those men were returned, and that therewas no longer any fear of the young menbeing caught by them, she drew them up bythe rope, and bid them go on their journey.Accordingly they used great diligence in theprosecution of that journey, and came toDavid, and informed him accurately of allthe counsels of Absalom. So he commandedthose that were with him to pass over Jordanwhile it was night, and not to delay at all onthat account.
But Ahithophel, on the rejection of his ad­vice, got upon his ass and rode away to hisown country, Gilon; and calling his familytogether, he told them distinctly, what advicehe had given Absalom: and since he had notbeen persuaded by it, he should certainlyperish, and this in no long time, and thatDavid would overcome him, and return to hiskingdom again. So he said it was betterthat he should take his own life away withfreedom and magnanimity, than oppose him­self to be punished by David; in oppositionto whom he had acted entirely for Absalom.When he had discoursed thus to them, hewent into the innermost room of his house,and hanged himself.*
And this was the death of Ahithophel, whowas self-condemned. And when his relationshad taken him down from the halter, theytook care of his funeral. Now as for Davidhe passed over Jordan, as we have saidalready, and came to Mahanaim, a very fineand strong city; and all the chief men of thecountry received him with great pleasure;both out of the shame they had that he shouldbe forced to flee away from Jerusalem; andout of the respect they bare to him while hewas in his former prosperity. These were
* 2 Sam. xvii. 23.
t The son of Ainmiel, of Lodebar, Hebrew and Sep-tuagint.
J In 2 Sam. xv. 18. we read, that All the Gittites, sixhundred men, which came after him, (viz. David) fromGath, passed on before the king: but who these Gittiteswere, it is hard to determine; because we have no men­tion made of them in any other part of Scripture. Someimagine they were natives of Gath, who, taken with thefame of David's piety, and happy success, came along


Barzillai the Gileadite, Siphar the ruleramong the Ammonites, and Machirf theprincipal man of Gilead: these furnished himwith plentiful provisions for himself and hisfollowers, insomuch that they wanted no bedsnor blankets for them, nor loaves of bread,nor wine. Nay, they bought them a greatmany cattle for slaughter; and afforded themwhat furniture .they wanted for their re­freshment when they were weary, and forfood, with plenty of other necessaries.
CHAP. X.
of Absalom's defeat and death.
WHILST David and his adherents werein this situation, Absalom got togethera vast army of Hebrews to oppose his father;and passed therewith over the river Jordan,and sat down not far off Mahanaim, in thecountry of Gilead. He appointed Amasa tobe captain of all his host, instead of Joab hiskinsman. His father was Ithra, and his mo­ther Abigail. Now she and Zeruiah the mo­ther of Joab were David's sisters. But whenDavid had numbered his followers, and foundthem to be about four thousand, he resolvednot to tarry till Absalom attacked him; butset over his men captains of thousands, andcaptains of hundreds, and divided his armyinto three parts; one part he committed toJoab, the next to Abishai, Joah's brother,and the third to Ittai,J David's companionand friend, but one that came from the cityGath. And when he was desirous of fightinghimself among them, his friends would notlet him; and their refusal was founded uponvery wise reasons. "For," said they, " if webe conquered when he is with us, we havelost all hopes of recovering ourselves; but ifwe should be beaten in one part of our army,the other parts may retire to him, and maythereby prepare a greater force; while the


voL. I. NOS. 21 & 22.
with Ittai, whom the Jews suppose to have been the sonof Achish, king of Gath, and being proselyted to theJewish religion, became a part of David's guard, and at­tended him in his wars. But others rather think, thatthey were men of Jewish extract, but had this additionalname, from their flying unto David, probably under theconduct of Ittai, while he was at Gath, and accompanyinghim ever after, not only in the time of Saul's persecutionof him, but even after his accession to the united kingdomsof Judah and Israel. Patrick's Commentary. B.
3B


-







OCR Output








an. 29.] 553 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


friends; and put the army in array, and rodealong with Caesar, and had a hundred andfifty men, well appointed in all respects, aftera rich and sumptuous manner, for the betterreception of him and his friends. He alsoprovided them with what they should want,as they passed over the arid desert: inso­much that they lacked neither wine, norwater: which last the soldiers stood in thegreatest need of. And besides, he pre­sented Caesar with eight hundred talents,and procured to himself the good will ofthem all: because he was assisting to themin a much greater and more splendid de­gree than the kingdom he had obtainedcould afford. By this means he more andmore demonstrated to Caesar the firmnessof his friendship, and his readiness to assisthim. And what was of the greatest advan­tage to him was, that his liberality came ata seasonable time also. And when they re­turned again out of Egypt, his assistanceswere no way inferior to the good offices hehad formerly done them.
CHAP. VII.
OF THE EXECUTION OF SOHEMUS, AND MARIAMNE; ALEX­ANDRA, AND COSTOBARUS J HEROD'S MOST INTIMATEFRIENDS; AND THE SONS OF BABA.
HOWEVER, when Herod came into hiskingdom again, he found his house allin disorder, and his wife Mariamne, and hermother Alexandra, very uneasy; for theynaturally supposed, that they were not putinto that fortress [Alexandrium] for the se­curity of their persons; but as into a gar­rison for their imprisonment; and that theyhad no power over any thing either ofothers or of their own affairs. And Mari­amne supposing that the king's love to herwas rather pretended, as advantageous tohimself, than real; she looked on it as falla­cious. She also was grieved that he wouldnot allow her any hopes of surviving him, ifhe should come to any harm himself. Shealso recollected what commands he had for­merly given to Joseph; insomuch that sheendeavoured to please her keepers, and es­pecially Sohemus; as well apprised how allwas in his power. Sohemus was at firstfaithful to Herod, and neglected none of thethings he had given him in charge: but


when the women, by kind words, and liberalpresents, had gained his affections over tothem, he was by degrees overcome, and atlength discovered to them all the king's in­junctions: and this on that account princi­pally, that he did not so much as hope hewould come back with the same authorityhe had before. So that he thought he shouldescape any danger from him, and supposedthat he did hereby much gratify the women,who were likely not to be overlooked in thesettling of the government: nay, that theywould be able to make him ample recom­pense: since they must either reign them­selves, or be very near to him that shouldreign. He had a farther ground of hopealso, that though Herod should have all thesuccess he could wish for, and should returnagain, he could not contradict his wife, inwhat she desired: for he knew that theking's fondness for her was inexpressible.These were the motives that drew Sohemusto discover what injunctions had been givenhim. So Mariamne was greatly displeasedto hear, that there was no end of the dan­gers she was under from Herod; and wasgreatly uneasy at it; and wished that hemight obtain no favours from Caesar; andesteemed it an almost insupportable task tolive with him any longer. And this she af­terwards openly declared, without conceal­ing her resentments.
And now Herod sailed home with joy, atthe unexpected good success he had had:and went first of all to his wife, and told herthe good news, as preferring her before therest, on account of his fondness for her, andthe intimacy there had been between them,and saluted her. But so it happened, thatas he told her of the good success he hadhad, she was so far from rejoicing, that sherather was sorry for it. Nor was she ableto conceal her resentments: but, dependingon her dignity, and the nobility of her birth,in return for his salutations, she gave agroan, and declared evidently that she ra­ther grieved than rejoiced at his success:and this till Herod was disturbed at her, asaffording him not only marks of her suspi­cion, but evident signs of her dissatisfaction.This much troubled him, to see that thissurprising hatred of his wife to him was notconcealed, but open. And he took this so







OCR Output








266 [book VII. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


own homes. Adonijah also, as afraid of theking for what he had done, became a sup­plicant to God, and took hold of the horns ofthe altar, which were prominent.* It wasalso told Solomon, that he had so done; andthat he desired to receive assurances fromhim, that he would not remember the injuryhe had done: and not inflict any severepunishment for it. Solomon answered verymildly and prudently, that he forgave himthis his offence; but said withal, that if hewere found in any attempt for new innova­tions, he would be the author of his ownEunishment. So he sent to him, and raisedim up from the place of his supplication.And when he was come to the king, and hadworshipped him; the king bade him go awayto his own house, and have no suspicion ofany harm, and desired him to shew himself aworthy man, as what would tend to his ownadvantage.
But David being desirous of ordaining hisson king of all the people, called togethertheir rulers to Jerusalem, with the priestsand the Levites. And having first numberedthe Levites, he found them to be thirty-eightthousand, from thirty years old to fifty. Outof which he appointed twenty-three thousandto take care of the building of the temple;and out of the same, six thousand to be judgesof the people and scribes; four thousand forporters to the house of God, and as manyfor singers, to sing to the instruments whichDavid had prepared. He divided them alsointo courses; and when he had separated thepriests from them, he found of these prieststwenty-four courses; sixteen of the house ofEleazar, and eight of that of Ithamar; andhe ordained that one course should minister


to God eight days, from sabbath to sabbath.And thus were the courses distributed by lot,in the presence of David, and Zadok, andAbiathar, the high-priests, and of all therulers. And that course which came up firstwas written down as the first; and accordinglythe second, and so on to the twenty-fourth.And this partition hath remained to this day.He also made twenty-four parts of the tribeof Levi, and when they cast lots, they cameup in the same manner for their courses ofeight days. He also honoured the posterityof Moses, and made them the keepers of thetreasures of God, and of the donations whichthe kings dedicated. He also ordained, thatall the tribe of Levi, as well as the priests,should serve God night and day, as Moseshad enjoined them.
After this he divided the army into twelveparts, with their leaders, and captains of hun­dreds and commanders. Now every part hadtwenty-four thousand: which were ordered towait on Solomon, by thirty days at a time,from the first day till the last, with the cap­tains of thousands, and captains of hundreds.He also set rulers over every part, such as heknew to be good and righteous men. He setothers also to take care of the treasures, audof the villages, and of the fields, and of thebeasts. When David had ordered all theseoffices after the manner before mentioned, hecalled the rulers of the Hebrews, and theirheads of tribes, and the officers over the seve­ral divisions, and those that were appointedover every work, and every possession; and,standing upon a high pulpit, he said to themultitude: "My brethren, and my people, Iwould have you know, that I intended to builda house for God; and prepared a large quan­


* There is no precept in the law to make the altara privileged place: but, in conformity to the customsof other nations, the Jews seem to have done it. Othernations had certainly this custom, as appears from thatpassage in Virgil:
Talibus orabat dictis, arasque tenebat. JEneid. 6.
And it seems not unlikely, that as the people, when theycame into the land of Canaan, had cities appointed byGod, whereunto the manslayer might fly; so while theycontinued in the wilderness, the camp of the Levitesmight serve for the same purpose. Nay, from the wordsin Exodus xxi. 14. where God orders the wilful murdererto be taken from his altar, that he may die, it seems un­questionably true, that, even in the land of Canaan, theaitar continued a sanctuary for those who fled unto it; but
then the question is, to what altar Adonijah fled 1 Whe­ther to the brazen one, which Moses made, and whichwas now at Gibeon, or that which his father had latelyerected in the threshing-floor of Araunah? It is expresslysaid, 1 Kings i. 50. that he caught hold of the horns ofthe altar; but we can hardly suppose, say some, that thealtar in the threshing-floor, which was run up in suchhaste with stones and turf, was made in that figure. Butwhat should hinder us from supposing, that as David hadbuilt a place for the reception of the ark of the covenanton Mount Sion, he had likewise built there an altar for theoblation of the daily sacrifices, in the exact form of theoriginal one that was then at Gibeon, and that it was tothis altar, and neither of the others, that Adonijah betookhimself for refuge. Le Gere's, Patrick's, and Calmet'sCommentaries. 6.







OCR Output








76854


(y.i)


THE


EDITOR'S PREFACE.


T.


HE credibility of Scripture History has been established by a combination of evidence,altogether incontrovertible. This is the more remarkable and satisfactory, as the Bible con­tains not only the most ancient records, but exclusively makes known to us the origin of allthings, and the transactions of those ages, which will in vain be sought for elsewhere, orfound involved only in fable.
That, however, some difficulties should occur in perusing such venerable documents, mayeasily and reasonably be conceived; but they are not such as affect their authenticity, or evenweaken their evidence. It is not impracticable to solve or remove most of them; and the ob­scurity which remains after the fruitless efforts of sober criticism, may fairly be imputed tothe want of information, of which the distance of place and time has deprived us. A re­markable consistency and harmony characterises the historical parts of the Bible;—delivereddown to us as they have been in separate books, and written by various inspired penmen, theslightest comparison will serve to force upon our minds the conviction that they are genuine,as far, at least, as veracity may be inferred from an agreement of the various branches of asubject. «
There are different modes of ascertaining the integrity of the canon of scripture: learnedmen have with great success performed this task—evidence to confirm the claim of the in­spired writers to the characters they assume, has been adduced and admitted. Testimonyof an external nature has, likewise, been brought forward, to corroborate the general contentsof the Bible, or its particular parts and facts. Tradition furnishes us with some proof, thoughprudence requires a careful investigation of its documents, and a cautious admission of them;but, however they may be exaggerated or obscured, they must have had some foundation,which, if it can be traced, will deserve attention, from its correspondence to the great original.In some instances it is so very remarkable and striking, that the boldest scepticism cannot
well refuse and discard its aid.
B


voL. I. No. I.







OCR Output








268 [book VII. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


upon his father's throne, they were obedientfrom that day.
CHAP. XV.
OF THE CHARGE WHICH DAVID GAVE TO HIS SON SOLOMON,AT THE APPROACH OF HIS DEATH, AND OF THE MATERIALSHE LEFT HIM FOR BUILDING A TEMPLE.
A LITTLE afterward *David fell into adistemper, by reason of his age; andperceiving that he was near to death, hecalled his son Solomon, and discoursed tohim thus: "I am now, O my son! going tomy grave, and to my fathers; which is thecommon way which all men that now are, orthat shall be hereafter, must go. From whichway it is no longer possible to return, and toknow any thing that is done in this world. Itherefore exhort thee, while I am still alive,though already very near to death, in thesame manner as I have formerly said in myadvice to thee; to be righteous towards thysubjects, and religious towards God, whohath given thee thy kingdom; to observe hiscommands, and his laws, which he hath sentus by Moses; and neither do thou out of fa­vour nor flattery, allow any lust or passion toweigh with thee, to disregard them; for ifthou transgressest his law, thou wilt lose thefavour of God, and thou wilt turn away hisprovidence from thee in all things. But ifthou behave thyself so as I exhort thee, thouwilt preserve our kingdom to our family, andno other house will bear rule over the He­brews, but we ourselves for all ages. Bethou also mindful of the transgression ofJoab,f the captain of the host, who hath slaintwo generals out of envy, and those righteousand good men; Abner the son of Ner, and


Amasa the son of Jether; whose death do thouavenge, as shall seem good to thee; sinceJoab hath been too hard for me, and morepotent than myself; and so hath escapedpunishment hitherto. I also commit to theethe son of Barzillai, the Gileadite, whom, inorder to gratify me, thou shalt have in greathonour, and take great care of. For we havenot done good to him first; but we only repaythat debt which we owe his father, for whathe did to me in my flight. There is alsoShimei the son of Gera, of the tribe of Ben­jamin, who after he had cast many reproachesupon me, when, in my flight, I was going toMahanaim, met me at Jordan, and receivedassurances that he should then suffer nothing.Do thou now seek out for some just occasion,and punish him."
When David had given these admonitionsto his son respecting public affairs, and aboutthose whom he knew to deserve punishment,he died; having lived seventy years,J andreigned seven years and six months in He­bron, over the tribe of Judah; and thirty-three years in Jerusalem, over all the country.This man was of an excellent character, andwas endowed with all virtues that were de­sirable in a king, and in one that had thepreservation of so many tribes committed tohim. For he was a man of valour, in a veryextraordinary degree; and went readily andfirst of all into dangers, when he was to fightfor his subjects; as exciting the soldiers toaction by his own labours, and fighting forthem; and not by commanding them in a des­potic way. He was also of very great abili­ties in apprehension of present and futurecircumstances, when he was to manage anyaffairs. He was prudent, moderate, and kind


* An. 1056.
t David is here greatly blamed by some, for recom­mending Joab and Shimei to be punished by Solomon, ifhe could find a proper occasion, after he bad borne withthe first a long while; and seemed to have pardoned theother entirely; which Solomon executed accordingly.—Yet do I not discern any fault either in David or Solomonin these cases. Joab's murder3 of Abner and Amasa werevery barbarous, and could not properly be forgiven eitherby David or Solomon. For a dispensing power in kingsfor the crime of wilful murder, is warranted by no law ofGod, nay is directly against it every where. Nor is it inthe power of men to grant such a prerogative to any oftheir kings. Though Joab was so nearly related to David,and so potent in the army under a warlike administration,
that David durst not himself put him to death; as he sayshere, and 2 Sam. iii. 39. and xix. 7. Shimei's cursing theLord's anointed, and this without any just cause, was thehighest act of treason against God, and his anointed king,and justly deserved death. And though David could for­give treason against himself, yet had he done no more inthe case of Shimei than promised him, that he would notthen, on the day of his return and re-inauguration, orupon that occasion, himself put him to death, 2 Sam. xix.22. and he swore to him no farther, verse 23. as the wordsare in Josephus, than that he would Dot then put him todeath; which he performed. Nor was Solomon underany obligation to spare such a traitor.J From an. 1126 to 1056 B. C.







OCR Output








412 [BOOK XL ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


that are our faithful subjects, greeting. Manymen there are who, on account of the great­ness of the benefits bestowed on them, and be­cause of the honour which they have obtainedfrom the kind treatment of those that bestow­ed it, are not only injurious to their inferiors,but do not scruple to do evil to those who havebeen their benefactors; as if they would takeaway gratitude from among men. And bytheir insolent abuse of such benefits as theynever expected, they turn the abundance theyhave against those that are the authors of it;and suppose they shall lie concealed fromGodin that case, and avoid that vengeance whichcomes from him. Some of these men, whenthey have had the management of affairs com­mitted to them by their friends, and bearingprivate malice against some others, by de­ceiving those that have the power, persuadethem to be angry at such as have done themno harm; till they are in danger of perishing;and this by lying accusations and calumnies.Nor is this state of things to be discovered byancient examples, or such as we have merelylearned by report; but by some examples ofsuch impudent attempts under our own eyes.So that it is not fit to attend any longer to ca­lumnies, and accusations; nor to the persua­sions of others; but to determine what anyone knows of himself to have been really doneand to punish what justly deserves it, and togrant favours to such as are innocent. Thishath been the case of Haman, the son ofAmedatha; by birth an Amalekite, and alienfrom the blood of the Persians: who, when hewas hospitably entertained by us, and partookof that kindness which we bear to all men toso great a degree, as to be called our father;and to be all along worshipped, and to havehonour paid him by all in the second rankafter the royal honour due to ourselves, he


could not bear his good fortune, nor governthe magnitude of his prosperity with soundreason. Nay he made a conspiracy againstme, who gave him his authority: by endea­vouring to take away Mordecai my benefactor,and my saviour; and by basely and treache­rously requiring to have Esther, the partnerof my life, and of my dominion, brought todestruction. For he contrived by this meansto *deprive me of my faithful friends, andtransfer the government to others.
But since I perceived that these Jews thatwere by this pernicious fellow devoted todestruction, were not wicked men; but con­ducted their lives in the best manner; andwere men dedicated to the worship of thatGod who hath preserved the kingdom to meand my ancestors: I do not only free themfrom the punishment which the former epistle,which was sent by Haman, ordered to be in­flicted on them; to which if you refuse obe­dience you shall do well: but I will that theyhave all honour paid them. Accordingly Ihave hanged up the man that contrived suchthings against them, with his family, beforethe gates of Shushan: that punishment beingsent upon him from God, who seeth all things.And I give you in charge, that you publiclypropose a copy of this epistle through all mykingdom, that the Jews may be permittedpeaceably to use their own laws; and thatyou assist them: that at the same seasonwhereto their miserable estate did belong,they may defend themselves the very sameday from unjust violence: the thirteenth dayof the twelfth month, which is Adar. ForGod hath made that day a day of salvation,instead of a day of destruction to them. Andmay it be a good day to those that wish uswell; and a memorial of the punishment ofthe conspirators against us! And I will that


properly revoke his former barbarous decree, for the uni­versal slaughter of the Jews; but only empowered andencouraged the Jews to fight for their lives, and to killtheir enemies, if they attempted their destruction, seemsto have been, that old law of the Medes and Persians, notyet laid aside, that whatever decree was signed both bythe king, and his lords, could not be changed, but re­mained unalterable, Daniel vi. 7, 8, 9, 12, IS, 17. Estheri. 19. viii. 8. And Haman having engrossed the royal fa­vour, might perhaps have himself signed this decree forthe Jews' slaughter, instead of the ancient lords; and somight have rendered it, by their rulers, irrevocable.
* These words give an intimation, as if Artaxerxes sus­pected a deeper design in Haman than openly appeared:
viz. that knowing the Jews would be faithful to "him, andthat he could never transfer the crown to his own family,who was an Agagite, Esther iii. 1, 10. or of the posterityof Agag the old king of the Amalekites, 1 Sam. xv. 8, 32,33. while they were alive, and spread over all his do­minions, he therefore endeavoured to destroy them. Noris it to me improbable, that those 75,000 of the Jews*enemies who were soon destroyed by the Jews, on thepermission of the king, which must be on some greatoccasion, were Amalekites, their old and hereditary ene­mies, Exod. xvii. 14, 15. and that thereby was fulfilledBalaam's prophecy, "Amalek was the first of the na­tions; but his latter end shall be that he perish for ever."Numb. xxiv. 20.







OCR Output








.550 [book XV. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


For at that time both Herod's enemies andfriends despaired of his affairs: as it wasnot probable that he would remain withoutpunishment, who had shewed so much friend­ship for Antony. His friends despaired, andhad no hopes of his escape: but his ene­mies, though they outwardly appeared to betroubled at his case, were privately veryglad of it: as hoping to obtain a change forthe better. As for Herod himself, he sawthat there was no one of royal dignity left,but Hyrcanus; and therefore he thought itwould be for his advantage, not to suffer himto be an obstacle in his way any longer.For that in case he himself survived, andescaped the danger he was in, he thoughtit the safest way to put it out of the powerof such a man to make any attempt againsthim, at such junctures of affairs, as was moreworthy of the kingdom than himself: and incase he should be slain by Caesar, his envyprompted him to desire to slay him thatwould otherwise be king after him.
While Herod had these things in his mind,there was a certain occasion afforded him.For Hyrcanus was of so mild a temper, thathe desired not to meddle with public affairs,nor to concern himself with innovations; butleft all to fortune, and contented himself withwhat that afforded him. But Alexandra hisdaughter was a lover of strife; and was ex­ceeding desirous of a change in the govern­ment: and spake to her father not to bearHerod's injurious treatment of their family,but to anticipate their future hopes, as hesafely might: and desired him to writeabout those matters to Malchus, who wasthen governor of Arabia, to receive them,and to secure them from Herod: for that ifthey went away, and Herod's affairs proved,as it was likely they would, by reason ofCaesar's enmity to him, they should then bethe only persons that could take the govern­ment: and this both on account of the royalfamily they were of, and on account of thegood disposition of the multitude towardthem. While she used these persuasions,Hyrcanus put off their suit. But as sheshewed that she was a woman, and a con­tentious woman too, and would not desist
Roman empire, were each resolved to have all, andaccordingly agreed to throw the dice of war for it.


either night or day; but would always bespeaking to him about these matters, andabout Herod's treacherous designs; she atlast prevailed with him to entrust Dositheus,one of his friends, with a letter; wherein hisresolution was declared: and he desired theArabian governor to send to him some horse­men, who should receive him, and conducthim to the lake Asphaltites: which is threehundred furlongs distant from the bounds ofJerusalem. And he did therefore trust Do­sitheus with his letter, because he was acareful attendant on him, and on Alexandra;and had no small occasion to bear ill will toHerod. For he was a kinsman of one Jo­seph, whom he had slain; and a brother ofthose that were formerly slain at Tyre byAntony. Yet could not these motives in­duce Dositheus to serve Hyrcanus in thisaffair: for preferring the hopes he had fromthe present king, to those he had from him,he gave Herod the letter. So he took hiskindness in good part; and bade him go onin serving him, by rolling up the epistle, andsealing it again, and delivering it to Malchus;and then to bring back his letter in answer toit: for it would be much better if he couldknow Malchus's intentions also. And whenDositheus was very ready to serve him in thispoint also, the Arabian governor returnedback for answer, that he would receive Hyr­canus, and all that should come with him, andeven all the Jews that were of his party; thathe would also send forces sufficient to securethem in their journey; and that he shouldbe in no want of any thing he should desire.Now as soon as Herod had received this let­ter, he immediately sent for Hyrcanus, andquestioned him about the league he hadmade with Malchus; and when he deniedit, he shewed his letter to the Sanhedrim,and put the man to death immediately.
This account we give the reader, as it iscontained in the commentaries of king He­rod. But other historians do not agree withthem: for they suppose that Herod did notfind, but rather make, this an occasion forthus putting him to death: and that by trea­cherously laying a snare for him. For theywrite, that Herod and he were once at a
Plutarch De Antonio; and Prideaux's Connection, anno33. B.







OCR Output








AN. Ub 165. J ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


sight of the temple. So he chose out someoi his soldiers, and gave them order to fightagainst those guards that were in the citadel;until he should have purified the temple.When therefore he had carefully purged it,and had brought in new vessels; the candle­stick, the table of shew-bread, and the altarof incense, which were made of gold; hehung up the veils at the gates, and addeddoors to them. He also took down the altarof burnt-offering; and built a new one ofstones that he gathered together, and notof such as are hewn with iron tools.* So onthe five and twentieth day of the month Cas-leu, which the Macedonians call Apelleus,they lighted the lamps that were on the can­dlestick; and offered incense upon the altarof incense; and laid the loaves upon the ta­ble of shew-bread, and offered burnt-offeringsupon the new altar of burnt-offering. Nowit happened, that these things were done onthe very same day on which their divineworship had fallen off, and was reduced to aprofane and common use, after three years'time. For so it was, that the temple wasmade desolate by Antiochus, and so con­tinued for three years. For this desolationhappened to the temple in the hundred andforty-fifth year; on the twenty-fifth day of themonth Apelleus; and on the first year of thehundred and fifty-third Olympiad. But itwas dedicated anew, on the same day, thetwenty-fifth of the month Apelleus, on the


hundred and forty-eighth year; and on thefourth year of the hundred and fifty-fourthOlympiad. And this desolation came to passaccording to the prophecy of Daniel, whichwas given ffour hundred and eight yearsbefore. For he declared that the Macedo­nians would dissolve that worship,! for sometime.
Now Judas celebrated the festival of therestoration of the sacrifices at the temple foreight days:|| and omitted no sort of pleasuresthereon: but he feasted the people upon veryrich and splendid sacrifices :§ and he honour­ed God, and delighted them, by hymns andpsalms. Nay they were so very glad at therevival of their customs, when, after a Iontime of intermission, they unexpectedly hairegained the freedom of their worship, thatthey made it a law for their posterity, thatthey should keep a festival on account of therestoration of their temple-worship, for eightdays. And from that time to this we cele­brate this festival, and call it Lights. I sup­pose the reason was, because this liberty be­yond our hopes appeared to us; and thencewas the name given to that festival. Judasalso rebuilt the walls round about the city;and reared towers of great height againstthe incursions of the enemies; and set guardstherein. He also fortified the city Beth-sura, that it might serve as a citadel againstany distresses that might come from ourenemies.


* Exodus xx. 25.
t Therefore Daniel, in Josephus's copies, saw thevision in his 8th chapter, not on the 3d of Belshazzar, buton the first of Darius the Mede. Lit. Accompl. of Proph.Suppl. page 106, 107, 108. And we may also take notice,as we did before, on a like case, in the note on XI. 5. withwhat an unusual accuracy Josephus here determines thebeginning and ending of these three years of Antiochus'sprofanation of the temple; and adds to the exact num­bers of the years of the Seleucidae, which he had out ofthe first book of the Maccabees, the Olympiads, underwhich both its beginning and ending fell: and this seemsdone on purpose by him, because of the exact fulfilling ofDaniel's prophecy hereby; as he observes in this place.
I For 1096 days, or three years.
II This festival is commemorated in the Gospel, Johnii. 23. and our blessed Saviour, we are told, came up toJerusalem on purpose to bear a part in the solemnizingof it. Some indeed are of opinion, that it was anotherdedication feast, which Christ thus honoured with his pre­sence: but besides that the dedications both of Solomon'sand Zerubbabel's temples who (though they were verysolemnly celebrated at the first erection of these temples,)had never any anniversary feast afterwards kept in corn-
memoration of them, the very history of the Gospel(which tells us, that it was kept in winter,) confines us tothis dedication of Judas only. That of Solomon was onthe seventh month, which fell about the time of theautumnal equinox: and that of Zerubbabel was on thetwelfth month, which fell in the beginning of the spring;but that of Judas Maccabeus was on their twenty-fifth dayof the ninth month, which fell in the middle of winterSo that the feast of the dedication which Christ was pre­sent at in Jerusalem, was no other than that which wasinstituted by Judas, in commemoration of his dedicationof the temple anew, after that it had been cleansed fromidolatrous pollutions: and from hence Grotius, (in hisCommentary on the Gospel of St. John, chap. x. 22,) veryjustly observes, that festival days, in memory of publicblessings, may be piously instituted by persons in author­ity, without a divine command. Prideaxuc1 $ Connection,an. 166. B.
§ Sacrifices, as to their primary object, were designedto appease or honour the Deity: and as the accomplish­ment of that object was of great importance to those whooffered them, it appears a proper expression of their joythat they should feast at the same time. Hence it becameuniversal to feast upon the sacrifices offered unto God. B


4C2







OCR Output








an. 1064.] 249 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


bade him also to go out of the land, as animpure and accursed wretch; and he thankedGod for depriving him of his kingdom, andcausing him to be punished for what injurieshe had done to his master Saul, and this bythe means of his own son. Now when theywere all provoked against him, and angry athim, and particularly Abishai, who had amind to kill Shimei; David restrained hisanger. "Let us not," said he,* "bring uponourselves another fresh misfortune, to thosewe have already; for truly I have not theleast regard nor concern for this dog thatraves at me; I submit myself to God, bywhose permission this man treats me in sucha wild manner. Nor is it any wonder that Iam obliged to undergo these abuses fromhim; whde I experience the like from animpious son of my own. But perhaps Godwill have some commiseration upon us, if itbe his will to overcome them." So he wenton his way, without troubling himself withShimei, who ran along the other side of themountain, and threw out his abusive languageplentifully. But when David was come toJordan, he allowed those that were with himto refresh themselves, for they were weary.When Absalom, and Ahithophel his coun­sellor were come to Jerusalem, with all thepeople, David's friend Kushai came to them.And when he had worshipped Absalom, hewithal wished that his kingdom might last along time, and continue for all ages: butwhen Absalom said to him, " How comes this,that he who was so intimate a friend of myfather's, and appeared faithful to him in allthings, is not with him now, but hath left him,and is come over to me?" Hushai's answerwas very pertinent: for he said, "We oughtto follow God, and the multitude of thepeople; while these therefore, my lord and


master, are with thee, it is fit that I shouldfollow them. For thou hast received thekingdom from God. I will therefore, if thoubelievest me to be thy friend, shew the samefidelity and kindness to thee, which thouknow est 1 have shewn to thy father.f Nor isthere any reason to be in the least dissatisfiedwith the present state of affairs; for thekingdom is not transferred into another, butremains still in the same family, by the son'sreceiving it after his father." This speech
Sersuaded Absalom, who before suspected[ushai. And now he called Ahithophel, andconsulted with him what he ought to do. Hepersuaded him to go in unto his father's con­cubines: for he said, "By this action thepeople will believe that thy difference withthy father is irreconcileable, and will thencefight with great alacrity against thy father: forhitherto they are afraid of taking up openenmity against him, out of an expectation thatyou will be reconciled again." AccordinglyAbsalom was prevailed on by this advice, andcommanded his servants to pitch him a tentupon the top of the royal palace, in the sightof the multitude, and he went in and lay withhis father's concubines. Now this came topass, according to the prediction ofJ Nathan,when he prophesied, and signified to him,that his son would rise up in rebellion againsthim.
And when Absalom had done what he wasadvised to by Ahithophel, he desired hisadvice in the second place, about the waragainst his father. Now Ahithophel onlyasked him to let him have ten thousandchosen men; and he promised he would slayhis father, and bring the soldiers back againin safety: and he said, that the kingdomwould be then firm to him when David wasdead; but not otherwise. Absalom was


* The words of David upon this occasion are, So lethim curse, because the Lord hath said unto him, CurseDavid: Let him alone, let him curse for the Lord hathbidden him; not that God commanded it by his word, forthat severely forbids cursing, Exod. xxii. 28. nor movedhim to it by his Spirit; for neither was that possible, be­cause God tempteth no man, James i. 13. But themeaning is, that the secret providence of God did over­rule and determine him so to do, i. e. God did not put anywickedness into Shimei'a heart, (for he had of himself anheart full of malignity and venom against David,) but onlyleft him to his own wickedness; took away that commonprudence, which would have restrained him from so dan­gerous an action; directed his malice, that it should be
exercised against David, rather than any other man; andbrought him into so distressed a condition, that he mightseem a proper object of his scorn and contempt, which isenough to justify the expression, "The Lord hath biddenhim," in the same manner that we read of his commandingthe ravens, 1 Kings xvii. 4. and sometimes inanimatecreatures, Psal. cxlvii. 15, 18. The short is, Davidlooked upon Shimei as an instrument in God's hands, andtherefore took all his abuses patiently, out of a conscious­ness of his sinfulness, and a reverence to that Deity whohad brought him so low, as to deserve the insults of thevile Benjamite. Pool's Annotations. B.
t 2 Sam. xvi. 19.
J 2 Sam. xii. 11.







OCR Output








ait. 71.] 493 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


that had been slain already, they would takewhat had been done patiently, on account oftheir natural love to their governors: but ifthey must expect the same for the future also,they implored of her a dismission from herservice. For they could not bear to think ofattempting any method for their deliverancewithout her: but would rather die wiHingly,before the palace gate, in case she would notforgive them. And that it was a great shame,both for themselves, and for the queen, thatwhen they were neglected by her, they shouldcome under the lash of her husband's ene­mies. For that Aretas, the Arabian king,and the *monarchs, would give any rewardif they could get such men as foreign aux­iliaries; to whom their very names mightperhaps be terrible. But if they could notobtain this their second request, and if shehad determined to prefer the Pharisees be­fore them, they still insisted that she wouldplace them, every one in her fortresses. Forthat if some fatal demon had a constant spiteagainst Alexander's house, they would bewilling to bear their part, and to live in aprivate station there.
As these men spake thus, and called uponAlexander's ghost for commiseration of thosealready slain, and those in danger of death;all the bystanders burst into tears. But Aris-tobulus chiefly manifested what were his sen­timents; and used many reproachful expres­sions to his mother, saying, "Nay indeed thecase is this; that they have been themselvesthe authors of their own calamities, who havepermitted a woman, who against reason wasmad with ambition, to reign over them, whenthere were sons in the flower of their age fit­ter for it." So Alexandra, not knowing whatto do with any decency, committed the for­tresses to them, all but Hyrcania, Alexan-drium, and Macherus, where her principaltreasures were. After a little while also, sheBent Aristobulus with an army to Damascus,against Ptolemy, who was called Menneus.But he did nothing considerable there, andso returned home.


About this time news was brought" that Ti-granes, king of Armenia, had made an irrup­tion into Syria with "[five hundred thousandsoldiers; and was coming against Judea.This intelligence, as may well be supposed,terrified the queen and the nation. Accord­ingly they sent ambassadors to him withmany valuable presents; as he was besiegingPtolemais. For Selene, who was also calledCleopatra, ruled then over Syria; having per­suaded the inhabitants to exclude Tigranes.So the Jewish ambassadors interceded withhim, and intreated him that he would deter­mine nothing that was severe about theirqueen or nation. He commended them forthe respects they paid him at so great a dis­tance: and gave them good hopes of his fa­vour.:}: But as soon as Ptolemais was taken,news came to Tigranes, that Lucullus in hispursuit of Mithridates, could not overtakehim: for he had fled into Iberia; and waslaying fwaste Armenia, and besieging itscities. Now when Tigranes knew this, hereturned home.
After this, when the queen was fallen intoa dangerous distemper, Aristobulus resolvedto attempt seizing upon the government.Accordingly he stole away secretly by night,with only one of his servants, and went to thefortresses, wherein his friends, that were suchfrom the days of his father, were settled. Foras he had been a great while displeased at hismother's conduct, so he was now much moreafraid, lest, upon her death, their whole familyshould be under the power of the PhariseesiFor he saw the inability of his brother, whowas to succeed her in the government. Norwas any one conscious of what he was doing,but only his wife, whom he left at Jerusalem,with their children. He first of all came to||Agaba, where was Galestes, one of the po­tent men beforementioned; and was receivedby him. When it was day Alexandra per­ceived that Aristobulus was fled: and forsome time she supposed that his departurewas not in order to make any innovation.But when messengers came one after another,


* See Of the War, Book I. chap. 20.
t The number of 600,000, or even 300,000, as oneGreek copy, with the Latin copies, have it, for Tigranes'sarmy, that came out of Armenia into Syria and Judea;seems much too large. We have had already severalsuch extravagant numbers in Josephus's present copies,
which are not to be ascribed to him. Accordingly I in­cline to Dr. Hudson's emendation here, which suppose!them but 40,000.
I An. 71.
II Or, Argob.
. ... -


4 I 2







OCR Output








382 [book X. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


Cyrus, king of Persia, and Darius, king ofMedia, make war. And when he was be­sieged in Babylon, there happened a won­derful and prodigious vision. He set downat supper in a large room, and there were agreat many vessels of silver, such as weremade for royal entertainments; and he hadwith him his concubines, and his friends.Whereupon he commanded that those ves­sels of gold, which Nebuchadnezzar hadtaken out of Jerusalem, and had not madeuse of, but had put them into his own temple,should be brought out of that temple. Healso grew so haughty, as to proceed to usethem in the midst of his cups, drinking outof them, and blaspheming against God. Inthe mean time he saw a hand proceed outof the wall, and writing certain syllables.*At this sight he was disturbed, and calledthe magicians and Chaldeans together, andall that sort of men that were among these


harbarians, and were able to interpret sign?and dreams, that they might explain thewriting to him.f But when the magicianssaid they could discover nothing, nor didunderstand it; the king was in great disor­der of mind, and under great trouble at thissurprising accident.J So he caused it to beproclaimed through all the country, andpromised that to him who could explain thewriting, and give the signification thereof, hewould give a golden chain for his neck, andpermission to wear a purple garment, as didthe kings of Chaldea; and would bestowon him the third part of his own dominions.When the proclamation was made, the ma­gicians ran together more earnestly, andwere very ambitious to find out the importof the writing, but still hesitated about itas much as before. Now when the king'sgrandmother|| saw him cast down at thisaccident, she began to encourage him, and


after the hand-writing on the wall that Baltasar wasslain, does not so well agree with our copies of Da­niel; which say it was the same night; Daniel v. 30.But then it must be observed, that Theodoret directly
Snotes Josephus for the confirmation of our copies of•aniel, and particularly for affirming that he was slainthe same night also. Whose testimony is here set downat large by Dr. Hudson.* Daniel v. 5.
t The writing very probably might be in a characterunknown to the Chaldeans, as the old Hebrew, Phoeni­cian, and Samaritan were; or if they were acquaintedwith the character, yet such is the genius of most of theoriental languages, where so little use is made of vowels,and where the pronunciation and sequel of the discoursegenerally determine the signification of the letters, that aman may be a perfect master of a language, and yet notable to read and comprehend a word, when it standsalone, and without any context, as it is in the case ofMene. Tekel. Upharsin. A man, for instance, that un­derstands the Hebrew tongue ever so well, were he tomeet dbr standing alone, would have much ado to readthem, because, according to the manner that we pro­nounce them, the letters will admit of many differentsignifications; and it is much the same in the Chaldeelanguage, wherein the words we are now speaking of werewrote. Calmet's Commentary on Daniel v. 7. B.
J The king's words are these,—Whosoever shall readthis writing, and shew me the interpretation thereof, shallbe clothed with scarlet, and have a chain of gold abouthis neck, and shall be the third ruler in the kingdom.Daniel v. 7. From whence it appears, that the kings ofBabylon wore the same ornaments, and, in rewardingtheir favourites, gave the same marks of honour that thekings of Persia and their successors did. For purple, wefind, in several Greek authors, was the ordinary habits ofthe kings of Persia, and of the princes of their court thatwere in the highest posts of honour. The chain or collarof gold was one of the greatest marks of distinction that
the Persian kings could bestow upon their subjects; andto be the third ruler of the kingdom, was the same sub­lime office that Darius the Mede put Daniel in, chap. vi.1, 2. when he constituted him one of the presidents overthe hundred and twenty princes that he had made go­vernors over provinces. Xenophon's Cyropadia, lib. viii.Diodorus, lib. xviii. Josephui,s Antiquities, lib. xi. c. 6.Brisson, De Regno Persar. lib. i. B.
|| This grandmother, or mother of Baltasar, the queendowager of Babylon, (for she is distinguished from hisqueen, Daniel v. 10, 23.) seems to have been the famousNitocris, who fortified Babylon against the Medes andPersians; and in all probability governed it under Bal­tasar, who seems to have been a weak and effeminateprince. Whether Baltasar were the son or grandson ofthe great Nebuchadnezzar, will be best understood bythe following passage out of some observations 1 formerlymade, when I carefully read over Mr. Hutchinson's ex­cellent edition of Xenophon's Ku£* TXtuSem, as follows:"Xenophon, who made his Persian expedition not till onehundred and twenty-eight years after the death of Cyrus,and never seems to have been at Babylon, nor ever namesany king of Babylon; (as perhaps not knowing theirnames; always and only calling each of them tiv Aottupiov,the Assyrian king, in agreement with Ptolemy's Canon ;)took the last king of Babylon to be the son of his prede­cessor, and the same that injured Gobryas and Gadates,page 307, 529. Berosus also, who lived still much later,took Niricassolassar for the sister's husband, and puts inLaborosoarchod, who is not in the Canon. Perhaps wehad better follow the Scripture, and the Canon, as elder,and indeed contemporary records; and say, that Ilvaro-damus or Evil-Merodach was the son, and Niricassolassarthe grandson of Nebuchadnezzar; and that Baltasar orNabonadius was the uncle of Niricassolassar, and the sonof Nebuchadnezzar, by another wife, Nitocris. See Ba-ruch i. 11. 2 Chron. xxxvi. 20. Jer. xxvii. 7. Danielv. 18, 22. And perhaps Laborosoarchod was no morethan a first minister under Baltasar at first; as the queen







OCR Output








AN. 161.] 453 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


festival day. The Jewish nation were, forsome time afterward, free from wars, and en­joyed peace. But they returned into theirformer state of wars and hazards.
Now, as the high-priest, Alcimus, was re­solving to pull down the wall of the sanctu­ary, which had been there of old time, andhad been built by the holy prophets,* he wassmitten suddenly by God. This stroke madehim fall down speechless upon the ground;and undergoing torments for many days, heat length died; when he had been high-priestfour years. And when he was dead, thepeople bestowed the high-priesthood onfJudas. Who hearing of the powerJ of theRomans, and that they had conquered in warGalatia, Iberia, Carthage, and Libya; andthat, besides these, they had subdued Greece,and the kings Perseus and Philip, and Anti-ochus the Great; he resolved to enter into aleague of friendship with them. He there­fore sent to Rome some of his friends; Eupo-lemus the son of John, and Jason the son ofEleazar; and by them desired the Romansthat they would assist them, and be theirfriends; and would write to Demetrius thathe would not fight against the Jews. So thesenate received the ambassadors that cameto Rome from Judns, and discoursed withthem about the errand on which they came;and then granted them a league of assistance.They also made a decree concerning it, andsent a copy of it into Judea. It was also laidup in the capitol, and engraven in brass. Thedecree itself was this:—


"The decree of the senate concerning aleague of assistance and friendship with thenation of the Jews. It shall not be lawfulfor any that are subject to the Romans tomake war with the nation of the Jews, nor toassist those that do so; either by sendingthem corn, ships, or money. And if anyattack be made upon the Jews, the Romansshall assist them as far as they are able. Andagain, if any attack be made upon the Ro­mans, the Jews shall assist them. And if thenation of the Jews have a mind to add to, orto take away any thing from this league ofassistance, that shall be done with the com­mon consent of the Romans. And whatso­ever addition shall thus be made, it shall beof force."
This decree was written by Eupolemus,the son of John, and by Jason, the son ofEleazar;|| when Judas was the high-priestof the nation, and Simon, his brother, wasgeneral of the army. And this was the firstleague that the Romans made with the Jews.
CHAP. XI.
OF THE SECOND EXPEDITION OF BACCHIDES AGAINST THEJEWS, AND THE DEATH OF JUDAS MACCABEUS.
WHEN Demetrius was informed of thedeath of Nicanor, and of the destruc­tion of the army that was with him, he sentBacchides again with an army into Judea.Accordingly, he marched out of Antioch, andcame into Judea, and pitched his camp atArbela, a city of Galilee; and having besieged


Megillath Taanith. They now fast on that day, in me­mory of Esther's fast before the days of Purim." See2 Mace. xv. 36.
* This account of the miserable death of Alcimus orJacimus, the wicked high-priest, (the first that was not ofthe family of the high-priest, and made by a vile heathenLysias ;) before the death of Judas; and of Judas's suc­cession to him as high-priest, both here and at the con­clusion of this book, directly contradicts 1 Mace. ix. 54
57. which places his death after that of Judas; and saysnot a syllable of the high-priesthood of Judas. This ac­count is also inconsistent with Josephus's own most accu­rate scheme of the chronology of the Jewish high-priests,at the end of the Antiquities: where, instead of any years'high-priesthood ascrihed to Judas, which are three yearsat the end of this 12th book, he makes an interregnum inthe pontificate after Alcimus or Jacimus, for seven years;and allows Alcimus or Jacimus to have been high-priestbut three years, instead of four years here. These errorsseem to imply, that the copy of the first book of Macca­bees, which Josephus used when he wrote this 12th book,
had the number four for the duration of Akimus's high-priesthood; and had a dislocation of the verses above-mentioned; which then appeared at the end of the 7thchapter; and that afterwards he met with a better copy,whence he corrected his former errors. Which is athing by no means unusual in the works of this author.
t That the Asmoneans might be the direct heirs of thehigh-priesthood of Judea upon the extirpation of the oldfamily from Joshua, the son of Josedek, see Prideaux,at the years 153 and 141.
J How well the Roman histories agree with this ac­count of the conquests and powerful condition of the Ro­mans at this time, see the notes in Havereamp's edition.Only that the number of the senators of Rome was thenjust 320, is, I think, only known from 1 Maccabees viii. 15.
II This subscription is wanting, 1 Mace. viii. 17, 29.and must be the words of Josephus; who, by mistake,thought, as we have just now seen, that Judas was at thistime high-priest; and accordingly reckoned his brotherJonathan to be then general of the army; which yet heseems not to have been till after the death of Judas.


4D2







OCR Output








418 [book XI. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


had given the high-priest his right hand, thepriests ran along by him; and he came intothe city.* And when he went up into thetemple, he offered sacrifice to God, accordingto the high-priest's direction: and magnifi­cently treated both the high-priest, and thepriests. And whenf the book of Daniel wasshewn to him, wherein Daniel declared thatone of the Greeks should destroy the empireof the Persians, he supposed that himself wasthe person intended. And as he was thenglad, he dismissed the multitude for the pre­sent: but the next day he called them to him,and bade them ask what favours they pleasedof him. Accordingly the high-priest desiredthat they might enjoy the laws of their fore­fathers, and might pay no tribute the seventhyear. This was readily granted. And whenthey intreated that he would permit the Jewsin Babylon and Media to enjoy their own lawsalso, he willingly promised to do hereafterwhat they desired. And when he said to themultitude, that if any of them would enlistthemselves in his army, on the condition thatthey should continue under the laws of theirforefathers, and live according to them, hewas willing to take them with him; manywere ready to accompany him in his wars.
When Alexander had thus settled mattersat Jerusalem, he led his army into the neigh­bouring cities. And when all the inhabitants,to whom he came, received him with greatkindness, the Samaritans, who had then She-chem for their metropolis, (a city situate atmount Gerizzim, and inhabited by apostatesof the Jewish nation;) seeing that Alexanderhad so greatly honoured the Jews, determinedto profess themselves Jews. For such is thedisposition of the Samaritans, as we have al-readyJ declared, that when the Jews are inadversity, they deny that they are of kin tothem; and then they confess the truth. Butwhen they perceive that some good fortunehath befallen them, they immediately pretend


to have communion with them, saying, thatthey belong to them; and derive their gene­alogy from the posterity of Joseph, Ephraim,and Manasseh. Accordingly, they made theiraddress to the king with splendour; andshewed great alacrity in meeting him, at alittle distance from Jerusalem. And whenAlexander had commended them, the She-chemites approached to him: taking alongwith them the troops that Sanballat had senthim: and they desired that he would cometo their city, and do honour to their templealso. To whom he promised, that when hereturned he would come to them. And whenthey petitioned that he would remit the tri­bute of the seventh year to them, becausethey did not sow thereon; he asked who theywere that made such a petition; and whenthey said that they were Hebrews, but hadthe name of Sidonians, living at Shechem:he asked them again whether they wereJews? And when they said they were notJews, "It was to the Jews," said he, "thatI granted that privilege: however, when I re­turn, and am thoroughly informed by youof this matter, I will do what I shall thinkproper." And in this manner took leave ofthe Shechemites: but ordered that the troopsof Sanballat should follow him into Egypt,because there he designed to give themlands, which he did a little after in Thebais,when he ordered them to guard that country.On the death of Alexander j| the governmentwas divided among his successors, but thetemple upon mount Gerizzim remained. Andif any one were accused by those of Jerusa­lem of having eaten things§ common, or ofhaving broken the sabbath, or of any othercrime of the like nature, he fled away to theShechemites, and said that he was accusedunjustly. About this time it was that Jaddua,the high-priest, died: and Onias, the son, tookthe high-priesthood. This was the state of theaffairs of the people of Jerusalem at this time.


* The time of the year when Alexander came to Je­rusalem, seems rightly determined by the Rabbins inMegillath Taanith; when they keep the 21st of Casleu, afestival in memory of their superiority over the Samari­tans'at this time: as Reland here informs us. See thesame discourse, page 56. Reland informs us farther thatthe same book says, the principal Jews were in white gar­ments; with other circumstances agreeing with Josephus.
( The passages shewn to the king upon this occasion
might be Dan. vii. 6. viii. 3—8, 20, 21, 22. xi. 3. someor all of them very plain predictions of Alexander's con­quests and successes.
J See Book IX. Chap. 14.
II An. 323.
§ Here Josephus uses the very word " eating Kwoipwym,things common," for " eating things unclean;" as does ourNew Testament, Acts x. 14,15, 28, xi. 8,9. Rom. xiv. 14.See the like in Josephus, XII. 7.







OCR Output








ait. 1493.1 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWR


tilings, and a memorial for myself, when youshall be in the fruition of great plenty andprosperity. Let me, therefore, suggest to youby what means you may be happy, and mayleave an eternal prosperous possession toyour children after you; and then let me goout of the world. And I cannot but deserveto be believed by you, both on account of thegreat things I have already done for you, andbecause, when souls are about to leave thebody, they speak with the sincere.st freedom.O* children of Israel! there is but one sourceof happiness for all mankind, the favour ofGod: for he alone is able to give good thingsto those that deserve them, and to deprivethose of them that sin against him. If youbehave yourselves according to his will, andaccording to what I, who well understand hismind, do advise, you will both be esteemedblessed, and will be admired by all men, andwill never come into misfortunes, nor ceaseto be happy; you will then preserve the pos­session of the good things you already have,and will quickly obtain those that you at pre­sent are in want of. Only be obedient tothose whom God would have you to follow.Nor prefer any other constitution of govern­ment before the laws now given you; neitherdisregard that way of Divine worship whichyou now have, nor change it for any otherform. And if you do this, you will be mostcourageous of all men, in undergoing the fa­tigues of war; and will not be easily con­quered by any of your enemies. For whileGod is present to assist you, it is to be ex­pected that you will be able to despise theopposition of all mankind. And great rewardsof virtue are proposed to you, if you preservethat virtue through your whole lives. Itselfis indeed the principal and the first reward;and after that he bestows abundance ofothers. So that your exercise of virtue to­wards other men, will make your own liveshappy, and render you more glorious thanforeigners can be; and procure you an un­disputed reputation with posterity. Theseblessings you will be able to obtain, in caseyou hearken to and observe those lawswhich, by divine revelation, I have ordained


for you; that is, in case you meditate uponthe wisdom that is in them. I am now goingfrom you, rejoicing in the good things youenjoy; and I recommend you to the wise con­duct of your law, to the becoming order ofyour polity, and to the virtues of your com­manders; who will take care of what is foryour advantage. And that God, who hasbeen till now your leader, and by whose goodwill 1 have myself been useful to you, will notput a period now to his providence over you:but as long as you desire to have him yourprotector, in your pursuits after virtue, so long-will you enjoy his care over you. Your high-priest also, Eleazar, as well as Joshua, withthe senate, and chief of your tribes, will gobefore you, and suggest the best advices toyou; by following which advices you willcontinue to be happy: to them, therefore, doyou give ear without reluctance; as sensible,that all such that know well how to be go­verned, will also know how to govern, if theybe promoted to that authority themselves.And do not you esteem liberty to consist inopposing such directions as your governorsthink fit to give you for your practice; as atpresent, indeed, you place your liberty innothing else but abusing your benefactors:which error if you can avoid for the time tocome, your affairs will be in a better condi­tion than they have hitherto been. Nor doyou ever indulge such a degree of passion inthese matters, as you have oftentimes donewhen you have been very angry at me: foryou know that I have been oftener in dangerof death from you, than from our enemies.What I now put you in mind is not done inorder to reproach you: for I do not think itproper, now I am going out of the world, tobring this to your remembrance, in order toleave you offended at me; since at the timewhen I underwent those hardships, I was notangry at you; but I do it in order to makeyou wiser hereafter, and to teach you thatthis will be for your security; I mean thatyou never be injurious to those that presideover you, even when you are become rich; asyou will be to a great degree when you havepassed over Jordan, and are in possession of


* Josephus, in this one sentence, sums up his notion ofMoses's very long and serious exhortations in the book ofDeuteronomy. And his words are so true, and of suchimportance, that they deserve to be had in constant re-
membrance both by Jews and Christians: "O children ofIsrael! there is but one source of happiness for all man­kind, the favour of God."


 







OCR Output








Air 1020.] 293 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


tween these sorts of wood; nor unacquaintedwith the nature of the genuine pine-tree.
Now the weight of gold that was broughtthe king was six hundred and sixty-sixtalents; not including what was brought bythe merchants; nor what the toparchs andkings of Arabia gave him in presents; he alsocast two hundred targets of gold, each ofthem weighing six hundred shekels. Healso made three hundred shields, every oneweighing three pounds of gold; and he hadthem carried, and put into that house whichwas called the forest of Lebanon. He alsomade cups of gold, and of precious stones,for the entertainment of his guests; and hadthem adorned in the most curious manner;and he contrived that all his other furnitureof vessels should be of gold; for there wasnothing then to be sold or bought for silver.For the king had many ships which lay uponthe sea at Tarsus; these he commanded tocarry out all sorts of merchandise unto theremotest nations; by the sale of which silverand gold were brought to the king, and agreat quantity of ivory, and Ethiopians andapes; and they finished their voyage, goingand returning, in three years' time.
Accordingly there went* a great fame allround the neighbouring countries, which pro­claimed the virtue and wisdom of Solomon;insomuch that all the kings were desirous tosee him; as not giving credit to what was re­ported, on account of its being most incre­dible; they also demonstrated the regardthey had for him, by the presents they madehim. For they sent him vessels of gold andsilver, and purple garments, and many sortsof spices, and horses, and chariots, and as


many mules for his carriages as they couldfind proper to please the king's eyes, by theirstrength and beauty. This addition that hemade to those chariots and horses which hehad before from these that were sent him,augmented the number of his chariots byabove four hundred; for he had a thousandbefore;f and augmented the number of hishorses by two thousand; for he had twentythousand before. These horses also were somuch exercised, in order to their making afine appearance, and running swiftly, that noothers could upon the comparison appeareither finer or swifter; but they were at oncethe most beautiful of all others, and theirswiftness was incomparable also. Theirriders were a farther ornament to them,being in the first place young men in themost delightful flower of their age; and emi­nent for their stature, far taller than othermen. They had also very long hair, hangingdown, and were clothed in garments ofTyrian purple. They had also dust of goldevery day sprinkled on their hair; so thattheir heads sparkled with the reflection ofthe sun's beams from the gold. The kinghimself rode upon a chariot in the midst ofthese men, who were still in armour, and hadtheir bows fitted to them. He had on a whitegarment; and used to take his progress outof the city in the morning. There was a cer­tain place about fifty furlongs distant fromJerusalem, which is called JEtham; verypleasant in fine gardens, and abounding withrivulets of water. Thither did he use to goout in the morning, sitting on high in hischariot.
Now Solomon had a divine sagacity in all


who perhaps brought elephants out of India, or at leasttook care to have a great deal of i?ory imported fromthence, for, in after ages, we read of ivory beds, andivory palaces, &c. At this time, however, it was everywhit as precious as gold: and therefore we must not sup­pose that this throne of Solomon's was entirely overlaidwith gold, (for then it might as well be made of wood,)but only in particular places, that so the mixture of goldand ivory, which gave a lustre to each other, might makethe throne look more beautiful. The like to this, the textsays, there was not made in any kingdom, 1 Kings x. 20.and perhaps it was so in those days; but, in after ages,we read, that the throne of the Parthian kings was of gold,encompassed with four golden pillars, beset with preciousstones; and that the Persian kings sat in judgment undera golden vine, (and other trees of gold,) the bunches ofwhose grapes were made of several sorts of preciousstones. Patrick's Commentary. B.
* About an. 1018.
t 1 Kings x. 26.
J Whether these fine gardens and rivulets of Etham,about six miles from Jerusalem, whither Solomon rode sooften in state, be not those alluded to, Eccles. ii. 5, 6.where he says, he made him gardens and orchards, andplanted trees in them of all kinds of fruits: he made himpools of water, to water the wood that bringeth forthtrees: and to the finest part whereof he seems to allude,when in the Canticles be compares his spouse to a gardenenclosed, to a spring shut up, to a fountain sealed, chap,iv. 12. (part of which fountains are still extant, as Mr.Maundrell informs us, page 87, 88.) cannot now be cer­tainly determined; but may very probably be conjectured.Rut whether this Etham has any relation to those riversof Etham, which Providence once dried up, in a miracu­lous manner, Psal. Ixxiv. 15. in the Septuagint and Con-stitut. Apost. VIII. 12. page 402. I cannot say.


3G2







OCR Output








/)38 [book XV. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS


■!


and many presents with him: and desiredhim, in the most obliging way, that he wouldbe no hindrance to his gratitude toward hisbenefactor. But this zeal of Herod's didnot flow from that principle: but becausehe had been made governor of that countrywithout having any just claim to it, he wasafraid afterward of a change in his condi­tion: and so made what haste he could toget Hyrcanus into his power: or indeed toput him quite out of the way. Which lastthing he effected.
Accordingly, when Hyrcanus came, full ofassurance, by the permission of the king ofParthia, and at the expense of the Jews, whosupplied him with money: Herod receivedhim with all possible respect, and gave himthe upper place at public meetings, and sethim above all the rest at feasts: and therebydeceived him. He called him his father; andendeavoured, by all the ways possible, that hemight have no suspicion of any treacherousdesign against him. He also did other thingsin order to secure his government: which yetoccasioned a sedition in his own family. Forbeing cautious how he made any *illustriousperson the high-priest of God, he sent for anobscure priest out of Babylon, whose namewas Ananelus, and bestowed the high-priest­hood upon him.
However, Alexandra, the daughter of Hyr­canus, and wife of Alexander, the son ofAristobulus the king, who had also broughtAlexander two children, could not bear thisindignity. Now this son was one of thegreatest comeliness, and was called Aristo­bulus: and the daughter Mariamne was mar­ried to Herod, and eminent for her beautyalso. This Alexandra was much disturbed,and took the indignity offered to her sonexceeding ill: that while he was alive, anyone else should be sent for to have the dig­nity of the high-priesthood conferred uponhim. Accordingly she wrote to Cleopatra,(a musician assisting her in taking care to


have her letters carried;) to desire her in­tercession with Antony, in order to gain thehigh-priesthood for her son.
But as Antony was slow in granting thisrequest, his friend fDellius came into Judeaupon some affairs; and when he saw Aristo­bulus, he stood in admiration at the tallnessand handsomeness of the child; and no less atMariamne the king's wife: and was open inhis commendations of Alexandra, as themother of most beautiful children. And whenshe came to discourse with him, he persuadedher to get pictures drawn of them both, andto send them to Antony: for that when hesaw them, he would deny her nothing thatshe should ask. Accordingly Alexandra waselevated with these words of his, and sentthe pictures to Antony. Dellius also talkedextravagantly, and said, that these childrenseemed not derived from men, but from somegod. His design in doing so was to enticeAntony into lewd pleasures with them. Hewas ashamed to send for the damsel, as beingthe wife of Herod; and avoided it, becauseof the reproaches he should have from Cleo­patra on that account: but he sent, in themost decent manner he could, for the youngman: but added this withal, "Unless hethought it hard upon him so to do." Whenthis letter was brought to Herod, he did notthink it safe to send one so handsome as wasAristobulus, in the prime of his life; (for hewas sixteen years of age, and of so noble afamily:) and particularly not to Antony, theprincipal man among the Romans, and theone that would abuse him in his amours; andbesides, one that openly indulged himself insuch pleasures as his power allowed him,without control. He therefore wrote backto him, that "If this boy should only go outof the country, all would be in a state of warand uproar; because the Jews were in hopesof a change in the government; and to haveanother king over them."
When Herod had thus excused himself to


* Here we have an eminent example of Herod'sworldly and profane politics; when, by the abuse of hisunlawful and usurped power, to make whom he pleasedhigh-priest, in the person of Ananelus, he occasioned suchdisturbances in his kingdom, and in his own family, assuffered him to enjoy no lasting peace or tranquillity everafterward. And such is frequently the effect of profanecourt politics about matters of religion in other ages andnations. The Old Testament is full of the miseries of
the people of the Jews derived from such court politics:especially in, and after the days of Jeroboam, the son ofNebat, who made Israel to sin; who gave the most per­nicious example of it; who brought on the grossest cor­ruption of religion by it; and the punishment of whosefamily for it was most remarkable. The case is too wellknown to require particular citations.
t Of this wicked Dellius, see the note On the War,I. 15.







OCR Output








y


E







OCR Output








an. 586.] 378 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


one of a very eminent family, and exceed­ingly skilful in the language of his country.When Nebuzaradan had done thus, he madehaste to Babylon. But as to those that fledaway during the siege of Jerusalem, andhad been scattered over the country; whenthey heard that the Babylonians were goneaway, and had left a remnant in the land ofJerusalem, and those such as were to culti­vate the same; they came together from allparts to Gedaliah to Mispah. Now the ru­lers that were over them, were Johanan, theson of Kareah; and Jezaniah, and Seraiah,and others beside them. Now there was ofthe royal family one Ishmael, a wicked man,and very crafty; who, during the siege ofJerusalem, fled to Baalis, the king of theAmmonites, and abode with him during thattime. And Gedaliah persuaded them, nowthey were there, to stay with him, and haveno fear of the Babylonians; for that if theywould cultivate the country, they should suf­fer no harm. This he assured them of byoath, and said, that they should have him fortheir patron; and, that if any disturbanceshould arise, they should find him ready todefend them. He also advised them to dwellin any city, as every one of them pleased;and to send men along with his own servants,and rebuild their houses upon the old founda­tions, and dwell there. And he admonished


them beforehand, that they should make pre­paration while the season lasted, of corn andwine, and oil; to subsist during the winter.When he had thus discoursed to them, hedismissed them; that every one might dwellin what part of the country he pleased.
When this report was spread abroad asfar as the nations that bordered on Judea,that Gedaliah kindly entertained those thatcame to him, after they had fled away, uponcondition that they should pay tribute to theking of Babylon; they also came readily toGedaliah, and inhabited the country. Andwhen Johanan, and the rulers that were withhim, observed the country, and the humanityof Gedaliah, they were exceedingly in lovewith him, and told him, that Baalis, theking of the Ammonites, had sent Ishmael tokill him by treachery, and secretly; that hemight have the dominion over the Israelites,as being of the royal family; and they said,that he might deliver himself from his trea­cherous design, if he would give them leaveto slay Ishmael, and nobody should know it.For they told him they were afraid, thatwhen he was killed by the other, the entireruin of the remaining strength of the Israel­ites would ensue. But he professed, that hedid not believe what they said, when theytold him of such a treacherous design in aman that had been well treated by him;


disciple to go along with them, where the prophet died,and Baruch soon after made his escape to his brethren inBabylon, where, according to the tradition of the Rab­bins, he likewise died in the twelfth year of his captivity.'But of what authority the book, which goes under hisname, is, or by whom it was written, and whether anything related therein be historically true, or the wholeof it a fiction, is altogether uncertain. Grotius, in hisCommentary upon it, thinks it an entire fiction of someHellenistical Jew, under the name of Baruch. And St.Jerom, long before him, (in the preface to his Expositionof Jeremiah,) tells us, that the reason why he did notmake a comment on this book, though, in the edition ofthe Septuagint, it be joined with Jeremiah, was, because itwas not deemed canonical among the Hebrews, and con­tains an epistle which falsely bears the name of Jeremiah.This epistle is annexed to the book, and, in the commondivision of it, makes the last chapter. But the main sub­ject of the book itself is likewise an epistle, either sent, orfeigned to be sent, by king Jehoiakim, and the Jews whowere in captivity with him in Babylon, to their brethrenthe Jews who were still left in Judah and Jerusalem:wherein they recommend to their prayers the emperorNebuchadnezzar and his children, that, under his domi­nion, they may lead quiet and peaceable lives; whereinthey confess their sins, and ask pardon for what is past,
take notice of the threats of the prophets, which they hadso long despised, and acknowledge the righteousness ofGod in what he had brought upon them: wherein theyremind them of the advantage which the Jews had in theirknowledge of the law of God, and of true wisdom, aboveall other nations, and thereupon exhorted them to reformtheir manners, and forsake their evil customs, which wouldbe the only means to bring about their deliverance fromthe captivity under which they groaned. The whole isintroduced with an historical preface, wherein it is related,that Baruch, being then at Babylon, did, in the name ofthe captive king, and his people, draw up the same epistle,and afterwards read it to them for their approbation; andthat, together with it, they sent a collection of money tothe high-priest at Jerusalem, for the maintenance of thedaily sacrifices. This is the substance of the book itself:and, in the letter annexed to it, which goes under Jere­miah's name, the vanity of the Babylonish idols and idol­atry is set forth at large, and with liveliness enough. Ofthe whole there are but three copies; one in Greek, andthe other two in Syriac, whereof one agreeth with theGreek, though the other very much differs from it: butin what language it was originally written, or whether oneof these be not the original, or which of them may be so,it is next to impossible to tell. Prideaux's Connection,anno 595, and Calmet's Preface stir Baruch. B.







OCR Output








426 [book XII. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


him, and delivered him the epistle which theybrought from the high-priest, and answeredall the questions he put to them by word ofmouth. He then hastened to meet the elders,that came from Jerusalem, for the interpre­tation of the laws; and he gave commandthat other men who came on other occasions,should be sent away: which was a thing sur­prising, and what he did not use to do. Forthose that were drawn thither upon such oc­casions used to come to him on the fifth day:but ambassadors at the month's end. Butwhen he had sent those away, he waited forthese that were sent by Eleazar. But as theold man came in with the presents, which thehigh-priest had given them to bring to theking, and with the membranes, upon whichthey had their laws written in golden let­ters;* he put questions ta them concerningthose books. And when they had taken offthe covers wherein they were wrapt up, theyshewed him the membranes. So the kingstood admiring the thinness of those mem­branes, and the exactness of the junctures;which could not be perceived; so exactlywere they connected one with another: andthis he did for a considerable time. He thensaid, that he returned them thanks for com­ing to him, and still greater thanks to himthat sent them, arid above all to that Godwhose laws they appeared to be. Then didthe elders, and those that were present withthem, cry out with one voice, and wished allhappiness to the king: upon which he was soaffected that he burst into tears. It being na­tural to men to afford the same indications ingreat joy, that they do under sorrows. Andwhen he had bidden them to deliver the booksto those who were appointed to receive them,he saluted the men: and said that it was butjust to discourse in the first place of the errandthey were sent about: and then to addresshimself to them. He promised, however, thathe would make this day on which they cameto him remarkable and eminent every yearthrough the whole course of his life. For


their coming to him, and the victory which hegained over Antigonus by sea, proved to beon the very same day. He also gave ordersthat they should sup with him: and gave incharge that they should have excellent lodg­ings provided in the upper part of the city.
Now he that was appointed to take care ofthe reception of strangers, Nicanor by name,called for Dorotheus; whose duty it was tomake provisions for them; and bade him pre­pare for every one of them what should berequisite for their diet and way of living.Which thing was ordered by the king afterthis manner. He took care for those thatbelonged to every city, which did not usethe same way of living, that all things shouldbe prepared for them according to the cus­tom of those that came to him; that beingfeasted according to the usual method oftheir own way of living, they might be thebetter pleased, and might not be uneasy atany thing done to them, from which theywere naturally averse. And this was nowdone in the case of these men by Dorotheus;who was put into this office because of hisskill in such matters. For he took care ofall things which concerned this reception ofstrangers; and appointed them double seatsfor them to sit on, according as the king hadcommanded. For he had ordered that halfof their seats should be set at his hand, andthe other half behind his table: and he tookcare that no respect should be omitted thatcould be shewn them. And when they werethus set down, he bade Dorotheus ministerto all those who were come to him from Ju-dea, after the manner they used to be minis­tered to. For which cause he sent away theirsacred heralds; and those that slew the sacri­fices, and the rest that used to say grace. Butcalled to one of those that were come to him,whose name was Eleazar, who was a priest,and desired him to say grace :| who thenstood in the midst of them, and prayed, "thatall prosperity might attend the king, andthose that were his subjects." Hereupon an


* The Talnradists say, that it is not lawful to write thelaw in letters of gold: contrary to this certain and veryancient example. See Hudson's and Reland's noteshere.
| This is the most ancient example that I have metwith, of a grace, or a short prayer before meat: whichas it used to be said by a heathen priest, who was one ofthese seventy-two interpreters. The next example I
have met with, is that of the Essenes, Of the War II. 8.both before and after it. The next are those of our Sa­viour before it, Mark viii. 6. John vi. 11, 23. and St. Paul,Acts xxvii. 35. The next is a form of such a grace orprayer for Christians, at the end of the 5th book of theApostolical Constitutions; which seems to have been in­tended for both times, both before and after meat .







OCR Output








an. 1532.] 97 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


CHAP. vin.


OF THE PRIESTHOOD OF AAROH.
WHEN what has been described wasbrought to a conclusion, gifts notbeing yet presented, God appeared to Moses,and enjoined him to bestow the high-priest­hood upon Aaron* his brother; as upon himthat best deserved to obtain that honour, onaccount of his virtue; and when he had ga­thered the multitude together, he gave theman account of Aaron's virtue, and of his goodwill to them, and of the dangers he had un­dergone for their sakes, upon which, whenthey had given testimony to them in all re­spects, and shewed their readiness to receivehim, Moses said to them, "O ye Israelites,this work is already brought to a conclusion,in a manner most acceptable to God, and ac­cording to our abilities: and now, since yousee that he is received into this tabernacle,we shall first of all stand in need of one thatmay officiate for us, and may minister to thesacrifices, and to the prayers that are to beput up for us. And, indeed, had the enquiryafter such a person been left to me, I shouldhave thought myself worthy of this honour,both because all men are naturally fond ofthemselves, and because I am conscious tomyself that I have taken a great deal of painsfor your deliverance: but now God himselfhas determined that Aaron is worthy of thishonour, and has chosen him for his priest, asknowing him to be the most righteous personamong you: so that he is to put on the vest­ments which are consecrated to God; he isto have the care of the altars, and to makeprovision for the sacrifices; and he it is thatmust, put up prayers for you to God, who willreadily hear them, not only because he ishimself solicitous for your nation, but also


because he will receive them as offered byone that he hath himself chosen to this office."The Hebrewsf were pleased with what wassaid, and they gave their approbation to himwhom God had ordained; tor Aaron was themost deserving of this honour, on account ofhis own gift of prophecy, and his brother'svirtue. He had at that time four sons, Na-dab, Abihu, Eleazar, and Ithamar.
Now Moses commanded them to make useof all the utensils which were more than werenecessary to the structure of the tabernacle,for covering the tabernacle itself, the candle­stick, and altar of incense, and the other ves­sels, that they might not be at all hurt whenthey journeyed, either by the rain, or by therising of the dust; and when he had gatheredin the multitude together again, he ordainedthat they should offer half a shekel for everyman as an oblation to God, which shekel is aHebrew coin, and is equal to four Atheniandrachmae;} whereupon they readily obeyedwhat Moses had commanded, and the numberof offers was six hundred and five thousand,five hundred and fifty. Now this money, thatwas brought by the men that were free, waigiven by such as were above twenty yearsold, but under fifty; and what was collectedwas spent in the uses of the tabernacle.
Moses now purified the tabernacle and thepriest, which purification was performed afterthe following manner. He commanded themto take five hundred shekels of choice myrrh;an equal quantity of cassia, and half the fore­going weight of cinnamon, and a sort of sweetspice, called calamus; to beat them small,and wet them with a hin|| of olive oil; to mixthem together, and boil them, and preparethem after the art of the apothecary, andmake them into a very sweet ointment; andafterward to take it to anoint and purify thepriests themselves, and all the tabernacle, as


* Exod. xxviii. 1.
t It is worthy observation, that the two principal quali­fications here required for the constitution of the first high-priest, viz. that he should have an excellent character forvirtuous and good actions, as also that he should have theapprobation of the people, are here noted by Josephus,even where the nomination belonged to God himself,which are the very same qualifications which the Christianreligion requires in the choice of Christian bishops, priests,and deacons, as the Apostolical Constitution informs us, II.3, VIII. Nor is it unworthy of our notice, that Philo'speculiar word here cited, apieivSriv, that the governor wasto be of a most excellent character, is also the peculiar
word of the Apostolical Constitutions on this occasion,VIH. 4.
J This weight and value of the Jewish shekel, in thedays of Josephus, equal to about 2s. lOd. sterling, is bythe learned Jews owned to be one fifth larger than theirold shekels, which determination agrees perfectly withthe remaining shekels that have Samaritan inscriptions,coined generally by Simon the Maccabee, about 230 yearsbefore Josephus published his Antiquities, which neverweighed more than 2s. 4-Jd. and commonly but 2s. 4*d,See Reland, De Nummis Samaritanorum, p. 188.
II This hin is a Hebrew measure, and contains twoAthenian choas, or congiuses.







OCR Output








500 [book xrv. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


morning to Jerusalem. Hereupon Aristobu-lus repented of what he was doing;* andcame to Pompey, and promised to give himmoney, and received him into Jerusalem,and desired that he would leave off the war,and do what he pleased peaceably. So Pom­pey, upon his intreaty, forgave him; and sentGabinius, and soldiers with him, to receivethe money, and the city. Yet was no partof this performed: but Gabinius came back;being both excluded out of the city, and re­ceiving none of the money promised: becauseAristobulus's soldiers would not permit theagreements to be executed. At this Pompeywas very angry, and put Aristobulus intoprison; and came himself to the city: whichwas strong on every side, excepting thenorth, which was not so well fortified. Forthere was fa broad deep ditch that encom­passed the city; and included within it thetemple; which was itself encompassed aboutwith a very strong stone wall.
Now there was a sedition of the men thatwere within the city, who did not agree whatwas to be done in their present circumstances.Some thought it best to deliver up the city toPompey: but Aristobulus's party exhortedthem to shut the gates: because he was keptin prison. Now these prevented the others;and seized upon the temple; and cut off thebridge which reached from it to the city;and prepared themselves to sustain a siege.But the others admitted Pompey's army, anddelivered up both the city, and the king'spalace to him. So Pompey sent his lieutenantPiso with an army, and placed garrisons bothin the city, and in the palace, to securethem; and fortified the house that joined tothe temple; and all those which were moredistant, and without it. And in the first placehe offered terms of accommodation to thosewithin: but when they would not complywith what was desired, he encompassed all


the places thereabout with a wall; Hyrcanusgladly assisting him on all occasions. ButPompey pitched his camp within the wall, onthe north part of the temple, where it wasmost practicable. But even on that sidethere were great towers, and a ditch had beendug, and a deep valley begirt it round about.For on the parts towards the city were pre­cipices; and the bridge on what Pompeyhad gotten in was broken down: however abank was raised day by day, with a greatdeal of labour; while the Romans cut downmaterials for it from the places round about.And when this bank was sufficiently raised,and the ditch filled up, though but poorly,by reason of its immense depth, he broughthis mechanical engines, and battering ramsfrom Tyre: and placing them on the bank,he battered the temple, with the stones thatwere thrown against it. And had it not beenour practice from the day of our forefathers,to rest on the seventh days, this bank couldnever have been completed; by reason ofthe opposition the Jews would have made.For though our law gives us leave then todefend ourselves against those that begin tofight with us, and assault us; yet does it notpermit us to meddle with our enemies, whilethey do any thing else.
When the Romans understood this matter,on those days which we call sabbaths, theythrew nothing on the Jews, nor came to anybattle with them; but raised up their earthenbanks, and brought their engines into suchforwardness, that they might do executionthe next day. And any one may hence learn,how very great piety we exercise towardGod, and the observance of his laws: sincethe priests were not at all hindered fromtheir sacred ministrations by their fear duringthis siege; but did still, twice a day, in themorning, and about the ninth hour, offer theirsacrifices on the altars. Nor did they omit


* The fourth book of the Maccabees, (chap, xxxvi.)says nothing of this submission of Aristobulus to the Ro­man general, but tells us, that Pompey marched directlyagainst Jerusalem, where observing the situation of theplace, the strength of its walls, tower, &c. he resolved'to try to gain Aristobulus by fair means; that he invitedhim to come into his camp, and promised him all thesafety that he could desire; that accordingly he came tohim, and engaged to deliver up all the treasure of thetemple, if he would but declare for him; but that theor.esis having refused to ratify the king's promise, this
made the general lay siege to the temple. UniversalHistory, lib. 2, c. 1 r. B.
t The particular depth and breadth of this ditch;whence the stones for the wall about the temple -wereprobably taken, are omitted in our copies of Josephus;but set down by Strabo, XIV. page 763. from whom we-learn, that this ditch is 60 feet deep, and 250 feet broad..However, its depth is said by Josephus to be immense:which exactly agrees with Strabo's description: and thenumbers in Strabo are a strong confirmation of the truth,of Josephus's description also.







OCR Output








AN. 610.] 365 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


days.* And Jeremiah the prophet com­posed! an elegy to lament him; which isstill extant. Moreover this prophet de­nounced beforehand the sad calamities thatwere coming upon the city. He also leftbehind him in writing a description of thatdestruction of our nation, which has latelyhappened in our days, and the taking ofBabylon. Nor was he the only prophet whodelivered such predictions beforehand tothe multitude; but so did Ezekiel also; whowas the first person that wrote, and left be­hind him in writing Jtwo books concerningthese events. Now these two prophets werepriests by birth. But of them Jeremiahdwelt in Jerusalem, from the ||thirteenthyear of the reign of Josiah, until the cityand temple were utterly destroyed. How­ever, as to what befell this prophet, we willrelate it in its proper place.
Upon the death of Josiah, his son, Jehoahazby name, took the kingdom, being abouttwenty-three years old. He reigned in Jeru­salem; and his mother was Hamutal, of thecity Libnah. He was an impious man, andimpure in his course of life. But as the kingof Egypt returned from the battle, he sent forJehoahaz to come to him, to the city of Ha-math,§ which belongs to Syria; and whenhe was come, he put him in bands, and de­livered the kingdom to a brother of his bythe father's side, whose name was Eliakim;and changed his name to Jehoiakim; and laid


a tribute upon the land of a hundred talentsof silver, and a talent of gold: and this sumof money Jehoiakim paid by way of tribute.But Necho carried away Jehoahaz into Egypt;where he died, when he had reigned threemonths and ten days. Now Jehoiakim'smother was called Zebudah, of the cityRumah. He was of a wicked disposition;and prone to mischief: nor was he either re­ligious towards God, or good-natured to­wards men.**
CHAP. VI.
op Nebuchadnezzar's expedition against the kings ofegypt and judea j the death of jehoiakim, and thesuccession of his son jehoiachin.
IN the fourth year of Jehoiakim, one whosename was Nebuchadnezzar took the go­vernment over the Babylonians; who at thesame time went up with a great army to the1city Carchemish, which was at Euphrates;upon a resolution that he had taken to fightwith Necho king of Egypt, under whom allSyria then was. And when Necho under­stood the intention of the king of Babylon,and that this expedition was made againsthim, he did not despise his attempt; but madehaste with a great band of men to Euphrates,to defend himself from Nebuchadnezzar. Andwhen they had joined battle he was beaten,and lost many thousands of his soldiers. Sothe king of Babylon passed over the Eu­phrates, and took all Syria, as far as Pelusium,


* The Jews were wont to make lamentations, or mourn­ful songs, upon the death of great men, princes, andheroes, who had distinguished themselves in arms, or byany civil art had merited well of their country. By an ex­pression in 2 Chron. xxxv. 25. Behold they are writtenin the lamentations, one may infer, that they had certaincollections of this kind of composition. The author of thebook of Samuel has preserved those which David madeupon the death of Saul and Jonathan, of Abner and Ab­salom: but this mournful poem, which the disconsolateprophet made upon this immature death of good Josiah,we no where have, which is a loss the more to be de­plored, because, in all probability, it was a master-piecein its kind: since never was there an author more deeplyaffected with his subject, or more capable of carrying itthrough all the tender sentiments of sorrow and com­passion. Calmet'a Commentary, and Preface sur lesLamentations de Jeremie. B.
t Whether Josephus, from 2 Chron. xxxv. 25. heremeans the book of the Lamentations of Jeremiah, stillextant; which chiefly belongs to the destruction of Je­rusalem under Nebuchadnezzar: or any other melan­choly poem now lost, but extant in the days of Josephus,
belonging peculiarly to Josiah, cannot now be deter­mined.
J Of these two books of Ezekiel, see Authentic Re­cords, part II. page 778.
II Jeremiah i. 2.
§ This ancient city, Hamath, which is joined with Ar-pad or Aradus, and with Damascus, 2 Kings xviii. 34. Isa.xxxvi. 19. Jer. xlix. 23. cities of Syria and Phoenicia,near the borders of Judea, was also itself evidently nearthe same borders: though long ago utterly destroyed.Nor ought the moderns to dream here of Antioch at avast distance from those borders; or even of Epiphania, orEmesa, or any other neighbours; as being still much tooremote for the situation of this city. It was, I think, in orvery near a famous passage between Judea and Libanus orAntilibanus, so frequently called the entrance of Hamath«see Antiq. VIII. 6. Reland, Palestin. lib. I. page 119, 120,121, 122. and Maundrell, page 24, 25. who very well ob­serves from 1 Mace. xii. 25, 30. that the river Eleutherus»which ran somewhat north of Sidon, ran also through thiscountry of Amathis or Hamath. See Antiq. XIII. 4. whichaccurately determines the situation of that country.
** 2 Chron. xxxvi. 5.


3Q2







OCR Output













OCR Output








42 [book I. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


acceptable to those that received them, onaccount of their rarity. Those who were sentproceeded at certain intervals of space asun­der, that by following thick one after another,they might appear to be the more numerous,that Esau might remit of his anger on ac­count of these presents, if he were still unap-peased. Instructions were also given to thosethat were sent, to speak submissively to him.When Jacob had made these appointments,and night came on, he began to move withhis company: and as they were gone over acertain river, called Jabboc, Jacob was leftbehind; and meeting with an angel, hewrestled with him, the angel beginning thestruggle; but he prevailed over the angel,who used a voice, and spake to him in words,exhorting him to be pleased with what hadhappened to him, and not to suppose that hisvictory was a trifling one, but that he hadovercome a divine angel, and to esteem thevictory as a sign of great blessings that shouldcome to him, and that his offspring shouldnever fail, and that no man should be too hardfor his power. He also commanded him tobe called Israel,* which in the Hebrewtongue signifies one that struggled with thedivine angel. These promises were made atthe prayer of Jacob; for when he perceivedhim to be the angel of God, he desired hewould signify to him what should befal himhereafter, and when the angel had said whatis before related, he disappeared. Jacob waspleased with these things, and named the
Slace Phanuel, which signifies the face of God.iut when he felt pain by this struggling uponhis broad sinews, he abstained from eatingthat sinew himself afterward, and for his sakeit is still not eaten by us.t
When Jacob understood that his brotherwas approaching, he ordered his wives to gobefore, each by herself, with the handmaids,that they might see the actions of the men asthey were fighting, if Esau were so disposed.He then went and bowed down to his brother


Esau, who had no evil design upon him, butsaluted him,J and asked him about thecompany of the children, and of the women;and desired, when he had understood all hewanted to know about them, that he wouldgo along with him to their father; but Jacobpretending that the cattle were weary, Esaureturned to Seir, for there was his place ofhabitation, which he had named roughness,from his own hairy roughness.
CHAP. XXI.
OF THE VIOLATION OF DINa's CHA3TIT*
AFTER this interview, Jacob came to theplace, till this day called Succoth, orTents, whence he went to Shechem, a cityof the Canaanites. Now as the Shechemiteswere keeping a festival, Dina, who was theonly daughter of Jacob, went into the city, tosee the women of that country; but whenShechem, the son of Hamor the king, sawher, he defiled her by violence; and beinggreatly in love with her, he desired his fatherto procure the damsel for him in marriage.To this request Hamor acceded, and cameto Jacob, desiring permission that his sonShechem might according to law, marryDina; but Jacob, not knowing how to denythe desire of one of such great dignity, andyet not thinking it lawful to marry his daugh­ter to a stranger, intreated leave to have aprevious consultation. So the king wentaway, in hopes that Jacob would approve ofthis marriage; but Jacob informed his sons ofthe defilement of their sister, and of the ad­dress of Hamor, and desired them to give himtheir advice, what they should do. Upon thisthe greatest part said nothing, not knowingwhat advice to give; but Simeon and Levi,the brethren of the damsel, by the samemother, agreed between themselves upon theaction following: it being now the time of afestival, when the Shechemites were em­


so quick, by the great numbers which they have, that theyare obliged to remove them too often, which is very de­structive to their flocks, on account of the young ones,which have not strength enough to follow." This cir­cumstance shews the energy of Jacob's apology to Esau fornot attending him. Harmer's Observations, i. 126. B.
* Perhaps this may be the proper meaning of the wordIsrael by the present and the old Jerusalem analogy of theHebrew tongue. But it is certain that the Hellenists of
the first century, in Egypt and elsewhere, interpretedIs-ra-el, to be a man seeing God.
t Gen. xxxii. 32.
| When Jacob and Esau met they saluted each other.Esau ran to meet Jacob, embraced him, fell on his neck, andkissed him, Gen. xxxiii. 4. Such persons as are intimatelyacquainted, or of equal age and dignity, mutually kiss thehand, the head, or the shoulder of each other. Shaw'sTrav. p. 237. B.







OCR Output








an. 1532.] 83 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


 


might not be able to get their share, by rea­son of the overbearing of the strong in col­lecting it. However, these strong men, whenthey had gathered more than the measureappointed for them, they had no more thanothers, but only tired themselves more ingathering it; for they found no more than ahomer a piece, and the advantage they got bywhat was superfluous was none at all, as itcorrupted, both by worms breeding in it, andby its bitterness. So divine and wonderful afood was this! It also supplied the want ofother sorts of food to those that fed on it;and even now,* in all that place, this mannacomes down in rain, according to what Mosesthen obtained of God, to send it the peoplefor their sustenance. Now the Hebrews callthis food manna,f for the particle man in ourlanguage is the asking of a question, what isthis? So the Hebrews were very joyful atwhat was sent them from heaven, and theymade use of this food for forty years,J or aslong as they remained in the wilderness.
As soon as they removed thence, they cameto Rephidim,|| distressed to the last degreeby thirst: for, though in the foregoing daysthey had met with a few small fountains, theynow found the earth entirely destitute of wa­ter, and were in an evil case. They againturned their anger against Moses; but he atfirst avoided the fury of the multitude, andthen betook himself to prayer, beseechingGod, that as he had given them food whenthey were in the greatest want of it, so hewould give them drink, since the favour ofgiving them food was of no value to them-while they had nothing to drink. God didnot long delay to grant this request, but pro­mised that he would procure them a fountain,and plenty of water from a place where they


did not expect any; so he commanded Mosesto smite the rock§ which they saw lying therewith his rod, and out of it to receive plentyin what they wanted; for he had taken carethat drink should come to them without anylabour or exertion. When Moses had re­ceived this command, he came to the peoplewho waited for and looked upon him, for theysaw already that he was coming apace fromhis eminence. As soon as he was come, hetold them, that God would deliver them fromtheir present distress, and had granted theman unexpected favour, and informed them thata river should run for their sakes out of therock; but they were amazed at that hearing,supposing they were of necessity to cut therock in pieces now they were distressed bytheir thirst, and by their journey. Moses,however, by only smiting the rock with hisrod, opened a passage, and out of it burstwater in great abundance, and very clear;while they were astonished at this wonderfuleffect, and as it were quenched their thirstby the very sight of it: so they drank thispleasant, this sweet water, and such it seemedto be, as might well be expected where Godwas the donor. They were also in admira­tion how Moses was honoured by God, andthey made grateful returns of sacrifices toGod for his providence towards them. Nowthat scripture which is laid up in the temple**informs us how God foretold to Moses, thatwater should in this manner be derived outof the rock.
CHAP. II.
OF THE HOSTILITIES COMMITTED AGAINST THE HEBREWS BYTHE AMALEKITES, AND OF THEIR COMPLETE DEFEAT.
HE name of the Hebrews began alreadyto be every where renowned, and ru-


T


* This supposal that the sweet honey dew, or manna, socelebrated in ancient and modern authors, as falling usu­ally in Arabia, was of the very same sort with the mannasent to the Israelites, savours more of Gentilism than ofJudaism or Christianity. It is not improbable that someancient Gentile author, read by Josephus, thought so, norwould he here contradict him, though just before, and IV.3, he seems directly to allow that it had not been seen pre­viously. However, this food from heaven is here describedby the word v'i<pei6au, that it fell like snow; and in Artapa-nus, a heathen writer, it is compared to meal, like to oat­meal, in colour like to snow, rained down by God. Essayon the Old Test. Appendix, page 239. But as to the deri­vation of the word manna, whether from man, which Jose-phas says then signified, what is it? or from manah, to
VOI-. I. No. 7.
divide, i. e. a dividend, or portion allotted to every one, itis uncertain. I incline to the latter derivation. Thismanna is called angels' food, Ps. lxxviii. 25. and by ourSaviour, John vi. 31. as well as by Josephus here and else­where, said to be sent to the Jews from heaven.
t Exod. xvi. 15.
t From an. 1532 to 1429, B. C.
II Exod. xvii. 1.
§ This rock is here at this day, as modern travellersagree, and must be the same that was there in the days ofMoses.
** Note here, that the small book of the principal lawsof Moses is ever said to be laid npin the holy house itself,but the larger Pentateuch somewhere within the limits ofthe temple and its courts only. See V. 1. VI. 4. X. 4.
•.







OCR Output








290 [book VIII. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


it is *called by at this day among the Syrians;but the Greeks name it Palmyra.
Now Solomon the king was at this timeengaged in building these cities. But if anyinquire why all the kings of Egypt, fromMenes, who built Memphis, and was manyyears earlier than our forefather Abraham,until Solomon, where the interval was morethan one thousand three hundred years, werecalled Pharaohs, and took it from one Pharaohthat lived after the kings of that interval? Ithink it necessary to inform them of it: andthis in order to cure their ignorance, and tomake the occasion of that name manifest.Pharaoh in the Egyptian tongue signifies faking. But I suppose they made use of othernames from their childhood: but when theywere made kings, they changed them into thename which in their own tongue denoted theirauthority. For thus it was also that the kingsof Alexandria, who were called formerly byother names when they took the kingdom,were named Ptolemies, from their first king.The Roman emperors also were from theirnativity called by other names, but are styledCaesars: their empire and their dignity im­posing that name upon them, and not suf­fering them to continue those names whichtheir fathers gave them. I suppose also thatHerodotus of Halicarnassus, when he said


there were Jthree hundred and thirty kingsof Egypt after Menes, who built Memphis,did therefore not tell us their names, becausethey were in common called Pharaohs. Forwhen after death there was a queen reigned,he calls her by her name, ||Nicaule: as therebydeclaring, that while the kings were of themale line, and so admitted of the same name,while a woman did not admit the same, hetherefore set down that her name, which shecould not naturally have. As for myself, Ihave discovered from our own books, thatafter Pharaoh the father-in-law of Solomon,no other king of Egypt did any longer usethat name; and that it was after that timewhen the queen of Egypt and Ethiopia cameto Solomon, concerning whom we shall informthe reader presently. But I have now mademention of these things, that I may prove thatour books, and those of the Egyptians, agreetogether in many things.
King Solomon subdued to himself the rem­nant of the Canaanites, that had not befo resubmitted to him; those I mean that dweltin mount Lebanon, and as far as the city Ha-math, and ordered them to pay tribute. Healso chose out of them every year such aswere to serve him in the meanest offices,and to do his domestic works, and to followhusbandry. For none of the Hebrews were


thing as a well or fountain, but in this spot only, to befound. If we may guess by the ruins, which later tra­vellers give us the description of, this city was certainlyone of the finest and most magnificent in the east; and itis somewhat surprising, that history should give us noaccount, either when or by whom it was reduced to thesad condition wherein it lies at this day. But the truereason for his building this town in so desolate a placewas the commodiousness of its situation, to cut off allcommerce between the Syrians and Mesopotamians, andto prevent their caballing and conspiring together againsthim, as they had done against his father David. Le Clerc'sCommentary. If the reader is desirous to know the pre­sent state of this ruinated city, he may find it related inthe Philosophical Transactions, for October, 1C95, in aletter from Dr. Halifax to Dr. Bernard; or in Well'sGeography of the Old Testament, vol. iii. who has bor­rowed it from thence. B.
* It is a well known and very true observation of Am-raianus Marcellinus, near the beginning of his XlVthbook; that the Greek and Roman names of places werenever among the natives of Syria; which is the reasonwhy most places retain their adopted original names" atthis day. This is in effect the note of Mr. Mnundrell,page 53, and is perfectly agreeable to Josephus's observa­tion here. We have an account of the wonderful remainsof this Tadmor or Palmyra, in our Philosophical Transac­tions, No. 318, to which I refer the reader.
t This signification of the name of Pharaoh appears tobe true. And Mr. Reland himself says, "Piouro, in theCoptic tongue, is a king; which the Greeks would pro­nounce *afaw." What Josephus adds presently, thatin his copy, no king of Egypt was called Pharaoh afterSolomon's father-in-law, does hardly agree with ourcopies; which have long afterwards the names of Pha­raoh Necho, and Pharaoh Hophrn, 2 Kings xxiii. 29.Jer. xliv. 30. besides the frequent mention of that name inthe Prophets. However, Josephus in his own speech tothe Jews, Of the War, V. 9. speaks of Nechao, who wasalso called Pharaoh; as the name of that king of Egyptwith whom Abraham was concerned; of which nameNechao yet we have elsewhere no mention, till thedays of Josiah, but only of Pharaoh. And indeed itmust be confessed that in this chapter we have moremistakes made by Josephus, and those relating to thekings of Egypt, and to that Queen of Egypt and Ethiopia,whom he supposes to have come to see Solomon, thanalmost any where else in all his Antiquities, and whichare particularly taken notice of by Bochart in his Phaleg.II. 26, of the occasions of which mistakes I c»n give DOaccount.
% Of these 330 kings of Egypt, and that they were ingreat measure collateral and not successive, see my Chro­nological Table.
II Perhaps Nitocris.







OCR Output








462 [book XIII ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


temple at Jerusalem was built according tothe laws of Moses: and to put Sabbeus andTheodosius to death. And these were theevents that befell the Jews at Alexandria, inthe days of Ptolemy Philometor.
CHAP. IV.
OF THE HONOURS CONFERRED UPON JONATHAN BY ALEXAN­DER, KING OF SYRIA; AND OF THE AFFAIRS OF DEME­TRIUS, WHO AFTERWARD MADE A LEAQUE OF FRIENDSHIPWITH JONATHAN.
DEMETRIUS being slain in battle, aswe have *already related, Alexandertook the kingdom of Syria; and wrote toPtolemy Philometor, desiring his daughterin marriage; for he said it was but just thathe should be joined in affinity to one whohad now received the principality of hisforefathers; and had been promoted to it byGod's providence; and had conquered De­metrius; and who was on other accounts notunworthy of being related to him. Ptolemyreceived this proposal gladly: and wrotehim an answer, saluting him on account ofhis having received the kingdom of his fore­fathers; and promising that he would givehim his daughter in marriage. and would ac­company her as far as Ptolemais; where hedesired, that he would meet him. WhenPtolemy had written thus, he came suddenlyto Ptolemais, and brought his daughter Cleo­patra along with him. And as he found Alex­ander there before him, according as he haddesired, he gave him his child in marriage:


and for her portion gave her as much silverand gold, as became such a king to give.
When the wedding was over, Alexanderwrote to Jonathan the high-priest; and de­sired him to come to Ptolemais. So whenhe came to these kings, and had made themmagnificent presents, he was honoured bythem both. Alexander compelled him alsoto put off his own garments, and to take apurple garment; and made him sit with himin his throne: commanding his captains thatthey should go with him into the middle ofthe city, and proclaim, that it was not per­mitted to any one to speak against him, orto give him any disturbance. And whenthe captains had thus done, those that wereprepared to accuse Jonathan, and who barehim ill-will, when they saw the honour thatwas done him by proclamation, and that bythe king's order, ran away, and were afraidlest some mischief should befall them. Nay,king Alexander was so very kind to Jona­than, that he set him down as the principalof his friends.
But upon the hundred and sixty-fifth year,Demetrius, the son of Demetrius, came fromCrete, with a great number of mercenary sol­diers, which Lasthenes, the Cretan, broughthim; and sailed to Cilicia. This cast Alex­ander into great concern and disorder, whenhe heard it. So he hastened immediately outof Phoenicia, and came to Antioch; that hemight put matters in a safe posture there,before Demetrius should come. He also leftfApollonius Daus governor of Coelesyria,J


about those men, in the plural, who were to dispute fortheir temple at Jerusalem; whereas, it seems here, theyhad but one disputant, Andronicus by name. Perhapsmore were prepared to speak on the Jews' side: but thefirst having answered to his name, and overcome the Sa­maritans, there was no necessity for any other defenderof the Jerusalem temple.
* Chap. II.
t This Apollonius Daus was, by his account, the son ofApollonius, who had been made governor of Coelesyriaand Phoenicia by Seleucus Philopator; and was himself aconfidant of his son Demetrius the father; and restored tohis father's government by him; but afterwards revoltedfrom him to Alexander: but not to Demetrius the son.
J Apollonius was a common name among the Syro-Macedonians and Greeks; and, in the history of the Mac­cabees, we find so many mentioned of that name, thatfor the prevention of mistakes, it may not be improperto give some account of the several persons who bore it.The first that we meet with of that name is Apollonius,the son of Thraseas, 2 Mace. iii. 5. who was governor•f Co?lesyri» and Phoenicia, under Seleucus Philopator
when Heliodorus came to Jerusalem, to rob the temple.He was chief minister of state to Seleucus; but, on theaccession of his brother Antiochus Epiphanes to thecrown, he left Syria, and retired to Miletus. He had ;ison of his own name, that was bred up at Rome, and re­sided with Demetrius, (the son of Seleucus Philopator,)who was then a hostage in that place. When Demetriusrecovered the crown of Syria, this Apollonius became hisprime favourite, and was made governor of Coelesyria andPhoenicia, the same government which his father held un­der Seleucus Philopator; and this I take to be the sameApollonius, who being continued in the same governmentby Alexander, now revolted from him to embrace the in­terest of Demetrius, the son of his old master, and, to en­gage Jonathan to do the like, marched his forces againsthim. Another Apollonius is spoken of, 2 Mace. iv. 21. asthe chief minister of Antiochus Epiphanes, who from himwas sent as ambassador first to Rome, and afterwards toPtolemy Philometor, king of Egypt; and him I take to bethe same, that with a detachment of two and twenty thou­sand men, was sent to destroy Jerusalem, and build a for­tress on mount Acra. There are, besides these, two other







OCR Output








an. 1748.] 55 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


was no returning into Egypt unless they camewith what they had promised. Now themisery growing every day worse, and his sonsbegging it of him, he had no other course totake in his present circumstances; and Judas,who was of a bold temper on other occasions,spake his mind very freely. He told him,that it did not become him to be afraid onaccount of his son, nor to suspect the worst,as he did; for nothing could be done to hisson but by the appointment of God; whichmust also for certain come to pass though hewere at home with him: that he ought notto condemn them to such manifest destruc­tion, nor deprive them of that plenty of foodthey might have from Pharaoh, by his unrea­sonable fear about his son Benjamin, butought to take care of the preservation ofSimeon; lest by attempting to hinder Benja­min's journey, Simeon should perish. Heexhorted him to trust God for him; and saidhe would either bring his son back to himsafe, or, together with his, lose his own life.So that Jacob was at length persuaded, anddelivered Benjamin to them, with the price ofthe corn doubled ;* he also sent presents toJoseph, of the fruits of the land of Canaan;balsam,t and rosin, as also turpentine andhoney. Now their father shed many tears atthe departure of his sons, as well as them­selves; his concern was, that he might receivethem back again safe after their journey; andtheir concern was, that they might find theirfather well, and no way afflicted with thegrief for them. And this lamentation lasteda whole day; so that the old man was at last


tired with grief, and stayed behind; but theywent on their way for Egypt, endeavouring tomitigate their grief for their present misfor­tunes, with the hopes of better success here­after.
As soon as they came into Egypt they werebrought down to Joseph; but here no smallfear disturbed them, lest they should be ac­cused about the price of the corn, as if theyhad cheated Joseph. They therefore made along apology to Joseph's steward, and toldhim that when they came home they foundthe money in their sacks; and that they hadnow brought it along with them. He said hedid not know what they meant. So they weredelivered from that fear. And when he hadloosed Simeon, and put him into a handsomehabit, he suffered him to be with his brethren:at which time Joseph came from his attend­ance on the king. So they offered him theirpresents, and upon his putting the question tothem about their father, they answered thatthey found him well. He also, upon his dis­covery that Benjamin was alive, asked, whe­ther this was their youngest brother? for theyhad not seen him. Whereupon they said hewas; he replied, that the God over all washis protector. But when his affection madehim shed tears, he retired; desiring he mightnot be seen in that state by his brethren.Then Joseph took them to supper; and theywere seated in the same order as they used tosit at their father's table. And although Josephtreated them all kindly, yet did he send amess to Benjamin, that was donbleJ to whatthe rest of the guests had for their shares.||


* Gen. xliii. 12.
t Of the precious balsam of Judea, and the turpentine,see note on VIII. 6.
J Five times as much. Heb. and Septuagint.
11 The reason which some assign for the Egyptians re­fusing to eat with the Hebrews, was their sacrificing somecreatures which the Egyptians worshipped: but though,in after ages, they certainly did worship several kinds ofanimals, yet there appears nothing from the story thatthey did so in Joseph's days; for their worship of thefamous ox, called Apis, was a much later invention, asmany learned men have demonstrated. It is much morelikely therefore, that this great abhorrence should be re­solved into their different manner, both of dressing andeating their victuals. No people, as Herodotus tells, (evenwhere he treats of their manner of feasting, Euterpe, c. 28.)were more tenacious of their old customs than the Egyp­tians. They would not use those of any other nationwhatever; and therefore the Hebrews were not the onlypeople they had an aversion to. For (as the same histo-
voL. I. No. 5-
rian informs us) an Egyptian man, or woman, would not kissthe mouth of a Greek, would not make use of a spit or apot belonging to them; nor eat any meat that was cut withone of their knives. Patrick's and Le Clerc's Commentary.The manner of eating among the ancients was not for allthe company to eat out of one and the same dish, but forevery one to have one or more dishes to himself. Thewhole of these dishes were set before the master of thefeast, and he distributed to every one his portion. AsJoseph, however, is here said to have had a table to him­self, we may suppose, that he had a great variety of littledishes, or plates set before him; and as it was a custom forgreat men to honour those who were in their favour, bysending such dishes to them as were first served up tothemselves, Joseph shewed that token of respect to hisbrethren: but to express a particular value for Benjamin,he sent him five dishes to their one, which disproportioncould not but be marvellous and astonishing to them, ifwhat Herodotus tells us be true, 1. 6. c. 27. viz. "Thatthe distinction in this case, even to Egyptian kings them-







OCR Output








506 [book XIV. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


had four sons, Phasael; Herod, who was af­terward made king; Joseph, and Pheroras;and a daughter named Salome. This Anti-pater cultivated also a friendship and mutualkindness with other potentates: but espe­cially with the king of Arabia, to whom hecommitted his children, while he foughtagainst Aristobulus. So Cassius removed hiscamp, and marched to Euphrates, to meetthose that were coming to attack him; as hathbeen related by others.
But some time* afterward Caesar, when hehad taken Rome, and after Pompey and thesenate were fled beyond the Ionian Sea, freedAristobulus from his bonds; and resolved tosend him into Syria, and delivered two legionsto him, that he might set matters right, as be­ing a potent man in that country. But Aristo­bulus had no enjoyment of what he hoped forfrom the power that was given him by Caesar:for those of Pompey's party prevented it; anddestroyed him by poison. And those ofCaesar's party buried him. His dead bodyalso lay for a considerable time in honey; tillAntony afterward sent it to Judea; and causedhim to be buried in the royal sepulchre. ButScipio, upon Pompey's sending him to slayAlexander, the son of Aristobulus, becausethe young man was accused of what offenceshe had been guilty of at first against the Ro­mans, cut off" his head. And thus did he dieat Antioch. But Ptolemy, the son of Menneus,who was the ruler of Chalcis, under mountLibanus, took his brethren to him, and senthis son Philippion to Ascalon, to Aristobulus'swife, and desired her to send back with himher son Antigonus, and her daughters. Theone of which, whose name was Alexandra,Philippion fell in love with, and married:though afterward his father slew him, andmarried Alexandra, and continued to takecare of her brethren.
CHAP. VIII.
OF THE ASSISTANCE WHICH THE JEWS GAVE TO CESAR IKHIS BXPEDITION AGAINST EGYPT; THE GLORIOUS ACTIONSOF ANTIPATER, AND HIS FRIENDSHIP WITH CESAR; ANDTHE HONOURS WHICH THE JEWS RECEIVED FROM THEROMANS AND ATHENIANS.
OW after Pompey was dead,f Antipater,who managed the Jewish affairs, became


N


* An. 49.t An. 48.


very useful to Caesar, when he made waragainst Egypt; and that by the order of Hyr-canus. For when Mithridates of Pergamuswas bringing his auxiliaries, and was not ableto continue his march through Pelusium, butobliged to stay at Ascalon, Antipater came tohim, conducting three thousand armed Jews.He had also taken care the principal men ofthe Arabians should come to his assistance.And on his account it was, that all the Syriansassisted him also; as not willing to appearbehind-hand in their alacrity for Caesar: viz.Jamblicus the ruler, and Ptolemy his son; andTholomy, the son of Sohemus, who dwelt atmount Libanus; and almost all the Jcities.So Mithridates marched out of Syria, andcame to Pelusium. And when its inhabitantswould not. admit him, he besieged the city.Now Antipater signalized himself here; andwas the first who plucked down a part of thewall, and so opened a way to the rest, wherebythey might enter the city: and by this meansPelusium was taken. But it happened thatthe Egyptian Jews, who dwelt in the countrycalled Onion, would not let Antipater andMithridates, with their soldiers, pass to Caesar.But Antipater persuaded them to come overto their party, because he was of the samepeople with them; and that chiefly by shewingthem the epistles of Hyrcanus the high-priest;wherein he exhorted them to cultivate friend­ship with Caesar. And accordingly when theysaw Antipater and the high-priest of the samesentiments, they did as they were desired.And when the Jews about Memphis heardthat these Jews had come over to Caesar, theyalso invited Mithridates to come to them. Sohe came and received them also into his army.When Mithridates had gone over all theDelta, as the place is called, he came to apitched battle with the enemy, near a placecalled the Jewish camp. Now Mithridateshad the right wing, and Antipater the left.And when it came to an engagement, thatwing where Mithridates was gave way, andwas likely to suffer extremely; unless Anti­pater had come running to him with his ownsoldiers, along the shore; when he had al­ready defeated the enemy that opposed him.So he delivered Mithridates, and put thoseEgyptians who had been too hard for him to
I Free cities.







OCR Output













OCR Output








AN. 710.] 357 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


cure of not being at all disturbed by him, andthat the people might go on peaceably andwithout fear with their husbandry and otheraffairs. But after a little while, the king ofAssyria, when he had failed of his treache­rous designs against the Egyptians, returnedhome, without success, on the following oc­casion. He spent a long time in the siege ofPelusium; and when the banks that he hadraised over against the walls were of a greatheight, and when he was ready to makean immediate assault upon them, he heardthat Tirhaka, king of the Ethiopians, wasbringing great forces to aid the Egyptians,and was resolved to march through the de­sert, and so to fall directly upon the Assy­rians. Sennacherib was therefore disturbedat the news: and, as I said before, left Pe­lusium, and returned back without success.Now concerning this Sennacherib Herodotussays, in the second book of his histories, thathe came against the Egyptian king, who wasthe priest of Vulcan: and that as he wasbesieging Pelusium, he broke up the siegeon the following occasion. This Egyptian


priest prayed to God, and God heard hisprayer; and sent a judgment upon the Ara­bian king; but in this Herodotus was mis­taken, when he called this king not *king ofthe Assyrians, but of the Arabians. For hesaith, that "A multitude of mice gnawed topieces in one night both the bows, and therest of the armour of the Assyrians; and thatit was on that account that the king, whenhe had no bows left, drew off his army fromPelusium." And Herodotus does indeedgive us this history. Nay, and Berosus,who wrote of the affairs of Chaldea, makesmention of this king Sennacherib, and thathe ruled over the Assyrians, and that hemade an expedition against all Asia andEgypt; and fsays thus:—
"Now when Sennacherib was returningfrom his Egyptian war to Jerusalem, hefound his army under Rabshakeh his gene­ral, in danger by a plague, for God had senta pestilential distemper upon his army; andon the very first night of the siege a hundredand eighty-five thousand, with their captainsand generals, were destroyed.J So the king


that (afterward) the people might go on peaceably, andwithout fear with their husbandry, and other affairs," ismore distinct in our other copies, both of the Kings andof Isaiah; and deserves very great consideration. Thewords are these, "This shall be a sign unto thee: yeshall eat this year such as groweth of itself; and thesecond year that which springeth of the same; and inthe third year sow ye, and reap, and plant vineyards, andeat the fruits thereof." 2 Kings xix. 20. Isaiah xxxvii.30. which seem to me plainly to design a sabbatic year;a year of Jubilee, next after it; and the succeeding usuallabours and fruits of them on the third and followingyears. From which may be determined the sabbaticyear; part of the 18th and part of the 19th year of He-zekiah; or part of the 710th and 709th years before theChristian Era: and the year of Jubilee: part of the 19thand part of the 20th of Hezekiah; which is the part ofthe 709th and part of the 708th before the Christian Era.From which texts may be determined all the other sab­batic years; and that in agreement with a great deal ofother evidence, which in this case no way differs fromit. From which texts also may be determined, what wehave hitherto extremely wanted, the situation of all theother years of Jubilee; even from that first year whereinMoses died, and Joshua led the Israelites into the land ofCanaan, an. 1492, to the last year of Jubilee, whereinJohn the Baptist began his ministry, A. D. 28, thirty-twoin all. Whence the Scripture chronology may be settled,and this without the error of a single year, as far back asthe death of Moses; during the very long interval of3227 years.
* Correct here Josephus's copies, as to the citation outof Herodotus, and read, "who says that Sennacheribwas not only king of the Assyrians, but of the Arabians
also." Which Josephus seems to have esteemed a mis­take in Herodotus.
t That this terrible calamity of the slaughter of the185,000 Assyrians is here delivered in the words of Be­rosus the Chaldean; and that it was certainly and fre­quently foretold by the Jewish prophets, and that it wascertainly and undeniably accomplished, see AuthenticRec. part II. page 858—871.
J The ancient Jews, (as well as Persians and Arabians,)were of opinion, that there is an angel of death, or an ex­terminating angel, whom God has given the commissionto take away the lives, either of single persons, or of mul­titudes of people at once, wherein the Almighty gives theorder, but leaves the method of doing it to the angel;so that in which way soever the infliction is made, it isalways said to be done by the angel of God. The modernJews are much of the same opinion: for they maintain,that this angel of death stands at every dying man's bed'shead, with a naked sword in his hand, at the extremityof which there hang three drops of gall, and that the sickperson, seeing this angel, in a great fright opens hismouth, whereupon he immediately drops into it thesethree fatal drops; the first which occasions his death; thesecond makes him pale and livid; and the third reduceshim to the dust in the grave, with some other notions ofthe like nature. Now since the Scripture has no wheresaid expressly, in what manner this Assyrian army wasdestroyed, some have thought that it was by a plague;others by thunder and lightning; others by fire from hea­ven; others by a scorching wind; others by their fallingfoul upon one another in the obscurity of the night; butwhich way soever it was effected, according to the He­brew idiom, there is no impropriety in saying, that it wa»done by a destroying angel, which is a comprehensive


3P2







OCR Output








384 [book X. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


had *another name among the Greeks.Moreover, he took Daniel the prophet, andcarried him with him into Media, and ho­noured him very greatly, and kept him withhim, for he was one of the three presidentswhom he set over his three hundred and sixtyprovinces.
However, while Daniel was in so greatdignity, and in so great favour with Darius,and was alone intrusted with every thing byhim, as having somewhat divine in him, hewas envied by the rest; for those that seeothers in greater honour than themselveswith kings, envy them. And when those thatwere grieved at the great favour Daniel wasin with Darius, sought for an occasion againsthim, he afforded them no occasion at all.For as he was above all the temptations ofmoney, and despised bribery, and esteemedit a very base thing to take any thing by wayof reward, even when it might be justly givenhim, he afforded those that envied him notthe least handle for an accusation. So whenthey could find nothing for which they mightcalumniate him to the king; and thereby de­prive him of the honour he was in; theysought for some other method whereby theymight destroy him. When therefore theysaw that Daniel prayed to God three times aday,f they thought they had found an occa­sion by which they might ruin him. So theycame to Darius, and told him, that the princesand governors had thought proper to allowthe multitude a relaxation for thirty days;that no one might offer a petition or prayereither to himself, or to the gods; but that hewho should transgress this decree should becast into the den of lions, and there perish.J
Hereupon the king, not being acquaintedwith their wicked design, nor suspecting thatit was a contrivance against Daniel, said hewas pleased with this decree; and promisedto confirm what they desired; he also pub­lished an edict to promulgate that decreewhich the princes had made. Accordinglyall the rest took care not to transgress those


injunctions, and rested in quiet. But Danielhad no regard to them; but as he was wonthe stood and prayed to God in the sight ofthem all. The princes having now met withthe occasion they so earnestly sought, camepresently to the king, and accused Daniel asthe only person who had transgressed thedecree; while not one of the rest durst prayto their gods. This discovery they made,not because of his impiety, but because theyhad watched him and observed him out ofenvy. For supposing that Darius did thusout of a greater kindness to him than theyexpected, and that he was ready to granthim pardon for this contempt of his injunc­tions; and envying this very pardon to Daniel,they did not become more favourable to him,but desired he might be cast into the den oflions, according to the law. So Darius, ho­ping that God would deliver him, and thathe would undergo nothing that was terribleby the wild beasts; bade him bear this acci­dent cheerfully: and when he was cast intothe den, he put his seal to the stone that layupon the mouth of the den, and went his way.He then passed all the night without food,and without sleep; being in great distress forDaniel. But when it was day, he got up, andcame to the den; and found the seal entire,which he had left the stone sealed withal;he also opened the seal, and called to Daniel,and asked him if he were alive? And as soonas he heard the king's voice, and said, thathe had suffered no harm; the king gave orderthat he should be drawn up out of the den.Now when his enemies saw that Daniel hadsuffered nothing which was terrible, theywould not own that he was preserved by God,and by his providence; but they said, thatthe lions had been filled with food, and onthat account it was, as they supposed, thatthey would not touch Daniel, nor come tohim. And this they alleged to the king. Batthe king, out of an abhorrence of their wick­edness, gave order that they should throw ina great deal of flesh to the lions; and when


* Cyaxares.
t It was a constant custom among the Jews, for thosethat were in the country, or in any distant land, to turnthemselves towards Jerusalem; and for those that were atJerusalem, to turn towards the temple, when they prayed;and the probable reason of this might be, the words ofSolomon, in his prayer to God, at the consecration of the
temple: If thy people, when led away captive, pray untothee toward their land which thou gavest unto their fa­thers, the city, which thou hast chosen, and the house,which 1 have built for thy name; then hear thou theirprayers, and their supplication, in heaven, thy dwellingplace, and maintain their cause, 1 Kings viii. 48, 49. B.X Daniel vi. 7.







OCR Output








156 [book v. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


be taken without great difficulty, through thestrength of its walls and the nature of theplace.
For this reason they removed their campto Hebron; and when they had taken it, theyslew all the inhabitants. There were tillthen left the race of giants;* who had bodiesso large, and countenances so entirely dif­ferent from other men, that they were sur­prising to the sight, and terrible to the hear­ing. The bones of these men are shewn tothis very day, unlike to any credible relationsof other men. Now they gave this city to theLevites, as an extraordinary reward, withthe suburbs of two thousand cubits. But theland thereto belonging they gave as a freegift to Caleb, according to the injunctions ofMoses. This Caleb was one of the spieswhich Moses sent into the land of Canaan;they also gave land for habitation to the pos­terity of Jethro, the Midianite, who was thefather-in-law to Moses. For they had lefttheir own country and followed them, andaccompanied them in the wilderness.
Now the tribes of Judah and Simeon tookthe cities which were in the mountainous partof Canaan, as also Ascalon and Ashdod, ofthose that lay near the sea. But Gaza andEkron escaped them; for they, lying in a flatcountry, and having a great number of cha­riots, sorely galled those that attacked them.So these tribes when they were grown veryrich by this war, retired to their own cities,and laid aside their weapons of war.


But the Benjamites, to Whom belonged Je­rusalem, permitted its inhabitants to pay tri­bute; so they all left off, the one to kill, andthe other to expose themselves to danger, andhad time to cultivate the ground. The restof the tribes imitated that of Benjamin, anddid the same; and contenting themselves withthe tributes that were paid them, permittedthe Canaanites to live in peace.
However, the tribe of Ephraim, when theybesieged Bethel, made no advance; nor per­formed any thing worthy of the time theyspent, and of the pains they took about thatsiege. Yet did they persist in it, still sittingdown before the city; though they enduredgreat trouble thereby. But, after some time,they caught one of the citizens, that came tothem to get necessaries; and they gave himsome assurances, that if he would deliver upthe city they would preserve him and hiskindred. So he sware that, upon those terms,he would put the place into their hands.Accordingly, he was preserved with his fa­mily, whue the Israelites slew all the otherinhabitants, and retained the city for them­selves.
After this the Israelites grew effeminate asto fighting any more against their enemies;but applied themselves to the cultivation ofthe land; which producing great plenty andriches, they neglected the regular dispositionof their settlement, and indulged themselvesin luxury and pleasures. Nor were they anylonger careful to hear the laws that belonged


nary voice from between the cherubim, when he had hisbreast-plate, or Urim and Thummim on, before or in themost holy place of the temple; which was no other thanthe oracle of Urim and Thummim. Of which above, inthe note on Antiq. III. 8.
** This great number of Reguli, or small kings overwhom Adonibezek had tyrannized, and for which he waspunished according to the Lex Talionis; as well as thethirty-one kings of Canaan, subdued by Joshua, and namedin one chapter, Josh. xii. and thirty-two kings, or royalauxiliaries, to Benhadad king of Syria, 1 Kings xx. 1.Antiq. VIII. 14. intimate to us, what was the ancient formof government among several nations, before the monar­chies began; viz. That every city or large town, with itsneighbouring villages, was a distinct government by itself.Which is the more remarkable, because this was certainlythe form of ecclesiastical government that was settled bythe apostles, and preserved throughout the Christianchurch, in the first age of Christianity. Mr. Addison isof opinion, that it would be for the good of mankind, tohave all the mighty empires and monarchies of the worldcantoned out into petty states and principalities; that, like
so many large families, might lie under the observation oftheir proper governors; so that the care of the princemight extend itself to every individual person under hisprotection; though he despairs of such a scheme beingbrought about; and thinks that if it were, it would quicklybe destroyed. Remarks on Italy, 4to. p. 151. Nor is itunfit to be observed here, that the Armenian records,though they give us the history of thirty-nine of theirancientest heroes or governors, after the flood, before thedays of Sardana lus, had no proper king till the 40thPararus. See Mora's Chorenensis, p. 55, and the notethere. And the Almighty God does not approve of suchabsolute or tyrannical monarchies, and one may learn, thatreads Deut. xvii. 14—20. and 1 Sam. viii. 1—22. xii.1—26. Although if such kings are set up, as own himfor their supreme King; and aim to govern according tohis laws, he hath admitted of them, and protected them,and their subjects, in all generations.
tt Judg. i. 7.
* Of the old giants, their several species, statures, andremaining bones, see Authent. Rec. Part I. p. 260—293.and Part II. 872—938. at large.
>







OCR Output








AN. 1178.] 173 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


Accordingly she intreated God to send theangel again, that he might be seen by herhusband. So the angel came again, by thefavour of God, while they were in the sub­urbs; and appeared to her, when she wasalone, without her husband. She desired theangel to stay so long till she might bring herhusband; and that request being granted,she went to call Manoah. When he saw theangel, he was not yet free from suspicion; anddesired him to inform him of all he had toldhis wife. But when he said, it was sufficientthat she alone knew what he had said; hethen requested of him to tell him, who he was;that when the child was born, they might re­turn him thanks, and give him a present. Hereplied, that he did not want any present; forhe did not bring them the good news of thebirth of a son out of the want of any thing.And when Manoah intreated him to stay, andpartake of his hospitality, he did not give hisconsent. However he was persuaded, at theearnest request of Manoah, to stay so long, aswhile he brought him one mark of his hospi­tality. So he slew a kid of the goats, andbade his wife boil it. When all was readythe angel enjoined him to set the loaves andthe flesh, but without the vessels, upon therock. Which, when . they had done, hetouched the flesh with a rod which he had inhis hand; which, upon the breaking out of aflame, was consumed, together with theloaves. And the angel ascended in theirsight, up to heaven by means of the smoke,as by a vehicle. Now Manoah was afraidthat some danger would come to them, fromthis sight of God; but his wife exhorted himto be of good courage; for that God appearedto them for their benefit.*
So the woman became pregnant, and wascareful to observe the injunctions that were


given her. And they called the child, whenit was born, Sampson; which name signifiesone that is strong. So the child grew apace,and it appeared evidently that he would beaf prophet; both by the moderation of hisdiet, and the permission of his hair to grow.
Now when he once came with his parentsto Timnath, a city of the Philistines, whenthere was a great festival, he fell in love witha maid of that country, and desired of his pa­rents that they would procure him the dam­sel for his wife. But they refused so to do;because she was not of the stock of Israel.Yet because this marriage was of God, whointended to convert it to the benefit of theHebrews, he over-persuaded them to procureher to be espoused to him. And as he wascontinually coming to her parents he met alion; and, though he was naked, he receivedthe animal's onset, strangling him with hishands, and cast his body into a woody pieceof ground, on the inside of the road.
Another time when he was going to thedamsel, he discovered a swarm of bees, ma­king their combs in the breast of the lion.And taking three honey-combs away, he gavethem, together with the rest of his presents, tothe damsel. Now the people of Timnath, outof a dread of the young man's strength, gavehim, during the time of the wedding-feast,(for he then feasted them all) thirty of themost stout of their youths in pretence to behis companions; but in reality to be a guardupon him, that he might not attempt to givethem any disturbance. Now as they weredrinking merrily and playing, Sampson said,as was usual at such times, " Come; I proposeyou a riddle,! and if you can expound it inthese seven days time, I will give you everyone a linen shirt and a garment,|| as a rewardof your wisdom." So they, being very ambi­


* Judg. xiii. 23.
t Here by a prophet Josephus seems only to mean,one that was born by a particular providence, who livedafter the manner of a Nazarite devoted to God, and was tohave an extraordinary commission and strength from Godfor the judging and avenging his people Israel; withoutany proper prophetic revelations.
J This shews how ancient the custom was, (which wefind afterwards amongst the Greeks,) of proposing ques­tions to be resolved in their compotations and feasts, thatthey might not be spent merely in eating and drinking,but that there might be something to exercise their witand ingenuity. Such riddles as were contrived to puzzleand perplex were called by the name of 7f 190s, which the
scholiast upon Aristophanes defines to be a question putamong their cups. See Bochart Hieroz, lib. iv. cap. 12.It should also be observed, that they incurred a forfeitureequal to the reward, if they failed altogether in theiranswers. B.
II Among the Greeks it was usual for the bride to givechanges of dress to the friends of the bridegroom at thecelebration of the marriage. Homer represents Pallas asappearing to Nausica in a dream, and commanding her todescend to the river, and wash the robes of state, pre­paratory to her nuptials.
Oh, indolent, to waste thy hours away!
And sleep'st thon, careless of the bridal day?


Pp2







OCR Output








512 [book xit ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


magistrates, senate, and people of Sidon,sendeth greeting. If you be in health, it iswell: I also, and the army, are well. I havesent you a copy of that decree, registered onthe tables, which concerns Hyrcanus, the sonof Alexander, the high-priest and ethnarch ofthe Jews; that it may be laid up among thepublic records. And I will that it be openlyproposed in a table of brass, both in Greekand in Latin. It is as follows :—I, JuliusCaesar, imperator the second time, and high-priest, have made this decree, with the ap­probation of the senate. Whereas Hyrcanusthe son of Alexander, the Jew, hath demon­strated his fidelity and diligence about ouraffairs; and this both now and in formertimes; both in peace and in war, as many ofour generals have borne witness; and cameto our assistance in the last *AIexandrian war,with fifteen hundred soldiers; and when hewas sent by me to Mithridates, shewed him­self superior in valour to all the rest of thatarmy: for these reasons I will, that Hyrca­nus, the son of Alexander, and his children,be ethnarchs of the Jews, and have the high-priesthood of the Jews for ever; accordingto the customs of their forefathers: and thathe and his sons be our confederates: and thatbesides this, every one of them be reckonedamong our particular friends. I also ordain,that he and his children retain whatsoeverprivileges belong to the office of high-priest;or whatsoever favours have been hithertogranted them. And if at any time hereafterthere arise any question about the Jewishcustoms, I will that he determine the same.And I think it not proper that they should beobliged to find us winter quarters; or thatany money should be required of them."
"The decrees of Caius Caesar, consul:containing what hath been granted and de­termined, are as follows: That Hyrcanus andhis children bear rule over the nation of theJews, and have the profits of the places tothem bequeathed; and that himself as the


high-priest and ethnarch of the Jews, defendthose that are injured. And that ambassadors be sent to Hyrcanus, the son of Alex­ander, the high-priest of the Jews, that maydiscourse with him about a league of friend­ship and mutual assistance; and that a tableof brass, containing the premises, be openlyproposed in the capitol, and at Sidon, andTyre, and Ascalon, and in the temple; en­graven in Roman and Greek characters; thatthis decree may also be communicated to thequaestors and pretors of the several cities, andto the friends of the Jews: and that the am­bassadors may have presents made them, andthat these decrees be sent every where."
"Caius Caesar, imperator, dictator, consul,hath granted that out of regard to the honourand virtue and kindness of the man, and forthe advantage of the senate and of the peopleof Rome, Hyrcanus, the son of Alexander,and his children, be high-priests, and priestsof Jerusalem, and of the Jewish nation, bythe same right, and according to the samelaws, by which their progenitors have heldthe priesthood."
"Caius Caesar,t consul the fifth time, hathdecreed, that the Jews shall possess Jerusa­lem; and may encompass that city withwalls; and that Hyrcanus, the son of Alex­ander, the high-priest, and ethnarch of theJews, retain it, in the manner he himselfpleases: and that the Jews be allowed to de­duct out of their tribute, every second yearthe land is let in the sabbatic period, a corusof that tribute. And that the tribute theypay be not let to farm, nor that they pay al­ways the same tribute."
"Caius Caasar, imperator the second time,hath ordained, that all the country of theJews, excepting Joppa, do pay a tributeyearly Jfor the city Jerusalem; excepting theseventh, which they call the sabbatical year:because thereon they neither receive the fruitsof their trees, nor do they sow their land: andthat they pay their tribute in Sidon, on the


* That Hyrcanus was himself in Egypt, along withAntipater, at this time: to whom accordingly the boldand prudent actions of his deputy Antipater are hereascribed; as this decree of Julius Caesar supposes, weare farther assured, by the testimony of Strabo, alreadyproduced by Josephus, chap. 8. But as for the otherniceties in these decrees on behalf of the Jews, most ofwhich are but lately recovered in our editions of Jose­phus, but which are of the most authentic authority, as
compared with the Roman customs, and other records;and what light arises from them to the other Roman au­thors and antiquities, they only belong to the learned inthe Roman affairs, and shall not therefore be dwelt uponin this English version. Jacobus Gronovius, &c. in Ha-vercamp's edition, will generally afford the inquisitivereader abundant satisfaction.
t See the note on chap. 8.
X Probably to rebuild the walls, or to keep them in repair.







OCR Output








AN 1531.] 109 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


same time he promised to give that land totheir children, and to bestow on them thosegood things which their fathers had forfeitedby their ungoverned passions.
When Moses had discoursed thus, accord­ing to the direction of God, the multitudegrieved, and were in affliction; and intreatedMoses to procure their reconciliation to God,and to permit them no longer to wander in thewilderness, but to bestow cities upon them;but he replied that God would not admit ofany such trial, for that God was not moved tothis determination from any human levity oranger, but that he had judiciously condemnedthem to that punishment. Now we are notto disbelieve that Moses, who was but a sin­gle person, pacified so many ten thousandswhen they were in anger, and converted themto a mildness of temper; for God was with him,and prepared the way to his persuasions of themultitude; and as they had often been diso­bedient, they were now sensible that such dis­obedience was disadvantageous to them, andthat they had thereby fallen into calamities.
This man was indeed admirable for hisvirtue, and powerful in making men givecredit to what he delivered, not only duringthe time of his natural life, but even there isstill no one of the Hebrews, who does not acteven now, as if Moses were present, andready to punish him if he should do any thingthat is indecent; nay, there is no one but isobedient to what laws he ordained, althoughthey might be concealed in their transgres­sions. There are also many other demonstra­tions that his power was more than human;for some have even come from the parts be­yond Euphrates, a journey of four months,through many dangers, and at great expenses,
* This great famine, as Dr. Hudson observe?, in thedays of Claudius, is again mentioned in the Antiquities,XX. 4, and Acts xi. 28, as also by Tacitus, Phlegon, Dio,and Africanus. .


in honour of our temple; and yet when theyhad offered their oblations could not partakeof their own sacrifices, because Moses hadforbidden it, by somewhat in the law that didnot permit them, or somewhat that had be­fallen them, which our ancient customs madeinconsistent therewith; so that some of thesedid not sacrifice at all, and others left theirsacrifices in an imperfect condition: nay,many were not able even at first so much asto enter into the temple, but went their waysin this state, as preferring a submission to thelaws of Moses before the fulfilling of their owninclinations, even when they had no fear uponthem that any body could convict them, butonly out of a reverence to their own con­science; so that this legislation, which ap­peared to be divine, made this man to beesteemed as one superior to his own humannature. Nay, farther, a little before the be­ginning of this war, when Claudius was em­peror of the Romans, and Ismael was ourhigh-priest; and when so great a famine*was come upon us, that one tenth deal ofwheat was sold for four drachmae, and whenno less than seventy corifof flour was broughtinto the temple, at the feast of unleavenedbread, not one of the priests was so hardy asto eat one crumb of it, even while so great adistress was on the land, and this out of adread of the law, and of that wrath whichGod retains against acts of wickedness, evenwhen no one can accuse the actors; whencewe are not to wonder at what was then done,while this very day the writings left by Moseshave so great force, that even those who hateus, confess that he who established this set­tlement was God, and that it was by themeans of Moses, and of his virtue.
t These cori are thirty-one Sicilian, or forty-one Athe­nian medimni.







OCR Output








aN. 1800.] 39 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


look upon yourself and God to be the sup­porters of my travels, and think myself safe inmy present circumstances."
Laban now promised to treat him withgreat humanity, both on account of his an­cestors, and particularly for the sake of hismother; towards whom he said he would shewhis kindness, even though she were absent,by taking care of him. For he assured himhe would make him the head shepherd of hisflock, and gave him authority sufficient forthat purpose; and when he should be inclinedto return to his parents, he would send himback with presents, and this in as honourablea manner as their consanguinity should re­quire. Jacob heard these promises gladly;and said he would willingly undergo any sortof pains while he tarried with him; but de­sired as the reward of those pains that hemight be permitted to marry Rachel, whowas not only on other accounts esteemed byhim; but also because she was the means ofhis coming to him; for he said he was forcedby the love of the damsel to make this pro­posal. Laban was pleased with this agree­ment, and consented to give the damsel tohim, if he would stay with him some time;for he was not willing to send his daughterto be among the Canaanites; for he repentedof the alliance he had made already by mar­rying his sister there. And when Jacob hadgiven his consent to this, he agreed to serveis father-in-law seven years, that by givinga specimen of his virtue, it might be betterknown what sort of a man he was. Whenthe stated time was expired, Laban made thewedding feast, but when it was night, withoutJacob's perceiving it, he put his other daugh­ter into bed to him; who was both elder thanRachel, and of no comely countenance. Jacobslept with her that night; but when it wasday he knew what had been done to him, andcomplained of this unfair proceeding. Labanasked pardon for that necessity which forcedhim to do what he did; for he said he did notgive him Lea out of any ill design, but asovercome by another greater necessity; that,notwithstanding this, nothing should hinderhim from marrying Rachel; but that when hehad served another seven years he would
* Gen. xxix. 28.
t Here we have the difference between slaves for life,and servants, such as we nOw hire for a time agreed upon
voL. I.—No. 4.


give him her whom he loved. Jacob sub­mitted to this condition; for his loye to thedamsel did not permit him to do otherwise;and when seven years more were expired, hetook Rachel to wife.*
Now each of these had handmaids, by theirfather's donation. Zilpha was handmaid toLea, and Bilba to Rachel; by no meansslaves,f but subject to their mistresses. NowLea was sorely troubled at her husband's loveto her sister; and she expected she shouldbe better esteemed if she bare him children.She, therefore in treated God perpetually, andwhen she had borne a son, and her husbandwas on that account better reconciled to her,she named her son Reubel, because God hadhad mercy upon her in giving her a son, forthat is the signification of this name. Aftersome time she bare three more sons; Simeon,which name signifies that God had hearkenedto her prayer; Levi, the confirmer of theirfriendship; and Judah, which denotes thanks­giving. But Rachel, fearing lest the fruit-fulness of her sister, should estrange Jacob'saffection from herself, gave him her handmaidBilba, by whom Jacob had Dan: one mayinterpret that name into the Greek tongue, adivine judgment; and after him Nephthalim,as it were unconquerable in stratagems; sinceRachel tried to conquer the fruitfulness of hersister by this stratagem. Accordingly Leatook the same method, and used a counterstratagem to that of her sister's; for she gaveJacob her own handmaid Zilpha, by whom hehad a son, whose name was Gad, which maybe interpreted fortune; and after him Asher,which may be called a happy man, becausehe added glory to Lea.
Now Reubel, the eldest son of Lea, broughtapples of mandrakes to his mother. WhenRachel saw them, she desired that she wouldgive her the apples, for she longed to eatthem; but when she refused, and bid her becontent that she had deprived her of the be­nevolence she ought to have had from herhusband, Rachel, in order to mitigate hersister's anger, said she would yield her hus­band to her that evening. She accepted ofthe favour, and Jacob slept with Lea, whobare then these sons; Issachar, denoting one
onboth sides, and dismiss again after the time contractedfor is over, who are no slaves, but free men and freewomen.







OCR Output








280 [book VIII. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


twenty cubits every way, to be the most se­cret chamber; but he appointed that of fiftycubits to be the sanctuary.* And when hehad cut a door place out of the wall, he puttherein doors of cedar, and overlaid themwith a great deal of gold, that had sculpturesupon it. He also had veils of blue, andpurple, and scarlet, and the brightest andsoftest linen, with the most curious flowerswrought upon them, which were to be drawnbefore those doors. He dedicated for themost secret place, whose breadth was twentycubits, and its length the same; two cheru-bims of solid gold;t the height of each ofthem was five cubits; they had each of themtwo wings stretched out as far as five cubits;wherefore Solomon set them up not far fromeach other; that with one wing they mighttouch the southern wall of the secret place,and with another the northern; their otherwings, which joined to each other, were acovering to the ark; which was set betweenthem. But nobody can tell, or even conjec­ture what was the shape of the cherubims.He also laid the floor of the temple withplates of gold. And he added doors to thegate of the temple agreeable to the measureof the height of the wall, but in breadthtwenty cubits; and on them fixed gold plates.And, in a word, he left no part of the temple,neither internal nor external, but what was


covered with gold. He also had curtainsdrawn over these doors; in like manner asthey were drawn over the inner doors of themost holy place. But the porch of the templehad nothing of that sort.
Now Solomon sent for an artificer out ofTyre, whose name was Hiram. He was bybirth of the tribe of Naphthali, on the mother'sside; but his father was JUr, of the stock ofthe Israelites. This man was skilful in allsorts of work; but his chief skill lay in work­ing of gold and silver, and brass; by whomwere made all the mechanical works aboutthe temple, according to the will of Solomon.Moreover, this Hiram made ||two hollow pil­lars; whose outsides were of brass, and thethickness of the brass was four fingers'breadth; and the height of the pillars waseighteen cubits, and their circumferencetwelve cubits. But there was cast with eachof their chapiters lily-work that stood uponthe pillar, and it was elevated five cubits;round about which there was net-work inter­woven with small palms, made of brass, andcovered with lily-work. To this also werehung two hundred pomegranates, in tworows; the one of these pillars he set at theentrance of the porch on the right hand, andcalled it Jachin, and the other at the lefthand, and called it Booz.
Solomon also cast a brazen sea,§ whose


departed not from the temple, Luke i. 37. (i. e. lived inthat part of the court of the Israelites which was appropri­ated to religious women,) the Greek word is 'ispov. Andthis observation holds good all through the New Testa­ment. La my, De Tabern. lib. v. c. 5. B.
* This temple itself, strictly so called, had two stories.The upper of which was raised quite above these littlehouses, and their roofs; for their roofs reached no higherthan the top of the first story. The second story, whichhad no building adjoining to its side, made a large roomover the sanctuary, and the holy of holies, of equal dimen­sions with them; and it is no improbable opinion, that thiswas the upper chamber, in which the Holy Ghost waspleased to descend upon the Apostles in a visible manner.This under room was appropriated to the pious laity as aplace for them to come and pay their devotions in; andtherefore it seems very likely, that the Apostles were herewith other devout persons, while the temple was full ofJews of all nations, who were come to celebrate the feastof the Pentecost, and that thereupon they below, hearingthe noise, which was occasioned by the shaking of theplace, ran up to see the cause of it, and, to their greatsurprise, found the Apostles distinguished from the otherJews about them, both by the cloven tongues which satupon each of them, and by the several different languagesthat they spake. Lamy's Introduction, lib. i. c. 4. B.
t Josephus says here that the cherubims were of solidgold; and only of five cubits high; while our Hebrewcopies 1 Kings vi. 23, 28. say they were of the olive-tree,and the Septuagint of the cypress-tree; and only overlaidwith gold; and both agree they were ten cubits high. Isuppose the number is here falsely transcribed, and thatJosephus wrote ten cubits also.
| Josephus, in almost all his present copies, has Ovputinstead of TupiK; i. e. Ur, instead of a Tyrian in our othercopies: 1 Kings vii. 14. 2 Chron. ii. 14. which words inthe Greek are so alike, that it is not improbable Josephusalso wrote Tvpa; and that he here agreed with the othercopies.
II As for these two famous pillars, Jachin and Booz,their height could be no more than 18 cubits; as hereand 1 Kings vii. 15. 2 Kings xxv. 17. Jer. lii. 21. Those35 cubits in 2 Chron. iii. 15. being contrary to all rulesof architecture. It is supposed that a circumference of12 cubits, or a diameter of" almost 4 cubits, is also notagreeable to the rules of architecture. But the contraryis shewn from Vitruvius; and this proportion of 6 to 1,which is that of the pillars, including the chapiter, was theoldest and strongest of all proportions in architecture.See the description of the temples, chap. xiii.
§ It is not to be doubted, but that Solomon made all theutensils and ornaments of the temple proportionable, both
'







OCR Output








254 [book tu, ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEW&


tormenting himself, and crying out, "O myson! I wish that I had died myself, and endedmy days with thee!" for he was of a tendernatural affection, and had extraordinarycompassion for this son in particular. Butwhen the army and Joab heard that the kingmourned for his son, they were ashamed toenter into the city in the habit of conquerors:but they all came in as cast down, and intears, as if they had been defeated.* Nowwhile the king covered himself, and griev­ously lamented his son, Joab went to himand comforted him, and said, "O my lordthe king, thou art not aware that thou layesta blot on thyself, by what thou now doest:for thou seemest to hate those that love thee,and undergo dangers for thee; nay, to hatethyself and thy family, and to love those thatare thy bitter enemies: and to desire thecompany of those who have been justly slain.For had Absalom obtained the victory, andfirmly settled himself in the kingdom, therehad been none of us left alive; but all of us,beginning with thyself and thy children, hadmiserably perished; while our enemies hadnot wept for us, but rejoiced over us, andpunished even those that lamented our mis­fortunes. And thou art not ashamed to dothis in the case of one that has been thybitter enemy; who while he was thine ownson, hath proved so wicked to thee. Leaveoff therefore thy unreasonable grief, andcome abroad to thy soldiers; and returnthem thanks for the alacrity they shewed inthe flight. For I myself will this day per­suade the people to leave thee and to givethe kingdom to another, if thou continuest todo thus; and then I shall make thee grievebitterly, and in earnest." Joab's speakingthus made the king leave off his sorrow, andbrought him to the consideration of his af­fairs. So he changed his habit, and exposedhimself in a manner fit to be seen by the mul­titude, and sat at the gates. Whereupon allthe people heard of it and ran togethert andsaluted him.


CHAP. XI.


OF DAVID S REINSTATEMENT IN THE KINGDOM, HIS RECO.N-CIUATION WITH SHIMEI AND ZIBA, AND HIS AFFECTIONTO BARZILLA1. THE REBELLION AND DEATH OF SHEBA.
"T^TOW those Hebrews that had been with_|_^( Absalom, and had retired out of thebattle, when they were all returned home;sent messengers to every city to put them inmind of what benefits David had bestowedupon them; and of that liberty which hehad procured them, by delivering them frommany and great wars. But they complained,that whereas they had ejected him out ofhis kingdom, and committed it to anothergovernor, who was already dead; they didnot now beseech David to leave off his angerat them, and to become friends with them;and, as he used formerly to do, to resumethe care of their affairs, and to take the king­dom again. This was often told to David;and this, notwithstanding David sent to Za-dok and Abiathar the high-priest, that theyshould speak to the rulers of the tribe ofJudah after the following manner: that itwould be a reproach upon them to permitthe other tribes to choose David for theirking before their tribe, and this while theywere akin to him, and of the same commonblood. He commanded them also to sayto Amasa, the captain of their forces: thatwhereas he was his sister's son, he had notpersuaded the multitude to restore the king­dom to David. That he might expect fromhim not only a reconciliation, for that wasalready granted, but that supreme commandof the army also which Absalom had be­stowed upon him. Accordingly the high-priests, when they had discoursed with therulers of this tribe, and said what the kinghad ordered them, persuaded Amasa toundertake the care of his affairs. So hepersuaded that tribe to send ambassadorsimmediately, to beseech him to return tohis own kingdom. The same did all theIsraelites, at the like persuasion of Amasa.


place of that city gate, which seems still to have beenbuilt the highest of any part of the wall; and since ourother copies say he went to the chamber over the gate,2 Sam. xviii. 33. I think we ought to correct our pre­sent reading of Josephus, and for city, should read gate:i. e. instead of the highest part of the city, should say,
the highest part of the gate. Accordingly we find Davidpresently in Josephus, as well as in our other copies, 8Sam. six. 8. sitting as before in the gate of this city.
* 2 Sam. xix. 2, 3.
t 2 Sam. xix. 8.







OCR Output








18 [boor I. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


to God,* and feasted with his companions.However, the Armenians call this placeA*o€a7^&ov,t the place of descent: for the Arkbeing saved in that place, its remains areshewed by the inhabitants of this day.
Now all the writers of profane history make
f mention of this flood, and of this ark, among
whom is Berosus, the Chaldean; for when he
was describing the circumstances of the
flood, he goes on thus:
"It is said there is still some part of theship, in Armenia, at the mountain of the Cor-jj dyeeans; and that some people carry offpieces of the bitumen, which they take away,and use, chiefly as amulets, for the avertingof mischiefs." Hieronymus the Egyptian also,who wrote the Phoenician Antiquities; andManaseas, and many more make mention ofthe same. Nay, Nicolaus of Damascus, inhis ninety-sixth Book, hath a particular rela­tion about them, where he speaks thus:"There is a great mountain in Armenia,over Minyas, called Baris; upon which it isreported that many who fled at the time ofthe deluge were saved; and that one whowas carried in an ark, came on shore uponthe top of it, and that the remains of thetimber were a great while preserved: thismight be the man about whom Moses, thelegislator of the Jews wrote."
But as for Noah, he was afraid, since Godhad determined to destroy mankind, lest heshould drown the earth every year. So heoffered burnt offerings, and besought Godthat nature might hereafter go on in its formerorderly course, and that he would not bringon so great a judgment any more, by whichthe whole race of creatures might be in dan­ger of destruction; but that, having nowpunished the wicked, he would of his good­ness spare the remainder, and such as he hadhitherto judged fit to be delivered from sosevere a calamity; for that otherwise theselast must be more miserable than the first, andthat they must be condemned to a worse con­dition than the others, unless they be suffered


* Gen. viii. 20.
t This place of descent is the proper interpretation ofthe Armenian name of this city. It is called in PtolemyNaxuana, and by Moses Chorenensis, the Armenian His­torian, Idsheuan; but at the place itself Nichidsheuan,which signifies the first place of descent; and is a lastingmonument of the preservation of Noah in the Ark uponthe top of that Mountain, at whose foot it was built, as the


to escape entirely; that as, if they be reservedfor another deluge, while they must be af­flicted with the terror and the sight of thedeluge, and must also be destroyed by asecond. He also intreated God to accept ofhis sacrifice, and to grant, that the earthmight never again undergo the like effects ofhis wrath; that men might be permitted togo on cheerfully in cultivating the same; tobuild cities, and live happily in them; andthat they might not be deprived of any ofthose good things which they enjoyed beforethe flood; but might attain to the old agewhich the ancient people had arrived at be­fore.
When Noah had made these supplications,God, who loved the man for his righteousness,granted his prayers: and said, "that it wasnot he who brought the destruction on a pol­luted world, but that they underwent thatvengeance on account of their own wicked­ness; and that he had not brought men intothe world if he had himself determined to de­stroy them; it being an instance of greaterwisdom not to have granted them life at all,than, after it was granted to procure theirdestruction. But the injuries," said he, "•theyoffered to my holiness and virtue, forced mejto bring this punishment upon them; but I will/leave off for the time to come to require suchpunishments, the effects of so great wrath,for their future wicked actions; and especiallyon account of thy prayers. But if I shall atany time send tempests of rain in an extra­ordinary manner, be not affrighted at thecopiousness of the showers, for the watershall no more overspread the earth. HoweverI require you to abstain from shedding theblood of men, and to keep yourselves purefrom murder, and to punish those who com­mit any such thing; I permit you to make useof all the other living creatures, at your plea­sure, and as your appetites lead you; for Ihave made you lords of them all; both ofthose that walk on the land, and those thatswim in the waters, and of those that fly in
first city or town after the flood. See Antiq. xx. 2, andMoses Chorenensis, page 71—72. Who also says, page19, that, another town was related by tradition to havebeen called Seron, or the place of dispersion, on accountof the first dispersion of Xisuthrus's or Noah's sons fromthence. Whether any remains of this Ark be still pre •served, as the people of the country suppose, I cannot cei-tainly tell.


• •







OCR Output








556 [book XV. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


tators; as it was principally by her thepoor woman was to suffer. For at the firstshe gave her not a word, nor was discom­posed at her peevishness; and only lookedat her: yet did she out of a greatness of souldiscover her concern for her mother's offence;and especially for her exposing herself in amanner so unbecoming. But as for herself,she went to her death with an unshaken firm­ness of mind and without changing colour:and thereby evidently discovered the nobilityof her descent to the spectators, even in thelast moments of her life.
And thus died Mariamne: a woman of anexcellent character, both for chastity andgreatness of soul: but she wanted moderation,and had too much of contention in her nature;yet had she all that can be said in the beautyof her body, and her majestic appearance inconversation: and thence arose the greatestpart of the occasions why she did not proveso agreeable to the king, nor live so pleasantlywith him, as she might otherwise have done.For while she was most indulgently used bythe king, out of his fondness for her; and didnot expect that he could do any thing hardto her; she took too unbounded a liberty.Moreover, that which most afflicted her was,what he had done to her relations: and sheventured to speak of all they had suffered byhim. And at last greatly provoked both theking's mother and sister, till they becameenemies to her: and even he himself also didthe same; on whom alone she depended forher expectations of escaping the last ofpunishments.
But when she was dead, the king's affec­tions for her were kindled in a more outra­geous manner than before: for his love to herwas not of a calm nature; nor such as weusually meet with among other husbands.For at its commencement, it was of an enthu­siastic kind. Nor was it by their long co­habitation and free conversation togetherbrought under his power to manage. Butat this time his love to Mariamne seemed toseize him in such a peculiar manner, aslooked like divine vengeance upon him, forthe taking away her life. For he would fre­quently call for her; and frequently lamentfor her, in a most violent manner. He alsobethought him of every thing he could makeuse of to divert his mind from thinking of


her; and contrived feasts and assemblies forthat purpose. But nothing would suffice.He, therefore, laid aside the administrationof public affairs; and was so far conqueredby his passion, that he would order his ser­vants to call for Mariamne; as if she werestill alive, and could still hear them. Andwhen he was in this way, there arose a pes­tilential disease, and carried off the greatestpart of the multitude, and of his best andmost esteemed friends: and made all mensuspect, that this distemper was broughtupon them by the anger of God, for the in­justice that had been done to Mariamne.This circumstance affected the king stillmore; till at length he forced himself to gointo desert places; and there under pre­tence of going a hunting, bitterly afflictedhimself. Yet had he not borne his griefthere many days, before he fell into a mostdangerous distemper himself. He had aninflammation upon him, and a pain in thehinder part of his head, joined with madness.And the remedies that were used, did himno good at all; but proved contrary to hiscase, and so at length brought him to des­pair. All the physicians also that were abouthim, partly because the medicines theybrought for his recovery could not at all con­quer the disease; and partly because his dietcould be no other than what his disease in­clined him to; desired him to eat whateverhe had a mind to; and so left the small hopesthey had of his recovery in the power of thatdiet, and committed him to fortune. Andthus did his distemper go on while he was atSamaria, now called Sebaste.
Alexandra, in the mean time, abode at Je­rusalem: and being informed what conditionHerod was in, she endeavoured to get pos­session of the fortified places that were aboutthe city, which were two, the one belongingto the city, the other belonging to the temple.And those that could get them into theirhands had the whole nation under theirpower. For without the command of them" itwas not possible to offer their sacrifices. Andto think of leaving off those sacrifices, is toevery Jew plainly impossible; who are stillmore ready to lose their lives, than to leaveoff that divine worship which they have beenwont to pay unto God. Alexandra, there­fore, discoursed with those that had the keep


•;







OCR Output








aN. 898.] 317 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


they should beat them. They also gave himthis farther advice; to send home those kingswhom he had brought as his auxiliaries; butto retain their army, and to set captains overit, instead of the kings; and to raise an armyout of their country, and let them be in theplace of the former who perished in thebattle, together with horses and chariots. Sohe judged their counsel to be good, and actedaccording to it in the management of his army.At the beginning of the spring Benhadadtook his army with him, and led it againstthe Hebrews; and when he was come to acertain city called Aphek, he pitched hiscamp in the great plain. Ahab also went tomeet him with his army, and encamped overagainst him: although his army were a verysmall one, if it were compared with hisenemies. But the prophet came again tohim, and told him, that God would give himthe victory; that he might demonstrate hisown power to be not only on the mountains,but on the plains also: which it seems wascontrary to the opinion of the Syrians. Sothey lay quiet in the camp seven days; buton the last of those days, when the enemycame out and put themselves in array, inorder to fight, Ahab also brought out hisarmy: and when the battle was joined, andthey fought stoutly, he put the enemy toflight, and pursued them, and pressed uponthem, and slew them. Nay, they were de­stroyed by their own chariots, and by oneanother. And even the few who escaped totheir own city Aphek, were also killed bythe walls falling upon them, being in numbertwenty-seven thousand.* Now there wasslain in this battle a hundred thousand more.But Benhadad, the king of the Syrians, fledaway, with certain others of his most faithfulservants, and hid himself in a cellar underground. And when these told him that the


kings of Israel were humane and mercifulmen; and that they might make use of theusual manner of supplication, and obtain de­liverance from Ahab, in case he would givethem leave to go to him, he gave them leaveaccordingly. So they came to Ahab, clothedin sackcloth, and with ropes about theirheads:f for this was the ancient manner ofsupplication among the Syrians: and said,that Benhadad desired he would save him,and that he would ever be a servant to himfor that favour. Ahab replied, he was gladhe was alive, and not hurt in the battle.And he further promised him the samehonour and kindness that a man would shewto his brother. So they received assurancesupon oath from him, that when he came tohim he should receive no harm; and thenwent and brought him out of the cellarwherein he was hid, and brought him toAhab, as he sat in his chariot. So Ben­hadad worshipped him. And Ahab gavehim his hand, and made him come up to himin his chariot, and kissed him, and bade himbe of good cheer, and not to expect thatany mischief should be done to him. SoBenhadad returned him thanks, and pro­fessed that he would remember his kindnessall the days of his life; and promised hewould restore those cities of the Israeliteswhich the former kings had taken fromthem; and grant that he should have leaveto come to Damascus, as his forefathers hadcome to Samaria. So they confirmed theircovenants by oaths, and Ahab made himmany presents, and sent him back to hisown kingdom. And this was the conclusionof the war that Benhadad made against Ahaband the Israelites.
But a certain prophet whose name wasMicaiah,J came to one of the Israelites, andbade him smite him on the head; for by so


* Josephus's number, two myriads and seven thousand,agrees here with that in our other copies; as those thatwere slain by the fulling down of the walls of Aphek.But I suspected at first that this number in Josephus'spresent copies could not be his original number, becausehe calls them a few: which could hardly be said of somany as 27,000, and because of the improbability of thefall of a particular wall killing so many. Yet when Iconsider that Josephus's next words, how the rest whichwere slain in the battle were ten other myriads ; that 27,000are but a few in comparison of 100,000; and that it wasnot a wall, as in our English version, but the wall, or theentire walls of the city that fell down, as in all the origi-
nals, I lay aside that suspicion; and firmly believe thatJosephus himself hath, with the rest, given us the justnumber, 27,000. The Aphek is by Josephus justly calledthe Syrians' city: as probably one of them which ourBible, and Josephus speak of presently; and which thisBenhadad's predecessors had taken from the Israelites,and was now to be restored.
t This manner of supplication for men's lives amongthe Syrians, with ropes or halters about their heads ornecks, is, I suppose, no strange thing in later ages, evenin our own country.
J It is here very remarkable, that in Josephus's copythis prophet, whose denunciation of a disobedient person's


3K2







OCR Output








ait. 1493.] 117 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


cat; and in the temple also; and the sameday they were offered.
When Moses had made these constitutions,after the sedition was over, he removed to­gether with the whole army, and came to theborders of Idumea. He then sent ambassa­dors to the king of the Idumeans, and desiredhim to give him a passage through his coun­try: and agreed to send him what hostageshe should desire, to secure him from any in­jury. He desired also, that he would allowhis army liberty to buy provisions: and if heinsisted upon it, he would pay down a pricefor the very water they should drink. Butthe king was not pleased with this ambassagefrom Moses, nor did he allow a passage forthe army, but brought his people armed tomeet Moses, and to hinder them in case theyshould endeavour to force their passage.Upon which Moses consulted God by theOracle; who would not have him begin thewar first; and so he withdrew his forces, andtravelled round about through the wilder­ness.
Then it was that Miriam, the sister ofMoses, came to her* end; having completedherf fortieth year since she left Egypt; on Jthe first day of the lunar month Xanthicus.They then made a public funeral for her, at agreat expense. She was buried upon a cer­tain mountain, which they call Sin. Andwhen they had mourned for her thirty days,Moses purified the people after this manner:He brought a heifer, that had never beenused to the plough, or to husbandry; that wascomplete in all its parts, and entirely of a redcolour; at a little distance from the camp, intoa place perfectly clean. This heifer was slainby the high-priest, and her blood sprinkledwith his finger seven times before the taber­nacle of God. After this, the entire heiferwas burnt in that state, together with its skinand entrails, and they threw cedar-wood, andhyssop, and scarlet wool, into the midst of thefire. Then a clean man gathered all herashes together, and laid them in a place per­fectly clean. When, therefore, any persons


were defiled by a dead body, they put a littleof these ashes into spring water, with hyssop;and dipping part of these ashes in it, theysprinkled them with it, both on the third day,and on the seventh; and after that they wereclean. This he enjoined them to do also,when the tribes should come into their ownland.
Now when this purification, which theirleader made, upon the mourning for his sister,as it had now been described, was over, hecaused the army to remove, and to marchthrough the wilderness, and through Arabia.And when he came to a place which the Ara­bians esteem their metropolis, which was for­merly called Arce, but has now the name ofPetra: at this place, which was encompassedwith high mountains, Aaron went up one ofthem, in the sight of the whole army; Moseshaving before told him that he was to die.for this place was over against them. Hethere put off his pontifical garments, and de­livered them to Eleazar his son, to whom thehigh-priesthood belonged, because he was theelder brother; and died|| while the multitudelooked upon him. He died in the same yearwherein he lost his sister; having lived in allan hundred and twenty-three years. He diedon the first day of that lunar month, which iscalled by the Athenians, Hecatombaeon; bythe Macedonians, Lous; but by the Hebrews,Abba.
CHAP. V.
OF THE CONQUEST OF SIHON AND OG, KINGS OF THE AMO-RITES J AND THE DIVISION OF THEIR LAND BY LOT TOTWO TRIBES AND A HALF OF THE HEBREWS.
THE people mourned for Aaron thirtydays: and when this mourning was over,Moses removed the army from that place, andcame to the river Arnon; which issuing outof the mountains of Arabia, and runningthrough all that wilderness, fell into the lakeAsphaltites, and became the limit betweenthe land of the Moabites, and the land of theAmorites. This land is fruitful, and sufficientto maintain a great number of men, with the


* Numb. xx. 1.
T Josephus here uses this phrase, when the fortiethyear was completed, for when it was begun; as does St.Luke, when the day of Pentecost was completed. Acts ii. 1.
J Whether Miriam died, as Josephus's Greek copiesimply, on this first day of the month, may be doubted;
because the Latin copies say, it was on the tenth; and sosay the Jewish calendars also, as Dr. Bernard assures us.It is said her sepulchre is still extant near Petra, the oldcapital of Arabia Petra, at this day; as also that of Aaron,not far off.
1! Numb. xx. 28.







OCR Output








242 [book VII. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


the same city, the one of them was rich, andthe other poor; the rich man had a greatmany flocks of cattle, of sheep, and of kine;but the poor man had but one ewe lamb.This he brought up with his children, andlet her eat her food with them, and he hadthe same natural affection for her which anyone might have for a daughter. Now uponthe coming of a stranger to the rich man, hewould not vouchsafe to kill any of his ownflocks, and thence regale his friend; but hesent for the poor man's lamb, and took heraway from him, and made her ready forfood, and thence feasted the stranger." Thisdiscourse troubled the king exceedingly; andhe denounced to Nathan, that this was awicked man, who could dare to do such athing, and it was but just that he should re­store the lamb* fourfold, and be punishedwith death for it also. Upon this Nathan im­mediately said, that he was himself the manwho ought to suffer those punishments; andthat by his own sentence: for that it was hewho had perpetrated this great and horridcrime. He also revealed to him the anger ofGod, who had made him king over the armyof the Hebrews, and lord of all the nations,and those many and great nations, roundabout him; who had formerly delivered himout of the hands of Saul, and had given himsuch wives as he had justly and legally mar­ried, and now this God was despised by him,and affronted by his impiety; when he hadmarried, and now had another man's wife;and by exposing her husband to the enemy,had really slain him; that God would inflictpunishments upon him on account of thoseinstances of wickedness; that his own wivesshould be violated by one of his sons; andthat he should be treacherously supplanted bythe same son, and that although he had per-


petrated his wickedness secretly, yet shouldthat punishment which he was to undergo, beinflicted publicly upon him, and also that thechild which was born to him of Bathshebashould soon die. When the king was troubledat these messages, and sufficiently confound­ed, and said with tears and sorrow that he hadsinned: (for he was without controversy apious man, and guilty of no sin at all in hiswhole life, excepting those in the matter ofUriah,) God had compassion on him, andwas reconciled to him, and promised that hewould preserve him both nis life and hiskingdom. For he said, that seeing he re­pented of the things he had done, he wasno longer displeased with him. So Nathan,when he had delivered this prophecy to theking, returned home.
However God sent a dangerous distemperupon the child that was born to David, of thewife of Uriah. At which the king was trou­bled, and did not take any food for sevendays;t although his servants almost forcedhim to take it; but he clothed himself in ablack garment, and fell down, and lay uponthe ground, in sackcloth: intreating God forthe recovery of the child, for he vehementlyloved the child's mother. But when, on theseventh day, the child was dead, the king'sservants durst not tell him of it; as supposingthat when he knew it, he would still less ad­mit of food, and other care of himself, byreason of his grief at the death of his son?since when the child was only sick, he sogreatly afflicted himself, and grieved for him.But when the king perceived that his servantswere in disorder, and seemed to be affectedas those are who are very desirous to concealsomething, he understood that the child wasdead; and when he had called one of his ser­vants to him, and discovered that it was so, he


even at this day it is a custom in Arabia, (which is con­tiguous to Judea) to have one of the finest lambs in theflock brought up in the house, and fed with the children."And there came a traveller to the rich man;" this de­notes David's straggling appetite, which he suffered towander from his own home, and to covet another man'swife: and of this appetite the Jewish doctors have this ob­servation, that 'in the beginning it is but a traveller, butin time it becomes a guest, and in conclusion is the masterof the house.' "And he spared to take of his own flockand his own herds," wherewith he might have satisfiedhis appetite, "but took the poor man's lamb, and dressedit for the wayfaring man that was come to him." Mostcommentators here take notice, that Nathan did not go so
far in the parable, as to say any thing of the rich man'skilling the poor man. This certainly would have madethe resemblance more complete, but it is therefore omit­ted, that David might not so readily apprehend Nathan'smeaning, and so be induced unawares to pronounce asentence of condemnation upon himself; whereupon theprophet had a fair opportunity to shew him, that if therich man, who took away the poor man's lamb, deserveddeath according to his own judgment, how much moredid he deserve it, who had not only taken another man'swife, but caused him to be slain likewise by the enemiesof Israel! Patrick's Commentary. B.
* Exod. xxii. 1.
t See the note on VI. 14.
%







OCR Output








AN. H08.J 197 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


«It is not without some cause, that God re­fuses to answer what we inquire of him; whoyet a little while ago declared to us all thatwe desired beforehand, and even preventedus in his answer. To be sure there is somesin against him that is concealed from us,which is the occasion of his silence. Now Iswear by himself, that though he that com­mitted this sin should prove to be my own sonJonathan, I will slay him; and by that meanswill appease the anger of God against us;and that in the very same manner as if I wereto punish a stranger, and one not at all relatedto me for the same offence."* So when themultitude cried out to him so to do, he pre­sently set all the rest on one side, and he andhis son stood on the other side, and he soughtto discover the offender by lot. Now the lotappeared to fall upon Jonathan himself. Sowhen he was asked by his father what sin hehad been guilty of? and what he was con­scious of in the course of his life that mightbe esteemed instances of guilt or profaneness?his answer was this, "O father! I have donenothing more than that yesterday, withoutknowing of the curse and the oath thou hadstdenounced, while I was in pursuit of theenemy, I tasted of a honey-comb." Saul im­mediately swore that he would slay him, andprefer the observation of his oath before allthe ties of birth and of nature. But Jonathanwas not dismayed at this threatening; butoffering himself to it generously, and undaunt­edly, he said, "Nor do I desire you, father,to spare me. Death will be to me very ac­ceptable, when it proceeds from thy piety,and after a glorious victory; for it is the
freatest consolation to me, that I leave the[ebrews victorious over the Philistines."Hereupon all the people were greatly afflictedfor Jonathan; and they sware that they wouldnot see him die, who was the author of theirvictory. By which means they snatched himout of the danger he was in from his father'scurse; while they made their prayers to God,also for the young man, that he would remithis sin.
So Saul having slain about sixty thousandof the enemy, returned to his own city, andreigned happily. And he also fought against


the neighbouring nations, and subdued theAmmonites, Moabites, Edomites, and Amale-kites; as also the king of Zobah. He hadthree male children, Jonathan, Ishui, andMelchi-shua, with Merah and Michal, hisdaughters. He had also Abner, his uncle'sson, for the captain of his host; that uncle'sname was Ner. Now Ner and Kish the fa­ther of Saul were brothers. Saul had also agreat many chariots and horsemen; andagainst whomsoever he made war, he re­turned conqueror, and advanced the affairs ofthe Hebrews to a great degree of success andprosperity, and made them superior to othernations. And he made such of the youngmen as were remarkable for tallness andcomeliness his body guards.
chap, vn,
op saul's war with the amalekites, and his conquest
OF THEM.
NOW Samuel came unto Saul,f and saidunto him, that he was sent by God toput him in mind, that God had preferred himbefore all others, and ordained him king; andhe therefore ought to be obedient to him, andto submit to his authority; as considering, thatthough he had the dominion over the othertribes, yet that God had the dominion overhim, and over all things. That accordinglyGod said to him, "Because the Amalekitesdid the Hebrews a great deal of mischiefwhile they were in the wilderness, and when,upon their coming out of Egypt, they weremaking their way to that country which isnow their own, I enjoin thee to punish theAmalekites, by making war upon them; andwhen thou hast subdued them, to leave noneof them alive; but to pursue them throughevery age, and to slay them; beginning withthe women and the infants; and to requirethis as a punishment to be inflicted on themfor the mischief they did to our forefathers.To spare nothing, neither asses, nor otherbeasts; nor to reserve any of them for yourown advantage and possession; but to devotethem universally to God, and, in obedienceto the commands of Moses, to blot out thename of J Amalek entirely."


* 1 Sam. xiv. 39.t About an. 1106.X The reason of this severity is distinctly given, 1 Sam.
xv. 18. Go and utterly destroy the sinners, the Amale­kites. Nor indeed do we ever meet with these Amale­kites, but as very cruel and bloody people; and particu-


Ss2







OCR Output








350 [book h. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


government, stood up, and three others withhim, and said, "We will not suffer the citi­zens to bring these prisoners into the city, lestwe be all destroyed by God. We have sinsenough of our own, that we have committedagainst him, as the prophet assures us. Norought we therefore to introduce the practiceof new crimes." When the soldiers heardthat, they permitted them to do what theythought best. So the aforenamed men tookthe captives and gave them provisions, andsent them into their own country, withoutdoing them any harm. However, these fourwent along with them, and conducted themas far as Jericho, which is not far from Jeru­salem; and then returned to Samaria.
Hereupon king Ahaz, having been so com­pletely defeated by the Israelites, sent toTiglath-Pileser,* king of the Assyrians, andsued for assistance in his war against theIsraelites, Syrians, and Damascenes; witha promise to send him much money. Hesent him also great presents at the sametime. Now this king, upon the reception ofthe ambassadors, came to assist Ahaz, andhaving made war upon the Syrians, he laidtheir country waste, took Damascus by force,slew Rezin their king, and transplanted thepeople of Damascus into the upper Media;and planted a colony of Assyrians, in theircity. He also afflicted the land of Israel,and took many captives out of it. In themean time, king Ahaz took all the gold thatwas in the royal treasury, and the silver,


and what was in the temple of God, and whatprecious gifts were there, and he carriedthem with him, and came to Damascus, andgave it to the king of Assyria, according tohis agreement. So he confessed that heowed him thanks for all that he had donefor him, and returned to Jerusalem.
Now this king was so thoughtless of whatwas for his own good, that he would notleave off worshipping the Syrians' gods, whenhe was beaten by them: but he continued inhis idolatry, as though they had procuredhim the victory. And when he was beatenagain, he began to honour the gods of theAssyrians: and he seemed more desirous tohonour any other than his paternal and trueGod; whose anger was the cause of his de­feat. Nay he proceeded to such a degreeof contempt of God's worship, that he shutup the temple entirely ;f and forbade thepeople to bring in the appointed sacrifices;and took away the gifts that had been givento it. And when he had offered these indig­nities to God, he died; having lived thirty-sixyears,J and reigned sixteen ;j| and he left hisson Hezekiah for his successor.
CHAP. XIII.


OF THE DEATH OF PEKAH; AND THE REIGNS OF HOSHEA,KING OF ISRAEL, AND HEZEKIAH, KING OF JUDAH.
ABOUT the same time Pekah.§ king ofIsrael died by the treachery of a friendof his named Hoshea, who retained the king­


* In 2 Chron. xxviii. 20, we read, that Tiglath-Pilesercame unto Ahaz, and distressed, but strengthened him not.And yet, in 2 Kings xvi. 9. it is said, that he did help him;and how then can he be said to have distressed him?Very well: for as he came to his assistance against theking of Syria, so he took Damascus, carried the peoplecaptive, and delivered Ahaz from the power of the Syrians;but this did Ahaz little good, for he helped him not to re­cover the cities which the Philistines had taken fromhim. He lent him no forces, nor enabled him to recruithis own ; on the contrary he rather weakened him, by ex­hausting his treasures, and destroying Samaria, whichopened a way for the invasion of his country with morefacility, as it happened in the next reign. For it is nouncommon thing, even in later ages, to hear of kingdomsthat were called in the help of some foreign princeagainst their enemies, over-run and conquered by thosewho came in their assistance. Patrick'} Commentary. B.
t 2 Kings xxviii. 24.
J When Josephus, together with all our Hebrew, andall our Greek copies in the Kings; and all our Hebrew,and almost all our Greek copies in the Chronicles, makeAhaz to be but twenty years old when he began to reign,
and to reign sixteen years; and then as all the copiesagree, to be succeeded by Hezekiah at twenty-five yearsof age: it is plain there are but eleven years, or at mostsome odd months besides for Ahaz, the father, when theson Hezekiah was born; which is one of the greatest dif­ficulties in all the Bible. But then, as Dr. Wall justlyobserves, this difficulty is cleared by the Greek copy andthe Armenian version; which though the former in theKings, and the latter in the Chronicles, had with the restdropped the odd years above twenty for the age of Ahaz,when he came to the crown, yet has the former in theChronicles, 2 Chron. xxviii. 1, and the latter in the Kings,preserved them, and expressly assured us there, thatAhaz was twenty-five years old when he began to reign;which directly implies that he was sixteen years old whenhis son Hezekiah was born; which wholly obviates thedifficulty.
II From An, 744 to 728.
§ Josephus says here, that Pekah was slain about thesame time that Ahaz died; which chronology will notallow. Yet when we consider, that in the same chrono­logy the fourth of Ahaz is called the twentieth of Jotham,2 Kings xv. 30. while Jotham reigned in all but sixteen







OCR Output








Ik [book I. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


ous designs towards men, and it being easiestto take vengeance of him that way; and whenhe had deprived him of the use of his Jget, hemade him to go rolling along, and dragginghimself upon the ground; and when God hadappointed these penalties for them, he re­moved Adam and Eve out of the garden* intoanother place.
CHAP. II.
OF THE POSTERITY OF ADAM, AND THE TEN GENERATIONSFROM HIM TO THE DELUGE.
ADAM and Eve had two sons,f the elderof them was named Cain, which name,when interpreted, signifies a possession. Theyounger was Abel, which signifies sorrow.They also hadjlaughters. Now the two bre­thren were pleased with different courses oflife: for Abel the brother was a lover ofrighteousness, and believing that GocTwaspresent at all his actions, he excelled in vir­tue, and his employment was that of a shep­herd. But Cain was not only very wicked inother respects, but was wholly intent upongetting, and he first contrived to plough theground. He slew his brother on the followingoccasion :—they had resolved to sacrifice toGod; now Cain brought the fruits of the earth,and of his husbandry: but Abel brought milk,and the first fruits of his flocks. But GodJwas more delighted with the latter oblation,when he was honoured with what grew natu­rally of its own accord, than he was with whatwas the invention of a covetous man, and got­ten by forcing the ground. Cain, therefore,was very angry that Abel was preferred byGod before him, and he slew his brother, and


hid his dead body, thinking to escape dis­covery. But God knowing what had been done,came to Cain and asked him, What was be­come of his brother? because he had not seenhim many days, whereas he used to observethem conversing together at other times. ButCain was in doubt with himself, and knew notwhat answer to give to God. At first he said,that he was himself at a loss about his bro­ther's disappearing; but when he was pro- jvoked by God, who pressed him vehemently,'as resolving to know what the matter was, hereplied, "He was not his brother's guardianor keeper, nor was he an observer of what hedid." But in return God convicted Cain, ashaving been the murderer of his brother, andsaid, " I wonder at thee, that thou knowestnot what is become of a man whom thou thy­self has destroyed." God however did notinflict the punishment of death upon him, onaccount of his offering sacrifice, and therebymaking supplication to him not to be extremein his wrath to him: but he made him ac­cursed and threatened his posterity in theseventh generation. He also cast him, togetherwith his .wife, out of that land; and when hewas afraid, that in wandering about he shouldfall among wild beasts, and by that meansperish, God told him not to entertain such amelancholy suspicion,|| but to go over all theearth without fear of what mischief he mightsuffer from wild beasts; and setting a markupon him that he might be known, he com­manded him to depart.§
When Cain had travelled over many coun­tries, he, with his wife, built a city, namedNod,** which is a place so called, and there


* Gen. iii. 23.
t Gen. iv. et sequel.
J St. John's account of the reason why God acceptedthe sacrifice of Abel, and rejected that of Cain; as alsowhy Cain slew Abel, on account of his acceptance withGod, is much better than this of Josephus; I mean, be­cause " Cain was of the evil one, and slew his brother.And wherefore slew he him? Because his own workswere evil, and his brother's righteous." 1 John iii. 22.Josephus's reasons seems to be no better than a Phari­saical notion or tradition.
|| The punishment of Cain was doubtless a severe one,but not more so than his aggravated guilt demanded. Re­ferring to it, Moses represents him as saying, My punish­ment is greater than I can bear, Gen. iv. 13. but as theHebrew words signifies iniquity rather than punishment,and the verb signifies to be forgiven, as well as to bear, itseems to agree better with the context, to render theverse positively, my iniquity is too great to be forgiven; or
by way of interrogation, is my iniquity too great to be for­given? A learned annotator has observed that as there areseven abominations in the heart of him that loveth not hisbrother, Prov. xxvi. 25. there were the like number oftransgressions in Cain's conduct. 1. He sacrificed with­out faith. 2. He was displeased that God respected himnot. 3. He hearkened not to God's admonition. 4. Hespake dissemblingly to his brother. 5. He killed him inthe field. 6. He denied that he knew where he was.7. He neither hoped or asked for mercy from God, butdespaired, and so fell into the condemnation of the devil.Jiinsworth's Jlnnot. B.
§ Of this punishment of Cain in the seventh generation,and of the punishment of Lamech in the seventy-seventhgeneration, as also of the mark set upon Cain and his pos­terity, see Literal Accomplishment of Scripture Prophe­cies, Supplement at large, page 106—134.
** Gen. iv. 16.







OCR Output








216 [book VI. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


from harm; and what had passed would provevery pernicious to his master." When theservant had said this, Abigail, (for that wasthe wife's name,) saddled her asses, andloaded them with all sorts of presents; andwithout telling her husband any thing of whatshe was about, for he was not sensible onaccount of his drunkenness, she went toDavid. She was then met by David, as shewas descending a hill, for he was coming
Wainst Nabal with the four hundred men.hen the woman saw him, she leaped fromher ass, and fell on her face, and bowed downto the ground; and intreated him not to bearin mind the words of Nabal; since he knewthat he resembled his name: Now Nabal, inthe Hebrew tongue, signifies folly. So sheapologized by saying, that she did not seethe messengers whom he sent. "Forgiveme, therefore," said she, "and thank Godwho hath hindered thee from shedding humanblood. For so long as thou keepest thyself*innocent, he will avenge thee of wicked men.For those miseries which await Nabal, willfall upon the heads of thine enemies. Bethou gracious to me, and think me so farworthy as to accept these presents; and outof regard to me remit that wrath and angerwhich thou hast against my husband, and hishouse. For mildness and humanity becomethee; especially as thou art to be our king."Accordingly David accepted her presents,and said, "O woman! it was no other than


God's mercy which brought thee to us to-day.For otherwise thou hadst never seen anotherday; I havingf sworn to destroy Nabal's housethis very night, and to leave alive not one ofyou who belonged to a man that was wicked,and ungrateful to me, and my companions.But now hast thou prevented me, and sea­sonably mollified my anger; as being thyselfunder the care of God's providence. But asfor Nabal; although, for thy sake, he nowescape punishment, he will not always avoidjustice for his evil conduct, which on someother occasion, will be ruin."
When David had said this, he dismissedthe woman. And when she came home, andfound her husband feasting with a great com­pany, and oppressed with wine, she saidnothing to him about what had happened;but on the next day, when he was sober, shetold him all the particulars, and made hiswhole body to appear like that of a deadman,J by her words; and by that grief whicharose from them. So Nabal survived onlyten days, and then died.|| And when Davidheard of his death, he said that God had justlyavenged him of this man; for that Nabal diedby his own wickedness, and had sufferedpunishment on his account; while he had kepthis own hand clean. At which time he under­stood, that the wicked are persecuted byGod; that he does not overlook any man, butbestows on the good what is suitable to them,and inflicts a deserved punishment on the


* Here we may perceive how Josephus, nay, howAbigail herself, would understand, the not avenging our­selves, but heaping coals of fire on the head of the inju­rious: Prov. xxv. 21, 22. Rom. xii. 20. not as we com­monly do now, of melting them into kindness; but ofleaving them to the judgment of God; to whom vengeancebelongeth: Deut. xxxii. 35. Ps. xciv. 1. Heb. x. 30. andwho will take vengeance on the wicked. And since allGod's judgments are just, and all fit to be executed; andall, at length, for good of the persons punished, I inclineto think that to be the meaning of this phrase, of heapingcoals of fire on their heads. So also, as it seems to me,do the Apostolical Constitutions understand it, I. 2.
t We imy note here, that how sacred soever an oathwas esteemed among the people of God in old times, as Ihave fully shewn in my Scripture Politics, p. 54—65,they did not think it obligatory where the action wasplainly unlawful. For so we see it was in this case ofDavid; who although he had sworn to destroy Nabal, andhis family, yet does he here, and 1 Sam. xxv. 32, 33, 31bless God for preventing his keeping this oath, and fromshedding of blood as he had sworn to do.
J The words in the original are, " He became a stone;"but our translation has wisely supplied the particle at,which should always be done, when the scripture affirms
something of another that is not absolutely of the samenature. We may observe, however, that this manner ofexpression is very common among profane authors. ThusOvid brings in Ariadne expressing her grief and astonish­ment at the loss of Theseus, who had left her in the islandDia:
Aut mare prospiciens in saxo frigida sedi.Quamque lapis seges, tarn lapis ipsa fui.
The like expression is used of Hecuba, when she saw thedead body of her son Polydorus:
-duroque simillima saxo.
Torpet
But in the case of Niobe, who is said to be turned into astatue of stone, Cicero, in his Tusculan Questions ob­serves, that this fable only represents her perpetualsilence in mourning; and accordingly Josephus tells usof Nabal that when his wife told him of the danger hehad escaped, he was struck with such an astonishment,that he fell into a dead numbness all over his body, ofwhich he soon died. Le Clerc,s Comment, and Dm. Destatu,/ salis. 6.II 1 Sam. xxv. 38.







OCR Output








aN. 1492.] 151 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


burnt their chariots, and passed all over theircountry without opposition; no one daring tomeet him in battle; but he still went on, ta­king their cities by siege, and killing what­ever he took.
The filth year was now past;* and therewas not one of the Canaanites remained anylonger; excepting some that had retired toplaces of great strength. So Joshua removedhis camp to the mountainous country, and
{ilaced the tabernacle in the city of Shiloh;for that seemed a fit place for it, because ofthe beauty of its situation; until such timesas their affairs would permit them to build atemple. And from thence he went to She-chem, together with all the people, and raisedan altar where Moses had previously di­rected. Then did he divide the army, andplaced one half of them on Mount Geriz-zim, and the other half on Mount Ebal; onwhich mountain the altar was; he also placedthere the tribe of Levi, and the priests. Andwhen they had sacrificed, and denounced theblessings and the curses, and had left themengraven upon the altar, they returned toShiloh.
And now Joshua was old, and saw that thecities of the Canaanites were not easily to betaken; not only because they were situatedin such strong places, but because of thestrength of the walls themselves; which be­ing built round about, the natural strength ofthe places on which the cities stood, seemedcapable of repelling their enemies from be­sieging them. For when the Canaanites hadlearned, that the Israelites came out of Egypt,in order to destroy them, they were busy allthat time in making their cities strong. Sohe gathered the people together at Shiloh;and when they, with great zeal and haste,were come thither, he observed to them, whatprosperous successes they had already had,and what glorious things had been done; andthose such as were worthy of that God whoenabled them to do those things, and worthyof the virtue of those laws which they fol­lowed. He took notice also, thatJ thirty-oneof those kings that ventured to give thembattle were overcome; and every army, howgreat soever it were that confided in their
* An. 1487.t Josh, xviii. 1.


power, and fought with them, was utterly de­stroyed; 60 that not so much as any of theirposterity remained. And as for the cities,since some of them were taken, but the othersmust be taken in length of time by long sieges;both on account of the strength of their walls,and of the confidence the inhabitants had inthem; he thought it reasonable that thosetribes that came along with them from beyondJordan, and had partaken of the dangers theyhad undergone, being their own kindred,should now be dismissed and sent home; andshould have thanks for the pains they hadtaken together with them. As also he thoughtit reasonable, that they should send one manout of every tribe, and he such as had thetestimony of extraordinary virtue, who shouldmeasure the land faithfully, and without anyfallacy or deceit should inform them of itsreal magnitude.
Now Joshua, when he had thus spoken,found that the multitude approved of his pro­posal. So he sent men to measure theircountry, and sent with them some geometri­cians, who could not easily fail of ascertain­ing the truth, on account of their skill in thatart. He also gave them a charge to estimatethe measure of that part of the land that wasmost fruitful, and what was not so good. Forsuch is the nature of the land of Canaan, thatone may see large plains, and such as are ex­ceedingly fit to produce fruit, which if theywere compared with other parts of the coun­try, might be reckoned exceeding fruitful;yet, in comparison with the fields about Jeri­cho, and those that belong to Jerusalem, theywill appear to be of no account at all. Andalthough it happen, that these people havebut very little of this sort of land, and that itis in general, mountainous also, yet does itnot come behind other parts on account of itsexceeding goodness and beauty. For whichreason, Joshua thought that the land for thetribes should be divided by estimation of itsgoodness, rather than its extent, it often hap­pening that one acre of some sort of land wasequivalent to a thousand other acres. Nowthe men that were sent, which were in num­ber ten, travelled all about, and made an es­timation of the land; and in the seventh
J Josh. xii. 8—24.


 


 







OCR Output








k«. 37.] 537 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


of Cappadocia attests to what I have said;when he thus speaks: "Antony ordered An-tigonus the Jew to be brought to Antioch,and there to be beheaded. And this Antonyseems to have been the very first man whobeheaded a king; as supposing he could noother way bend the minds of the Jews, so asto receive Herod, whom he had made kingin his stead. For by no torments could theybe forced to call him king: so great a fondnessthey retained for their former king. So hethought that this dishonourable death woulddiminish the value they had for Antigonus'smemory; and at the same time would dimi­nish their hatred to Herod."
CHAP. II.
OF THE LIBERATION OF HYRCANUS BY THE PARTHIANS;AND OF THE ACTIONS OF ALEXANDRA, WHEN SHE HEARDTHAT ANANELUS WAS MADE HIGH-PRIEST.
NOW after Herod was in possession ofthe kingdom, Hyrcanus, the high-priest,who was then a captive among the Parthians,came to him again, and was set free from hiscaptivity, in the following manner. Barza-pharnes and Pacorus, the generals of the Par­thians, took Hyrcanus, who was first madehigh-priest, and afterward king: and Herod'sbrother, Phasaelus, captives; and were car­rying them away into Parthia. Phasaelus in­deed could not bear the reproach of being inbonds; and thinking that death, with glory,was better than any life whatsoever, he be­came his own executioner; as I have *for-merly related.
But when Hyrcanus was brought into Par­thia, the king Phraates treated him after avery gentle manner; as having already learn­ed of what an illustrious family he was. Onwhich account he set him free from his bonds;and gave him a habitation at fBabylon;where there were Jews in great numbers.The Jews honoured Hyrcanus as their high-formal sentence in Judicature, this sentence was executedupon him in the same manner as upon a common crimi­nal by the rods and axe of the victor, which the Romansnever before subjected any crowned head to. Prideaux'sConnection, part II. book 7. B.


priest, and king; as did all the Jewish nationthat dwelt as far as Euphrates. This respectwas very much to his satisfaction. But whenhe was informed that Herod had received thekingdom, new hopes came upon him; as having been himself from the beginning of a kinddisposition towards him; and expecting thatHerod would bear in mind what favour he hadreceived from him; when he was upon histrial, and when he was in danger that a capi­tal sentence would be pronounced againsthim, he delivered him from that danger, andfrom all punishment. Accordingly he talkedof that matter with the Jews that came oftento him, with great affection. But they en­deavoured to retain him among them, and de­sired that he would stay with them; remind­ing him of the kind offices and honours theydid him; and that those honours they paidhim were not inferior to what they could payto either their high-priests, or their kings.And what was a greater motive to determinehim, they said, was this, that he could nothave those dignities in Judea; because ofthat maim in his body, which had been in­flicted on him by Antigonus: and that kingsdo not use to requite men for those kindnesseswhich they received when they were privatepersons; the height of their fortune makingusually no small changes in them.
Now although they suggested these argu­ments to him for his own advantage, yet didHyrcanus still desire to depart. Herod alsowrote to him, and persuaded him to desire ofPhraates, and the Jews that were there, thatthey should not grudge him the royal autho­rity; which he should have jointly with him­self. For that now was the proper time forhimself to make him amends for the favourshe had received from him; as having beenbrought up by him, and saved by him also;as well as for Hyrcanus to receive it. And ashe wrote thus to Hyrcanus, so did he sendalso Saramallas, his ambassador, to Phraates,


* See Book XIV. chap. 13.
t The city here called Babylon by Josephus, seems tobe one which was built by some of the Seleucidae, uponthe Tigris; which long after the utter desolation of oldBabylon was commonly so called; and, I suppose, not far
from Seleucia. Just as the latter adjoining city Bagdathad been, and is often called by the same old name ofBabylon till this very day. And a plain reason occurshere, which shews that Josephus meant no other than acity built on the Tigris; and this from his own way ofspeaking immediately; that not only the Jews at this Ba­bylon, but over all the country, as far as Euphrates, paidthis honour to Hyrcanus. Which surely implies, that thisBabylon did not lie upon Euphrates; as the old Babyloncertainly did. See Prideaux at the year 239, at large.







OCR Output








aN. 1780.] 45 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


in prudence. This affection of his father ex­cited the envy and the hatred of his brethren,as did also his dreams which he related tohis father and to them; which foretold hisfuture happiness; it being usual with man­kind to envy their very nearest relation suchprosperity. Now the visions which Josephsaw in his sleep were these:
When they were in the middle of harvest,and Joseph was sent with his brethren togather the fruits of the earth, he saw a visionin a dream, greatly exceeding the customaryappearances that come when we are asleep;which when he got up he told his brethren,that they might judge what it portended. Hesaid, he saw the last night, that his wheatsheaf stood still, in the place where he set it;but that their sheafs ran to bow down to it,as servants bow down to their masters.* Butas soon as they perceived the vision foretoldthat he should obtain power and great wealth;and that his power should be in opposition tothem, they gave no interpretation of it toJoseph: as if the dream were not understoodby them. But they prayed, that no part ofwhat they suspected to be its meaning mightcome to pass; and their hatred against him-was augmented on that account.
But God in opposition to their envy senta second vision to Joseph, which was morewonderful than the former; for it seemed tohim that the sun took with him the moon, andthe rest of the stars, and came down to theearth, and bowed down to him.f He toldthis vision to his father, and that, as sus­pecting nothing of ill will from his brethren,when they were there also; and desired himto interpret what it should signify. NowJacob was pleased with the dream; for con­sidering the prediction in his mind, andshrewdly and wisely guessing at its meaning,he rejoiced at the great things thereby sig­nified; because it declared the future hap­piness of his son: and that by the blessingof God, the time should come when he shouldbe honoured, and thought worthy of worshipby his parents and brethren; as guessing thatthe moon and sun were like his mother andfather—the former as she that gave increaseand nourishment to all things; and the latter,he that gave form and all other powers
* Gen. xxxvii, 1.t Gen. xxxvii. 9.


to them; and that the stars were like hisbrethren, since they were eleven in number,as were the stars that receive their powerfrom the sun and moon.
And thus did Jacob make a shrewd judg­ment of this vision; but these interpretationscaused great grief to Joseph's brethren; andthey were affected to him hereupon as if hewere a stranger that was to have those goodthings which were signified by the dreams,and not as one that was a brother, with whomit was probable they should be joint par­takers; and as they had been partners in thesame parentage, so should they be of thesame happiness. They also resolved to killthe lad: and having fully ratified that in­tention, as soon as their collection of thefruits was over, they went to Shechem, whichis a country good for feeding of cattle, andfor pasturage; there they fed their flock,without acquainting their father with theirremoval. Jacob, therefore, had melancholysuspicions about them, as being ignorant ofhis sons' condition; and receiving no mes­senger from the flocks that could inform himof their true state, he sent Joseph to learnthe circumstances his brethren were in, andto bring him word how they did.
CHAP. III.
of Joseph's cruel treatment by his brethren, hisslavery, and subsequent greatness in egypt.
NOW these brethren rejoiced as soon asthey saw their brother coming to them;not, indeed, as at the presence of a near re­lation, or even as one sent by their father;but as at the presence of an enemy, and onethat by divine providence was delivered intotheir hands; and they already resolved to killhim, and not let slip the opportunity that laybefore them. But when Reubal, the eldestbrother saw them thus disposed, and thatthey had agreed together to execute theirpurpose, he tried to restrain them:£ shewingthem the heinous enterprise they were goingabout, and the horrid nature of it; that thisaction would appear wicked in the sight ofGod, and impious before men; even thoughthey should kill one not related to them; butmore flagitious and detestable to appear to
\ Gen. xxxvii. 21.







OCR Output








40 [book I. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


born by hire; and Zebulon, one born as apledge of benevolence towards her; and adaughter, Dina. After some time Rachel hada son, named Joseph, which signified thereshould be another added to him.
Now Jacob fed the flocks of Laban all thistime, being twenty years,* after which he de­sired permission to take his wives, and gohome; but when his father-in-law would notgive him leave, he contrived to do it secretly.He made trial, therefore, of the dispositionof his wives, what they thought of this jour­ney. When they appeared glad, and ap­proved of it, Rachel took along with her theimages of the gods, which, according to theirlaws, they used to worship in their own coun­try, and ran away, together with her sister.Their children also, and their handmaids, andwhat possessions they had, went along withthem. Jacob also drove away half the cattle,without letting Laban know of it beforehand:but the reason why Rachel took the images ofthe gods, although Jacob had taught her todespise such worship, was this, that in casethey were pursued and taken by her father,she might have recourse to these images, inorder to obtain his pardon.
Laban, after one day, being acquaintedwith Jacob's and his daughters' departure,was much troubled, and pursued after them,leading a band of men with him; and on theseventh day overtook them, and found themresting on a certain hill; but he did not thenmeddle with them, for it was even-tide. Godstood by him in a dream the same night, andwarned him to receive his son-in-law and hisdaughters in a peaceable manner, and not toventure upon any thing rashly, or in wrath tothem, but to make a league with Jacob; as­suring him that if he despised their smallnumber, and attacked them in an hostile man­ner, he would himself assist them."
Laban having been thus forewarned byGod, called Jacob to him the next day, inorder to treat with him, and shewed him whatdream he had; in dependence whereon hecame confidently to him, and began to accusehim, alledging that he had entertained himwhen he was poor, and in want, and hadgiven him plenty of all things which he had;"For," said he, " I have joined my daughtersto thee in marriage, and supposed that thy


**~~ * From about an. 1801 to 1714 B. C.


kindness to me would be greater than beforebut thou hast had no regard to either thyown mother's relation to me, nor to the affinitymore recently contracted between us, nor tothose wives whom thou hast married; nor tothose children of whom I am the grandfather:thou hast treated me as an enemy, by drivingaway my cattle, and by persuading my daugh­ters to run away from their father: and bycarrying home those sacred paternal imageswhich were worshipped by my forefathers,and which have been honoured with worshipby myself. In short, thou hast done thiswhilst thou wert my kinsman, and my sister'sson, and the husband of my daughters, andwast hospitably treated by me, and didst eatat my table."
When Laban had said this, Jacob repliedin his defence, that he was not the only per­son in whom God had implanted the love ofhis native country, but that he had made itnatural to all men; and, therefore, it was butreasonable that, after so long time, he shouldgo back to it. "But as to the prey," saidhe, " of whose driving away thou accusestme, if any other person were the arbitrator,thou wouldst be found in the wrong, for in­stead of those thanks I ought to have hadfrom thee, for both keeping thy cattle, andincreasing them, how is it that thou art un­justly angry because I have taken a smallportion of them; but then, as to thy daugh­ters, it is not through any evil practices ofmine that they follow me in my return home,but from that just affection which wives na­turally have for their husbands; they follow,therefore, not so properly myself, as theirown children." Thus far his apology wasmade in order to clear himself from thecharge of injustice; to which he added hisown complaint and accusation of Laban, say­ing, "While I was thy sister's son, and thouhadst given me thy daughters in marriage,thou hast worn me out with thy harsh com­mands, and detained me twenty years underthem; that, indeed, which was required inorder to my marrying thy daughters, hard asit was, I own to have been tolerable: but asto those that were put upon me after thosemarriages, they were worse, and such indeed,as an enemy would have avoided." For cer­tainly Laban had used Jacob very ill; forwhen he saw that God was assisting to Jacob







OCR Output








306 [book vni ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


chres of his forefathers. He left behind himtwenty-two sons, and sixteen daughters; andhe had also those children by fourteen wives;and Asa his son succeeded in his kingdom;and the young man's mother was Michaiah.Under his reign the country of the Israelitesenjoyed peace for ten years.
But Jeroboam, the king of the ten tribes,died when he had reigned twenty-two years.*His son Nadab succeeded him in the secondyear of the reign of Asa; and governed twoyears, and resembled his father in impiety andwickedness. In these two years he made anexpedition against Gibbethon, a city of thePhilistines, and continued the siege in orderto take it; but he was conspired against whilehe was there by a friend of his, whose namewas Baasha, the son of Ahijah, and was slain.Baasha took the kingdom after the other'sdeath, and destroyed the whole house of Je­roboam. It also came to pass, according asGod had foretold, that some of Jeroboam'skindred that died in the city were torn topieces and devoured by dogs, and that othersof them that died in the field were torn anddevoured by the fowls. So the house of Je­roboam suffered the just punishment of hisimpiety, and of his wicked actions.
CHAP. XII.
OF THE AFFAIRS OF ASA, KINO OF JERUSALEM; THE DE­STRUCTION OF THE HOUSE OF BAASHA, AND THE CON­DUCT OF THE SUCCESSORS ON THE THRONE OF ISRAEL.
NOW Asa, the king of Jerusalem, was anexcellent character, and had a regardto God; and neither did nor designed anything but what was consistent^with the laws.He made a reformation of his kingdom, andcut off whatsoever was wicked therein, and


purified it from every impurity. Now he hadan army of chosen men that were armed withtargets and spears; out of the tribe of Judahthree hundred thousand; and out of the tribeof Benjamin that bare shields and drew bows,two hundred and fifty thousand. But whenhe had reigned ten years, Zerah,t king ofEthiopia,J made an expedition against him,||with a great army, of nine hundred thousandfootmen, one hundred thousand horsemen,and three hundred chariots: and came as faras Mareshah,§ a city that belonged to thetribe of Judah. Now when Zerah had passedso far with his own army, Asa met him, andput his army in array over against him, in avalley called Zepathan, not far from the city.And when he saw the multitude of the Ethio­pians, he cried out, and besought God togive them the victory, and that he might killmany thousands of the enemy. "For," saidhe, "I depend on nothing else but that as­sistance which I expect from thee: whichis able to make the fewer superior to themore numerous, and the weaker, to thestronger, and thence it is alone that I venture to meet Zerah and fight him."
While Asa was speaking thus, God gavehim a signal victory; and joining battle cheerfully on account of what God had foretoldabout it, he slew a great many of the Etbiopians: and when he had put them to flight,he pursued them to the country of Gerar.And when they left off killing their enemies,they betook themselves to spoiling them, (forthe city of Gerar was already taken;) and tospoiling their camp. So that they carried offmuch gold and silver, and a great deal ofother prey, and camels, and cattle, and flocksof sheep. Accordingly when Asa and hisarmy had obtained such a victory, and such


* From an. 975 to 955, at eleven months to a year.See Chron. of the Old Testament, page 16—20.
t The Scripture takes no notice of what was the causeof this war between Zerah and Asa, nor are interpreterswell agreed what the country was from whence this ene­my came. The country, in the original, is called Cush,though we translate it Ethiopia. Now there are threecountries different from one another, all called by thename of Cush: 1. the land of Cush, upon the river Gihon;2. Cush upon the eastern shore of the Red Sea; and, 3.Cush, situated above Thebais, and in Upper Egypt. Itis very probable, then, that the country here spoken ofmust not be Ethiopia, properly so called, because we canhardly imagine, how an army of a million of men shouldbe permitted to march through Egypt, (as they must have
done to invade Judea,) without some opposition: andtherefore the country must be the land of Cush, whichlay in Arabia Petraea, upon the east shore of the Red Sea,and, at the extremity to the point of that sea, incliningtowards Egypt and Judea. And whereas some havemade a doubt, how so small a country could have pro­duced so large an army, it is no hard matter to suppose,that a great part of the array might perhaps have beenmercenaries. Calmest Commentary on 2 Chron. xiv. 9and Dictionary, under the word Cush. And Well's Geog­raphy of the Old Testament, vol. I. c. 4. B.
J The reader is to remember that Cush is not Ethiopiabut Arabia. See Bochart Phaleg. IV 2
B An. 947.
§ 2 Chron. xiv. 9.







OCR Output








138 [book IV. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


thereby, that although you have a numerousarmy, with horses, and weapons, and abovethese, a God merciful to you, and ready toassist you; you do, however, desire them notto compel you to fight against them, nor totake from them what they have; which willindeed be our gain, but what they will haveno reason to wish we should take to ourselves.And if they hearken to you, it will be properfor you to keep peace with them; but if theytrust on their own strength, as superior toyours, and will not do you justice, lead yourarmy against them; making use of God asyour supreme commander, but ordaining as alieutenant under him one that is of the great­est courage among you. For these differentcommanders, besides their being an obstacleto actions that are to be done on the sudden,are a disadvantage to those that make use ofthem. Lead an army, pure, and of chosenmen, composed of all such as have extraor­dinary strength of body, and hardiness ofsoul; but send away the timorous part, lestthey flee in the time of action, and so affordan advantage to your enemies. Do you alsogive leave to those that have lately built themhouses, and have not yet lived in them a year'stime, and to those that have planted themvineyards, and have not been yet partakersof their fruits, to continue in their own coun­try; as well as to those also who have be­trothed or lately married wives; lest theyhave such an affection for these things, thatthey be too sparing of their lives, and by re­serving themselves for these enjoyments, theybecome voluntary cowards.*
When you have pitched your camp takecare that you do nothing that is cruel; andwhen you are engaged in a siege, and wanttimber for making warlike engines, do notrender the land naked by cutting down treesthat bear fruit; but spare them, as consider-


ing that they were made for the benefit ofmen, and that if they could speak, they wouldhave a just plea against you; because, thoughthey are not occasions of the war, they areunjustly treated, and suffer in it; and would,if they were able, remove themselves intoanother land. When you have beaten yourenemies in battle, slay those that have foughtagainst you, but preserve the others alive,that they may pay you tribute; excepting thenation of the Canaanites, for as to that peopleyou must entirely destroy them.
Take care, especially in your battles, thatno woman use the habit of a man, nor manthe garment of a woman, f
This was the form of political governmentwhich was left us by Moses. Moreover hehadJ already delivered laws in writing, in thefortieth year after they came out of Egypt,concerning which we will discourse in ano­ther book. But now on the following days,(for he called them to assemble continually;)he delivered blessings to them, and cursesupon those that should not live according tothe laws, but should transgress the duties thatwere determined for them to observe. Afterthis, he read to them a poetic song, whichwas composed in hexameter verse, and leftit to them in the holy book; it contained aprediction of what was to come to pass after­ward; agreeably whereto all things have hap­pened all along, and do still happen to us;and wherein he has not at all deviated fromthe truth. Accordingly he delivered thesebooks to the|| priests, with the ark; intowhich he also put the Ten Commandments,written in two tables. He also delivered tothem the tabernacle; and exhorted the peo­ple, that when they had conquered the land,and were settled in it, they should not forgetthe injuries of the Amalekites;§ but make waragainst them, and inflict punishment upon


* Deut. xx. 7.
i Deut. xxii. 5.
Deut. xxii. 5. The woman shall not wear that whichpertaineth unto a man, neither shall a man put on a wo­man's garment. This prohibitory law seems directedagainst an idolatrous usage, which appears to be as ancientas Moses, and which later writers inform us was to befound among several nations in after times; and that tooattended with the most abominable practices. From Plu­tarch (De Isid. et Osir. tom. ii. p. 368. edit. Xylandr.) welearn that thp Egyptians called the moon the mother ofthe world, and assigned to her a nature both male and ft -
male; and Boyse (Pantheon, p. 72.) says of Diana, Luna,or the moon, that the Egyptians worshipped this deityboth as male and female, the men sacrificing to it as Luna,the women as Lunus, and each sex on these occasionsassuming the dress of the other. Parkhurst's Heb. Lex.p. 107. B.
J These laws seem to be those previously recited inthis chapter.
I I What laws were now delivered to the priests, see thenote on HI. 1. / «
§ Deut. xxv. 1"







OCR Output













OCR Output








12 [book I. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


Moreover Moses, after the seventh day wasover, begins to talk philosophically;* and con­cerning the formation of man says thus: thatGod took dust from the ground,f and formedman,J a"d inserted in him a spirit and a soul.This man was called Adam, which in the*He-brew tongue signified one that is red, becausehe was formed out of red earth compoundedtogether, for of that kind is virgin and true,earth. God also presented the living crea­tures, when he had made them, according totheir kinds, both male and female, to Adam,and gave them those names by which theyare still called. But when he saw that Adamhad no female companion, no society, for therewas no such created, and that he wonderedat the other animals which were male and fe­male, he laid him asleep, and took away oneof his ribs, and out of it formed the woman ;§whereupon Adam knew her when she wasbrought to him, and acknowledged that shewas made out of himself. Now a woman iscalled in the Hebrew tongue Issa: but thename of this woman was Eve, which signifiesthe mother of all living.


Moses says farther, that God planted a pa­radise in the east, flourishing with all sorts oftrees, and that among them was the tree oflife, and another of knowledge, whereby wasto be known what was good and evil; andthat when he had brought Adam and his wifeinto this garden, he commanded them to takecare of the plants.|| Now the garden was wa­tered by one river,** which ran round aboutthe whole earth, and was parted into^Purparts. Phison, which denotes a multitude, lrunning into India, makes its exit into the'sea, and is by the Greeks called Ganges. Eu­phrates also, as well as Tigris, goes downinto the Red Sea,ff Now the name Euphrates,or Phrath, denotes either a dispersion or aflower; by Tigris, or Diglath, is signified whatis swift, with narrowness; and Geon runsthrough Egypt, and denotes what arises fromthe East, which the Greeks call Nile.
God therefore commanded that Adam andhis wife should eat of all the rest of the plants,but to abstain from the tree of knowledge,and foretold to them, that if they toucjied it, itwould prove their destruction. But while all


* Since Josephns, in his preface, says, that Moses wrotesome things enigmatically, some allegorically, and the restin plain words; since in his account of the first chapter ofGenesis, and the three first verses of the second, he givesus no hints of any mystery at all; but when he comes tover. 4. &c. he says, that Moses, after the seventh day wasover, began to talk philosophically, it is not improbablethat he understood the rest of the second and the thirdchapters in some enigmatical, allegorical, or philosophicalsense. The change of the name of God just at this placefrom Elohim to Jehovah Elohim, from God to Lord God,in the Hebrew, Samaritan, and Septuagint, also seems tofavour some such change in the narration or construc­tion.
t Gen. ii. 7.
j Josephus supposed man to be compounded of Spirit,soul, and body, with St. Paul, 1 Thess. v. 23, and the restof the ancients. He elsewhere says also, that the bloodof animals was forbidden to be eaten, as having in it souland spirit.
§ Gen. ii. 22.
II The place wherein the country of Eden, as mentionedby Moses, seems most like to be situated, is Chaldea, notfar from the banks of the Euphrates. To this purpose,when we find Rabshekah vaunting his master's 'actions,have the gods of the nations delivered them which my fa­thers luive destroyed, as Gazan and Haran, and Rezeph,and the children of Eden, which were in Telassar? As Te-lassar, in general, signifies any garrison or fortification, sohere, more particularly, it denotes that strong fort whichthe children of Eden built in an island of the Euphrates,towards the west of Babylon, as a barrier against the in­cursions of the Assyrians on that side. And therefore, inall probability the country of Eden lay on the west side,
or rather on both sides the Euphrates, after its conjunctionwith the Tigris, a little below the place where, in processof time, the famous city of Babylon came to be built. Thuswe have found out a country called Eden, which for itspleasure and fruitfulness, as all authors agree, answers thecharacter which Moses gives of it. Herodotus, who wasan eye witness of it, tells us, that where Euphrates runsout into Tigris, not far from the place where Ninus isseated, that region is, of all that ever he saw, the most ex­cellent : so fruitful in bringing forth corn, that it yields twohundred fold; and so plenteous in grass, that the peopleare forced to drive their cattle from pasture, lest theyshould surfeit themselves. B.
** Whence this strange notion came, which is not pe­culiar to Josephus, but Dr. Hudson says, is derived fromelder authors; as if four of the greatest rivers in the world,running two of them at vast distances from (he other two,by some means or other watered Paradise, is hare, to say.Only, since Josephus has already appeared to allegorizethis history, and takes notice that these four names had aparticular signification: Phison for Ganges, a multitude;Phrath for Euphrates, either a dispersion or a flower;Diglath for Tigris, what is swift with narrowness; and Geonfor Nile, what arises from the east; we perhaps mistakehim when we suppose he literally means those four rivers,especially as to Geon, or Nile, which arises from the east;while he very well knew the literal Nile arises from thesouth; though what farther allegorical sense he had inview is now, I fear, impossible to be determined.
tt By the Red Sea is not here meant the Arabian Gulf,which alone we now call by that name, but all that SouthSea which included the Red Sea and the Persian Gulf, asfar as the East Indies; as Reland and Hudson truly notefrom the old geographers.







OCR Output








454 [book XII, ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


find taken those that were there in theircaves, (for many of the people had fled intosuch places,) he removed, and made all thehaste he could to Jerusalem. And when hehad learned that Judas had pitched his campat a certain village whose name was Beth-zetho, he led his army against him. Theywere twenty thousand footmen, and two thou­sand horsemen. Now Judas had no moresoldiers than *one thousand. When thesesaw the multitude of Bacchides's men, theywere afraid, and left their camp, and fled allaway, excepting eight hundred. Now whenJudas was deserted by his own soldiers, andthe enemy pressed upon him, and gave himno time to gather his army together, he wasdisposed to fight with Bacchides's army,though he had but eight hundred men withhim. So he exhorted these men to undergothe danger courageously, and encouragedthem to attack the enemy. And when theysaid they were not a body sufficient to fightso great an army, and advised that theyshould retire now, and save themselves; andthat when he had gathered his own mentogether, he should fall upon the enemy after­wards: his answer was this, "Let not thesun ever see' such a thing, that I should shewmy back to the enemy: and although this bethe time that will bring me to my end, and Imust die in this battle, I will rather stand toit courageously, and bear whatever comesupon me, than by running away bring re­proach upon my former great actions; ortarnish their glory." This was the speechhe made to those that remained with him;whereby he encouraged them to attack theenemy.
But Bacchides drew his army out of theircamp, and put them in array for the battle.He set the horsemen on both wings; and thelight soldiers and the archers he placed be­fore the whole army; but he was himself onthe right wing. And when he had thus puthis army in order, and was going to joinbattle with the enemy, he commanded thetrumpeter to give a signal, and the army to


make a shout, and to fall on the enemy. Andwhen Judas had done the same, he joinedbattle with them; and as both sides foughtvaliantly, and the engagement continued tillsun-set, Judas saw that Bacchides, and thestrongest part of the army was in the rightwing; and therefore took the most coura­geous men with him, and ran upon that partof the army, and fell upon those that werethere, and brake their ranks, and drove theminto the middle, forced them to run away,and pursued them as far as to a mountaincalled Aza. But when those of the left wingsaw that the right wing was put to flight,they encompassed Judas, and pursued him,and came behind him, and took him into themiddle of their army. So being not able toflee, but encompassed round about with ene­mies, he stood still, and he and those thatwere with him fought. And when he hadslain a great many of those that came againsthim, he at last was himself wounded and fell,and gave up the ghost; and died in a waylike to his former famous actions. WhenJudas was dead, those that were with himhad no one whom they could regard as theircommander; but when they saw themselvesdeprived of such a general, they fled.f ButSimon, and Jonathan, Judas's brethren, re­ceived his dead body by a treaty from theenemy; and carried it to the village Modin;where their father had been interred, andthere buried him; while the multitude la­mented him many days, and performed theusual solemnities of a funeral to him. Andthis was the end that Judas came to. Hehad been a man of valour, and a great war­rior, and mindful of the commands of theirfather Mattathias; and had undergone alldifficulties, both in doing and suffering, for theliberty of his countrymen. And when his cha­racter was so excellent, while he was alive,he left behind him a glorious reputation, andmemorial: by gaining freedom for his nation;and delivering them from slavery under theMacedonians. And when he had retainedthe high-priesthood three years, he died.


* That this copy of Josephus, as he wrote it, had herenot 1000 but 3000, with 1 Mace. ix. 5. is very plain;because though the main part ran away at first, even inJosephus, as well as in 1 Mace. ix. 6. yet, as there, so
here, 800 are said to have remained with Judas. Whichwould be absurd, if the whole number had been no morethan 1000.
t 1 Mace. iz. 18.







OCR Output








298 [book VIII. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


thought it agreeable to the dignity of his go­vernment to give them such an answer. Ac­cordingly when the multitude was assembledto hear his answer on the third day, all thepeople were in great expectation, and veryintent to hear what the king would say tothem; and supposed they should hear some­what of a kind nature, but he passed by hisfriends, and answered as the young men hadgiven him counsel.* Now this was done ac­cording to the will of God; that what Ahijahhad foretold might come to pass.
By these words the people were struck, asit were by an iron hammer; and were sogrieved as if they had already felt the effectsof them; and they had great indignation atthe king: and all cried out aloud, and said,"We will have no longer any relation toDavid, or his posterity,f after this day; andwill only leave to Rehoboam the temple whichhis father built." Nay they were so bitter,and retained their wrath so long, that whenhe sent Adoram, who was over the tribute,that he might pacify them, and persuadethem to forgive him, if he had said any thingthat was rash or grievous to them in hisyouth, they would not hear it; but threwstones at him, and killed him. When Reho­boam saw this, he thought himself aimed atby those stones, with which the multitude hadkilled his servant: and feared lest he shouldundergo the last of punishments in earnest.So he got immediately into his chariot4 andfled to Jerusalem. There the tribe of Judahand that of Benjamin ordained him for theirking: but the rest of the multitude forsookthe sons of David, from that day; and ap­pointed Jeroboam to be the ruler of their


public affairs. Upon this, Rehoboam assem­bled a great congregation of those two tribesthat had submitted to him, and was ready totake a hundred and eighty thousand chosenmen out of the army, and to make an expedi­tion against Jeroboam and his people; thathe might force them by war to be his ser­vants. But he was forbidden of God by theprophet Shemaiah to go to war.|| For thatit was not just, that brethren of the samecountry should fight against one another.He also said, that this defection of the mul­titude was according to the purpose of God.So he did not proceed in this expedition.§And now I will relate first the actions ofJeroboam, the king of Israel; and afterwardswhat are therewith connected, the actions ofRehoboam, the king of the two tribes. Bythis means we shall preserve the order ofthe history unbroken.
When Jeroboam had built him a palace inthe city Shechem, he dwelt there. He alsobuilt him another at a city called Penual. Andnow the feast of tabernacles was approachingin a little time, Jeroboam considered, that ifhe should permit the multitude to go to wor­ship God at Jerusalem, and there to celebratethe festival, they would probably repent ofwhat they had done, and be enticed by thetemple, and by the worship of God thereperformed; and would leave him, and returnto their first king; and if so, he should runthe risk of losing his own life. So he madetwo golden heifers, and built two little tem­ples for them; the one in the city Bethel,and the other in Dan:** which last was thefffountains of the lesser Jordan: and he putthe heifers into both the little temples, in


of scorpions, such as is our furze-bush; or else someterrible sort of whip of the like nature. See Hudson'sand Spenheim's Notes here, and Mr. Barker's parallelobservations.
* 1 Kings xii. 13.
t 1 Kings xii. 16.
| This is the first time that we read of a king's ridingin a chariot. Saul, David, and Solomon, rode in none:but after the division of the kingdom, mention is fre­quently made of the use of them, both by the kings ofJudah and Israel. Patrick'$ Commentary. B.
II This prophet was very well known in the reign ofRehoboam. He is supposed to have wrote the annals ofthat prince; and of what authority he was in Judah, wemay gather from this passage, where he is said to haveprevailed with the king, and a hundred and four scorethousand men, to lay down their arms, and return home,
merely by declaring, that the division which had hap­pened was the appointment and order of God. CalmefsCommentary. B.
§ 1 Kings xii. 24.
** 1 Kings xii. 29.
tt Whether these fountains of the lesser Jordan werenear a place called Dan, and the fountains of the greaternear a place called Jor, before their conjunction; orwhether there was only one fountain, arising at the lakePhiala; at first sinking under the ground; then rising nearthe mountain Paneum, and thence running through thelake Semochonites to the sea of Galilee, and so far calledthe lesser Jordan, is hardly certain even in Josephus him­self; though the latter account be the most probable. SeeRelancPs Palestine, tom. I. lib. I. c. 41, 43. However thenorthern idolatrous calf, set up by Jeroboam, was wherelittle Jordan fell into great Jordan; near a place called







OCR Output








AN. 40.] 327 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


came to the port of Brundusium. And whenhe was come from thence to Rome, he firstrelated to Antony what had befallen him inJudea; and that Phasaelus his brother wasseized on by the Parthians, and put to deathby them; that Hyrcanus was detained cap­tive by them; and that they had made Anti-gonus king, who had promised them a thou­sand talents, with five hundred women; whowere to be of the principal families, and ofthe Jewish stock; and that he carried off thewomen by night; and that by undergoing agreat many hardships, he had escaped thehands of his enemies. As also that his ownrelations were in danger of being besieged,and taken; and that he had sailed through astorm, and contemned all these terrible dan­gers in order to come, as soon as possible, tohim; who was his hope, and only succour, atthis time.
This account made Antony commiserate*the change that had happened in Herod'scondition. And reasoning with himself, thatthis was a common case among those that areplaced in such great dignities, and that theyare liable to the mutations that come fromfortune, he was very ready to give him theassistance he desired; and this because herecollected the friendship he had had withAntipater; because Herod offered him moneyto make him a king, as he had formerly givenit him to make him tetrarch, and chiefly be­cause of his hatred to Antigonus: for he tookhim to be a seditious person, and an enemy tothe Romans, f Caesar was also the forwarderto raise Herod's dignity, and to give him hisassistance in what he desired, on account ofthe toils of war which he had himself under­gone with Antipater, his father, in Egypt;and of the hospitality he had treated himwithal; and the kindness he had alwaysshewn him: as also to gratify Antony, whowas very zealous for Herod. So a senate wasconvened: and Massala first, and then Atra-


tinus, introduced Herod into it: and enlargedupon the benefits they had received from hisfather; and reminded them of the good willhe had borne the Romans. At the same timethey accused Antigonus, and declared him anenemy; not only because of his former oppo­sition to them; but that he had now over­looked the Romans, and taken the govern­ment from the Parthians. Upon this the se­nate was irritated: and Antony informedthem farther, that it was for their advantagein the Parthian war that Herod should beking. This seemed good to all the senators;and they made a decree accordingly.
This was the principal instance of Antony'saffection for Herod, that he not only pro­cured him a kingdom which he did not ex­pect; (for he did not come with an intentionto ask the kingdom for himself; which he didnot suppose the Romans would grant him;who used to bestow it on some of the royalfamily; but intended to desire it for his wife'sbrother, who was grandson by his father toAristobulus, and to Hyrcanus by his mother;)but that he procured it for him so suddenly,that he obtained what he did not expect, anddeparted out of Italy in seven days. ThisJyoung man, the grandson, Herod afterwardtook care to have slain; as we shall shew inits proper place. But when the senate wasdissolved, Antony and Caesar went out of thesenate house, with Herod between them, andwith the consuls and other magistrates beforethem; in order to offer sacrifices, and to layup their decrees in the capitol. Antony alsofeasted Herod the first day of his reign. Andthus did this man receive the kingdom; havingobtained it in the hundred and eighty-fourthOlympiad; when Caius Domitius Calvinuswas consul the second time, and Caius Asi-nius Pollio the first time.
In the mean time Antigonus besieged thosethat were in Massada; who had plenty of allother necessaries, but were only in ||want of


* Concerning the chronology of Herod, and the timewhen he was first made king at Rome; and concerningthe time when he began his second reign, without a rival,upon the conquest or slaughter of Antigonus; both prin­cipally derived from this and the two next chapters in Jo-gephus; see the Harm, of the Evang. page 150—155, andthe note on chap. 15. It is, however, very strange, thatin such a violent haste as Herod now was, Josephus shoulduse such words, and that both here, and in the history Ofthe War, I. 14. as almost imply his building a great shipat Rhodes, in his passage to Italy; for which to be sure,
he now had no time at all. Spanheim says, on the placeOf the War now quoted, that he only hired a ship now atRhodes; and that as Josephus's affirmation also; which,though not at all unlikely in itself, but rather highly pro­bable, yet has no foundation in the copies. See also forthis chronology of Herod, Josephus's own speech to theJews, Of the War, V. 9.
t See Chap. 13.
J Aristobulus, jun. See Book XV. chap. 3.
II This grievous want of water at Maseada, till theplace had like to have been taken by the Parthians, men







OCR Output








 


Tcu-fit i'







OCR Output








 


72 [book II. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


joined them so to do. He persuaded himalso not to counterwork the designs of God,but to esteem his favour above ail things, andto permit them to depart lest he should layan obstruction in the way of the Divine com­mands, and so occasion his suffering suchpunishments, as it was probable any one thatwithstood the Divine commands should un­dergo, since the severest afflictions arise fromevery object to those that provoke the Divinewrath against them; for such as these haveneither the earth, nor the air, for their friends:nor are the fruits of the womb according tonature, but every thing is unfriendly and ad­verse towards them. He said farther, thatthe Egyptians should know this by sad expe­rience, and that the Hebrew people should goout of their country without permission.


.


CHAP. XIV.


OF THE TEN PLAGUES WHICH CAME UPON THE EGYPTIANS.
WHEN the king despised the words ofMoses, and had no regard at all tothem, grievous plagues seized the Egyptians;every one of which I will describe; both be­cause no such plagues ever happened to anyother nation as the Egyptians now felt; andbecause I would demonstrate that Moses didnot fail in any one thing that he foretold them;and because it is for the good of mankind,that they may learn this caution, not to doany thing that may displease God, lest he beprovoked to wrath, and avenge their iniqui­ties upon them.
The Egyptian river ran with bloody water,*at the command of God, insomuch, that itcould not be drank; and they had no otherspring of water. For the water was not onlyof the colour of blood, but it brought uponthose that ventured to drink it great pains,and bitter torment. Such was the river tothe Egyptians. But it was sweet and fit todrink to the Hebrews, and no way different


from what it naturally used to be. As theking, therefore, knew not what to do in thesesurprising circumstances, and was in fear forthe Egyptians, he gave the Hebrews leave togo away. But when the plague ceased, hechanged his mind, and would not suffer themto go.
But when God saw that he was ungrateful,and upon the ceasing of the calamity wouldnot grow wiser, he sent another plague uponthe Egyptians: an innumerable multitude offrogst consumed the fruit of the ground.JThe river was also full of them; insomuchthat those who drew water had it spoiled bythe blood of these animals, as they died in,and were destroyed by, the water; and thecountry was full of filthy slime, as they wereborn, and as they died; they also spoiledtheir vessels in their houses which they used,and were found among what they ate andwhat they drank, and came in great numbersupon their beds. There was also a noisomesmell arose from them, as they were born, andas they died therein. Now when the Egyp­tians were under the oppression of thesemiseries, the king ordered Moses to take theHebrews with him, and be gone: upon whichthe whole multitude of the frogs vanishedaway; and both the land and the river re­turned to their former natures. But as soonas Pharaoh saw the land freed from thisplague, he forgot the cause of it, and retainedthe Hebrews; and, as though he had a mindto try the nature of more such judgments, hewould not yet suffer Moses and his people todepart; having granted that liberty ratherout of fear, than out of good consideration.
Accordingly, God punished his falsenesswith another plague, added to the former.For there arose, out of the bodies of theEgyptians, an innumerable quantity oflice;||by which, wicked as they were, they misera­bly perished; being unable to destroy thissort of vermin, either with washes, or withointments. § At this terrible judgment, the


* Exod. vii. 20.
t Exod. viii. 6.
J The river Nile naturally produces frogs; but so greatan abundance appearing on a sudden, filling the country,and leaving the rivers and fields, to go into the cities andhouses, was really miraculous. How they got into thecities and houses is not so hard a matter to conceive: forif expert generals, according to both ancient and modernhistory, have sometimes surprised an enemy bv entering
cities through the common sewers, with much less dimunity might the frogs, these armies of the Divine vengeance,find a conveyance into the cities, which stood all upon tbebanks of the river, by aqueducts and subterraneous com­munications; and being eot into the cities, they might findapertures in the walls of the bouses, which the inhabitantsnever perceived before. Bibliotheca Bill, in locum. B.
II Exod. viii. 17.
§ Some would have the word Cmnim, which we reader







OCR Output








208 [book yr. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


he, with great sincerity, told him; that hewould believe what he said, when he shouldeither see him killed himself, or learn it uponinquiry from others; and that the reason whyhis father did not tell him of these thingswas, that he knew of the friendship and affec­tion that he bore towards him.*
When Jonathan found that this intention ofSaul's was so well attested, he asked himwhat he would have him do for him? to whichDavid replied, "I am sensible that thou artwilling to gratify me in every thing, and pro­cure me what I desire. Now to-morrow isthe new moon; and I was accustomed to sitdown then with the king at supper. If itseem good to thee, I will go out of the city,and conceal myself privately there. And ifSaul inquire why I am absent, tell him, that fam gone to my city Bethlehem, to keep afestival with my own tribe; and add this also,that thou gavest leave so to do. And if hesay, as is usually said in the case of friendsthat are gone abroad, it is well that he went;then assure thyself that no latent mischief orenmity may be feared at his hands. But ithe answer otherwise; that will be a sure signthat he hath some design against me. Ac­cordingly thou shalt inform me of thy father'sinclinations, and that out of pity to my case,and out of thy friendship for me: as instancesof which friendship, thou hast vouchsafed toaccept the assurances of my love to thee;and to give the like assurances to me; thatis, those of a master to his servant. But ifthou discoverest any wickedness in me, dothou prevent thy father, and kill me thyself'f
But Jonathan heard those last words withindignation; and promised to do what he de­sired of him, and to inform him if his father'sanswer implied any thing of a melancholynature, and any enmity against him. Andthat he might the more firmly depend uponhim, he took him out into the open field, intothe pure air, and sware that he would neglectnothing that might tend to his preservation;Jand he said, "I appeal to that God, who, as


thou seest, is diffused every where, andknoweth this intention of mine, before I ex­plain it in words, as the witness of this mycovenant with thee; that I will not leave offto make frequent trials of the purpose of myfather, till I learn whether there be anylurking distemper in the most secret parts ofhis soul; and when I have learnt it, I will notconceal it from thee; but will discover it tothee, whether he be gently or peevishly dis­posed. For this God himself knows, that Ipray he may always be with thee; for he iswith thee now, and will not forsake thee; butwill make thee superior to thine enemies;whether my father be one of them, or whether1 myself be such. Do thou only rememberwhat we now do; and if it happen, that I die,preserve my children alive, and requite whatkindnesses thou hast now received, to them."When he had thus sworn, he dismissed David,bidding him to go to a certain part of thatplain, where he used to perform his exercises.For as soon as he knew the mind of his father,he would come thither to him, with one ser­vant: and "If," said he, "I shoot three dartsat the mark, and then bid my servant carrythose three darts away, for they are beforehim; know thou that there is no mischief tobe feared from my father; but if thou hearestme say the contrary, expect the contrarytreatment from the king.|| However, thoushalt gain security by my assistance, andshalt by no means suffer any harm. But seethat thou dost not forget what I have desiredof thee, in the time of thy prosperity, and beserviceable to my children." Now David,when he had received these assurances fromJonathan, went to the place appointed.
On the next day, which was the new moon,the king, when he had purified himself, as thecustom was, came to supper; and when theresat by him his son Jonathan on his right hand,and Abner, the captain of his host, on theother hand, he saw David's seat empty; butsaid nothing; supposing that he had not puri­fied himself, and so could not be present.


* 1 Sam. xx. 3.
t 1 Sam. xx. 8.
J Various ceremonies have been used on these occa­sions. When treaties were made, either of a private orpublic nature, such usages were observed as were ofestablished authority, or 'tignificantly important. TheScythians had a peculiar method of forming their treaties.Herodotus (1. iv c 70.) relates that they first poured
wine into a large earthen vessel, and then the contractingparties, cutting their arms with a knife, let some of theirblood run into the wine, and stained likewise their armourtherewith. After which they themselves, and all thatwere present, drank of that liquor, making the strongestimprecations against the person that should violate thetreatv. B.It 1 Sam. xx. 22







OCR Output








AW. 205 1106.] ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


to him, and when he should aim to get himgreat glory by undertaking a thing so dan­gerous and incredible, he would immediatelyset about it, and so perish by the Philistines;and his designs about him would succeed tohis mind, as he should be freed from him, andget him slain, not by himself, but by anotherman. So he gave order to his servants to tryhow David would relish this proposal of mar­rying the damsel. Accordingly they began tosay to him, that king Saul loved him, as wellas did all the people; and that he was de­sirous of his affinity by marriage of thisdamsel. To which he gave this answer,"Seemeth it to you a light thing to be madethe king's son-in-law? it does not seem to me:especially when I am one of a family that islow, and without any glory or honour." Nowwhen Saul was informed by his servants whatanswer David had made; he said, " Tell him,that I do not want any money, nor dowryfrom him; which would be rather to set mydaughter to sale, than to give her in mar­riage; but I desire only such a son-in-lawas hath in him fortitude, and all other kindsof virtue; of which I perceive David is pos­sessed, and my desire is to receive of him, onaccount of his marrying my daughter, neithergold, nor silver, nor that he should bring suchwealth out of his father's house; but onlysome revenge on the Philistines, and indeedsix hundred of their heads; than which amore desirable, or a more glorious presentcould not be brought me; and I had muchrather obtain this, than any of the accustomeddowries for my daughter: viz. that she shouldbe married to a man of that character, andto one who had a testimony as having con­quered his enemies."
When these words of Saul were brought toDavid, he was pleased with them; and sup­posed that Saul was really desirous of thisaffinity with him. So that without bearing todeliberate any longer, or casting about in hismind whether what was proposed was pos­sible, or was difficult or not; he and his com­panions immediately set upon the enemy, andwent about doing what was proposed as thecondition of the marriage. Accordingly, be­cause it was God who made all things easyand possible to David, he slew many of thePhilistines, and cut off the heads of six hun­dred of them; and came to the king, and by


shewing him these heads of the Philistines,required that he might have his daughter inmarriage. Accordingly, Saul having no wayof getting off his engagements; as thinking ita base thing either to seem a liar when hepromised him this marriage, or to appear tohave acted treacherously by him in puttinghim upon what was in a manner impossible,in order to have him slain; he gave him hisdaughter Michal in marriage.*
CHAP. XI.
op david's deliverance from saul's machinations, bythe affection of jonathan, and the contrivanceof michal.
SAUL was not disposed to persevere longin the state wherein he was; for when hesaw that David was in great esteem both withGod, and with the multitude, he was afraid.And being not able to conceal his fear, con­cerning his kingdom and his life, to be de­prived of either of which was a very greatcalamity; he resolved to have David slain,and commanded his son Jonathan, and hismost faithful servants to kill him. But Jona­than wondered at his father's change with re­lation to David, that it should be made to sogreat a degree, from shewing him no smallgood will, to contrive how to have him killed.Now because he loved the young man, andreverenced him for his virtue, he informedhim of the secret charge his father had given;and what was his intentions concerning him.However, he advised him to take care, andbe absent the next day; for that he wouldsalute his father; and, if he met with a favour­able opportunity, he would discourse withhim about him, and learn the cause of hisdisgust, and shew how little ground there wasfor it, and that for it he ought not to kill aman that had done so many good things forthe multitude, and had been a benefactor tohimself; on account of which he ought inreason to obtain pardon, had he been guiltyof the greatest crimes. He also promised toinform him of Saul's resolution. AccordinglyDavid complied with such advantageous ad­vice, and kept himself out of the king's sightOn the next day Jonathan came to Saul, assoon as he saw him in a cheerful disposition,


* 1 Sam. xviii. 27.


Tt2







OCR Output













OCR Output








232 [book VII. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


of legitimate wives: but the two last of con­cubines. And Tamar had the same motherwith Absalom.
CHAP. IV.
«t david's further success against the Philistines;
HIS REMOVAL OF THE ARK TO JERUSALEM, AND HIS DE­SIRE TO BUILD A TEMPLE.
WHEN the Philistines understood thatDavid was made king of the Hebrews,they made war against him at Jerusalem.And when they had seized upon that valleywhich is called The valley of the Giants; andfa a place not far from the city; they pitchedtheir camp there. But the king of the Jews,*who never permitted himself to do any thingwithout prophecy, and the command of God,and without depending on him as a securityfor the time to come, bade the high-priestforetell to him what was the will of God, andwhat would be the event of this battle. Andwhen he foretold that he should gain the vic­tory, and the dominion, he led out his armyagainst the Philistines; and when the battlewas joined, he came himself behind, and fellupon the enemy suddenly, and slew some ofthem, and put the rest to flight. And let noone suppose that it was a small army of thePhilistines that came against the Hebrews:as guessing so from the suddenness of theirdefeat, and from their having performed noaction that was worth recording, from theslowness of their march, and want of courage:but let him know, that all Syria and Phoenicia,with many other nations besides them, andthose warlike nations also, came to their as­sistance; and had a share in this war. Whichthing was the only cause why, when they hadbeen so often conquered, and had lost so manyten thousands of their men, they still cameupon the Hebrews with greater armies. Nay,indeed, when they had so often failed of theirpurpose in these battles, they came upon Da­vid with an army three times as numerous asbefore, and pitched their camp on the samespot of ground as before. The king of Israel


therefore inquired of God again, concerningthe event of the battle; and the high-priestprophesied to him, that he should keep hisarmy in the groves, called the Groves ofWeeping, which were not far from the ene­mies' camp: and that he should not move,nor begin to fight till the trees of the groveshould be in motion without the winds blow­ing; but as soon as these trees moved, and thetime foretold to him by God was come, heshould, without delay, go out to gain whatwas already prepared, an evident victory.For the several ranks of the enemies' armydid not sustain him, but retreated at the firstonset, whom he closely followed, and slewthem as he went along and pursued them tothe city Gaza, which is the limit of theircountry. After ..this, he spoiled their camp,in Which he found great riches; and he alsodestroyed their gods.
When this had proved the event of the bat­tle, David thought proper, upon a consultationwith the elders, and rulers, and captains ofthousands, to send for those that were in theflower of their age, out of all his countrymen,and out of the whole land; and withal for thepriests and the Levites: in order to their goingto Kirjathjearim, to bring up the ark of Godout of that city, and to carry it to Jerusalem,and there to keep it; and offer before itthose sacrifices, and those other honours, withwhich God used to be well pleased. For hadthey done thus in the reign of Saul, they hadnot undergone any great misfortunes at all.So when the whole body of the people werecome together, as they had resolved to do,the king came to the ark, which the priestsbrought out of the house of Aminadab, andlaid it upon a new cart, and permitted theirbrethren and children to draw it, together withthe oxen. Before it went the king, and thewhole multitude of the people with him, sing­ing hymns to God, and making use of all sortsof songs usual among them; accompaniedwith the sounds of musical instruments, andwith dancing and singing of psalms; as alsowith the sounds of trumpets and of cymbals:


* It deserves here to be remarked, that Saul very rare­ly, and David very frequently, consulted God by Urim:and that David aimed always to depend, not on his ownprudence or abilities, but on the divine direction; con­trary to Saul's practice. See the note on III. 8. Andwhen Saul's daughter, Michal, laughed at David's dancing
before the ark, 2 Sam. vi. 16, &c. it is probable shedid so, because her father S;ml did not use to paysuch regard to that ark; to the Urim there inquiredby; or to God's worship before it; and because shethought it beneath the dignity of a king to be so re­ligious.







OCR Output








502 [book xiv. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


which had elevated itself so high before,within its own bounds. Moreover he Re­built Gadara, which had been demolished alittle before, to gratify Demetrius of Gadara,who was his freed man; and restored the restof the cities, Hippos, Scythopolis, Pella,Dios, and Samaria; as also Marissa, Ashdod,Jamnia, and Arethusa, to their own inhabit­ants: these were in the inland parts. Besidesthose that had been demolished; and alsoof the maritime cities, Gaza, Joppa, Dora,and Strato's Tower: which last Herod re­built after a glorious manner, and adornedwith havens and temples; and changed itsname to Caesarea. All these Pompey left ina state of freedom; and joined them to theprovince of Syria.
Now the occasions of this misery whichcame upon Jerusalem, were Hyrcanus andAristobulus; by raising a sedition one againstthe other. For now we lost our liberty ,t andbecame subject to the Romans; and weredeprived of that country which we had gainedby our arms from the Syrians; and were com­pelled to restore it to them. The Romansalso exacted of us, in a little time, above tenthousand talents. And the royal authority,which was a dignity formerly bestowed onthose that were high-priests, by the right oftheir family, became the property of privatemen. But of these matters we shall treat intheir proper places. Now Pompey committedCoelesyria, as far as the river Euphrates andEgypt, to Scaurus, with two Roman legions;


and then went away to Cilicia; and madehaste to Rome. He also carried with himAristobulus and his children. For he hadtwo daughters, and as many sons: one ofwhich ran away; but the younger, Antigonus,w as carried to Rome, together with his sisters.
CHAP. V.
OF THE LEAGUE OF BTOTUAL ASSISTANCE WHICH SCAURUSMADE WITH ARETAS J AND WHAT GABINIUS DID IN JCDF.A,AFTER HE HAD CONQUERED ALEXANDER, THE SON OF
ARISTOBULUS.
SCAURUS now made an expedition!against Petra, in Arabia, and set on fireall the surrounding places, because of thegreat difficulty of access to it. And as hisarmy was pinched by famine, Antipater fur­nished him with corn out of Judea, and withwhatever else he wanted, and this at the com­mand of Hyrcanus. And when he was sentto Aretas, as an ambassador, by Scaurus, be­cause he had lived with him formerly; hepersuaded Aretas to give Scaurus a sum ofmoney, to prevent the burning of his country;and undertook to be his surety for three hun­dred talents. So Scaurus, upon these terms,ceased to make war any longer: which wasdone as much at Scaurus's desire, as at thedesire of Aretas.
Some time afterward, when Alexander, theson of Aristobulus, made an incursion intoJudea, Gabinius came from Rome to Syria,as commander of the Roman forces. He did


* Of the destruction of Gadara, here presupposed, andits restoration by Pompey, see the note, On the War,I. 7. Of this Demetrius of Gadara, Pompey's freed man,we have mention both by Seneca and Plutarch, as Dr.Hudson here notes; and from the restitution of thesecities, an aera of the Greeks takes date, in the Greekcollections for Eusebius, set down in Scaliger; and wastaken from the 179th Olympiad; as Spanheim observes.
t Before this, the government had been managed, underthe prince, by two sorts of councils, or courts of justice;one consisting of twenty-three persons, called the LesserSanhedrim; and the other, of seventy-two, called theGreater Sanhedrim. Of the first sort there was one inevery city; only in Jerusalem, (because of the greatnessof the place,) there were two, which sat apart from eachother in two distinct rooms. Of the latter sort there wasonly one in the whole land. The Lesser Sanhedrim des­patched all affairs of justice arising within the respectivecities where they sat, and the precincts belonging to them.The Great Sanhedrim presided over the affairs of the.whole nation, received appeals from the Lesser Sanhedrims,interpreted the laws, and, by new institutions from time to
time, regulated the execution of them. All this Gabiniusabolished; and, instead thereof, erected five courts, orSanhedrims, and invested them all with sovereign power,independent of each other. The first of them he placedat Jerusalem; the second at Jericho; the third at Gadara;the fourth at Amathus; and the fifth at Sepphoris; andhaving, under these five cities, divided the land into fiveprovinces, he ordered the inhabitants of each to repair tothe court which he had there erected, and from whichthere was no appeal, except it was to Rome. Besides thetwo sorts of Sanhedrims abovementioned, there was athird court among the Jews, which was not affected by anyof these alterations, and that was the court of three, insti­tuted for the deciding all controversies about bargains,sales, contracts, and all other such matters of commonright between man and man. In all which cases, one ofthe litigants chose one judge, and the other another, andthese two chose a third, which three constituted a courtto hear, and ultimately determine the matter in contest.Talmud in Sanhedrim; Lightfoofs Prospect of the Tttnplt,chap. 20 and 22; and Joseph. Antiq. lib. 14. C 10. B.X An. 62.







OCR Output








ao [book III ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


BOOK III.


Containing an Interval of Two Years.


FROM THE EXODUS OUT OF EGYPT, TO THE REJECTION OF THAT GENERATION.


CHAP. I.
OP THE VICISSITUDES EXPERIENCED BY THE HEBREWS INTHEIR JOURNEY TO MOUNT SINAI.
WHEN the Hebrews had obtained sucha wonderful deliverance, the countrywas a great trouble to them, for it was en­tirely a desert, and had not water enough tosuffice any of the cattle; for it was parchedup, and had not moisture that might affordnutriment to the vegetables. So they wereforced to travel over this country, as havingno other route. They had, indeed, carriedwater with them from the land over whichthey had travelled before, as their conductorhad bidden them; but when that was spentthey were obliged to draw water out of wells,with pain, by reason of the hardness of thesoil. The water thus obtained, also, wasbitter, and unfit for drinking, and this in smallquantities. And as they thus travelled, theycame late in the evening to a place calledMarah,* from the badness of its waters: forMar denotes bitterness.f Thither they cameafflicted, both by the tediousness of the jour­ney, and by want of food; for it entirely failedthem at that time. Now here was a well,which induced them to stay in the place; foralthough it was not sufficient to satisfy sogreat an army, it afforded them some comfortin such a desert place; for they heard fromthose who had been to search, that there wasnothing to be found, if they travelled farther.
* Dr. Bernard takes notice here, that this place Mar,where the waters were bitter, is called by the Syriansand Arabians, Mariri; and by the Syrians sometimesMarath, all derived from the Hebrew Mar: as also hetakes notice, that it is called the bitter fountain, by Pliny


The water, however, was bitter, and not fitfor men to drink; and not only so, but it wasintolerable even to the cattle themselves.
When Moses saw how much the peoplewere cast down, and that the occasion of itcould not be contradicted; for the peoplewere not in the nature of a complete army ofmen, who might oppose a manly fortitude tothe necessity that distressed them; and themultitude of the children and of the women,being of too weak capacities to be persuadedby reason, blunted the courage of the menthemselves; Moses was in great difficulties,and made every body's calamities to be hisown; for they all ran to him, and begged ofhim; the women begged for their infants, andthe men for the women, that he would notoverlook them, but procure some way orother for their deliverance. He thereforebetook himself to prayer to God, that hewould change the water, and make it fit fordrinking. And when God had granted himthat favour, he took the top of a stick that layat his feet, and divided it in the middle, andmade the section lengthways; he then let itdown into the well, and persuaded the He­brews that God had hearkened to his prayers,and had promised to render the water suchas they desired it to be, in case they wouldbe subservient to him in what he should en­join them to do, and this not after a remiss ornegligent manner. And when they asked,what they were to do in order to have the
himself. Which waters are bitter still, as Thevenot as­sures us; as there are also abundance of palm-trees. Seehis Travels, part I. chap. xxvi. page 166.t Exod. xv. 23.







OCR Output








an. 2928.] 19 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


the regions of the air on high, excepting theblood, for therein is the life. But I will giveyou a sign that I have laid aside my anger bymy bow;"* whereby is meant the rainbow:for they determined that the rainbow was thebow of God. And when God had said andpromised thus, he went away.
Now when Noah had lived three hundredand fifty years after the flood, and all thattime happily, he died; being nine hundredand fifty years old, but let no one, upon com­paring the lives of the ancients with our lives,and with the few years which we now live,
(think that what we have said of them is false;or make the shortness of our lives at presentan argument that they did not attain to solong a duration of life; for those ancientswere beloved of God, and lately made byGod himself; and, because their food wasthen fitter for the prolongation of life, mightwell live so great a number of years. Andbesides, God afforded them a longer time oflife on account of their virtue, and the good
I use they made of it in astronomical and ge­ometrical discoveries, which would not haveafforded them time for foretelling the pe­riods of the stars, unless they had lived sixhundred years, for the great year is com­pleted in that interval.
Now I have for witnesses to what I havesaid all those that have written antiquities,both among the Greeks and Barbarians; foreven Manetho, who wrote the Egyptian His­tory; and Berosus, who collected the Chal­dean Monuments; and Mochus, and Hestiseus,
. and besides these, Hieronymus, the Egyptian,and those that compose the Phoenician His­tory, agree to what I here say. Hesiodf also,and Hecataeus, and Hellanicus, and Aculsi-laus; and besides these, Ephorus and Nico-laus relate, that the ancients lived a thou­sand years. But, as to these matters, letevery one look upon them as they think fit.
CHAP. IV.
OF THE TOWER OF BABYLON, AND THE CONFUSION OFTONGUES.
HE sons of Noah were three, Shem,Japhet, and Ham, born one hundred


* Gen. far. 13.
t Since the Latin copies have here generally Isiodorus,fcstead of Hesiodus; Vossius, and perhaps Hudson, in-
vot. I. No. 2-


T


years before the deluge. These first of alldescended from the mountains into the plains,and fixed their habitation there and per­suaded others, who were greatly afraid ofthe lower grounds on account of the flood,and so were very loth to come down from thehigher places, to venture to follow their ex­ample. Now the plain in which they firstdwelt was called Shinar. God also com­manded them to send colonies abroad, for thethorough peopling of the earth, that theymight not raise seditions among themselves,but might cultivate a great part of the earth,and enjoy its fruits after a plentiful manner;but they were so ill-instructed, that they didnot obey God, for which reason they fell intocalamities, and were made sensible by expe­rience of what sin they had been guilty of; forwhen they flourished with a numerous youth,God admonished them again to send out colo­nies; but they imagining that the prosperitythey enjoyed was not derived from the favourof God, but supposing that their own powerwas the proper cause of the plentiful con­dition they were in, did not obey him. Nay,they added to this disobedience to the divinewill, the suspicion that they were ordered tosend out separate colonies, that, being dividedasunder, they might the more easily be op­pressed.
Now it was Nimrod who excited them tosuch an affront and contempt of God; he wasthe grandson of Ham, the son of Noah, a boldman, and of great strength of hand. He per­suaded them not to ascribe it to God, as if itwere through his means that they were happy,but to believe that it was their own couragethat procured that happiness. He also gra­dually changed the government into tyranny,seeing no other method of turning men fromthe fear of God, but to bring them into a con­stant dependence on his own power. Healso said, " He would be revenged on God, ifhe should have a mind to drown the worldagain; for that he would build a tower toohigh for the waters to be able to reach, andthat he would avenge himself on God fordestroying their fore-fathers.
Now the multitude were very ready to fol­low the determination of Nimrod, and to
clined to think the writer here meant was Isidorus Chara-cenus, who produced instances of kings who reigned alongtime. But since the Greek copies, have constantly Hesiod,







OCR Output








&v. 336.] 413 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


his son John took that dignity. On whoseaccount il was also that Bagoses, the generalof *another of Artaxerxes's army, pollutedthe temple, and imposed tributes on the Jews;that out of the public stock, before they of­fered the daily sacrifices, they should pay forevery lamb filly shekels. Now Jesus was thebrother of John, and was a friend of Bagoses:who had promised to procure him the high-priesthood. In consequence of whose sup­port Jesus quarrelled with John in the tem­ple; and so provoked his brother, that in hisanger his brother slew him. Now it was ahorrible thing for John, when he was high-priest, to perpetrate so great a crime; and somuch the more horrible, that there never wasso cruel and impious a thing done, either bythe Greeks or Barbarians. However, Goddid not neglect its punishment. But thepeople were, on that very account, enslaved:and the temple was polluted by the Persians.Now when Bagoses, the general of Artax-erxes's army, knew that John, the high-priestof the Jews, had slain his own brother Jesusin the temple: he came upon the Jews imme­diately; and began in anger to say to them,"Have you had the impudence to perpetratea murder in your temple?" And as he wasaiming to go into the temple, they forbadehim so to do. But he said, "Am not I purerthan he that was slain in the temple?" Andwhen he had said those words, he went intothe temple. Accordingly Bagoses made useof this pretence; and punished the Jewsseven years for the murder of Jesus.


Now when John was departed this life, hisson Jaddua succeeded in the high-priesthood.He had a brother, whose name was Manasseh.Now there was one tSanballat, who was sentby Darius, the last king of Persia, into Sa­maria. He was a Cuthean by birth; of whichstock were the Samaritans also. This manknew that the city of Jerusalem was a famouscity; and that their kings had given a greatdeal of trouble to the Assyrians, and the peo­ple of Coelesyria. So that he willingly gavehis daughter, whose name was Nicaso, inmarriage to Manasseh; as thinking this alli­ance by marriage would be a pledge andsecurity, that the nation of the Jews shouldcontinue their good will to him.
CHAP. Vffl.
OF SANBATXAT, AND MANASSEH, AND OF THE TEMPLE WHICHTHEY BUILT IN MOUNT GERIZZIM J ALSO OF THE CON­QUESTS OF ALEXANDER; HIS ENTRY INTO THE CITY OFJERUSALEM; AND THE BENEFITS HE BESTOWED ON THEJEWS.
ABOUT this {time Philip, king of Mace-don, was treacherously assaulted andslain at iEgeae, by Pausanias, the son of Ce­rastes; who was derived from the family ofthe Orestae. His son Alexander succeededin the kingdom; and passing over the Hel­lespont, overcame the generals of Darius'sarmy in a battle fought at Granicum. Sohe marched over Lydia, and subdued Ionia,and over-ran Caria, and fell upon the placesof Pamphylia.


worship: nor do we know that there ever was so im­perfect a copy of it in the world, till after the days ofBarchocah, in the second century.
* Concerning this other Artaxerxes, called Mnemon,and the Persian affliction and captivity of the Jews underhim, occasioned by the murder of the high-priest's bro­ther in the holy house, see Authent. Rec. at large, page49, 50, 116—161. And if any one wonder why Josephuswholly omits the rest of the kings of Persia, after Ar­taxerxes Mnemon; till he came to their last king, Darius,who was conquered by Alexander the Great; I shallgive them Vossius's and Dr. Hudson's answer, though inmy own words: viz. that Josephus did not do ill in omit­ting those kings of Persia with whom the Jews had noconcern: because he was giving the history of the Jews,and not of the Persians. Which is a sufficient reasonalso, why he entirely omits the history and the book ofJob; as not particularly relating to that nation. He justlytherefore returns to the Jewish affairs, after the death ofLongimanus, without any mention of Darius II. before Ar­taxerxes Mnemon, or of Ochus, or Arogus, as the canon
of Ptolemy names them, after him. Nor had he probablymentioned this other Artaxerxes, unless Bagoses, one ofthe governors and commanders under him, had occasionedthe pollution of the Jewish temple, and had greatly dis­tressed the Jews upon that pollution. But still, how verywide are those learned men from truth, who, from suchbare omissions in Josephus, collect that he was unacquaintedwith those reigns he omitted; and with the modern Jews,greatly shortened the Persian monarchy. For Josephuswas in fact so far from diminishing, that he has increasedits duration; and that no fewer than 38 or 39 years.
t Many have here, very weakly, supposed that thisSanballat, under the last Darius, is by Josephus confoundedwith Sanballat the Horonite in Nehemiah xiii. 28. underXerxes or Artaxerxes Longimanus: who yet lived, byJosephus's own chronology, about 120 years before him.So palpable a mistake is hardly worth a particular confuta­tion, and only pardonable on account of the same persons'former mistake, as to the duration of this Persian monarchy,in Josephus's opinion; just now observed and confuted.
} An. 336.







OCR Output








ah. 27a] 423 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


was dead, and had left a young son, who wascalled Onias, Simon's brother Eleazar, ofwhom we are speaking, took the high-priest­hood. And he it was to whom Ptolemywrote, and that in the manner following:—
"King Ptolemy to Eleazar the high-priestsendeth greeting. There are many Jews whodwell now in my kingdom, whom the Persians,when they were in power, carried captives.These were honoured by my father: some ofthem he placed in the army, and gave themgreater pay than ordinary; to others of them,when they came with him into Egypt, he com­mitted his garrisons, and the guarding ofthem, that they might be a terror to theEgyptians. And when I had taken the go­vernment, I treated all men with humanity;and especially those that are thy fellow-citi­zens. Of whom I have set free above a hun­dred thousand, that were slaves; and paidthe price of their redemption to their mas­ters, out of my own revenues; and those thatare of a fit age I have admitted into the num­ber of my soldiers. And for such as are ca­pable of being faithful to me, and proper forray court, I have put them in such a post: asthinking this kindness done to them to be avery great and acceptable gift, which I de­vote to God for his providence over me. Andas I am desirous to do what will be gratefulto these, and to all the other Jews in the ha­bitable earth, I have determined to procure aninterpretation of your law, and to have ittranslated out of Hebrew into Greek, and tobe deposited in my library. Thou wilt there­fore do well to choose out and send to memen of a good character, who are now el­ders in age, and six hi number, out of everytribe. These, by their age, must be skilfulin the laws; and of abilities to make an ac­curate interpretation of them. And whenthis shall be finished, I shall think that I havedone a work glorious to myself. And I havesent to thee Andreas, the captain of my guard,and Aristeus, men whom I have in very greatesteem; by whom 1 have sent those firstfruits -which I have dedicated to the temple,and to the sacrifices, and to other uses to thevalue of a hundred talents. And if thou wilt


* When we have, here and presently, mention madeof Philadelphus's queen and Bister, Arsinoe, we are toremember, with Spanheim, that Arsinoe was both hisgxster and his wife; according to the whole custom of


send to let me know what thou wouldest havefarther, thou wilt do a thing acceptable tome."
When this epistle was brought to Eleazar,he wrote an answer to it, with all the respectpossible: "Eleazar, the high-priest, to kingPtolemy, sendeth greeting. If thou, and thy*queen Arsinoe, and thy children be well, weare entirely satisfied. When we receivedthy epistle, we greatly rejoiced at thy inten­tions. And when the multitude were gather­ed together, we read it to them: and therebymade them sensible of the piety thou hasttowards God. We also shewed them twentyvials of gold, and thirty of silver; and thefive large basons, and the table for the shew-bread: as also the hundred talents for thesacrifices, and for the making what shall beneedful at the temple. Which thing Andreasand Aristeus, those most honoured friends ofthine, have brought us. And truly they arepersons of an excellent character, and ofgreat learning, and worthy of thy virtue.Know then, that we will gratify thee in whatis for thy advantage, though we do what weused not to do before. For we ought tomake a return for the numerous acts of kind­ness which thou hast done to our country­men. We immediately therefore offeredsacrifices for thee, and thy sister, with thychildren and friends; and the multitudemade prayers that thy affairs may be to thymind; and that thy kingdom may be preserv­ed in peace; and that the translation of ourlaw may come to the conclusion thou desirest,and be for thy advantage. We have alsochosen six elders out of every tribe; whomwe have sent, and the law with them. It willbe thy part, out of thy piety and justice, tosend back the law, when it hath been trans­lated; and to return those to us that bring itin safety. Farewell."
This was the reply which the high-priestmade. But it does not seem necessary to setdown the names of the seventy-two elders,who were sent by Eleazar, and carried thelaw; which yet were subjoined at the end ofthe epistle. However, I think it not improperto give an account of those very valuable and
Persia, and of Egypt at this very time; nay of the Assy-rians long afterward. See XX. 2. Whence wc have,upon the coins of Philadelphus, this known inscription©fwv 'AfcXuiv. or the divine brother and sister.







OCR Output








24 [book I. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


CHAP. VIII.


OF ABRAM S DEPARTURE INTO EGYPT IN CONSEQUENCE OF AFAMINE; AND OF HIS SUBSEQUENT RETURN.
NOW after this, when a famine* had in­vaded the land of Canaan, and Abramhad discovered that the Egyptians were in aflourishing condition, he was disposed to godown to them; both to partake of the plentythey enjoyed, and to learn what their priestasserted concerning the gods: designingeither to follow them, if they had better no­tions than he; or to convert them into a bet­ter way, if his own notions proved the truest.Now as he was to take Sarai with him, andwas afraid of the madness of the Egyptianswith regard to women, lest the king shouldkill him on occasion of his wife's great beauty,he contrived this device: He pretendedto be her brother, and directed her in adissembling way to pretend the same: for hesaid, it would be for their benefit. Now assoon as they came into Egypt, it happened toAbram as he supposed. For the fame of hiswife's beauty was greatly talked of; for whichreason Pharaoh, the king of Egypt, would notbe satisfied with what was reported of her,but would needs see her himself. But Godput a stop to his unjust inclinations, by send­ing upon him a distemper, and a seditionagainst his government. And when he en­quired of his priests, how he might be freedfrom those calamities, they told him, that hismiserable condition was derived from thewrath of God, upon account of his inclinationto abuse the stranger's wife. He then, outof fear, asked Sarai, who she was, and whoit was that she had brought along with her?And when he had discovered the truth, heexcused himself to Abram, that supposing thewoman to be his sister, and not his wife, heset his affections on her, as desiring an affinitywith him by marrying her, but not as incitedby lust to abuse her. He also made him alarge present in money; and gave him leave toenter into conversation with the most learnedamong the Egyptians. From which conver­sation his virtue and reputation became moreconspicuous than they had been before.For whereas the Egyptians were formerly
* Gen. xii. 10. **^ft
t Gen. xiii. 7.


addicted to different customs, and despisedeach others sacred and accustomed rites, andwere angry one with another on that account:Abram conferred with each of them, and con­futing the reasonings they made use of fortheir respective practices, he demonstratedthat such reasonings were vain, and void oftruth. Whereupon he was admired by themin those conferences as a very wise man, andone of great sagacity, when he discoursed onany subject he undertook; and this, not onlyin understanding it, but in persuading othermen also to assent to him. He communicatedto them arithmetic, and delivered to them thescience of astronomy. For before Abramcame into Egypt they were unacquaintedwith some parts of learning; for that sciencecame from the Chaldeans into Egypt, andfrom thence to the Greeks also.
As soon as Abram returned into Canaan, heparted the land between him and Lot, uponaccount of the tumultous behaviour of theirshepherds,t concerning the pastures whereinthey should feed their flocks. However, hegave Lot his option, or leave to choose whichlands he would take; and he took, himself,what the other left; which were the lowergrounds at the foot of the mountains: and hehimself dwelt in Hebron, which is a city sevenyears ancienter than Tanis of Egypt.}: ButLot possessed the land of the plain and theriver Jordan, not far from the kingdom ofSodom: which was then a fine city, but is nowdestroyed, by the will and wrath of God; aswill be shewn in its proper place hereafter.
CHAP. IX.
OF THE DESTRUCTION OF THE SODOMITES BY THE ASSYRIANWAR.
AT this time, when the Assyrians had thedominion over Asia, the people of Sodomwere in a flourishing condition; both as toriches and the number of their youth. Therewere five kings that managed the affairs ofthis country; Ballas, Barsas, Senabir, andSumobor, with the king of Bela; and eachking led on his own troops. And the Assyri­ans made war upon them, and dividing theirarmy into four parts, fought against them.
J Numbers xiii. 22.







OCR Output








188 [flOOK VI. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


him, for that from him they should gain in­telligence respecting their asses. Saul re­plied, that they had nothing to give him as areward for his prophecy, for their subsistence-money was spent; but the servant answered,that he had still the fourth part of a shekel,*and he would present him with that; for theywere mistaken out of ignorance, as not know­ing that the prophet received no such re­ward. So they went to him; and when theywere before the gates, they met with certainmaidens that were going to fetch water, andthey asked them which was the prophet'shouse? They shewed them which it was,and bade them make haste before he was setdown to supper, for he had invited manyguests to a feast, and that he used to sit downbefore those that were invited. Now Samuelhad gathered many together to feast with himon this very account; for while he every dayprayed to God to tell him beforehand whomhe would make king, he had informed him theday before, that he would send him a certainyoung man out of the tribe of Benjamin aboutthis hour; and he sat on the top of the housein expectation of that time being come; andwhen the time was completed he came down,and went to supper, so he met with Saul, andGod discovered to him that this was he whoshould rule over the people. Then Saulwent up to Samuel, and saluted him, and de­sired him to inform him which was the pro­phet's house; for he said he was a stranger,


"* Of this great mistake of Saul and his servant, as if atrue prophet of God would accept a gift or present forforetelling what was desired of him, see the note on IV. 6.
t It seems not improbable, that these 70 guests ofSamuel, as here and in the Septuagint, with himself at thehead of them, were a Jewish Sanhedrim, and that herebySamuel intimated to Saul, that these 71 were to be hisconstant counsellors, and that he was not to act like a solemonarch, but with the advice and direction of these 71members of that Jewish Sanhedrim upon all occasions,which yet we never read that he consulted afterwards.
J This was with design to let Saul understand, thatwhat he was going to do was by the divine order and ap­pointment; and that when it should come to the castingof lots, as it did afterwards, 1 Sam. x. 20. he might per­ceive that he was not chosen king by chance of a lot.There might be likewise this further reason for Samuel'sbidding Saul to send away his servants, viz. lest the people,suspecting Samuel to do this by his own will, more thanby God's appointment, might be inclined to mutiny. Sincethis royal unction then was only designed for Saul's privatesatisfaction, it was necessary not to have it published be­fore the people had proceeded to a public election of theirking. Howell's Hist, in the notes. B.


and did not know it. Samuel told him thathe was himself the person, and led him in tosupper, assuring him that the asses werefound which he had been to seek, and thatthe greatest of good things was assured tohim. Saul replied, " Sir, I am too inconside­rable to hope for any such thing, and of atribe too small to have kings made out of it,and of a family smaller than several otherfamilies. But thou tellest me this in jest, andmakest me an object of laughter, when thoudiscoursest with me of greater matters thanwhat I stand in need of." However, the pro­phet led him unto the feast, and made himsit down, him and his servant that followedhim, above the other guests that were invited,which were seventy in number, f And hegave order to the servants to set the royalportion before Saul. But when the time ofgoing to bed was come, the rest rose up, andevery one of them went home; but Saul andhis servant stayed with the prophet, and sleptwith him.
As soon as it was day, Samuel raised upSaul out of his bed, and conducted him home­ward; and when he was out of the city, hedesired him to cause his servant to go be­fore,:}: but to stay behind himself, for that hehad somewhat to say to him, when nobodyelse was present. Accordingly Saul sentaway his servant that followed him.|| Thenthe prophet took a vessel of oil, and pouredit upon the head of the young man,§ and
I1 1 Sam. xi. 27.
§ We read of no express command for the anointing ofkings, and yet it is plain from the parable of Jotham, Judg.ix. 8. that this was a custom two hundred years before thistime. Why oil, rather than any other liquid, was thesymbol of conveying a. regal authority, we are no whereinformed. It is true, that God directed Moses to conse­crate Aaron to the high-priest's office, by anointing hishead with oil, Exod. xxix. 7. But the anointing of kings,we may presume, was of a prior date. Unction, indeed,in the days of Jacob, was the common method of settingapart from common use even things inanimate, Genesisxxviii. 18. and therefore it may well be supposed thatpersons of such designation, as kings were, were all alongadmitted by the same ceremony, which might be of divineappointment, perhaps at the first institution of government,in the antediluvian world, and thence handed down, by along tradition, to future generations. This rite of unction,in short, was so much the divine care, that we find G odgiving Moses a prescription how to make the consecratedoil, Exod. xxx. 23. But though Solomon was anointedwith the oil taken from the tabernacle, yet since Samuelwas no priest, and could not therefore have any access tothe tabernacle, which at this time was at some distance







OCR Output








AN. 1030.] 289 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


to light. Menander also, one who translatedthe Tyrian archives out of the dialect of thePhoenicians into the Greek language, makesmention of these two kings, where he says:"When Abibalus was dead, his son Hiramreceived the kingdom from him: who whenhe had lived fifty-three years, reigned thirty-four. He raised a bank in a large place, anddedicated the golden pillar which is in Ju­piter's temple. He also went and cut downmaterials of timber out of the mountain calledLi ban us, for the roofs of temples: and whenhe had pulled down the ancient temples, heboth built the temple of Hercules, and thatof Astarte; and he first set up the templeof Hercules in the Peritius; he also madean expedition against the Euchii or *Titii,who did not pay their tribute; and when hehad subdued them to himself he returned.Under this king there was Abdemon, a youthin age; who always conquered the difficult
{>roblems which Solomon king of Jerusa-em commanded him to explain." Diusalso made mention of him, where he says,"When Abibalus was dead, his son Hiramreigned. He raised the eastern parts of thecity higher, and made the city itself larger.He also joined the temple of Jupiter, whichbefore stood by itself, to the city, by raisinga bank in the middle between them; and headorned it with donations of gold. More­over he went up to mount Libanus, and cutdown materials of wood for the building ofthe temples.*' He says also, that "Solomon,who was then king of Jerusalem, sent rid­dles to Hiram, and desired to receive thelike from him; but that he who could notsolve them should pay money to him thatdid solve them; and that Hiram acceptedthe conditions, and when he was not able tosolve the riddles, he paid a great deal ofmoney for his fine. But that he afterwarddid solve the proposed riddles by the meansof Abdemon, a man of Tyre: and that Hiramproposed other riddles; which when Solo­mon could not solve, he paid back a greatdeal of money to Hiram." This is it whichDius wrote.


CHAP. VI.
OF THE FORTIFICATIONS OF JERUSALEM, THE ERECTIONOF THE OTHER CITIES BY SOLOMON J HIS SUBJUGATIONOF SOME OF THE CANAANITES, AND HIS ENTERTAINMENTOF THE QUEEN OF EGYPT AND ETHI0TIA.
NOWf when the king saw that the wallsof Jerusalem stood in need of beingbetter secured, and made stronger; (for hethought the walls that encompassed Jerusa­lem ought to correspond with the dignity ofthe city;) he both repaired them and madethem higher, with great towers upon them:he also built cities which might be countedamong the strongest, Hazor and Megiddo,and the third Gezer; which had indeed be­longed to the Philistines; but Pharaoh, theking of Egypt, had made an expeditionagainst it, and besieged it, and taken it byforce; when he had slain all its inhabitants,he utterly overthrew it, and gave it as apresent to his daughter, who had been mar­ried to Solomon. For this reason the kingrebuilt it, as a city that was naturally strong,and might be useful in wars, and the muta­tions of affairs that sometimes happen. More­over he built two other cities not far from it;Beth-horon was the name of one of them, andBaalath of the other. He also built othercities that lay conveniently for these, in orderto the enjoyment of pleasures and delicaciesin them; such as were naturally of good tem­perature of the air, and agreeable for fruitsripe in their proper seasons, and well wateredwith springs. Nay, Solomon went as far asthe desert above Syria, and possessed himselfof it, and built there a very large city, whichwas distant two days' journey from the upperSyria, and one day's journey from Euphrates,and six long days' journey from Babylon thegreat. Now the reason why this city lay soremote from the parts of Syria that are inha­bited is this, that below there is no water tobe had; and that it is in that place only thatthere are springs and pits of water. Whenhe had therefore built this city, and encom­passed it with very strong walls, he gave itthe name of Tadmor: J and that is the name


* Pr bably the Tyrians.
t About an. 1025.
J Tadmor, which, by the Greeks, is called Palmyra,is situated in the wilderness of Syria, upon the bordersof Arabia Deserta, inclining towards the Euphrates. Jo-
sephus places it two days' journey from the upper Syria,one day's journey from the Euphrates, and six days'journey from Babylon: and the reason he gives why So­lomon was inclined to build a city in this place, was, be­cause in all the country round about, there was no such







OCR Output








70 [book u. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS-


on all occasions, promising to be with him,and to assist him in his words when he was topersuade men, and in his deeds when he waslo perform wonders. He bid him also takea signal of the truth of what he said, bythrowing his rod* upon the ground; whichwhen he had done, it crept along; and be­came a serpent,f and rolled itself round in itsfolds, and erected its head, as ready to re­venge itself on such as should assault it, andafterwards it became a rod again, as it wasbefore. After this God bid Moses put his righthand into his bosom; be obeyed, and whenhe took it out it was white, and in colour liketo chalk, but afterward it returned to itswonted colour again. He also, upon God'scommand, took some of the water that wasnear him, and poured it upon the ground, andsaw the colour was that of blood. Upon thesurprise that Moses testified at these signs,God exhorted him to be of good courage, andto be assured that he would be the greatestsupport to him, and bid him make use of thosesigns in order to obtain belief among all men,and to demonstrate that he did all things ac­cording to the Divine commands. Accord­ingly he was enjoined to make no more de­lays, but to hasten to Egypt, and to travelnight and day, and not to draw out the time:and so make the slavery of the Hebrews, andtheir sufferings, to last no longer.
Moses, having seen and heard these won­ders, that assured him of the truth of God's■


promises, had no room left him to disbelievethem; so he intreated him to grant him thatpower when he should be in Egypt, and be­sought him, since he had heard and seen him,that he would also tell him his name, andwhen he offered sacrifice he might invoke himby such name in his oblations. HereuponGod declared to him that name which hadnever been discovered to men before, con­cerning which it is not lawfulJ for me to sayany more. Now these signs accompaniedMoses, not then only, but always when heprayed for them; of all which signs he attri­buted the firmest assent to the fire in thebush; and believing that God would be agracious supporter to him, he hoped he shouldbe able to deliver his own nation, and bringcalamities on the Egyptians.
CHAP. XIII.


OF THE RETURN OF MOSES AND AARON INTO EGYPT, TOPHARAOH.
MOSES having understood that Pharaoh,in whose reign he fled away, was dead,asked leave of Raguel to go to Egypt, for thebenefit of his own people; and he took withhim Zipporah. the daughter of Raguel, whomhe had married, and the children he had byher, Gersom and Eleazar, and hastened intoEgypt. Now the former of those names, Ger­som, in the Hebrew tongue signifies that hewas in a strange land: and Eleazar, that by


* Wonderful are the stories which the Hebrew doctorstell us of this rod, viz. That it originally grew in Paradise,was brought away by Adnm, from him passed to Noah,and so through a succession of patriarchs, till it came to betransplanted into Jethro's garden, and there took rootagain, God knows how; that it was called Zaphir, (whenceZiphorah his daughter had her name) and had the Tetra-grammaton written upon it; that when Ziphorah fell inlove with Moses, her father consented that she shouldnave him if he could pluck up this Zaphir-rod, at the sametime published a proclamation, that whoever did it firstshould marry his daughter; that hereupon several lustyyoung men came, and tried their strength in vain; but thatMoses, by being acquainted with the true pronunciation ofthe name of God, in virtue thereof did it with ease, andso not only obtained his daughter, but this rod into the bar­gain, with which he wrought afterwards all his wonders inEgypt. But how fictitious soever all this may be, it iscertain that in Exod. iv. 20. this staff is called the rod ofGod; and that partly because it was appropriated to God'sspecial service, to be the instrument of all his gloriousworks; and partly to shew that whatever was done by thatrod was not done by any virtue in it, or in the hand of
Moses, but merely by the power of God, who was pleased,for the greater confusion of his enemies, to use so mean aninstrument. Nor is it an improbable conjecture, that thewands which great ministers are wont to carry in theirhands, in token of their power and office, were originallyderived from this of Moses. Universal Hut. 1. c. 7; andPool's Annot. B.
t Exod. iv. 8.
I This superstitious fear of discovering the name withfour letters, which of late have been used falsely to pro­nounce Jehovah, but-seems to have been originally pro­nounced Jahoh, or Jao, is never, I think, heard of till thispassage of Josephus: and this superstition, in not pro­nouncing that name, is continued among the RabbinicalJews to this day; though whether the Samaritans andCanutes observed it so early does not appear. Josephusalso durst not set down the very words of the Ten Com­mandments, as we shall see hereafter, III. 5. which super­stitious silence, I think, has yet not been continued evenby the Rabbins. Both these cautious concealments,'bow-ever, were probably taught Josephus by the Pharisees, abody of men at once very wicked and very superstitious







OCR Output













OCR Output








AM. 1800.J 41 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


in all that he desired, he promised him, thatof the young cattle which should be born, heshould have sometimes what was of a whitecolour, and sometimes what should be of ablack colour; but when those that came toJacob's share proved numerous, he did notkeep his faith with him, but said he wouldgive them to him the next year, because ofhis envying him the multitude of his posses­sions. He promised him as before, becausehe thought such an increase was not to be ex-
Eected: but when it appeared to be the fact,e again deceived him.But with regard to the sacred images,Jacob bid them search for them; and whenLaban accepted of the offer, Rachel beinginformed of it, put those images in that camel'ssaddle on which she rode, and sat upon it;and by a well-timed excuse* evaded the ne­cessity of rising up; s0 Laban left off search­ing any farther, not supposing that his daugh­ter would conceal his images. He then madea league with Jacob, that he would not bearhim any malice on account of what had hap­pened; and Jacob made the like league, andpromised to love Laban's daughters; andthese leagues they confirmed with oaths uponcertain mountains, whereon they erected apillar, in the form of an altar; whence thathill is called Gilead, and from thence theycall that land the Land of Gilead at this day.Now when they had feasted,t after makingthe league, Laban returned home.}:


CHAP. XX.
of Jacob's interview with his brother esau.


N


OW as Jacob was proceeding on hisjourney to the land of Canaan, angels


appeared to him, and suggested to him goodhope of his future condition; and that placehe named the Camp of God; and being de­sirous of knowing his brother's intentions, hesent messengers to give him an exact accountof every thing, being afraid, on account ofthe enmity between them. He charged thosethat were sent, to say to Esau, that " Jacobhad thought it wrong to live together withhim, while he was incensed against him, andso had gone out of the country; but now,thinking the time of his absence must havemade up their differences, was returning; thathe brought with him his wives and his chil­dren, with what possessions he had gotten,and delivered himself, with what was mostdear to him, into his hands; and should thinkit his greatest happiness to partake, togetherwith his brother, of what God had bestowedon him.
When this message was delivered, Esauwas very glad, and met his brother with fourhundred men: but when Jacob heard that hewas coming to meet him with such a number,he was greatly afraid. However, he com­mitted his hope of deliverance to God: andconsidered how in his present circumstanceshe might preserve himself, and those thatwere with him, and overcome his enemies,if they attacked him injuriously. He there­fore distributed his company into parts; somehe sent before the rest,|| and the others heordered to come close behind: that if thefirst were overpowered, when his brother at­tacked them they might have those that fol­lowed as the refuge to flee unto; and whenhe had put his company in this order, he sentsome of them to his brother, with presentsof cattle, and a great number of four-footedbeasts of many kinds, such as would be very


* Gen. xxxi. 35.
t Gen. xxxi. 55.
J This league appears to have been made with peculiarcircumstances: especially with the singular rite of makingan heap of stones, and eating upon it, and setting up onestone for a pillar. Gen. xxxi. 45, 46. Niebuhr, relatinghis audience with the rinam of Yemen, says, " I had gonefrom mylod<*ings indisposed, and by standing so long foundmyself so faint, that I was obliged to ask permission to quitthe room. I found near the door some of the principalofficers of the court, who were sitting in a scattered man­ner, in the shade, upon stones, by the side of the wall.Among them was the Nakit, (the general, or rather masterof the horse.) Cheir Allah, with whom I had some ac­quaintance before. He immediately resigned nis place to
me, and applied himself to draw together stones into anheap, to build himself a new seat." This managementmight be owing to various causes. The extreme heat ofthe ground might render sitting there disagreeable. Thesame inconvenience might arise also from its wetness. Itwas certainly a very common practice; and, as 't appearsfrom the instance of Jacob, a very ancient one. Harmer'tObservations, Vol. iii. p, 215. B.
II Jacob appears to have been very cautious in conduct­ing both his family and his flocks in their journey. Hewas particularly desirous of preserving them. They wouldhave been exposed to great danger by haste. Preparedas the Arabs are for speedy flight, a quick motion is verydestructive to the young of their flocks. Chardin says"Their flocks feed down, the places of their encampmen







OCR Output








236 [book VII. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


David, king of Judea; and tried his fortunein many battles, and particularly in the lastbattle at Euphrates, wherein he was beaten.He seems to have been the most excellent ofall their kings, in strength and manhood."Besides this, he says of his posterity, thatafter his death they succeeded one anotherin his kingdom, and in his name: where hethus speaks, "When Hadad was dead, hisposterity reigned for ten generations, each ofhis successors receiving from his father hisdominion and his name; as did the Ptolemiesin Egypt. But the third was the most pow­erful of them all; and was willing to avengethe defeat his forefather had received; so hemade an expedition against the Jews, andlaid waste the city which is now called Sa­maria." Nor did he err from the truth. Forthis is that Hadad who made the expeditionagainst Samaria, in the reign of Ahab, kingof Israel; concerning whom we shall speak indue place hereafter.
Now when David had made an expeditionagainst Damascus, and the other parts ofSyria, and had brought it all into subjection,and had placed garrisons in the country, andappointed that they should pay tribute, hereturned home. He also dedicated to Godat Jerusalem the golden quivers, and the en-lire armour which the guards of Hadad usedto wear; which Shishak the king of Egypttook away when he fought with David'sgrandson Rehoboam; with a great deal ofother wealth which he carried out of Jeru­salem. However these things will come to beexplained in their proper places hereafter.Now as for the king of the Hebrews, he wasassisted by God, who gave him great successin his wars; and he made an expeditionagainst the best cities of Hadadezer, Betah,and Machon. So he took them by force, andlaid them waste. Therein was found a verygreat quantity of gold and silver, besides thatsort of brass which is said to be more valuablethan gold. Of which brass Solomon made


that large vessel which was called the brazensea; and those most curious lavers, when hebuilt the temple of God.
But when the king of Hamath was informedof the ill success of Hadadezer, and hadheard of the ruin of his army, he was afraidon his own account, and resolved to make aleague of friendship with David, before heshould come against him. So he sent to himhis son Joram, and professed that he owedhim thanks for fighting against Hadadezer,who was his enemy; and made a league withhim of mutual assistance and friendship. Healso sent him presents, vessels of ancientworkmanship, both of gold, silver, and brass.*So when David had made this league of mu­tual assistance with Toi, (for that was thename of the king of Hamath,) and had re­ceived the presents he sent him, he dismissedhis son with that respect which was due onboth sides. But then David brought thosepresents that were sent by him; as also therest of the gold and silver which he had takenof the cities of the nations, whom he had con­quered, and dedicated them to God. Nordid God give victory and success to him only,when he went to the battle himself, and ledhis own army; but he gave victory to Abishai,the brother of Joab, general of his forces,fover the Idumeans; and by him to David,when he sent him with an army into Idumea.For Abishai destroyed eighteen thousand ofthem in the battle. Whereupon the king ofIsrael placed garrisons through all Idumea,and received the tribute of the country, andof every head among them. Now David wasin his nature just, and made his determina­tions with regard to truth. He had for thegeneral of his whole army Joab; and he madeJehoshaphat, the son of Ahilud, recorder.He also appointed Zadok, of the family ofPhineas, to be high-priest, together with Abi-athar; for he was his friend. He also madeSeisan the scribe, and committed the com­mand over the guards of his body to Benaiah,J


* 1 Chron. xviii. 9, 10.
t By this great victory over the Idumeans or Edomites,the posterity of Esau, and by the consequent tribute paidby that nation to the Jews, were the prophecies deliveredto Rebecca before Jacob and Esau were born; and byold Isaac before his death, that the elder, Esau, orthe Edomites, should serve the younger, Jacob, or theIsraelites; and Jacob, or the Israelites, should be Esau's,or the Edomites', lord, remarkably fulfilled. See VIII.
7. Gen. xxv. 23. and xxvii. 29, 37. and the Notes onI. 18.
J The word in our translation, is recorder, which, inthe marginal note, is remembrancer, or writer of chroni­cles; an employment of no mean estimation in the easternworld, where it was customary with the kings to keepdaily registers of all the transactions of their reigns; anda trust, which however discharged to purpose, must belet into the true springs and secrets of action, and conse­







OCR Output








420 [book XII. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


beaten Darius in battle; so he distributedmany of them into garrisons; and at Alexan­dria gave them equal privileges of citizenswith the Macedonians* themselves: and re­quired of them to take their oaths, that they"would keep their fidelity to the posterity ofthose who committed these places to theircare. Nay there were not a few other Jews,who, of their own accord, went into Egypt:as invited by the goodness of the soil, and bythe liberality of Ptolemy. However, therewere disorders among their posterity, withrelation to the Samaritans; on account oftheir resolution to preserve that conduct oflife which was delivered to them by theirforefathers: and they thereupon contendedone with another: while those of Jerusalemsaid, that their temple was holy; and resolvedto send their sacrifices thither: but the Sa­maritans were resolved that they should besent to mount Gerizzim.
CHAP. II.
Or THE TRANSLATION OF THE LAWS OF THE JEWS INTOTHE CREEK TONGUE, BY ORDER OF PTOLEMY PHILADEL­PHIA; WHO SET MANY CAPTIVES FREE; AND DEDICATEDMANY GIFTS TO COD.
WHEN Alexander had reigned ftwelveyears, and after him Ptolemy Soterforty years, Philadelphus took the kingdomof Egypt, and held it forty years within one.He procured the Jlaw to be interpreted: andliberated those that were come from Jerusa­lem into Egypt, and were in slavery there:who were a hundred and twenty thousand.The occasion was this: Demetrius Phalerius,library keeper to the king, was now endea­vouring, if it were possible, to gather toge­ther all the books that were in the habitableearth; and buying whatsoever was any wherevaluable or agreeable to the king's inclina­tion; (who was very earnestly set upon col­lecting of books:) to which inclination of his,Demetrius was zealously subservient. Andwhen once Ptolemy asked him how manythousands of books he had collected, he re-


plied, that he had already about two hundredthousand; but that, in a little time, he shouldhave five hundred thousand. But he said hehad been informed that there were manybooks of laws among the Jews, worthy ofinquiring after, and worthy of the king's li­brary; but which being written in charactersand in a dialect of their own, would causeno small difficulty in getting them translatedinto the Greek tongue: that the character inwhich they were written seemed like to thatof the Syrians; and that its sound, when pro­nounced, appeared to be peculiar to them­selves. Wherefore he said, that nothing hin­dered why they might not get those books tobe translated also. "For," said he, "whilenothing is wanting that is necessary for that
fmrpose, we may have their books also in thisibrary." So the king thought Demetrius wasvery zealous to procure him abundance ofbooks, and that he suggested what was ex­ceeding proper for him to do: and accord­ingly, he wrote to the Jewish high-priest,that he should act accordingly.
Now there was one Aristeus, who wasamong the king's most intimate friends, andon account of his modesty very acceptable tohim. This Aristeus had frequently resolvedto petition the king, that he would set all thecaptive Jews in this kingdom free. And hethought this to be a convenient opportunityfor making that petition. So he discoursedin the first place with the captains of theking's guards, Sosibius of Tarentum, and An­dreas; and persuaded them to assist him inwhat he was going to intercede with the kingfor. Accordingly Aristeus embraced the sameopinion with those that have been before-mentioned; and went to the king, and madethe following speech to him: "It is not fit forus, O king, to overlook things hastily, or todeceive ourselves; but to lay the truth open.For since we have determined not only to getthe laws of the Jews transcribed, but inter­preted also, for thy satisfaction; by whatmeans can we do this, while so many of the


* See this fully proved, Book XIV. chap. 10.
t These numbers; 12 years for Alexander; 40 forPtolemy the son of Lagus; and 39 for Ptolemy Phila­delphus, are very nearly the same which Ptolemy's canonascribes to them respectively.
J Of the translation of the other parts of the Old Tes­tament by seventy Egyptian Jews, in the joint reigns ofPtolemy the son of Lagus, and Philadelphus; as also of
the translation of the Pentateuch by seventy-two Jemsalem Jews, in the seventh year of Philadelphus, atAlexandria; has given us an account of by Aristeus, andthence by Philo and Josephus; with a vindication ofAristeus's history, see the Appendix to the Literal Ac­complishment of the Prophecies at large, page 117—15*.which has hitherto received no confutation.


 







OCR Output








"N







OCR Output








AN. 217 1097.] ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


wicked. So he sent to Nabal's wife, and in­vited her to come to him, to live with him,and to be his wife. Whereupon she repliedto those that came, that she was not worthyto touch his feet. However she came withall her servants, and became his wife; havingreceived that honour on account of her wiseand righteous course of life, and also partlyon account of her beauty. Now David hada wife before, whom he married from the cityAbesar. For as to Michal, the daughter ofking Saul, who had been David's wife, herfather had given her in marriage to Phalti,the son of Laish, who was of the city Gallim.*After this came certain of the Ziphites, andtold Saul, that David was come again intotheir country, and that if he would affordthem his assistance, they could catch him.So he came to them with three thousandarmed men, and upon the approach of nighthe pitched his camp at a certain place calledHachilah. But when David heard that Saulwas coming against him, he sent spies, andbade them let him know to what part of thecountry Saul was already come. And whenthey told him that he was at Hachilah, heconcealed his going away from his own com­panions, and came to Saul's camp, havingtaken with him Abishai, his sister Zeruiah'sson, and Ahimelech the Hittite. Now Saulwas asleep, and the armed men, with Abner,their commander, lay round about him in acircle. Hereupon David entered into theking's tent, but he did neither kill Saul,though he knew where he lay, by the spearthat was stuck down by him,t nor did he give


leave to Abishai, who would have killed him,and was strongly inclined so to do. For hesaid it was a horrid crime to kill one that wasordained king by God, although he were awicked man; for that he who gave him thedominion, would in time inflict punishmentupon him: so he restrained his eagerness.But that it might appear to have been in his
f)ower to have killed him when he refrainedrom it, he took his spear, and the cruse ofwater which stood by Saul, without beingperceived by any in the camp, who were allasleep, and went securely away; having per­formed every thing among the king's attend­ants that the opportunity afforded, and hisboldness encouraged him to do. So when hehad passed over the brook, and ascended tothe top of a hill, whence he might be suffi­ciently heard, he cried aloud to Saul's sol­diers, and to Abner their commander, andawakened them out of their sleep; and calledboth to him and to the people. Hereuponthe commander asked who it was that calledhim? to whom David replied, " It is I, the sonof Jesse, whom thou makest a vagabond. Butwhat is the matter? dost thou that art a manof so great dignity, and of the first rank inthe king's court, take so little care of thymaster's person? and is sleep of more conse­quence to thee than his preservation? thisnegligence deserves death; and punishmentought to be inflicted on thee, who didst notperceive when a little while ago some of usentered into thy camp; nay, as far as to theking himself. If thou look for the king'sspear, and his cruse of water; thou wilt learn


* 1 Sam. xxv. 44.
t Carrying a long pike before a company of Arabs is atoken that an Arab Sheekh, or prince, is there: the fixingof it likewise near a person of authority points out his dig­nity. Thus Josephiis, giving an account of David's en­tering the camp of Saul, when that prince and his peoplewere fast asleep, informs us, that notwithstanding the op­portunity, he did no hurt to Saul, though he well knewwhere he slept, by the spear, which was fixed near him,and that he suffered not Abishai, to slay him then, thoughhe would fain have done it. English readers generallysuppose that every man had his spear stuck into theground at his head: but Josephus supposes that circum­stance distinguished the royal sleeping-place from that ofevery body else, which it would not have done, if it hadnot been something peculiar to Saul, distinguishing himfrom his officers and people. It was, it should seem then,a customary distinction in the timo of Josephus, and hethought it also an usage is -m-ient as the time of Saul.Perhaps too, this describing Saul, as known by the spear, I
may intimate, that he slept with his face covered, beinglaid on the ground in the open air. Thus de la Roquedescribes the Bedouin Arabs of the Holy Land, though ingeneral they live under tents, yet, sometimes, he says,they sleep in their clothes, in summer time, on the ground,only covering their body and face with their aba, or outergarment. Voy. dans la Pal. c. 12. p. 176. Josephus,then in all probability, supposes this expedition was un­dertaken in the time of summer; and that Saul's face wasmuffled up, so as rather to be known by the spear, thanby his countenance, in a night sufficiently light to havedistinguished him, had he not been so covered. It seemsindeed to be the common practice of the Eastern peopleto sleep with their faces covered, according to Niebuhr;and he supposes that Europeans would find the benefit ofit, if they would adopt the same usage, the dews and somewinds being found to be very hurtful. Descript. deVArahie, p. 9. Harrier's Observations on Scripture, vol. i.p. 96. Clarke's Edition. B.







OCR Output













OCR Output








224 [BOOK VII. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEW&


BOOK VII.


Containing an Interval of Forty Years.


FROM THE DEATH OF SAUL TO THE DEATH OF DAYID.


CHAP. I.
of david's conduct ok receiving the news of saul's
DEATH, AND OF THE CIVIL WAR WHICH ENSUED BETWEENTHE ADHERENTS OF DAVID AND ISHBOSHETH, IN WHICHASAHEL AND ABNER WERE SLAIN.
THIS battle happened on the same daywhereupon David was come back toZiklag, after he had overcome the Amalekites.Now when he had been already two days atZiklag, there came to him the man who slewSaul; he had escaped out of the battle whichthe Israelites had with the Philistines; andhad his clothes rent, and ashes upon hishead. And when he made his obeisance toDavid, he inquired of him whence he came?He replied, from the battle of the Israelites;and informed him, that the result of it wasunfortunate; many ten thousands of the Is­raelites having been cut off, and Saul, toge­ther with his sons, slain. He also said, thathe could well give him this information, be­cause he was present at the victory gainedover the Hebrews; and was with the kingwhen he fled. Nor did he deny that he hadhimself slain the king, when he was ready tobe taken by the enemy, and himself exhortedhim to that act; because when he was fallenon his sword his wounds had made him soweak, that he was not able to kill himself.He also produced demonstrations that theking was slain; which were the golden brace­lets that had been on the king's arms and his
* 2 Sam. i. 13, lb.
t Though David, after Saul's demise, had a right to thekingdom by virtue of God's designation; yet as God hadno where declared, at what time he was make use of thisright he would not enter into possession, nor take the


crown, which he had taken away from Saul'sdead body; and had brought them to him.So David having no longer any room to ques­tion the truth of what he said, but seeingmost evident marks that Saul was dead, herent his garment, and continued all that daywith his companions in weeping, and lamen­tation. This grief was augmented by the con­sideration of Jonathan, the son of Saul, whohad been his most faithful friend, and theoccasion of his deliverance. He also evincedsuch great virtue, and such great kindnessfor Saul, as not only to take his death toheart, though he had been frequently indanger of losing his life by his means, but topunish him that slew him. For when Davidhad said to him, that he was become his ownaccuser, as the very man who had slain theking; and when he had understood that hewas the son of an Amalekite, he commandedhim to be slain.* He also committed to wri­ting some lamentations and funeral com­mendations of Saul and Jonathan; whichhave continued to my own age.
When David had paid these honours to theking, he left off his mourning, and inquiredof God by the prophet,t which of the citiesof the tribe of Judah, he would bestow uponhim to dwell in? God answered that he be­stowed upon him Hebron:J so he left Ziklag,and came to Hebron; and took with him histwo wives, and his armed men. Whereuponall the people of the aforementioned tribe


administration of public affairs upon him. without havingfirst consulted him". Patrick's Comment. B.
J Hebron was situated in the midst of the tribe of Judah;as it was a very ancient city, the metropolis of thewhole tribe, and the possession of those priestly families


X







OCR Output








AN. 148.] ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


who coming to Jamnia with a great army,sent to Jonathan the high-priest, and toldhim, that it was not right that he alone shouldlive at rest, and with authority, and not besubject to the king: that this thing had madehim a reproach among all men, that he hadnot yet made him subject to the king. "Donot thou therefore deceive thyself," said "he,"and sit still among the mountains, and pre­tend to have forces with thee. But if thouhast any dependance on thy strength, comedown into the plain, and let our armies becompared together; and the event of the bat­tle will demonstrate which of us is the mostcourageous. However, take notice, that themost valiant men of every city are in myarmy. And that these are the very menwho have always defeated thy progenitors.But let us have the battle in such a place ofthe country where we fight with weapons,and not with stones; and where there maybe no place whither those that are beatenmay flee."
With this Jonathan was irritated: andchoosing out ten thousand of his soldiers, hewent out of Jerusalem in haste, with his bro­ther Simon, and came to Joppa, and pitchedhis camp on the outside of the city: becausethe people of Joppa had shut their gatesagainst him. For they had a garrison in thecity put there by Apollonius. But when Jo­nathan was preparing to besiege them, theywere afraid he would take them by force;and therefore they opened the gates to him.Apollonius hearing that Joppa was taken byJonathan, took three thousand horsemen, andeight thousand footmen, and came to Ashdod:and removing thence he made his journeysilently and slowly; and going up to Joppa,he made as if he were retiring from the place,and so drew Jonathan into the plain: asvaluing himself highly upon his horsemen,and having his hopes of victory principallyin them. However, Jonathan sallied out,and pursued Apollonius to Ashdod. But assoon as Apollonius perceived that his enemywas in the plain, he came back, and gave himbattle. Now Apollonius had laid a thousand


horsemen in ambush, in a valley, that theymight be seen by their enemies as behindthem. Jonathan, however, was under n»consternation, on perceiving them, but or­dering his army to stand in a square battlearray, he gave them a charge to fall on theenemy on both sides; and set them to facethose that attacked them both before andbehind. And while the fight lasted till theevening, he gave part of his forces to hisbrother Simon, and ordered him to attack theenemies: but for himself, he charged thosethat were with him to cover themselves withtheir armour, and receive the darts of thehorsemen. Accordingly the enemies' horse­men, while they threw their darts till theyhad no more left, did them no harm: for thedarts that were thrown did not enter intotheir bodies; being thrown upon the shieldsthat were united and conjoined together: thecloseness of which easily overcame the forceof the darts, and they flew about without anyeffect. But when the enemy grew remiss inthrowing their darts, from morning till lateat night; Simon perceived their weariness,and fell upon the body of men before him.And because his soldiers shewed great alac­rity, he put the enemy to flight. And whenthe horsemen saw that the foot ran away,neither did they stay themselves: but theybeing weary by the duration of the fight tillevening, and their hope from the infantrybeing quite gone, they basely ran away, andthat in great confusion also; till they wereseparated one from another, and scatteredover all the plain. Hereupon Jonathan pur­sued them as far as Ashdod; and slew a greatmany of them: and compelled the rest, indespair of escaping, to flee to the temple ofDagon, which was at Ashdod. But Jonathantook the city on the first onset, and burnt it,and the villages about it, nor did he abstainfrom the temple of Dagon itself, but burnt italso; and destroyed those that had fled to it.Now the entire multitude of the enemies thatfell in the battle, and were consumed in thetemple, were eight thousand. When Jona­than therefore had overcome so great an


persons in the history of the Maccabees, mentioned underthe name of Apollonius. The former of these beinggovernor of Samaria in the time of Antiochus Epiphanes,1 Mace. iii. 10. was slain in battle by Judas Maccabeus;and the latter, (who is called the son of Gennens, 2 Mace.
xii. 2.) being governor of some toparchy in Palestine,under Antiochus Eupator, did then signalize himself bybeing a great enemy to the Jews. Prideaux'i Connection,anno 148. B.







OCR Output








an. 1264.] 169 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


people went out, and Gaal with them, at thehead of his soldiery, bo they gathered theirfruit with safety; and when they were atsupper in several companies, they then ven­tured to curse Abimelech openly,* and themagistrates laid ambushes in places aboutthe city, and caught many of Abimelech'sfollowers, and destroyed them.
Now there was one Zebul, a magistrate ofthe Shechemites, that had entertained Abim­elech. He sent messengers, and informedhim how much Gaal had irritated the peopleagainst him, and excited him to lay ambushesbefore the city; for that he would persuadeGaal to go out against him; which wouldleave it in his power to be revenged on him;and when that was once done, he would bringhim to be reconciled to the city. So Abime­lech laid ambushes, and himself laid withthem. Now Gaal abode in the suburbs, tak­ing little care of himself; and Zebul waswith him. Now as Gaal saw the armed mencoming on, he said to Zebul, that some armedmen were coming; but the other replied,they were only shadows of huge stones;f and,when they were come nearer, Gaal perceivedwhat was the reality, and said they were notshadows, but men lying in ambush. Thensaid Zebul, "Didst not thou reproach Abim­elech for cowardice? why dost thou not then


* Judg. ix. 27.
t Our translation of the Book of Judges from the He­brew, represents Zebul as saying to Gaal, upon his beingalarmed at seeing troops of men making to him, Thou seestthe shadazes of the mountains as if they were men, ch. ix.ver. 36. Whereas Josephus represents him as tellinghim, he mistook the shadow of the rocks for men. Acommentator might be at a loss to account for this change,that had not read Deubdan's representation of some partof the Holy Land, in which he tells us, that in those placesthere are many detached rocks scattered up and down,some growing out of the ground, (Voyage, p. 98,) .ndothers are fragments broken off from rorky precipices, theshadow of which it appears Josephus thought might bemost naturally imagined to look like troops of men at adistance, rather than the shadow of the mountains. Har-mer's Observations, vol. I. p. 98. Clarke's Edition. B.
t In the text the expression is, Then God sent an evilspirit, or spirit of discord, between Abimelech and the menof Shecliem, Judg. ix. 23. which, in Scripture, is an un­usual form of speech, and denotes not any positive action,but a permission only, or, at most, a direction from God.It is observed, however, that this manner of expressionmay possibly have given rise to some notions in the theo­logy of the Heathens, when they suppose, that the furiesappointed by the gods to sow the seeds of discord amongmen:


shew how very courageous thou art thyself,and go and light him?" So Gaal being indisorder, joined battle with Abimelech, andsome of his men fell; whereupon he fled intothe city, and took his men with him. ButZebul managed his matters so in the city, thathe procured them to expel Gaal out of thecity; and this by accusing him of cowardicein this action with the soldiers of Abimelech.:}:But Abimelech, when he had learned that theShechemites were again coming out to gathertheir grapes, placed ambushes before thecity; and when they were come out, the thirdpart of his army took possession of the gatesto hinder the citizens from returning, whilstthe rest pursued those that were scatteredabroad; and so there was slaughter everywhere; and when he had overthrown the cityto the very foundations, (for it was not ableto bear a siege) and had sown its ruins withsalt,|| he proceeded on with his army, till allthe Shechemites were slain. As for thosethat were scattered about the country, and soescaped the danger, they were gathered toge­ther unto a certain strong rock, and settledthemselves upon it, and prepared to build awall about: but when Abimelech knew theirintentions, he prevented them; and cameupon them with his forces; and laid fnggotsof dry wood round the place, he himself


 


.1


Luctificam Alecto, dirarum ab sede sororumInfernisque ciet tenebris; cui tristia bella,Iraeque, insidiaeque, et crimina noxia cordi.And a little lower,
Disjice compositam pacem, sere crimina belli:Anna velit, poscatque simul, rapiatque juventus.
Virg. JEn. 7. B
II The effect of salt, where it abounds, on vegetation,is described by burning, Dent. xxix. 23. Thus Volney,speaking of the borders of the Asphaltic Lake, or DeadSea, says, "the true cause of the absence of vegetablesand animals, is the acrid saltness of its waters, which isinfinitely greater than that of the sea. The land sur­rounding the lake being equally impregnated with thatsaltness refuses to produce plants: the air itself, which isby evaporation loaded with it, and which moreover re­ceives vapours of sulphur and bitumen, cannot suit vege­tation: whence the dead appearance which reigns roundthe lake." Voyage en Syrie, tom. i. p. 282. Tims alsoVirgil. Georg. lib. ii. 238. Hence the ancient custom ofsowing an enemy's city, when taken, with salt, in tokenof perpetual desolation. Judg. ix. 45. And thus in after-times, Ann. 1162, the city of Milan was burnt, razed,sown with salt, and ploughed by the exasperated emperorFrederic Barbarossa. Complete System of Georg. vol. I.p. 822, B.







OCR Output








332 [book IX ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


TT^^SH


P—


of cattle. They also possessed themselves ofso many thousand measures of wheat and bar­ley, as they never in the least expected, andwere not only freed from their former mise­ries, but had such plenty, that two seahs ofbarley were bought for a shekel; and a seahof fine flour for a shekel; according to theprophecy of Elisha. Now a seah is equal toan Italian modius and a half. The captain ofthe third band was the only man that re­ceived no benefit by this plenty. For he wasappointed by the king to oversee the gate,that he might prevent the too great crowd ofthe multitude, and they might not endangerone another in the press; but he sufferedhimself in that very way, and was trodden*to death; as Elisha had predicted, when healone disbelieved what he said concerningthe plenty of provisions which they shouldsoon have.
When Benhadad had escaped to Damascus,and understood that it was God himself thatcast all his army into disorder, and that itdid not arise from the invasion of enemies,he was greatly dejected at having God sogreatly for his enemy, and fell into a dis­temper. Now it happened that Elisha theprophet, at that time was gone out of hisown country to Damascus; of which whenBenhadad was informed, he sent Hazael, themost faithful of all his servants, to meet him,and to carry him presents, and bade himinquire about his distemper, and whether heshould escape the danger that it threatened.So Hazael came to Elisha with forty camels,laden with the best and most precious fruitsthat the country of Damascus afforded, aswell as those which the king's palace sup-


plied. He saluted him kindly, and said, thathe w as sent to him, by king Benhadad, andbrought presents with him in order to inquireconcerning his distemper, whether he shouldrecover from it or not? whereupon the pro­phet bid him tell the king no melancholynews: but still he said he would die. Sothe king's servant was troubled to hear it.And Elisha wept also, and his tears randown plenteously at his foresight of whatmiseries his people would undergo after thedeath of Benhadad. And when Hazaelasked him what was the occasion of theconfusion he was in; he said, "Out of com­miseration for the multitude of the Is­raelites; and what terrible miseries theywill suffer by thee. For thou wilt slay thestrongest of them, and wilt burn the strongestcities, and wilt destroy their pregnant wo­men, and dash their children against thestones." And when Hazael said, "How canit be that 1 should have power enough todo such things?" the prophet replied, thatGod had informed him he should be kingof Syria. So when Hazael was come toBenhadad, he told him good news concern­ing his distemper:f but on the next day hespread a wet cloth, in the nature of a net,over him, and took his dominion.J He wasan active man, and had the good will of theSyrians, and of the people of Damascus: bywhom both Benhadad himself, and Hazael,who ruled after him, are honoured to thisday, as gods, by reason of their benefactions,and their building them temples; by whichthey adorned the city of the Damascens.They also do with great pomp pay theirdaily worship! to these kings; and value


* 2 Kings vii. 20.
t Since Elijah did not live to anoint Hazael, king ofSyria, - himself as he was empowered to do, 1 Kings xix.15. Antiq. VIII. 13, it was most probably now done, inhis name, by his servant and successor Elisha. Nor doesit seem to me otherwise, but that Benhadad immediatelyrecovered of his disease, as the prophet foretold; andthat Hazael, upon his being anointed to succeed him;though he ought to have staid till he died by the courseof nature, or some other way of divine punishment; asdid David for many years in the like case; was too im­patient, and the very next day smothered or strangledhim, in order to come directly to the succession.
J 2 Kings viii. 15.
|| What M. Le Clerc pretends here, that it is moreprobable that Hazael and his son were worshipped by theSyrians, and people of Damascus, till the days of Jose-
phus, than Benhadad and Hazael: because under Ben­hadad they had greatly suffered; and because it is almostincredible, that both a king and the king's murderershould be worshipped by the same people, is of littleforce against those records, out of which Josephus drewthis history; especially when it is likely that they thoughtBenhadad died of the distemper he laboured under, andnot by Hazael's treachery, and when Selden hath shewnthat Benhadad was among the gods of Syria. De DiisSyris. Synt. I. D. 6. Besides, the reason that Josephnsgives for this adoration, that these two kings had beengreat benefactors to the inhabitants of Damascus, andhad built them temples, is too remote from the politicalsuspicions of Le Clerc. Nor ought such weak suspicionsto be deemed of any force against the authentic testimo­nies of antiquity.







OCR Output








34 [book I. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


As soon as this was done, the servants ofLaban brought the camels in, and took careof them, and the stranger was himself broughtin to supper by Laban, and. after supper hesaid to him, and to the mother of the damsel,addressing himself to her, Abraham is the sonof Terah, and a kinsman of yours: for Nahor,the grandfather of these children, was thebrother of Abraham, by both father andmother, upon which account he hath sent meto you, being desirous to take this damsel forhis son to wife. He is his legitimate son, andis brought up as his only heir. He couldindeed have had the most happy of all thewomen in that country for him, but he wouldnot have his own son marry any of them outof regard to his own relations. I would not,therefore, have you despise his affection; forit was by the good pleasure of God that otheraccidents fell out in my journey, and thatthereby I met with your daughter and yourhouse; for when I was come near your city, Isaw a great many maidens coming to a well,and I prayed that I might meet with thisdamsel, which has come to pass accordingly.Do you therefore confirm that marriage,whose espousals have been already made bya divine appearance, and shew the respectyou have for Abraham, who has sent me withso much solicitude, in giving your consent tothe marriage of this damsel."
Upon this they understood it to be thewill of God, and greatly approved of theoffer, and sent their daughter,* as was de­sired, f Accordingly Isaac married her, theinheritance being now come to him: for thechildren of Keturah were gone to their ownremote habitations.


CHAP. XVII.


OF ABRAHAM S DEATH AND BURIAL.


A LITTLE while after this Abrahamdied ;J he was a man of incomparablevirtue, and honoured by God in a manneragreeable to his piety towards him. Thewhole time of his life was one hundred andseventy-five years,|| and he was buried inHebron with his wife Sarah, by their sonsIsaac and Ismael.


CHAP. XVIII.
OF THE NATIVITY AND EDUCATION OF ESAU AND JACOB.
ISAAC'S wife proved with child,§ after thedeath of Abraham; and when she wasfar advanced in her pregnancy, Isaac wasvery anxious, and inquired of God; who an­swered, that Rebeka should bear twins, andthat two nations should take the names ofthose sons: and that he who appeared thesecond, should excel the elder.** Accordinglyshe in a little time, as God foretold, gavebirth to twins; the elder of whom, from hishead to his feet was very rough and hairy;but the younger took hold of his heel as theywere in the birth. Now the father loved theelder, who was called Esau: a name agreeableto his roughness, for the Hebrews call such anhairy roughness Esauff for Seir; but Jacobthe younger was best beloved by his mother.When there was a famine in the land, Isaacresolved to go into Egypt, the land therebeing good; but he went to Gerar, as Godcommanded him. Here Abimelech, the king


* Gen. xxiv. 59.
t When Kebeka was sent away, it appears that hernurse accompanied her. Nurses were formerly held invery high esteem, and considered as being entitled toconstant and lasting regard. "The nurse in an Easternfamily is always an important personage. Modern travel­lers inform us, that in Syria she is considered as a sort ofsecond parent, whether she has been foster-mother orotherwise. She always accompanies the bride to herhusband's house, and ever remains there an honouredcharacter. Thus it was in ancient Greece." Siege ofAcre, b. ii. p. 35. Note.
Rebeka upon leaving her family received their bless­ing. Nuptial benedictions were used both by the Jews,Greeks, and Romans. That of the Jews was in thisform: "Blessed be thou, O Lord, who hast created manand woman, and ordained marriage, &c." This was re­peated every day during the wedding week, provided
there were new guests. The Grecian form of bene­diction was, aoaSri ru^i]. The Latin was, Quod faustumfelixque sit. The Jews constantly made use of the sameform, but the Greeks and Romans frequently varied theirs:a benediction, however, in some form, was always used.See Selden de Jure, N. et G. 1. 5. c. 19. B.
I An. 1862.
II Gen. xxv. 7.
§ The birth of Jacob and Esau is here said to be afterAbraham's death; it should have been after Sarah's deathThe chronology here certainly shews the other to be amistake. The order of the narration in Genesis, notalways exactly according to the order of time, seems tohave led Josephus into it, as Dr. Bernard observes here.
** Gen. xxv. 23.
Tt For Seir, in Josephus, the coherence requires thatwe read Esau or Seir -, which signifies the same thing.







OCR Output








370 [book X. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


would be to his advantage; but that hewas afraid of those of his own country, thathad fallen away to the Babylonians; lest heshould be accused by them to the king ofBabylon, and be punished. But the prophetencouraged him, and said, he had no causeto fear such punishment: for that he shouldnot have the experience of any misfortune, ifhe would deliver all up to the Babylonians;neither himself, nor his children, nor hiswives; and that the temple should then con­tinue unhurt. So when Jeremiah had saidthis, the king let him go, and charged him tobetray what they had resolved on to noneof the citizens, nor tell any of these mattersto any of the rulers, if they should havelearned that he had been sent for, andshould inquire of him what it was that hewas sent for, and what he had said to him;but to pretend to them, that he besoughthim that he might not be kept in bonds andin prison. And indeed he said so to them;for they came to the prophet, and askedhim what advice it was that he came togive the king relating to them.
CHAP. VIII.


OF THE REDUCTION OF JERUSALEM, AND THE REMOVAL OFZEDEKIAH AND HIS SUBJECTS TO BABYLON.
NOW the king of Babylon was very intentupon the siege of Jerusalem. And heerected towers upon great banks of earth;and from them repelled those that stoodupon the walls. He also made a great num­ber of such banks round about the wholecity, whose height was equal to those walls.However, those that were within bore thesiege with courage and patience. For theywere not dismayed either by the famine, orby the pestilential distemper: but were ofcheerful minds, in the prosecution of the war;


although those miseries within oppressedthem also; and they did not suffer themselves to be terrified, neither by the con-trivances of the enemy, or by their enginesof war; but contrived still different enginesto oppose them; till there seemed to be anentire struggle between the Babylonians,and the people of Jerusalem, which had thegreater sagacity and skill; the former partysupposing they should be thereby too hardfor the other, for the destruction of the city:the latter placing their hopes of deliverancein persevering in such inventions, in oppo­sition to the other, as might demonstratethe enemies' engines were useless to them.And this siege they endured for eighteenmonths; until they were destroyed by thefamine, and by the darts which the enemythrew at them from the towers.
At length the city was taken, on the ninthday of the fourth month, in the eleventh yearof the reign of Zedekiah.* They were in­deed only generals of the king of Babylon,to whom Nebuchadnezzar committed thecare of the siege: for he abode himself inthe city of Riblah. The names of thesegenerals who ravaged and subdued Jerusa­lem, if any one desire to know them, werethese: Nergal Sharezer, Samgar Nebo,Rabsaris, Sarsechim, and Rabmag. Andwhen the city was taken, about midnight,and the enemy's generals were entered intothe temple:f and when Zedekiah was sen­sible of it, he took his wives, his children,his captains, and his friends, and fled outof the city, through the fortified ditch, andthrough the desert. And when certain ofthe deserters had informed the Babyloniansof this, at break of day they pursued afterZedekiah, and overtook him not far fromJericho, and encompassed him about. Butfor those friends and captains of Zedekiah,


* 2 Kings xxv. 2, 3.
t The temple was burnt, from the time that it wasbuilt, four hundred years, says Sir John Marsham; fourhundred and twenty-four years three months and eightdays, says Primate Usshur; four hundred and thirtyyears, says Abarbinel, and other learned Jews: but Jo-sephus computes the thing still higher: for he tells us,that the temple was burnt four hundred and seventy yearssix months and ten days, from the building of it; onethousand and sixty years six months and ten days, fromthe Israelites coming out of the land of Egypt; one thou­sand nine hundred and fifty years and six months and ten
days from the deluge; and three thousand five hundredand thirty years six months and ten days from the crea­tion of the world. Josephus stands amazed, that the se­cond temple should be burnt by the Romans in the samemonth, and on the very same day of the month, that thiswas set on fire by the Chaldeans, and as some of theJewish doctors say, when the Levites were singing thesame psalm in both destructions, viz. xciv. 23. He shallbring upon them their own iniquity, and he shall cotthem off in their own wickedness; yea, the Lord out"God shall cut them off. Patrick's Commentary, andJewish Antiq. lib. X. c. 11. 6.







OCR Output








ak. 1056.] 271 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


BOOK VIII.


Containing an Interval of One Hundred and Sixty-three Years.


FROM THE DEATH OP DAVID TO THE DEATH OP AHAB.


CHAP. I.
of Solomon's conduct after he had received the
KINGDOM.
WE have already treated of David, andhis virtue, and of the benefits that hewas the author of to his countrymen; of hiswars also, and battles which he managedwith success; and then died an old man.And when Solomon his son, who was but ayouth in age,* had taken the kingdom, andwhom David had declared, while he wasalive, the lord of that people, according toGod's will; when he sat upon the throne, thewhole body of the people made joyful accla­mations to him, as is usual at the beginningof a reign; and wished that all his affairsmight come to a blessed conclusion; and thathe might arrive at a great age, and at themost happy state of affairs possible.
But Adonijah, who, while his father waslivings attempted to gain possession of thegovernment, came to the king's mother, Bath-sheba, and saluted her with great civility;and when she asked him, whether he cameto her, as desiring her assistance in any thingor not? and bade him tell her if that werethe case, for that she would cheerfully affordit him; he began to say, that she knew herselfthat the kingdom was his, both on account ofhis elder age, and of the disposition of themultitude; and that yet it was transferred toSolomon her son, according to the will ofGod. He also said, that he was contentedto be a servant under him, and was pleasedwiththe present settlement. But he desired


* About 12 or 14 years old.


her to be a means of obtaining a favour fromhis brother to him, and to persuade him tobestow on him in marriage Abishag; who hadslept by his father, but was still a virgin. SoBathsheba promised to afford him her assist­ance, and to bring this marriage about; be­cause the king would be willing to gratify himin such a thing; and because she would presshim to it very earnestly. Accordingly hewent away in great hopes of succeeding inthis affair. So Solomon's mother Went pre­sently to her son, to speak about what shehad promised, upon Adonijah's supplicationto her. And when her son came forward tomeet her, and embraced her; and when hehad brought her into the house where hisroyal throne was, he sat thereon, and badethem set another throne on the right handfor his mother. When Bathsheba was setdown, she said, "O son! grant me one re­quest that I desire of thee, and do not doany thing to me that is disagreeable or un­grateful; which thou wilt do if thou deniestme." And when Solomon desired her to layher commands upon him, because it wasagreeable to his duty, to grant her everything she should ask; and complained thatshe did not at first begin her discourse, witha firm expectation of obtaining what she de­sired, but had some suspicion of a denial; sheintreated him to grant, that his brother Ado­nijah might marry Abishag.
But the king was greatly offended at thesewords, and sent away his mother, saying, thatAdonijah aimed at great things; and that hewondered she did not desire him to yield upthe kingdom to him, as to his elder brother;







OCR Output








AN. 610,] 363 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


prive them of all the happiness they enjoyed;which sentence none could set aside; sinceit was passed on account of their transgres­sion of the laws, and of their not having re-Eented in so long a time while the prophetsad exhorted them to amend, and had fore­told the punishment that would ensue ontheir impious practices; which threateningGod would certainly execute upon them;that they might be persuaded that he wasGod, and had not deceived them in any re­spect, as to what he had denounced by theprophets: that yet, because Josiah was arighteous man, he would at present delaythose calamities; but that after his death hewould send on the multitude what miserieshe had determined for them."*
So the messengers, upon this prophecy ofthe woman, came and told it to the king.Whereupon he sent to the people everywhere, and ordered that the priests and Le-vites should come together to Jerusalem; andcommanded that those of every age shouldbe present. And when they were gatheredtogether, he first read to them the holybooks; after which he stood upon a pulpit,in the midst of the multitude, and obligedthem to make a covenant, with an oath,that they would worship God, and keepthe laws of Moses. Accordingly they gavetheir assent willingly; and undertook to dowhat the king had recommended. So theyimmediately offered sacrifices, after an ac­ceptable manner; and besought God to begracious and merciful to them. He alsoenjoined the high-priest, that if there re­mained in the temple any vessels dedicatedto idols, or to foreign gods, they should castthem out. So when a great number of such


vessels were got together, he burnt them,and scattered their ashes abroad; and slewthe priests of the idols, that were not of thefamily of Aaron.
When he had done thus in Jerusalem, hewent into the country, and utterly destroyedwhat buildings had been made therein, byking Jeroboam, in honour of strange gods;and he burnt the bones of the false prophetsupon that altar which Jeroboam first built, tAnd as the prophet Jadon, who came toJeroboam, when he was offering sacrifice,and when all the people heard him, fore­told what would come to pass, viz. that acertain man of the house of David, Josiahby name, should do what is here mentioned.And it happened that those predictions tookeffect after three hundred and sixty-oneyears.J
After the9e things, Josiah went to suchother Israelites as had escaped captivity unTder the Assyrians; and persuaded them todesist from their impious practices, and toleave off the honours they paid to thestrange gods; but to worship rightly theirown Almighty God, and adhere to him. Healso searched the houses, the villages, andthe cities, out of a suspicion that somebodymight have idols in private. Nay indeed,he took away the chariots of the sun|| thatwere set up in his royal palace; which hispredecessors had framed; and what thingsoever there was besides which they wor­shipped as a god: and when he had thuspurged all the country, he called the peopleto Jerusalem, and there celebrated the feastof unleavened bread, and that called thepassover.§ He also gave the people, forpaschal sacrifices, thirty thousand young


* That this book of the law of Moses, laid up in theholy house itself, was a small book of the principal laws ofrighteousness, and not the entire Pentateuch itself, whichwas laid up only in one of the courts of the temple, seeHoreb Covenant revived, page 107, 108.
t 2 Kings xxii. 15—20.
!2 Kings xxiii. 15.It is difficult to reconcile the account in the secondbook of Kings xxiii. 11. with this account in Josephus;and to translate this passage truly in Josephus; whosecopies are supposed to be here imperfect. However,the general sense of both seems to be this: that therewere certain chariots with their horses, dedicated tothe idol of the sun, or to Moloch; which idol mightbe carried about in procession, and worshipped by thepeople: these chariots were now taken away, as Jo-
voL. I.—NOS. 31 & 32.
sephus says; or, as the book of Kings says, burnt withfire by Josiah.
§ The words of the text are—Surely there was not heldsuch a passover, from the days of the judges, nor in allthe days of the kings of Israel, and of the kings of Judah,2 Kings xxiii. 22. which, taken in a literal sense, mustdenote, that this passover, which was celebrated by twotribes only, was more numerous, and more magnificentthan all those that were observed in the days of Davidand Solomon, in the most happy and flourishing state ofthe Jewish monarchy, and when the twelve tribes weremet together, to solemnize that feast. It may not beamiss therefore to allow, that, in these expressions, thereis a kind of auxesis or exajjgeration, not unusual in sacred,as well as in profane authors. For nothing is more com­mon than to say, "Never was so much splendour and
3Q







OCR Output








498 [book XIV. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


mascus again. And Aristobulus, with a greatarmy made war with Aretas and Hyrcanus:and fought them at a place called Papyron,and beat them in the battle, and slew aboutsix thousand of the enemy; with whom fellPhalion also, the brother of Antipater.
CHAP. III.
ARISTOBULUS AND HYRCANUS COME TO POMPEY, IN ORDERTO ARGUE WHO OUGHT TO HAVE THE KINGDOM J ANDUPON THE FLIGHT OF ARISTOBULUS TO THE FORTRESSALEXANDRIUM, POMPEY LEADS HIS ARMY AGAINST HIM JAND ORDERS HIM TO DELIVER UP THE FORTRESSESWHICH HE POSSESSED.
A LITTLE afterward Pompey came toDamascus, and marched over Coele-syria. At which time there came ambassa­dors to him from all Syria, and Egypt, andout of Judea also. For Aristobulus had senthim a great present; which was a *goldenvine, of the value of five hundred talents.Now Strabo of Cappadocia mentions thispresent in these words: "There came alsoan ambassage out of Egypt, and a crown ofthe value of four thousand pieces of gold.And out of Judea there came another, whe­ther you call it a vine or a garden. Theycalled the thing Teg*uX»i, the delight. How­ever, we ourselves saw that present, deposit­ed at Rome, in the temple of Jupiter Capito-linus; with this inscription: "The giftf ofAlexander, king of the Jews." It was valuedat five hundred talents. And the report is, thatAristobulus, the governor of the Jews, sent it.In a little time afterward came ambassa­dors again to him; Antipater from Hyrcanus,and Nicodemus from Aristobulus: which lastalso accused such as had taken bribes; firstGabinius, and then Scaurus: the one threehundred talents, and the other four hundred.By which procedure he made these two hisenemies, besides those he had before. Andwhen Pompey had ordered those that had


controversies one with another to come tohim in the beginning of the spring, hebrought his army out of their winter quar­ters, and marched into their country of Da­mascus. And as he went along he demolishedthe citadel that was at Apamia; which An-tiochus Cyzicenus had built: and took cog­nizance of the country of Ptolemy Menneus;a wicked man, and not less so than Dionysiusof Tripoli, who had been beheaded, whowas also his relation by marriage. Yet didhe buy off the punishment of his crimes fora thousand talents: with which money Pom­pey paid his soldiers their wages. He alsoconquered the place called Lysias; of whichSilas, a Jew, was tyrant. And when he hadpassed over the cities of Heliepolis andChalcis; and got over the mountain which ison the limit of Coelesyria, he came fromPella to Damascus. And there he heard thecauses of the Jew3, and of their governorsHyrcanus and Aristobulus, who were at dif­ference one with another: as also of the na­tion against them both; which did not desireto be under regal government. Because theform of government they received from theirforefathers was that of subjection to thepriests of that God whom they worshipped:and they complained that though these twowere the posterity of priests, yet did theyseek to change the government of their na­tion to another form; in order to enslavethem. Hyrcanus complained, that althoughhe was the elder brother, he was deprivedof the prerogative of his birth by Aristobu­lus, and held but a small part of the countryunder him: Aristobulus having taken awaythe rest by force. He also accused him, thatthe incursions which had been made intotheir neighbours' countries, and the piraciesthat had been at sea, were owing to him:and that the nation would not have revolted,unless Aristobulus had been a man given to


* This golden vine or garden, seen by Strabo at Rome,has its inscription here, as if it were the gift of Alexander,the father of Aristobulus; and not of Aristobulus himself,to whom yet Josephus ascribes it; and in order to provethe truth of that part of his history, introduces this testi­mony of Strabo's. So that the ordinary copies seem to behere either erroneous or defective; and the original read­ing; seerns to have been either Aristobulus, instead ofAlexander, with one Greek copy; or else Aristobulus, theson of Alexander, with the Latin copies; which last seemsto me the most probable. For as to archbishop Usher's
conjectures, that Alexander made it, and dedicated it toGod in the temple; and that thence Aristobulus took it,and sent it to Pompey; they are both very improbable,and no way agreeable to Josephus; who would hardlyhave avoided the recording both those uncommon pointsof history, had he known any thing of them. Nor wouldcither the Jewish nation, or even Pompey himself, thenhave approved such a flagrant instance of sacrilege. SeeDr. Hudson's note here.t Or, of Aristobulus, the son of Alexander.







OCR Output








AN. 261 1059.] ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


he was unarmed, kill him with his ownspear, which he threw at him; for he caughthim by force, and took away his weapons,while he was alive and fighting, and slewhim with his own weapons.
One may also add this to the aforemen­tioned actions of the same man, either as theprincipal of them in alacrity, or as resem­bling the rest. When God sent a snow, alion slipped, and fell into a certain pit; andbecause the pit's mouth was narrow, it wasevident he would perish, being inclosed withthe snow. So when he saw no way to getout and save himself, he roared. When Be-naiah heard the wild beast, he went towardshim, and coming at the noise he made, hewent down into the mouth of the pit, andsmote him,* as he struggled, with a stake thatlay there, and immediately slew him. Theother thirty-three were also like these invalour. ,,


,, f^-'s


CHAP. XIII


OF THE ENUMERATION OF THE PEOPLE BY DAVID S COM­MAND; AND THE SUBSEQUENT EFFECTS OF THE DIVINEDISPLEASURE.
NOWf king David was desirous to knowhow many ten thousands there wereof the people; but J forgot the command ofMoses, who told them beforehand, that if themultitude were numbered they should payhalf a shekel to God for every head. Accord­ingly the king commanded Joab, the captainof his host, to go and number the whole mul-


titude. But when he said there was no ne­cessity for such a numeration, he was notpersuaded to countermand it, but enjoinedhim to make no delay, but to go about thenumbering of the Hebrews immediately. SoJoab took with him the heads of the tribes,and the scribes; and went over the countryof the Israelites; and took notice how nu­merous the multitude were, and returned toJerusalem to the king, after nine months andtwenty days. And he gave in to the king thenumber of the people, without the tribe ofBenjamin; for he had not yet numbered thattribe, nor the tribe of Levi; for the king re­pented of his having sinned against God.Now the number of the rest of the Israeliteswas nine hundred thousand men, who wereable to bear arms and go to war.|| But thetribe of Judah, by itself, was four hundredthousand.§
Now when the prophets had signified toDavid that God was angry at him, he beganto intreat he would be merciful to him, andforgive his sin. But God sent Nathan theprophet to propose to him the choice of threethings. "Whether he would have faminecome upon the country for seven years? orwould have a war, and be subdued threemonths by his enemies? or whether Godshould send a pestilence and a distemperupon the Hebrews, for three days? But ashe was fallen to a fatal choice of great mise­ries, he was in trouble and sorely confounded.And when the prophet had said, that he mustof necessity make this choice, and had


* 2 Sam. xxiii. 20.
t About an. 1058.
J The words of God by Moses, Exod. xxx. 12, suffi­ciently justify the reason here given by Josephus for thegreat plague mentioned in this chapter. "When thoutakest the sum of the children of Israel, after their number,then shall they give every man a ransom for his soul untothe Lord, when thou numberest them; that there be noplague amongst them when thou numberest them." Norindeed could David's, or the Sanhedrim's neglect of exe­cuting this law at this enumeration excuse the people;who ought still to have brought their bounden oblation ofhalf a shekel a piece with them, when they came to benumbered. And I am inclinable to suppose that the greatreason why nations art so constantly punished by and withwicked kings and governors, is this: that they almost con­stantly comply with them in their neglect of, or disobe­dience to, the divine laws; and suffer those divine laws togo into disuse, or contempt, in order to please those wickedikings and governors, and that they submit to severalwicked political laws and commands of those kings and
governors, instead of the righteous laws of God, which allmankind ought ever to obey, let their kings and governorssay what they please to the contrary, this preference ofhuman, before divine laws, seeming to me the principalcharacter of idolatrous or antichristian nations. Accord­ingly Josephus well observes IV. 8. that it was the dutyof the people of Israel to take care that their kings, whenthey should have them, did not exceed their proper limitsof power, and prove ungovernable by the laws of God;which would certainly be a most pernicious thing to theirdivine settlement. Nor do I think that negligence pe­culiar to the Jews: those nations which are called Chris­tian are sometimes indeed very solicitous to restrain theirkings and governors from breaking the human laws of theirseveral kingdoms; but without the like care for re­straining them from breaking the laws of God. "Whe­ther it be right in the sight of God, to hearken unto menmore than to God, judge ye." Acts iv. 19. "We oughtto obey God rather than men." v. 29.
II Eight hundred thousand, 2 Sam. xxiv. 9.
§ Five hundred thousand.


3C2







OCR Output








74 [book II. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


fore,* nor was it like to that which falls in otherclimatest in winter time, but larger than thatwhich falls in the middle of spring to thosethat dwell in the northern and north-westernregions. This hail brake down their boughsladen with fruit. After this a tribe of locustsconsumed the seed which was not hurt by thehail; so that to the Egyptians all the hopes offuture fruits of the ground were entirely lost. JOne would think the aforementioned cala­mities might have been sufficient for one thatwas only foolish, without wickedness, to makehim sensible what was for his advantage. ButPharaoh, led not so much by his folly, as byhis wickedness, even when he saw the causeof his miseries, still contested with God, andwilfully deserted the cause of virtue. So hebid Moses to take the Hebrews away, withtheir wives and children; but to leave theircattle behind, since their own cattle weredestroyed. But when Moses said, that whathe desired was unjust, since they were obligedto offer sacrifice to God of those cattle, andthe time being prolonged on this account, a


thick darknessj| without the least light, spreaditself over the Egyptians; whereby their sightbeing obstructed, and their breathing hin­dered by the thickness of the air, they diedmiserably; and under a terror lest they shouldbe swallowed up by the dark cloud. Besidesthis, when the darkness, after three days, andas many nights, was dispatched; and whenPharaoh did not still repent, and let the He­brews go, Moses came to him, and said,"How long wilt thou be disobedient to thecommand of God? for he enjoins thee to letthe Hebrews go; nor is there any other wayof being freed from the calamities you areunder, unless you do so." But the king wasangry at what he said, and threatened tostrike off his head, if he came any more totrouble him about these matters. HereuponMoses said, he would not speak to him aboutthem ;§ but that he himself, together with theprincipal men among the Egyptians, shoulddesire the Hebrews to go away. So whenMoses had said this he went his way.
When God had signified, that with one


frost: he gave up the cattle also to the hail, and their flocksto hot thunderbolts. Ps. lxxviii. 47, 48. And from theplain account of Moses, where he mixes thunder, hail, andfire together, Exod. ix. 23. the observation is obvious, thathere were no less than three of the elements in confede­racy against Pharaoh's obstinacy; the air in the thunder;the water in the hail; and the fire in the lightning, alljointly demonstrating and proclaiming, that the God ofIsrael was the God of nature. B.
* Exod. ix. 24.
t As to this winter or spring hail near Egypt and Judea,see the like on thunder and lightning there in the note onVI. 5. and Havercamp's note on III. 1.
J This is the creature which we properly call the grass­hopper; and wonderful is the account which severalauthors give of them. Thevenot, in his travels, tells us,"That in that part of Scythia which the Cossacks nowinhabit, there are infinite numbers of them, especially indry seasons, which the north-east wind brings over fromTartary, Circassia, and Mingrelia, which are seldom ornever free from them; that they fly in the air all compacttogether, like avast cloud, sometimes 15 or 18 miles long,and about 10 or 12 miles broad; so that they quite darkenthe sky, and make the brightest day obscure; and thatwherever they light, they devour all the corn in less thantwo hours time, and frequently make a famine in the coun­try. These insects," says he, "live not above six months;and when they are dead, the stench of them so corruptsand infects the air, that it very often breeds dreadful pes­tilences." God (as we hinted before) calls the locust, thecanker worm, caterpillar, and the palmer .worm, his greatarmy which he sends amongst a wicked and rebellious peo­ple. Joel, ii. 25. And how proper the expression is, inrelation to the locust in particular, will appear from theaccount which Aldrovandus and Fincelius give us of these
animals, viz. " That in the year of our Lord, 852, on in­finite number of them was seen to fly over twenty milesin Germany in one day, in the manner of a formed army,divided in several squadrons, and having their quartersapart when they rested; that the captains marched a day'sjourney before the rest, and chose the most opportuneplaces for their camp; that they never removed until sun-rising, at which time they went away in as much order asany army of men could do; that at last having done greatmischief wherever they passed, (after prayers made toGod,) they were driven by a violent wind into the Belgicocean, and there drowned; but that, being cast by the seaupon the shore, they covered 140 acres of land, and causeda great pestilence in the country;" which is enough toshew how dreadful a punishment this was, especially con­sidering that these locusts were such as were never knownbefore, and yet the ordinary locust (as Aristotle and Plinyhave described it) was an animal so fierce and formidable,that one single one would kill a serpent, by taking it fast bythe jaws, and biting it to death. Arist. Hist. Animal. 1. 6.c. 23. Pliny's Nat. Hist. 1. 11. c. 9. and he CUrc's Com­mentary. B.
II The Septuagint, and most translations, render it adarkness which might be felt, i. e. consisting of black va­pours and exhalations, so condensed, that they might beperceived by the organs of touch. But some commentatorsthink, that this is carrying the sense too far; since, in sucha medium as this, mankind could not live an hour, muchless for the space of three days, as the Egyptians are saidto have done: and therefore they imagine, that instead ofa darkness that may be felt, the Hebrew phrase may signifya darkness wherein men were groping and feeling about forevery thing they wanted. B.
§ Exod. viii. 7.
"\







OCR Output








234 [book tii. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


in his dancing, uncover himself among theservants and the handmaidens. But he re­plied, that he was not ashamed to do whatwas acceptable to God, who had preferredhim before her father, and before all others;that he would play frequently, and dance,without any regard to what the hand­maidens and she herself thought of it. Sothis Michal who was David's wife, had nochildren; however when she was afterwardmarried to him to whom Saul her fatherhad given her, (for at this time David hadtaken her away from him, and had her him­self) she bare five* children. But con­cerning those mattersf I shall discourse ina proper place.
Now when the king saw that his affairsgrew better almost every day, by the will ofGod, he thought he should offend him, if, whilehe himself continued in houses made of cedar,such as were of great height, and had the mostcurious works of architecture in them, heshould overlook the ark, while it was laid ina tabernacle; and he was desirous to build atemple to God, as JMoses had predicted sucha temple should be built. And when he haddiscoursed with Nathan the prophet aboutthese things, and had been encouraged by himto do whatsoever he had a mind to do, ashaving God with him, and his helper in allthings: he was thereupon the more ready toset about that building. But God appearedto Nathan that night, and commanded himto ||say to David, that he took his purposes


David kept himself within the bounds of modesty, howjoyous soever he might be. It was a command whichGod gave the Israelites, that they should rejoice in theirfeasts, Deut. xii. 7; but then their joy was not to be las­civious or petulant, but pious and moderate. In the casebefore us, David was in the more immediate presence ofGod, and about a very sacred business; and therefore itis incongruous to think that he would commit any thingimmodest. And, that he could not expose his nakedness(as his wife would insinuate,) is evident from his havingnot only an ephod on, but being clothed with a robe offine linen, besides his usual under garments, 1 Chron. xv.27, and therefore, though his putting off his regal robesmight give some occasion to Michal's expression of hisuncovering himself, yet it must be owned, that this op­probrious term proceeded from nothing but the overflow­ing spleen of a proud passionate woman. Calmefs andPatrick?! Commentaries. B.
* Hence correct our other copies. 2 Sam. vi. 23.
t This is now wanting.
I Josephus here informs us that, according to his un­derstanding of the sense of his copy of the Pentateuch,


and his desires kindly, since nobody had be­fore now thought of building him a temple;although upon his having such a notion, hewould not permit him to build him that tem­ple, because he had made many wars, andwas defiled with the slaughter of his ene­mies; that, however, after his death, in hisold age, and when he had lived a long life,there should be a temple built by a son ofhis, who should take the kingdom after him,and should be called Solomon, whom he pro­mised to provide for, as a father provides forhis son, by preserving the kingdom for hisson's posterity, and delivering it to them;but that, if he sinned, he would still punishhim, with diseases and barrenness of land.When David understood this from the pro­phet, and was overjoyed at this knowledgeof the sure continuance of the dominion to hisposterity, and that his house should be splen­did, and very famous, he came to the ark,and fell down on his face, and began toadore God, and to return thanks to him forall his benefits; as well for those that he hadalready bestowed upon him, in raising himfrom a low state, and from the employmentof a shepherd, to so great dignity of dominionand glory; as for those also which he hadpromised to his posterity, and besides forthat providence which he had exercised overthe Hebrews, in procuring them the libertythey enjoyed. And when he had said thus,and had sung a hymn of praise to God, hewent his way.
Moses had himself foretold the building of the temple:which yet is no where that I know of in our presentcopies. And that this is not a mistake, set down by himunwarily, appears by what he observed before, IV. 8.how Moses foretold, that upon the Jews' future disobedi­ence, their temple should be burnt and rebuilt; and thatnot once only, but several times afterwards. See alsoJosephus's mention of God's former commands to buildsuch a temple presently, chap. xiv. contrary to our othercopies; or at least to our translation of the Hebrew.2 Sam. vii. 6, 7. 1 Chron. xyii. 5, 6.
II Josephus seems in this place, with our modern in­terpreters, to confound the two distinct predictions whichGod made to David, and to Nathan, concerning the build­ing him a temple, by one of David's posterity; the onebelonging to Solomon, the other to the Messiah: the dis­tinction between which is of the greatest consequence tothe Christian religion: and of which I have largely treatedin my Boyle's Lectures, from p. 247—272. To whichdiscourse I must here refer the inquisitive reader. Seealso Antiq. VII. 13. and chap. xiv.







OCR Output








an. 1620.] 63 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEW&


plained on what account it was that they leftEgypt.
CHAP. IX.


OF THE AFFLICTIONS THAT BEFEL THE HEBREWS IN EGYPT,DURING FOUR HONORED YEARS..*
NOW it happened that the Egyptiansgrew delicate and indolent, and gavethemselves up to pleasure, and in particularto the love of gain. They also became veryill affected towards the Hebrews, as touchedwith envy at their prosperity; for when theysaw how the nation of the Israelites flourished,and were become eminent already in plentyof wealth, which they had acquired by theirvirtue and natural love of labour, they thoughttheir increase was to their own detriment;and having in length of time forgotten thebenefits they had received from Joseph, par­ticularly the crown being now come intoanother family,t they became very abusive tothe Israelites, and contrived many ways ofafflicting them, for they enjoined them to cuta great number of channels for the river, andto build wallsJ for their cities and ramparts,that they might restrain the river, and hinderits waters from stagnating, upon its runningover its own banks; they set them also tobuild pyramids,|| and by all this wore themout, and forced them to learn all sorts of me­chanical arts, and to accustom themselves to


* As to the affliction of Abraham's posterity for 400years, see I. 10. and as to what cities they built in Egyptunder Pharaoh Sesostris, and of Pharaoh Sesostris's drown­ing in the Red Sea, see Essay on the Old Test . Append.page 139—162.
t Exodus, i. 8.
J It is a common opinion, that the word pyramid is de­rived from the Greek Pyr or Pur, Fire; and that thesestructures were so called from their shape, which ascendedfrom abroad basis, and ended in a point, like a flame offire. Others, whose opinion Vossius seems to approve,say that the name comes from the word Pyroi, which, inthe same language, signifies wheat, because they supposethem to have been the granaries of the ancient Egyptiankings. But a late writer, versed in the Coptic tongue, hasgiven us another etymology from that language, whereinPouro signifies a king, and Misi, a race, or generation; andthe reason why the Pyramids had this name given them,was, as he tells us, because they were erected to preservethe memory of the .princes (who were their founders) andtheir families. . WiUdtui's Dxssert. de ling. Copt. p. 108.
II Of this building of the pyramids of Egypt by theIsraelites, see Perizonius Orig. Egyptiac. c. 21. It is notimpossible they might build one or more of the small ones,but the large ones seem much later. See my Chronolo-
TOL. I. No. 6.


hard labour: and four hundred years did theyspend under these afflictions, for they stroveone against another which should get themastery; the Egyptians desiring to destroythe Israelites by these labours, and the Israel­ites desiring to hold out to the end underthem.
While the affairs of the Hebrews were inthis condition, there was this occasion offereditself to the Egyptians, which made themmore solicitous for the extinction of our na­tion. One of these sacred scribes,§ who arevery sagacious in foretelling future eventstruly, told the king, that about this time achild would be born to the Israelites; who, ifhe were reared, would bring the Egyptiandominion low, and would raise the Israelites;that he would excel all men in virtue, andobtain a glory that would be rememberedthrough all ages; which thing was so fearedby the king, that, according to this man'sopinion, he commanded that every male child,which was born to the Israelites, should becast into the river, and destroyed; that be­sides this, the Egyptian** midwives shouldwatch the labours oi the Hebrew women, andobserve what was born; for those were thewomen who were enjoined to do the office ofmidwives to them, and by reason of their re­lation to the king would not transgress hiscommands.tt He enjoined, also, that if anyparents should disobey him, and venture to
gical Table, and Authent. Rec. Part II. page 885, 886,887. Only if they be all built of stone, this does not sowell agree with the Israelites' labours, which are said tohave been in brick, and not in stone, as Mr. Sandys ob­serves in his Travels, page 127, 128.
§ Dr. Bernard informs us here, that instead of this singlepriest, or prophet of the Egyptians, without a name inJosephus, the Targum of Jonathan names the two famousantagonists of Moses, Jannes and Jambres. Nor is it at allunlikely, that it might be one of these who foreboded somuch misery to the Egyptians, and so much happiness tothe Israelites, from the rearing of Moses.
** Josephus is clear that these midwives were Egyp­tians, and not Israelites, as in our other copies, which isvery probable, it being not easily to be supposed that Pha­raoh could trust the Israelite midwives to execute so bar­barous a command against their own nation. Consult,therefore, and correct hence our ordinary copies, Exod.i. 15—22; and, indeed, Josephus seems to have had muchcompleter copies of the Pentateuch, or other authenticrecords now lost, about the birth and actions of Moses, thaneither our Hebrew, Samaritan, or Greek Bibles afford us,which enabled him to speak so largely and particularlyabout him.
tt It is generally supposed that the midwives upon this
R







OCR Output








532 [book XIV. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


thereby rendered the way safe for those thatcame after. And these called Herod theirsaviour and protector.
And when he was near to Samosata, An­tony sent out his army in all their proper ha­biliments to meet him, in order to pay Herodthis respect; and because of the assistancehe had given him. For he had heard whatattacks the Barbarians had made upon himin Judea. He also was very glad to see himthere; as having been made acquainted withthe great actions he had performed upon theroad. So he entertained him very kindly,and could not but admire his courage. An­tony also embraced him, as soon as he sawhim, and saluted him after a most affectionatemanner, and gave him the upper hand, ashaving himself lately made him a king. Andin a little time Antiochus delivered up thefortress; and on that account this war was atan end. Then Antony committed the rest toSosius, and gave him orders to assist Herod,and went himself to Egypt. AccordinglySosius sent two legions before into Judea, tothe assistance of Herod; and he followed him­self with the body of the army.
Now Joseph was already slain in Judea, inthe following manner. He forgot what chargehis brother Herod had given him, when hewent to Antony. And when he had pitchedhis camp among the mountains; (for Mache-ras had lent him five regiments;) he wenthastily to Jericho, in order to reap the cornthereto belonging. And as the Roman regi­ments were but newly raised, and were un­skilful in war; for they were in great partcollected out of Syria; he was attacked bythe enemy, and caught in those places of dif­ficulty; and was himself slain, as he wasfighting bravely: and the whole army waslost. For there were six regiments slain.So when Antigonus had got possession of thedead bodies, he cut off Joseph's head; al­though Pheroras, his brother, would have re­deemed it at the price of fifty talents. Afterthis defeat, the Galileans revolted from theircommanders, and took those of Herod's party,and drowned them in the lake: and a great partof Judea was become seditious. But Mache-ras fortified the place Gitta, in Samaria.
At this time messengers came to Herod,and informed him of what had been done;and when he was come to Daphne by Antioch


they told him of the ill fortune that had befal­len his brother. But this he had expected,from certain visions that appeared to him inhis dreams; which clearly foreshewed hisbrother's death. So he hastened his march;and when he came to mount Libanus, hereceived about eight hundred of the men ofthat place: having already with him also oneRoman legion: and with these he came toPtolemais. He also marched thence by nightwith his army, and proceeded along Galilee.Here it was that the enemy met him, andfought him, and were defeated, and shut up inthe same place of strength, whence they hadsallied out the day before. So he attackedthe place in the morning. But by reason of agreat storm that was then very violent, he wasable to do nothing; but drew off his army intothe neighbouring villages. Yet as soon as theother legion that Antony sent him was cometo his assistance, those that were in garrisonin the place were afraid; and deserted it inthe night time. Then did the king marchhastily to Jericho, intending to avenge himselfon the enemy, for the slaughter of liis brother.And when he had pitched his tents, he madea feast for the principal commanders; andafter this collation was over, and he had dis­missed his guests, he retired to his own cham­ber. And nere may one see what kindnessGod had for the king. For the upper partof the house fell down, when no body was init; and so killed none: insomuch that all thepeople believed that Herod was beloved ofGod; since he had escaped such a great andsurprising danger.
But the next day six thousand of the enemycame down from the tops of the mountainsto fight the Romans; which greatly terrifiedthem. And the soldiers that were in lightarmour came near, and pelted the king'sguards that were come out, with darts andstones: and one of them struck him on theside with a dart. Antigonus also sent a com­mander against Samaria, whose name wasPappus, with some forces; being desirous toshew the enemy how potent he was; and thathe had men to spare in his war with them.He sat down to oppose Macheras. But He­rod, when he had taken five cities, took suchas were left in them, being about two thou­sand, and slew them, and burnt the citiesthemselves; and then returning to go against







OCR Output








48 [book n. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


this opposition of Joseph's, when she did notexpect it, made her still more violent in herlove to him, and she resolved to accomplishher design by a second attempt.
When, therefore, there was a festivalcoming on, in which it was the custom forwomen to come to the public solemnity, shepretended to her husband that she was sick,as contriving an opportunity for solitude andleisure, that she might entreat Joseph again.This opportunity being obtained, she usedmore kind words to him than before, and saidthat it had been good for him to have yieldedto her first solicitation, and to have given herno repulse, both because of the reverence heought to bear to her dignity, who solicitedhim, and because of the vehemency of herpassion, by which she was forced, though shewere his mistress, to condescend beneath herdignity. But that he might now, by takingmore prudent advice, wipe off the imputationof his former folly; for whether it were thathe expected the repetition of her solicitations,she had now made it, and that with greaterearnestness than before, for that she had pre­tended sickness on this very account, and hadpreferred his conversation before the festivaland its solemnity: or whether he opposed herformer discourses, as not believing she couldbe in earnest: she now gave him sufficientsecurity, by thus repeating her application,that she meant not in the least by fraud toimpose on him, and assured him, that if hecomplied with her affections, he might expectthe enjoyment of the advantages he alreadyhad: and if he were submissive to her, heshould have still greater advantages: but thathe must look for revenge and hatred fromher in case he rejected her desires, and pre­ferred the reputation of chastity before hismistress; for that he would gain nothing bysuch procedure, as she would then becomehis accuser, and would falsely pretend to herhusband that he attempted her chastity, andthat Potiphar would hearken to her wordsrather than to his, let his be ever so agree­able to the truth.
But though the woman said thus, and evenwith tears in her eyes, Joseph was not dis­suaded from his chastity, nor induced by fearto a compliance with her: but he opposedalike her solicitations and her threatenings,and was afraid to do an ill thing, choosing


rather to undergo the sharpest punishment,than to enjoy his present advantages by doingwhat his own conscience knew would justlydeserve that he should die for it. He alsoreminded her that she was a married woman,and that she ought to cohabit with her hus­band only, and desired her to suffer theseconsiderations to have more weight with herthan the short pleasure of lustful dalliancewhich would occasion trouble and repentanceafterwards, and yet would not amend whathad been done amiss. He also suggested thefear she would be in lest they should becaught, and that the advantage of conceal­ment was uncertain, and that only while thewickedness was not known would there beany quiet for them. But that she might havethe enjoyment of her husband's companywithout any danger, and he told her, that inthe company of her husband she might havegreat boldness, from a good conscience, bothbefore God and before men; nay, that shewould act more consistently as his mistress,and make use of her authority over him bet­ter while she persisted in her chastity, thanwhen they were both ashamed for what wick­edness they had been guilty of; and that itis much better to depend on a good life knownto have been so, than upon the hopes of theconcealment of evil practices.
Joseph, by saying this and more, tried torestrain the violent passion of the woman, andto reduce her affections within the rules ofreason; but she grew more ungovernable, andearnest in the matter: and since she despairedof persuading him, she laid her hands uponhim, and had recourse to violence. But assoon as Joseph had got away from her anger,leaving his garment with her, and leaped outof her chamber, she was equally afraid lesthe should discover her lewdness to her hus­band, and incensed at the affront he hadoffered her, so she resolved to be before-handwith him, and to accuse him falsely to Poti­phar, and by that means to revenge herselffor his pride and contempt; thinking it a wisething in itself, and also becoming a woman,thus to prevent his accusation. Accordinglyshe sat sorrowfully, and in confusion, framingherself so hypocritically and angrily, that thesorrow, which was really occasioned by herdisappointment, might appear to be for anattempt upon her chastity: so that when her







OCR Output








AN. 39.] 531 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


them every one: and after that he slew hiswife, and cast their dead bodies down theprecipice, and himself after them; and so un­derwent death rather than slavery. But be­fore he did this, he greatly reproached Herodwith the meanness of his family; although hewas then king. Herod also saw what he wasdoing, and stretched out his hand, and offered^him all manner of security for his life. Bywhich means all these caves were at lengthsubdued entirely.
When the king had sent Ptolemy over theseparts of the country, as his general, he wentto Samaria, with six hundred horsemen, andthree thousand armed footmen, as intendingto fight Antigonus. But still this commandof the army did not succeed well with Pto­lemy: but those that had been troublesome toGalilee before, attacked him, and slew him;and when they had done this, they fled amongthe lakes, and places almost inaccessible,laying waste and plundering whatsoever theycould come at in those places. But Herodsoon returned, and punished them for whatthey had done. For some of these rebels heslew; and others of them, who had fled to thestrong holds, he besieged, and both slew them,and demolished their strong holds. Andwhen he had thus put an end to their rebel­lion, he laid a fine upon the cities of a hun­dred talents.
In the mean time Pacorus was *fallen in abattle; and the Parthians were defeated, whenVentidius sent Macheras to the assistance ofHerod, with two legions, and a thousandhorsemen: while Antony encouraged him tomake haste. But Macheras, at the instiga­tion of Antigonus, without the approbation ofHerod, as being corrupted by money, wentabout to take a view of his affairs. But Anti­gonus suspecting this intention of his coming,did not admit him into the city, but kept himat a distance, with slinging stones at him;and plainly shewed what he himself meant.But when Macheras was sensible that Herodhad given him good advice, and that he hadmade a mistake in not hearkening to that ad­vice, he retired to the city Emmaus; andwhat Jews he met with he slew, whether theywere enemies or friends; out of the rage hewas in at what hardships he had undergone.


* On the 18th of July, according to Pagi.VOL. I.—NOS. 45 & 46.


The king was provoked at this conduct, andwent to Samaria, and resolved to go to An­tony about these affairs, and to inform himthat he stood in no need of such helpers, whodid him more mischief than they did his ene­mies; and that he was able of himself to beatAntigonus. But Macheras followed him, anddesired that he would not go to Antony; or ifhe were resolved to go, that he would join hisbrother Joseph with him, and let them fightagainst Antigonus. So he was reconciled toMacheras, upon his earnest entreaties. Ac­cordingly he left Joseph there with his army;but charged him to run no hazards, nor toquarrel with Macheras.
But for his own part, he hastened to An­tony; (who was then at the siege of Samo-sata, a place upon Euphrates,) with his troops,both horsemen and footmen, to be auxiliariesto him. And when he came to Antioch, andmet there a great number of men that werevery desirous to go to Antony, but durst notventure to go out of fear, because the Barba­rians fell upon men on the road and slewmany; he encouraged them, and became theirconductor upon the road. Now when theywere within two days' march of Samosata,the Barbarians had laid an ambush to disturbthose that came to Antony; and where thewoods made the passes narrow, as they led tothe plains, there they laid not a few of theirhorsemen; who were to lie still until thosepassengers were gone by, into the wide place.Now as soon as the first ranks were gone by,(for Herod brought on the rear,) those thatlay in ambush, who were about five hundred,fell upon them on the sudden; and when theyhad put the foremost to flight, the king cameriding hard, with the forces that were abouthim; and immediately drove back the enemy.By which means he emboldened his own mento go on; insomuch that those who ran awaybefore, now returned back; and the Barba­rians were slain on all sides. The king alsowent on killing them, and recovered all thebaggage; among which were a great numberof beasts for burden, and of slaves; and pro­ceeded on in his march. And whereas therewere a great number of those in the woodsthat attacked them, and were near the passagethat led into the plain, he made a sally uponthese also, with a strong body of men. and putthem to flight, and slew many of them; and4 O







OCR Output








AN. 135.J 477 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


gilded; with all sorts of sweet spices; andwith cups of gold and silver. So those thatwere at the gates received the sacrifices fromthose that brought them, and led them to thetemple; Antiochus in the mean time feastinghis army. This was quite a different con­duct from that of Antiochus Epipbanes: who,when he had taken the city, offered swineupon the altar, and sprinkled the templewith the broth of their flesh; in order to vio­late the laws of the Jews, and the religionthey derived from their forefathers: forwhich reason our nation made war withhim, and would never be reconciled to him.But for this Antiochus, all men called himAntiochus the Pious; for the great zeal hehad about religion.
Accordingly Hyrcanus took this modera­tion kindly: and when he understood how re­ligious he was towards the Deity, he sent anambassage to him; and desired that he wouldrestore the settlements they received fromtheir forefathers. So he rejected the counselof those that *would have him utterly destroythe nation; by reason of their way of living,which was to others unsociable; and did notregard what they said. But being persuadedthat all they did was out of a religious mind,


he answered the ambassadors, that if the be­sieged would deliver up their arms, and paytribute for Joppa and the other cities whichbordered upon Judea, and admit a garrisonof his; on these terms he would make waragainst them no longer. But the Jews, al-,though they were content with the otherconditions, did not agree to admit the gar­rison, because they could not associate withother people, nor converse with them. Yetwere they willing, instead of the admissionof the garrison, to give him hostages, andfive hundred talents of silver. Of whichthey paid down three hundred, and sent thehostages immediately; which king Antio­chus accepted. One of those hostages wasHyrcanus's brother. But still he brake downthe fortifications that encompassed the city.And upon these conditions Antiochus raisedthe siege, and departed.
Now Hyrcanus topened the sepulchre ofDavid; who excelled all other kings in riches,and took out of it three thousand talents.fHe was also the first of the Jews that, rely­ing on this wealth, maintained foreign troops.He likewise made a league of friendship andmutual assistance with Antiochus, and admit­ted him into the city, and furnished him with


* This account in Josephus, that the present Antiochuswas persuaded, though in vain, not to make peace with theJews, but to cut them off utterly, is fully confirmed by Dio-doras Siculus, in Photius's extracts out of his 34th book,f See the note on Book VII. chap. 15.I Josephus tells us, that Hyrcanus, to find some moneyfor this, and other occasions of the government, broke upthe sepulchre of David, and took from thence three thou­sand talents, and that Herod the Great did afterwards thelike, (Antiq. lib. XVII. c. 16, and lib. XVI. c. 11.) Butboth these stories are highly improbable. David had nowbeen dead near nine hundred years, and what is told ofthis treasure, supposes it to have been buried with himall this time. It supposes, that as oft as the city of Jeru­salem, the palace, and the temple, during the reigns ofthe kings of Judah, had been plundered of all theirwealth and treasure by prevailing enemies, this dead stockstill remained safe from all rifle or violation. It supposes,that as oft as these kings were forced to take all the trea­sure that was found in the house of the Lord, as well asin their own, to relieve the exigencies of the state, theynever meddled with this, that was uselessly buried withDavid in his grave. It supposes, that when one of theworst of their kings, (2 Kings xv. 8, &c. and 2 Chron.xxviii. 28, &c.) plundered the temple of its sacred vessels,and cut them in pieces, to melt them down into moneyfor his common occasions; and that when one of thebest of them, (2 Kings xviii. 15, 16,) was forced to cutoff the gold wherewith the gates and pillars of the tem­ple were overlaid, to bribe a destroying enemy, this use-
less treasure still continued untouched. Nay, it supposesthat when Nebuchadnezzar destroyed both the city andtemple of Jerusalem; so that, for many years, they bothlay in rubbish, this treasure in David's sepulchre lay, allthe while, safe and secure under it; and that when An­tiochus Epiphanes, in like manner, destroyed the city,and robbed the temple of all that he could find, this trea­sure still escaped his rapacious hands, nor was ever mo­lested, till Hyrcanus, at this time, was forced to makebold with it: all which suppositions seem highly impro­bable, and beyond belief. There is this, however, to besaid in the matter, that as there certainly was a bank ortreasury in the temple, where money was laid up for thesupport of the poor, for the relief of widows and father­less children, and for the maintenance of divine service:and where the great men, and rich men of the nationwere used to deposit their wealth, for its better security;it is not improbable, that upon the account of the fre­quent invasions and depredations they were liable to, thistreasure might be kept in some secret and subterraneousplace, unknown to all, but such as were at the head ofaffairs; that Hyrcanus, being now under great difficultyto raise money, might borrow it out of this bank, till bet­ter times enabled him to repay it; and that Herod, whenhe plundered it quite, might trump up this plausiblestory, that it neither belonged to church, nor poor, norany private person, but had been deposited there byDavid, and his successors, as a proper supply for the statein times of need. Prideaux's Connection, anno 135, andUniversal History, lib. 2, c. 11. B.


4G2







OCR Output








60 [BOOK It ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


slaughter of the Ethiopians. Now when theEgyptian array had once tasted of this pros­perous success, by the means of Moses, theydid not slacken their diligence, insomuch thatthe Ethiopians were in danger of being re­duced to slavery and complete destruction;and at length they retired to Saba, a royalcity of Ethiopia, which Cambyses afterwardnamed Meroe, after the name of his own sis­ter. The place was to be besieged with verygreat difficulty, since it was both encom­passed by the Nile, and the other rivers As-tapus and Astaborus, made it a very difficultthing for such as attempted to pass over them;for the city was situate in a retired place, andwas inhabited after the manner of an island,being encompassed with a strong wall, andhaving the rivers to guard them from theirenemies; and having great ramparts, betweenthe wall and rivers, insomuch, that when thewaters come with the greatest violence it cannever be drowned, which ramparts make itnext to impossible, for even such as havepassed over the rivers, to take the city. How­ever, while Moses was uneasy at the army'slying idle, (for the enemy durst not come toa battle,) this accident happened: Tharbis,the daughter of the king of the Ethiopians,happened to see Moses, as he led the armynear to the walls, and fought with great cou­rage; and admiring the subtilty of his un­dertakings, and believing him to be the authorof the Egyptians' success, when they had be­fore despaired of recovering their liberty, andto be the occasion of the great danger thatthe Ethiopians were in, when they had be­fore boasted of their great achievements, shefell deeply in love with him, and, upon theprevalency of that passion, sent to him themost faithful of all her servants to discoursewith him about their marriage. He hereuponaccepted the offer, on condition she wouldprocure the delivering up of the city, andgave her the assurance of an oath to take herto his wife; and that when he had once takenpossession of the city, he would not break hisoath to her. No sooner was the agreementmade, but it took effect immediately; andwhen Moses had cut off* the Ethiopians, he
gave thanks to God, and having consummatedis marriage, led the Egyptians back to theirland.


CHAP. XI.


OF MOSES S FLIGHT OUT OF EGYPT INTO MIDIAN.
NOW the Egyptians, after they had beenpreserved by Moses, entertained anhatred to him, and were very eager in effect­ing their designs against him, and suspectingthat he would take occasion, from his goodsuccess, to raise a sedition, and bring innova­tions into Egypt, they told the king he oughtto be slain. The king had also some inten­tions of the same nature, and this as well outof envy at his glorious expedition at the headof his army, as out of fear at being broughtlow by him, and being instigated by the sa­cred scribes, he was ready to undertake tokill Moses; but when he had learned before­hand what plots there were against him, hewent away privately; and because the publicroads were watched, he took his flight throughthe deserts, and where his enemies could notsuspect he would travel; and though destituteof food, he went on, and despised that diffi­culty courageously; and when he came tothe city Midian, which lay upon the Red Sea,and was so denominated from one of Abra­ham's sons by Keturah, he sat upon a certainwell, and rested himself there after his labo­rious journey, and the affliction he had beenin. It was not far from the city, and the timeof the day was noon, where he had an occa­sion offered him, by the custom of the coun­try, of doing what recommended his virtue,and afforded him an opportunity of betteringhis circumstances.
For that country having but little water,the shepherds used to seize on the wells be­fore others came, lest their flocks should wantwater, and lest it should be spent by othersbefore they came. There were now come,therefore, to this well, seven virgin sisters, thedaughters of Raguel, a priest, and one thoughtworthy by the people of the country of greathonour: these virgins, who took care of theirfather's flock, which sort of work it was cus­tomary and very familiar for women to do inthe country of the Troglodytes, came first ofall, and drew water out of the well in a quan­tity sufficient for their flocks into troughs,which were made for the reception of thatwater: but the shepherds came upon the







OCR Output








54 [book II ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


make a long lamentation for him; and weare in affliction both by calamity of the deathof our brother, and the miserable state of ouraged father. We are now, therefore, cometo buy corn; having intrusted the care of ourfather, and the provision of our family to Ben­jamin, our youngest brother; and if thousendest to our house thou mayest learn whe­ther we are guilty of the least falsehood inwhat we say."
Thus did Reubel endeavour to persuadeJoseph to have a better opinion of them; butwhen he had learned that Jacob was alive,and that his brother was not destroyed bythem, he, for the present, put them in prison;as intending to examine more into their affairswhen he should be at leisure. But on thethird day he brought them out, and said tothem, "Since you constantly affirm, that youare not come to do any harm to the king'saffairs; that you are brethren, and sons ofthe father whom you named; you will satisfyme of the truth of what you say, if you leaveone of your company with me, who shallsuffer no injury here; and if, when you havecarried corn to your father, you will come tome again, and bring your brother, whom yousay you left there, along with you, this shallbe esteemed an assurance of the truth ofwhat you have told me." Hereupon theywere in greater grief than before; they wept,and perpetually deplored one among anotherthe calamity of Joseph; and said, they werefallen into this misery as a punishment in­flicted by God for the evil contrivances theyhad against him. And Reubel reproachedthem for their too late repentance, whenceno profit arose to Joseph; and earnestly ex­horted them to bear with patience whateverthey suffered, since it was done by God inway of punishment on his account. Thusthey spake to one another, not imagining thatJoseph understood their language. A generalsadness also seized on them at Reubel'swords, and a repentance for what they had


done; and they condemned the wickednessthey had perpetrated, for which they judgedthey were justly punished by God. JNowwhen Joseph saw that they were in this dis­tress, he was so affected that he burst intotears; but not being willing that they shouldtake notice of him, he retired, and after awhile came to them again; and takingSimeon,* in order to his being a pledge forhis brethren's return; he bid them take thecorn they had bought, and go their way. Healso commanded his steward privily to putthe money which they had brought withthem for the purchase of corn, into theirsacks,f and to dismiss them therewith, whodid as he was commanded.
When Jacob's sons were come into theland of Canaan, they told their father whathad happened to them in Egypt; and thatthey were taken to have come thither asspies upon the king; how they said theywere brethren, and had left their eleventhbrother with their father, but were not be­lieved; and that they had left Simeon withthe governor, until Benjamin should gothither, and be a testimonial of the truth ofwhat they had said. They then begged oftheir father to fear nothing, but to send thelad along with them; but Jacob was notpleased- with any thing his sons had done,and being grieved at the detention ofSimeon, he thought it a foolish thing to giveup Benjamin also. Neither did he yield toReubel's persuasion, though he said that thegrandfather might, in way of requital, kill hisown sons, in case any harm came to Benja­min in the journey. So they were distrestand knew not what to do. Nay, there wasanother accident that still disturbed themmore: the money that was found hidden intheir sacks of corn. Yet when the corn theyhad brought failed them, and when the faminestill afflicted them, and necessity forcedthem, Jacob did not still resolve to sendBenjamin with his brethren; although there


* The reason why Simeon might be selected out of therest for Joseph's prisoner, is plain in the Testament ofSimeon, viz. that he was one of the bitterest of all Joseph'sbrethren against him.
t There are two sorts of sacks taken notice of in thehistory of Joseph, which ought not to be confounded; onefor the corn, the other for the baggage. There are nowaggons almost through all Asia, as far as to the Indies,
every thing is carried upon beasts of burthen, in sacks ofwool, covered in the middle with leather, the better tomake resistance to water. Sacks of this sort are calledtambellit; they inclose in them their things done up inlarge parcels. It is of this kind of sacks we are to under­stand what is said here and all through this history, and notof their sacks in which they carry their corn. (Chardin.)Harmf.r, v. i. p. 429. B







OCR Output








346 [book IX. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


When Jeroboam the king had passed hislife in great happiness, and had ruled fortyyears,* he died, and was buried in Samaria;and his son Zechariah took the kingdom.After the same manner did Uzziah, the sonof Amaziah, begin to reign over the two tribesin Jerusalem in the fourteenth year of thereign of Jeroboam. He was a good man, andby nature magnanimous, and very laboriousin taking care of the affairs of his kingdom.He made an expedition against the Philis­tines, and overcame them in battle, and tookthe cities of Gath and Jabneh, and brakedown their walls. After which expeditionhe assaulted those Arabs that adjoined toEgypt . He also built a city upon the RedSea, and put a garrison in it; and, havingoverthrown the Ammonites, and appointedthat they should pay tribute, he subdued allthe countries as far as to the bounds of Egypt;and then began to take care of Jerusalem,for the rest of his life. For he rebuilt andrepaired all those parts of the wall whichhad either fallen down by length of time, orby the carelessness of his predecessors; aswell as all that part which had been throwndown by the king of Israel, when he took hisfather Amaziah prisoner,! and entered withhim into the city. Moreover he built a greatmany towers, of a hundred *and fifty cubitshigh; and built walled towns in desert places,and put garrisons into them, and dug manychannels for conveyance of water. He hadalso many beasts of labour, and an immensenumber of cattle; for his country was fit for


pasturage; and being addicted to husbandry,he took care to cultivate the ground; andplanted it with all sorts of plants, and sowedit with all sorts of seeds. He had also abouthim an army composed of three hundred andseventy thousand chosen men, who weregoverned by two thousand general; officers,and captains of thousands, who were men ofvalour, and of unconquerable strength. Healso divided his whole army into bands, andarmed them; giving every one a sword, withbrazen bucklers and breast-plates, with bowsand slings; and besides these, he made forthem many engines of war,J for besieging ofcities; such as cast stones and darts, withgrapplers, and other instruments of thatsort .
While Uzziah|| was in this state, and ma­king preparations for futurity, he was cor­rupted in his mind by pride,§ and becameinsolent; on account of that abundance whichhe had of things that will soon perish; anddespised that power which is of eternal du­ration, which consisted in piety towardsGod, and in the observance of his laws: so hefell by occasion of the success of his affairs,and was carried headlong into those sins ofhis fathers, which the splendour of that pros-
Eerity he enjoyed, and the glorious actionse had done, led him into: while he wasunable to govern himself well about them.Accordingly when a remarkable day wascome, and a general festival was to be cele­brated, he put on the holy garment, andwent into the temple to offer incense to God


and Deaths of the prophets, (who goes under the name ofEpiphanus) tells us, returning from Nineveh, and beingashamed to see that his prediction was not fulfilled, heretired with his mother to the city of Tyre, where helived in the plain of Sear, until he died, and was buriedin the cave of Cenezeus, judge of Israel; but who theauthor means by Cenezeus, unless it be Caleb, who isfrequently surnamed the Kenezite, (though we do notread of his being ever a judge of Israel,) or rather Othniel,who was the son of Kenez, and one that judged Israel,we cannot tell. Calmet's Dictionary, under the wordJonah; and Howell's History, in the notes. B.
* Forty-one years, Hebrew, from an. 826 to 785 B. C.
t See chap. ix.
I This is the first time that we read of any machine,either for besieging or defending towns; which is plainlythe reason why sieges were of so long a continuance be­fore the invention of these. Homer, who is the mostancient Greek writer we know of that treats of sieges,describes a kind of entrenchment, though a poor one,some lines of circumvallation, and a ditch with palisades;
but we hear not one word of .any machines, such as theballistae and the catapultae, which were used for hurlingstones and throwing darts; and therefore we need lesswonder, that the famous siege of Troy continued so long.Sardanapalus king of Assyria maintained himself in Ninevehfor seven years, because the besiegers, as Diodorus ob­serves, lib. 2. wanted such engines as were fit for de­molishing and taking of cities, they being not then invented.Uzziah was certainly the first inventor of them; andtherefore it is said, that for these and other warlike pre­parations, his name was spread abroad. From this timethey began to be employed, both in attacking and de­fending towns; and therefore we find the prophet Ezekieldescribing the future sieges of Jerusalem and Tyre, wherehe makes mention of battering-rams, and engines of war,or, as it should be rendered, machines of cords, which, inall probability, were what latter ages called their ballisticand catapultae. Calmet's Dissertation sifr la milice desanciens Hebreux. B.
II About an. 766.
§ 2 Cbron. xxvi. 16. et sequel.







OCR Output








534 [book xiv. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


encamped at the north wall of the city; beingnow an army of eleven legions, armed men onfoot, and six thousand horsemen, with otherauxiliaries out of •Syria. The generals weretwo, viz. Sosius, sent by Antony, to assist He­rod; and Herod, on his own account, in orderto take the government from Antigonus, whowas declared an enemy at Rome; and thathe might himself be king, according to thedecree of the senate.
Now the Jews that were enclosed withinthe walls of the city, fought against Herodwith great alacrity and zeal; for the wholenation was gathered together: they also gaveout many prophecies respecting the temple,and many things agreeable to the people; asif God would deliver them out of the dangersthey were in. They had also carried offwhat was out of the city, that they might notleave any thing to afford sustenance for men,or for beasts; and by private robberies theymade the want of necessaries greater. WhenHerod understood this, he opposed ambushesin the fittest places against their private rob­beries; and sent legions of armed men tobring in provisions; and that from remoteplaces: so that in a little time they had greatplenty. Now the three bulwarks were easilyerected; because so many hands were conti­nually at work upon them. For it was sum­mer time, and there was nothing to hinderthem in raising their works, neither from theair nor from the workmen. So they broughttheir engines to bear, and shook the wall ofthe city, and tried all manner of ways to getin. Yet did not these within discover anyfear: but they also contrived not a few en­gines, to oppose those of the besiegers. Theyalso sallied out, and burnt not only those en­gines that were not yet perfected, but thosethat were: and when they came hand to handtheir attempts were not less bold than thoseof the Romans; though they were inferior tothem in skill. They also erected new works,when the former were ruined; and makingmines under ground, they met each other, andfought there: and making use of brutish cou­rage, rather than of prudent valour, they per­sisted in this war to the very last. And thisthey did while a mighty army lay round aboutthetn; and while they were distressed byfamine, and the want of necessaries: for thishappened to be a sabbatic year. The first


that scaled the walls were twenty chosenmen: the next were Sosius's centurions, t orthe first wall was taken in forty days; and thesecond in fifteen more: when some of thecloisters that were about the temple wereburnt: which Herod gave out to have beenburnt by Antigonus, in order to expose him tothe hatred of the Jews. And when the outercourt of the temple, and the lower city, weretaken, the Jews fled into the inner court of thetemple, and into the upper city. But now fear­ing lest the Romans should prevent them fromoffering their daily sacrifices to God, they sentan ambassage, and desired that they wouldonly permit them to bring in beasts for sa­crifices. This Herod granted: hoping theywere going to yield. But when he saw thatthey did nothing of what he supposed, butbitterly opposed him, in order to preserve thekingdom to Antigonus, he made an assaultupon the city, and took it by storm. And nowall parts were full of those that were slain, bythe rage of the Romans at the long durationof the siege; and by the zeal of the Jewsthat were on Herod's side; who were notwilling to leave one of their adversaries alive.So they were murdered continually in thenarrow streets, and in the houses by crowds,and as they were fleeing to the temple forshelter; and there was no pity taken of eitherinfants or the aged; nor did they spare somuch as the weaker sex. Nay, although theking sent about and besought them to sparethe people, yet nobody restrained their handfrom slaughter; but, as if they were a com­pany of madmen, they fell upon persons of allages, without distinction. And then Anti­gonus, without regard to either his past orpresent circumstances, came down from thecitadel, and fell down at the feet of Sosius.He, however, took no pity of him, in thechange of his fortune; but insulted him be­yond measure, and called him * Antigone. Yet .did not he treat him as if he were a woman,by letting him go at liberty; but put him intobonds, and kept him in close custody.
And now Herod had overcome his enemies,his care was to govern those foreigners whohad been his assistants. For the crowd ofstrangers rushed to see the temple, and thesacred things it contained. But the kingthinking a victory to be a more severe al-
* Antigone is the name of a woman.







OCR Output








AN. 1183.] 179 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


law. And when this was done, Booz marriedRuth, and they had a son within a year'stime. Naomi was herself a nurse to hischild; and by the advice of the women call­ed him Obed, as being to be brought up inorder to be subservient to her in her old age.For Obed in the Hebrew dialect signifies aservant. The son of Obed was Jesse; andking David was his son,* who left his domi­nions to his sons for one and twenty gene­rations. I was therefore obliged to relatethis history of Ruth, because I had a mind todemonstrate the power of God; who, with­out difficulty, can raise those that are ofordinary parentage to dignity and splendour,to which he advanced David, though hewere born of such mean parents.


CHAP. X.


OF THE BIRTH OF SAMUEL, AND HIS PREDICTION OF THECALAMITY THAT BEFEL THE SONS OF ELI.
AND now, upon the ill state of the af­fairs of the Hebrews, they made waragain upon the Philistines. The occasionwas this: Eli the high-priest had two sons,Hophni and Phineas, who were guilty ofinjustice towards men, and of impiety to­wards God; and abstained from no sort ofwickedness. Some of their gifts they carriedoft", as belonging to the honourable employ­ment they had: others of them they tookaway by violence. They also were guilty ofimpurity with the women that came to wor­ship God at the tabernacle. Nay, the wholecourse of their life, was no better than ty-ranny.f Their father therefore was angry atthem for such wickedness, and expected thatGod would suddenly inflict his punishmentsupon them, for what they had done. Themultitude took it heinously also. And assoon as God had foretold what calamitywould befall Eli's sons, which he did both toEli himself, and to Samuel the prophet, who
the shoe as a token of investiture, Castell, Lex. Polyg.col. 2342. mentions that the Emperor of the Ahyssiniansused the casting of a shoe as a sign of dominion. SeePsalm lx. 8. To these instances the following may pro­perly be added; "Childebert the Second was fifteenyears old, when Gontram his uncle declared he was ofage, and capable of governing by himself. I have put"gays he, " this Javelin into thy hands, as a token that IVOL. I.—nos. 15 & 16.


was yet but a child, he openly shewed hissorrow for his son's destruction.
I will first despatch what I have to sayabout the prophet Samuel; and after thatwill proceed to speak of the sons of Eli, andthe miseries which they brought upon thewhole people of the Hebrews. Elcanah, aLevite, one of a middling condition among hisfellow citizens, and one that dwelt at Rama-thaim, a city of the tribe of Ephraim, mar­ried two wives, Hannah, and Peninnah. Hehad children by the latter, but he loved theother best, although she were barren.Now Elcanah came with his wives to thecity Shiloh, to sacrifice; for there it was thatthe tabernacle of God was fixed. Now afterhe had sacrificed, he distributed at thatfestival portions of the flesh to his wives andchildren; and when Hannah saw the otherwife's children round about their mother, sheburst into tears, on account of her barren­ness; and, suffering her grief to prevail overher husband's consolations, she went to thetabernacle to beseech God to make her amother, and to vow to consecrate the firstson she should bear to the service of God;and this in such a way that his manner ofliving should not be like that of ordinarymen. And as she continued at her prayers along time, Eli the high-priest who sat beforethe tabernacle, bade her go away: thinkingshe had been disordered with wine; butwhen she said she had drank water, but wasin sorrow for want of children, and was be­seeching God for them: he exhorted her tobe of good cheer, and told her that Godwould grant her request.J
So she came to her husband full of hope,and ate her meal with gladness. And whenthey returned to their own country, she foundherself pregnant, and they had a son born tothem; to whom they gave the name of Samu­el, which may be styled one that was askedof God. They therefore came to the taber­nacle to offer sacrifice for the birth of thechild, and brought their tithes with them; but
have given thee all my kingdom." And then turning to­wards the assembly, he added, " You see that my sonChildebert has become a man. Obey him." Montes­quieu, Spirit of Lares, vol. i. p. 361. B.
* Ruth iv. 17.
t 1 Sam. ii. 12—17.
j 1 Sam. i. 17.







OCR Output








142 [book v. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


BOOK V.


Containing an Interval of Four Hundred and Seventy-six Years.


FROM THE DEATH OF MOSES TO THE DEATH OF ELI.


CHAP. I.
OF THE WAR CARRIED ON BY JOSHUA AGAINST TJIE CA-NAANITES, AND THE SIGNAL SUCCESSES OF THE HEBREWS.
WHEN Moses had been taken fromamong men, in the manner alreadydescribed, and when all the solemnities be­longing to the mourning for him were finished,Joshua commanded the multitude to getthemselves ready for an expedition. He alsosent spies to Jericho,* to discover what forcesthey had, and what were their intentions.But he put his camp in order, as intendingto pass over Jordan at a proper season. Andcalling to him the rulers of the tribe of Reu-


bel, and the governors of ^he tribe of Gad,and the half tribe of Manasseh, (for half of thistribe had been permitted to have their habi­tation in the country of the Amorites, whichwas thet seventh part of the land of Canaan;)he put them in mind what they had promisedMoses, and exhorted them that for the sakeof the care that Moses had taken of them,who had never been weary of taking painsfor them, no not when he was dying; and forthe sake of the public welfare, they wouldprepare themselves, and readily perform whatthey had promised. So he took fifty thousandof them, and marched with them, from Abilato Jordan, sixty furlongs.


* Josh. ii. 1. Jericho was a city of Canaan, whichafterwards fell to the lot of the tribe of Benjamin, aboutseven leagues distant from Jerusalem, and two from Jor­dan. Moses calls it likewise the city of palm-tftes, Deut.xxxiv. 3. because there were great numbers of them inthe plains of Jericho; and not only of palm-trees, but asJosephus tells us, (Antiq. lib. 4. c. 5.) balsam-trees like­wise, which produced the precious liquor in such highesteem among the ancients. The plain of Jericho waswatered with a rivulet, which was formerly salt and bitter,but was afterward sweetened by the prophet Elisha, 2Kings ii. 21, 22; whereupon the adjacent country, whichwas watered by it, became not only one of the most agree­able, but most fertile spots in all that country. As to thecityitself, after it was destroyed by Joshua, it was in thedays of Ahab, king of Israel, rebuilt by Hiel the Bethelite,1 Kings xvi. 24. and in the times of the last kings of Ju-dea, yielded to none except Jerusalem. For it was adornedwith a royal palace, wherein Herod the Great died; withan hippodromus, or place where the Jewish nobilitylearned to ride the great horse, and other arts of chivalry,with an amphitheatre, and other magnificent buildings ; butduring the siege of Jerusalem, the treachery of its inhab­itants provoked the Romans to destroy it. After the siegewas over, there was another city built, but not upon thesame place where the two former stood, for the ruins ofthem are seen to this day. Of what account and bigness
it was we have no certain information; but some latertravellers inform us, that at present it is no more than apoor nasty village of the Arabs. Well's Geog. of theOld and jvea; Testament; and MaundreWs Journey fromAleppo. B.
f The Amorites were one of the seven nations of Ca­naan. Hence Reland is willing to suppose, that Josephusdid not here mean that their land beyond Jordan was aseventh part of the whole land of Canaan, but meant theAmorites as a seventh nation. His reason is, that Jose­phus, as well as our Bible, generally distinguish the landbeyond Jordan, from the land of Canaan. Nor can it bedenied, that in strictness they were different. Yet aftertwo tribes and a half of the twelve tribes came to inheritit, it might in a general way be included under the land ofCanaan, Palestine, or Judea. Of which we have a clearexample before us in Josephus, whose words evidentlyimply that, taking the whole land of Canaan, or that in­habited by all the twelve tribes together, and parting itinto seven parts; the part beyond Jordan was in quantityof ground one seventh of the whole. And this agreeswith Reland's map of that country. Although this landbeyond Jordan was so peculiarly fruitful, and good forpasturage, as the two tribes and a half took notice. Numb,xxxii. 1, 4, 16. that it maintained about a fifth part of thewhole people.







OCR Output








an. 1057.] 265 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


the king had commanded that he should beadmitted, he came in, and asked him, whetherhe had ordained Adonijah to be king,* anddelivered the government to him or not? forthat he had made a splendid supper, and in­vited all his sons, except Solomon; as alsothat he had invited Joab, the captain of thehost, and Abiathar the high-priest, who werefeasting with applauses, and many joyfulsounds of instruments, and wishing that thekingdom might last for ever. "But," saidNathan, "he hath not invited me, nor Zadokthe high-priest, nor Benaiah the captain ofthe guards. And it is but fit that all shouldknow whether this be done by thy approba­tion or not." When Nathan had said thus,the king commanded that they should callBathsheba to him; for she had gone out ofthe room when the prophet came. And whenBathsheba was come, David said, "I swearby Almighty God, that thy son Solomon shallcertainly be king, as I formerly swore; andthat he shall sit upon my throne this veryday." So Bathsheba worshipped him, andwished him a long life: and the king sent forZadok the high-priest, and Benaiah the cap­tain of the guards; and when they were come,he ordered them to take with them Nathanthe prophet, and all the armed men about thepalace, and to set his son Solomon upon theking's mule; and so carry him out of the cityto the fountain called Gihon,f and to anointhim there with the holy oil, and to make himking. This he charged Zadok the high-priest, and Nathan the prophet to do; andcommanded them to follow Solomon throughthe midst of the city, and to sound the trutn-


pets, and wish aloud, that "Solomon theking might sit upon the royal throne forever," that so all the people might know thathe was ordained king by his father. He alsogave Solomon a charge concerning his go­vernment, to rule the whole nation of the He­brews, and particularly the tribe of Judah,righteously. And when Benaiah had prayedto God to be favourable to Solomon, they setSolomon upon the mule4 and brought himout of the city to the fountain, and anointedhim with the oil: and brought him into thecity again, with acclamations and wishesthat his kingdom might continue a longtime. And when they had introduced himinto the king's house, they set him upon thethrone. Whereupon all the people betookthemselves to make merry, and to celebratea festival; dancing, and delighting themselveswith musical pipes, till both the earth andthe air echoed|| with the multitude of theinstruments of music.
Now when Adonijah and his guests per­ceived this noise, they were in disorder; andJoab, the captain of the host, said he was notpleased with these echoes, and the sound ofthese trumpets. And when supper was set be­fore them, nobody tasted of it; but they wereall very thoughtful, what should be the mat­ter. Then Jonathan, the son of Abiathar, thehigh-priest, came running to them; and whenAdonijah saw the young man gladly, and saidto him, that he was a good messenger, he de­clared the whole matter about Solomon, andthe determination of king David. Hereuponboth Adonijah and all his guests rose hastilyfrom the feast, and every one fled to their


* In 2 Sam. vii. 12. God had promised David by Na­than, that he would set upon his throne a son that shouldproceed from him, which plainly signified, that none ofhis sons already born were to be the person; and in1 Chron. xxii. 9, &c. he declared by the same prophet,that after his father, Solomon should reign, and build hima house. This Adonijah could not but know; and there­fore his setting himself against the decree of heaven madehis sin the greater. Patrick's Commentary. B.
t Some commentators are of opinion, that Gihon wasthe same with the fountain of Siloam; but this is a grossmistake, since Gihon was manifestly to the west, andSiloam to the east of Jerusalem. There is little or nocertainty likewise in the notions of some Rabbins, whopretend that, in ancient times, kings were always anointedby the side of a fountain, by way of good omen, or thatthe perpetual running of the stream might be an emblem ofthe perpetuity of the king's reign. In the history of Saul,who was their first king, and of David, who was three
times anointed, we find no mention made of any springor fountain. As these fountains however were places ofgreat concourse, (for there were not many in Jerusalem,)the chief reason, we may imagine, why David orderedSolomon to be anointed at one of these, was, that the thingmight be done as publicly, and in the presence of as manyspectators as possible. Patrick's Commentary. B.
J All the rest of David's sons were wont to ride uponmules, when they went abroad, 2 Sam. xiii. 29. but Dnvidhad a mule peculiar to himself, and the mounting Solo­mon upon it was a sufficient declaration in his favour.For, as it was capital, (according to Maimonides,) to rideupon the king's mule, or sit on his throne, or handle hitsceptre without his order; so, on the contrary, to havethe honour to ride upon the king's horse, by his appoint­ment, was accounted the highest dignity among the Per­sians, as appears by the story of Mordecai in the book ofEsther. Calmet's Commentary. B.
I I 1 Kings i. 40.







OCR Output








452 [book XII. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


and irritated him against Judas, and accusedhim; alleging that he had undergone manymiseries by his means; and that he would domore mischief unless he were prevented, andbrought to punishment; which must be doneby sending a powerful force against him.
So Demetrius, being already of opinionthat it would be a thing pernicious to hisown affairs to overlook Judas, now he wasbecoming so great, sent against him Nicanor,the most faithful of all his friends. For he itwas who fled away with him from the city ofRome. He also gave him as many forces as hethought sufficient for him to conquer Judas;and bade him not to spare the nation at all.When Nicanor was come to Jerusalem, hedid not resolve to fight Judas immediately;but judged it better to get him into his powerby treachery.* So he sent a pacific message,and said, there was no manner of necessityfor them to fight, and hazard themselves; andthat he would give him his oath that he woulddo him no harm. For that he only came withsome friends, in order to let him know whatking Demetrius's intentions were; and whatopinion he had of their nation. When Nica­nor had delivered this message, Judas and hisbrethren complied with him; and, suspectingno deceit, they gave him assurances of friend­ship, and received Nicanor and his army.But while he was saluting Judas, and theywere talking together, he gave a certain signalto his troops; upon which they were to seizeupon Judas. But he perceived the treachery,and ran back to his own soldiers, and fledaway with them. So upon this discovery ofhis purpose, and of the snares laid for Judas,Nicanor determined to make open war withhim, and gathered his army together, andprepared for fighting him; and upon joiningbattle with him at a certain village calledCapharsalama, hef beat Judas, and forcedhim to flee to that citadel, which was at Jeru­salem.
When Nicanor came down from the citadelunto the temple, some of the priests and


elders met him. and saluted him; and shewedhim the sacrifices which they said theyoffered to God for the king. Upon this heblasphemed; and threatened them, that un­less the people would deliver up Judas tohim, upon his return, he would pull down thetemple.J And when he had thus threatenedthem, he departed from Jerusalem. But thepriests fell into tears, out of grief at what hehad said; and besought God to deliver themfrom their enemies. Now Nicanor, when hewas gone out of Jerusalem, and was at a cer­tain village called Bethoron, he there pitchedhis camp; another army out of Syria havingjoined him. And Judas pitched his camp atAdasa, another village, which was thirty fur­longs distant from Bethoron; having no morethan ||one thousand soldiers. And when hehad encouraged them not to be dismayed atthe multitude of their enemies, nor to regardhow many they were against whom they weregoing to fight; but to consider who theythemselves were; and for what great re­wards they hazarded themselves, and toattack the enemy courageously, he led themout to fight; and joining battle with Nicanorhe overcame the enemy after a severe con­flict, and slew many of them; and at last Ni­canor himself fell, as he was fighting glori­ously. Upon his fall the army did not stay;but when they had lost their general, theywere put to flight, and threw down theirarms; Judas also pursued and slew them,and gave notice by sound of trumpet to theneighbouring villages, that he had conqueredthe enemy. Which, when the inhabitantsheard, they put on their armour hastily, andmet their enemies in the face, as they wererunning away, and slew them. Insomuchthat not one of them escaped out of thisbattle: and they were in number nine thou­sand. This victory happened on the thir­teenth day of that month, which by the Jewsis called Adar, and by the Macedonians, Dys-trus. And the Jews thereon ^celebrate thisvictory every year; and esteem it to be a


* 1 Mace. vii. 27.
f Josephus's copies must have been corrupted, whenthey here give the victory to Nicanor; contrary to thewords following: which imply that he who was beaten,fled into the citadel; which belonged to the city of David,or to mount Sion, and was in the possession of Nicanor'sgarrison, and not of Judas's. As also it is contrary to theexpress words of Josephus's original author, 1 Mace. vii.
32. who sayR. that Nicanor lost about 6000 men, and fledto the city of David.
I 2 Mace. xiv. 33.
I! Three thousand, see 1 Mace. vii. 40.
§ Take Hudson's and Spanheim's notes on this place:"This festival for a victory was annually celebrated bythe Jews, in memory of the conquest of Nicanor by Judas,1 Mace. vii. 49. on the 13th of Adar. So do we read ip







OCR Output








358 [book X. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


was in a great dread at this calamity; andbeing in fear for his whole array, he fled withthe rest of his forces to his own kingdom,and to his city Nineveh.* And when he hadabode there a little while, he was treache­rously assaulted, and died by the hands ofhis elder sons fAdrammeleeh and Sarasar:and was slain in his own temple, which wascalled Araske. Now these sons of his weredriven away on account of the murder oftheir father by the citizens* and went intoArmenia: while Assarachoddas took thekingdom of Sennacherib." And this provedto be the conclusion of this Assyrian expedi­tion against the people of Jerusalem.
CHAP. II.
as hezekiah's indisposition, the prolongation of
HIS LIFE FOR FIFTEEN YEARS, AND THE GOING BACKOF THE SHADOW TEN DEGREES, IN CONFIRMATION OFGOD'S PROMISE.
RING Hezekiah being thus delivered,after a surprising manner, from thedread he was in, offered thank-offerings toGod, with all his people: because the de­struction of some of their enemies, and thedeparture of the rest from Jerusalem, wasentirely owing to the divine assistance. Yet,though he was very zealous and diligentabout the worship of God, he soon after fellinto a severe Jdistemper; insomuch that thephysicians despaired of him, and expected


phrase, that reconciles all the Scripture passages whereinthis terrible defeat is mentioned, and all the sentiments ofcommentators concerning it. Calmet's Dissertation sur laDefaite de l'Armee de Sennacherib. B.
* When Sennacherib was got home, after the loss ofso great an army, he demanded of some about him, Whatthe reason might be, that the irresistible God of heaven sofavoured the Jewish nation? To which he was answered,That Abraham, from whom they were descended, by sa­crificing his only son to him, had purchased his protectionto his progeny; whereupon the king replied, If that willwin him, I will spare him two of mine to gain him'to myside: which when his two sons, Sharezer and Adram-melech heard, they resolved to prevent their own deathby sacrificing him. But for all this fiction there is noother foundation, but that scarce any thing else can bethought of, that can afford any excuse for so wicked aparricide. Prideaux's Connection, anno 709. B.
t We are here to take notice, that these two sons ofSennacherib, that ran away into Armenia, became theheads of two famous families there, Arzerunii and theGenunii; of which see the particular histories in Mo»esChorenensis, the Armenian historian, page 60, 92, 93.
| Josephus, and all our copies, place the sickness of


no good issue of his sickness; as neither didhis friends. And besides the distemper it­self, there was a very melancholy circum­stance that disordered the king, which wasthe consideration that he was childless, andwas going to die, and leave his house and hisgovernment without a successor of his ownbody. So he was troubled at the thoughtsof his condition: and lamented himself, andintreated God that he would prolong his lifefor a little while, till he had some children;and not suffer him to depart this life beforehe was become a father. Hereupon Godhad mercy upon him, and accepted of hissupplication; because the trouble he wasunder at his supposed death, was not be­cause he was soon to leave the advantageshe enjoyed in the kingdom, nor did he onthat account pray that he might have alonger life afforded him; but in order tohave sons, that might receive the govern­ment after him. And so God sent Isaiahthe prophet, and commanded him to informHezekiah, that "within three days' time heshould recover from his distemper, andshould survive it fifteen years;ll and that heshould also have children." Now upon theprophet's saying this, as God had com­manded him, Hezekiah could hardly be­lieve it: both on account of the distemperhe was under, which was very sore: and byreason of the surprising nature of what wastold him; so he desired that Isaiah would
Hezekiah, after the destruction of Sennacherib's army;because it appears to have been after his first assault, ushe was going into Arabia and Egypt; where he pushedhis conquest as far as they would go: and in order todespatch his story altogether. Yet does no copy butthis of Josephus's say it was after that destruction; butonly that it happened in those days, or about that time ofHezekiah's life. Nor will the fifteen years prolongationof his life after his sickness, allow that sickness to havebeen later than the former part of the fifteenth year ofhis reign. Since chronology does not allow him in allabove twenty-nine years and a few months. Whereasthe first assault of Sennacherib was in the fourteenthyear of Hezekiah, 2 Kings xviii. 13. but the destructionof Sennacherib's army was not till the eighteenth year.There is also a promise inserted in the history of He­zekiah's sickness, which shews it to have been afterSennacherib's first assault, but before his army's destruc­tion; I mean the words of the prophet Isaiah, "I wiHdeliver thee awl this city out of the hand of the kingof Assyria, and I will defend this city to save it, for myown sake, and for my servant David's sake." 3 Kingsxx. 6. Isaiah xxxviii. 6.8 2 Kings xx. 6,6.







OCR Output








424 [BOOK XII. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


artificially contrived vessels, which the kingsent to God; that all may see how great aregard the king had for God. For he allow­ed a vast deal of expenses for these vessels;and came often to the workmen, and viewedtheir works; and suffered nothing of careless­ness or negligence to be any damage to theiroperations. And I will relate how rich theywere, as well as I am able. Although per­haps the nature of this history may not re­quire such a description: but I imagine Ishall thereby recommend the elegant stateand magnanimity of this king to those whoread this history.
And first I will describe what belongs tothe table. It was indeed in the king's mindto make this table vastly large in its dimen­sions. But then he gave order, that theyshould learn what was the magnitude of thetable which already was at Jerusalem; andhow large it was: and whether there was apossibility of making one larger than it. Andwhen he was informed how large that waswhich was already there; and that nothinghindered, but a larger might be made: hesaid, that he was willing to have one madethat should be five times as large as the pre­sent table: but his fear was, that it mightbe then useless in their sacred ministrationsby its too great largeness. For he desiredthat the gifts he presented them, should notonly be there for shew; but should be use­ful also in their sacred ministrations. Ac­cording to which reasoning, that the formertable was made of so moderate a size foruse, and not for want of gold, he resolved,that he would not exceed the former tablein largeness; but would make it exceed itin the variety and elegance of its materials.And as he was sagacious in observing thenature of all things, and in having a just no­tion of what was new and surprising; andwhere there were no sculptures, he wouldinvent such as were proper by his own skill,and would shew them to the workmen; hecommanded, that such sculptures should nowbe made; and that those which were deline­ated should be most accurately formed, by aconstant regard to their delineation.
When therefore the workmen had underta­ken to make the table, they framed it in length


* Two cubits. Aristasus; as Exod. xxy. 23. xxxvii.10- and Antiq. iii. 6.


two cubits and a half,* in breadth one cubit,and in height one cubit and a half: and theentire structure of the work was of gold.They also made a crown, of a hand breadthround it; with wave-work wreathed about it:and with an engraving which imitated a cord,and was admirably turned on its three parts:for as they were of a triangular figure, everyangle had the same disposition of its sculp­tures: that when he turned them about, thevery same form of them was turned about,without any variation. Now that part of thecrown work that was enclosed under the table,had its sculptures very beautiful: but thatpart which Went round on the outside, wasmore elaborately adorned with most beautifulornaments; because it was exposed to sight,and to the view of the spectators. For whichreason both those sides which were extantabove the rest were acute; and none of theangles appeared less than another, when thetable was turned about. Now into the cord-work thus turned, were precious stones insert­ed, in rows parallel one to the other, enclosedin golden buttons, which had ouches in them.But the parts that were on the side of thecrown, and were exposed to the sight, wereadorned with a row of oval figures obliquelyplaced, of the most excellent sort of preciousstones; which imitated rods laid close, andencompassed the table round about. But un­der these oval figures, thus engraven, theworkmen had put a crown all round it;where the nature of all sorts of fruit wasrepresented, by the work of the engraver;insomuch that the bunches of grapes hung up.And when they had made the stones to re­present all the aforementioned kinds of fruits,and each in its proper colour; they madethem fast with gold round the whole table.The like dispositions of the oval figures, andof the engraved rods, was framed under thecrown; that the table might on each sideshew the same appearance of variety, andelegance of its ornaments; that so neither theposition of the wave-work, nor of the cro"Wnmight be different; although the table wereturned on the other side; but that the pros­pect of the same artificial contrivances mightbe extended as far as the feet. For therewas made a plate of gold, four fingers broad,through the entire breadth of the table; intowhich they inserted the feet; and then fast­







OCR Output








AUTHOR'S PREFACE. k


these books to apply their minds to God; and to examine the mind of our legislator,whether he hath not understood his nature in a manner worthy of him, and hath not everascribed to him such operations as become his power, and hath not preserved his writingsfrom those indecent fables which others have framed, although, by the great distance of timewhen he lived, he might have securely forged such falsehoods. For he lived * two thousandyears ago. At which vast distance of ages, the poets themselves have not been so hardy as tofix even the generations of their gods; much less the actions of their men, or their own laws.As I proceed, therefore, I shall accurately describe what is contained in our records, inthe order of time that belongs to them. For I have already promised so to do throughoutthis undertaking; and this without adding any thing to what is therein contained, or takingaway any thing therefrom.
But because almost all our constitution depends on the wisdom of Moses our legislator, I
I cannot avoid the saying somewhat concerning him before-hand, though I shall do it briefly.
I mean because otherwise those that read my books may wonder how it comes to pass, thatmy discourse, which promises an account of laws and historical facts, contains so much ofphilosophy. The reader is therefore to know, that Moses deemed it exceedingly necessary,that he who would conduct his own life well, and give laws to others, in the first place shouldconsider the divine nature; and, upon the contemplation of God's operations, should therebyimitate the best of all patterns, so far as it is possible for human nature to do, and to en­deavour to follow after it; neither could the legislator himself have a right mind, withoutsuch a contemplation, nor would any thing he should write tend to the promotion of virtuein his readers: I mean unless he be taught first of all, that God is the father and lord of allthings, and sees all things, and that thence he bestows a happy life upon those that followhim; but plunges such as do not walk in the paths of virtue into inevitable miseries. Nowwhen Moses was desirous to teach this lesson to his countrymen, he did not begin theestablishment of his laws after the same manner that other legislators did: I mean uponcontracts, and other rights between one man and another; but by raising their minds up­wards to regard God, and his creation of the world; and by persuading them that men arethe most excellent of the creatures of God upon earth. Now when once he had broughtthem to submit to religion, he easily persuaded them to submit in all other things. For as toother legislators, they followed fables; and by their discourses transferred the most reproach­ful of human vices unto the gods, and so afforded wicked men the most plausible excuses fortheir crimes. But as for our legislator, when he had once demonstrated that God waspossessed of perfect virtue, he supposed that men also ought to strive after the participationof it. And on those who did not so think and so believe, he inflicted the severest punishment.I therefore exhort my readers to examine the whole of this undertaking in that view; forthereby it will appear to them that there is nothing therein disagreeable either to themajesty of God, or to his love to mankind. For all things have here a reference to the


* Of Josephus's chronology both here and hereafter, the reader is not to expect much account in these Notes.However, he is to observe, that though the numbers at the beginning of every book are translations from the lasteditions of Josephus, and so imperfect; yet all those in the margin are my own numbers, as they are more perfectlydiscovered and stated in the chronology, and my chronological table, published A. D. 1721. Josephus often correctedhis own chronology, and for want of Ptolemy's Canon, and of the knowledge of the years of Jubilee, which are sureguides to me in this matter, was often mistaken ; I choose rather to give the reader in the margin the true chronologythan to perplex him with such an one as we know to be often very erroneous.







OCR Output








av. 1532.] 105 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


at all injured her husband, and to wish thatif she had violated her chastity, her rightthigh might be put out of joint, that her bellymight swell, and that she might die thus: butthat if her husband, by the violence of hisaffection, and of the jealousy which arosefrom it, had been rashly moved to this sus­picion, that she might bear a male child onthe tenth month. Now when these oaths wereover, the priest wiped the name of God outof the parchment, and wrung the water intoa vial. He also took up some dust out of thetemple, if any happened to be there, and puta little of it into the vial, and gave it her todrink, whereupon the woman, if she were un­justly accused, conceived a child, and broughtit to perfection; but if she had broken herfaith of wedlock to her husband, and hadsworn falsely before God, she died in a re­proachful manner:* her thigh fell off fromher, and her belly swelled with a dropsy:and these are the ceremonies about sacrifices,and about the purifications thereto belong­ing, which Moses provided for his country­men. He also prescribed the following lawsto them.
CHAP. XII.
OF SEVERAL LAWS INSTITUTED BY MOSES.
AS for adultery, Moses forbade it entirely,as esteeming it a happy thing that menshould be wise in the affairs of wedlock, andthat it was profitable both to cities and fami­lies that children should be known to be genu­ine. He also abhorred a man's connectionwith his mother, father's wife, aunt, sister, orson's wife, as instances of abominable wick­edness. He also forbade a man to lie withhis wife when she was defiled; and not tocome near brute beasts; nor to approve ofthe lying with a male in order to hunt afterunlawful pleasures on account of beauty. Tothose which were guilty of such insolent be­haviour, he' ordained death for their punish­


ment.


/;


; »iiii ii


.* . Numb, y., 27. • .
"f These words of Josephus are. remarkable, that thelawgiver of the Jews required of the priests a double de­gree otf purity, in comparison of that required of the peo­ple-, of- which he gives several instances. This was thecase also among the first Christians of the eletfgy, in com­parison of the laity, as the apostolical constitutions andcanons every where inform us.


As for the priests, he prescribed to themalso a double degree of purity;f for he re­strained them in the foregoing instances, andalso forbade them to marry a harlot, a slave,or a captive, and such as got their living bycheating trades, and by keeping inns; as alsoa woman parted from her husband on anyoccasion whatsoever. Nay, he did not thinkit proper for the high-priest to marry even thewidow of one that was dead, though he al­lowed that to the priests; but he permittedhim only to marry a virgin, and to retain her;whence it is that the high-priest is not to ap­proach one that is dead,J although the restare not prohibited from coming near to theirbrethren, parents, or children, when they aredead, but they are to be unblemished in allrespects. He ordered that the priests, whohad any blemish, should have his portion in­deed among the priests; but he forbade himto ascend the altar, or to enter into the holyhouse. He also enjoined them not only toobserve purity in their sacred ministrations,but in their daily conversation, that it mightbe unblameable also; and on this account itis, that those who wear the sacerdotal gar­ments are without spot, and eminent for theirpurity and sobriety. Nor are they permittedto drink wine so long as they wear those gar-ments.|| Moreover, they offer sacrifices thatare entire, and have no defect whatever.
Moses gave them all these presents, beingsuch as were observed during his own lifetime: but though they lived now in the wil­derness, yet did he make provision how theymight observe the same laws when they shouldhave taken the land of Canaan. He gave thenrest to the land from ploughing and plantingevery seventh year, as he had prescribed tothem to rest from working every seventh day,and ordered that then what grew of its ownaccord out of the earth should in commonbelong to all that pleased to use it, makingno distinction in that respect between theirown countrymen and foreigners; and he or­dained that they should do the same after


t Levit. xxi. 11.
11 We must here note with Reland, that the preceptgiven to the priests of not drinking wine, while they worethe s'acred: garments, is equivalent to their abstinence fromit while they ministered in the temple, because they thsnonly wore those sacred garments, which were laid upthere from one time of ministration to another.







OCR Output








472 [book XIII. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


pho, when he should come against them.He then called the people together into thetemple; and thence began thus to encouragethem:
"O my countrymen, you are not ignorantthat our father, myself, and my brethren, haveventured to hazard our lives, and that wil­lingly, for the recovery of your liberty. Since1 have therefore such plenty of examples be­fore me, and we of our family have deter­mined with ourselves to die for our laws, andour divine worship; there shall no terror beso great as to banish this resolution from oursouls; nor to introduce in its place a love oflife, and a contempt of glory. Do you there­fore follow me with alacrity, whithersoever Ishall lead you; as not destitute of such acaptain as is willing to suffer, and to do thegreatest things for you. For neither am Ibetter than my brethren, that I should besparing of my own life; nor so far worse thanthey, as to avoid and refuse what theythought the most honourable of all things; Imean, to undergo death for your laws, andfor that worship of God which is peculiar toyou. I will therefore give such proper de­monstrations as will shew that I am their ownbrother. And I am so bold as to expect thatI shall avenge their blood upon our enemies;and deliver you all, with your wives and chil­dren, from the injuries they intend againstyou; and, with God's assistance, to preserveyour temple from destruction by them. ForI see that these nations have you in contempt,as being without a governor; and that theyhence are encouraged to make war againstyou."
By this speech Simon inspired the multi­tude with courage; and as they had been be­fore dispirited through fear, they were nowraised to a good hope of better things; inso­much, that the whole multitude cried out allat once, that Simon should be their leader;


and that instead of Judas and Jonathan, hisbrethren, he should have the government overthem:* and they promised that they wouldreadily obey him in whatsoever he shouldcommand them. So he immediately assem­bled all his own soldiers, that were fit forwar; and made haste in rebuilding the wallsof the city, and strengthened them by veryhigh and strong towers; and sent his friendJonathan, the son of Absalom, to Joppa, andgave him order to eject the inhabitants outof the city. For he was afraid lest they shoulddeliver up the city to Trypho. But he him­self stayed to secure Jerusalem.
Now Trypho removed from Ptolemais, witha great army, and came into Judea; andbrought Jonathan with him in bonds. Simonalso met him with his army at the city Adida,which is upon a hill; and beneath it lie theplains of Judea. And when Trypho knewthat Simon was made governor of the Jews,he sent to him, and would have imposed uponhim by deceit and treachery; and desiredhim if he would have his brother Jonathanreleased, that he would send him a hundredtalents of silver, and two of Jonathan's sons,as hostages; that when he should be released'he might not make Judea revolt from theking; for that at present he was kept in bondson account of the money that he had bor­rowed of the king, and now owed to him.But Simon was aware of the craft of Trypho;and although he knew that if he gave himthe money he should lose it, and that Tryphowould not set his brother free, and withalshould deliver the sons of Jonathan to theenemy; yet because he was afraid that heshould have a calumny raised against himamong the multitude, as the cause of his bro­ther's death; if he neither gave the money,nor sent Jonathan's sons; he gathered hisarmy together, and told them what offersTrypho had made: and added, that the offers


joying without fear, the fruits of their labours, and be­holding with pleasure the flourishing state of their coun­try; their trade increased by the reduction of Joppa, andother maritime places; their territories enlarged; theirarmies well disciplined; their towns and fortresses wellgarrisoned; their religion and liberties secured; theirland freed from Heathen enemies, and Jewish apostates;and their friendship courted by all the nations about them,even by the Romans and the Lacedaemonians. He ob­serves, farther, that this Simon was no less zealous for theservice of God, in exterminating apostacy, superstition,
idolatry, and every thing else that was contrary to hislaws; that he was a great protector of the true Israelites,and a friend to the poor; that he restored the service ofthe temple to its ancient splendour, and repaired thenumber of its sacred vessels: so that we need not wonder,if the Jewish Sanhedrim thought no dignity of honour,while he lived, and when he was so basely and barbarouslycut off, no grief and lamentation too great for a man of hisuncommon merit . Universal History, lib. 2. c. 11. B.* 1 Macc. xiii. 8.







OCR Output








AK. 1108.] 195 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


■as*


panies, and took as many roads, and laidwaste the country of the Hebrews;* whileSaul and his son Jonathan saw what wasdone, but were not able to defend the land;as having no more than six hundred men with'them. But as he, and his son, and Ahiah thehigh-priest, who was of the posterity of Eli,were sitting upon a pretty high hill, andseeing the land laid waste, they were greatlydisturbed at it. Now Saul's son agreed withhis armour-bearer, that they would go pri­vately to the enemies' camp, and make atumult, and a disturbance among them. Andwhen the armour-bearer had readily pro­mised to follow, whithersoever he should leadhim, though he should be obliged to die inthe attempt, Jonathan made use of the youngman's assistance, and descended from the hill,and went to their enemies. Now the enemies'camp was upon a precipice, which had threetops, that ended in a small but sharp and longextremity; while there was a rock that sur­rounded them, like lines made to prevent theattacks of an enemy. There it happened,that the out-guards of the camp were neg­lected; because of the natural security of theplace, and because they thought it altogetherimpossible, not only to ascend up to the campon that quarter, but so much as to come nearit. As soon therefore as they came to thecamp, Jonathan encouraged his armour-bearer, and said to him, "Let us attack ourenemies; and if when they see us, they bid us


come up to them; take that for a signal ofvictory. But if they say nothing, as not in­tending to invite us to come up, let us re­turn back again."f So when they were ap­proaching to the camp, just after break ofday, and the Philistines saw them, they saidto one another, "The Hebrews come out oftheir dens and caves:" and they said to Jona­than, and to his armour-bearer, "Come on,ascend up to us, that we may inflict a justpunishment upon you for your rash attempt."So Saul's son accepted that invitation; asindicative of victory, and immediately cameout of the place whence they were seen bytheir enemies: so he changed his place, andcame to the rock, which had none to guard it,because of its own strength. From thencethey crept up with great labour and difficulty,and overcame by force the nature of theplace, till they were able to fight with theirenemies. So they fell upon them,}: as theywere asleep, and slew about twenty of them;and thereby filled them with disorder, andsurprise; insomuch that some of them threwaway their armour, and fled; but the greatestpart not knowing one another, because theywere of different nations, suspected eachother to be enemies; (for they did not ima­gine that there were only two of' the Hebrewsthat came up,) and so they fought one againstanother. And some of them died in the battle,and some as they were flying away werethrown headlong from the rock.||


a matter, in so short a time, to recover a trade that waslost; especially among a people that had no iron-mines,and were so wholly addicted to the feeding of cattle, thatthey made no account of any mechanical art. In the fa­mous victory which they gained over Sisera, we are told,that there was not a shield or spear seen among fiftythousand men of Israel, Judg. v. 8. but notwithstandingthis, they had bows and arrows, and slings, which the menof Gibeah could manage to a wonderful advantage, Judg.xx. 16. And besides these, the Israelites, upon this oc­casion, might convert their instruments of husbandry, theirhatchets, their spades, their forks, their mattocks, &c. intoinstruments of war; a much better shift than what weread of some, who, in ancient times, had no other armsthan clubs and sharpened stakes, hardened in the fire.
Non jam certamine agrestiStipitibus duris agitur, sudibnsque praeustis.
Virgil, Jlneid, 7. B.
* About an. 1108.
t 1 Sam. xiv. 9, 10.
J This action of Jonathan's, considered in itself, wasdoubtless a very rash attempt, and contrary to the lawsof war, which prohibit all under command (as he was)voL. U—NOS. 17 & 18.
from engaging the enemy, or entering upon any enter­prise, without the general's order: but what may veryjustly be said in excuse of it is,—That he had a divineincitation to it, which he might probably feel upon thesight of the Philistines appearing as if they intended toassault Gibeah, and upon the information which he mightreceive of the great spoil which the three parties made ofthe poor people in the country. Patrick's Comment. B.|| How two men could put the whole army into such aconsternation, may seem somewhat extraordinary; but itshould be considered, that Jonathan and his armour-bearer, climbing up a way that was never attempted be­fore, might come upon them unawares, and surprise them:that this action might happen, as Josephus thinks, early inthe morning, when a great part of the Philistines' armywas asleep; that even, had they been all awake, Jonathanmight have so posted himself, (as Horatius Codes did ona bridge,) so as to be able to maintain his pass against allthe force of the enemy; that those who made at him, (asonly one perhaps could at a time,) he with one strokemight lay flat on the ground, and his armour-bearer imme­diately despatch them; that the rest, seeing tbem act thugintrepidly, might take them for two scouts, or van-couriersonly of a great army that was coming up, and ready to fallSs







OCR Output








an. 1089.] 227 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


give this as the first mark of performance ofthe present league, that he might have hiswife Michal restored to him, as her whom hehad purchased with great hazards, and withthose six hundred heads of the Philistineswhich he had brought to Saul, her father.So Abner took Michal from Phalli el, whowas then her husband, and sent her to David;Ishbosheth himself affording him his assist­ance: for David had written to him that ofright he ought to have his wife restored tohim. Abner also called together the eldersof the multitude, the commanders, and cap­tains of thousands; and spake thus to them,that, He had formerly dissuaded them fromtheir own resolution, when they were readyto forsake Ishbosheth, and to join themselvesto David: that, however, he now gave themleave so to do, if they had a mind to it; forthey knew that God had appointed David tobe king of all the Hebrews, by Samuel theprophet; and had foretold that he shouldpunish the Philistines, and finally overcomethem. Now when the elders and rulers heardthis, and understood that Abner was comeover to those sentiments about the publicaffairs which they were of before, theychanged their measures, and came in toDavid. When these men had agreed to Ab-ner's proposal, he called together the tribeof Benjamin; (for all of that tribe were theguards of Ishbosheth's body;) and spake tothem to the same purpose. And when hesaw that they did not in the least opposewhat he said, but resigned themselves up tohis opinion, he took about twenty of hisfriends, and came to David, in order to re­ceive himself security upon oath from him.For we may justly esteem those things to befirmer which every one of us do by ourselves,than those which we do by another. He alsogave him an account of what he had said tothe rulers, and to the whole tribe of Ben­jamin. And when David had received himin a courteous manner, and had treated himwith great hospitality for many days, Abner,when he was dismissed, desired permissionto bring the multitude with him, that he mightdeliver up the government to him, whenDavid himself was present, and a spectatorof what was done.
When David had sent Abner away, Joab,(he general of his army, came immediately to


Hebron; and when he had understood thatAbner had been with David, and had partedwith him a little before under an agreement,that the government should be delivered upto David; he feared lest David should placeAbner, who had assisted him to gain the king­dom, in the first rank of dignity; especiallysince he was a shrewd man in other respects;in understanding affairs, and in managingthem artfully, as proper seasons should re­quire; and that he should himself be putlower, and be deprived of the command ofthe army; so he took a knavish and a wickedcourse. In the first place he endeavoured tocalumniate Abner to the king, exhorting himto have a care of him, and not to give atten­tion to what he had engaged to do for him;because all he did tended to confirm thegovernment to Saul's son; that he came tohim deceitfully, and with guile, and was goneaway in hopes of gaining his purposes by thismanagement. But when he could not thuspersuade David, nor saw him at all exas­perated, he betook himself to a project bolderthan the former. He determined to kill Abner;and in order thereto he sent some messengersafter him; to whom he gave in charge, thatwhen they should overtake him, they shouldrecall him in David's name; and tell him, thathe had somewhat to say to him about hisaffairs which he had not remembered to speakof when he was with him.
Now when Abner heard what the mes­sengers said, (for they overtook him in a cer­tain place called Bisera, which was distantfrom Hebron twenty furlongs;) he suspectednone of the mischief which was befalling him,and came back. Hereupon Joab met himin the gate; and received him in the kindestmanner, as if he were Abner's most benevo­lent acquaintance and friend; for such as un­dertake the vilest actions, in order to preventthe suspicion of any private mischief, do fre­quently make the greatest pretence to whatgood men do sincerely. So he took him asidefrom his own followers, as if he would speakto him in private, and brought him into a voidplace of the gate; having himself nobody withhim, but his brother Abishai; then he drewhis sword, and smote him in the groin; uponwhich Abner died* by this treachery of


voL. r. NOS. 19 & 20.
* 2 Sam. iii. 27.
Yy







OCR Output








284 [book Vllf. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


vessels that were for ministration to the sa­crifices of God,* and removed them to thetemple. The king himself, and all the peo­ple, and the Levites, went before, renderingthe ground moist with sacrifices,! and drink-offerings, and the blood of a great number ofoblations, and burning an immens? quantityof incense; and this till the circumambientair was so full of these odours, that it met, ina most agreeable manner, persons at a greatdistance; and was an indication of God's pre­sence, and of his habitation with them in thisnewly built and consecrated place. For theydid not grow weary either of singing hymns,or of dancing, until they came to the temple.And in this manner did they carry the ark.But when they should transfer it into themost sacred place, the rest of the multitudewent away; and only those priests that car­ried it set it between the two cherubims;which embracing it with their wings, (for sowere they framed by the artificer,) coveredit as under a tent, or a cupola. Now the arkcontained nothing but those two tables ofstone that preserved the ten commandments,


which God delivered to Moses in MountSinai; and which were engraven upon them.But they set the candlestick, and the table,and the golden altar in the temple, before themost secret place, in the very same placeswherein they stood till that time in the taber­nacle. So they offered up the daily sacrifices.But for the brazen altar, Solomon set it be­fore the temple, over against the door: thatwhen the door was opened, it might be ex­posed to sight, and the sacred solemnities,and the richness of the sacrifices might bethence seen. And all the rest of the vesselsthey gathered together, and put them withinthe temple.
Now as soon as the priests had put allthings in order about the ark, and were goneout, a thick cloud came down and spread it­self, after a gentle manner, into the Jtemple:such a cloud it was, as was diffused and tem­perate; not such a rough one as we see fullof rain in the winter season.|| This cloudso darkened the place, that one priest couldnot discern another: but it afforded to theminds of all a visible image, and glorious


secret place, (from whence, it is doubted, whether theyhave ever yet been removed,) for fear of profanation.Patrick's and Calmet's Commentaries. B.
* This solemn removal of the ark from Mount Sion toMount Moriah, at the distance of almost three quarters ofa mile, confutes that notion of the modern Jews, and ofmany Christians also, as if those two were one and thesame mountain; for which there is, I think, very littlefoundation.
t The number of sacrifices which upon this occasionare said to be offered, was two and twenty thousand oxen,and a hundred and twenty thousand sheep, 1 Kings viii.63. but we must not suppose, that these were offered allon one day, much less on one altar. The continuance ofthis meeting was for fourteen days, seven in the feast oftabernacles, and seven in that of the dedication; and be­cause the brazen altar, before the door of the temple,was not sufficient to receive all these sacrifices, Solomon,by a special license from God, ordered other altars to beerected in the court of the priests, and perhaps in otherplaces which were to serve only during this present so­lemnity, when such a vast number of sacrifices were to beoffered: for at other times, no other altar was allowed butthis brazen one, which Moses had made. It is no bad ob­servation however of Josephus, (lib. viii. c. 2.) that duringthe oblation of so many sacrifices, the Levites took care toperfume the air with the fragrancy of incense, and sweetodours, to such a degree, that the people were sensible ofit at a distance; otherwise the burning of so many beastsat one time must have occasioned an offensive smell.Patrick's Commentary. B.
J 1 Kings viii. 10.
II When Moses had finished the tabernacle, accordingto the pattern which God had shewed him, and set it all
up, it is said, that a cloud covered the tent of the congre­gation, and the glory of the Lord filled the tabernacle, sothat Moses was not able to enter into the tent of the con­gregation, because the cloud abode thereon, and the gloryof the Lord filled the tabernacle, Exod. xl. 34, 35. Andtherefore, when the temple was finished, and the arkbrought into the sanctuary, God gave the like indicationof his presence, and residence there. Hereby he testifiedhis acceptance of the building, and furnishing of the tem­ple, as a service done to his name; and hereby he de­clared, that as the glory of the ark (that sacred symbolof his presence) had been long eclipsed by its frequentremoves, and mean habitations; so now his pleasure wasthat it should be looked upon with the same esteem andveneration as when Moses conducted it into the taber­nacle. For this cloud, we must know, was not a heavy,thick, opaque body, such as is engendered in the air,and arises from vapours and exhalations, but a cloud thatwas dark and luminous at the same time, whose darknesswas awful and majestic, and whose internal part wasbright and refulgent, darting its rays upon occasion, andexhibiting its light through its obscurity: so that, ac­cording to its different phasis, or position, it became tothe Israelites a pillar of a cloud by day, to screen themfrom the heat, and at night a pillar of fire, to give themlight, Exod. xiii. 21. Whatever it was that constitutedthis strange appearance, it is certain this mixture of lightand darkness was looked upon as a symbol of the divinepresence; for so the Scripture has informed us, that Hewho dwelleth in light that is inaccessible, made darknesshis secret place, his pavilion round about him, with darkwater, and thick clouds to cover him, Psal. xviii. 11Calmefs Commentary. B.







OCR Output








An. 29.] 555 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


by way of reproach, that he had caused*her father and her brother to be slain. Andwhen he took this injury very unkindly, andwas ready to use violence to her, in a pre­cipitate manner, the king's sister Salome,observing that he was more than ordinarilydisturbed, sent in to the king his cup-bearer,who had been prepared long beforehand forsuch a design; and bade him tell the king,how Mariamne had persuaded him to givehis assistance in preparing a love potionfor him: and if he appeared to be greatlyconcerned, and should ask, what that lovepotion was? to tell him, that she had thepotion; and that he was desired only to giveit him. But that in case he did not appearto be much concerned at this potion, to letthe thing drop; and that if he did so, noharm should thereby come to him. Whenshe had given him these instructions, shesent him in at this time to make such aspeech. So he went in, after a composedmanner, to gain credit to what he shouldsay; and yet somewhat hastily; and said,that Mariamne had given him presents, andpersuaded him to give him a love potion.And when this moved the king, he said,that this love potion was a composition thatshe had given him; whose effects he did notknow; which was the reason of his resolvingto give him this information, as the safestcourse he could take, both for himself andfor the king. When Herod heard what hesaid, and was in an ill disposition before,his indignation grew more violent; and heordered that eunuch of Mariamne's, whowas most faithful to her, to be brought to thetorture, about this potion; as well knowingit was not possible that any thing could bedone without him. And when the man wasunder the utmost agonies, he could say no­thing concerning the thing he was torturedabout; but so far he knew, that Mariamne'shatred against him was occasioned by some­what that Sohemus had said to her. Nowas he was saying this, Herod cried out aloud,and said, that Sohemus, who had been atall other times most faithful to him and tohis government, would not have betrayed


what injunctions he had given him, unlesshe had had a nearer conversation than ordi­nary with Mariamne. So he gave order thatSohemus should be seized on, and slain im­mediately. But he allowed his wife to takeher trial; and he assembled those that weremost faithful to him; and laid an elaborateaccusation against her, for this love potion,and composition; which had been chargedupon her by way of calumny. However, hekept no temper in what he said, and was intoo great a passion for judging well aboutthis matter. Accordingly when the court wasat length satisfied that he was so resolved,they passed the sentence of death upon her.But when the sentence was passed, thistemper was suggested by himself, and bysome others of the court; that she should notbe thus hastily put to death; but be laid inprison in one of the fortresses belonging tothe kingdom. Salome and her party, how­ever, laboured hard to have the woman putto death; and they prevailed with the kingto do so, and advised this out of caution,lest the multitude should be tumultuous, ifshe were suffered to live. And thus wasMariamne led to execution.
When Alexandra observed how thingswent, and that there were small hopes thatshe should escape the like treatment fromHerod, she changed her behaviour, to quitethe reverse of what might have been ex­pected from her former boldness; and thisafter a very indecent manner. For out ofher desire to shew how entirely ignorant shewas of the crimes laid against Mariamne,she leaped out of her place, and approachedher daughter in the hearing of all the peo­ple; and cried out, that she had been an illwoman, and ungrateful to her husband; andthat her punishment came justly upon her,for her insolent behaviour; for that she hadnot made proper returns to him who hadbeen their common benefactor. And whenshe had for some time acted after this hypo­critical manner, and been so outrageous asto tear her hair; this indecent and dissem­bling behaviour, as was to be expected, wasgreatly condemned by the rest of the spec­


* Whereas Mariamne is here represented as reproaching
Herod with the murder of her father Alexander, as well
as her brother Aristobulus: while it was her grandfather
Hyrcanus, and not her father Alexander, whom he caused
voL. I.—NOS. 47 & 48.
to be slain (as Josephus himself informs us, chap. 6.) wemust either take Zonaras's reading, which is here grand­father rightly; or else we must, as before, chap. 1. allow aslip of Josephus's pen or memory, in the place before ub4R







OCR Output








902 [book VIII ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


Now I cannot but think, that the greatnessof a kingdom, and its change into prosperity,often becomes the occasion of mischief andof transgression to men. For when Reho-boam saw his kingdom so much increased,he went out of the right way into irreligiouspractices, and despised the worship of God;till the people themselves imitated his wickedactions. For so it usually happens, that themanners of subjects are corrupted at thesame time with those of their governors;which subjects then lay aside their own soberway of living, as a reproof of their governors'intemperate courses; and follow their wick­edness, as if it were virtue. For it is notpossible to shew that men approve of theactions of their kings, unless they do thesame actions with them. Agreeably wheretoit now happened to the subjects of Reho-boam; for when he was grown impious,* anda transgressor himself, they endeavoured notto offend him by resolving still to be righteous.But God sent Shishak,t king of Egypt, topunish them for their unjust behaviour to­wards him. Concerning whom Herodotuswas mistaken, and applied his actions toSesostris. For this Shishak,J in the fifth yearof the reign of Rehoboam, made an expe­dition into Judea with many thousand men.For he had one thousand two hundred cha­riots, threescore thousand horsemen, andfour hundred thousand footmen. These hebrought with him; and they were the greaterpart of them Libyans and Ethiopians. Nowtherefore when he fell upon the country ofthe Hebrews, he took the strongest cities ofRehoboam's kingdom, without fighting; andwhen he had put garrisons in them, he camelast of all to Jerusalem.||
While Rehoboam, and the multitude withhim, were shut up in Jerusalem, by the armyof Shishak; and when they besought God togive them victory and deliverance, they could


not persuade God to espouse their cause; butShemaiah the prophet told them, that Uodthreatened to forsake them, as they hadthemselves forsaken his worship. YV hen theyheard this, they were in great consternation,and, seeing no way of deliverance, they allearnestly set themselves to confess that Godmight justly overlook them, since they hadbeen guilty of impiety towards him, and hadlet his laws lie in confusion. So when Godsaw them in that disposition, and that theyacknowledged their sins, he told the prophethe would not destroy them; but that he wouldmake them servants to the Egyptians; thatthey might learn whether they would sufferless by serving men or God. So when Shi­shak had taken the city without fighting, be­cause Rehoboam was afraid, and receivedhim into it; he spoiled the temple, andemptied the treasures of God, and those ofthe king, and carried off' innumerable thou­sands of gold and silver; and left nothing atall behind him. He also took away thebucklers of gold, and the shields, whichSolomon the king had made. Nay, he didnot leave the golden quivers which Davidhad taken from the king of Zobab, and haddedicated to God. And when he had thusdone, he returned to his own kingdom. NowHerodotus of Halicarnassus mentions thisexpedition; having only mistaken the king'sname, and in saying that, he made war uponmany other nations also, and brought Syriaof Palestine into subjection; and took themen that were therein prisoners, withoutfighting. Now it is manifest that he intendedto declare our nation was subdued by him;for he saith, that he left behind him pillars inthe land of those that delivered themselvesup to him, without fighting, and engravedupon them symbols of their effeminacy. Nowour king Rehoboam delivered up our citywithout fighting. He says withal, that " The


* An. 971.
t It may seem something strange, that Shishak, whowas so nearly allied to Rehoboam, should come up againsthim, and take his royal city; but Rehoboam, we must re­member, was not the son of Pharaoh's daughter, andtherefore no relation to Shishak. But, even had he beennever so nearly related, as kingdoms, we know, nevermarry, so, it is likely that Jeroboam, who bad lived longin Egypt, stirred him up to invade his rival, and therebyhe might establish himself in this new kingdom: and forthis reason it was, that, when the armies of Egypt had
taken the fenced cities of Jiulah, they returned, withoutgiving Jeroboam, or his dominions, any the least dis­turbance. Patrick's Commentary. T$.
I That this Shishak was not the same person with th«famous Sesostris, as some have very lately, in contradiction to all antiquity, supposed; and that our Josephus didnot take him to be the same, as they pretend; but thatSesostris was many centuries earlier than Shishak, seeAuthent. Records, Part II. page 1024, 1025, 1026. andthe authors there cited.
II 1 Kings xiv. 25.







OCR Output








AH. 1064.] 24? ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


perform the injunction I laid upon thee,which was, to reconcile my father to me.And I really beg it of thee now thou art here,to pacify my father as to me; since I esteemmy coming hither, to be more grievous thanmy banishment, while my father's wrathagainst me continues." Joab was herebypersuaded, and pitied the distress that Ab­salom was in, and became an intercessorwith the king for him. And when he haddiscoursed with his father, he soon broughthim to that amicable disposition towards Ab­salom, that he presently sent for him to cometo him. And when he had cast himself downupon the ground, and begged for the forgive­ness of his offences, the king raised him up,and promised to forget what he had formerlydone.*
CHAP. IX.


OF THE INSURRECTION OF ABSALOM AGAINST DAVID, ANDTHE DEATH OF AHITHOFHEL.
NOW Absalom upon this success with theking, procured to himself many horsesand chariots, and that in a little time.? Hehad also fifty armour-bearers that were abouthim, and he came early every day to theking's palace, and spake what was agreeableto such as came for justice, and lost theircauses; as if that happened for want of goodcounsellors about the king, or perhaps be­cause the judges mistook in that unjust sen­tence they gave. Whereby he gained the


good will of all the populace. He told them,that had he but such authority committed tohim, he would distribute justice to them in amost equitable manner. When he had madehimself so popular among the multitude, hethought he had already the good will of thepeople secured to him.J But when four||years had passed since his father's reconcili­ation, he came to him,§ and besought him togive him leave to go to Hebron, and pay asacrifice to God, because he vowed it to himwhen he fled out of the country. So whenDavid had granted his request, he wentthither; and great multitudes came runningtogether to him; for he had sent to a greatnumber so to do.
Among them came Ahithophel, the Gilonite,a counsellor of David's, and two hundred menof Jerusalem, who knew not his intentions;but were sent for as to a sacrifice. So he wasappointed king by all of them, which he ob­tained by this stratagem. As soon as thisnews was brought to David, and he was in­formed of what he did not expect from hisson; he was affrighted at this impious andbold undertaking; and wondered that he wasso far from remembering how his offence hadlately been forgiven him, that he undertookmuch worse and more wicked enterprises:first to deprive him of that kingdom whichwas given him of God; and secondly to takeaway his own father's life. He therefore re­solved to fly to the parts beyond Jordan. Sohe called his most intimate friends together,


* 2 Sam. xiv. 33.
t It is an observation of Plato, that when any one in­tends to make himself a tyrant in a popular state, he nosooner enters on the government, but *po<tyska « xcuct<f*a%erai Taulaj, uav irspirvyxam, he smiles upon, andkindly salutes, all sorts of people, wherever he meetsthem; avowing that he hates tyranny, promising greatthings both in private and public, xai tfao*iv iXsof re xcuwaTpwos eivco tfpotftfoisii-ai, and making as if he would bemild, and gentle, and fatherly to all; even as Tacitus re­lates of Otho, that protendens manum adorare vulgvm,jacere oscula, et omnia serviliter pro dominatione. Thathe used to kiss, and shake hands with any one, court andadore the mob, and do every little servile thing, to getpossession of the government. Plato de Repvb. lib. 8.and Tacit. Hist. lib. 1. B.
J It is an observation of Aristotle, in his Politics, (lib.6. c. 4.) that all changes and revolutions in governmentare made by one of these two ways, ere |aev 8m 8iag ore 8s«i owra"is, either by force and violence, or else by deceitand craft. Nor ever was there a man better formed bynature to manage matters in this latter way, than was Ab­salom, who was a person of courage and gallantry, of
civility and courtesy, young, and wonderfully beautiful,descended from kings, both by his father's and mother'sside, and prodigal enough of large and magnificent pro­mises, if ever he came to be king; a character not unlikethat of Turnus in Virgil:
Hunc decus egregium formae movet, atque juventaeHunc atavi reges, hunc claris dextera factis.
JEneid. lib. 7. B.
|| This is one of the best corrections that Josephus'scopy affords us of a text that, in our ordinary copies, isgrossly corrupted. They say, that this rebellion of Ab­salom was forty years after what went before (of his re­conciliation to his father,) whereas the series of the his­tory shews it could not be more than four years after it;as here in Josephus; whose number is directly confirmedby that copy of the Septuagint version, whence the Ar­menian translation was made, which gives us the samesmall number of four years. Dr. Wall also notes, thatfour of the MSS. of the Vulgate have the same smallnumber. Which indeed I think ought, without dispute,to be allowed the right reading.
§ About an. 1064.







OCR Output








an. 976.] 299 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


the aforementioned cities. And when he hadcalled the ten tribes together over whom heruled, he made a speech to the people inthese words: "I suppose, my countrymen,you know that every place hath God in it:nor is there any determinate place in whichhe is: but he every where hears and seesthose that worship him. On which accountI do not think it right for you to go so long ajourney to Jerusalem, which is an enemy'scity, to worship him. It was a man that builtthe temple: I have also made two goldenheifers, dedicated to the same God; and theone I have consecrated in the city Bethel,and the other in Dan; to the end that thoseof you who dwell nearest those cities may goto them and worship God there. And I willordain for you certain priests and Levitesfrom among yourselves; that you may haveno want of the tribe of Levi, or of the sons ofAaron. But let him that is desirous amongyou of being a priest, bring to God a bullockand a ram; which they say* Aaron the firstpriest brought also." When Jeroboam hadsaid this, he deluded the people, and causedthem to revolt from the worship of their fore­fathers, and to transgress their laws. Thiswas the beginning of miseries to the He­brews; and the cause why they were over­come in war by foreigners, and so fell intocaptivity. But we shall relate those thingsin their proper places hereafter.
When this feast of tabernacles was justfapproaching, JeroboamJ was desirousto ce­lebrate it himself in Bethel; as did the twotribes in Jerusalem. Accordingly he built


an altar before the heifer, and undertook tobe high-priest himself. So he went up to thealtar, with his own priests about him. Butwhen he was going to offer the sacrifices,and the burnt-offerings, in the sight of all thepeople, a prophet,|| whose name was Jadon,was sent by God, and came to him from Je­rusalem; who stood in the midst of the mul­titude, and in the hearing of the king, anddirecting his discourse to the altar, said thus:"God foretells that there shall be a certainman of the family of David, Josiah by name,who shall slay upon thee those false prieststhat shall live at that time, and upon theeshall burn the bones of those deceivers of the
Eeople, those impostors and wicked wretchestowever, that this people may believe thesethings shall come to pass, I foretell a sign tothem, that shall also be fulfilled. This altarshall be broken to pieces immediately; andall the fat of the sacrifices that is upon itshall be poured upon the ground." Whenthe prophet had said this, Jeroboam, in apassion, stretched out his hand, and badethem lay hold of him. But that hand whichhe stretched out was enfeebled, and he wasnot able to pull it in again to him: for it wasbecome withered, and hung down as if itwere dead. The altar also was broken topieces, and all that was upon it was pouredout: as the prophet had foretold shouldcome to pass. So the king understood thathe was a man of veracity, and had a divineforeknowledge; and intreated him to prayunto God, that he would restore his righthand. Accordingly the prophet did pray to


Daphnn, as Josephus elsewhere informs us: Of the War,IV. 1. See the note there.
* Lev. viii. 14, 22.
t An. 975.
J As the Jews had their feast of tabernacles on the fif­teenth day of the seventh month, so Jeroboam had a feaston the fifteenth day of the eighth month, which he insti­tuted of his own accord. Some suppose, indeed, that asthis feast was appointed by God to be observed after thegathering in of the fruits, which might be sooner ripe inJerusalem, than in the northern parts of the country, soJeroboam might pretend, that the eighth would be a bet­ter time for it than the seventh, because then they wouldevery where be gathered. Others imagine, that he mighthave this farther design in the alteration of this month,viz. that the people of Judah, when their own feast wasover a month before at Jerusalem, might have an oppor­tunity to come to his, if their curiosity led them. Butthe plain cast is, that he did every thing he could in oppo­sition to the established religion, and his chief intention
voL. I.—NOS. 25 & 26.
was to alienate the people from Jerusalem. Bedford'sScripture Chronology lib. VI. c. 2. B.
|| Who this prophet was, commentators are not agreed.The Jews would generally have it to have been Iddo; butunless we may suppose that what is here related fell outin the latter end of Jeroboam's reign, Iddo could not bethe person; because Iddo was alive in the days of Abijah,son of Rehoboam, whereas the prophet here spoken ofdied, in a manner, as soon as he had delivered this pro­phecy. Others therefore have thought, that this prophetwho came to rebuke Jeroboam was Ahijah, the same whohad foretold him of his exaltation to the crown of Israel.But besides that Ahijah was alive after the time that thisprophet was slain, Ahijah was certainly a native of Shilohand lived in Shiloh, which is the tribe of Ephraim, anapart of Jeroboam's dominions: whereas it is expresslysaid of this prophet, that he came from Judah. So thatthere is no foundation, so much as for a conjecture, whatthe name of this man of God was. Patrick's and Calmet'iCommentaries. B.
3H







OCR Output








32 [book I. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


them a burying-place, which piece of groundAbraham bought, for four hundred shekels,of Ephron, an inhabitant of Hebron: andboth Abraham and his descendants builtthemselves sepulchres in that place.
CHAP. XV.
OF THE RATION OF THE TROGLODYTES, WHO WERE DERIVEDFROM ABRAHAM BY KF.TUJUH.
ABRAHAM after this married Keturah,by whom six sons were born to him,men of courage, and of sagacious minds.Zambran, and Jazar, and Madan, and Ma-dian, and Josabak and Sous. Now the sonsof Sous were Sabathan and Dadan. The sonsof Dadan were Latusim, Assur, and Luom.The sons of Madian were Ephas, Ophren,Anoch, Ebidas, and Eldas. Now Abrahamcontrived to settle all these sons and grand­sons in colonies, and they took possession ofTroglodytis, and the country of Arabia theHappy, as far as it reaches to the Red Sea.It is related of Ophren, that he made waragainst Lybia, and took it; and that his grand-Children, when they inhabited it, called itfrom his name Africa: and indeed AlexanderPolyhistor gives his attestation to what I heresay when he speaks thus: "Cleodemus, theprophet, who was also called Malchus, whowrote a history of the Jews in agreement withthe history of Moses, their legislator, relatesthat there were many sons born to Abrahamby Keturah. He even names three of them.Apher, and Surim, and Japhran: that fromSurim was the land of Assyria denominated;and that from the other two, Apher and Ja-


* An. 1897.
t The present mode of swearing among the Moham­medan Arabs, that live in tents as the patriarchs did, ac­cording to de la Roque, (Voy. dans la Pal. p. 162.) is bylaying their hands on the Koran. They cause those whoiwear to wash their hands before they give them thebook; they put their left hand underneath, and the rightover it. Whether, among the patriarchs one hand wasunder, and the other upon the thigh, is not certain; pos­sibly Abraham's servant might swear with one hand underhis master's thigh, and the other stretched out to Heaven.As the posterity of the patriarchs are described as comingout of the thigh, it has been supposed, this ceremony hadsome relation to their believing the promise of God, tobless all the nations of the earth, by means of one that wasto descend from Abraham. B.
Harmer, vol. iv. p. 477.
J Homer mentions the same custom of women's beingemployed in drawing water among the Phaecians and


phran, the country of Africa took its name;because these men were auxiliaries to Her­cules, when he fought against Libya andAntseus; and that Hercules married Aphra'sdaughter, and of her begat a son Diodorus;and that Sophon was his son, from whom thebarbarous people called Sophacians weredenominated."
CHAP. XVI.
of Isaac's marriage.
NOW when Abraham, the father of Isaac,had resolved to take Rebeka, who wasgrand-daughter to his brother Nahor, for awife to his son Isaac, who was then aboutforty* years old, he sent the eldest of hisservants to betroth her; after he had obligedhim to give him the strongest assurances ofhis fidelity, after the following manner. Theyput each other's hands under each other'sthighs,f and called upon God as the witnessof what was to be done. He also sent suchpresents to those that were there as were inesteem, on account that they either rarely, ornever were seen in that country. This ser­vant got thither not under a considerabletime; for it requires much time to passthrough Mesopotamia, in which it is tedioustravelling both in winter, for the depth of theclay, and in summer, for want of water; andbesides this, for the robberies there com­mitted, which are not to be avoided by tra­vellers, but by the utmost caution. However,the servant came to Haran; and when he wasin the suburbs, he met a considerable numberof maidens going to the water;J he therefore
LcEstrygonians. (Od. vii. 20. et x. 105.) Dr. Shaw,speaking of the occupation of the Moorish women in Bar-bary, says, "to finish the day, at the time of the evening,even at the time that the women go out to draw water,they are still to fit themselves with a pitcher or goat-skin,and tying their sucking children behind them, trudge it inthis manner two or three miles to fetch water." Travels,p. 421.
The same custom prevailed in ancient Greece. Homerrepresents Minerva meeting Ulysses as the sun was goingdown, under the form of a Phaecian virgin carrying apitcher of water, that being the time when the maidenswent out to draw water.
When near the fam'd Phwcian wall he drew,The beauteous city op'ning to his view,His step a virgin met, and stood before;A polish'd urn the seeming virgin bore.
Odyst. b. vii. 25. Pope.







OCR Output








322 [book it. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


BOOK IX.


Containing an Interval of One Hundred and Fifty-seven Years.


FROM THE DEATH OF AHAB TO THE CAPTIVITY OF THE TEN TRIBES.


CHAP. I.
of jehoshaphat's pious conduct; HIS appointment of
JUDGES, AND HIS VICTORIES OVER HIS ENEMIES.
WHEN Jehoshaphat was come to Jeru­salem, from the assistance he hadafforded Ahab, king of Israel, against theSyrians, the prophet Jehu met him and ac­cused him for assisting an impious prince;and said to him, that God was displeasedwith him for so doing, but that he deliveredhim from the enemy, notwithstanding he hadsinned, because of his own disposition, whichwas good. Hereupon the king betook him­self to thanksgivings, and sacrifices to God;and soon afterward went over all that countrywhich he ruled round about, and taught thepeople to observe the laws which God gavethem by Moses, and that religious worshipthat was due to him. He also appointedjudges in all the cities of his kingdom; andcharged them to have regard to nothing somuch in judging the multitude as to do jus­tice, and not to be moved by bribes, nor bythe dignity of men eminent for either theirbirth or riches; but to distribute justiceequally to all;* as knowing that God is con­scious of every secret action. When he hadinstructed them thus, and gone over every
* The charge or solemn admonition which Jehoshaphatgave the judges, whom he appointed in each city, runs inthese words:—Take heed what ye do, for ye judge not forman, hut for the Lord, who is with you in the judgment:wherefore now, let the fear of the Lord be upon you:Take heed and do it; for there is no iniquity with the Lordour God, nor respect of persons, nor taking of gifts,2 Chron. xix. 6, 7. It is a remarkable saying of Cicero,that judges, being sworn to do justice, should remember,when they come to pass sentence, "Deum habere testem:


city of the two tribes, he returned to Jeru­salem. He there also constituted judges outof the priests and Levites,t and principalpersons of the multitude; and admonishedthem to pass all their sentences with careand justice. And that if any of the peopleof his country had differences of great conse­quence, they would send them out of theother cities, to these judges, who would beobliged to give righteous sentences con­cerning such causes, and this with the greatercare, because it is proper that the sentenceswhich are given in that city where the templeof God is, and wherein the king dwells, begiven with the utmost care and equity. Nowhe set over them Amariah, the priest, andZebadiah, of the tribe of Judah. And afterthis manner it was that the king ordered theseaffairs.
About the same time the Moabites andAmmonites made an expedition against Je­hoshaphat, and took with them a great bodyof Arabians; and pitched their camp at En-gedi, a city situate near the lake Asphaltites,and distant three hundred furlongs from Je­rusalem. In that place grew the best kindof palm-trees, and the opobalsamum.J NowJehoshaphat heard that the enemies hadpassed over the lake, and had made an irrup-
id est ut ego arbitror mentem suatn, qua nihil homini deditipse Deus divinus." De Offic. lib. 3. c. 13. B.
t These judges constituted by Jehoshaphat, were akind of Jerusalem Sanhedrim, out of the priests, the Le-vites, and the principal of the people; both here and2 Chron. xix. 8. much like the old Christian Judicaturesof the bishop, the presbyters, the deacons, and thepeople.
Concerning this precious balsam, see the note on


VI


h.







OCR Output








>







OCR Output








aN. 2520.] 2S ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


dred and thirty-fourth year, he himself heingbegotten by Sala when he was a hundred andthirty years old: whom Arphaxad had for hisson at the hundred and thirty-fifth year of hieage. Arphaxad was the son of Shem, andborn twelve years after the deluge. NowAbram had two brethren, Nahor and Ha ran;of these, Haran left a son, Lot: as also Saraiand Milcha, his daughters; and died amongthe Chaldeans, in a city of the Chaldeanscalled Ur, and his monument is shewn to thisday. These married their nieces; Nahormarried Milcha, and Abram married Sarai.Now Terah hating Chaldea on occount of hismourning for Haran, they all removed toHaran of Mesopotamia, where Terah* died,and was buried, when he had lived to betwo hundred and five years old; for the lifeof man was already, by degrees, diminished,and became shorter than before, till the birthfof Moses, after whom the term of human lifewas one hundred and twenty years, God de­termining it to the length that Moses hap­pened to live. Now Nahor had eight sonsby Milcha; Uz and Buz, Kemuel, Chesed,Azau, Pheldas, Jadelph, and Bethuel. Thesewere all the genuine sons of Nahor; for Tebaand Gaam, and Tachas and Maaca, wereborn of Reuma his concubine; but Bethuelhad a daughter Rebecca, and a son Laban.
CHAP. VII.
OF ABRAM'S REMOVAL FROM THE COUNTRY OF THE CHAL­DEANS, TO THE LAND THEN CALLED CANAAN, BUT NOWJUDEA.
ABRAM having no sons of his own,adopted Lot, his brother Haran's son,and his wife Sarai's brother: he left the landof Chaldea^ when he was seventy-five yearsold; and at the command of GodJ went intoCanaan, and therein he dwelt himself, andleft it to his posterity. He was a person ofgreat sagacity, both for understanding allthings, and persuading his hearers; and notmistaken in his opinions, for which reason hebegan to have higher notions of virtue thanothers had; and he determined to reformand change the opinion all men happened


* An. 1962.} An. 1612.
voL. I.—No. 2.


then to have concerning God; for he was thefirst who ventured to publish this notion thatthere was but one God, the creator of theuniverse; and that as to other gods, if theycontributed to the happiness of men, thateach of them afforded it according to his ap­pointment, and not by their own power. Thisopinion was derived from the irregular phe­nomena that were visible both at land andsea; as well as those that happen to the sunand moon, and all the heavenly bodies, thus:"If," said he, "these bodies had power oftheir own they would certainly take care oftheir own regular motions; but since they donot preserve such regularity, they make itplain that so far as they operate to our ad­vantage, they do it of their own abilities butas they are subservient to him that commandsthem; to whom alone we ought justly to offerour honour and thanksgiving." For whichdoctrines when the Chaldeans and otherpeople of Mesopotamia raised a tumultagainst him, he thought fit to leave that coun­try; and at the command and by the assist­ance of God, he came and lived in the landof Canaan.|| And when he was there settled,he built an altar, and performed a sacrificeto God.
Berosus mentions our father Abram with­out naming him, when he says, " In the tenthgeneration after the flood, there was amongthe Chaldeans a man, righteous and great,and skilful in the celestial science." But He-cateus does more than barely mention him;for he composed and left behind him a bookconcerning him. And Nicolaus of Damascus,in the fourth book of his history, says," Abramreigned at Damascus; being a foreigner, whocame with an army out of the land aboveBabylon, called the land of the Chaldeans.But after a long time he removed from thatcountry also, with his people, and went intothe land then called the land of Canaan, butnow the land 6f Judea: and this when hisposterity were become a multitude; as towhich posterity of his we relate their historyin another work. Now the name of Abram iseven still famous in the country of Damas­cus; and there is shewn a village namedfrom him, The Habitation of Abram."
SGen. xii. 1 mm* <
Gen. xii. 5.







OCR Output








120 [BOOR If. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


the ambassadors, and told them that he washimself willing and desirous to comply withtheir request, but that God was opposite tohis intentions, even that God who had raisedhim to great reputation on account of thetruth of his predictions. For that this armywhich they entreated him to come to curse,was in favour of God. On which account headvised them to go home again, and not topersist in their enmity against the Israelites.And when he had given them that answer, hedismissed the ambassadors.
Now the Midianites, at the earnest en­treaties of Balak, sent other ambassadors toBalaam, who, desiring to gratify the men, in­quired again of God; but he was displeasedat this second trial, and bid him by no meansto contradict the ambassadors. Balaam didnot imagine that God gave this injunction inorder to deceive him; so he went along withthe ambassadors. But when the Divine angelmet him in the way, when he was in a narrowpassage, and edged in with a wall on bothsides, the ass on which Balaam rode, under­stood that it was a Divine spirit that met him;and thrust Balaam to one of the walls, with­out regard to the stripes which her master,when he was hurt by the wall, gave her. Butwhen the ass, upon the angel's continuing todistress her, and upon the stripes which were


given her, fell down; by the will of God shemade use of the voice of a man, and com­plained of Balaam, as acting unjustly to her;that whereas he had no fault to find with herin her former service, he now inflicted stripesupon her, as not understanding that she washindered from serving him in what he wasnow going about by the providence of God.And when he was disturbed by reason of thevoice of the ass, which was that of a man, theangel plainly appeared to him,* and blamedhim for the stripes he had given his ass; in*forming him, that the creature was not in fault,but that he was himself come to obstruct hisjourney, as being contrary to the will of God.Upon this Balaam was afraid, and was pre­paring to return back, yet God excited him togo on his intended way; but added this in­junction, that he should declare nothing, butwhat he himself should suggest.f
When God had given him this-charge, theprophet came to Balak; and after the kinghad entertained him in a magnificent manner,he desired him to go to one of the mountains,to take a view of the state of the camp of theHebrews. Balak himself also came to themountain, and brought the prophet alongwith him, with a royal attendance. Thismountain lay over their heads, and was dis­tant sixty furlongs from the camp.J He then


* Numb. xxii. 31. "Then the Lord opened the eyesof Balaam, and he saw the angel of the Lord standing in theway." There are several instances to be found, both inthe scriptures and in profane authors, where the eyeshave been opened by a divine power to perceive thatwhich they could not see by mere natural discernment.Thus the eyes of Hagar were opened, that she might seethe fountain, Gen. xxi. 19. Homer also presents us withan example of this kind. Minerva says to Diomed:
Yet more from mortal mists I purge thy eyes,And set to view the warring deities. II. v. 164. Pope.And in Virgil, Venus performs the same office to iEneas,and shews him the gods who were engaged in the destruc­tion of Troy.Aspice; namque omnem, quae nunc obducta tuentiMortales hebetat visus tibi, ethumida circum, &c.
JEn. ii. 604.Now cast your eyes around: while I dissolveThe mists and films that mortal eyes involve;Purge from your sight the dross, and make you seeThe shape of each avenging deity. Dryde.w
Milton seems likewise to have imitated this, when hemakes Michael open Adam's eyes to see the future revo­lutions of the world, and the fortunes of his posterity.
then purg'd with euphrasy and rue
The visual nerve, for he had much to see,
And from the well of life three drops instill'd.
Paradise Lost, b. xi. 414. B.
t Note that Josephus never supposes Balaam to be anidolater, nor to seek idolatrous enchantments, or to pro­phesy falsely, but to be no other than an ill-disposed pro­phet of the true God: and intimates that God's answer thesecond time, permitting him to go, was ironical, and ondesign that he should be deceived; which sort of decep­tion, by way of punishment for former crimes, Josephusnever scruples to admit; as ever esteeming such wickedmen justly and providentially deceived. But perhaps wehad better to adhere closely to the text; which says,Numb, xxiii. 20, 21, that God only permitted Balaam togo along with, or in the Septuagint version, to follow, theambassadors, in case they came and called him; or posi­tively insisted on his going along with them, on any terms.Whereas Balaam seems, out of impatience, to have risenup in the morning and saddled his ass, and rather to havecalled them, than staid for their calling him. So zealousdoes he seem to have been for his reward of divination,his wages of unrighteousness. Numb. xxii. 7, 17,18, 37.2 Pet. ii. 15. Jude 11. which reward or wages the trulyreligious prophets of God never required, nor accepted;as Josephus justly takes notice in the cases of Samuel,Antiq. VI. 4, and Daniel, Antiq. X. 17. See also Gen.xiv. 23, 24. 2 Kings v. 15, 16, 26. and Acts viii. 18—24.
% Balaam required seven altars to be built, and suitable







OCR Output








as. 1781-3 43 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


ployed in ease and feasting, they fell uponthe watch when they were asleep, and en­tering into the city,* slew all the males, asalso the king and his son with them, butspared the women; and when they had donethis, without their father's consent, theybrought away their sister.
Now, while Jacob was astonished at thisdaring act, and was severely blaming his sonsfor it, God stood by him,f and bid him be ofgood courage, but to purify his tents, and tooffer those sacrifices which he had vowed tooffer when he went first into Mesopotamia,and saw his vision. As he was therefore
Eurifying his followers, he found the gods ofiaban, (for he did not before know they werestolen by Rachel,) and he hid them in theearth, under an oak, in Shechem; and de­parting thence, he offered sacrifice at Bethel,the place where he saw his vision when hewent first into Mesopotamia.
When he was gone thence, and was comeover against Ephrata, he there buried Ra­chel,:}: who died in childbed; she was theonly one of Jacob's kindred that had not thehonour of burial at Hebron; and when hehad mourned for her a great while, he called


the son that was born of her Benjamin,|| be­cause of the sorrow the mother had with him.These are all the children of Jacob, twelvemales, and one female; of whom eight werelegitimate, viz. six of Leah, and two of Ra­chel; and four were of the handmaids, twoof each, all whose names have been set downalready.
CHAP. XXII.
of Isaac's death and interment at hebron.
FROM thence Jacob went to Hebron, acity situate among the Canaanites, andthe residence of Isaac; and there they livedtogether for a little while: for as to Rebeka,Jacob did not find her alive. Isaac also diednot long after the coming of his son, and wasburied, with his wife, in Hebron, where thefamily had a monument belonging to themfrom their forefathers. Now Isaac was a manwho was beloved of God, and was vouchsafedgreat instances of providence by God, afterAbraham his father, and lived to be exceed­ing old; for when he had lived virtuously onehundred and eighty-five years, he then died.


* Why Josephus has omitted the circumcision of theseShechemites, as the occasion of their death; and of Jacob'sgreat grief, as in the testament of Levi, I cannot telh
t Gen. xxxv. 1.
% Gen. xxxv. 19.
II Since Benoni signifies the son of my sorrow, andBenjamin the son of days, or one born in the father's oldage. Gen. xliv. 20, I suspect Josephus's present copies tobe here imperfect, and suppose that, in correspondence to
other copies, he wrote that Rachel called her son's nameBenoni, but his father called him Benjamin; Gen. xxxv.18. As for Benjamin, as commonly explained, the son ofthe right-hand, it makes no sense at all, and seems to be agross modern error only. The Samaritan always writesthis name truly, Benjamin, which probably is here of thesame signification, only with the Chaldee termination ininstead of im, in the Hebrew.
VOL. I.—NO. 4.







OCR Output








166 [book v. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


that bent down on their knees, and so drank,to be men of courage, but for all those thatdrank hastily and tumultuously, that he shouldesteem them to do it out of fear, and as indread of their enemies. And when Gideonhad done as God had suggested to him, there-were found three hundred men that tookwater with their hands, tumultuously. So Godbid him take these men, and attack the enemy.Accordingly they pitched their camp at theriver Jordan; as ready the next day to passover it.
Gideon was in great fear, because God hadtold him beforehand that he should set uponhis enemies in the night time. But God beingwilling to free him from his fear, bid him takeone of his soldiers, and go near the Midian-itcs' tents; for that he should from that veryplace have his courage raised,* and growbold. So he obeyed, and went and took hisservant Phurah with him. And as he camepear to one of the tents, he discovered thatthose that were in it were awake, and thatone of them was telling his fellowvsoldier adream of his own; and that so plainly, thatGideon could hear him. The dream was this:he thought he saw a barley-cake, such an oneas could hardly be eaten by men, it was sovile, rolling through the camp, and overthrow­ing the royal tent, and the tents of all thesoldiers. Now the other soldier explainedthis vision to signify the destruction of thearmy; and told them what his reason was,which made him so to conjecture: viz. Thatthe seed called barley was all of it allowedto be of the vilest sort of seed; and that theIsraelites were known to be the vilest of allthe people of Asia; agreeably to the seed ofbarley. And that what seemed to look big


among the Israelites, wasthis Gideon and thearmy that was with him. "And since thousayest, thou didst see the cake overturningour tents," said he, " I am afraid lest Godhath granted the victory over us to Gideon."When Gideon had heard this dream, he wasinspired with courage, and commanded hiesoldiers to arm themselves, telling them ofthis vision of their enemies. They also tookcourage upon what was told them, and wereready to perform what he should command;so Gideon divided his army into three parts,and brought it out about the fourth watch ofthe nightjt each part containing a hundredmen; they all bare empty pitchers and lightedlamps in their hands, that their onset mightnot be discovered by their enemies. Eachman had also a ram's horn in his right hand,which he used instead of a trumpet. Theenemies' camp took up a large space ofground, for they had a great many camels;and as they were divided into different na­tions, so they were all contained in one circleNow when the Hebrews did as they wereordered upon their approach to their ene­mies, and, on the signal given, sounded withtheir rams' horns, and brake their pitchers,and set upon their enemies with their lamps,and a great shout, and cried, "Victory toGideon, by God's assistance," a disorder anda fright seized on the other men, while theywere half asleep, for it was night time, as Godwould have it; so that a few of them wereslain by their enemies, but the greatest partby their own soldiers, on account of the di­versity of their language; and when theywere once thrown into disorder they killedall that they met with, as thinking thorn to beenemies also. Thus there was a great slaugh­


token of their temperance, and of the nobleness of theirspirit, which made them so desirous to engage the enemy,that they would not stay to drink, but (though they werevery thirsty) contented themselves to moisten their mouths,as we say, with a little water; whereas the rest indulgedthemselves so fir, as to drink their bellyful. But afterall, the true reason and design of this method seems to beonly this: That God was minded to reduce Gideon's armyto a very small number, which might very likely be doneby this means. For as the season of the year was hot, andthe generality of the soldiers weary, thirsty, and faint, itw;is most probable that they would lie down, as indeed theydid, and refresh themselves plentifully, and scarce to beexpected that any great number would deny themselves inthis matter. Patrick's Comment, and Saurin's Gideonclef ait des Madianies. B.
* Judg. vii. 10, 11.
t The expression in the text is, in the beginning of themiddle watch. For though the Romans in after ages, di­vided the night into four watches, (Matt. xiv. 25.) yet, inthe eastern parts, and in more ancient times, it consistedbut of three, whereof the first began at six, and continuedfour hours. The second therefore is called the middlewatch, and began at eleven; so that we may suppose, thatit was some time after this, that Gideon alarmed the Midi-anitish camp; and the reason why he chose this part ofthe night to do it in, is obvious, because the trumpetswould then seem to sound louder, and the lights to shinebrighter, and so both increase the consternation of theenemy, and conceal the smailness of his own army. Pool'sAnnot. B.







OCR Output








an. 976.] 901 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


treatment after his death; the bones notbeing then to be distinguished asunder." Butwhen he had performed those funeral rites tothe prophet, and had given that charge to hissons, as he was a wicked and impious man,he went to Jeroboam and said to him:—"Wherefore is it now that thou art disturbedat the words of this silly fellow?" And whenthe king related what had happened aboutthe altar and about his own hand; and gavehim the names of a divine man, and an excel­lent prophet; he endeavoured by a wickedtrick, to weaken that his opinion, and byusing plausible words concerning what hadhappened, he aimed to injure the truth thatwas in them. For he attempted to persuadehim, that his hand was enfeebled by thelabour it had undergone, in supporting thesacrifices; and that upon its resting awhileit returned to its former nature again. Andthat as to the altar, it was but new, and hadborne an abundance of sacrifices, and thoselarge ones too; and was accordingly brokento pieces, and fallen down, by the weight ofwhat had been laid upon it. He also in­formed him of the death of him that hadforetold those things, and how he perished;whence he concluded that he had not anything in him of a prophet, nor spake anything like one. When he had thus spokenhe persuaded the king; and entirely alienatedhis mind from God, and from doing worksthat were righteous and holy; and en­couraged him to go on in his impious prac­tices.* And accordingly he was to thatdegree injurious to God, and so great atransgressor; that he sought for nothing elseevery day but how he might be guilty ofsome new instances of wickedness; and suchas should be more detestable than what hehad been so insolent as to do before. Andso much shall at present suffice to have saidconcerning Jeroboam.


CHAP. X.
OF rehoboam's impiety, and his punishment by shishak
KINO OF EGYPT.
REHOBOAM,t the son of Solomon, who,as we said before, was king of the twotribes, built strong and large cities, Beth­lehem, Etam, Tekoa, Bethzur, Shoco, Adul-lam,J Ipan, Maresha, Ziph, Adoraim, La-chish, Azekah, Zorah, Aijalon, and Hebron.These he built first of all in the tribe ofJudah. He also built other cities in the tribeof Benjamin; and walled them about, andput garrisons in them all, and captains, and agreat deal of corn, and wine, and oil; and hefurnished every one of them plentifully withother provisions that were necessary for sus­tenance. Moreover he put therein shieldsand spears, for many thousand men. The
Eriests also that were in all Israel, and the.evites; and if there were any of the multi­tude that were good and righteous men, theygathered themselves together to him; havingleft their own cities, that they might worshipGod in Jerusalem. For they were not willingto be forced to worship the heifers, whichJeroboam had made; and they augmentedthe kingdom of Rehoboam for three years.And after he had married a woman of his ownkindred, and had by her three children; hemarried also another of his own kindred,who was the daughter of Absalom by Tamar,whose name was Maachah; and by her hehad a son, whom he named Abijah. He hadalso many other children by other wives; buthe loved Maachah above them all. Now hehad eighteen legitimate wives, and thirtyconcubines;|| and he had born to him twenty-eight sons, and threescore daughters; buthe appointed Abijah, whom he had byMaachah, to be his successor in the kingdom;and intrusted him with the treasures and thestrongest cities.


* How much a larger and better copy Josephus had inthis remarkable history of the true prophet of Judea, andhis concern with Jeroboam, and with the false prophet ofBethel, than our other copies have, is evident at firstlight. The prophet's very name Jadon, or, as the Con­stitutions call him, Adonias, IV. 6. is wanting in our othercopies; and it is there, with no little absurdity, said, thatGod revealed Jadon the true prophet's death; not tohimself, as here, but to the false prophet. Of which seeEssay on the Old Test, page 74, 75. Whether the par­ticular account of the arguments made use of, after all, by
the false prophet against his own belief, in order to per­suade Jeroboam to persevere in his idolatry and wicked­ness; and which it seems prevailed with him; than whichmore plausible could not be invented; was intimated inJosephus's copy, or in some other ancient book, cannotnow be determined; our other copies say not one wordof it.
t An. 974.
X Gath, 2 Chron. xi. 8.
II Sixty, 2 Chron. xi. 21.


3H2







OCR Output








ah. 48.] 507 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


flight. He also took their camp, and con­tinued in the pursuit of them. He then re­called Mithridates who had been worsted,and was retired a great way off! Of whosesoldiers eight hundred fell; but of Antipater'sfifty. So Mithridates sent an account of thisbattle to Caesar; and openly declared, thatAntipater was the author of this victory, andof his own preservation. Insomuch that Caesarcommended Antipater; and made use of himin all the rest of that war in the most hazard­ous undertakings: he happened also to bewounded in one of those engagements.
However, when Caesar, after some time,had finished that war, and was sailed awayfor Syria, he honoured Antipater greatly; andconfirmed Hyrcanus in the high-priesthood;and bestowed on Antipater the privilege of acitizen of Rome, and a freedom from taxesevery where. It is reported indeed by many,that Hyrcanus went along with Antipater inthis expedition, and came himself into Egypt:and Strabo of Cappadocia bears witness tothis, when he says thus, in the name of Asi-nius, "After Mithridates had invaded Egypt,and with him Hyrcanus the high-priest of theJews." The same Strabo says thus again, inanother place, in the name of Hypsicrates:that "Mithridates at first went out alone; butAntipater, who had the care of the Jewishaffairs, was called by him to Ascalon; andthat he had three thousand soldiers ready togo along with him; and encouraged othergovernors of the country to go along with himalso; and Hyrcanus. the high-priest, was alsopresent in this expedition."
But Antigonus, the son of Aristobulus, cameat this time to Caesar; and lamented hisfather's fate; and complained that it was byAntipater's means that Aristobulus was takenoff by poison, and his brother was beheaded


by Scipio; and desired that he would takepity on him, who had been ejected out of thatprincipality which was due to him. He alsoaccused Hyrcanus and Antipater as governingthe nation by violence; and offering injuriesto himself. Antipater was present, and madehis defence, as to the accusations that werelaid against him. He demonstrated that An­tigonus and his party were given to innova­tion, and were seditious persons. He alsoreminded Caesar of the difficulties and ser­vices he had undergone when he assisted himin his wars; and discoursed about what hewas a witness of himself. He added, thatAristobulus was justly carried away to Rome,as one that was an enemy to the Romans, andcould never be brought to be a friend tothem: and that his brother had no more thanhe deserved from Scipio; as being seized incommitting robberies. And that this punish­ment was not inflicted on him in a way of vio­lence, or injustice by him that did it.
When Antipater had made this speech,Caesar appointed Hyrcanus to be high-priest;and gave Antipater what principality heshould choose; leaving the determination tohimself. So he made him procurator of Judea.He also gave Hyrcanus leave to raise up thewalls of his own city, upon his asking thatfavour of him; for they had been demolishedby Pompey And this grant he sent to theconsuls to Rome, to be engraven in the capi-tol. *The decree of the senate was as follows:
"Lucius Valerius, the son of Lucius thepraetor, referred this to the senate, upon theides of December, in the temple of Concord.There were present at the writing of this de­cree Lucius Coponius, the son of Lucius, ofthe Colline tribe; and Papirius. of theQuirinetribe; concerning the affairs which Alexanderthe son of Jason, and Numenius, the son of


* Take Dr. Hudson's note upon this place: which Isuppose to be. the truth. "Here is some mistake in Jose-phus. For when he had promised us a decree for therestoration of Jerusalem, he brings in a decree of fargreater antiquity; and that a league of friendship andunion only. One may easily believe that Josephus gaveorder for one thing, and his amanuensis performed ano­ther; by transposing decrees that concerned the Hyrcani;and as deluded by the sameness of their names. For thatbelongs to the first high-priest of this name, [John Hyrca­nus,] which Josephus here ascribes to one that lived later,SHyrcanus the son of Alexander Janneus.] However, theecree which he proposes to set down, follows a littlelower, in the collection of Roman decrees, that concernedVOL. I.—NOS. 43 & 44.
the Jews; and is that dated when Caesar was consul thefifth time." But when he finds, at the beginning of thisdecree, the ides of December; and here at the end of the9th of Hyrcanus; and yet presently the month Panemus,which answers to part of the Julian June and July, it isclear these months December and Panemus are incon­sistent. Petitus therefore seems to be in the right, whenhe separates Panemus from the former decree, and refersit to the next that follows it; which is certainly dated inthat month; and as esteeming both in the same year, the9th of Hyrcanus. Though perhaps a word or two mayhave been dropped out of our copies, that, if extant,would have made some conjecture more certain. SeeDean Prideaux at the year !27.
4L







OCR Output








AN. 381 562.] ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


nied with a few others, over the desert, andcame to Babylon. So he took upon him themanagement of the public affairs and of thekingdom, which had been kept for him byone that was the principal of the Chaldeans;and he received the entire dominions of hisfather; and appointed, that, when the cap­tives came, they should be placed as colo­nies, in the most proper parts of Babylonia.He then adorned the temple of Belus, andthe rest of the temples, in a magnificentmanner, with the spoils he had taken in thewar. He also added another city to thatwhich was there of old, and rebuilt it: thatsuch as would besiege it hereafter mightno more turn the course of the river, andthereby attack the city itself. He thereforebuilt three walls round about the inner city,and three others about that which was theouter; and this he did with burnt brick.And after he had walled the city, andadorned its gates, he built another palacebefore his father's palace; but so that theyjoined to it: to describe whose vast heightand immense riches it would perhaps be toomuch for me to attempt. Yet as large andlofty as they were, they were completed* infifteen days. He also erected elevatedplaces for walking, of stone; and made itresemble mountains: and built it so that itmight be planted with all sorts of trees.He also erected what was called a pensileparadise: because his wife was desirous tohave things like her own country; she hav­ing been bred up in the palaces of Media."Megasthenes also, in his fourth book of his


the year 6IS, that Nebuchadnezzar must have been acommon name of other kings of Babylon besides the greatNebuchadnezzar himself, is a groundless mistake of somemodem chronologers only, and destitute of all properoriginal authority.
* These fifteen days for finishing such vast buildingsat Babylon, in Josephus's copy of Berosus, would seemtoo absurd to be supposed to be the true number;were it not for the same testimony extant also in thefirst book against Apion, with the same number. Itthence indeed uppears, that Josephus's copy of Berosushad this sm.ill number; but that it is the true number, IStill doubt. Josephus assures us, that the walls of somuch a smaller city as Jerusalem were two years andfour months in building by Nehemiah, who yet hastenedthe work all he could; XI. 5. I should think one hun­dred and fifteen days, or a year and twenty days, muchmore proportionable to so great a work.
t Two ye:irs.
% Four years.


Accounts of India, makes mention of thesethings; and thereby endeavours to shew thatthis king, Nebuchadnezzar, exceeded Her­cules in fortitude, and in the greatness of hisactions. For he saith, that "he conqueredgreat part of Libya and Iberia," Dioclesalso, in the second book of the Accounts ofPersia, mentions this king. As does Philos-tratus, in his accounts both of India andof Phoenicia say, that "this king besiegedTyre thirteen years: while at the same timeEthbaal reigned at Tyre." These are allthe histories that I have met with concerningthis king.
After the death of Nebuchadnezzar, Evil-Merodach his son succeeded in the kingdom;who immediately set Jechoniah at liberty,and esteemed him among his most intimatefriends. He also gave him many presents,and made him honourable above the rest ofthe kings that were in Babylon. For hisfather had not kept his faith with Jechoniah,when he voluntarily delivered up himself tohim, with his wives and children, and hiswhole kindred, for the sake of his country:that it might not be taken by siege, and ut­terly destroyed; as we said before. WhenEvil-Merodach was dead, after a reign ofteighteen years, Niglissar his son took thegovernment, and retained it Jforty years:and then ended his life. And after him thesuccession in the kingdom came to his sonLabosordacus, who continued in it, in all,but nine months, and when he was dead, itcame to Baltasar;|| who by the Babylonianswas called Naboandelus. Against him did
II It is here remarkable, that Josephus, without theknowledge of Ptolemy's Canon, should call the same king,whom he himself here, Baruch i. 11. and Daniel v. 1,2,9, 12, 22, 29, 30. styles Baltasar, or Belshazzar, from theBabylonian god Bel; Naboandelus also; and in anotherplace from the same citation out of Berosus, Nabonnedon;from the Babylonian god Nabo, or Nebo. This last isnot remote from the original Babylonian pronunciation inPtolemy's Canon, Nabonadius. For both the place ofthis king in that Canon, as the last of the Assyrian orBabylonian kings, and the number of years of his reign,seventeen, the same in both, demonstrate that it is oneand the same king that is meant by them all. It is alsoworth noting, that Josephus knew that Darius, the part­ner of Cyrus, was the son of Astyages, and was calledby another name among the Greeks: though it does notappear he knew what that name was; as having neverseen the best history of this period, which is Xenophon'iKujs .buiSsm. But then, what Josephus's present copiessay presently, that it was only within no long time


3S2







OCR Output








an. 893.] 329 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


ram, and exhorted him to take care of thatplace; for that therein were some Syrianslying in ambush to kill him. So the kingdid as the prophet exhorted him, and avoid­ed going a hunting. And when Benhadadmissed of the success of his lying in ambush,he was angry with his own servants; as ifthey had betrayed his concealment to Jo-ram, and he sent for them, and said, theywere the betrayers of his secret counsels;and he threatened that he would put themto death: since such their practice was evi­dent, because he had intrusted this secretto none but them; and yet it was madeknown to his enemy. But one that was
E resent said, that he should not mistakeimself, nor suspect that they had discoveredto his enemy his sending men to kill him;but that he ought to know that it wasElisha the prophet who discovered all tohim, and laid open all his counsels. So hegave order that they should send some tolearn in what city Elisha dwelt. Accordinglythose that were sent brought word that hewas in Dothan. Wherefore Benhadad sentto that city a great army with horses andchariots, to take Elisha. So they encom­passed the city round about by night, andkept him therein confined. But when theprophet's servant in the morning perceivedthis, and that his enemies sought to takeElisha, he came running, and crying after adisordered manner to him, and told him of it.But he encouraged him, and bade him not beafraid, but to despise the enemy, and trust inthe assistance of God; and he besought Godto manifest to his servant his power and pre­sence, so far as was possible, in order to theinspiring him with hope and courage. Ac­cordingly God heard the prayer of the pro­phet, and made the servant see a multitudeof chariots and horses encompassing Elisha,till he laid aside his fear, and his courage re­vived, at the sight of what he supposed wascome to their assistance. After this Elishadid farther intreat God, that he would dimthe eyes of their enemies, and*cast a mistbefore them, whereby they might not discern


him. When this was done he went into themidst of his enemies, and asked them, who itwas that they came to seek? And when theyreplied, the prophet Elisha, he promised hewould deliver him to them, if they wouldfollow him to the city where he was. Sothese men were so darkened by God in theirsight and in their mind, that they followedhim very diligently. And when Elisha hadbrought them to Samaria, he ordered Joramthe king to shut the gates, and to place hisown army round about them; and prayed toGod to clear the eyes of these their enemies*and take the mist from before them. Ac­cordingly when they were freed from (heobscurity they had been in, they saw them­selves in the midst of their enemies. Andas the Syrians were strangely amazed anddistressed, as was but reasonable, at an ac­tion so divine and surprising, and as kingJoram asked the prophet, if he would givehim leave to shoot at them: Elisha forbadethem so to do; and said, that it was just tokill those that were taken in battle; butthat these men had done no harm; but,without knowing it, were come thither bythe divine power. So that his counsel wasto treat them in a hospitable manner at histable; and then send them away, withouthurting them. Wherefore Joram obeyed theprophet: and when he had feasted the Sy­rians in a splendid and magnificent manner,he let them go to Benhadad their king.t
Now when these men were come back,and had shewed Benhadad how strange anaccident had befallen them: and how theyhad experienced the God of Israel's power,he wondered at it: as also at that prophetwith whom God was so evidently present.So he determined to make no more secretattempts upon the king of Israel, out of fearof Elisha: but resolved to make open warwith them; as supposing he could be toohard for his enemies by the multitude of hisarmy and his power. So he made an ex­pedition with a great army against Joram;who, not thinking himself a match for him,shut himself up in Samaria, and depended


* 1 Kings vi. 20.
t Upon occasion of this stratagem of Elisha's in Jose-phus, we may take notice, that although Josephus wasone of the greatest lovers of truth in the world, yet, ina just war, he seems to have had no manner of scruple
upon him by all such stratagems possible to deceivepublic enemies. See this Josephus's account of Jere­miah's imposition on the great men of the Jews in some­what a like case, X. 7. See him also, VII. 9. And seeour own Bible, 2 Sam. xvi. 16, &c. and xvii. 1—16, 20.







OCR Output








an. 782.] 351 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


dom nine years;* but was a wicked man,and a despiser of the divine worship. AndShalmaneser, king of Assyria, made an expe­dition against him, and overcame him (whichmust have been because he had not Godfavorable nor assistant to him,) and broughthim to submission, and ordered him to pay anappointed tribute. Now in the fourth yearof the reign of Hoshea, Hezekiah,f the sonof Ahaz, began to reign in Jerusalem; andhis mother's name was Abijah, a citizen ofJerusalem. His nature was good, and reli-
fious. For when he came to the kingdome thought nothing more necessary, or moreadvantageous to himself, and to his subjects,than to worship God. Accordingly he as­sembled the people, and the priests and theLevites, and made a speech to them, andsaid, " You are not ignorant how by the sinsof my father, who transgressed that sacred


honour which was due to God, you have hadexperience of many and great miseries; whileyou were corrupted in your mind by him;and were induced to worship those which hesupposed to be gods. I exhort you, there­fore, who have learned by sad experience howdangerous a thing impiety is, to put that imme­diately out of your memory; and to purifyyourselves from your former pollutions; andto open the temple to these priests and Le­vites who are here convened; and to cleanseit with the accustomed sacrifices, and torecover all the ancient honour which ourforefathers payed to it. For by this meanswe may render God favourable; and he willremit the anger he hath had towards us."
When the king had said this, the priestsopened the temple; and when they had setin order the vessels of God, and had cast outwhat was impure, they laid the accustomed


years, verse, 33, it may be questioned, whether some ofthe copies in the days of Josephus had not hereaboutssome different numbers; and that according to thosenumbers Pekah might hare been slain about the sametime that Ahaz died; though possibly Josephus mightuse these words, "about the same time," in a looseracceptation.
* From an. 737 to 728.
t Of Ahaz it is recorded, that he was but twenty yearsold when he began to reign, and that he reigned sixteenbefore he died; so that in the whole he lived six andthirty years, 2 Kings xvi. 2. Now his son Hezekiah issaid to have been five and twenty years old when hebegan to reign, 2 Kings xviii. 2. and, consequently, hisfather must have begot him when he was eleven years old,which seems a HtUe incredible: and to solve this diffi­culty, commentators have taken several ways. Somehave imagined that Hezekiah was not the real, but adoptedson only of Ahaz, and might therefore succeed his fosterfather, at this or any other age; but this hypothesis, asBochart observes, spoils the descent of our Saviour fromDavid. Others suppose, that there was an interregnumfor some years occasioned by a sedition that happened inJerusalem. But there is no foundation for this hypothesisin history; on the contrary it is much more likely, that,as Hezekiah was a man grown, and greatly beloved bythe people, he should immediately succeed upon hisfather's demise. Others imagine, that, in the detestationof Ahaz's wickedness his reign is omitted in this account,and that therefore the passage should be thus rendered :—Ahaz was twenty years old when his father began toreign. But this is reversing the order of the words in thetext, and turning them into a sense that is fir from beingnatural. Others, not satisfied with any of these solutions,will needs have it, that there is an error crept into thetext itself by the negligence of some transcriber, whoinstead of twenty, made Hezekiah five and twenty yearsold, when his reign commenced, merely by mistaking thenumerical letters, (which are most liable in variation,) tofind any fault with the text except where there is no other
tolerable solution, which is not the case here. In thesedays, and long before, it was no unusual thing, upon se­veral considerations, for kings to take the son who was tosucceed them into partnership with them before they died.Now, Ahaz, by his mismanagement, had brought himselfinto so many intanglements, 2 Chron. xxviii. 16, &.c. andxxix. 7, &c. as to want an assistant in the government,and, accordingly, it appears that he admitted his son inthat capacity. For, whereas, it is said of Hezekiah, thathe began to reign in the third year of Hoshea son ofElah, 2 Kings xviii. 1. and of Hoshea, that he began toreign in the twelfth year of Ahaz, 2 Kings xvii. 1. it isevident that Hezekiah began to reign in the fourteenthyear of Ahaz his father, and so reigned two or three yearsbefore his father's death. So that, at the first date of hisreign, which was in conjunction with his father, he mightbe two or three and twenty, and his father consequentlywhen he begot him, two or three years older than thecommon computation. But there is another way of solv­ing this difficulty. It is a common thing, both in sacredand profane authors, in the computation of time, to takeno notice, whether the year they mention be perfect orimperfect, whether finished or but newly begun. Uponthis account Ahaz might be near one and twenty yearsold when he began to reign, and near seventeen yearsolder when he died: and on the other hand, Hezekiah,when he began to reign, might be but just entering intohis five and twentieth year, and by this means, Ahaz mightbe near fourteen years old when he begat Hezekiah, whichis no extraordinary thing at all. Nay, even upon thelowest supposition, that he was but eleven or twelve yearsold, yet instances are innumerable (such as Bochart andothers have given) of persons that have procreated chil­dren at that age: for it is not so much the number ofyears, as the nature of the climate, the constitution of thebody, the stature of the person, the quality of the diet, &cthat ought to be considered in this affair. Bochart's Phaleg. p. 920. Miller'$ History of the Church, p. 201. Bedford's Scripture Chronology; Patrick's and Caltntt't Com-mentaries. B.







OCR Output








288 [book viit. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


think they were in motion. But the otherpart up to the roof was plastered over, and,as it were, embroidered with colours andpictures. He built other edifices for plea­sure; as also very long cloisters, and thosesituate in an agreeable part of the palace;and among them a most noble dining-roomfor feastings, and full of such furniture as sofine a room ought to have for the conveniencyof the guests, and where all the vessels weremade of gold. Now it is very hard to reckonthe magnitude, and the variety of the royalapartments; how many rooms there were ofthe largest sort, how many of a bigness infe­rior to those, and how many that were sub­terraneous and, invisible; the curiosity ofthose that enjoyed the fresh air, and thegroves for the most delightful prospect, forthe avoiding the heat and the covering oftheir bodies. In a word, Solomon made thewhole building entirely of white stone, andcedar wood, and gold, and silver. He alsoadorned the roofs and the walls with stonesset in gold, and beautified them in the samemanner as he had beautified the temple ofGod with the like stones. He also madehimself a large throne of ivory,* constructedas a seat of justice, and having six steps to it.On every one of which stood, on each end ofthe step, two lions; two other lions standingabove also, but at the sitting place of the


throne, hands came out, and received theking; and when he sat backward, he restedon a half bullock, that looked towards hisback, but still all was fastened together withgold.
When Solomon had completed all this inftwenty years' time, because Hiram, king ofTyre, had contributed a great deal of gold,and more silver, to these buildings; as alsocedar wood, and pine wood; he rewardedHiram with rich presents; corn he sent himalso year by year, and wine, and oil; whichwere the principal things he stood in need of;because he inhabited an island, as we havealready said. And besides these, he grantedhim twenty cities of GalileeJ that lay notfar from Tyre; which when Hiram went to,and viewed, and did not like the gift, he sentword to Solomon that he did not want suchcities as they were. And after that timethose cities were called the land of Cabul;which name, if it be interpreted according tothe language of the Phoenicians, denotes whatdoes not please. Moreover the king of TyreIjsent sophisms and enigmatical sayings toSolomon, and desired he would return theirsolutions. Now so sagacious and under­standing was Solomon, that none of theseproblems were too hard for him; but he con­quered them all by his reasonings, and disco­vered their hidden meaning, and brought it


* 1 Kings x. 18.
t From an. 1052 to 1032 B. C.
J It 13 an express injunction which God gives the Israel­ites, that the land wherein the people had a right bydivine lot, and himself a right, as being the sole proprietorthereof, was not to be sold or alienated for ever, Lev. xxv.23. How then could Solomon, without violating this law,pretend to give Hiram twenty cities in the land of Galilee?Now to this some have replied, that Solomon did not giveHiram a property and perpetual right to those cities, butonly assigned him the possession of them for a time, untilthe debt which he had contracted for the several supplieshe had from him, while he was building the temple, wassatisfied. Others think that upon supposition that thesecities were inhabited by Israelites, Solomon did not giveHiram, (as indeed he could not,) their particular posses­sions, but only his own royalties over them, (which hemight justly do) and all the profits he received from them,which according to the taxes then imposed, 1 Kings xii. 4.were not inconsiderable. But there is no reason for thesefar-fetched solutions, when the Scripture expressly tellsus, that these cities were not in the territories of Israel,nor inhabited at that time by the Israelites, 2 Chron. viii.2* They were indeed some of them conquered by theking of Egypt, who gave them to Solomon as a portionwith his daughter, and others by Solomon himself, who,as Seidell observes (De Jure Nat. et Gen. lib. vi. cap. 16.)
had " a right to dispose of those lands which he had con­quered in voluntary war, without the consent of thesenate." And this may be one reason why he gave these,rather than other cities, because these were certainly inhis own power to give, when others perhaps were not.A learned author upon this subject, has given a quitedifferent turn to the sense of the passage. For hisopinion is, that Hiram did not return these cities, becausehe thought them not good enough, but because he wasunwilling to receive so large a remuneration for the fewgood offices he had done Solomon, and was minded ratherthat his favours of this kind should be all gratuitous.He therefore makes the word Cabul, (which is the namethat Hiram gives to the country where these cities stood,)a title of respect, and not of contempt; for he derives itfrom the Hebrew Chebes, which signifies a bond orchain, intimating that these two neighbouring kings hadmutually bound themselves in a bond of friendship,Solomon by giving, and Hiram by returning the citiesnow under consideration. This is very pretty: but it iscarrying the point of generosity in the king of Tyre alittle too high, in my opinion, considering his acceptanceof, if not express stipulation for, such a quantity of cornand oil, in lieu of the timber which he sent Solomon,1 Kings v. 10. 11. Patrick's and Le Clerks Commentaries,and Pool's Annotations. B.I I About an. 1030.







OCR Output








ah. 1756.] 53 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


gates; and he called upon Joseph, who soldthe corn to them; being become confessedlya saviour to the whole multitude of the Egyp­tians. Nor did he open this market of cornfor the people of that country only: but stran­gers had liberty to buy also, Joseph beingwilling that all men, who are naturally akinto each other, should have assistance fromthose that lived in happiness.
Jacob also when he understood thatforeigners had this privilege, sent all his sonsinto Egypt to buy corn; for the land of Ca­naan was grievously afflicted with the famine:and this great misery touched the wholecontinent. He only retained Benjamin, whowas born to him by Rachel; and was of thesame mother as Joseph. These sons of Jacobthen came into Egypt, and applied them­selves to Joseph, to buy corn, for nothing ofthis kind was done without his approbation!since even the honour that was paid the kinghimself, was only advantageous to the per­sons that paid it when they took care tohonour Joseph also. Now when he well knewhis brethren, they thought nothing of him; forhe was but a youth when he left them, andwas now come to an age much greater, thatthe lineaments of his face were changed, andhe was not known to them; besides this, thegreatness of the dignity wherein he appearedsuffered them not so much as to suspect thetruth. He therefore now made trial whatsentiments they had about the affairs of thegreatest consequence; for he refused to sellthem corn, and said they were come as spiesof the king's affairs; and that they came fromseveral countries, and joined themselvestogether, and pretended they were of kin; itnot being possible that a private man should


breed up so many sons, and those of so greata beauty of countenance as they were: suchan education of so many children being noteasily obtained by kings themselves. Nowthis he did in order to discover what con­cerned his father; and what happened to himafter his own departure from him; and as de­siring to know what was become of Benjaminhis brother; for he was afraid that they hadventured on the like wicked enterprise againsthim, that they had done to himself, and hadtaken him off also.*
Now these brethren of his were under dis­traction and terror, and thought that verygreat danger hung over them; yet not at allreflecting upon their brother Joseph, andstanding firm under the accusations laid againstthem, they made their defence by Reubel, theeldest of them, who now became their spokes­man. "We come not hither," said he, " withany unjust design, nor in order to bring anyharm to the king's affairs; we only want tobe preserved, as supposing,your humanitymight be a refuge for us from the miserieswhich our country labours under; we haveheard that you proposed to sell corn, not onlyto your own countrymen, but to strangersalso; and that you determined to allow thatcorn in order to preserve all that want it.But that we are brethren, and of the samecommon blood, the peculiar lineaments ofour face, and those not much different fromone another, plainly shew. Our father's nameis Jacob, an Hebrew; who had twelve sons,by four wives, which twelve of us while wewere all alive, were a happy family. Butwhen one of our brethren, whose name wasJoseph, died, our affairs changed for theworse, for our father could not forbear to


of famine before they came, told us before, as well as here,by Josephus, seems almost incredible. It is in no othercopy that I know of.
* In scripture Joseph is represented as swearing by thelife of Pharaoh. Most authors take this for an oath, theoriginal of which is well explained by Mr. Selden, (in hisTitles of Honour, p. 45.) where he observes, that thenames of gods being given to kings very early, from theexcellency of their heroic virtue, which made them an­ciently great benefactors to mankind; thence arose thecustom of swearing by them: which Aben Ezra saith,continued in his time, (about 1170,) when Egypt wasgoverned by caliphs. It any man swore by the king'sbead, and were found to have sworn falsely, he waspunished capitally. Extraordinary as this kind of oathwhich Joseph made use of may appear to us, it still con-
tinues in the East. Mr. Hanway says, the most sacredoath among the Persians is " by the king's head;" (Trav.vol. i. p. 313.) and among other instances of it we read inthe travels of the Ambassadors, p. 204, "there were butsixty horses for ninety-four persons. The Mehemander(or conductor) swore by the head of the king (which is thegreatest oath among the Persians) that he could not pos­sibly find any more." And Thevenot says, (Trav. p.97, part 2.) "his subjects never look upon him but withfear and trembling; and they have such respect for him,and pay so blind an obedience to his orders, that how un­just soever his commands might be, they perform them,though against the law both of God and nature. Nay, ifthey swear by the king's head, their oath is more authentic,and of greater credit, than if they swore by all that is mostsacred in heaven and upon earth."







OCR Output








AN. 31.] 545 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


vantage to be expected from such an under­taking, if any such could be supposed in thiscase, it would appear to deserve condemna­tion, on account of the insolence he must takeupon him in doing it. These considerationsmade it very plain, that in so doing he wouldfind his government filled with mischiefs, bothgreat and lasting, both to himself and his pos­terity: whereas it was still in his power to re­ject that wickedness she would persuade himto, and to come off honourably at the sametime. So by thus representing to Herod thehazard he must, in all probability, run by thisundertaking, they restrained him from it. Hetherefore treated Cleopatra kindly, and madeher presents, and conducted her on her wayto Egypt.
But Antony subdued Armenia, and sentArtabazes, the son of Tigranes, in bonds, withhis children, and procurators, to Egypt; andmade a present of them, and of all the royalornaments which he had taken out of thatkingdom, to Cleopatra. And Artaxias theeldest of his sons, who had escaped at thattime, took the kingdom of Armenia. Hewas, indeed, ejected by Archelaus, and NeroCaesar, when they restored Tigranes hisyounger brother to that kingdom: but thishappened a considerable time afterward.
But as to the tributes which Herod was toay Cleopatra for that country which Antonyad given her, he acted fairly with her, asdeeming it not safe for him to afford anycause for Cleopatra to hate him. As for theking of Arabia, whose tribute Herod had un­dertaken to pay her; for some time indeedhe paid him as much as came to two hundredtalents. But he afterward became very slowin his payments; and could hardly be broughtto pay some parts of it; and was not willingto pay even them without some deductions.
CHAP. V.
HEROD MAKES WAR WITH THE KING OF ARABIA, AND AFTERSEVERAL ENGAGEMENTS, SUBDUES HIM; AND IS CHOSEN
BY THE ARABS TO BE GOVERNOR OF THAT NATION.
ALSO, CONCERNING A GREAT EARTHQUAKE.
HEREUPON Herod held himself readyto go against the king of Arabia; be­cause of his ingratitude; and because, afterall, he would do nothing that was just to him.Although Herod made the Roman war an oc-


E


casion of delaying his own. For the battleat Actium was now expected; which hap­pened in the second year of the hundred andeighty and seventh Olympiad: where Caesarand Antony were to fight for the supremepower of the world. But Herod having en­joyed a country that was very fruitful, andthat now for a long time; and having receivedgreat taxes, and raised great armies there­with; got together a body of men, and care­fully furnished them with all necessaries, anddesigned them as auxiliaries for Antony. ButAntony said he had no want of his assistance.But he commanded him to punish the king ofArabia; for he had heard, both from him,and from Cleopatra, how perfidious he was:for Cleopatra thought it for her own advan­tage, that these two kings should do oneanother as great mischief as possible. Uponthis message from Antony, Herod returnedback; but kept his army with him, in orderto invade Arabia. So when his army of horse­men and footmen was ready, he marched toDiospolis. Thither the Arabians came alsoto meet them; for they were not unapprisedof this war that was coming upon them. Andafter a great battle had been fought, the Jewshad the victory. But afterward there weregotten together another numerous army ofthe Arabians, at Cana, a place of Coelesyria.Herod was informed of this beforehand: sohe came against them, with the greatest partof his forces. And when he was come nearto Cana, he resolved to encamp himself, andhe cast up a bulwark; that he might take aproper season for attacking the enemy. Butas he was giving those orders, the multitudeof the Jews cried out, that he should makeno delay, but lead them against the Arabians.On this occasion they were in high spirits, asbelieving they were in very good order; andthose especially were so that had been in theformer battle, and had been conquerors; andhad not permitted their enemies so much asto come to a close fight with them. Andwhen they were so tumultuous, and shewedsuch great alacrity, the king resolved to makeuse of that zeal the multitude then exhibited.And when he had assured them he would not ibe behindhand with them in courage, he ledthem on, and stood before them in his ar­mour: all the regiments following him intheir several ranks. Hereupon a consterna-







OCR Output








106 [book III. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


seven times seven years,* which in all arefifty years; and the fiftieth year is called bythe Hebrews the Jubilee. At that time debt­ors are freed from their debts, and slaves areset at liberty, which slaves became such,though they were of the same stock, by trans­gressing some of those laws whose punishmentwas not capital; but they were punished bythis method of slavery. This year also re­stores the land to its former possessors in thefollowing manner; when the jubilee is come,which name denotes liberty, he that sold theland, and he that bought it, meet together,and make an estimate on one hand of thefruits gathered, and on the other hand of theexpenses laid out upon it. If the fruits ga­thered come to more than the expenses laidout, he that sold it takes the land again; butif the expenses prove more than the fruits,the present possessor receives of the formerowner the difference that was wanting, andleaves the land to him: but if the fruits re­ceived, and the expenses laid out, proveequal, the present possessor relinquishes it tothe former owner. Moses would have thesame law obtain as to those houses also whichwere sold in villages: but he made a differ­ent law for such as were sold in a city; for ifhe that sold it tendered the purchaser hismoney again within a year, he was forced torestore it; but in case a whole year had in­tervened, the purchaser was to enjoy what hehad bought. This was the constitution of thelaws which Moses learned of God when thecamp lay under mount Sinai, and this he de­livered in writing to the Hebrews.
Now when this settlement of laws seemedto be well over, Moses thought proper to takea review of the host, in order to settle theaffairs of war: so he charged the heads ofthe tribes, excepting the tribe of Levi, to takean exact account of the number of those whowere able to go to war; for as to the Levitesthey were holy, and free from all such bur­dens. Now, when the people had been num­bered, there were found six hundered thou­sand that were able to go to war, from twentyto fifty years of age, besides three thousandsix hundred and fifty. Instead of Levi, Mosestook Manasseh, the son of Joseph, among the


* Levit. xxv. 1.t Book II. chap. 8.


heads of tribes, and Ephraim instead of Jo­seph. It was indeed the desire of Jacobhimself to Joseph, that he would give him hissons to be his own by adoption,f as I have be­fore related.
When they set up the tabernacle, they re­ceived it into the midst of their camp; threeof the tribes pitching their tents on each sideof it, and roads were cut through the midstof these tents. It was like a well appointedmarket, and every thing was there ready forsale in due order, and all sorts of artificerswere in the shops, and it resembled nothingso much as a city that sometimes was movea­ble, and sometimes fixed. The priests hadthe first places about the tabernacle; thenthe Levites, who, because their whole mul­titude was reckoned from thirty days old,were twenty-three thousand eight hundredand eighty males; and during the time thatthe cloud stood over the tabernacle, theythought proper to stay in the same place, assupposing that God there inhabited amongmen, but when that removed they journeyedalso.J
Moses was also the inventor of the form ofthe Hebrew trumpet, which was made ofsilver. In length it was little less than a cu­bit. It was composed of a narrow tube, some­what thicker than a flute, but with so muchbreadth as was sufficient for admission of thebreadth of a man's mouth; it ended in theform of a bell, like common trumpets. Itssound was called, in the Hebrew tongue,assosra. There were two of them made; andwhen the first of them gave a signal, theheads of the tribes were to assemble, andconsult about the affairs to them properly be­longing: but when both of them sounded theycalled the multitude together, which wasdone when the tabernacle was to remove.When the second signal was given, those thatwere on the south quarter did the like. Inthe next place, the tabernacle was taken topieces, and was carried in the midst of sixtribes that went before, and of six that fol­lowed. Now all the Levites were about thetabernacle. When the third signal was given,that part which had their tents towards thewest put themselves in motion; and at the
X Exod. xl. 36, 37.







OCR Output













OCR Output








226 [book VII. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


with him pursuing Abner, when they came tothe place where Asahel lay, they stood roundabout the dead body, and left off the pursuitof the enemy. However, both Joab himself,*and his brother Abishai, ran past the corpse,and making their anger at the death of Asahelan occasion of greater zeal against Abner,they went on with incredible haste andalacrity, and pursued Abner, to a certainplace called Ammah; it was about sunset.Then did Joab ascend a certain hill, as hestood at that place, having the tribe of Ben­jamin with him, whence he took a view ofthem, and of Abner also. Hereupon Abnercried aloud, and said, that it was not fit thatthey should irritate men of the same nationto fight so bitterly one against another; thatas for Asahel his brother, he was himself inthe wrong when he would not be advised byhim not to pursue him any farther; whichwas the occasion of his death. So Joab con­sented to what he said, and accepted hiswords as an excuse about Asahel; andcalled his soldiers back with the sound ofthe trumpet, as a signal for their retreat,and thereby put a stop to any farther pur­suit. After which Joab pitched his campthere that night. But Abner marched allnight, and passed over the river Jordan, andcame to Ishbosheth, Saul's son, to Mahanaim.On the next day Joab counted the deadmen, and took care of all their funerals.Now there were slain of Abner's soldiersabout three hundred and sixty; but of thoseof David nineteen besides Asahel, whosebody Joab and Abishai carried to Bethle­hem. And when they had buried him inthe sepulchre of their fathers,f they came toDavid to Hebron. From this time, therefore,there began an intestine war, which lasteda great while; in which the followers ofDavid grew stronger, in the dangers theyunderwent, and the servants and subjects of


Saul's sons did almost every day becomeweaker.
About this time,t David was become thefather of six sons, born of as many mothers.The eldest was by Abinoam, and he wascalled Amnon; the second was Daniel, by hiswife Abigail; the name of the third was Ab­salom, by Maachah, the daughter of Talmai,king of Geshur; the fourth he named Ado­nijah, by his wife Haggith; the fifth was She-phatiah, by Abitail; and the sixth he calledIthream, by Eglah. Now while this intestinewar went on, and while the subjects of thetwo kings came frequently to action, it wasAbner, general of the host of Saul's son, whoby his prudence and the great interest hehad among the multitude, made them all con­tinue with Ishbosheth. And indeed it was aconsiderable time that they continued of hisparty.
But afterwards|| Abner was blamed, andan accusation was laid against him, that hehad taken indecent liberties with Rispah,the daughter of Aiah, and Saul'3 concubine;§so when he was complained of by Ishboshethhe was very uneasy, and angry at it; becausehe had not justice done him by Ishbosheth,to whom he had shewn the greatest kind­ness. He therefore threatened that he wouldtransfer the kingdom to David, and demon­strated that he did not rule over the peoplebeyond Jordan by his own abilities andwisdom, but by his warlike conduct andfidelity, in leading his army. So he sentambassadors to Hebron, and desired thatDavid would give him security upon oath,that he would esteem him his companionand friend; upon condition that he shouldpersuade the people to leave Saul's son,and to choose him king of the whole country.And when David had made that leaguewith Abner; (for he was pleased with thismessage to him,) he desired that he would


* It ought here to be noted, that Joab, Abishai, andAsahel, were all David's nephews, the sons of his sisterZeruiah, as 1 Chron. ii. 16. and that Amasa was also hisnephew, by his other sister Abigail, v. 17.
t 2 Sam. ii. 32.
t An. 1090.
II An. 1089.
§ What notion the world, at this time, had of marryingany royal relirt, is evident from the case of Adonijah,whom Solomon put to death for desiring but to ask forAbisbag, one of David's concubines, though he had era-
ployed Bath-sheba, the king's mother, to he his inter­cessor, and was himself his brother, 1 Kings ii. 17. Itmay be said perhaps, that Adonijah was at this time as­piring at the throne, which Solomon perceiving, tookoccasion from this his request, to fall out with him, andprevent it. But however this be, a general rule it was,not among the Jews only, but among other nations, thatno private person should presume to marry the king'swidow; for this made him appear as a rival and competitorfor the crown. Calmet'i Comment. B.







OCR Output








AN. 44.] 513 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


second year of that sabbatical period, thefourth part of what was sown. And besidesthis, they are to pay the same tithes to Hyr-canus and his sons which they paid to theirforefathers. And that no one, neither presi­dent, lieutenant nor ambassador, raise aux­iliaries within the bounds of Judea. Nor maysoldiers exact money of them for winter quar­ters, or under any other pretence; but theyare to be free from all sorts of injuries. Andwhatsoever they shall hereafter have, and arein possession of, or have bought, they shallretain. It is also our pleasure that the cityJoppa, which the Jews had originally, whenthey made a league of friendship with theRomans, shall belong to them, as it formerlydid; and that Hyrcanus, the son of Alexan­der, and his sons have, as tribute of that cityfrom those that occupy the land, for thecountry, and for what they export every yearto Sidon, twenty thousand six hundred andseventy-five modii every year; the seventhyear which they call the sabbath year, ex­cepted: whereupon they neither plough, norreceive the product of their trees. It is alsothe pleasure of the senate, that as to the vil­lages which are in the great plain, whichHyrcanus and his forefathers formerly pos­sessed, Hyrcanus and the Jews have themwith the same privileges with which theyformerly had them also: and that the sameoriginal ordinances remain still in force whichconcern the Jews, with regard to their high-priests; and that they enjoy the same bene­fits which they have had formerly by theconcession of the people, and of the senate:and let them enjoy the like privileges inLydda. It is also the pleasure of the senate,that Hyrcanus the ethnarch, and the Jews,retain those places, countries, and villages,which belonged to the kings of Syria andPhoenicia, the confederates of the Romans,and which they had bestowed on them, astheir free gifts: it is also granted to Hyrcanus,and to his sons, and to the ambassadors bythem sent to us; that in the fights betweensingle gladiators, and in those with beasts,they shall sit among the senators, to see thoseshows. And that when they desire an audi-
* Dr. Hudson justly supposes, that these Roman impe-rators or generals of armies, who gave testimony to Hyr-canus's and the Jews' fidelity and good will to the Ro­mans, before the senate and people of Rome, were prin-


ence, they shall be introduced into the senate,by the dictator, or by the general of the horse.And when they have introduced them, theiranswers shall be returned in ten days at thefarthest, after the decree of the senate ismade about their affairs."
"Caius Caesar, imperator, dictator thefourth time, and consul the fifth time, de­clared to be perpetual dictator; made thisspeech, concerning the priests and privilegesof Hyrcanus, the son of Alexander, the high-priest and ethnarch of the Jews. Since those*imperators that have been in the provincesbefore me have borne witness to Hyrcanusthe high-priest of the Jews, and to the Jewsthemselves, and this before the senate andpeople of Rome; when the people and senatereturned their thanks to them: it is good thatwe also now remember the same, and pro­vide that a requital be made to Hyrcanus, tothe nation of the Jews, and to the sons ofHyrcanus, by the senate and people of Rome;and that suitably to the good will they haveshewn us, and to the benefits they have be­stowed upon us."
"Julius Caius, the praetor and consul ofRome, to the magistrates, senate, and people,of the Parians, sendeth greeting. The Jewsof Delos, and some other Jews that sojournthere, in the presence of your ambassadors,signified to us, that by a decree of yours youforbid them to make use of the customs oftheir forefathers, and their way of sacred wor­ship. Now it does not please me that suchdecrees should be made against our friendsand confederates: whereby they are forbid­den to live according to their own customs,or to bring in contributions for common sup­pers, and holy festivals; while they are notforbidden so to do even at Rome itself. Foreven Caius Caesar, our imperator, and consul,in that decree, wherein he forbade the Bac­chanal rioters to meet in the city, did yetpermit these Jews and these only, both tobring in their contributions, and to maketheir common suppers. Accordingly when Iforbid other Bacchanal rioters, I permit theseJews to gather themselves together, accord­ing to the customs and laws of their forefa-
cipally Pompey, Scaurus, and Gabinius. Of all whomJosephus had already given us the history, so far as theJews were concerned with them.







OCR Output








AN. 63.] 49ft ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


violence and disorder. And there were nofewer than a thousand Jews, of the bestesteem among them, who confirmed this ac­cusation; which confirmation was procuredby Antipater. But Aristobulus alledgedagainst him, that it was Hyrcanus's own tem­per, which was inactive, and on that accountcontemptible, which caused him to be de­prived of the government: and that for him­self he was necessitated to take it upon him;lest it should be transferred to others. Andthat as to his *title of king, it was no otherthan what his father had taken before him.He also called for witnesses of what he said,some persons who were both young and in­solent; whose purple garments, fine heads ofhair, and other ornaments, were detested bythe court, and which they appeared in, notas though they were to plead their cause ina court of justice; but as if they were march­ing in a pompous procession.
When Pompey had heard the causes ofthese two, and had condemned Aristobulusfor his violent procedure; he spake civilly tothem, and dismissed them with an assurancethat when he came again into their countryhe would settle all their affairs; after he hadfirst taken a view of the affairs of the Naba-teans. In the mean time he ordered them tobe quiet; and treated Aristobulus civilly;lest he should make the nation revolt, andhinder his return. This, however, Aristobu­lus did: for without expecting any fartherdetermination, which Pompey had promisedthem, he went to the city Delius, and thencemarched into Judea.
At this behaviour Pompey was angry: andtaking with him that army which he wasleading against the Nabateans, and the aux­iliaries that came from Damascus, and theother parts of Syria; with the other Romanlegions which he had with him; he made anexpedition against Aristobulus. But as hepassed by Pella, and Scythopolis, he cameto Coreae; which is the first entrance into


Judea when one passes over the midlandcountries. There he came to a most beau­tiful fortress, (that was built on the top ofthe mountain called Alexandrium,) whitherAristobulus had fled; and thence Pompeysent his commands to him, that he shouldcome to him. Accordingly, at the persuasionsof many, that he would not make war withthe Romans, he came down. And when hehad disputed with his brother about his rightsto the government, he went up again to thecitadel; as Pompey gave him leave to do.And this he did two or three times: flatter­ing himself with the hopes of having thekingdom granted to him. So that he stillpretended he would obey Pompey in what­soever he commanded: although at the sametime he retired to his fortress; that he mightnot depress himself too low; and that hemight be prepared for a war, in case it should
})rove as he feared, that Pompey would trans­fer the government to Hyrcanus. But whenPompey enjoined Aristobulus to deliver upthe fortresses he held; and to send an injunc­tion to their governors, under his own hand,for that purpose: (for they had been forbid­den to deliver them up upon any other com­mands:) he submitted to do so; but still heretired in displeasure to Jerusalem, and madepreparation for war. A little after this, cer­tain persons came out of Pontus, and inform­ed Pompey, as he was on the way, and con­ducting his army against Aristobulus, thatMithridates was slain by his son Pharnaces.
CHAP. IV.


OF THE IMPRISONMENT OP ARISTOBULUS, AND THE SIEGEAND REDUCTION OF JERUSALEM BY FOMPKY.
WHEN Pompey thad pitched his campat Jericho, (where J the palm-treegrows, and that balsam which is an ointmentof all the most precious: which, upon an in­cision made in the wood with a sharp stone,distils out like a juice:) he marched in the


* See the note, Book XIII. chap. 10.
t An. 63.
t These express testimonies of Josephus's here, andVIII. 6, and XV. 4. that the only balsam gardens, and thebest palm-trees were, at least in his days, near Jerichoand Engaddi; about the north part of the Dead Sea:(whereabout also Alexander the Great saw the balsamdrop, Thund. Legion, page 38, 56,) shew the mistake ofthose that understand Eusebius and Jerom, as if one of
VOL. I.—NOS. 41 & 42.
those gardens were at the south part of that sea, at Zoaror Segor. Whereas they must either mean another Zoaror Segor, which was between Jericho and Engaddi, agree­ably to Josephus; which yet they do not appear to do:or else they directly contradict Josephus; ana were there­in greatly mistaken. I mean this, unless that balsam, andthe best palm-trees, grew much more southward in Judeain the time of Eusebius and Jerom than they did in thedays of Josephus.
4K







OCR Output








aN. 896.] 321 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


the enemy, and wounded the king throughhis breast-plate, in his lungs. Upon this,Ahab resolved not to make his mischanceknown to his army, lest they should run away.But he bade the driver of his chariot to turnit back, and carry him out of the battle, be­cause he was mortally wounded.* However,he sat in his chariot, and endured the paintill sunset, and then he fainted away anddied.
At the approach of night the Syrian armyretired to their camp; and when the heraldbelonging to the camp gave notice that Ahabwas dead, they returned home. And theytook the dead body of Ahab to Samaria, andburied it there; but when they had washedhis chariot in the fountain of Jezreel, whichwas bloody with the dead body of the king,they acknowledged that the prophecy ofElijah was true, for the dogs licked his blood,and the harlots continued afterward to washthemselves in that fountain. But still he diedat Ramoth, as Micaiah had foretold. And as


what things weref foretold should happen toAhab by the two prophets came to pass, weought thence to have exalted notions of God;and every where to honour and worship him,and never to suppose that what is pleasantand agreeable is worthy of belief before whatis true; and to esteem nothing more advan­tageous than the gift of prophecy, and thatforeknowledge of future events which is de­rived from it. Since God shews men therebywhat they ought to avoid. We may also,from what happened to this king, considerthe power of fate;J that there is no way ofavoiding it, even when we know it. It creepsupon human souls, and flatters them withpleasing hopes, till it leads them about to theplace whence it will be too hard for themAccordingly Ahab appears to have been de­ceived thereby, till he disbelieved those thatpredicted his defeat; but by giving credit tosuch as foretold what was grateful to him, hewas slain; and his son Ahaziah succeededhim.


* 1 Kings xxii. 34.
t We have here a very wise reflection of Josephus'sabout Divine Providence; and what is derived from it,prophecy; and the inevitable certainty of its accomplish­ment; and that when wicked men think they take propermethods to elude what is denounced against them, and to
escape the Divine judgments thereby threatened, withoutrepentance, they are ever, by Providence, infatuated tobring about their own destruction. And thereby withalto demonstrate the perfect veracity of that God whosepredictions they endeavour to elude.J Or Divine Providence.







OCR Output








AN, 1106.] 201 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


should overthrow the Philistines; and thatagainst what nations soever he should makewar, he should be the conqueror, and survivethe tight; and that while he lived he shouldenjoy a glorious name, and afterwards trans­mit it to his posterity.
So Samuel, when he had given him theseadmonitions, went away. But the divine
Eovver departed from Saul, and removed to•avid; who upon this removal of the divinespirit to him, began to prophesy. But as forSaul, some strange and demoniacal disorders*came upon him; and brought upon him suchsuffocations, as were ready to choke him.For when the physicians could find no otherremedy but this; if any person could charmthose passions by singing, and playing uponthe harp, they advised them to enquire forsuch a one, and to observe, when these de­mons came upon him, and disturbed him; andto take care that such a person might standover him, andf play on the harp, and recitehymns to him. Accordingly Saul did notdelay; but commanded them to seek outsuch a man. And when a certain bystandersaid, that he had seen in the city Bethlehem,a son of Jesse, who was yet no more than achild in age, but comely and beautiful, and inother respects one that was deserving of greatregard; who was skilful in playing on theharp, and in singing hymns; and an excellentsoldier in war; he sent to Jesse, and desiredhim to take David away from the flocks, andto send him to him; for he had a mind to seehim, as having heard an advantageous cha­racter of his comeliness and his valour. SoJesse sent his son, and gave him presents tocarry to Saul. And when he was come, Saul


was pleased with him, and made him hisarmour-bearer, and held him in very greatesteem; for he charmed his passion, and wasthe only physician against the trouble he hadfrom the demons, whenever it came uponhim; and this by reciting of hymns, andplaying upon the harp, and bringing Saul tohis right mind again. However, he sent tothe father of the child, and desired him topermit David to stay with him; for that hewas delighted with his company. Whichstay, that he might not contradict Saul, Jessereadily granted.
CHAP. IX.
OF ANOTHER EXPEDITION OF THE PHILISTINES AGAINSTTHE HEBREWS, UNDER THE REIGN OF SAUL, AND OFTHEIR DEFEAT, BY DAVID SLAYING GOLIATH IN SINGLECOMBAT.
NOW the Philistines gathered themselvestogether again, no very long time after­ward: and having assembled a great army,they made war against the Israelites; andhaving seized a place between Shochoh andAzekah,J they there pitched their camp.Saul also drew out his army to oppose them.And by pitching his own camp on a certainhill, he forced the Philistines to leave theirformer station, and to encamp themselvesupon such another hill, over against that onwhich Saul's army lay, so that a valley whichwas between the two hills on which they lay,divided their camps asunder. Now therecame down a man out of the camp of thePhilistines, whose name was Goliath, of thecity Gath; a man of vast bulk, for he was of jjfour cubits and a span in tallness;§ and had


* 1 Sam. xvi. 14.
t Spanheim takes notice here, that the Greeks hadsuch singers of hymns; and that usually children or youthwere chosen for that service. As also that those calledsingers to the harp, did the same that David did here, i. e.join their own vocal and instrumental music together.
J Soccoth and Azekah lay to the south of Jerusalem,and the east of Bethlehem, about four leagues from theformer, and five from the latter, and the ancient valley ofElah must consequently lie not far distant from them,though later travellers place it at no more than a league'sdistance from Jerusalem. Calmef s Commentary. B.
i! Six in the Hebrew; four in the Septuagint.
§ The words in the text are,—Wliose height was sixcubits and a span; so that taking a cubit to be twentyinches and a half, and a span to be three inches, and alittle more, the whole will amount to about twelve feetand a half. A stature above as tall again as usual! The
lowest computation of the cubit, however, brings it to nearten feet, which is the standard that we have set it at;though it must not be dissembled, that both the Septuagintand Josephus have reduced it to little more than eightfeet, which badly comports with the weight and vastnessof his armour, though it might suit their design perhaps,in accommodating their account to the credibility of theirHeathen readers. But be that as it will, several authors,to shew this vast size of the man not to be beyond thebounds of probability, have written, ex prqfesso de gigant-ibus, among whom Hermannus Conringius, in his bookDe antiquo statu Holmstadii, and in another De habitu cor-porum Germanorum, have demonstrated, that the ancientGermans were of a vast size, even as Cassar, De belloGall, testifies of them, by calling them, cimmani orporummagnitudine homines, men of huge greatness of body.Nay, even Josephus himself, who is quoted for denyingthe existence of giants, furnishes us with an argument in







OCR Output








 


H .
'.i"T..\.. *■ *<- Z-. V.V ,V.<


 


 


Mi ■


 


■


-_-







OCR Output








an. 1064.] 253 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


Then Joab sounded a retreat, and recalledhis soldiers from pursuing the enemy's army,in order to spare their countrymen.*
Now Absalom had erected for himself amarble pillar, in the king's dale, two furlongsdistant from Jerusalem, which he named Ab­salom's Hand; saying, that if his childrenwere killed, his name would remain by thatpillar. For he had three sons, and onedaughter, named Tamar, as we said before,who when she was married to David's grand­son, Rehoboam, bare a son,f Abijah by name,who succeeded his father in the kingdom.But of these we will speak in a part of ourhistory which will be more proper. Butafter the death of Absalom, they every onereturned home.
Now Ahimaaz, the son of Zadok, the high-priest, went to Joab, and desired he wouldpermit him to go and tell David of this vic­tory; and to carry him the good news thatGod had afforded his assistance and his pro­vidence to him. However he did not grantthis request; but said to him, "Wilt thou,that hast always been the messenger of goodnews, now go and acquaint the king that hisson is dead?" so he desired him to desist.He then called Cushi and committed thebusiness to him, that he should tell the kingwhat he had seen. But when Ahimaaz againdesired to let him go as a messenger, and as­sured him that he would only relate whatconcerned the victory, but not concerningthe death of Absalom, he gave him leave togo to David. Now he took a nearer roadthan the former did: for nobody knew it buthimself; and he came before Cushi. Now asDavid was sitting between the gates,J and


waiting to see when somebody would cometo him from the battle; one of the watchmensaw Ahimaaz running, and before he coulddiscern who he was, he told David, that hesaw somebody coming to him, who said, hewas a good messenger. A little while afterhe informed him that another messenger fol­lowed him. Whereupon the king said thathe was also a good messenger. But whenthe watchman saw Ahimaaz, and that he wasalready very near, he gave the king noticethat it was the son of Zadok, the high-priest,who came running. So David was very glad,and said, he was a messenger of good tidings,and brought him such news from the battleas he desired to hear.
While the king was saying thus, Ahimaazappeared, and worshipped the king. Andwhen the king inquired about the battle,he said, he brought him the good news ofvictory and dominion. And when he hadinquired what he had to say concerninghis son, he said, that he came away on thesudden, as soon as the enemy was defeated;but that he heard a great noise of those thatpursued Absalom, and that he could learn nomore, because of the haste he made whenJoab sent him to inform him of the victory.But when Cushi was come, and had wor­shipped him, and informed him of the victory,he asked him about his son: who replied,"May the like misfortune befall thine ene­mies, as hath befallen Absalom." That worddid not permit either himself or his soldiersto rejoice for the victory, though it was verygreat; but David went up to the highest partof the ||city, and wept for his son and beathis breast, tearing the hair off his head, and


out to out. The inside of this chamber is all plain, butthe outside is adorned with some pilasters of the samekind of stone. The upper part or covering, is made inthe form of a conic pyramid, pretty high and large, with akind of flower-pot on its top. The pyramid is composedof several stones, but the monument itself is square, andall cut out of one block. In the time of Josephus, themonument, which was said to be Absalom's, was nothingmore than one marble pillar, widely different from what,at present, goes under his name; and which therefore,must be accounted a more modern building. Le Gere'sand Patrick's Commentaries, and Calmet's Dictionary,under the word Absalom. B.
* Commentators have observed the justice of God, inbringing Absalom to a condign punishment, and such akind of death, as was ordained by the law for offences likeunto his. For whereas, in the first place, he was hanged
as it were, this was declared by the law to be an accurseddeath, Deut. xxi. 23. and was afterwards, in some mea­sure, stoned; this was the particular kind of death thatthe law prescribed for a stubborn and rebellious son,Deut. xxi. B.
t 2 Chron. xi. 20.
J Those that take a view of my description of the gatesof the temple, will not be surprised at this account ofDavid's throne, both here, and 2 Sam. xviii. 24. that itwas between two gates, or portals. Gates being in cities,as well as at the temple, large open places, with a portalat the entrance, and another at the exit: between whichjudicial causes were heard, and public consultations held;as it is well known from several places of Scripture,2 Chron. xxxi. 2. Psal. ix. 14. exxvii. 5. Prov. i. 2J.viii. 3, 34. xxxii. 23. and often elsewhere.
II Since David was now in Mahanaim, and in the open


3B2







OCR Output








90 [book III. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


and were not wanting in diligence accordingto their ability; but they brought silver, andgold, and brass, and the best sorts of wood,and such as would not at all decay by putre­faction; camels" hair also, and sheep-skins;some of them dyed of a blue colour, and someof a scarlet: some brought the flower for thepurple colour, and others for white, with wooldyed by the aforementioned flowers; and finelinen, and precious stones, which those thatuse costly ornaments set in ounces of gold:they brought also a great quantity of spices.For of these materials did Moses build thetabernacle: which did not at all differ from amoveable temple. Now when these thingswere brought together with great diligence,(for every one was ambitious to further thework, even beyond their ability,) he set ar­chitects over the works, and this by the com­mand of God: and indeed the very samewhich the people themselves would havechosen, had the election been allowed tothem. Now their names are set down in wri­ting in the sacred books; and they were these,Bazaleel, the son of Uri, of the tribe of Judah,the grandson of Miriam, the sister of theirconductor; and Aholiab, the^on of Ahisa-mach, of the tribe of Dan. Now the peoplewent on with what they had undertaken withso great alacrity, that Moses was obliged torestrain them, by making proclamation, thatwhat had been brought was sufficient, as theartificers had informed him: so they fell towork upon the building of the tabernacle.Moses also informed them, according to thedirection of God, both what the measureswere to be, and its dimensions; and howmany vessels it ought to contain, for the useof the sacrifices. The women also wereambitious to do their parts about the garmentsof the priests, and about other things thatwould be wanted in this work, both for orna­ment, and for the divine service itself.
When all things were prepared, the gold,and the silver, and the brass, and what was. woven, Moses having previously appointedthat there should be a festival, and that sacri­fices should be offered according to everyone's ability, reared up the tabernacle. Andwhen he had measured the open court, fifty
cripts, omitted here the heinous sin of the Israelites, inmaking and worshipping the golden calf, or the EgyptianApis, made of wood, but covered over with cast gold round


cubits broad, and a hundred long, he set upbrazen pillars, five cubits high; twenty oneach of the longer sides, and ten pillars forthe breadth behind. Every one of the pillarsalso had a ring. Their chapiters were ofsilver, but their bases were of brass; theyresembled the sharp ends of spears, and wereof brass, fixed into the ground. Cords werealso put through the rings, and were tied atthe farther ends to brass nails of a cubit long,which at every pillar were driven into thefloor, and would keep the tabernacle frombeing shaken by the violence of winds. Buta curtain of fine soft linen went round allthe pillars, and hung down in a flowing man­ner from their chapiters, and enclosed thewhole space, forming a kind of wall about it.Such was the structure of three of the sidesof this enclosure: but as for the fourth side,which was fifty cubits in extent, and was thefront of the whole; twenty cubits of it werefor the opening at the gates, wherein stoodtwo pillars on each side, after the resem­blance of open gates; these were made whollyof silver, and polished all over, excepting thebases, which were of brass. Now on eachside of the gates there stood three pillars,which were inserted into the concave basesof the gates, and were suited to them; andround them was drawn a curtain of fine linen.But to the gates themselves, which weretwenty cubits in extent, and five in height,the curtain was composed of purple, andscarlet, and blue, and fine linen; and em­broidered with divers sorts of figures, except­ing the figures of animals. Within thesegates was the brazen laver, for purification,having a bason beneath of the like matter:in which the priests might wash their hands,*and sprinkle their feet. And this was theornamental construction of the enclosureabout the court of the tabernacle, which wasexposed to the open air.
As to the tabernacle itself, Moses placed itin the middle of that court, with its front tothe east; that when the sun rose, it mightsend its first rays upon it. Its length, when itwas set up, was thirty cubits, and its breadthwas ten cubits. One of its walls was on thesouth, and the other was exposed to the north,
about it. See Isaiah xl. 19, 20. Jer. x. 3, 4, and Habii. 19.
* Exod. xxx. 19.


 


 







OCR Output








an. 1950.] 29 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


possess her, if he had known she was a wife;"But since," said he, " she accompanied theein the character of thy sister, I was guilty ofno offence." He also intreated him to be atpeace with him, and to make God propitiousto him; and that if he thought fit to continuewith him, he should have what he wanted inabundance; but that if he designed to goaway, he should be honourably conducted,and have whatever supply he wanted whenhe came thither. Upon his saying this, Abra­ham told him, that his pretence of kindred tohis wife was not a falsehood, because shewas his brother's daughter, and that he didnot think himself safe in his travels abroadwithout this sort of dissimulation, and that hewas not the cause of his distemper, but wasonly solicitous for his own safety. He said alsothat he was ready to stay with him, where­upon Abimelech assigned him land andmoney; and they covenanted to live togetherwithout guile, and took an oath at a certainwell, called Beersheba,* which may be in­terpreted the well of the oath, and so it isnamed by the people of the country unto thisday.
Now in a little time Abrahamf had a sonby Sarah, as God had foretold to him, whomhe named Isaac, which signifies laughter;and indeed they so called him because Sarahlaughed when God saidJ that she should beara son, she not expecting such a thing, asbeing past the age of child-bearing, for shewas ninety years old, and Abraham a hundred,so that his son was born to them both in thelast year of each of those decimal numbers;and they circumcised him|| upon the eighth


* Gen. xvi. 31.
t An. 1937.
J It is well worth observation that Josephus here callsthat principal angel who-appeared to Abraham, and fore­told the birth of Isaac, directly God; which as he haddone it before in his coherence, c. 11. and does it after­ward, c. 13. and v. 8. is not very strange in a great readerand admirer of Philo, who does it so often; which lan­guage of Josephus's here, prepares us to believe thoseother expressions of his, that Jesus was a wise man, if itbe lawful to call him a man, XVIII. 3. and of God theWord, in his last homily concerning Hades, may beboth genuine; nor is the other expression of divineangel, used presently, and before, also of any other signifi­cation.
II This circumcision is not after, but on the eighth day:as it is elsewhere expressed by Josephus. The like con­struction to which we meet with in the New Testament,


day; and from that time the Jews continuethe custom of circumcising their sons withinthat number of days; but as for the Arabians,they circumcise after the thirteenth year,because Ismael, the founder of their nation,who was born to Abraham of the concubine,was circumcised at that age, concerningwhom I will hereafter give a particular ac­count.
As for Sarah, she at first loved Ismael, whowas born of her handmaid Hagar, with anaffection not inferior to that of a mother, forhe was brought up in order to succeed in thegovernment; but when she herself had borneIsaac, she was not willing that Ismael shouldbe brought up with him, as being too low forhim, and able to do him injuries when theirfather should be dead. She therefore per­suaded Abraham to send him and his motherto some distant country. Now at first he didnot agree to what Sarah was zealous for, andthought it an instance of the greatest bar­barity to send away a young child,§ and awoman unprovided of necessaries; but atlength he agreed to it, because God waspleased with what Sarah had determined; sohe delivered Ismael to his mother, as not yetable to go by himself, and commanded her totake a bottle of water, and a loaf of bread,**and so to depart, and to take necessity forher guide. But as soon as her necessary pro­visions failed, she found herself in an evilcase; and when the water was almost spent,she laid the young child, who was ready toexpire, under a fir-tree, and went on farther,so that he might die while she was absent;but a divine angel came to her, and told her
Matthew xxvii. 63. Luke ii. 21. John xx. 26. This isReland's observation.
§ Josephus here calls Ismael, u^*iov, a young child, orinfant, though he were above 13 years of age, as Judas callshimself and his brethren vhg, young men, when he was47, when he had two children; and they were of muchthe same age as is a damsel of 12 years old called ira«5iov,or little child, Mark v. 39—42, five several times. Hero<lis also said by Josephus to be, vs'©^ -aavra..aa<tiv, a veryyoung man at 25; and Aristobulus is styled «ai8kv,«-av7airaffiv, a very little child, at 16 years of age. Antiq.XV. 2. Domitian is also called by him 'ravlcwraoWui, avery young child, when he went on his German expedition,at about 18 years of age. Of the war, VII. 4. Samson'swife, and Ruth, when she was a widow, are called -aa.T&tfchildren, Antiq. V. 8 and 9. Accordingly in Xenophon,we have uaTSsg for children, till 16 or 17 years of ageKip TlouS. Edit. Hutch, page 12.
** Gen. xxi. 14. ...•.,,,.!' ./'







OCR Output








344 [BOOK IX. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


of the life of Amaziah; because of his inno­vations in religion, and his contempt of God;when he had lived fifty-four years, and hadreigned twenty-nine.* He was succeeded byhis son, whose name was Uzziah.
CHAP. X.


OF THE AFFAIRS OF JEROBOAM, KINO OF ISRAEL; JONAHTHE PROPHET; ZECHARIAH, THE SON OF JEROBOAM JAND UZZIAH, KING OF JERUSALEM.v
IN the fifteenth year of the reign of Ama­ziah, Jeroboam, the son of Joash, reignedover Israel,f in Samaria. The king wasguilty of contumely against God,J and be­came very wicked in worshipping of idols,and in many absurd and impious underta­kings, by which he occasioned ten thousandmisfortunes to the people of Israel. Now one


Jonah, a prophet, foretold to him, that heshould make war with the Syrians, and con­quer their army, and enlarge the bounds ofhis kingdom on the northern parts, to the cityHamath; and on the southern, to the lakeAsphaltites; for the bounds of the Canaanitesoriginally were these, as Joshua their generalhad determined them. So Jeroboam madean expedition against the Syrians, and over­run all their country, as Jonah had foretold.Now I cannot but think it necessary to de­scribe the actions of this prophet, so far as Ihave found them written down in the He­brew books. Jonah|| had been commandedby God to go to the kingdom of Nineveh;and to publish in that city, how it should losethe dominion it had over the nations. But hewent not, out of fear; nay,' he ran away fromGod to the city§ Joppa;** and finding a shipthere, he went into it, and sailed to Tarsus


* From an. 840 to an. 811.
t 2 Kings xiv. 22.
J What I have above noted concerning Jehoash, seemsto have been true also concerning his son Jeroboam II.viz. that although he began wickedly, as Josephus agreeswith our other copies; and, as Josephus adds, was thecause of a vast number of misfortunes to the Israelites, inthose his first years, (the particulars of which are unhap­pily wanting both in Josephus and in all our copies;) sodoes it seem that he was afterward reclaimed, and becamea good king; and so was encouraged by the prophetJonah, and had great successes afterward; when Godsaved the Israelites by the hand of Jeroboam, the son ofJoash, 2 Kings xiv. 27. which encouragement by Jonah,and great successes, are equally observable in Josephus,and in other copies.
II The only mention we have of this prophet (whomthe Jews will have to be the son of the widow of Zare-phath, whom Elijah raised from the dead, but withoutany foundation of reason) is in this passage, and the ac­count of this famous mission to Nineveh. What the pro­phecies were, whereby he encouraged Jeroboam to pro­claim war against the king of Syria, we have no whererecorded; but as we have not every thing which theprophets did write, so several prophets, we must know,did not commit their predictions to writing. From thisplace, however, we may observe, that God was verymerciful to the Israelites, (though they were certainly avery wicked people,) in continuing a race of prophetsamong them, even after Elisha was dead. (Patrick'sCommentary.) It is a very common opinion among theJews, as we said, that Jonah was the son of the widow ofZarephath; and this opinion they found upon the wordsof the mother, when she received her son alive from theprophet's hand. By this I know, that the word of theLord in thy mouth is truth, 1 Kings xvii. 24. for there­fore, say they, was the child called the son of Amittai;because Amittai signifies truth: a weak reason, and suchas is plainly repugnant to the testimony of Scripture. Forthis we know for certain, that Jonah lived in the reigns of
Joash, and Jeroboam the second, kings of Israel, andtherefore could not be the son of the widow of Zarephath,since the former of these two princes did not begin toreign till sixty years after the translation of Elijah. Otherspretend that he was son to the Shunamite woman, whomthe prophet Elisha raised from the dead; but Shunam andGath-hepher (where we are certain Jonah was born) weretwo quite different places, the former in the tribe of Issa-char, the other in that of Zabulon; and therefore, we mayconclude, that Amittai was the proper name of Jonah'sfather, who lived in a little canton of the tribe of Zabulon,called Hepher, orHopher, wherein was the town of Goth,which is generally believed to be the same with Jotapata,so fiimous for the siege which Josephus there maintainedagainst the Roman army, a little before the destruction ofJerusalem. Cahnefs Preface sur Jonas, and his Dictionary,under the word. B.
§ Jonah i. 3.
** Joppa is a seaport town in Palestine, upon theMediterranean, and was formerly the only port which theJews had upon that coast, whither all the materials thatwere sent from Tyre, towards the building of Solomon'stemple, were brought and landed. The town itself isvery ancient; for profane authors reckon it was builtbefore the flood, and derives the name of it from Joppa,the daughter of Elolas, and the wife of Cepheus, whowas the founder of it. Others arc rather inclined to be­lieve, that it was built by Japhet, and from him had thename of Japho, which was afterwards moulded into Joppa?but is now generally called Jaffa, which comes nearer tothe first appellation. The town is situated in a fine plain,between Jamnia to the south; Caesirea of Palestine to thenorth; and Rama, or Ramula to the east; but, at pre­sent, is in a poor and mean condition; nor is its port byany means good, by reason of the rocks which projectinto the sea. The chief thing for which this place wasfamous, in ancient Pagan history, is the exposition ofAndromeda, the daughter of Cepheus, king of Egypt,who, for her mother's pride, was bound to a rock, inorder to be devoured by a sea-monster, but was delivered







OCR Output








406 [book XI. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


he had indignation at him, and said withinhimself, "Whereas the Persians, who arefree men, worship me; this man, who is nobetter than a slave, does not vouchsafe to doeo." And when he desired to punish Morde-cai, he thought it too small a thing to requestof the king, that he alone might be punished.He rather determined to extirpate the wholenation. For he was naturally an enemy tothe Jews: because the nation of the Amale-kites, of which he was, had been destroyedby them.* Accordingly he came to the king,and accused them, saying, "There is a cer­tain wicked nation, and it is dispersed overall the habitable earth that is under thy do­minion: a nation separate from others, unso­ciable; neither admitting the same sort ofdivine worship that others do, not using lawslike the laws of others; at enmity with thypeople, and with all men, both in their man­ners and practices. Now if thou wilt be abenefactor to thy subjects, thou wilt giveorder to destroy them utterly, and not leavethe least remains of them, nor preserve anyof them either for slaves or for captives."But that the king might not be injured bythe loss of the tributes which the Jews paidhim, Haman promised to give him out of hisown estate forty thousand talents, wheneverhe pleased. And he said, he would pay thismoney very willingly, that the kingdom mightbe freed from such a misfortune.
When Haman had made this petition,the king both forgave him the money, andgranted him the men; to do what he wouldwith them. So Haman, having gained whathe desired, sentf out immediately a decree,as from the king, to all nations, the contentswhereof were these: "Artaxerxes, the great


king, to the rulers of the hundred and twenty-seven provinces, from India to Ethiopia, sendsthis writing. Whereas I have governed manynations, and obtained the dominion of all thehabitable earth, according to my desire; andhave not been obliged to do any thing that isinsolent or cruel to my subjects, by such mypower; but have shewn myself mild and gen­tle, by taking care of their peace and goodorder, and have sought how they might enjoythose blessings for all time to come. Andwhereas Haman, who, on account of his pru­dence, and justice, is the first in my esteem,and in dignity, and only second to myself,for his fidelity and constant good will to me;hath kindly informed me, that there is an illnatured nation intermixed with all mankind,that is averse from our laws, and not subjectto kings; and of a different conduct of lifefrom others; and of a disposition perniciousto our affairs: I give order that all these men,of whom Haman, our second father, hath in­formed us, be destroyed, with their wives andchildren; and that none of them be spared,and that none prefer pity to them, before obe­dience to this decree. And this I will to beexecuted on the fourteenth day of the twelfthmonth of this present year: so that when allthat have enmity to us are destroyed, and thisin one day, we may be allowed to lead therest of our lives in peace hereafter." Nowwhen this decree was brought to the cities,and to the country, all were ready for the de­struction and entire extirpation of the Jews,against the appointed day. And they werevery hasty about it at Shushan in particular.Accordingly the king and Haman spent theirtime in feasting together, with good cheerand wine: but the city was in Jdisorder.||


no sort of adoration to an Amalekite, which nation hadbeen such great sinners, as to have been universally de­voted to destruction by God himself, Exod. xvii. 14, 15,16. 1 Sam. xv. 18. or whether both causes occurred,cannot now be entirely determined.
* See Exod. xvii. 8-—16. and 1 Sara. xv.
t The first institution of posts is generally ascribed tothe Persians; for the kings of Persia, (as Diodorus Sicu-lus, lib. 19. observes,) that they might have intelligenceof what passed in all the provinces of their vast dominions,placed sentinels on eminences, at convenient distances,where towers were built, and these sentinels gave noticeof public occurrences to one another, with a very loud andshrill voice, by which means news was transmitted fromone extremity of the kingdom to the other with great ex­pedition But as this could be practised only in the case
of general news, which might be communicated to thewhole nation, Cyrus, (as Xenophon relates, Cyropaed.lib. 8.) set up couriers, places for post-horses on all high­roads, and offices, where they might deliver their packetsto one another. This, says our author, they did nightand day; so that no rain or hard weather being to stopthem, in the judgment of many, they went faster thancranes could fly. The like is said in Herodotus, lib. 8.And he acquaints us farther, that Xerxes, in his famousexpedition against Greece, planted posts from the jEgeansea to Shushan, at certain distances, as far as a horsecould ride with speed, that thereby he might send noticeto the capital city of whatever might happen in his army.Calmefs Dictionary under the word. B.
% Esther iii. 15.
11 Not only the Jews, but a great many others in Shu­







OCR Output








264 [book VII. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


when they should be free from all their mis­fortunes; for that by this means they shouldenjoy, instead of them, peace and a happysettlement; with which blessings God re­wards such men as are religious and righ­teous. He also gave orders, that when thetemple should be built, they should put theark therein, with the holy vessels; and heassured them, that they ought to have had atemple long ago, if their fathers had not beennegligent of God's commands; who had givenit in charge, that when they had got the pos­session of this land, they should build him atemple. Thus did David discourse to thegovernors, and to his son.
David was now in years, and his body bylength of time was become cold and be­numbed; insomuch that he could get noheat by covering himself with many clothes.And when the physicians came together,they agreed that a beautiful virgin,* chosenout of the whole country, should sleep bythe king's side; and that this damsel wouldcommunicate heat to him, and be a remedyagainst his numbness. Now there was foundin the city one woman of superior beauty;her name was Abishag, who sleeping withthe king, did communicate warmth to him.But of this woman we shall speak morepresently. '••'-*c£?J
Now the fourth son of David was a beau­tiful young man, and tall; born to him offHaggith, his wife. He was named Adonijah,and was in his disposition like to Absalom,and exalted himself, as hoping to be king,and told his friends, that he ought to takethe government upon him. He also preparedmany chariots and horses, and fifty men torun before him.J When his father saw this,he did not reprove him, nor restrain him fromhis purpose, nor did he go so far as to askwherefore he did so. Now Adonijah had forhis assistants Joab, the captain of the army,


and Abiathar the high-priest. And the onlypersons that opposed him were Zadok thehigh-priest, and the prophet Nathan, and Be-naiah, who was captain of the guards, andShimei, David's friend, with all the othermost mighty men. Now Adonijah had pre­pared a supper out of the city, near the foun­tain that was in the king's paradise, and hadinvited all his brethren, except Solomon; andhad taken with him Joab, the captain of thearmy, and Abiathar, and the rulers of thetribe of Judah: but had not invited to thisfeast, Zadok the high priest, Nathan the pro­phet, nor Benaiah, the captain of the guards,nor any of those of the contrary party. Thismatter was told by Nathan to Bathsheba,Solomon's mother; that Adonijah was king,and that David knew nothing of it; and headvised her to save herself, and her sonSolomon, and to go by herself to David, andsay to him, that he had indeed sworn thatSolomon should reign after him; but that, inthe mean time Adonijah had already takenthe kingdom. He said, that he, the prophethimself, would come after her, and, when shehad spoken thus to the king, would confirmwhat she had said. Accordingly Bathshebaagreed with Nathan, and went in to the king,and worshipped him; and when she had de­sired leave to speak with him, she told himall things in the manner that Nathan hadsuggested to her; and related what a supperAdonijah had made, and who they werewhom he had invited, as his intimate friends.She also said, that all the people had theireyes upon him, to know whom he wouldchoose for their king. She desired him alsoto consider, how, after his departure, Ado­nijah, if he were king, would slay her andher son Solomon.
Now as Bathsheba was speaking, thekeepers of the king's chambers tol^ him,that Nathan desired to see him. And ygheii


* It is the observation of Galen, in his fifth book Of thePowers of Simple Medicines, that nothing so effectuallyprocures heat and health as the application of any thingyoung to the stomach: the advice of David's physicianstherefore was not amiss; but it had been sinful advice,and such as he could not have followed, had not thisyoung woman, whom he took to bed with him, been hisconcubinary wife. In those days such wives were al­lowable: and that she served him in this capacity, is verymanifest from the account we have of her in Scripture,for whereas it is said, that the king knew her not, this cer-
tainly implies, that he might have had carnal knowl«dgeof her without sin or scandal; whereas it is said, that**lay in his bosom, this phrase every where in Scriptsdenotes what was the sole privilege of a wife, concubi,e>Gen. xvi. 5. Deut. xiii. 6. Nor can we imagine v&JAdonijah's desiring her in marriage had been so hein^sa crime in Solomon's account, had she not been the kir'g swife, and he, by this means, had designed to revive^ ^pretensions to the crown. Pool's Annotations. B.
t 2 Sam. iii. 4.
J About an. 1058







OCR Output








aN. 896.] 331 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


barley, or fine flour, out of heaven; so it isimpossible that what thou hast said, shouldcome to pass." To which the prophet madethis reply, "Thou shalt see these thingscome to pass; but thou shalt not be in theleast a partaker of them."
What Elisha had thus foretold, came to
{mss in the following manner: There was aaw at Samaria,* that those who had theleprosy, and whose bodies were not cleansedfrom it, should abide without the city. Andthere were four men that on this accountabode before the gates, while nobody gavethem any food by reason of the extremity ofthe famine. And as they were prohibitedfrom entering into the city by the law; andthey considered, that if they were permittedto enter, they should miserably perish by thefamine; as also, that if they stayed wherethey were, they should suffer in the samemanner; they resolved to deliver themselvesup to the enemy; that in case they sparedthem, they should live; but if they shouldbe killed, that would be an easy death. Sowhen they had confirmed this resolution, theycame by night to the enemy's camp. NowGod had alarmed and disturbed the Syrians,by bringing the noise of chariots and armourto their ears, as though an army were comingupon them; and had made them suspect thatit was coming nearer and nearer. In short,they were in such a dread of this army, thatthey left their tents, and ran together to Ben-hadad, and said, that Joram king of Israelhad hired for auxiliaries, both the king ofEgypt, and the king of the Islands, and ledthem against them; for they heard the noiseof them as they were coming. And Benha-dad believed what they said: (for there camethe same noise to his ears, as well as it did totheirs:) so they fell into a great disorder andtumult; and left their horses and beasts intheir camp, with immense riches also; andbetook themselves to flight. When the afore­mentioned lepers, therefore, arrived at thecamp, they found every thing perfectly quietand silent. Accordingly they went hastilyinto one of the tents; and when they saw no­body there, they ate and drank, and carried


* This law of the Jews, for the exclusion of lepers outof the camp in the wilderness, and out of cities in Judea,
is a known one.voL. I.—NOS.
Levit. xiii. 46.27 & 28-
and Numb. v. 1—4.


off garments, and a great quantity of gold,and concealed them beyond the camp. Afterwhich they went into another tent, and car­ried off what was in it, as they did at theformer; and this they did four several times,without the least interruption. They nowperceived plainly that the enemies were de­parted; and reproached themselves, that theydid not inform Joram, and the citizens of it.So they came to the walls of Samaria, andcalled aloud to the watchmen, and told them,in what state the enemies were. This wassoon communicated to the king, who sent forhis friends, and the captain of his host, andsaid to them, "I suspect that this departureof the king of Syria is designed by way ofambush and treachery; and that out of de­spair of ruining you by famine, when you ima­gine them to be fled away, you may come outof the city to spoil their camp; and he maythen fall upon you on a sudden, and may bothkill you, and take the city without fighting.Whence it is that I exhort you to guard thecity carefully, and by no means to go out ofit, or proudly to despise your enemies, asthough they were really gone away." A cer­tain person replied, that he did very wiselyto admit such a suspicion; but that he stilladvised him to send a couple of horsemen,to search all the country, as far as Jordan;that if they were seized by an ambush of theenemy, they might be a security to the armythat they may not go out as if they suspectednothing, nor undergo the like misfortune:"And," said he, "those horsemen may benumbered among those that have died bythe famine, supposing they be caught anddestroyed by the enemy." So the king waspleased with his opinion, and sent such asmight search out the truth: who performedtheir journey over a road that was withoutany enemies; but found it full of provisions,and of weapons that they had thrown awayand left behind them, in order to their beinglight and expeditious in their flight. Whenthe king heard this, he sent out the multitudeto take the spoils of the camp; which werenot things of small value; but they took agreat quantity of gold and silver, and all kinds
Antiq. III. 11. See the examples of its constant obtainingin practice, Numb. xii. 10—14. 2 Kings vii. 3. xv. 52 Chron. xxvi. 21. Antiq. IX. 10.
3M







OCR Output













OCR Output








an. 1962.] 25 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


Now every part of the army had its owncommander, and when the battle was joined,the Assyrians were conquerors, and imposeda tribute upon the kings of the Sodomites,who submitted to this slavery twelve years;and so long they continued to pay their tri­bute; but on the thirteenth year they re­belled; and then the army of thje Assyrianscame upon them, under their commandersAmraphel, Arioch, Chedorlaomer,* and Ti-dal.f These kings had laid waste all Syria,and overthrown the offspring of the giants.And when they were come over against So­dom, they pitched their camp at the vale,called the Slimepits; for at that time therewere many pits in that place; but upon thedestruction of the city of Sodom, that vale be­came the lake Asphaltites, as it is called:however, concerning this lake, we shall speakmore presently. Now when the Sodomitesjoined battle with the Assyrians, and the fightwas very obstinate, many of them were killed,and the rest were carried captive; amongwhich captives were Lot, who had come toassist the Sodomites.
CHAP. X.
OF ABRAm's SUCCESSFUL ENGAGEMENT WITH THE ASSYRIANS,AND HIS RESCUE OF THE SODOMITE PRISONERS.
WHEN Abram heard of their calamity,he was at once afraid for Lot, hiskinsman, and pitied the Sodomites, his friendsand neighbours; and thinking it proper toafford them assistance, he did not delay it,but marched hastily, and the fifth night fellupon the Assyrians near Dan; for that is thename of the other spring of Jordan; and be­fore they could arm themselves he slew themas they were in their beds; and others, whowere not yet gone to sleep, but were so in­toxicated they could not fight, ran away.Abram pursued after them till, on the second


day, he drove them in a body unto Hoba,J aplace belonging to Damascus; and therebydemonstrated that victory does not dependon multitude, and the number of hands, butthat the alacrity and courage of soldiers over­come the most numerous bodies of men:while he got the victory over so great anarmy with no more than three hundred andeighteen of his servants, and three of hisfriends. But all those that fled returned homeingloriously. So Abram, when he had savedthe captive Sodomites, who had been takenby the Assyrians, and Lot, also, his kinsman,returned home in peace.
Now the king of Sodom met him at a cer­tain place, which they called the King's Dale,where Melchisedec, king of the city of Sa­lem, received him. That name signifies, therighteous king: and such he was without dis­pute, insomuch, that on his account, he wasmade the priest of God. However, theyafterwards called Salem, Jerusalem. Nowthis Melchisedec supplied Abram's army ina hospitable manner, and gave them pro­visions in abundance: and as they were feast­ing, he began to praise him, and to bless Godfor subduing his enemies under him. Butwhen Abram gave him the tenth part of hisprey, he accepted of the gift. But the Kingof Sodom desired Abram to take the prey;but intreated that he might have those menrestored to him whom Abram had saved fromthe Assyrians because they belonged to him.But Abram would not do so; nor would makeany other advantage of that prey, than whathis servants had eaten; but still insisted thathe should afford a part to his friends who hadassisted him in the battle. The first of themwas called Eschol, and the others Enner andMambre.
God commended his virtue and said,"Thou shalt not, however lose the rewardsthou hast deserved to receive by such glo­


* We no where in profane history meet with the nameof Chedorlaomer, nor with any of those names of the kingswho were confederate with him. The reason hereof is,that Ctesias X. from whom the profane historians take thenames of these kings, did not use their original Assyriannames in his history, but rather such as he found in thePersian records. However, since the date of this trans­action falls four years before the death of Ninyas, thereare good grounds to infer, that Ninyas, who then lived inPersia, was the Chedorlaomer of Moses, at that time thebead of the Assyrian monarchy: that Amraphel was his
deputy at Babylon in Shinar: and Arioch and Tidal hisdeputies over some other adjacent countries. For it isremarkable, that Ninyas, was the first who appointed un­der him such deputies: nor is there any absurdity in Mo­ses to call them kings, since it is observable, from whatIsaiah hinted afterwards, chap. x. 8. that the Assyrianboasted his deputy princes to be equal to royal governors.Are not my princes altogether kings? Shackford's Connec­tion, Vol. II. 1. 6. B.
t Gen. xiv. 1.
j Gen. xiv. 16.







OCR Output








ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. [book I.


esteem it a piece of cowardice to submit toGod; and they built a tower, neither sparingany pains, nor being at any degree negligentabout the work; and by reason of the multi­tude of hands employed in it, it grew veryhigh sooner than any one could expect, butthe thickness of it was so great, and it was sostrongly built, that thereby its great heightseemed, upon view, to be less than it reallywas. It was built of burnt brick, cementedtogether with mortar, made of bitumen, thatit might not be liable to admit water. WhenGod saw them acting so madly, h ttcl id not re­solve to destroy them utterly, since they werenot grown wiser by the destruction of the for­mer sinners, but he caused a tumult amongthem by producing in them divers languages,and causing that through the multitude ofthose languages, they should not be able tounderstand one another. The place whereinthey built the tower is now called Babylon,because of the confusion of that languagewhich they readily understood before, for theHebrew means by the word Babel,* con­fusion. The Sibylf also makes mention ofthe tower, and of the confusion of the lan­guage, when she says thus:—" When all menwere of one language, some of them built anhigh tower, as if they would thereby ascendup to heaven, but the gods sent storms ofwind, and overthrew the tower, and gaveevery one his peculiar language; and for thisreason it was that the city was called Baby­lon." But as to the plain of Shinah, in thecountry of Babylonia, Hestiaeus mentions itwhen he says, " Such of the priests as weresaved took the sacred vessels of Jupiter Enya-lius, and came to Shinar or Babylonia."
CHAP. V.
OF THE MANNER. IN WHICH THE POSTERITY OF NOAH SENTOUT COLONIES, AND INHABITED THE WHOLE EARTH.
FTER this they were dispersed abroadon account of the difference of their


languages, and went out by colonies everywhere; and each colony took possession ofthat land unto which God led them, so thatthe whole continent was filled with them, boththe inland and maritime countries. Therewere some also who passed over the sea inships, and inhabited the islands; and some ofthose nations still retain the denominationswhich were given them by their first foun­ders, but some have lost them, and some haveonly admitted certain changes in them, thatthey might be more intelligible to the in­habitants; and they were the Greeks whobecame the authors of such mutations; forwhen, in after ages they grew potent, theyclaimed to themselves the glory of antiquity,giving names to the nations that sounded wellin Greek, that they might be better under­stood among themselves, and setting agreea­ble forms of government over them, as if theywere a people derived from themselves.
CHAP. VI.


HOW EVERY NATION WAS DENOMINATED FROM THEIR FIRSTINHABITANTS.
NOW they were the grand-children ofNoah, in honour of whom names wereimposed on the nations by those that firstseized upon them. Japhet, the son of Noah,had seven sons; they inhabited so, that be­ginning at the mountains Taurus and Amanus,they proceeded along Asia, as far as the riverTanais, and along Europe to Cadiz, andsettling themselves on the lands they chose,which none had inhabited before, they calledthe nations by their own names; for Gomerfounded those whom the Greeks called Gala-tians, but were then called Gomerites. Ma­gog founded those that from him were namedMagogites, but who are by the Greeks calledScythians. Now as to Javan and Madai, thesons of Japhet: from Madai came the Ma-deans, which are called Medes by the Greeks,


and since Hesiod says, that men's lives were once so long,that at one hundred years of age they might be esteemedgreat infants, I prefer that reading. But what a catalogueof ancient authors are there that confirm the sacred His­tory in one of its most difficult branches! To which hadJosephus read the Latin authors, as he did the Greek, hemight have added Varro, the most learned of the Romanswho made this enquiry, what the reason was that the an­cients were supposed to have lived one thousand years?* Gen. xi. 29.
t See this testimony in the original, and in English inmy Edition of the Sibylline oracles, page 11. 93, 94. butthere it is in verse, as here in prose, the reason of whichdifference 1 by no means understand. But what is hereremarkable is, that Moses Chorenensis, the Armenian his­torian, confirms this history, that God overthrew this towerby a terrible and divine storm; and confounded the lan­guage of the builders, and this from the earliest recordsbelonging to that nation.
■i







OCR Output








ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. [book II.


thee of the dominion, I gave it thee; and bymy kindness it was that when thou was sentinto Mesopotamia alone, thou obtainedst goodwives, and returnedst with many children,and much wealth. Thy whole fomily, also,has been preserved by my providence; andit was I who conducted Joseph thy eon, whomthou gavest up for lost, to the enjoyment ofgreat prosperity. I also made him lord ofEgypt, so that he differs but little from a king.Accordingly I come now as a guide to theein this journey, and foretel to thee that thoushalt die in the arms of Joseph, and that thyposterity shall be many ages in authority andglory; and I will settle them in the landwhich I have promised them." h
Encouraged by this dream, Jacob went onmore cheerfully for Egypt, with his sons, andall belonging to them. Now they were in allseventy. I once indeed thought it best notto set down the names of this family; espe­cially because of their difficult pronuncia­tion by the Greeks. But upon the whole, Ithink it necessary to mention those names;that I may confute such as believe that wecame originally not out of Mesopotamia, butare Egyptians.
Now Jacob had twelve sons. Of these Jo­seph was come thither before: we will there­fore set down the names of Jacob's childrenand grand-children. Reuben had four sons;Anoch, Phallu, Assaron, and Charmi. Simeonhad six; Jamuel, Jamin, Avod, Jachin, Soar,and Saul. Levi had three sons; Gersom,Caath, and Merari. Judas had three sons;Sala, Pharez, and Zerab; and by Pharez, twogrand-children; Esrom and Amur. Isacharhad four sons; Thola, Phua, Jasub, and Sa-maron. Zabulon had with him three sons;Sarad, Helon, and Jalel. So far is the pos*terity of Leah, with whom went her daughterDinah. These are thirty-three. Rachel hadtwo sons; one of whom, Joseph, had two sonsalso; Manasseh and Ephraim. The other,Benjamin, had ten sons; Bolau, Bacchar,Asabel, Geras, Naaman, Jes, Ros, Momphis,


Opphis, and Arad. These fourteen added tothe thirty-three before enumerated, amountto forty-seven: and this was the legitimateposterity of Jacob. He had beside by Bilha,the handmaid of Rachael, Dan and Naphthali,which last had four sons, that followed him;Jesel, Guni, Issari, and Sellim. Dan had anonly begotten son, Usi. If these be added tothose above-mentioned, they complete thenumber fifty-four. Gad and Aser were thesons of Zilpha, who was the handmaid ofLeah. Gad had these seven sons; Saphoniah,Augis, Sunis, Azabon, Aerin, Ereod, andAriel. Aser had a daughter, Sarah, and sixmale children, whose names were Jomne, Isus,Isoui, Baris, Abar, and Melchiel. If we addthese, which are sixteen, to the fifty-four, theafore-mentioned number, seventy, is com­pleted, Jacob* himself not being included.
When Joseph understood that his fatherwas coming, for Judas his brother arrivedbefore him, and announced his approach, hewent out to meet him, and they met togetherat Heroopolis. But Jacob almost faintedaway at this great and unexpected joy; how­ever, Joseph revived him, though unablehimself to refrain being affected in the samemanner. Yet he was not wholly overcomewith his passion, as his father was. Afterthis he desired Jacob to travel on slowly,whilst he himself took five of his brethrenwith him, and hastened to the king, to tellhim that Jacob and his family were come.This was a joyful hearing to Pharaoh, whobid Joseph tell him what sort of life his bre­thren loved to lead, that he might give thempermission to follow the same. He said, theywere good shepherds, and had been used tofollow no other employment: by which he pro­vided for them, that they should not be sepa­rated, but live in the same place, and take careof their father; as also hereby he provided,that they might be acceptable to the Egyp­tians, by doing nothing that would be commonto them with the Egyptians; for the Egyp­tians are prohibitedt from feeding sheep.


* All the Greek copies of Josephus have the negativeparticle here, that Jacob himself was not reckoned oneof the seventy souls that cane into Egypt. But the oldLatin copies want it, and directly assure us he was one ofthem. It is, therefore, hardly certain which of these wasJosephus's true reading: since the number of seventy ismade up without him, if we reckon Leah for one; but if
she be not reckoned, Jacob himself must be one, to com­plete the number.
N. B. The LXXII. add Machir, and Gilead, and Satetaam, and Taom, and Edem, who were bom in Egypt, andso have in all seventy-five souls: as Act. vii. 14.
t Josephus thought that the Egyptians hated or despisedthe employment of a shepherd in the days of Joseph.







OCR Output













OCR Output








432 [book XII. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


Hereupon he came to Jerusalem, and re­proved Onias for not taking care of the pre­servation of his countrymen; but bringingthe nation into dangers, by not paying thismoney. For which preservation of them, hetold him, he had received the authority overthem, and had been made high-priest. Butthat, in case he was so great a lover of money,as to endure to see his country in danger onthat account, and his countrymen suffer thegreatest damages, he advised him to go to theking, and to petition him to remit either thewhole, or a part of the sum demanded. Oniasreplied, that he did not care for his authority;and that he was ready, if the thing was prac­ticable, to lay down his high-priesthood; andthat he would not go to the king; because hetroubled not himself at all about such mat­ters. Joseph then asked him, if he would notgive him leave to go ambassador on behalf ofthe nation? He replied that he would givehim leave. Hereupon Joseph went up intothe temple, and called the multitude togetherto a congregation; and exhorted them not tobe disturbed, nor affrighted, because of hisuncle Onias's carelessness; but desired themto be at rest, and not terrify themselves withfear about it; for he promised, that he wouldbe their ambassador to the king, and per­suade him, that they had done him no wrong.And when the multitude heard this they re­turned thanks to Joseph.. So he went down from the temple, andtreated Ptolemy's ambassador in a hospitablemanner. He also presented him with richgifts and feasted him magnificently for manydays; and then sent him to the king beforehim; and told him that he would soon followhim. For he was now more willing to go tothe king by the encouragement of the ambas­sador; who earnestly persuaded him to comeinto Egypt; and promised that he should ob­tain every thing that he desired of Ptolemy.For he was highly pleased with his frank andliberal temper, and with the gravity of hisdeportment.
When Ptolemy's ambassador was come intoEgypt, he told the king of the thoughtlesstemper of Onias; and informed him of thegoodness of the disposition of Joseph; and
days of Abraham, Genesis xxi. 22, and might possiblybr; the place of that Phicol's nativity or abode. For it


that he was coming to him, to excuse themultitude, as not having done him any harm;for that he was their patron. In short, he wasso very warm in his encomiums upon theyoung man, that he disposed both the kingand his wife Cleopatra to have a kindnessfor him, before he came. So Joseph sent tohis friends at Samaria, and borrowed moneyof them; and got ready what was necessaryfor his journey; garments, and cups, andbeasts for burden, which amounted to abouttwenty thousand drachmae; and went to Alex­andria. Now it happened, that at this timeall the principal men and rulers went up outof the cities of Syria and Phoenicia, to bid fortheir taxes. For every year the king soldthem to the men of the greatest power inevery city. So these men saw Joseph jour­neying on his way; and laughed at him forhis poverty and meanness. But when hecame to Alexandria, and heard that kingPtolemy was at Memphis; he went up thitherto meet with him; which happened as theking was sitting in his chariot, with his wife,and his friend Athenion; who was the veryperson who had been ambassador at Jeru­salem, and been entertained by Joseph. Assoon, therefore, as Athenion saw him, he pre­sently made known to the king, how good andhow generous a young man he was. SoPtolemy saluted him, and desired him tocome up in his chariot; and as Joseph satthere, he began to complain of the manage­ment of Onias. To which he answered,"Forgive him, on account of his age; forthou canst not certainly be unacquaintedwith this, that old men and infants have theirminds exactly alike. But thou shalt havefrom us, who are young men, every thingthou desirest; and shalt have no cause tocomplain." With this good humour andpleasantry of the young man, the king was sodelighted, that he began already, as thoughhe had long experience of him, to have a stillgreater affection for him; insomuch that hebade him take his diet in the king's palace;and be a guest at his own table every day.But when the king was come to Alexandria,the principal men of Syria saw him sittingwith the king, and were much offended at it
seems to hare been in the south part of Palestine, aa thatwas







OCR Output








aN. 1532.] 107 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


fourth signal* those on the north did so like­wise. 1 hey also used trumpets in their sa­cred ministrations, when they were bringingtheir sacrifices to the altar, as well as on thesabbaths, and on the rest of the festival days.And now it was that Moses offered that sacri­fice which was called the Passover in the wil­derness, as the first he had offered after thedeparture out of Egypt.
CHAP. XIII
OF MOSES'S REMOVAL FROM MOUNT SINAI TOWARDS THEBORDERS OF THE CANAANITES.
A LITTLE while afterwards Moses roseup, and went from mount Sinai; and,having passed through several mansions, ofwhich we will speak anon, he came to a placecalled Hazeroth, where the multitude beganagain to be mutinous, and to blame him forthe misfortunes they had suffered in theirtravels; and that when he had persuadedthem to leave a good land, they at once hadlost that land, and instead of the happy statehe had promised them, they were still wan­dering in their present miserable condition,being already in want of water, and if themanna should happen to fail, they must thenutterly perish; yet, while they generally spakemany bitter things against the men, there wasone who exhorted them not to be unmindfulof Moses, and of what great pains he had beenat about their common safety, and not to des­pair of assistance from God. The multitude,however, became still more unruly, and moremutinous against Moses than before; here­upon Moses,f although he was so baselyabused by them, encouraged them in theirdespairing condition, and promised that hewould procure them a great quantity of fleshmeat, and that not for a few days only, but formany days; and when they could not believehim, and one of them asked, whence he couldobtain such vast plenty of what he promised?he replied, "Neither God nor I, although wehear such opprobrious words from you, willleave off our labours for you; and this shallsoon appear." As soon as he had said this,


* These two signals are wanting in the Hebrew andSamaritan, but extant in the Septuagint, as in Josephus.
t This circumstance clearly evinces the propriety withwhich Moses is denominated the meekest of men. Theprovocations he received would have excited resentment
vol. I-—No. 9.


the whole camp was filled with quails, andthey stood round about them, and gatheredthem in great numbers. However, it was notlong ere God punished the Hebrews for thatinsolence and those reproaches they had usedtowards him, for no small number of themdied; and to this day the place retains thememory of their destruction, and is namedKi broth Hattaavah, which is, the graves oflust4
CHAP. XIV.
OF THE SPIES WHO WERE SENT TO SEARCH OUT THE LANDOF CANAAN, AND THE CONSEQUENCE OF THEIR REPORT.
WHEN Moses had led the Hebrews toa place called Paran, which was nearthe borders of the Canaanites, and a placedifficult to be continued in, he gathered themultitude together: and standing in the midstof them, he said: "Of the two things that Goddetermined to bestow upon us, liberty, andthe possession of a happy country, the one yeare already partakers of, by the gift of God,and the other you will quickly obtain; for wenow have our abode near the borders of Ca­naan, and nothing can hinder the acquisitionof it, when we now at last are fallen upon it:I say not only no king, nor city, but neitherthe whole race of mankind, if they are allgathered together, could do it. Let us, there­fore, prepare ourselves for the work; for theCanaanites will not resign up their land to uswithout fighting, but it must be wrested fromthem by great struggles in war. Let us thensend spies, who may take a view of the good­ness of the land, and what strength it is of;but above all things, let us be of one mind,and let us honour God, who is our supremehelper and assister."
When Moses had said thus, the multituderequited him with marks of respect, andchose twelve spies of the most eminent men,one out of each tribe, who, passing over allthe land of Canaan, from the borders of Egypt,came to the city Hamath and to mount Leba­non, and when they had learned the natureof the land and of its inhabitants, they re­in most men; but on him it had no other effect than toinduce him to exert himself the more for the good of thepeople. B.
X Numb. xi. 34.


Ee







OCR Output








an. J052.] 279 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


and the materials were strong stones, andsuch as would resist the force of time; thesewere to unite themselves with the earth, andbecome a basis for a sure foundation for thatedifice which was to be erected; they wereto be so strong, in order to sustain with easethose vast superstructures, and precious or­naments, whose own weight was to be notless than the weight of those high and heavybuildings which the king designed to be veryornamental and magnificent. They erectedits entire body quite up to the roof, of whitestone. Its height was sixty cubits, its lengthwas the same, and its breadth twenty. Therewas another building, erected over it equalto it in its measures. So that the entire alti­tude of the temple, was a hundred and twentycubits. Its front was to the east. As to theporch, they built it before the temple. Itslength was twenty cubits, and it was so or­dered that it might agree with the breadthof the house; and it had twelve cubits inlatitude, and its height was raised as high asa hundred and twenty cubits. He also builtround about the temple thirty small rooms,which might include the whole temple, bytheir closeness to each other, and by theirnumber, and outward position round it. Healso made passages through them, that theymight be come into one through another.Every one of these rooms* had five cubits inbreadth, and the same in length, but in heighttwenty. Above these were other rooms, andothers above them equal both in their mea­sures and number; so that these reached toa height equal to the lower part of the house;for the upper part had no buildings about it.The roof that was over the house was ofcedar: and each of these rooms had a roof ofits own that was not connected with the other


rooms: but for the other parts, there was acovered roof common to them all, and builtwith very long beams that passed through therest, and through the whole building; that sothe middle walls being strengthened by thesame beams of timber, might be thereby madefirmer. But as for that part of the roof thatwas under the beams, it was made of thesame materials, and was all made smooth,and had ornaments proper for roofs, andplates of gold nailed upon them. And as heinclosed the walls with boards of cedar, sohe fixed on them plates of gold, which hadsculptures upon them: so that the wholetemple dazzled the eyes of such as entered,by the splendour of the gold that was onevery side. Now the whole structure of thetemple was made with great skill, of polishedstones, and those laid together so verysmoothly and harmoniously, that there ap­peared to the spectators no sign of anyhammer, or other instrument of architecture;fbut as if, without any use of them, the entirematerials had naturally united themselvestogether; that the agreement of one partwith another seemed rather to have beennatural, than to have arisen from the forceof tools upon them. The king also had afine contrivance for an ascent to the upperroom over the temple; and that was by stepsin the thickness of its wall. For it had nolarge door on the east end as the lower househad; but the entrances were by the sides,through very small doors. He also overlaidthe temple both within and without withboards of cedar, that were kept close toge­ther by thick chains: so that this contrivancewas in the nature of a support to the building.Now when the king had divided the templeinto two parts,:}; he made the inner house of


but the many courte and offices that were about it made thewhole a vast pile, and the exqnisiteness of the art, andthe fewness of the artists that could be employed about it,made a longer time requisite. It must be owned however,that, considering all things, Solomon made an extraordi­nary despatch; for, if the building of Diana's temple atEphesus employed all Asia for the space of two hundredyears, and no less than three hundred and sixty thousandmen, for twenty years together, were taken up in erectingone pyramid, (as Pliny, lib. 36. c. 12. affirms,) no rea­sonable man can wonder, that this temple was seven yearsand a half in building. Pool's Annotations, and CalmefsCommentary. B.
* These small rooms, or side chambers about the loweritixty cubits of the holy house, seem to have been, by
Josephus's description, in the three stories one aboveanother, no less than twenty cubits high a piece. Other­wise there must have been a large interval between one,and the other that was over it; and this with double floors,the one of six cubits distance from the floor beneath it, as1 Kings vi. 5. in the Septuagint, and the other of no lessthan twenty cubits.
t See 1 Kings vi. 7.
J These several parts of the temple the Greeks arevery careful to distinguish by different names. What wasproperly the temple, they called "o vows; and the courtsand other parts of the temple, to ispov. Thus whenZar.harias is said to have gone into the temple to burn in­cense, Luke i. 9. (which was done in the sanctum,) theword is vows; but when it is said, that Anna the prophetess


 


 


 







OCR Output








 


n


i
.8
n|
I


WB


>







OCR Output








an. 1532.] 73 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


king of Egypt was in disorder, upon the fearinto which he reasoned himself, lest his peopleshould be destroyed, and that the manner ofthis death was also reproachful. So that hewas forced in part to recover himself from hiswicked temper to a sounder mind; for hegave leave for the Hebrews themselves todepart. But when the plague thereuponceased, he thought it proper to require, thatthey should leave their children and wivesbehind them, as pledges of their return;whereby he provoked God to be more vehe­mently angry at him; as if he thought to im­pose on his providence; and as if it were onlyMoses, and not God who punished the Egyp­tians for the sake of the Hebrews. For hefilled that country full of various sorts of pes­tilential creatures,* with their various pro­perties; such, indeed, as never came into thesight of men before. By their means the men


perished themselves, and the land was desti­tute of husbandmen for its cultivation: but ifany thing escaped destruction from them, itwas killed by a distemper, which the menunderwent also.
Pharaoh did not yet yield to the will ofGod; but while he gave leave to the husbandsto take their wives with them, he insisted thatthe children should be left behind; Godtherefore resolved to punish his wickednesswith several sorts of calamities, and thoseworse than the foregoing, which had yet sogenerally afflicted them; but their bodies hadterrible boils,f breaking forth with blains;while they were already inwardly consumed;and a great part of the Egyptians perished inthis manner. But when the king was notbrought to reason by this plague, hail wassent down from heaven ;J and such hail as theclimate of Egypt had never suffered be­


lice, to signify gnats. The Septuagint call them Kriviireg;but what kind of creatures these were, is not so certainlyknown. Others would have them to be a new species ofanimals, called analogically by an old name; or if theywere lice, that they were such as had wings, and cruellystung and ulcerated the Egyptians. But upon the suppo­sition that they were no worse than common lice, this wasplague enough to the Egyptians, who affected neatness tosuch a degree, that they bathed themselves every day, andsome of them frequently shaved their bodies all over, forfear of such vermin. Those who pretended that theselice were a new species, make this a reason why the magi­cians could not counterfeit this miracle, because, thoughthey could easily provide the serpents, the blood, and thefrogs, yet this sort of animal was now no where to be had;and therefore, as the organs of sight are more liable to beimposed upon than those of feeling, the magicians mightimpose upon the king, and the other spectators, with fan­tastical blood and frogs, but visionary lice could not vexand torment the body; so that now it was time for the en­chanters to desist, and to own their inability to mimic Mosesany farther. But supposing, that what the magicians did,in the three former miracles, was not illusion and imposi­tion upon the senses, but reality, the true reason why theycould proceed no farther was, that God Almighty had laidbis restraint and prohibition upon the evil spirits, who hadhitherto been subservient to them, that they might notassist them any longer. Le Clerc's Commentary; and jBi'4-liotheca Bibl. in locum. B.
* The word Arab, which we render fly in general, is bythe Septuagint called Kvvofwia, i. e. dog-fly, from its biting;for it fastens its teeth so deep in the flesh, and sticks sovery close, that it oftentimes makes cattle run mad; andthe congruity of this plague seems to be greater, becauseone of the Egyptian deities, which they called Anubis, borethe head of a dog. The Psalmist indeed tells us, that Godsent divers sorts of flies among them, which devoured them.Ps. Ixxviii. 45. So that according to him, it was not oneparticular kind, but all sorts of flies mingled together inone prodigious swarm or conflux. Some translate it a
mixture of beasts, which they suppose went into Egypt toinfest and destroy the country: but this is not so probablea construction, because the punishments hitherto inflictedwere nauseous and troublesome, rather than mortal;though this plague of infinite numbers of small tormentorsis so great aone, that God calls it his army, Joel ii. 25, andthe Greeks thought fit fas Pliny, 1. 20. c. 28. tells us) tohave a god to deliver them from it, under the style ofMyiagros, or Myiodes, even as Belzebub signifies the Lordor God of flies. Bochart, Hier. part 2. B.
t The Hebrew word Sliechin properly signifies an in­flammation, which first makes a tumor or boil, (as wetranslate it,) and thence turns a grievous ulcer. Dr.Lightfoot indeed observes, that in the book of Job, chap,ii. 7, 8. where the same word occurs, it signifies only aburning itch, or an inflamed scab; an intolerable dry itch,which Job could not scratch off with his nails, and wastherefore forced to make use of a potsherd: but then heconfesses that thisShechin here spoken of, was more ran­corous than that, having blains and ulcers that broke outwith it, which Job's had not. So that the Egyptians, accor­ding to this, must have been vexed with a triple punish­ment at once, (a punishment fitly calculated for the morti­fication of a delicate and a voluptuous people,) aking boils,nauseous ulcers, and a burning itch; and to this that com­munication of Moses to the people, in case they proveddisobedient, does, without all peradventure, allude. TheLord mill smite thee with the botch of Egypt, and with theemcrods, and with the scab, and with the itch, whereof thoucanst not be healed. Deut. xxviii. 27. B.
I This infection was the more terrible in Egypt, be­cause according to the account of Herodotus, (1. 3. c. 10.)a very rare thing it was to see any rain, and much moreany bail, in that climate: and accordingly he mentions itas a kind of prodigy, that in the reign of Psammenitus,there happened to be a shower in Thebes, which wasnever known before in the memory of man, nor ever after,to the age wherein our author wrote. The Psalmist hasgiven us a very poetic description of this judgment: Hedestroyed the vines with haU, and the sycamore trees with







OCR Output








AN. 20.] 561 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


in Galilee, called *Gaba; with Hesebonitisin Perea. And these were the places whichhe particularly built. While he was alwaysinventing somewhat farther for his own se­curity; and encompassing the whole nationwith guards, that they might by no meansget from under his power, nor fall into tu­mults; which they did continually upon anysmall commotion; and that if they did makeany commotions, he might know of it; whilesome of his spies might be upon them fromthe neighbourhood, and might both be ableto know what they were attempting, and toprevent it. And when he went about build­ing the walls of Samaria, he contrived tobring thither many of those that had beenassisting to him in his wars; and many ofthe people in that neighbourhood, whom hemade fellow citizens with the rest. This hedid out of an ambitious desire of building atemple; and out of a desire to make the citymore eminent than it had been before; butprincipally because he contrived that itmight at once be for his own security, anda monument of his magnificence. He alsochanged its name; and called it fSebaste;and parted the adjoining country, which wasexcellent in its kind, among the inhabitantsof Samaria, that they might be in a happycondition, upon their first coming to inhabit.Besides this he encompassed the city with awall, of great strength; and made use ofthe acclivity of the place for making his for­tifications stronger. Nor was the compassof the place made now so small as it hadbeen before; but was such as rendered itnot inferior to the most famous cities. Forit was twenty furlongs in circumference.Now within and about the middle of it, hebuilt a sacred place, of a furlong and a halfin circuit, and adorned it with all sorts ofdecorations; and therein erected a temple,which was illustrious on account of both itslargeness and beauty. And as to the severalparts of the city, he adorned them with deco­rations of all sorts also; and made the walls


very strong for his own security, and made it,for the greatest part, a citadel: and as to theelegance of the buildings, it was taken careof also; that he might leave monuments ofhis taste and beneficence to future ages.
CHAP. IX.
of the famine that happened in judf.a and syria;herod's marriage with simon's daughter; andthe rebuilding of cfsarea, and other grecian
CITIES.
NOW on this year, which was the thir­teenth of the reign of Herod, verygreat calamities came upon the country.Whether they were derived from the angerof God, or Jwhether this misery returnagain naturally in certain periods of time.For in the first place there were perpetualdroughts; and for that reason the groundwas barren, and did not bring forth the samequantity of fruits that it used to produce.And after this barrenness of the soil, thatchange of food which the want of corn occa­sioned, produced distempers in the bodiesof men; and a pestilential disease prevailed;one misery following upon the back of ano­ther. And these circumstances that theywere destitute both of methods of cure, andof food, made the pestilential distemper,which began after a violent manner, themore lasting. The destruction of men alsoafter such a manner deprived those that hadsurvived of all their courage; because theyhad no way to provide remedies sufficientfor the distresses they were in. When there­fore the fruits of that year were spoiled, andwhatsoever they had previously laid up wasspent, there was no foundation of hope forrelief remaining; but the misery, contraryto what they expected, still increased uponthem. And this not only on that year, whilethey had nothing for themselves left at theend of it: but what seed they had sownperished also; by reason of the ground notyielding its fruits on the ||second year. This


* Perhaps Gamala.
t Augusta, in honour of Augustus Caesar.
^ Here we have an eminent example of the languageof Josephus in his writing to Gentiles different from thatwhen he wrote to the Jews. In his writing to whom hestill derives all such judgments from the anger of God.But because he knew many of the Gentiles thought theymight naturally come in certain periods, he complies
with them in the following sentence. See the note Onthe War, I. 33.
II This famine for two years, that affected Judea andSyria, the 13th and 14th years of Herod: which are the24th and 23d years before the Christian Era; seems tohave been more terrible, during this time, than was thatin the days of Jacob, Gen. xli. xlii. And what makesthe comparison the more remarkable is this: that now, as







OCR Output








292 [BOOK Till ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


she was in: but openly confessed how wonder­fully she was affected. For she proceeded todiscourse with the king, and thereby ownedthat she was overcome with admiration at thethings before related; and said, "All thingsindeed, O king, that come to our knowledgeby report, come with uncertainty as to ourbelief of them; but as to those good thingsthat to thee appertain, both such as thoupossessest, 1 mean wisdom and prudence, andthe happiness thou hast from thy kingdom,certainly the fame which came to us was nofalsity; it was not only a true report, but itrelated thy happiness after a much lowermanner than I now see it to be before myeyes. For as for the report, it only attemptedto persuade our hearing; but did not so makeknown the dignity of the things themselvesas does the sight of them, and being presentamong them. I indeed, who did not believewhat was reported, by reason of the multi­tude and grandeur of the things I inquiredabout, do see them to be much more nu­merous than they were reported to be. Ac­cordingly I esteem the Hebrew people, aswell as thy servants and friends, to be happy,who enjoy thy presence, and hear thy wisdomevery day continually. One would thereforebless God who hath so loved this country,and those that inhabit therein, as to makethee king over them."
Now when the queen had thus demon­strated how deeply the king had affectedher, she made that disposition known bycertain presents. For she gave him *twentytalents of gold, and an immense quantity ofspices and precious stones. They say alsothat we possess the froot of that balsam•which our country still bears by this wo­man's gift. Solomon also repaid her with


many good things, and principally by be­stowing upon her what she chose of herown inclination; for there was nothing thatshe desired which he denied her. And ashe was very generous and liberal in his owntemper, so did he shew the greatness of hissoul in bestowing upon her what she her­self desired of him. So when this queen ofEgypt and Ethiopia had obtained what wehave already given an account of, and hadagain communicated to the king what shebrought with her, she returned to her ownkingdom.J
CHAP. VII.
of Solomon's immense riches, his love of strangewomen, the subsequent rebellion of ader and je­roboam, and the death of solomon.
ABOUT the same time|| there werebrought to the king from the AureaChersonesus, (a. country so called,) preciousstones and pine-trees: and these trees hemade use of for supporting the temple, andthe palace; as also for the materials of musi­cal instruments, the harps and the psalteries;that the Levites might make use of them intheir hymns to God. The wood which wasbrought to him at the time, was larger andliner than any that had ever been broughtbefore. But let no one imagine that thesepine-trees were like those which are now sonamed, and which take their denominationfrom the merchants, who so call them thatthey may procure them to be admired bythose that purchase them. For those wespeak of were to the sight like the woodof the fig-tree; but were whiter and moreshining.§ Now we have said thus much, thatnobody may be ignorant of the difference be­


* A hundred and twenty, Hebrew and Septuagint,which I suppose to be the true number.
t Some blame Josephus for supposing, that the balsamtree might be first brought out of Arabia, or Egypt, orEthiopia, into Judea, by this queen of Sheba; since seve­ral have said, that of old no country bore this preciousbalsam but Judea. Yet, as my learned friend Mr. Barkersuggested to me from Bochart's Phaleg. II. 26, it is notonly false that this balsam was peculiar to Judea; butboth Egypt and Arabia, and particularly Sabxa had it:which last was that very country whence Josephus, ifunderstood not of Ethiopia, but of Arabia, intimates thisqueen might bring it first into Judea. This Bochartproves from Agatharchides, Diodorus Siculus, and Arte-midorus, in Strabo. Nor are we to suppose, that the
queen of Sabaea could well omit such a present as thisbalsam tree would be esteemed by Solomon, in case itwere then almost peculiar to her own country. Nor isthe mention of balsam, as carried by merchants, and sentas a present to Judea by Jacob, to the governor of Egypt,Gen. xxxvii. 15. and xliii. 11. to be alleged to the con­trary: since what we there render balm, or balsam, de­notes rather that turpentine, which we now cull turpentineof Chio or Cyprus, the juice of the turpentine-tree, thanthis precious balsam. This last is also the same word thatwe elsewhere render, by the like mistake, balm of Gilead.It should be rendered the turpentine of Gilead, Jer. viii. 22.
J 1 Kings x. 13.
II About an. 1020.
§ We never read of ivory till about Solomon's dayB,







OCR Output








56 [book n. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


Now when after supper they had composedthemselves to sleep, J oseph commanded hissteward both to give them their measures ofcorn, and to hide its price again in their sacks;and withal they should put into Benjamin'ssack the golden cup, out of which he himselfused to drink. Which things he did in orderto make trial of his brethren, whether theywould stand by Benjamin when he should beaccused of having stolen the cup, and shouldappear to be in danger; or whether theywould leave him, and, depending on their owninnocency, go to their father without him.When the servant had done as he was bidden,the sons of Jacob, knowing nothing of this,went their way, and took Simeon with them,and had a double cause of joy; both becausethey had received him again, and becausethey took back Benjamin to their father, asthey had promised. But presently a troop ofhorsemen encompassed them, and broughtwith them Joseph's servant, who had put thecup into Benjamin's sack. Upon this unex­pected attack, they were much disturbed,and asked the reason why they came thusupon men, who a little before, had been bytheir lord thought worthy of an honourableand hospitable reception? They replied, bycalling them wicked wretches, who had for­got that very hospitable and kind treatmentwhich Joseph had given them, and did notscruple to be injurious to him; and to carryoff that cup out of which he had, in so friendlya manner, drank to them; regarding theirfriendship with Joseph no more than thedanger they should be in, if they were taken,in comparison of the unjust gain. Hereuponhe threatened, that they should be punished,for though they had escaped the knowledgeof him, who was but a servant, yet had theynot escaped the knowledge of God, nor hadgone off with what they had stolen; and afterall, asked, why they were pursued, as if theyknew nothing of the matter; and he told them,that they should immediately know it by theirpunishment. This and more of the samenature did the servant say, in way of reproach;but they being wholly ignorant of any thinghere that concerned them, laughed at whathe said, and wondered at the abusive lan-selves, in all public feasts and banquets, was no more thana double mess." Patrick's Commentary and BibliothecaBibl. B.


guage which he gave them, when he was sohardy as to accuse those who did not beforeso much as retain the price of their corn,which was found in their sacks, but brought itagain, though nobody else knew of any suchthing; so far were they from offering anyinjury to Joseph voluntarily. But still, sup­posing that a search would be a more surejustification of themselves than their own de­nial of the fact, they bid him search them;and said, if any of them had been guilty oftheft, he might punish them all; for being noway conscious of any crime, they spake withassurance, and, as they thought, without anydanger to themselves. The servants desiredthere might be a search made; but they said,the punishment should extend to him alonewho should be guilty of the theft. So theymade the search; and having searched allthe rest, they' came at last to Benjamin, asknowing it was Benjamin's sack in which theyhad hidden the cup; they having searchedthe rest only for a shew of accuracy; so therest were out of fear for themselves, and werenow only concerned about Benjamin; butstill were well assured that he would be alsofound innocent; and they reproached thosethat came after them for their hindering them,while they might have proceeded a good wayon their journey. But as soon as the cup wasfound in Benjamin's sack, all was changed tomourning and lamentation. They rent theirgarments, and wept for the punishment whichtheir brother was to undergo for his theft; andfor the delusion they had put on their father,when they promised they would return Ben­jamin safe to him. What added to theirmisery was, that this melancholy accidentcame unfortunately at a time when theythought they had been gotten off clear. Butthey confessed that this misfortune of theirbrother, as well as the grief of their fatherfor him, was owing to themselves; since theyhad forced their father to send him with them,when he was averse from it.
The horsemen therefore took Benjamin andbrought him to Joseph, his brethren also fol­lowing him, who, when he saw him in custody,and them in the habit of mourning, said,*" How came you, vile wretches as you are,
* This oration seems too long, and too unugual a digres­sion to have have been composed by Joseph on this occa­sion. It seems to me a speech or declaration composed







OCR Output








an. 538.] 385 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


they had filled themselves, he gave fartherorder that Daniel's enemies should be castinto the den; that he might learn whetherthe lions, now they were* full, would touchthem or not.* And it appeared plainly toDarius, after the princes had been cast to thewild beasts, that it was God who preservedDaniel. tFor the lions spared none of them;but tore them all to pieces, as if they hadbeen very hungry and wanted food. I sup­pose therefore it was not their hunger, whichhad been a little before satisfied with abun­dance of flesh, but the wickedness of thesemen that provoked them to destroy theprinces. For if it so please God, that wick­edness might by even those irrational crea­tures, be esteemed a plain foundation fortheir punishment.
When therefore those that had intendedthus to destroy Daniel by treachery, werethemselves destroyed, king Darius sent lettersover all his country, and praised that Godwhom Daniel worshipped; and said, that hewas the only true God, and had power. Healso held Daniel in very great esteem; andmade him the principal of his friends. Nowwhen Daniel was become so illustrious andfamous, on account of the opinion men hadthat he was beloved of God, he built a Jtowerat Ecbatana in Media. It was a most ele­gant building, and wonderfully made, and itis still remaining, and preserved to this day.And to such as see it, it appears to have beenlately built, and to have been no older thanthat very day when any one looks upon it;it is ||so fresh and beautiful, and no waygrown old in so long a time. For buildingssuffer the same as men do, they grow old, as


well as they, and by numbers of years theirstrength is dissolved, and their beautywithered. Now they bury the kings of Media,of Persia, and Parthia in this tower, to thisday, and he who was intrusted with the careof it, was a Jewish priest; which thing is alsoobserved to this day. But it is proper togive an account of what this man did; for hewas so happy, as to have strange revelationsmade to him, and those as to one of thegreatest of the prophets; insomuch thatwhile he was alive, he had the esteem andapplause both of kings and of the multitude;and now he is dead he retains a remembrancethat will never fail. For the several booksthat he wrote and left behind him, are stillread by us, till this time; and from them webelieve that he conversed with God; for henot only prophesied of future events, as didthe other prophets; but he also determinedthe time of their accomplishment. And whileprophets used to foretell misfortunes, and onthat account were disagreeable both to thekings and the multitude; Daniel was to thema prophet of good things, and this to such adegree, that, by the agreeable nature of hispredictions, he procured the good will of allmen; and by the accomplishment of them heprocured the belief of their truth, and theopinion of a sort of divinity for himself amongthe multitude. He also wrote and left be­hind him what evinced the accuracy andundeniable veracity of his predictions. Forhe saith, that when he was in Susa the metro­polis of Persia, and went out into the fieldwith his companions, there was on the suddena motion and concussion of the earth; andthat he was left alone by himself, his friends


* The lex talionis condemned all calumniators to thesame sort of punishment which they intended to havebrought upon others; and in this case, among the Per­sians, it was a frequent thing to include all the family inthe penalty inflicted on the father; but, abominandae leges(says Ammianus Marcellinus) per quas, ob novara unius,omnis propinquitas perit. Calmed Comtnentary. B.
t It is no way improbable that Daniel's enemies mightsuggest this reason to the king, why the lions did notmeddle with him; and that they might suspect the king'skindness to Daniel had procured these lions to be so filledbeforehand; and that thence it was that he encouragedDaniel to submit to this experiment, in hope of comingoff safe! and that this was the true reason of making soterrible an experiment upon those his enemies and alltheir families. Daniel vi. 24. Though our other copiesdo not directly take notice of it.
% Of this Baris or tower, built by Daniel, whether it
were at Ecbatana in Media, as Josephus's present copieshave it; or at Susa in Persia, as Jerome quotes it fromhis copies of Josephus, is hard to determine. Dean Pri-deaux thinks Jerome's to be the true reading; and thatthis tower was at Susa. Connex. part 1. at the year 634.I! What Josephus here says, that the stones of the se­pulchres of the kings of Persia at this Baris, or those per­haps of the same sort that are now commonly called theruins of Persepolis, continued so entire and unaltered inhis days, as if they were lately put there, " 1," says Re-land, " here can shew to be true, as to those stones of thePersian king's mausoleum which Corn. Brunius brake offand gave me." He ascribed this to the hardness of thestones; which scarcely yields to iron tools; and provesfrequently too hard for cutting by the chisel, but often­times breaks the chisel to pieces. See the like as to theArmenian buildings of Semiramis, in Moses Chorenensis,page 46.







OCR Output








178 [book v. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


her mother-in-law, went out to glean; thatthey might get a stock of corn for theirfood. Now it happened that she came intoBooz's field; and after some time Boozcame thither, and when he saw the damsel,he enquired of his servant that was set overthe reapers concerning the girl. The ser­vant had a little before enquired about allher circumstances, and told them to hismaster. Booz then kindly embraced her;both on account of her affection to her moth­er-in-law, and her remembrance of that sonof her's, to whom she had been married,and wished that she might experience aprosperous condition. So he desired hernot to glean, but to reap what she was able;and gave her leave to carry it home. Healso gave it in charge to that servant whowas over the reapers, not to hinder herwhen she took it away, and bade him giveher her dinner and make her drink, whenhe did the like to the reapers. Now whatcorn Ruth received of him, she kept for hermother-in-law, and carried it to her in theevening. And Naomi had kept for her apart of such food as her neighbours hadplentifully bestowed upon her. Ruth alsotold her mother-in-law what Booz had said;and when the other had informed her thathe was near of kin to them, and perhapswas so pious a man as to make some pro­vision for them, she went out again on thedays following to gather the gleanings, withBooz's maid-servant.
It was not many days before Booz, afterthe barley was winnowed, slept in his thresh­ing floor. When Naomi was informed ofthis circumstance, she contrived that Ruthshould lie down by him, for she thought thatit might be for their advantage that heshould discourse with the girl. Accordinglyshe sent the damsel to sleep at his feet, whowent as she bade her; for she did not thinkit consistent with her duty to contradict anycommand of her mother-in-law. And at first


* Roth iii. 13.
t It is not easy to give an account of the origin of thiscustom, but the reason of it is plain; it being a naturalsignification that he resigned his interest in the land, bygiving him his shoe, wherewith he used to walk in it, thathe might enter into and take possession of it himself.The Targum instead of the shoe hath right hand glove;it being then the custom, perhaps, to give that in room ofthe shoe.
"X


she lay concealed from Booz, as he was fastasleep; but when he awaked about midnight,and perceived a woman lying by him, heasked who she was? and when she had toldhim her name, and desired that he, whomshe owned for her lord, would excuse her,he said no more; but in the morning, beforethe servants began to set about their work,he waked her, and bid her take as muchbarley as she could carry, and go to hermother-in-law, before any body should seethat she had lain down by him; because itwas but prudent to avoid any reproach thatmight arise on that account, especially whenthere had been nothing done that was ill;but, as to the main point she aimed at, thematter should rest here; "He that is nearerof kin than 1 am shall be asked whether hewish to take thee to wife? if he says he does,thou shalt follow him; but if he refuse, Iwill marry thee, according to the law."*
When she had informed the mother-in-lawof this, they were very glad of it; out of thehope they had that Booz would make pro­vision for them. Now about noon Boozwent down into the city, and gathered thesenate together; and when he had sent forRuth, he called for her kinsman also. Andwhen he was come, he asked him whetherhe did not retain the inheritance of Elim-elech, and his sons? he confessed that hedid retain it, as he was permitted to do bythe laws, because he was their nearest kins­man. Then said Booz, "Thou must notremember the laws in part; but do everything according to them. For the wife ofMahlon is come hither; whom thou mustmarry according to the law, in case thouwilt retain their fields." So the man yieldedup both the fields and the wife to Booz, whowas himself of kin to those that were dead;as alleging that he had a wife already, andchildren also. So Booz called the senate towitness, and bid the woman to loose hisshoe,f and spit in his face, according to the
In latter times the Jews delivered a handkerchief forthe same purpose. So R. Solomon Jarchi says, we ac­quire, or buy, now, by a handkerchief or veil, instead of ashoe. The giving of a glove was, in the middle ages, aceremony of investiture in bestowing lands and dignities.In A. D. 1002, two bishops were put in possession oftheir sees, each by receiving a glove So in England,in the reign of Edward the Second, the deprivation rfgloves was a ceremony of degradation.—With regard to







OCR Output








torn 'Hfirihgisdl S^iusi
I2£W TKGSSKCD LTT5T







OCR Output








XJr.827.] 343 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


slew of them ten thousand, and took as manyprisoners alive, whom he brought to thegreat rock, which is in Arabia, and threwthem down from it headlong. He alsobrought away a great deal of prey, and vastriches from those nations. But while Ama-ziah was engaged in this expedition, thoseIsraelites whom he had hired, and then dis­missed, were very uneasy, and taking theirdismission for an affront, as supposing thatthis would not have been done to them butout of contempt, they fell upon his kingdom,and proceeded to spoil the country as far asBeth-horon, and took much cattle, and slewthree thousand men.
In consequence of the victory which Araa-ziah had gotten, and the great acts he haddone, he was puffed up; and began to over­look God, who had given him the victory;and proceeded to worship the gods he hadbrought out of the country of the Amalekites.So a prophet came to him, and said, he won­dered how he could esteem them to be gods,who had been of no advantage to their own
Seople, who paid them no honours; nor hadelivered them from his hands; but had over­looked the destruction of many of them, andhad suffered themselves to be carried cap­tive; for that they had been carried to Jeru­salem in the same manner as any one mighthave taken some of the enemy alive, and ledthem thither. This reproof provoked theking to anger; and he commanded the pro­phet to hold his peace, and threatened toSunish him if he meddled with his conduct,o he replied, that he should indeed holdhis peace; but foretold withal, that Godwould not overlook those attempts at innova­tion. Amaziah, however, was not able tocontain himself under that prosperity whichGod had given him, although he had affrontedGod thereupon; but in a vein of insolencehe wrote to Joash, king of Israel, com­manding that he and all his people shouldbe obedient to him, as they had formerlybeen obedient to his progenitors, David andSolomon; and giving him to understand, thatif he would not be so wise as to do what hecommanded he must fight for his dominions.Hereupon Joash returned this answer inwriting:
* 8 Kings xiv. 9, 10.


KING JOASH TO KING AMAZIAH.
"There was a vastly tall cyprus tree inmount Lebanon, as also a thistle: this thistlesent to the cypress tree, to give the cypresstree's daughter in marriage to the thistle'sson. But as the thistle was saying this, therecame a wild beast and trod it down. Andthis may be a lesson to thee, not to be soambitious; but to be careful, lest upon thygood success in the fight against the Amale­kites, thou growest so proud, as to bringdangers upon thyself, and upon thy king­dom."*
When Amaziah had read this letter, hewas more eager upon his expedition: whichI suppose, was by the impulse of God, thathe might be punished for his offence againsthim. But as soon as he led out his armyagainst Joash, and they were going to joinbattle, there came such a consternation uponthe army of Amaziah, as God, when he isdispleased, sends upon men; and discomfitedthem, even before they came to a close fight.Now it happened, that as they were scatteredabout by the terror that was upon them,Amaziah was left alone, and was taken pri­soner by the enemy. Whereupon Joashthreatened to kill him, unless he would per­suade the people of Jerusalem to open theirgates, and receive him and his army into thecity. Accordingly Amaziah was so distressed,and in such fear of his life, that he made hisenemy to be received into the city. So Joashoverthrew a part of the wall, of the length ofone hundred cubits, and drove his chariotthrough the breach into Jerusalem, and ledAmaziah captive along with him. By whichmeans he became master of Jerusalem, andtook away the treasures of God, and carriedoff all the gold and silver that was in theking's palace, and then freed the king fromcaptivity, and returned to Samaria.f Nowthese things happened to the people of Jeru­salem in the fourteenth year of the reign ofAmaziah: who after this had a conspiracyformed against him by his friends, and fledto the city Lachish, and was there slain bythe conspirators. So they took up his deadbody, and carried it to Jerusalem, and madea royal funeral for him. This was the end


t 2 Kings xiv. 11


13.







OCR Output








AN. 1148.] 185 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


This assembly did not escape the notice ofthe Philistines. So when they had learnedthat so large a company had met together,they fell upon the Hebrews with a greatarmy, and mighty forces, as hoping to assaultthem when they did not expect it, nor were
Erepared for it. This thing affrighted the[ebrews, and put them into disorder and ter­ror. So they came running to Samuel, andsaid, "Our souls were sunk by our fears,and by the former defeat we had received:and thence it was that we lay still, lest weshould excite the power of our enemiesagainst us. Now while thou hast brought ushither to offer up our prayers and sacrifices,and take oaths to be obedient; our enemiesare making an expedition against us, whilewe are naked and unarmed. Wherefore wehave no other hope of deliverance but thatby thy means, and by the assistance God shallafford us upon thy prayers to him, we shallobtain deliverance from the Philistines."Hereupon Samuel bid them be of good cheer,and promised that God would assist them.And taking a sucking lamb, he sacrificed itfor the multitude;* and besought God tohold his protecting hand over them whenthey should fight with the Philistines, andnot to overlook them, nor suffer them tocome under a second misfortune. Accord­ingly God hearkened to his prayers; and, ac­cepting their sacrifice with a gracious inten­tion, he granted them a victory over theirenemies. Now while the altar had thesacrifice of God upon it, and had not yetconsumed it wholly by the sacred fire; theenemy's army marched out of their camp,and was put in order of battle; and this inhope that they should be conquerors, sincethet Jews were caught in distressed circum­stances; as neither having their weapons


with them, nor being assembled in order tofight. But things so fell out, that they wouldhardly have been credited though they hadbeen foretold by any body. For in the firstplace God disturbed their enemies with anearthquake, and moved the ground underthem to such a degree, that he caused it totremble, and made them to shake; insomuchthat by its trembling he made some unable tokeep their feet, and made them fall down;and by opening its chasms he caused thatothers should be hurried down into them.After which he caused such a noise of thunderto come among them, and made fiery light­ning shine so terribly round about them, thatit was ready to burn their faces; and he sosuddenly shook their weapons out of theirhands, that he made them flee, and returnhome naked. So Samuel, with the multitude,pursued them to a place called Bethcar; andthere he set up a stone as a boundary of theirvictory, and their enemies' flight; and calledit the stone of power; as a signal of thatpower God had given them against theirenemies.
So the Pnilistines, after this stroke, madeno more expeditions against the Israelites;Jbut lay still out of fear, and out of remem­brance of what had befallen them. And whatcourage the Philistines had formerly againstthe Hebrews, after this victory, was trans­ferred to the Hebrews. Samuel also made anexpedition against the Philistines, and slewmany of them, and entirely humbled theirproud hearts, and took from them that countrywhich, when they were formerly conquerors,they had cut off from the Jews; which wasthe country that extended from the bordersof Gath to the city Ekron. But the remainsof the Canaanites were at this time in friend­ship with the Israelites.


most probable opinion is, that this water was, upon thisoccasion, poured out, by way of libation, before God.And for support of this it is commonly alleged, that liba­tions of this kind were very customary in ancient times;that Theophrastus, as he is cited by Porphyry, (De Abstin.lib. 2.) tells us, that the earliest libations were of water,though afterwards honey and wine came into request:that Virgil (jEneid. iv.) mentions the practice of sprink­hng the water of the lake Avernus: and that Homer(Odyss. 12.) remarks, that for want of wine, the com­panions of Ulysses poured out water in a sacrifice, whichthey offered to the Gods. It is certain, that David pouredout unto the Lord the water which the three gallant men
in his army brought him from the well of Bethlehem, atthe hazard of their lives, 2 Sam. xxiii. 16. and, therefore,though the law does not enjoin any such libations of water;yet, since there is no positive prohibition of them, whymay we not suppose, that upon this extraordinary occasion,something singular and extraordinary might have beendone? Patrick's and Calmet's Comment. B.
* 1 Sam. vii. 9.
t This is the first place, so far as I remember, in theseAntiquities, where Josephus begins to call his nation Jews,he having hitherto usually, if not constantly, called themeither Hebrews or Israelites.
| 1 Sam. vii. 13.







OCR Output








58 [book n ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


for thyself, to preserve even those that wouldhave nobody to lament them when they weredead; but we would have yielded ourselvesup to suffer whatsoever thou pleasedst. Butnow, (for we do not plead for mercy to our­selves, though indeed, if we die, it will bewhile we are young, and before we have hadthe enjoyment of life,) have regard to ourfather, and take pity on his old age; on whoseaccount it is that we make these supplications.We beg thou wilt give us those lives, whichthis wickedness of ours has rendered obnox­ious to thy punishment; and this for his sakewho is not himself wicked; nor does his beingour father make us wicked. He is a goodman, and not worthy to have such trials of hispatience; now we are absent he is afflictedwith care for us. But if he hear of our deaths,and what was the cause of it, he will on thataccount die an immature death: and the re­proachful manner of our ruin will hasten hisend, and will directly kill him; nay, will bringhim to a miserable death, while he will makehaste to rid himself out of the world, and bringhimself to a state of insensibility, before thesad story of our end come abroad into therest of the world.
"Consider things in this manner, althoughour wickedness does now provoke thee, witha just desire of punishing that wickedness;and forgive it for our father's sake; and letthy commiseration of him weigh more withthee, than our wickedness. Have regard tothe old age of our father, who, if we perish,will be very lonely while he lives; and willsoon die himself also. Grant this boon to thename of father, for thereby thou wilt honourhim that begat thee, and wilt grant it to thy­self also, who enjoyest already that denomi­nation; thou wilt then, by that denomination,be preserved of God the father of all; byshewing a pious regard to which in the caseof our father, thou wilt appear to honour himwho is styled by the same name. I mean ifthou wilt have this pity on our father, uponthe consideration how miserable he will be ifhe be deprived of his sons. It is thy part,therefore, to bestow on us what God has givenus, when it is in thy power to take it away;and so to resemble him intirely in charity.For it is good to use that power which can
* In all this speech of Judas's we may observe, thatJosephus supposed death to have been the punishment of


neither give nor take away, on the mercifulside, and when it is in thy power to destroy,to forget that thou ever hadst that power, andto look on thyself as only allowed power forpreservation; and that the more any one ex­tends this power, the greater reputation doeshe gain to himself. Now by forgiving ourbrother what he has unhappily committed,thou wilt preserve us all. For we cannotthink of living if he be put to death; since wedare not shew ourselves alive to our fatherwithout our brother. But here must we par­take of one and the same catastrophe. Andso far we beg of thee, O governor, that if thoucondemnest our brother to die, thou wiltpunish us together with him, as partakers ofhis crime; for we shall not think it reasonableto be reserved to kill ourselves for grief ofour brother's death, but so to die rather asequally guilty with him of this crime. I willonly leave with thee this one consideration,and then will say no more, viz. that our bro­ther committed his fault when he was young,and not yet of confirmed wisdom in his con­duct; and that men naturally forgive suchyoung persons. And I end here, withoutadding what more I have to say, that in casethou condemnest us, that omission may besupposed to have hurt us, and permitted theeto take the severer side. But in case thousettest us free, that this may be ascribed tothy own goodness; of which thou art inwardlyconscious, that thou freest us from condem­nation; and that not by barely preserving us,but by granting us such a favour as will makeus appear more righteous than we really are:and by representing to thyself more motivesfor our deliverance than we are able to pro­duce ourselves. If, therefore, thou resolvestto slay him, I desire thou wilt slay me in hisstead, and send him back to his father, or ifthou pleasest to retain him with thee as aslave, I am fitter to labour for thy advantagein that capacity, and as thou seest, am better
Prepared for either of those sufferings."* Soudas being very willing to undergo anything for the deliverance of his brother, casthimself clown at Joseph's feet, and earnestlylaboured to assuage and pacify his anger. Allhis brethren also fell down before him, weep­ing and delivering themselves up for destruc-
theft in Egypt, in the days of Joseph; though it never wagso among the Jews, by the law of Moses.







OCR Output








AN. 1512.] 115 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


that any such accident had happened. Thusdid these men perish,* and became a demon-tration of the power of God. And truly, anyone would lament them, not only on accountof this calamity that befel them, which yetdeserves our commiseration; but also becausetheir kindred were pleased with their suffer­ings; for they forgot the relation they bare tothem; and at the sight of this sad accident,approved of the judgment given against them:and because they looked upon the peopleabout Dathan as pestilent men, they thoughtthey perished as such, and did not grieve forthem.
Moses now called for those that contendedabout the priesthood, that trial might be madewho should be priest, and that he whose sacri­fice God was best pleased with, might be or­dained to that function. So the two hundredand fifty men approached, who indeed werehonoured by the people, not only on accountof their ancestors, but also on account of theirown power, in which they excelled the others.Aaron and Corah also came forth; and theyall offered incense, in those censers whichthey brought with them, before the taber­nacle. Hereupon, so great a fire shone out, asno one ever saw in any that is made by thehand of man; neither in those eruptions outof the earth, that are caused by subterrane­ous burnings; nor in such fires as arise oftheir own accord in the woods, when the agi­tation is caused by the trees rubbing oneagainst another; but this fire was very bright,and had a terrible flame, such as is kindled atthe command of God; by whose irruption onthem, all the company, and Corah himself,weref destroyed so entirely, that their verybodies left no remains. Aaron alone was pre­served, and not at all hurt by the fire; be­cause it was God that sent the fire to burnthose only who ought to be burned. Here­upon Moses, after these men were destroyed,was desirous that the memory of this judgmentmight be delivered down to posterity, andthat future ages might be acquainted with it;and he commanded Eleazar, the son of Aaron,to put their censers near the brazen altar,that they might be a memorial to posterity of


* Numb. xvi. 33.
t It appears here, from the Samaritan Pentateuch, and'j» effect from the Psalmist, as also from the ApostolicalConstitutions, from Clement's first Epistle to the Corin-
voi>. I.—No. 10.


what these men suffered, for supposing thatthe power of God might be eluded. And thusAaron was no longer esteemed to have thepriesthood by the favour of Moses, but by thepublic judgment of God, and he and his child­ren peaceably enjoyed that honour afterward.
CHAP. IV.
OF WHAT HAPPENED TO THE HEBREWS DURIN6 THIRTT-EICHT YEARS IN THE WILDERNESS.
THE sedition, however, was so far fromceasing upon this destruction, that itgrew much stronger,J and became more intolerable. And the occasion of its growingworse was of that nature, as made it likely thecalamity would last for a long time. For themen believing already that nothing is donewithout the providence of God, would haveit, that these things came thus to pass notwithout God's favour to Moses. They there­fore laid the blame upon him, that God wasso angry; and that this happened not so muchbecause of the wickedness of those that werepunished, as because Moses procured thepunishment: and that these men had beendestroyed without any sin of theirs, only be­cause they were zealous about the divineworship: as also that he who had been thecause of this diminution of the people, by de­stroying so many men, and those the most ex­cellent of them all; besides his escaping anypunishment himself, had now given the priest­hood to his brother so firmly, that nobodycould any longer dispute it with him; for noone else could now put in for it, since he musthave seen those that first did so, to have mise­rably perished. Nay, besides this, the kindredof those that were destroyed, made great en­treaties to the multitude to abate the arro­gance of Moses, because it would be safestfor them so to do.
Moses, upon his hearing that the peoplewere tumultuous, was afraid they would at­tempt some other innovation; and that somegreat and sad calamity would be the conse­quence. So he called the multitude to a con­gregation, and patiently heard what apologythey made for themselves, without opposing
thians, from Ignatius's Epistle to the Magnesians, and fromEusebius, that Corah was not swallowed up with theReubenites, but burnt with the Levites, of his own tribe.J Numb. xvi. 41.
Gg







OCR Output








An. 91.] 489 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


tious against him. For at a festival whichwas then celebrated, when he stood upon thealtar, and was going to sacrifice, the nationrose upon him, and pelted him with citrons,which they then had in their hands; becausethe law of the Jews required, that at the feastof tabernacles every one should have branchesof the palm and citron-tree: which things wehave* elsewhere related. They also reviledhim, as tderived from a captive; and so un­worthy of his dignity, and of sacrificing. Atthis he was in a rage, and slew about six thou­sand of them. He also built a partition wallof wood round the altar, and the temple; asfar as that partition; within which it was onlylawful for the priests to enter.J And by thismeans he obstructed the multitude fromcoming at him. He also maintained foreignersof Pisidia and Cilicia. For as to the Syrians,he was at war with them, and so made no useof them. He also overcame the Arabians;such as the Moabites, and Gileadites, andmade them bring tribute. Moreover he de­molished Amathus: while ||Theodorus durstnot fight with him. But as he had joinedbattle with Obedas, king of the Arabians, andfell into an ambush, in places that were rug­ged and difficult to be travelled over, hewas thrown down into a deep valley, by themultitude of the camels, at Gadara, a villageof Gilead, and hardly escaped with his life.From thence he fled to Jerusalem; where, be­sides his other ill success, the nation insultedhim, and he fought against them six years, andslew no fewer than fifty thousand of them.And when he desired that they would desistfrom their ill will to him, they hated him somuch the more, on account of what had al­ready happened. And when he had askedthem what he ought to do? They all cried out,that he ought to kill himself. They also sent toDemetrius Eucerus, and desired him to makea league of mutual defence with them.
CHAP. XIV.
OF THE AFFAIRS OF DEMETRIUS EUCERUS AND ALEXANDER;ALSO CONCERNING THE DEATH OF DEMETRIUS.
OW Demetrius came with an army, andtook those that invited him with him;


N


* See Book III. chap. 10.
t This reproach upon Alexander, that he was sprungfrom a captive, seems only the repetition of the Phari­saical calumny upon bis father. Chap. 10.


and pitched his camp near the city Shechem.Upon which Alexander, with his six thousandtwo hundred mercenaries, and about twentythousand Jews, who were of his party, wentagainst Demetrius; who had three thousandhorsemen, and forty thousand footmen. Greatexertions were made on both sides; Deme­trius trying to bring off the mercenaries thatwere with Alexander, because they wereGreeks; and Alexander endeavouring to bringoff the Jews that were with Demetrius. How­ever, when neither of them could persuadethem so to do, they came to a battle, in whichall Alexander's mercenaries were killed,when they had given demonstration of theirfidelity and courage. A great number ofDemetrius's soldiers were slain also, notwith­standing he gained the victory.
Now as Alexander fled to the mountains,six thousand of the Jews came together tohim from Demetrius out of pity at the changeof his fortunes. Hereupon Demetrius retiredout of the country, after which the Jews foughtagainst Alexander: but being beaten, theywere slain in great numbers, in the severalbattles which they had. And when he hadshut up the most powerful of them in the cityBethome, he besieged them therein. Andwhen he had taken the city, and gotten themen into his power, he brought them to Jeru­salem; and committed a most barbarous ac­tion. For as he was feasting with his concu­bines, in the sight of all the city, he causedabout eight hundred of them to be crucified:and while they were living he ordered thethroats of their wives and children to be cutbefore their eyes. This inhuman punishmentwas indeed by way of revenge for the injuriesthey had done him: for he had, by theirmeans, come to the last degree of hazard, bothof his life, and of his kingdom: while theywere not satisfied by themselves only to fightagainst him; but introduced foreigners alsofor the same purpose. Nay, at length theyreduced him to that degree of necessity, thathe was compelled to deliver back to the kingof Arabia, the land of Moab and Gilead,which he had subdued, and the places thatwere in them; that they might not join with
J An. 91.
II This Theodorus was the son of Zeno; and was inpossession of Amathus.







OCR Output








228 [book vir. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


Joab's; which, as he said himself, was in wayof punishment for his brother Asahel, whomAbner smote and slew as he was pursuingafter him in the battle of Hebron; but as thetruth was, out of fear of his losing his com­mand of the army, and his dignity with theking; and lest he should be deprived of thoseadvantages, and Abner should obtain thefirst rank in David's court. By these exam­ples any one may learn, how many and howgreat instances of wickedness men will ven­ture upon, for the sake of getting money andauthority; and that they may not fail of eitherof them. For as when they are desirous ofobtaining the same, they acquire them byten thousand evil practices; so when theyare afraid of losing them, they get them con­firmed by practices much worse than theformer. As if no other calamity so terriblecould befall them, as the failure of acquiringso exalted an authority, or as the loss of it,after its acquisition and long enjoyment. Andsince this last would be the heaviest of allafflictions, they all of them contrive and ven­ture upon the most difficult actions, out offear of losing the same. But let it sufficethat I have made these short reflections uponthat subject.
When David heard that Abner was slain,it grieved his soul, and he called all men towitness, with stretching out his hand to God,and crying out, that he was not a partaker inthe murder of Abner, and that his death wasnot procured by his command or approbation.He also wished the heaviest curses might fallupon him that slew him, and upon his wholehouse, and he devoted those that had assistedhim in this murder to the same penalties onits account. For he took care not to appearto have had any hand in this murder, contraryto the assurances he had given, and the oathshe had taken to Abner. However, he com­manded all the people to weep and lamentthis man, and to honour his dead body withthe usual solemnities; that is, by rending theirgarments, and putting on sackcloth; and thatthis should be the habit in which they shouldgo before the bier. He also followed it him­self, with the elders, and those that wererulers; lamenting Abner, and by his tearsdemonstrating his good will to him while hewas alive, and his sorrow for him now he wasdead; and that he was not taken off with his


consent. So he buried him at Hebron, in amagnificent manner, and indited funeral ele­gies for him: he also stood first over themonument weeping, and caused others to dothe same. Nay, so deeply did the death ofAbner disorder him, that his companionscould by no means persuade him to take anyfood: but he affirmed with an oath that hewould taste nothing till the sun was set. Thisprocedure gained him the good will of themultitude; for such as had an affection forAbner were highly gratified with the respecthe paid him, when he was dead; and theobservance of that faith he had plighted tohim; which was shewn in his vouchsafing himall the usual ceremonies, as if he had beenhis kinsman and friend, and not suffering himto be neglected and injured with a dishonour­able burial, as if he had been his enemy.Insomuch that the entire nation rejoiced atthe king's gentleness and mildness of dispo­sition; every one being ready to suppose thatthe king would have taken the same care ofthem, in the like circumstances, which theysaw he shewed in the burial of Abner. Andindeed David principally intended to gain agood reputation; and therefore he took careto do what was proper in this case; whencenone had any suspicion that he was the authorof Abner's death. He also said to the multi­tude, that he was greatly troubled at thedeath of so good a man, and that the affairsof the Hebrews had suffered great detrimentby being deprived of him, who was of so greatabilities to preserve them by his excellentadvice, and by the strength of his hands inwar. "But," added he, " that God, who hath >a regard to all men's actions, will not sufferthis man (Joab) to go off unrevenged. Butknow ye, that I am not able to do any thingto these sons of Zeruiah, Joab and Abishai,who have more power than I have. But Godwill requite their insolent attempts upon theirown heads."* And this was the fatal con­clusion of the life of Abner.
CHAP. II.
OF THE MURDER OF ISHBOSKETH, BY THE TREACHERY OFHIS FRIENDS, AND OF DAVID'S ACCESSION TO THE WHOLE


KIN'iDOM.


w


HEN Ishbosheth, the son of Saul, hadheard of the death of Abner, he took


* 2 Sam. iii. 39.







OCR Output








an. 536.] 387 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS


BOOK XL


Containing an Interval of Two Hundred and Fifty-three Years and Five Months.


FROM THE FIRST YEAR OF CYRUS TO THE DEATH OF ALEXANDER THE GREAT.


CHAP. I.


OF THE PERMISSION GRANTED TO THE JEWS BY CYRUS,KING* OF PERSIA, TO RETURN TO THEIR OWN COUNTRY,AND TO REBUILD THEIR TEMPLE.
IN the firstf year of the reign of Cyrus;which was the seventieth from the daythat the Jews were removed out of their ownland into Babylon: God commiserated thecaptivity and calamity of these poor people;according as he had foretold by Jeremiah theprophet,J before the destruction of the city;that after they had served Nebuchadnezzar,and his posterity, and after they had un­dergone that servitude seventy years,|| hewould restore them again to the land oftheir fathers, and they should rebuild theirtemple, and enjoy their ancient prosperity.And these things God did afford them. For


he stirred up the mind of Cyrus, and madehim write thus throughout all Asia: "Thussaith Cyrus the king, Since* God Almightyhath appointed me to be king of the habit­able earth, I believe that he is that Godwhom the nation of the Israelites worship:for indeed he foretold my name by the pro­phets; and that I should build him a houseat Jerusalem, in the country of Judea."§
This was known to Cyrus by his readingthe book which Isaiah left behind him of hisprophecies. For this prophet said, that Godhad spoken thus to him in a secret vision:—"My will is, that Cyrus, whom I have ap­pointed to be king over many and great na­tions, send back my people to their own land,and build my temple."** This was foretoldby Isaiah one hundred and forty years beforethe temple was demolished. Accordingly


'* N. B. Josephus never makes use of our Hebrewbook of Ezra, which probably he never saw; but onlyof the first book of Esdras, by us called apocryphal: andwhich he read in Hebrew; but which Hebrew copy hasbeen long lost; our book being now only extant in theSeptuagint, and vulgar Latin versions.
T 2 Chron. xxxvi. 22. Ezra i. 1.
j This Cyrus is called God's shepherd by Xenophon,page 581, as well as by Isaiah xlv. 28, as also it is said ofhim by the same prophet, "I will make a man more pre­cious than fine gold; even a man than the golden wedgeof Ophir," Isa.xiii. 12. which character makes Xenophon'smost excellent history of him very credible.
II Jeremiah xxv. 11.
§ It is a good deal more than probable, that this decreein favour of the Jews was, in a great measure, owing toDaniel's good offices. Cyrus, at his first coming to Baby-Ion, after he had taken the city, found him there an oldminister of state, famed for his great wisdom over all theEast, and in many things, for a knowledge superior to therest of mankind; and accordingly we find, that he not onlyemployed him as such, but, upon the settling of the govern-
voL. I.—NOS. 33 & 34.
ment of the whole empire, made him first superintendentor prime minister of state over all the provinces of it. Inthis station of life, Daniel must have been a person of greatauthority at court, and highly in the esteem of his prince:and therefore, as we find him earnest in his prayer to Godfor the restoration of his people, Daniel ix. we cannot butthink, that he would be equally warm in his intercessionsfor it with the king. To which purpose, it is not im­probable, that he might shew him those passages in Isaiah,which speak of him by name, (150 years before he wasborn,) as a great prince and conqueror, the ruler of manynations, and the restorer of his people, by causing histemple to be built, and the city of Jerusalem re-inhabited.For, that Cyrus had seen those prophecies, the thing isplain, not only from the testimony of Josephus, Antiq. lib.xi. c. 1. but from the recital that is made of them in thedecree itself, Ezra i. 2; and if so, who shall be so properto shew them to him, and to recommend the accomplish­ment of them to his princely care, as Dataiel, who had sogreat credit with him, and -so passionate a concern for therestoration of Zion? Prideaux's Connection, anno 539. B** Isaiah xliv. 28.
3T







OCR Output








an. 899.] 327 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


see this river full of water, till the army andcattle be saved by drinking of it. JNor willthis be all the favour that you shall receivefrom God; but you shall also overcome yourenemies, and take the best and strongestcities of the Moabites; and you shall *cutdown their fruit trees, and lay waste theircountry, and stop up their fountains andrivers."
Accordingly, the next day before sun-rise,a great torrent ran strongly: for God hadcaused it to rain very plentifully at the dis­tance of three days' journey in Edom. Sothat the army and the cattle found water inabundance. But when the Moabites heardthat the three kings were coming upon them,and made their approach through the wil­derness, the king of JVloab gathered his armytogether presently, and commanded them toencamp upon the mountains; that when theenemies should attempt to enter their country,they might not be concealed from them. Butat the rising of the sun when they saw thewater in the torrent; for it was not far fromthe land of Moab, and that it was of thecolour of blood; (for at such a time the waterespecially looks red, by the shining of thesun upon it;) they formed a false notion of thestate of their enemies, as if they had slainone another for thirst, and that the river ranwith their blood. However, supposing thatthis was the case, they desired their kingwould send them out to spoil their enemies.Whereupon they all went in haste, as to anadvantage already gained; and came to theenemy's camp; as supposing them destroyedalready. But their hope deceived them; foras their enemies stood round about them,some of them were cut in pieces, and otherswere dispersed, and fled to their own coun­try. And when the kings came to the landof Moab, they overthrew the cities that werein it, and spoiled their fields, and marredthem; filling them with stones out of thebrooks; and cut down the best of their trees,and stopped up their fountains of water, and


overthrew their walls to the foundations.But the king of Moab, when he was pursued,endured a siege; and seeing his city in dan­ger of being overthrown by force, he madea sally with seven hundred men, in order tobreak through the enemies' camp with hishorsemen, on that side where the watchseemed to be kept most negligently; andwhen, upon trial, he could not get away, hereturned to the city, and committed an ac­tion expressive of despair, and the utmostdistress: for he took his eldest son, who wasto reign after him, and lifting him up uponthe wall, that he might be visible to all theenemies, he offered him as a whole burnt-offering to God. When the kings saw this,they commiserated the distress that had oc­casioned it; and were so affected, that theyraised the siege, and every one returned tohis own house. So Jehoshaphat came to Je­rusalem, and continued in peace there, andsurvived this expedition but a little time,and then died; having lived in all sixtyyears, and reigned twenty-five.t He wasburied in a magnificent manner in Jeru­salem; for he had imitated the actions ofDavid.
CHAP. IV.
OF JF.ItOKAM, THE SUCCESSOR OF JEHOSHAPHAT; OF JORAMKING OF ISRAEL, AND THE WONDERS PERFORMED BY THEPROPHET ELISHA.
JEHOSHAPHAT had a considerablenumber of children, but he appointedhis eldest son Jehoram, to be his successor;Jwho had the same name with his mother'sbrother, that was king of Israel, and the sonof Ahab. Now when the king of Israel wascome out of the land of Moab to Samaria, hehad with him Elisha the prophet, whose acts
1 have a mind to go over particularly, forthey were illustrious and worthy to be re­lated; as we have them set down in thesacred books.
For they say that the ||widow of Obadiah,


* This practice of cutting down, or plucking up by theroots the fruit trees, was forbidden in ordinary wars, bythe law of Moses, Deut. xx. 19, 20. and only allowed byGod in this particular case, when the Moabites were tobe punished and cut off in an extraordinary manner fortheir wickedness. See Jer. xlviii. 11, 12, 13. and manysimilar prophecies against them. Nothing could there­fore justify this practice, but a particular commission from
God, by his prophet; as in the present case; which wasever a sufficient warrant for breaking any such ritual orceremonial law.
From an. 919 to 894 B. C.
1 Kings xxii. 50.
That this woman who cried to Elisha, and who, inour Bible, is styled the wife of one of the prophets,
2 Kings ir. 1. was no other than the widow of Obadiah,







OCR Output








AN. 1052.] 275 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


liver that child to the other woman as herown; ibr she would be satisfied with the lifeof the child, and with the sight of it, althoughit were esteemed the other's child. But theother woman was ready to see the child di­vided, and was even desirous that the firstwoman should be tormented. When theking understood that both their words pro­ceeded from the truth of their passions, headjudged the child to her who cried out forits preservation; for that she was the realmother; and he condemned the other as awicked woman, who had not only killed herown child, but was willing to see her friend'schild destroyed also. Now the multitudelooked on this determination as a great de­monstration of the king's sagacity and wis­dom; and after that day attended to him, asto one that had a divine mind.*
Now the captainsf of Solomon's armies,and officers appointed over the whole coun­try, were these. Over the lot of Ephraim wasUres; over the toparchy of Bethlehem wasDioclerus. Abinadab, who married Solo­mon's daughter, had the region of Dora, andthe sea coast under him. The great plainwas under Benaiah the son of Achilus, whoalso governed all the country as far as Jor­dan. Gabaris ruled over Gilead, and Gaula-nitis; and had under him the sixty great andfenced cities of Og. Achinadab managedthe affairs of all Galilee, as far as Sid on;and had himself also married a daughter ofSolomon, whose name was Basima. Bana-cates had the sea coast about Arce; as hadShaphat, mount Tabor and Carmel, and the


Tbracians, being appointed to arbitrate between threemen, who all pretended to be song of the king of theCimmerians, and claimed the succession, found out thetrue son and heir, by ordering them to shoot each manhis arrow into the dead king's body, which one of themrefusing to do, was deemed the true claimant. Pool'sAnnotations, Patrick''» and Calmefs Commentaries. B.
* 1 Kings iii. 28.
t Mr. Reland has treated of these prefects of provinces,and of their provinces, more exactly than any other: andhas compared our copies of 1 Kings iv. with Josephusvery carefully; to whom I refer the learned reader. Pa-lestina, tom. I. lib. I. chap. 29. Only we must note, thatJosephus has but ten prefects, and that his names are dif­ferent from those in our copies.
J It may not be amiss to compare the daily furnitureof Solomon's table, here set down, and 1 Kings iv. 22, 23.with the like daily furniture of Nehemiah, the governor'stable, after the Jews were come back from Babylon; andto remember withal, that Nehemiah was now building
VOL. I.—NOS. 23 & 24.


lower Galilee, as far as the river Jordan; oneman was appointed over all this country.Shimei was intrusted with the lot of Benja­min; and Gabares had the country beyondJordan; over whom there was again onegovernor appointed. Now the people of theHebrews, and particularly the tribe of Judah,received a wonderful increase, when theybetook themselves to husbandry, and thecultivation of their grounds. For as they en­joyed peace, and had besides an unboundedfruition of the most desirable liberty, everyone was busy in augmenting the product oftheir own lands, and making them worthmore than they had formerly been.
The king had also other rulers, who wereover the land of Syria, and of the Philistines,which reached from the river Euphrates toEgypt; and these collected his tributes of thenations. Now these contributed to the king'stable, and to his supper every day thirty coriof fine flour,} and sixty of meal; as also tenfat oxen, twenty oxen out of the pastures, anda hundred fat lambs; all these were besideswhat were taken by hunting, harts, buffaloes,birds, and fishes, which were brought to theking by foreigners every day. Solomon hadalso so great a number of chariots, that - thestalls of his horses for these chariots wereforty thousand;! and besides these he hadtwelve thousand horsemen: one half of whichwaited upon the king in Jerusalem, and weredispersed abroad, and dwelt in the royal vil­lages. But the same officers who providedfor the king's expenses, supplied also thefodder for the horses, and still carried it
the walls of Jerusalem, and maintained more than usualabove one hundred and fifty considerable men every day;and that, because the nation was then very poor, at hisown charges also; without laying any burden upon thepeople. "Now that which was prepared for me dailywas one ox, and six choice sheep. Also fowls were pre­pared for me. And once in ten days a store of all sorts ofwine; and yet for all this 1 required not the bread of thegovernor, because the bondage was heavy upon this peo­ple." Nehem. v. 18. See the whole context, v. 14, 19.Nor did the governor's usual allowance of forty shekelsof silver a day, v. 15, amount to 51. a day; nor to 1800/.a year. Nor does it indeed appear that under the judges,or under Samuel the prophet, there was any such publicallowance to those governors at all. Those great chargesupon the public for maintaining courts came in with kings,as God had foretold. 1 Sam. viii. 11—18.
II Four thousand, 2 Chron. ix. 25, which I suppose tobe the true number.
3 E







OCR Output








136 [book IV. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


found it, and then restore it again; as notthinking it right to make his own profit bythe loss of another. And the same rule is tobe observed in cattle found to have wanderedaway into a lonely place.* If the owner benot presently discovered, let him that is thefinder keep it with himself, and appeal toGod, that he has not purloined what belongsto another.
It is not lawful to pass by any beast that isin distress, when in a storm it is fallen downin the mire, but to endeavour to preserve it;as having a sympathy with it in its pain.t
It is also a duty to shew the roads to thosewho do not know them; and not to esteem ita matter of sport, when we hinder other's ad­vantage, by setting them in a wrong way.
In like manner let no one revile a personblind or dumb.J
If men strive together, and there be no in­strument of iron, let him that is smitten beavenged immediately, by inflicting the samepunishment on him that smote him. But ifwhen he is carried home, he lie sick manydays, and then die, let him that smote himescape punishment; but if he that is smittenescape death, and yet be at great expensefor his cure, the smiter shall pay for all thathas been expended during the time of hissickness, and for all that he has paid the phy­sician. I He that kicks a pregnant woman,so that she§ miscarry, let him pay a fine ofmoney, as the judges shall determine; ashaving diminished the multitude by the de­struction of her offspring; and let money alsobe given the woman's husband by him thatkicked her; but if she die of the stroke, lethim also be put to death; the law judging itequitable that life should go for life.
Let no one of the Israelites keep any poi-


son,** that may cause death, or any otherharm; but if he be caught with it, let him beput to death, and suffer the same mischief thathe would have brought upon them for whomthe poison was prepared.
He that maimeth any one, let him undergothe same himself; and be deprived of thesame member of which he hath deprived theother,tt unless he that is maimed will acceptof money instead of it. For the law makesthe sufferer the judge of the value of whichhe has suffered, and permits him to estimateit, unless he will be more severe.
Let him that is the owner of an ox whichpusheth with his horn, kill him; but if he pushand gore any one in the threshing floor, lethim be put to death by stoning; and let himnot be thought fit for food. But if his ownerbe convicted as having known what his na­ture was, and hath not kept him up, let himalso be put to death; as being the occasionof the ox's having killed a man.f|; But if theox have killed a man-servant, or a maid-ser­vant, let him be stoned, and let the owner ofthe ox pay|||| thirty shekels to the master ofhim that was slain. But if it be an ox that isthus smitten and killed, let both the oxen,that which smote the other, and that whichwas killed, be sold; and let the owners ofthem divide their price between them.
Let those that dig a well or a pit be carefulto lay planks over them, and so keep themshut up; not in order to hinder any personsfrom drawing water, but that there be nodanger of falling into them. But if any one'sbeast perish by falling into such a well or pit,thus digged, and not shut up, let the ownerpay its price to the owner of the beast.§§ Letthere be a battlement round the tops ofyour houses, instead of a wall; that may


* Exod. xxiii. 5.
t Exod. xxiii. 5.
I Levit. xix. 14. Deut. xxvii. 18.
I! Exod. xxi. 19.
§ Philo and others appear to have understood this law,Exod. xxi. 22, 23, better than Josephus; who seems toaJ'ow, that though the infant in the mother's womb, evenafter the mother were quick, and so the infant had a ra­tional soul, were killed by the stroke upon the mother,ye* if the mother escaped, the offender should only befined and not put to death. While the law seems ratherto mean, that if the infant in that case be killed, thoughthe mother escape, the offender must be put to death:ani* not only when the mother is killed, as 'Josephus un­derstood it. It seems this was the exposition of the Phari­sees, in the days of Josephus.
** What we render a witch, according to our modernnotions of witchcraft; Exod. xxii. 18. Philo and Jose­phus understood of a poisoner; or one who attempted by-secret and unlawful drugs, or philtra, to take away thesenses or the lives of men.
tt This permission of redeeming this penalty with mo­ney is not in our other copies. Exod. xxi. 24, 25. Levit.xxiv. 20. Deut. xix. 21.
ft Exod. xxi. 28, 29.
||l| We may here note that thirty shekels, the price ourSaviour was sold for by Judas to the Jews, Matt. xxiv. 15.xxvii. 3. was the old value of a bought servant, or slave,among that people.
§§ Exod. xxi. 33, 34.







OCR Output








536 [book xv. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


BOOK XV.


Containing an Interval of Eighteen Years.


FROM THE DEATH OP ANTIGONUS, TO THE FINISHING OF THE TEMPLE BY HEROD.


CHAP. I.
CONCERNING FOLLIO, AND SAMEAS. HEROD SLAYS THE
PRINCIPAL OF ANTIOONUS'S FRIENDS, AND SPOILS THECITY OF ITS WEALTH. ANTONY BEHEADS ANTIGONUS.
HAVING already related the reductionof Jerusalem by Sosius and Herod,and the taking of Antigonus captive; we willnow proceed in the narration. And sinceHerod had now the government of all Judeaput into his hands, he promoted such of theprivate men in the city, as had been of hisparty; but never left off avenging and punish­ing, every day, those that had adhered to theparty of his enemies. But Pollio the Pha­risee, and Sameas, a disciple of his, werehonoured by him above all the rest. Forwhen Jerusalem was besieged, they advisedthe citizens to receive Herod: for whichadvice they were well requited. But this*Pollio, at the time when Herod was onceupon his trial of life and death, foretold, inway of reproach, to Hyrcanus, and the otherjudges, how this Herod, whom they sufferednow to escape, would afterward inflict pun­ishment on them all. Which had its com­pletion in time; while God fulfilled thewords he had spoken.


Herod, having Jerusalem now under hispower, carried off all the royal ornaments, andspoiled the wealthy men of what they hadgotten; and when, by these means, he hadamassed a great quantity of silver and gold, hegave it to Antony and to his friends that wereabout him. He also slew forty-five of theprincipal men of Antigonus's party; and setguards at the gates of the city, that nothingmight be carried out together with their deadbodies. They also searched the dead; andwhatsoever was found either of silver or gold,or other treasure, it was carried to the king.Nor was there any end of the miseries hebrought upon them; and this distress waspartly occasioned by the covetousness of theprince regnant; and partly by the sabbaticyear, which was still going on, and forced thecountry to lie still uncultivated: since we areforbidden to sow our land in that year. Nowwhen Antony had received Antigonus as hiscaptive, he determined to keep him againsthis triumph. But when he heard that the na­tion grew seditious: and that out of their ha­tred to Herod, they continued to bear goodwill to Antigonus, he fresolved to beheadhim at Antioch; for otherwise the Jews couldno way be brought to be quiet.J And Strabo


* How Josephus could say, as it now stands in all hiscopies, but one, that it was Pollio, the master; and notSameas, the sdholar, who foretold that Herod would oneday slay the Sanhedrim of the Jews and Hyrcanus;whereas he had lately told us, in all his copies, that itwas Sameas, and not Pollio, XIV. 9. does not appear. Yetsince one copy, even in this place, says it was Sameas;that may well be supposed to be the true reading. Other­wise it must be allowed as a slip of either Josephus's pen,or memory: which now and then happens to the mostcareful writers.
t That Antony put this Antigonus to death, is con­firmed, (besides the testimony of Strabo, produced herein the text, by Josephus himself,) by Plutarch and Dio;as Dean Aldrich takes notice upon this occasion, in hisnotes On the War, I. 18. and Hudson and Reland, on theplace before us.
I Herod not thinking himself safe in his kingdom, aslong as this remainder of the old royal family continuedalive, never left soliciting Antony, till at length by a greatsum of money he obtained that this poor prince should beput to death: to which he having been condemned by a







OCR Output








an. 1582.] 69 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


maidens, and drove them away, that theymight have the command of the waters them­selves. Moses thought it would be a terriblereproach upon him it" he should overlook thisuujust oppression, and should suffer the vio­lence of the men to prevail over the right ofthe maidens, he therefore drove away themen, who had a mind to more than theirshare, and afforded a proper assistance to thewomen, who, when they had received such abenefit, came to their father, and told himhow they had been affronted by the shep­herds, and assisted by a stranger, and in-treated that he would not let this generousaction go without a reward. Now the fathertook it well from his daughters that they wereso desirous to remunerate their benefactor,and bid them bring Moses into his presence,that he might be rewarded as he deserved.And when Moses came, he told him whattestimony his daughters bare to him that hehad assisted them; and that, as he admiredhim for his virtue, he said, that Moses had"bestowed such assistance on persons not in­sensible of benefits, but where they were bothable and willing to return the kindness, andeven to exceed the measure of his generosity:so he made him his son, and gave him one ofhis daughters in marriage, and appointed himto be the guardian and superintendent overhis cattle, for of old all the wealth of the bar­barians was in their cattle.
CHAP. XII
OF THE BURNING BUSH AND THE ROD OF MOSES.
WHEN Moses had obtained this favourof Jethro* (for that was one of thenames of Raguel,) he stayed there, and fedhis flocks;f but some time afterward, takinghis station at the mountain called Sinai, hedrove his flocks thither to feed them. Nowthis is the highest of all the mountains there­abouts, and the best for pasturage, the herb­age being good: and it had not been beforefed upon, because of the opinion men had thatCod dwelt there, the shepherds not daring toascend up to it: and here it Was that a won­derful prodigy appeared to Moses: for a fireJ
* Jetheajacus, in the Greek of Josephus} Exod. iii. 1.


fed upon a thorn bush; yet did the greenleaves and flowers remain untouched, andthe fire did not consume the fruit branches,although the flame was great and fierce. Mo­ses was affrighted at this strange sight; buthe was still more astonished when the fireuttered a voice, and called to him by name,and spake words to him; by which it signi­fied how bold he had been in venturing tocome into a place whither no man had evercome before, because the place was divine;and advised him to remove a great way fromthe flame, and to be contented with what hehad seen; for, though he were himself a goodman, and the offspring of great men, he shouldnot pry any farther; and he foretold to himthat he should have glory and honour amongmen, by the blessing of God upon him. Healso commanded him to go with confidenceto Egypt, in order to his being the commanderand conductor of the body of the Hebrews,and to his delivering his own people from theinjuries they suffered there. "For," said God,"they shall inhabit this happy land, whichyour forefather Abraham inhabited, and shallhave the enjoyment of all sorts of good things;and thou, by thy prudence, shalt guide themto those good things." But he still enjoinedhim, when he had brought the Hebrews outof the land of Egypt, to come to that place,and offer sacrifice of thanksgiving there. Suchwere the divine oracles which were deliveredout of the fire.
Moses was astonished at what he saw, andmuch more at what he heard; and he said,"I think it would be an instance of too greatmadness, O Lord, for one of that regard Ibear to thee, to distrust thy power, since Imyself adore it, and know that it has beenmade manifest to my progenitors; but I amstill in doubt how I, who am a private man,and one of no abilities, should either persuademy countrymen to leave the country they nowinhabit, and to follow me to a land whither 1lead them; or, if they should be persuaded,how can I force Pharaoh to permit them todepart, since he augments his own wealth andprosperity by the labours and works he putsupon them."
But God persuaded him to be courageous
J An. 1532.







OCR Output








128 [book IV. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


the land of Canaan. Since when you shallhave once proceeded so far by your wealthas to a contempt and disregard of virtue, youwill also forfeit the favour of God; and whenyou-have made him your enemy, you will bebeaten in war; and will have the land whichyou possess taken away again from you byyour enemies: and this with great reproachesupon your conduct. You will be scatteredover the whole world; and will, as slaves,entirely fill both sea and land, and when onceyou have had the experience of what I nowsay, you will repent, and remember the lawsyou have broken, when it is too late. Whencef would advise you, if you intend to preservethese laws, to leave none of your enemiesalive, when you have conquered them; but tolook upon it as for your advantage to destroythem all; lest if you permit them to live, youimbibe their manners, and thereby corruptyour own proper institutions. I also fartherexhort you, to overthrow their altars, and theirgroves, and whatsoever temples they haveamong them; and to burn all such their na­tion and their very memory with fire. Forby this means alone the safety of your ownhappy constitution can be firmly secured toyou. And in order to prevent your ignoranceof virtue, and the degeneracy of your natureinto vice, I have also ordained you laws bydivine suggestion, and a form of government;which are so good, that if you regularly ob­serve them, you will be esteemed of all menmost happy."
When he had spoken thus, he gave themthe laws and the constitution of governmentwritten in a book. Upon which the peoplefell into tears, and appeared already touchedwith the sense that they should have a greatwant of their conductor; because they re­membered what a number of dangers he hadpassed through, and what care he had takenfor their preservation; they desponded aboutwhat would come upon them after he wasdead; supposing they should never haveanother governor like him; and fearing thatGod would take less care of them when Mo­ses was gone, who used to intercede for them.They also repented of what they had said tohim in the wilderness, when they were angry;and so were in grief on those accounts. Sothat the whole body of the people fell intotears with such bitterness, that it was past the


power of words to comfort them in their afflic­tion. However, Moses gave them some con­solation; and by calling them off the thoughthow worthy he was of their weeping for him,he exhorted them to adhere to that formof government he had given them. Andthen the congregation was dissolved at thattime.
1 shall now first describe this form of go­vernment, which was agreeable to the dignityand virtue of Moses; and shall thereby in­form those that peruse these Antiquities whatour original settlements were, and shall thenproceed to the remaining histories. Nowthese settlements are still in writing, as heleft them; and we shall add nothing by wayof ornament, nor any thing besides what Mo­ses left us. Only we shall so far innovate,as to digest the several kinds of laws into aregular system. For they were by him leftin writing, as they were accidentally scat­tered in their delivery; and as he, upon in­quiry, had learned them of God. On which ac­count I have thought it necessary to premisethis observation; lest any of my own country­men should blame me, as having been guiltyof an offence herein. Now part of our con­stitution will include the laws that belong toour political state: but with respect to thoselaws which Moses left concerning our com­mon conversation and intercourse with oneanother, 1 have reserved that for a dis­course concerning our manner of life, andthe occasions of those laws; which I pro­pose to myself, with God's assistance, towrite, after I have finished the work I amnow upon.
When you have possessed yourself of theland of Canaan, and have leisure to enjoy thegood things of it; and when you have after­ward determined to build cities, if you willdo what is pleasing to God, you will have asecure state of happiness. Let there be thenone city of the land of Canaan; and thissituate in the most agreeable place for itsgoodness, and very eminent of itself; and letit be that which God shall choose for himself,by prophetic revelation. Let there also beone temple therein, and one altar; not rearedof hewn stones, but of such as you gathertogether at random; which stones, when theyare whitened over with mortar, will have ahandsome appearance, and be beautiful to







OCR Output








a*. 1096.] 325 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


uame to him and ordained him their king.*But when he heard that the inhabitants ofJabesh Gilead had buried Saul and his sonshonourably, he sent to them and commendedthem, and took what they had done kindly,and promised to make them amends for theircare of those that were dead; and at thesame time he informed them that the tribe ofJudah had chosen him for their king.
But as soon as Abner, the son of Ner, whowas general of Saul's army, and a very activeand good natured man, knew that the kingand Jonathan and his two other sons werefallen in battle, he hastened into the camp;and taking away with him the remaining sonof Saul, whose name was Ishbosheth, hepassed over to the land beyond Jordan; andordained him king over the whole multitude,excepting the tribe of Judah;f and made hi»royal seat in a place called in our own lan­guage Mahanaim,J but in the language of theGrecians, The Camps. From whence Abnermade haste, with a select body of soldiers, tofight with such of the tribe of Judah as weredisposed to it; for he was angry that this tribehad set up David for their king. But Joab,whose father was Suri, and his mother Ze-ruiah, David's sister, who was general ofDavid's army, met him*, according to David'sappointment. He had with him aia brethrenAbishai, and Asahel; and also all David'sarmed men. Now when he met Abner, at acertain fountain, rn the city Gibeon, he pre­pared to fight. And when Abner said to him,that he had a mind to know whether of themhad the more valiant soldiers, it was mutuallyagreed, that twelve soldiers on each sideshould fight together. So those that were


chosen out by both generals for the fight,came between the two armies; and throwingtheir lances one against the other, they dreHftheir swords, and catching one another bythe head, they held one another fast, and raneach other's swords into their groins, untilthey all, as it were by mutual agreement,perished together. When these were fallen,the rest of the army came to an obstinate en­gagement, and Abner's men were beaten;and when they were beaten, Joab did notleave off pursuing them, but he pressed uponthem, and excited the soldiers to follow themclosely, and not to grow weary of killing them.His brethren also pursued them with greatalacrity; and especially the younger Asahel,who was the most eminent of them. He wasvery famous for his swiftness of foot; for hecouhi not e ily be too hard for men, but is re­ported to Krave over-ron a horse, when theyhad a raee together. This Asahel ran vio­lently after Abner; and would not turn in theleast out of the straight way, either to oneside, or to the other. Hereupon Abner turnedback, and attempted artfully to avoid hisviolence. Sometimes he bade him leave offthe pursuit, and take the armour of one of hissoldiers; and sometimes, when he could notpersuade him so to do* he exhorted him torestrain himself and not to pursue him anylonger, lest he should force him to kill him,and he should then not be able to look hisbrother in the face. But when Asahel wouldnot admit of any persuasion, but still con­tinued to pursue him; Abner smote him withhis spear|| as he held it in his flight, and by aback stroke gave him a deadly wound, so thathe died immediately. But those that were


who espoused David's interests, it whs a very commodiouscity for him to make the place of his residence at thisjuncture, as being not insensible, that'the determination ofthe metropolis in his favour would be of great Weight toinfluence the whole tribe. And accordingly we find, thathe was soon invested" with the sovereignty thereof: Forthe men of Judah, (suith the text) came, and there theyanointed David king over the house of Judah, 2 Sam. ii. 4.The History of the lift of King David, vol. 2. B.
* 2 Sam. ii. 4.
t 2 Sam. u. 9.
+ This was a place in the tribe of Gad, which had itsname from the appearance of an host of angels to Jacob,as he came with his family and all his substance to Padan-aram, Gen. xxxii. 1.: and the reasons for Abner's retreat­ing hither, in the beginning of the new king's reign, were,that he might secure the people on that side of Jordan, andespecially the gallant inhabitants of Jabesh Gilead, who
were great lovers of Saul, and attached to his family; thathe might prevent (he Philistines from falling upon theking, whom" fie had" under his protection, in the infancy ofhis reign-; and chiefly, that he might be at a great distancefrom David, have the new king more absolutely under hiscommand; and a better opportunity of raising recruitsamong the people, not only brave and courageous, hot verywell affected to the cause which He had espoused. Cal-met's Commentary, and Pool's Annotations* P.
|| The expression in the Bible is,—That with the hinderpart of the spear, he smote him under the fifth rib; whichVirgil, speaking of * mortal wound, has not unhappilyimitated:
—i—-—Haud'multa moratus
Excipit in latus, et, qua fata celerrima, .crudum
Transadigit costas et crates pectoris ensem.
6 JEn. 12. &







OCR Output








as. 1748.] 57 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


to have such a strange notion of my kindnessto you, and of God's providence, as impu­dently to do thus to your benefactor, who insuch an hospitable manner had entertainedyou?" Hereupon they gave up themselvesto be punished, in order to save Benjamin;and called to mind what wicked enterprisethey had been guilty of against Joseph. Theyalso pronounced him more happy than them­selves, if he were dead, in being freed fromthe miseries of this life; and if he were alive,that he enjoyed the pleasure of seeing God'svengeance upon them. They said farther,that they were the plague of their father;since they should now add to his former grieffor Joseph, this other affliction for Benjamin.Reubel also was very severe upon this occa­sion. But Joseph dismissed them; for hesaid, they had been guilty of no offence, andthat he would content himself with the lad'spunishment; for he said it was not proper tolet him go free, for the sake of those who hadnot offended; nor was it just to punish themtogether with him, who had been guilty ofstealing. When he promised to give themleave to go away in safety, they were undergreat consternation, and were able to saynothing on this sad occasion; but Judas, whohad persuaded their father to send the ladfrom him, being otherwise also a very boldand active man, determined to hazard him­self for the preservation of his brother.
** It is true," said he, " O governor, that wehave been very wicked with regard to thee,and on that account deserve punishment;even all of us may justly be punished, althoughthe theft were not committed by all, but onlyby one of us, and he the youngest also. Butyet, there remains some hope for us, whootherwise must be under despair on his ac­count, and this from thy goodness, whichpromises us a deliverance out of our presentdanger. And now, I beg thou wilt not look atus, or at that crime we have been guilty of,but at thy own excellent nature; and takeadvice of thine own virtue, instead of thatwrath which those that otherwise are of a lowcharacter indulge, as they do their strength:and that not only on great but also on verytrifling occasions. Overcome, sir, that pas­sion; and be not subdued by it, nor suffer it


to slay those that do not otherwise presumeupon their own safety, but are desirous toaccept of it from thee. For this is not thefirst time that thou wilt bestow it on us; butbefore when we came to buy corn, thouaffordest us great plenty of food, and gavestus leave to carry home to our family, as muchas has preserved them from perishing byfamine. Nor is there any difference betweennot over looking men that were perishing forwant of necessaries, and not punishing thosethat seem to be offenders, and have been sounfortunate as to lose the advantage of thatglorious benefaction which they receivedfrom thee. This will be an instance of equalfavour, though bestowed after a different man­ner. For thou wilt save those this way, whomthou didst feed the other: and thou wilthereby preserve alive, by thy own bounty,those souls, which thou didst not suffer to bedistressed by famine. It being indeed at oncea wonderful and a great thing, to sustain ourlives by corn, and to bestow on us that par­don, whereby, now we are distressed, we maycontinue those lives. And I am ready to sup­pose that God is willing to afford thee thisopportunity of shewing thy virtuous disposi­tion, by bringing us into this calamity, that itmight appear thou canst forgive the injuriesthat are done to thyself, and mayest be es­teemed-kind to others, besides those, who,on other accounts, stand in need of thy assist­ance; since it is indeed a right thing to dowell to those who are in distress for want offood; but still a more glorious thing to savethose who deserve to be punished, when it ison account of heinous offences against thyself.For if it be a thing deserving commendationto forgive such as have been guilty of smalloffences, that tend to a person's loss, and thisbe praise-worthy in him that overlooks suchoffences; to restrain a man's passion, as tothe crimes which are capital to the guilty, isto be like the most excellent nature of Godhimself. And truly, as for myself, had it notbeen that we had a father, who had disco­vered, on occasion of the death of Joseph,how miserably he is always afflicted at theloss of his sons, I had not spoken on accountof the saving our own lives: I mean any fartherthan as that would be an excellent character


formerly, in the person of Judas, and in the way of oratory,that lay by him; and which he thought fit to insert on this
occasion. See two more such speeches or declamations.VI. 14.







OCR Output








30 [book I. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


of a fountain hard by, and bid her take care,and bring up the child, because she shouldbe very happy by the preservation of Ismael.She then took courage upon the prospect ofwhat was promised her, and meeting withsome shepherds, by their care she got clearof the distresses she had been in.
When the lad was grown up, he married awife, by birth an Egyptian; from whence themother was herself derived originally. Ofthis wife were born to Ismael twelve sons;Nabioth, Kedar, Abdeel, Mabsam, Idumas,Masmaos, Massaos, Chodad, Theman, Jetur,Naphesus, and Kadmas. These inhabited allthe country from Euphrates to the Red Sea,and called it Nabatene. They are an Ara­bian nation, and name their tribes from these,both because of their own virtue, and becauseof the dignity of Abraham their father.
CHAP. XIII.
of isaac, Abraham's legitimate son.
NOW Abraham greatly loved Isaac, asbeing his only begotten,* and given tohim at the borders of old age, by the favourof God. The child also endeared himself tohis parents still more, by the exercise ofevery virtue, and adhering to his duty to hisparents, and being zealous in the worship ofGod. Abraham placed also his own happi­ness wholly in this prospect, that when heshould die he should leave his son in a safeand secure condition, which accordingly heobtained by the will of God; who being de­sirous to make an experiment of Abraham'sreligious disposition towards himself, ap­peared to him, and enumerated all the bless­ings he had bestowed on him; how he madehim superior to his enemies; and that hisson Isaac, who was the principal part of hispresent happiness, was derived from him, andhe said that he required this son of his as asacrifice, and a holy oblation. Accordinglyhe commanded him to carry him to the moun-


* Note that both here and Heb. xi. 17. Isaac is calledAbraham's iMvoyevy, only begotten son, though he at thesame time had another son, Ismael. The Septuagint ex­press the true meaning by rendering the text by iyartrp-h)-the beloved son.
t Gen. xxii. 2.
\ Here is a plain error in the copies, which say thatking David afterwards built the temple on this mount


tain Moriah,f and to build an altar, and offerhim for a burnt-offering upon it; for that thiswould best manifest his religious dispositiontowards him, if he preferred what waspleasing to God before the preservation ofhis own son.
Now Abraham thought that it was notright to disobey God in any thing, but thathe was obliged to serve him in every circum­stance of life, since all creatures that liveenjoy their life by his providence, and thekindness he bestows on them; accordinglyhe concealed this command of God; and hisown intentions about the slaughter of his sonfrom his wife, as also from every one of hisservants, otherwise he would have been hin­dered from his obedience to God; and hetook Isaac together with two of his servants,and laying what things were necessary for asacrifice, upon an ass, he went away to themountain. Now the two servants went alongwith him two days, but on the third day, assoon as he saw the mountain, he left thoseservants that were with him till then in theplain, and having his son alone with him, hecame to the mountain. It was that mountainupon which king David afterwards builtJ thetemple. Now they had brought with themevery thing necessary for a sacrifice, except­ing the animal that was to be offered. NowIsaac was twenty-five|| years old, and as hewas building the altar, he asked his fatherwhat he was about to offer, since there wasno animal there for an oblation; to which itwas answered, that God would provide him­self an oblation, he being able to make aplentiful provision for men out of what theyhave not, and to deprive others of what theyalready have, when they put too much trusttherein; that, therefore, if God pleased to bepresent and propitious at this sacrifice hewould provide himself with an oblation.
As soon as the altar was prepared, andAbraham had laid on the wood, and all thingswere entirely ready, he said to his son, "O son!I poured out a vast number of prayers that
Moriah, while it was certainly no other than king Solo­mon, who built that temple, as indeed Procopius cites itfrom Josephus; only if we change ispov into /3u^hv,temple into altar, we "eed not correct the name, for itwas David and not Solomon, who built the first altarthere, as we learn, 2 Sam. xnv. 18. &c. 1 Cbxon. rxi.22. &c.
II An. 1922.







OCR Output








86 [boor III. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


pains, by which they deemed every difficultymight be surmounted: and this was the resultof the battle.
On the next day Moses stripped the deadbodies of their enemies, and gathered to­gether the armour of those that were fled,and gave rewards to such as had signalisedthemselves in the action, and highly com­mended Joshua, their general, who was at­tested to by all the army, on account of thegreat actions he had done; nor was any oneof the Hebrews slain, though the slain of theenemies' army were too many to be enume­rated. So Moses offered sacrifice of thanks­giving to God, and built an altar, which henamed, the Lord the conqueror. He alsoforetold that the Amalekites should be utterlydestroyed, and that hereafter none of themshould remain, because they fought againstthe Hebrews when they were in the wilder­ness, and in their distress. Moreover he re­freshed the army with feasting: and thus didthey fight this first battle with those that ven­tured to oppose them, after they were goneout of Egypt. But, when Moses had cele­brated this festival for the victory, he per­mitted the Hebrews to rest for a few days,and then brought them out after the fight inorder of battle; for they had now many sol­diers in light armour, and going gradually on,he came to mount Sinai, and three monthsafter they were removed out of Egypt, atwhich mountain, as we have before related,the vision of the bush, and the other wonder­ful appearances had happened.
CHAP. ffl.
OF RAOUEL's ARRIVAL AND RECEPTION BV MOSES AT MOUNTSINAI.
WHEN Raguel, Moses's* father-in-law,understood in what a prosperous con­dition his affairs were, he willingly came tomeet him; and Moses took Zipporah his wife,and his children, and pleased himself with hiscoming: and when he had offered sacrifice,he made a feast for the multitude, near thebush he had formerly seen; everyone, accor­ding to their families, partaking of the festi­val. But Aaron and his family took Raguel,and sung hymns to God, as to him who hadbeen the author and procurer of their deliver-
* Exod. xviii. 1.


ance, and their freedom. They also praisedtheir conductor, as him by whose virtue itwas that all things had succeeded so wellwith them. Raguel, also, in his eucharisticaloration to Moses, made great encomiumsupon the whole multitude; and he could notbut admire Moses for his fortitude, and thathumanity he had shewed in the delivery ofhis friends.
CHAP. IV.
OF RAGUEL's FRIENDLY SUGGESTIONS RESPECTING THE GO­VERNMENT OF THE HEBREWS, WHICH WERE ADOPTED BVMOSES.
THE next day, Raguel saw Moses in themidst of a crowd of business,f for hedetermined the differences of those that re­ferred them to him, every one still going tohim, and supposing they should then onlyobtain justice, if he were the arbitrator; andthose that lost their causes thought it no greatharm, while they thought they lost them justly,and not by partiality. Raguel, however, saidnothing at that time, as not desirous to be anyhindrance to such as had a mind to make useof the virtue of their conductor; but after­ward he took Moses to himself; and when hehad him alone, he instructed him in what heought to do, and advised him to leave thetrouble of lesser causes to others, but himselfto take care of the greater, and of the people'ssafety, for that others of the Hebrews mightbe found that were fit to determine causes,but that nobody but a Moses could take careof the safety of many thousands. "Be not,therefore," said he, " insensible of thine ownvirtue, and what thou hast done by minister­ing under God to the people's preservation.Leave, therefore, the determination of com­mon causes to others: but do thou reservethyself to the attendance on God only, andlook out for methods of preserving the multi­tude from their present distress. Make useof the method I suggest as to human affairs,and take a review of the army, and appointchosen rulers over tens of thousands, and,then over thousands; and then divide theminto five hundreds, and again into hundreds,and into fifties, and set rulers over each ofthem, who may distinguish them into thirties,and keep them in order, and at last number
t Exod. xviii. 13.







OCR Output








516 [book xy. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


tion fell upon the Arabians: for when theyperceived that the Jews were not to be con­quered, and were full of spirit, the greaterpart of them ran away, and avoided fighting.And they had been quite destroyed, had notAthenio fallen upon the Jews, and distressedthem. This man was Cleopatra's generalover the soldiers she had there, and was atenmity with Herod; and very wistfully lookedon, to see what the event of the battle wouldbe. He had also resolved, that in case theArabians did any thing that was brave andsuccessful, he would lie still; but in case theywere beaten, as it really happened, he wouldattack the Jews with those forces he had ofhis own, and with those that the country had
fotten together for him. So he fell upon theews unexpectedly, when they were fatiguedand thought they had already vanquished theenemy, and made a great slaughter of them.For as the Jews had spent their courage upontheir known enemies, and were about to enjoythemselves in quietness after their victory;they were easily beaten by these that at­tacked them afresh; and in particular re­ceived a great loss in places where the horsescould not be of service, and which were verystony; and where those that attacked themwere better acquainted with the places thanthemselves. And when the Jews had sufferedthis loss, the Arabians resumed their courageafter their defeat; and, returning back again,slew those that were already put to flight.And indeed all sorts of slaughter were nowfrequent; and of those that escaped, a fewonly returned into the camp. So king Herod,when he despaired of the battle, rode up tothem, to bring them assistance. Yet he didnot come time enough to render them anyservice; though he laboured hard to do it:but the Jewish camp was taken. So that theArabians had unexpectedly a most glorioussuccess; having gained that victory, whichof themselves they were no way likely tohave gained; and slaying a great part of theenemy's army. Whence afterward Herodcould only act like a private robber, andmake excursions, upon many parts of Arabia,


and distress them by sudden incursions;while he encamped among the mountains,and avoided by any means to come to apitched battle. Yet did he greatly harassthe enemy by his assiduity, and the hardlabour he took in this matter. He also tookgreat care of his own forces; and used allthe means he could to restore his affairs totheir former state.
At this time the fight happened at Actium,between Octavius Caesar and Antony; in theseventh* year of the reign of Herod. Andthen it was also that there was an earthquakein Judea: such a one as had not happenedat any other time: and which earthquakebrought a great destruction upon the cattlein that country. About ften thousand menalso perished by the fall of houses. But thearmy, which lodged in the field, received nodamage from this sad accident. When theArabians were informed of this, and whenthose that hated the Jews, and pleased them­selves with aggravating the reports, told themof it; they raised their spirits, as if their ene­my's country were quite overthrown, and themen were utterly destroyed; and thoughtthere now remained nothing that could op­pose them. Accordingly they took the Jewishambassadors, who came to them, after allthis had happened, to make peace with them,and slew them; and came with great alacrityagainst their army. But the Jews durst notwithstand them; and were so cast down bythe calamities they were under, that they tookno care of their affairs; but gave themselvesup to despair. For they had no hope thatthey should be upon a level with them againin battle, nor obtain any assistance elsewhere;while their affairs at home were in such greatdistress. When matters were in this condi­tion, the king persuaded the commanders byhis words, and tried to raise their spirits,which were quite sunk. And first he endea­voured to encourage and embolden some ofthe better sort beforehand; and then venturedto make a speech to the multitude. which hehad before avoided to do; lest he should findthem uneasy because of the misfortunes which


* The reader is here to take notice, that this seventhyear of the reign of Herod, and all the other years of hisreign, in Josephus, are dated from the death of Antigo-nus; or at the soonest from the conquest of Antigonus,and the taking of Jerusalem a few months before: and
never from his first obtaining the kingdom at Romeabove three years before; as some have very injudi­ciously done. See the rest of those dates, XV. 9, 10,and 11. and XVI. 5.t Or thirty thousand







OCR Output








U2 [book III. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


minded them of all that had passed: how theEgyptians were destroyed when they at­tempted to detain them, contrary to the com­mand of God; and after what manner the verysame river was to the others bloody, and notfit for drinking, but was sweet and potableto them; and how they went a new roadthrough the sea, which fled a long way fromthem: by which means they were themselvespreserved, but saw their enemies destroyed;and that when they were in want of weapons,God gave them plenty of them. Thus he re­counted all the particular instances, whenthey were in appearance, just going to be de­stroyed, but God had saved them in a sur­prising manner: that he had still the samepower, and that they ought not even now todespair of his providence over them, and ac­cordingly he exhorted them to continue quiet,and to consider that help would not come toolate, though perhaps not immediately, if itwere present with them before they sufferedany great misfortune. "You ought," said he,"to reason thus, that God delays to assistyou, not because he has no regard to you, butbecause he will first try your fortitude, andthe pleasure you take in your freedom; thathe may learn whether you have souls greatenough to bear want of food, and scarcity ofwater on its account; or whether you reallylove to be slaves, as cattle are slaves to suchas own them, and feed them liberally, butonly in order to make them more useful intheir service. As for myself, I shall not be somuch concerned for my own preservation,for if I die unjustly, I shall not reckon it anyaffliction; but I am concerned for you, lestby casting stones at me, you should be thoughtto condemn God himself."
By this means looses pacified the people,and restrained them from stoning him, andbrought them to repent of what they weregoing to do. And because he thought thenecessity they were under made their passionless unjustifiable, he thought it needful to ap­ply to God by prayer and supplication; andgoing up to an eminece, he requested somesuccour for the people, and some way of de­liverance from the want they were in; becausein God, and in him alone, was their hope of


salvation. He also desired that he would for­give what necessity had forced the people todo: since such was the nature of mankind,hard to please, and very complaining underadversities. Accordingly God promised hewould take care of them, and afford the suc­cour they were desirous of. Now when Mo­ses had heard this, he came down to the mul­titude; and as soon as they saw him joyful atthe promises he had received from God, theychanged their sad countenances into gladness.So he placed himself in the midst of them,and "told them he came to bring them fromGod a deliverance out of their present dis­tress. Accordingly a little time after came avast number of quails, (which birds are moreplentiful in this Arabian Gulf than any whereelse) flying over the'sea, and hovered overthem, till wearied with their laborious flight,and indeed, as usual, flying very near to theearth, they fell down among the Hebrews,who caught them, and satisfied their hungerwith them, supposing this was the methodwhereby God meant to supply them with food.Hereupon, Moses returned thanks to God foraffording them assistance so suddenly, andsooner than he had promised.
But soon after this first supply of food, theyreceived a second; for, as Moses was liftingup his hands in prayer, a. dew fell down, andMoses, when he found it adhere to his hands,supposed this was also come for food fromGod; he tasted it, and perceiving that thepeople knew not what it was, but thought itsnowed, and that it was what usually fell atthat time of the year, he informed them, thatthis dew did not fall from heaven after themanner they imagined, but came for theirpreservation and sustenance; so he gave themsome of it, that they might be satisfied aboutwhat he had told them. They also imitatedtheir conductor, and were pleased with thefood, for it was like honey in sweetness, andin substance like to bdellium, one of the sweetspices, but in bigness equal to coriander seed.The people were now very earnest in gather­ing it; but they were enjoined to gather itequally,* the measure of a homer for everyone every day, because this food should notcome in too small quantity, lest the weaker


* It seems to me from what Moses, Exod. xri. 18, St.Paul, 2 Cor. viii. 15, and Joaephus here says, comparedtogether, that the quantity of manna'that fell daily, and did
not putrefy was just so much as come to a homer a piecethrough the whole host of Israel, and no more.







OCR Output








ait. 1449.] 161 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


coming on, these two hundred Benjamites layin ambush before the city, by two or threetogether; and waited for the coming of thevirgins in the vineyards, and other placeswhere they could lie concealed. Accordinglythe virgins came along, playing, and sus­pected nothing of what was coming uponthem, and walked after an unguarded man­ner. So those that lay scattered in the road,rose up, and caught hold of them. By thismeans these Benjamites got them wives, andapplied themselves to agriculture, and tookgood care to recover their former happy state.And thus was this tribe, after they had beenin danger of entirely perishing, saved by thewisdom of the Israelites. And accordinglyit flourished, and soon increased to be a mul­titude, and came to enjoy all other degreesof happiness. And such was the conclusionof this war.


CHAP. III.


OF THE MISFORTUNES BROUGHT UPON THE ISRAELITES BVTHEIR INDOLENCE AND REMISSNESS; THEIR OPPRESSIONBV THE ASSYRIANS, AND THEIR SUBSEQUENT DELIVER­ANCE BV OTHNIEL, WHO RULED OVER THEM FORTY YEARS.
NOW it happened,* that the tribe of Dansuffered in the like manner with thetribe of Benjamin, and on the following occa­sion. When the Israelites had already leftoff the exercise of their arms of war, and wereintent upon their husbandry, the Canaanitesdespised them, and brought together an army.Not because they expected to suffer fromthem, but because they had a mind to have asure prospect of treating the Hebrews illwhen they pleased; and might thereby, forthe time to come, dwell in their own citiesmore securely. They prepared, therefore,their chariots, and gathered their soldierstogether. Their cities also combined, anddrew over to them Ascalon and Ekron, whichwere within the tribe of Judah, and manymore of those that lay in the plain. They


also forced the Danites to fly into the moun­tainous country, and left them not the leastportion of the plain country to set their footon. Since then these Danites were not ableto fight them, and had not land enough fortheir own support; they sent five of their meninto the midland country, to see for a land towhich they might remove their habitation.So these men went as far as the neighbour­hood of mount Libanus, and the fountains ofthe lesser Jordan, at the great plain of Sidon,a day's journey from the city. And whenthey had taken a view of the land, and foundit to be exceeding fruitful, they acquaintedtheir tribe with it. Whereupon they madean expedition with an army; and built therethe city of Dan, of the same name with theson of Jacob, and of the same name of theirown tribe.
The Israelites now grew so indolent,f thatmisfortunes came heavier upon them; whichalso proceeded in part from their contemptof the Divine worship. For when they hadonce fallen off from the regularity of theirpolitical government, they indulged them­selves farther in living according to their ownwill; till they were full of the evil doings thatwere common among the Canaanites. Godtherefore was angry with them, and they for­feited by their luxury that happy state whichthey had obtained by innumerable lahpurs.For when Chushan, king of the Assyrians, hadmade war against them, they lost many oftheir soldiers in the battle; and when theywere hesieged they were taken by force.Nay, there were some who, out of fear, vo­luntarily submitted to him; and though thetribute laid upon them was more than theycould bear, yet did they pay it; and under­went all sort of oppression^ for eight yearsAfter which time they were delivered in thefollowing manner:
There was one whose name was Othniel,|the son of Kenaz, of the tribe of Judah; aractive man, and of great courage. He had


make against this opinion is, that at any of these public fes­tivals, the concourse of people would have been too greatfor a design of this nature to be put into execution, sincethe violence which must, of course, have heen offered tothe young women, would hardly have met with a generalconnivance. It is much more probable, therefore, thatthis was some festival peculiar to the people of Shiloh,which the Benjamites perhaps might know nothing of, andwere therefore put in mind of it by the elders of the con-
gregation. Josephus tells us, that it was celebrated thricfevery year; and on this festival it might be a custom foithe voung women to go out into the fields, and there danceby themselves, which might give their ravishers the veryopportunity they wanted. Le Clerc's Commentary. B,
* About An."l455B. C.
t An. 1449.
I From 1449 to 1441 B. C.
II Judg. iii. 9.



